THE SINNERS SANCTUARY; OR, A discovery made, of those glorious privileges
offered unto the penitent and faithful under the Gospel: Unfolding their
freedom from death, condemnation, and the Law, in forty Sermons, upon Romans
Chap. 8.

By that eminent Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Hugh Binning, late Minister at
Govan.

Heb. 11.4. -- And by it he being dead, yet speaks.

Isaiah 38.16. O Lord, by these things men live, and in all these things is the
life of my spirit: so will thou recover me, and make me to live.

Zanch. These. 3. de Dispens. etc. Dispensare solet Christus hanc salutis
gratiam, per Sermonem veritatis, hoc est, per Evangelium salutis nostr^.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Swintown and James Glen, and are to be sold at
their Shops, in the Parliament-yard. Anno Dom. 1670.

Christian Reader,
EXperience has proved, that few Posthumous Works are perfect, most of them
being lame for their parts, and almost all of them wanting the last touch of
the Authors Pen, and the luster thereby given for public view; besides that,
there is a general aversation in them that survive, to mix with the Genius of
the dead. This little Piece upon the eighth Chapter to the Romans, labor
under all these disadvantages being imperfect, as to parts, by the immature
death of the Author, and for ought I know, never designed for public view,
could not have the last touch of his Pen: Neither has his Genius appeared in
another person, to pursue his Work; yet because many imperfect Writings have
been useful to the Church of Christ, and have provoked others with holy
emulation, to pursue the perfecting of things well begun; observing also the
universal acceptance that another imperfect Piece of the same Authors has
found with all who have seen it: I have been persuaded to let these go to the
worlds view, not doubting but they shall find the same acceptance, and be,
through the blessing of God, rendered profitable to the Christian Reader.

P. G.

SERMON I. Upon Romans VIII.
Verse. 1. There is therefore now no condemnation, etc.


THere are three things which concur to make man miserable; sin, condemnation,
and affliction: Every one may observe, that man is born unto trouble, as the
sparks fly upward; that his days here are few and evil, he possesses months
of vanity, and wearisome nights are appointed for him, Job. 5.6, 7. and 7.3. He
is of few days, and full of trouble, Job. 14.1. Heathens have had many
meditations of the misery of man's life; and in this have out-stript the most
part of Christians. We recount, amongst our miseries, only some afflictions and
troubles, as poverty, sickness, reproach, banishment, and such like: they again
have numbered even these natural necessities of men amongst his miseries, to be
conti^ually turned about, in such a circle of eating, drinking, and sleeping:
What burden should it be to an immortal spirit to roll about perpetually that
wheel? We make more of the body than of the soul: They have accounted this body
a burden to the soul; they placed prosperity, honor, pleasure, and such
things, which men pour out their souls upon, amongst the greatest miseries of
men, as vanity in themselves, and vexation, both in the enjoying and losing of
them: But, alace! they knew not the fountain of all this misery, sin; and the
accomplishment of this misery, condemnation. They thought trouble came out of
the ground and dust, either by a natural necessity, or by chance; but, the Word
of God, discovers unto us the ground of it, and the end of it: the ground and
beginning of it, was man's defection from God, and walking according to the
flesh; and from this head have all the calamities and streams of miseries in
the world issued; it has not only redounded to men, but even to the whole
creation, and subjected it to vanity, ver. 20. of this Chapter. Not only shall
thou, O man (says the Lord to Adam) eat thy meat in sorrow, but thy curse is
upon the ground also, and thou who was immortal, shall return to that dust
which thou magnified above thy soul, Genesis 3.17. But the end of it is suitable
to the beginning; the beginning had all evil of sin in it, and the end has all
evil of punishment in it. These streams of this life's misery, they run in to an
infinite, boundless, and bottomless ocean of eternal wrath. If thou live
according to the flesh, thou shall die: It is not only death here, but eternal
death after this. The miseries then of this present life, are not a
proportionable punishment of sin; they are but an earnest given of that great
sum, which is to be paid in the day of accounts; and that is condemnation,
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and the glory of his
power. Now, as the Law discovers the perfect misery of mankind, so the Gospel
has brought to light a perfect remedy of all this misery. Jesus Christ was
manifested to take away sin, and therefore his Name is Jesus, for he shall save
his people from their sins. This is the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world. Judgment was by one unto condemnation of all, but now there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus; so these two evils are removed,
which indeed have all evil in them. He takes away the curse of the Law, being
made under it; and then he takes away the sin against the Law by his holy
Spirit. He has a twofold virtue, for he came by blood and water, 1 Job. 5.6,
7. by blood, to cleanse away the guilt of sin; and by water, to purify us from
sin it self. But in the mean time, there are many afflictions and miseries upon
us, common to men: Why are not these removed by Christ? I say, the evil of them
is taken away, though themselves remain. Death is not taken away, but the sting
of death is removed; death, afflictions, and all a^e overcome by Jesus Christ,
and so made his servants to do us good: The evil of them is Gods wrath and sin,
and these are removed by Jesus Christ. Now they would be taken away indeed, if
it were not good they remained, for all things work together for the good of
those that love God, ver. 28. So then we have a most complete deliverance in
extent, but not in degrees: Sin remains in us, but not in dominion and power:
wrath sometimes kindles because of sin, but it cannot increase to everlasting
burnings. Afflictions and miseries may change their name, and be called
instructions and trials, good, and not evil: but Christ has reserved the full
and perfect delivery till another day, which is therefore called the day of
complete redemption, and then, all sin, all wrath, all misery shall have an
end, and be swallowed up of life and immortality, ver. 23.

This is the sum of the Gospel; and this is the substance of this Chapter.
There is a threefold consolation answerable to our threefold evils: There is
no condemnation to those that are in Christ. Here is a blessed message to
condemned lost sinners, who have that sentence within their breasts, verse. 1.
This was the end of Christ's coming and dying, that he might deliver us from sin
as well as death, and the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us;
and therefore he has given the holy Spirit, and dwells in us by the Spirit, to
quicken us who are dead in sins and trespasses. O! what consolation will this
be to souls, that look upon the body o^ death within them, as the greatest
misery, and do groan with Paul, O miserable man that I am, etc. Romans 7.24. This
is held forth to verse. 17. But because there are many grounds of heaviness and
sadness in this world, therefore the Gospel opposes unto all these, both our
expectation which we have of that blessed hope to come, whereof we are so sure,
that nothing can frust^at us of it. And also the help we get in the mean time,
of the Spirit to bear our infirmities, and to bring all things about for good
to us, verse. 28. And from all this the believer in Jesus Christ, has ground of
triumph and boasting before the perfect victory. Even as Paul does in the name
of believers, from verse. 31. to the end. Upon these considerations, he that
cried out not long ago, O miserable man, who shall deliver me? does now cry
out, Who shall condemn me? The distressed wrestler becomes a victorious
triumpher: the beaten Soldier becomes more than a Conqueror. Oh that your
hearts could be persuaded to hearken to this joyful sound! to embrace Jesus
Christ for grace and salvation; how quickly would a song of triumph in him
swallow up all your present complaints and lamentations?

All the complaints amongst men, may be reduced to one of these three. I hear
the most part bemoaning themselves thus; Alace for the miseries of this life,
this evil world! Alace for poverty, for contempt, for sickness! Oh miserable
man that I am, who will take this disease away? who will show me any good
thing? Psalm. 4. any temporal good? But if ye knew and considered your latter
end, ye would cry out more; ye would refuse to be comforted, though these
miseries were removed. But I hear some bemoaning themselves more sadly, they
have heard the Law and the sentence of condemnation is within them; the Law
has entered and killed them: Oh! what shall I do to be saved? Who will deliver
me from the wrath to come? What is al^ present afflictions and miseries, in
respect of eternity? Yet there is one moan and lamentation beyond all these,
when the soul finds the sentence of absolution in Jesus Christ, and gets its
eyes opened to see that body of death and sin within, that perfect man of sin
diffused throughout all the members; then it bemoans it self with Paul, Oh
miserable man, who shall deliver me from this body of death? Romans 7.24. I am
delivered from the condemnation of the Law, but what comfort is it, as long as
sin is so powerful in me? Nay, this makes me often suspect my delivery from
wrath and the curse, seeing sin it self is not taken away.

Now, if ye could be persuaded to hearken to Jesus Christ, and embrace this
Gospel, O! what abundant consolation should ye have? what a perfect answer to
all your complaints? they would be swallowed up in such a triumph, as Paul's are
here. This would discover unto you a perfect remedy of sin and misery, that ye
should complain no more; or at least no more as these without hope. You shall
never have a remedy of your temporal miseries, unless ye begin at eternal, to
prevent them. Seek first the kingdom of God, and all other things shall be
added unto you: seek first to flee from the wrath to come, and ye shall escape
it; and beside, the evil of time-afflictions shall be removed: first remove the
greatest complaints of sin and condemnation, and how easy is it to answer all
the lamentations of this life, and make you rejoice in the midst of them.

You have in this verse three things of great importance to consider, The great
and precious privilege, the true nature, and the special property of a
Christian. The privilege is one of the greatest in the world, because its of
eternal consequence and soul concernment: the nature is most divine, he is one
that is in Jesus Christ, and implanted in him by faith: his distinguishing
property is noble, sureable to his nature and privileges, he walks not as the
world, according to his base flesh, but according to the spirit. All these
three are of one latitude, none of them reaches further than another; that rich
privilege and sweet property concenters and meets together in one man, even in
the man who is in Jesus Christ: whoever enters into Jesus Christ, and abides
in him, he meets with these two, Justification and Sanctification, these are no
where else, and they are there together.

If ye knew the nature and properties of a Christian, ye would fall in love
with these for themselves, but if the^e for your own sakes will not allure you,
consider this incomparable privilege that he has beyond all others, that ye
may ^all in love with the nature of a Christian. Let this love of your selves,
and your own wel-being pu^sue you in to Jesus Christ, that ye may walk even as
he walked: and I assure you, if ye were once in Christ Jesus, ye would love the
very nature and walking of a Christian, no more for the absolution and
salvation that accompanies it, but ^or its o^n sweetness and excellency beyond
all other. Ye would, as the people of Samaria, no mo^e believe for the report
of your own nece^^^ty and misery, but ye would believe in Jesus Christ, and
walk according to the Spirit, for their own testimony they have in your
consciences. Ye would no more be allured only with the privileges o^ it to
embrace Ch^istianity, but ye would think Christianity the greatest privilege,
a reward unto it self. Pietas ipsa sibi merces e^t; Godliness is great gain in
it self, though it had not such sweet consequents or companions. That you may
know this privilege, con^^der the estate all men are into by nature: Paul
expresses it in sho^t, Romans 5. By the offense of o^ne, judgemnt came upon all
unto condemnation, and the reason of this is, by one man sin came upon all, and
so death by sin, for death passed upon all, because all have sinned, verse.
18.12. Lo then, all men are under a sentence of condemnation once: This
sentence is the curse of the Law: Cursed is every one that abides not in all
things commanded to do them. If ye knew what this curse were, ye would indeed
think it a privilege to be delivered from it. Sin is of an infinite deserving,
because against an infinite God: its an offense of an infinite Majesty, and
therefore the curse upon the sinner involves eternal punishment. O! what weight
is in that word, 2 These. 1.9. Ye shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and glory of his power? if it were duly
apprehended, it would weigh down a man's soul, and make it heavy unto death.
This condemnation includes both damnum and poenam, poenam damni and poenam
sensus, and both are infinite in themselves, and eternal in their continuance.
What an unpleasant and bitter life would one lead, that were born to a kingdom,
and yet to be banished it, and loss it? But what an incomparable loss is it,
to fall from an heavenly kingdom, which heart cannot conceive, and that for
ever? In Gods favor is life, and in his presence are rivers of pleasures for
evermore. When your petty penny-losses do so much afflict your spirits, what
would the due apprehension of so great a loss do? would it not be death unto
you, and worse then death, to be separated from this life, to be eternally
banished from the presence of this glory? If there should be no more punishment
but this only; if the wicked were to endure for ever on earth, and the godly
whom they despised and mocked, were translated to heaven, what torment would it
be to your souls to think upon that blessedness which they enjoy above? and
how foolishly ye have been put by it for a thing of no value? what would a rich
man's advantages and gains be to him, when he considers what an infinite
loser he is? how he has sold a kingdom for a dunghill? Now if there were any
hope, that after some years his banishment from heaven might end, this might
refresh him, but there is not one drop of such consolation: he is banished, and
eternally banished from that glorious life in the presence of God, which these
do enjoy, whom he despised, If a man were shut up all his lifetime in a pit,
never to see the light once more, would not this be torment enough to him? but
when withal there is such pain joined with this loss; when all this time, he
is tormented within with a gnawing worm, and without with fire: these senses
that did so greedily hunt after satisfaction to themselves, are now as sensible
in the feeling of pain and torment; and when this shall not make an end, but be
eternal; O! whose heart can consider it? It is the comfort and ease of bodily
to^ments here, that they will end in death. Destruction destroys it self, in
destroying the body, but here is an immortal soul to seed upon, and at length
the body shall be immortal, that destruction cannot quite destroy it, but shall
be an everlasting destruction, and living death.

This is the sentence that is once past against us all in the Word of God, and
not one jot of this Word shall fall to the ground: Heaven and earth may fail
sooner. Ye would think it were an irrepealable decree, if all the Nations in
the earth, and Angels above, conveened to adjudge a man to death, did pass
sentence upon him: Nay, but this Word that is daily spoken to you, which
passes this sentence upon you all, is more certain; and this sentence of death
must be executed, unless ye be under that blessed exception made here, and
elsewhere in the Gospel. I beseech you consider what it is to have such a Judge
condemning you. Would not any of you be afraid, if ye were under the sentence
of a King? if that judgment were above your head, Who of you would fit in peace
and quietness? Who would not flee from the wrath of a King, that is like the
roaring of a Lion? But there is a sentence of the KING of Kings and Nations,
above your heads: Who would not fear thee, to whom it does appertain, O King of
Nations! It is not a great man that can destroy thy body that is against thee;
it is not he who has power to kill thee, and he has also a great desire so to
do; this were indeed much: but it is the great and eternal Jehovah, who lifts
up his hand to heaven, and swears he lives for ever, he is against thee: he who
has all power over body and soul, is against thee, and so is oblidged to
improve his omnipotency against thee: He can kill both soul and body, and cast
them into hell, and by virtue of this curse he will not spare thee, but pour
out all the curses in this book. Thou would be at no peace if thou were
declared rebel by the King and Parliament; but alace! that is a small thing,
they can but reach thy body, nay, neither can they always do that; thou may
flee from them, but whither can thou flee from him? thou cannot go out of his
dominions, for the earth is his, and the sea, and all that therein is: darkness
cannot hide thee from him, he may spare long, because he can certainly overtake
when he pleases: men may not, because they have no assurance of finding. I
beseech you then, consider this, it is of soul-consequence; and what has a man
gained, if he gain the world and lose his soul? if the gainer be lost, what is
gained? And it is of eternal consequence, and what is many thousand years to
this? You can look beyond all these, and might comfort your s^lves on hope; but
you cannot see to the end of this, there is still more before than is past;
nay, there is nothing past, it is still as beginning.

O that ye would consider this curse of God that stands registrate upon us all;
What effects had it in Christ, when he did bear it? it made his soul heavy to
death, it was a cup that he could scarcely drink, he that supported the frame
of this world, was almost near succumbing under the weight of this wrath; it
made him sweat blood in the garden: He that could do all things, and speak all
things, was put to this, What shall I say? When this condemnation was so
terrible to him, who was that mighty One upon whom all help was laid, what
shall it be to you? No man's sorrow was ever like his, nor pain ever like his,
if all the scattered torments were united in one; but because he was God he
overcame, and came out from under it. But what do you think shall be the estate
of these who shall endure that same torment? and not for three days, or three
years, or some thousands of years, but beyond imagination, to all eternity.

I beseech you consider this condemnation which ye are adjudged unto, and do
not ly under it. Do ye think ye can endure what Christ endured? Do ye think ye
can bear wrath according to Gods power and justice? and yet the judgment is
come upon all men to this condemnation. But, alace! who fears him according to
his wrath? Who knows the power of his anger? Ye sleep secure, as if all matters
were past, and over your head. We declare unto you in the Lords Name, that this
condemnation is yet above you, because you have not judged your selves: It is
preached unto you that ye may flee from it, but since ye will not condemn your
selves, this righteous Judge must condemn you.

Now since it is so, that such a condemnatory sentence is past on all men, what
a privilege must it be, to be delivered from it, to have that sentence
repealed by some new act of Gods mercy and ^avour? David proclaims him a
blessed man, whose sins are forgiven and covered, and indeed he is blessed who
escapes that pit of eternal misery, though there were no more; though there
were no title to an inheritance and Kingdom above, to be delivered from that
wrath to come upon the children of disobedience; this is more happiness than
the enjoyment of all earthly delights: What would a man give in exchange for
his soul? Skin for skin, and all a man has he will give for his life: These
riches and advantages and pleasures that men spend their labor for, all these
they will part with in such a hazard. The covetous man he will cast his Coffers
overboard ere he lose his life: The voluptuous man he will suffer pain and
torment in cutting off a member, ere he die. But if men knew their souls, and
what an immortality and eternity expects them, they would not only give skin
for skin, and all that they have for their soul, but their life also: Ye would
choose to die a thousand deaths to escape this eternal death. But what shall a
man give in exchange for his soul, Mat. 16.26. though he would give, yet what
has he to give? There are two things endears any privilege to us, and
hightens the rate of it; the necessity of it, and the preciousness of it: and
these two are eminent here. Is it not necessary to be, to live, and have a
being? All men think so, when they will give all they have to redeem
themselves: All other things are accidental to them, they are nearest to
themselves; therefore all must go ere themselves go. But I say this is more
necessary, to be well eternally, than to be simply; to escape this
condemnation, than to have a being. And this shall be verified in the last day,
when men shall cry for hills and mountains to fall on them, and save them from
the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.16. Men will choose rather not to be, than to
fall in that wrath. O how acceptable would a man's first nothing be to him in
that great day of wrath? who shall be able to stand in it? When Kings and
Princes, bond and free, great and small, shall desire mountains to grind them
into powder, rather then to hear that sentence of condemnation, and yet shall
not obtain it. O blessed are all they that trust in him, when his wrath is
kindled but a little, Psalm. 2.12. Ye toil and vex your selves, and spends your
time about that body and life, but for as precious as they are to you now, ye
would exchange them one day for immunity and freedom from this wrath and curse.
How will that man think his lines are fallen in pleasant places? How will he
despise the glory of earthly Kingdoms, though all united in one; who considers
in his heart ^ow all Kings? all Tongues and Nations must stand before the
Judgment Seat of God? and the books of his Law be opened, to judge them by, as
also the books of their Consciences, to verify his accusation, and precipitate
their own sentence; and then in the open view of all the sons of Adam, and the
Angels, all secrets be brought out, their accusation read as large as their
lifeti^e, and as many curses to be pronounced against every one, as there be
breaches of the Law of God, whereof they are found guilty; and then all these
will seek into corners, and cry for mountains, but there is no covering from
his presence. What do ye think the man will think within himself who will stand
before God, and be absolved in Judgment by Jesus Christ, notwithstanding his
provocations above many of them: what will a King then think of his Crown and
Dominions, when he reflects on them? what will the poor persecuted Christian
then think of all the glory and perfection of this world, when he looks back
upon it? O know, poor foolish men, what madness is in venturing your souls for
trifles, ye run the hazard of all greatest things for a poor moments
satisfaction. Ye will repent it too late, and become wise to judge your selves
fools, when there is no place to mend it.

But this privilege is no more necessary than it is precious: Your souls are
now kept captive under that sentence of everlasting imprisonment, ye are all
prisoners, and know not of it. What will ye give in ransom for your souls?
your sins and iniquities have sold you to the righteous Judge of all the earth,
as malefactors, and he has past a sentence of your perpetual imprisonment
under satan's custody in hell. Now what will you give to redeem your souls from
that pi^? how few know the worth of their souls? and so they offer unto God
some of their riches for them. Does not many of you think ye have satisfied for
sins, if ye pay a civil penalty to the Judge; many thinks their own tears and
sorrow for sin may be a price to justice, at least if it be joined with
^mendment in time coming. And so men conceive their sins are pardoned, and
their souls redeemed. But alas! the redemption of the soul is precious, yea, it
cease for ever; all your substance will be utterly contemned, though ye
offered it. How few of you would give so much for your souls? and yet though ye
gave it, it will not do it, ye must pay the uttermost farthing, or nothing.
Your sorrow and reformations will not complete the sum, no nor begin it, though
thou wash thee with nitre, and take much soap, yet is thine iniquity marked
with me, yet there is still condemnation for thee: Though all the world should
conveen about this matter, to find a ransom for man; suppose all the treasures
of Monarchs, the mines and bowels of the earth; the coffers of rich men were
searched. Nay let the Earth, the Sea, the Heavens, and Sun and Moon be prized
at the highest: Join all the merits of Angels above, and men below, all their
good actions and sufferings, yet the sum that amounts of all that addition,
would not pay the least ^^rthing of this debt. The Earth would say, it is not
in me, the Heaven behoved to answer so, Angels and men might say, we have heard
of it, but its hid from all living. Where then is this Redemption from the
curse? where shall a ransom be found? Indeed God has found it: It is with
him, he has given his Son a ransom for many, and his blood is more precious
than souls, let be gold and silver. Is not this then a great privilege, that
if all the kingdoms of the world were sold at the dearest, yet they could not
buy it? What a jewel is this? what a pearl? who ever of you have escaped this
wrath, consider what is your advantage, O consider your dignity ye are advanced
unto, that ye may engadge your hearts to him, to become his, and his wholly:
for you are bought with a price; and are no more your own, he gave himself for
you, and was made a curse to redeem you from the curse. O how should ye walk as
privileged men, as redeemed ones.

I beseech you all to call home your thoughts, to consider and ponder on this
sentence that is past against us; there is now hope of delivery from it, if ye
will take it home unto you, but if ye will still continue in the ways of sin,
without returning, know this that ye are but multiplying those curses, platting
many cords of your iniquities, to bind you in everlasting chains; ye are but
digging a pit for your souls, ye that sweat in your sins, and travel in them,
and will not embrace this ransom offered: the key and lock of that pit is
eternal despair. O consider how quickly your pleasures and gains will end, and
spare some of your thoughts from present things, to give them to eternity, that
thread spun out for ever and ever; the very length of the days of the Ancient
of Days, who has no beginning of days, nor end of time. Remember now of it,
least ye become as long miserable as God is blessed, and that is for ever.

All men would desire to have privileges beyond others, but there is one that
carries it away from all the world, and that is the believer in Jesus Christ;
who is said to be in Christ, implanted in him by faith as a lively member of
that body whereof Christ is the head; Christ Jesus is the head of that body,
the Church; and this head communicats life unto all the members, for be fills
all in all; there is a mighty working power in the head, which diffuseth it
self throughout the members, Ephesians. 1.19, 22, 23. There are many expressions of
union between Christ and believers, ther^ is no near conjunction among men, but
this spiritual union of Christ with believers is represented to us under it:
The foundation and the building have a near dependence, the corner stone and
the wall these knit together; and Christ Jesus is the foundation and the chief
cornerstone, in whom all the building fitly joined together, grows up into an
holy temple, Ephesians. 2 20, 21. The head and members are near united, so is
Christ and believers, they grow up into him, Ephesians. 4.15. Parents and children
are almost one, ^o is Christ Jesus the everlasting Father, and he shows to the
Father the children which he has given him: we are his brethren, and he is not
ashamed to call us so. But which is more, we are one flesh with him: There is a
marriage between Christ and the Church, and this is the great meditation of the
Song of Solomon. He is the vine tree, and we are branches planted in him. Nay
this union is so strict, that it is mutual, I in them, and they in me. Christ
dwells in us by faith, by making us to believe in him, and love him; we dwell
in Christ by that same faith and love, by believing in him, and loving him.
Christ Jesus is our house where we get all our furniture; he is our storehouse
and treasure, our place of strength and pleasure, a city of refuge, a strong
tower, and a pleasant river to refresh us. We again are his habitation where he
dwells by his Spirit, we are his workhouse, where he works all his curious
pieces of the new creature, forming it unto the day of Espousals, the great day
of Redemption.

This gives us to understand what we once were; we may stand here and look back
upon our former condition, and find matter both of delight and sorrow. We were
once without Christ in the world, and if without Christ, then without God and
hope in the world, Ephesians. 2.12. I wish this were engraven on the hearts of men,
that they are born out of Christ Jesus; wild Olives, growing up in the stock of
degenerated Adam: He was once planted a noble Vine, but how quickly turned he
into a degenerate plant, and instead of Grapes, brought forth wild Grapes, and
sour. We all grow upon an Olive tree that is wild by nature, Romans 11.24. It
grows out of the Garden of God, in the barren wilderness, and is meet for
nothing but to bring forth fruit unto death, to be cut down and cast into the
fire. Its a tree which the Lord has cursed, never more fruit grow upon thee
henceforth: This was the fatal sentence pronounced on Adam. Oh that you would
know your condition by nature! how all your good inclinations, dispositions,
and educations, cannot make your stock good, and your fruit good. Ephraim is an
empty vine, this is ou^ name: Nay, but many thinks they bring forth fruit. Has
not Heathens spread forth their branches, and brought fo^th many pleasant
f^uits of ^emporal patience, sobriety, magnanimity, prudence, and such like?
Does not some civil men many acts of civility profitable to men? Do not many a
man pray, and read the Scriptures from his youth up? Yes indeed, these are
fruits, but for all that he is an empty Vine, for he brings forth fruit to
himself; and so, as in the Original, he is a Vine emptying the fruit which it
gives, Hos. 10.1. All these fruits are but to himself, and from himself; he
knows not to direct those to Gods glory, but to his own praise or advantage, to
make them his ornament: and he knows not his own emptiness, to seek all his
furniture and sap from another. What were all these ^air blossoms and fruits of
Heathens? indeed they were more and better than any now upon the multitude of
professed Christians: and yet these were but splendida peccata, shining sins.
What is all your praying and fasting? but to your selves, as the Lord charges
the people, Zech. 7. Do you fast at all to me? no, ye do it to your selves.
Here is the wildness and degenera^ness of your natures, either you bring forth
very bitter fruits, such as intemperance, avarice, contention, swearing, etc.
or else fruits that have nothing but a fair skin, like apples of Sodom, that
are beautiful on the tree, but being handled turn to ashes; so there is nothing
of them from God, or to God. I think every man almost intertains this secret
persuasion in his breast, that his nature it may be weak, yet it is not wicked;
it may be helped with education, and care and diligence, and dressed till it
please God, and profit others. Who is persuaded in heart that he is an enemy
to God, and cannot be subject to Gods Law? Who believes that their ^eart is
desperately wicked? Oh! its indeed deceitful above all things, and in this most
deceitful, that it perswade^ you ye have a good heart to God. Will not pro^ane
men, whose hands are defi^ed, maintain the uprightness of their hearts? N^mo
nascitur bonus sed fu. I beseech you once consider that ye are born out of
Christ Jesus; ye conceive ye are born and educat^^^ Christians, ye have that
name indeed from infancy, and are baptized. But I ask about the thing, baptism
of water does not implant you into Jesus Christ; nay, it declares this much
unto you, that by nature ye are far off from Jesus, and wholly defiled, all
your imaginations only evil. Now I beseech you, how came the change? or is
there a change? Are not the most part of men the old men? no new creatures; he
that is in Christ is a new creature; 2 Cor. 5.16. Ye have now Adams nature,
which ye had first: Ye have born the image of the earthly, and are ye not such
yet, who are still earthly? Think ye that ye can inherit the Kingdom of God
thus? Can ye pass over from a state of condemnation, to a state of life and no
condemnation, without a change? No, believe it, ye cannot inherit incorruption
with flesh and blood which ye were born with: ye must be implanted in the
second Adam, and bear his image, ere ye can say that ye are partakers of his
blessings, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49, etc. Now I may pose your consciences, how many
of you are changed? Are not the most part of you even such as ye were from your
childhood? Be not deceived, ye are yet strangers from the promises of God, and
without this hope in the world.

SERMON II.
Verse. 1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, who walk, etc.


ALL the promises are yea, and Amen, in Christ Jesus, they meet all in him, and
from him are derived unto us. When man was in integrity, he was with God, and
in God, and that immediately, without the intervention of a Mediator; but our
falling from God, has made us without God: and the distance is so great, as
Abraham speaks to the rich man, that neither can these above go down to him,
nor he come up to them: There is a gulf of separation between God and us, that
there can be no meeting. And so we who are without God, are without hope in the
world, Ephesians. 2 12. no hope of any more access to God as before. The tree of life
is compast about with a flaming fire and a sword; God is become a consuming
fire unto us, that none can come near these everlasting burnings, much less
dwell with them. Since there can be no meeting so, God has ^ound out the way
how sinners may come to him and not be consumed: He will meet with us in Jesus
Christ, that living Temple, and this is the trysting place. There was a
necessity of this Mediator, to take up the difference, and make a bridge over
that gulf of separation, for us to come to God; and this is his Humane Nature,
the new and living way, the vail of his flesh. God is in Christ therefore,
reconciling the world to himself: All the light of consolation and salvation
that is from God, is all embodied in this Sun of Righteousness: All the streams
of grace and mercy runs in the channel of his well-beloved Son. It follows
then, that God is not to be found out of Jesus Christ; and whoever is without
Christ, is without God in the world. God is in Christ reconciling the world,
and therefore no condemnation to them that are in Christ; but God out of Christ
is condemning the world, and therefore condemnation is to all that are not in
Christ. When all the sons of Adam were declared rebels, because of his and
their own rebellion, the Lord has appointed a City of refuge, that whosoever
is pursued by the avenger of blood, may enter in to it, and get protection and
safety. Without is nothing but the sword of the avenger, Justice reigning in
all the world beside; within this City, Justice may not enter to take out any
into condemnation: and therefore those souls that flee for refuge, to lay hold
on the hope set before them in Jesus Christ, Justice may pursue them to the
Ports of this City, condemnation may follow them hard, till they enter in; but
these may not enter into the Ports of the City. What a miserable estate then
are these souls in, that ly in their own natures, in the open fields without
this City? How many foolish men apprehend no danger? but sport about the Ports
of the City of Refuge, and will not enter in. O! the avenger of blood shall be
upon thee ere thou know: and if it find thee out of the City, woe unto thee,
all thy prayers and entreaties will not prevail; Justice is blind and deaf,
cannot deal partially, or respect persons, cannot hear thy supplications. It is
strange, that men are taken up with other petty inconsiderable things, and yet
neglect to know what this is, to be in Jesus Christ, upon which their salvation
depends.

Faith in Jesus Christ is the souls flight in to the City of Refuge, now none
flies but when they apprehend danger, or are pursued: This danger that a soul
apprehends, is, perishing and condemnation for ever: The pursuer is the Law of
God, and his Justice; these have a sword in their hand, the curse of God, and
the sentence of condemnation. God erects a Tribunal in his Word, wherein he
judges men; whosoever he has a purpose of good will unto, he makes the Law to
enter into their Consciences, that the offense might abound: he sends out some
messenger o^ affliction, or conviction, to bring them before the Judgment Seat,
and hear their accusation read unto them. There the soul stands trembling, and
the conscience witnesses and approves all that the Word challenges of; so
that the sinners mouth is stopped, and can have no excuse to this accusation:
then the Judge pronounces the sentence upon the guilty person, Cursed is every
one that abides not in all things, etc. the soul cries, guilty, O Lord,
guilty, I deserve the curse indeed: Oh! what shall I do to be saved? Then the
soul looks about on the right hand, and on the left hand, to seek some refuge,
but there is none. Whither shall he go from him? he looks within himself, and
behold nothing within, but the accusing witnessing conscience becomes a
tormenter: the fire is kindled within, which feeds upon the fuel of
innumerable sins; now the soul is almost overwhelmed, and spies is there be any
place to flee from it self, and from that wrath, and behold the Lord discovers
a City of refuge near hand, where no condemnation is, even Christ Jesus, who
has sustained the curse, that he might redeem us from it. The vision of peace
is here, and thither the soul flies out of it self, and from Justice, into that
discovered righteousness of Christ's, and so the more that the offense abounded:
now, the more has grace superabounded: so that there is now no more
condemnation to him.

I beseech you consider this, and let it be written on the table of your
hearts: there are two tribunals that God sits upon, one out of Christ Jesus,
another in Christ Jesus, there is a Throne of Justice, where no sentence passes
but pure unmixed Justice, without any temperament of mercy; and this all men
must once compear before. Ye know what a Covenant of Works God once made with
us, If thou do these things thou shall live, not, thou shall die the death:
according to this we must once be judged, that Justice suffer no prejudice.
Therefore God speaks out of his Law, upon this Throne, the language of Mount
Sinai, he reads our charge unto us, and because all the world is guilty,
therefore the sentence of death is once past upon all. Now whoever of you come
before this Tribunal to be judged, know that it is a subordinate Court, there
is a higher Court of Mercy and Judgment, both Justice and mercy mixed
together; though mercy be the predominant, Justice and Judgment i^ (...)
habitation of it, but mercy and truth goes before the Judges (...), and come
nearest sinners, to give them access. And this (...) may appeal unto, from that
Tribunal of Justice. But there is forgiveness with thee, etc. Psalm. 130.4, 5.
And whoever comes here, Christ Jesus sits on this Throne, to absolve him from
that sentence. If you ask what equity is in it, is not this a prejudice to
Justice, and an abomination to the Lord, to justify the wicked and ungodly
sinner? I say, it is no iniquity, because Jesus Christ has paid the price for
us, and was made a curse for our sins, that we might (...) he righteousness of
God in him; and therefore it is just with God to forgive sins, to relax that
sinner from the condemnation of the Law, that flees unto Jesus Christ. Ye may
answer Justice, I will not take this for Gods last word, I hear that all final
Judgment is committed to the Son, that he may give life to whom he will: he
calls me, and to him will I go, for he has the words of eternal life, he will
justify, and who shall condemn.

Now if any man, will not now arraign himself before the Tribunal of Gods
Justice, if he will not search his guiltiness till his mouth be stopped; and
hear his sentence of condemnation read, and take with it: that man cannot come
to Jesus Christ, to be absolved, for he justifies none but self condemned, and
lost sinners; so your day is but yet coming when ye must answer to Justice, the
Tribunal of Mercy shall be removed, and Christ shall sit upon a Throne of pure
Justice, to judge these who judged not themselves. Alas for your loss! the most
part of you: I pity you, ye live in great peace and quietness without the ports
of the city of refuge. We declare unto you in the Lords Name, ye are under the
curse of God: will ye yet sit secure, and put the evil day far from you. Oh!
rather trouble your peace for a season, with the consi^eration of your sins,
enter in judgment with your selves, till ye see nothing but perishing in your
selves, and there is no hazard, because here is salvation brought near in the
Gospel. If ye will not trouble your selves so much as to judge your selves,
then ye shall be judged when there is no Mediator, to plead for you, none to
appeal unto.

But whosoever takes the sentence of condemnation unto them, and subscribes to
the righteousness of the Lords curse upon them, we do invite all such in the
Lords Name, to come in hither, even to Jesus Christ, there is no condemnation
to them that are in him. If ye stand scrupulous, making many questions in such
a matter of so great necessity, ye wrong your own soul, and dishonor him; know
this, that God is in Christ reconciling the world to himself: therefore thou
condemned sinner may come to God in Christ: If ye ask any warrant, we think
there should be no such questioning, when ye are in so great necessity. If a
man we^e starving without a city, and it were told him there is plenty within,
were he not a fool that would make any more business, but labor to enter in.
This is enough to cross all your objections, ye are in extreme necessity, and
like to perish within your self, He is able to save to the utmost all that come
to him. What should more, let there be then a closure between absolute
necessity, and sufficient ability to save: will ye yet stand disputing without
the city, when the avenger of blood is above your head? If ye will yet press
for some more ground and warrant of believing, then I will tell you, all that I
know is in the Word for a ground of Faith, ye have great misery and necessity
within you; that ye grant; and it is your complaint; Christ has mercy and
sufficiency of grace in him, he is able to save to the utmost, that ye cannot
deny: But I do add this third, he is willing also to save thee, whoever will be
willing to be saved by him; nay, he is more willing than thou art. If ye
question this, I desire you but to consider the whole tenor of the Gospel; How
many invitations? How many persuasions? How many promises to those who come?
Yea, how many commands, and that peremptory, to believe on him? Yea, how many
threatenings against you, if ye will not come to him to have life? Has he given
himself for the sins of the world, and will he not be willing that sinners
partake of that he was at so much pains to purchase? Think ye that Christ will
be content his death should be in vain? and it should be in vain, if he did not
welcome the worst sinners; yea, it should be in vain, if he did not draw them
to him, and make them willing. But besides this, he has promised so
absolutely, and freely, and fully, as there should be no exception imaginable
against it; Him that comes I will not in any case cast out Joh. 6.37. Why do
ye imagine any case where Christ has made none? Why do ye sin against your own
souls? Oh! if I were in Christ, say ye, I would be well; and, Oh! that he would
welcome such a sinner. Christ answers thee in express terms, Whosoever will,
let him take and drink freely. Thou declares thy willingness in so speaking,
and he declares his willingness in so promising. Nay, thy looking afar off on
him, is a fruit of his willingness: Ye have not chosen me, but I have chosen
you, and loved you first. If ye will not yet believe this, look upon his
command; This is his command, that ye believe on the Son, 1 John 3.23. What
warrant have ye to do any duty he commands? and why do ye more question this?
Is not this his command? and is it not more peremptory, because a new command,
and his last command? And when withal he boasts us in to his Son, that we may
have life. Oh! who should have the face to question any more his willingness?
Other grounds than these I know none: And I think if any come to Christ, or
pretend to come on other grounds, he comes not right. If the most holy man come
not in among ungodly sinners, if he do not walk upon the grounds of his own
extreme necessity, and Christ's sufficiency, he cannot come to Jesus Christ.
There is a conceit among people, which if it were not so common as it is, I
would not mention it, it is so ridiculous: How can I come to Christ so unclean
and so guilty, nothing but condemnation in me? if I were such and such, I would
come to him. Alace! there can nothing be imagined more absurd, or contrary even
to sense and reason. If thou were such and such, as thou fancies a desire to
be, thou would not come to Christ, thou needed him not; that which thou
pretends as a reason why thou should not come, is the great reason pressed in
the Gospel, why thou should come. What madness is this? I am so unclean, I will
not come to the fountain to wash: Wherefore was the fountain opened, but for
sin and uncleanness? and the more uncleanness, the more need, and the more
need, the more reason to come: Necessity is a great errand, and our e^rand is a
sufficient warrant. I am pursued by the Law, I have condemnation within me, and
nothing but condemnation: well then, come to Christ Jesus, the City of Refuge,
where no condemnation is. Wherefore was this City appointed, but for this end?
I beseech you every one who uses those debates, and takes a kind of delight
in them, know what they mean, how they wrong your own souls, how they dishonor
Christ, and so God the Father; nay, how foolish and ridiculous they are, that
if it were not your perplexity indeed, they deserved no answer, but a rebuke,
or silence. I have seen people take delight in moving objections against the
truth, yea, and studying earnestly how to object against any answers given from
the truth. Alace! thou medles to thine own hurt, thou art upon a way which
shall never yield thee any comfort, but keep thy soul from establishment, as a
wave tossed up and down. If ye believe not, but dispute, ye shall not be
established.

But I would speak a word to these that have believed, that have fled for
refuge to Christ, Oh! it concerns you most of al^ men to study to know this
condemnation that ye are delivered from, that ye may be thankful, and may keep
closs within this City. I say, there is no man within the world should have more
thoughts, more deep and earnest meditations on the curse and wrath of God, then
these who are delivered from them through Christ; and my reason is, that ye may
know how great a salvation ye have received, how great a condemnation ye have
escaped, and may henceforth walk as these who are bought with a price. Your
Creation makes you not your own, but his, because he gave that being: but your
Redemption should make you twice more his, and not your own, because, when that
being was worse than if it had not been at all, he made it over again; so ye
are twice his: first he made you with a word, but now he has bought you with a
price, and that a dear price, his blood. Again, the keeping this curse always
in your view and sight, and application of it unto your sins, will make much
employment for Christ: O how will ye often ^^ee into that City? I think they
are the greatest enemies of Jesus Christ, and his grace, who would have a
believer have no more use of the Law: I know not who can use the Law, if he do
it not; I know not who can apply it unto Christ the end of it, but he:
Certainly he has not only use of the commands as a rule of obedience, but the
curse also, not to make him fear again unto bondage, no, no, but to make him
see always the more necessity of Jesus Christ, that he may take up house in
him, and dwell in him.

SERMON III.
Verse. 1. That walk not after the flesh, but, etc.


IT is difficult to determine which of these is the greatest privilege of a
Christian, that he is delivered from condemnation, or that he is made to walk
according to the Spirit, and made a new creature: whether we owe more to Christ
for our Justification, or Sanctification? for he is made both to us: But it is
more necessary to conjoyn them together, than to compare them with other; the
one is not more necessary to be delivered from wrath; than the other to walk
according to the Spirit. I think it were an argument of a soul escaped
condemnation, to have the great stream and current of its affections and
endeavors toward Sanctification, not that they may be accepted of God, but
because they are accepted of God. It is not said, there is nothing condemnable
in those that are in Christ, but there is no condemnation to them. There is
indeed a body of death, and law of sin within them, a nature defiled with
O^iginal pollution, and many streams flowing from it, which the sprinkling o^
the blood of Christ in Justification does not take away. If any man say there
is no sin in him, he is a liar, and the truth is not in him: But he^e is the
grace and me^cy of God in Jesus Christ that removes the curse where the sin is,
that takes away the condemnation, where all worthy of condemnation is. And thus
the souls Justification is parallel to Christ's condemnation; there was in him
nothing condemnable, no sin, no guile in his mouth, yet there was condemnation
to him, because he was in stead and place of sinners, our iniquities was laid
on him, not in him; he who knew no sin was made a curse for us, that we might
be made the righteousness of God in him: So then, the soul that flies in to
Jesus Christ his righteousness, though it have in it, all that deserves
condemnation, yet there is no condemnation to it, because his righteousness is
laid upon it, and Christ has taken away the curse. The innocent Son of God was
condemned, therefore are guilty sinners absolved: The curse was applied unto
him who had no sin, but only was made sin, or sin laid on him, and therefore
the sentence of absolution from the curse is applied unto them who have no
righteousness, but are made the righteousness of God by free and gracious
imputation. This I speak, because of many unsavory and unsound expressions in
this loose generation, that there is no sin in the justified, that
Justification removes it closs, as if it had never been at all. I say, as the
condemnation of Jesus Christ did not blot out his innocence and holiness within
him, but only Justice considered him in that account as a transgressour, who
yet was the holy and spotless Lamb of God in himself, so likewise the
justification of a sinner before God, does not remove or blot out the very
corruption and defilement of our natures, but only scrapes out our names out of
the roll of his debtors, as having satisfied in our Cautioner, and considers us
as righteous in that account before God. And this likewise I speak for your
use, that ye may loath and abhor your selves, as much in your selves, who are
made clean by the blood of Jesus Christ, as if ye were not washen. Nay, so much
the more ye ought to remember your own sins, which he does not remember as debt
any more; and to be ashamed and confounded because they are pardoned: It is
ordinary for souls to look on themselves with an eye of more complacency in
themselves, when they apprehend that God looks favorably on them: I do not
think that any soul can duly consider the gracious aspect of God in Jesus
Christ to them, but they will the more loath themselves; but I find it
ordinary, that slight and inconsiderate thoughts of pardon, begets jolly
conceits in men's hearts of themselves; and this is even the sin of Gods
children, something is abated of our self abhorring, when we have peace and
favor spoken in to us: but I beseech every one that believes there is no
condemnation for them, to consider there is all things worthy of it in them,
yea, nothing but what deserves it; and therefore let that aspect of God beget
self-loathing, and self-detestation in you: the more you apprehend he is
pleased with you, be ye the more displeased with your selves, because it is not
your selves he is pleased with, but his own well-beloved Son. The day of
redemption is coming, when there shall be no condemnation, and nothing
condemnable either: In Heaven you shall be so, but while ye are here, this is
the most important duty ye are called to, to loath your selves, because of all
your abominations, and because he is pacified toward you, Ezekiel. 16. at the
close, and Chap. 36.31. and 20, 43, 44. There is a new and strange
mortification, now pleadde ^or by many, whose highest advancement consists in
not feeling, or knowing, or confessing sin; but in being dead to the sense, and
convict^^n of the same. Alace! whither are these reforming time^ gone? Is not
this the spirit of Antichrist? I confess it is a mortification of Godliness, a
crucifying of Repentance and Holiness, a crucifying of the new man; but it is a
quickening of the old man, in the lusts thereof; a living to sin; this is a part
of that new (but ^a^sly so called) Gospel that is preached by some; which if an
Angel would b^ing from Heaven, we ought not to believe it. Other foundation can
no man lay then which is laid already, upon which the Prophets and Apostles are
builded; even Christ Jesus. Lord give the spirit to understand these mysteries
already revealed; but save us from these new discoveries and lights. That which
we have received is able to make us peref^ct to salvation.

Every one pretends a claim and right to this privilege of Christians, to be
pardoned and absolved from condemnation, who does not put it out of question,
though in the mean time, their iniquities testify against them; and their
transgressions say in the heart of a godly man, that there is no fear of God
before their eyes? Therefore the Apostle describes the man that is in Jesus
Christ, to be such an one, That walks not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit. Not only to guard against the presumptuous fancy of those that live in
their sins, that pretend to hope for Heaven, but to stir up every justified
soul to a new manner of conversation; since they are in Jesus Christ. We would
speak a word of two things from this: First, that the Scripture gives marks and
characters of justified and reconciled persons, that they may be known by, both
to themselves, and others. Next, that the Christian escaped condemnation, has
a new manner of walking, and is a new creature in Christ.

It might seem a strange thing, that this first, were questioned in this
generation; (if any the most clear and important truth could pass without
scanning;) the very tenor of the whole Scripture holds out so much of it. I
wonder that any man that reads this Chapter, or the Epistles of James, and
John, should have any more doubt of it. Hereby we know that we know him, if we
keep his commands; Is not this a conclusion of our state and condition, from
the conformity of our walking to the will of God? What divine truth can we be
sure of, if this be uncertain? When the beloved Disciple, who knew how to
preach Christ, asserts it in express terms, 1 Ioh. 5.13. These things have I
written to you that believe, that ye may know ye have eternal life, and that ye
may believe on the Name of the Son of God: this very thing was the great scope
and purpose of that Evangelick and Divine Epistle.

I find that Antinomians confound this question, that they may have the more
advantage in their darkness. The question is not concerning the grounds of a
man's believing in Christ, but concerning our assurance, or knowledge of our
believing. There is a great mistake in Christians practice, in confounding
these two, it makes Christians very unreasonable in their doubtings and
exercises, therefore let us have this before our eyes; Faith in its first and
pure acting, is rather an adherence and cleaving of a lost soul to Christ, than
an evidence of its interest in him, or of his everlasting love. You know all,
that it is one thing to know a thing, or love a thing, and another thing to
reflect upon it, and know that I know and love. John did write to believers
that they might know they did believe, and believe yet more. These things then
are both separable, and the one is posterior to the other; After ye believed ye
were sealed. The persuasion of Gods love, and our interest in Christ, is the
Spirits seal set upon the soul: there is a mutual sealing here, the soul by
believing and trusting in Jesus Christ, sets to its seal that God is true, as
John speaks, 3.33. When God speaks in his Law, the soul receives that testimony
of his Justice and Holiness, subscribes to the equity and righteousness of the
sentence, by condemning it self. And when Christ speaks in the Gospel, the soul
seals that doctrine of free Salvation, by approving and consenting with all its
heart to the offer, subscribes to the way of Salvation in Christ, and truth of
his promises: and thus is the truth of God and Christ sealed by the souls
believing. Then the Spirit of Jesus Christ afterward, when he pleases,
irradiats and shines upon the soul, and discovers these things that are freely
given, and witnesses to the conscience of the believer, that he is a son of
God: thus the Spirit seals the believer, and gives his testimony to his truth.

Now if we speak of the ground of the first, viz. Of believing in Christ to
salvation, I know none; but that which is common to sinners, and holden out in
the Gospel generally to all. Our sin, and misery, and absolute necessity, and
Christ's invitation of all to come, and receive his full and perfect salvation.
I think a man should seek nothing in himself, whereupon to build his coming to
Christ, though it be true, no man can come to a Savior, till he be convinced
of sin and misery, yet no man should seek convictions as a warrant to come to
Christ for salvation; he that is in earnest about this question, how shall I be
saved? I think he should not spend the time in reflecting on, and examination
of himself, till he find something promising in himself, but from discovered
sin and misery, pass straight way over to the grace and mercy of Christ,
without any interveening search of something in himself to warrant him to come;
there should be nothing before the eye of the soul, but sin and misery, and
absolute necessity, compared with superabounding grace, and righteousness in
Christ: And thus it singly devolves it self over upon Christ, and receives him
as offered freely, without money, and without price? I know it is not possible
that a soul can receive Christ till there be some preparatory convincing work
of the Law, to discover sin and misery: But I hold, that to look to any such
preparation, and fetch an encouragement or motive therefrom, to believe in
Christ, is really to give him a price for his free waters and wine; it is to
mix in together Christ, and the Law, in the point of our acceptance; and for
souls to go about to seek preparations, for a time resolving, not at all to
consider the promise of the Gospel, till they have found them, and satisfaction
in them, is nothing else, but to go about to establish their own righteousness;
being ignorant of the righteousness of Christ. And therefore many do corrupt
the simplicity of the Gospel, by rigid exactions of preparations, and measures
of them, and by making them conditions, or restrictions, of Gospel-commands and
promises: As in this, Come ye that are wearied. And from thence they seem to
exclude persons not so qualified, from having a warrant to believe. Alas it is
a great mistake of these and such words, certainly these are not set down of
purpose to exclude any who will come, for, whoever will, let them come and take
freely: but rather to encourage such wearied and broken souls, as conceives
themselves to be the only persons excluded; and to declare unto us in some
measure, the nature of true faith; that a soul must be beaten out of it self,
ere it can come to Christ. Therefore I conclude, that not only it is ^
ridiculous, and foolish conceit of many Christians that uses to object against
believing; I^ I were as such or such a person, if I did love God, if I had
these fruits of the Spirit, if I walked according to the Spirit, then I might
believe. Alace! how directly opposite is this to the terms of the Gospe^? I
say, If thou place satisfaction in these, and from that ground, come to Jesus
Christ, then thou do not come really, thou do indeed establish thine own
righteousness. Does any Saint, though never so holy, consider himself under
such notions of grace, when he comes to be justified? No indeed; but as an
ungodly man, rather, he must deny all that, though he had it. And besides, it
is most unreasonable, and incongruous, to seek the fruits, before the tree be
planted; and to refuse to plant the tree, till you can behold the fruits of it.
But also, it is contrary to the ^ree and comfortable Doctrine of the Gospel,
for a soul to seek the discovery of any thing in it self, but sin before it
apply to Jesus Christ. I say, there must be some sense o^ sin, otherwise it
has not rightly discovered sin; but a soul should not be at the pains to
discover that sense of sin, and find it out, so as to make it a motive of
believing in Christ: He ought to go straight foreward, and not return as he
goes; he must indeed examine himself; not to find himself a sensible humbled
sinner, that so he may have ground of believing, but that he may find himself a
lost perishing sinner; void of all grace and goodness, that he may find the
more necessity of Jesus Christ. And thus I think the many contentions about
preparations, or conditions preparatory to believing, may be reconciled.

Now if the question be (as it is indeed) about the grounds of our assurance,
and knowledge of our own faith, certainly it is clear as the noonday, that as
the good tree is known by the fruits thereof, and the fire by the heat thereof,
so the in-dwelling of faith in the heart, is known by its purifying of the
heart, and working by love, it makes a man a new creature; so that he, and
others may see the difference. Neither is this any derogation to the free grace
of Christ, or any establishing of our own righteousness (except men be so
afraid to establish their own righteousness, that they will have no holiness at
all, but abandon it quite, for fear of trusting in it, which is a remedy worse
than the disease) because I make it not a ground of my acceptance before God,
but only a naked evidence of my believing in Christ, and being accepted of God:
it being known that these have a necessary connection together in the
Scriptures, and it being also known that the one is more obvious and easy to
be discerned then the other. Sure I am, the Lambs Book of Life is a great
mystery, and unless this be granted, I see not but every man's regeneration and
change shall be as dark and hidden, as the hidden and secret decrees of Gods
Election; for the Spirit may immediately reveal both the one and the other. Is
it any derogation to the grace of Christ, to know what is freely given us? Does
it not rather commend his grace: When a soul looks upon it self, beautified
with hi^ comeliness, and adorned with his graces, and loathes it self in it
self, and ascribes all the honor and praise to him. Is it not more injury to
the fountain and fullness of grace in Christ, not to see the streams of it at
all, nor to consider them, then to behold the streams of grace that flows out
of this fountain, as coming out of it? I think Christians may be ready to
idolize their graces, and make them Mediators, when they are known; but is this
a good remedy of that evil, to abandone all sight and knowledge of the things
freely given us of God? Shall we not speak of the freeness of grace, because
men's corruptions turn grace into carnal liberty, and wantonness? If these
graces be in us, sure I am, it is no virtue to be ignorant of them, but rather a
weakness and darkness: It must then be the light and grace of God, to know
them, and from thence to conclude, that assurance of faith, which is not a
forced, ungrounded persuasion, and strong fancy, without any discovered reason
of it. Sure I am, the Apostles counsel is, to make our election sure, by making
our calling sure. How shall any venture to look in to these secrets of the
Lambs book of life, and read their name there, undoubtedly they belong not to
us, they are a light inaccessible, that will but con^ound an^ darken, us more?
Therefore whoever would know their election, according to the Scriptures, must
read the transcript, and copy of the Book of Life, which is written in the
hearts and souls of the elect; the thoughts of God are written in his works
upon the spirits of men; his election has a seal upon it. The Lord knows who
are his, and who can break up this seal? Who has understood the mind of the
Lord? None can, until the Lord write over his thoughts in some characters of
his Spirit, and of the new creature, in some lineaments and draughts of his own
Image, that it may be known they are the Epistle of Christ, not written with
ink and paper, but with the Spirit of the living God, not in tables of stone,
but in the fleshly tables of the heart, 2 Cor. 3.3. Christ writes his
everlasting thoughts o^ love, and good will to us in this Epistle; and that we
may not think this does extol the creature, and abase Christ, it is added, verse
5. Not that we are sufficient of our selves, but our suffi^iency is of Go^. The
seeing of grace in our selves, does not prejudge the grace o^ God, unless we
see it independent of the fountain, and behold not the true rise of it, that we
may have no matter to glory of. It is not a safe way of beholding the Sun, to
look straight on it, it is too dazzling to our weak eyes, you shall not well
take it up so; but the best way is to look on it in water, then we shall more
steadfastly behold it: Gods everlasting love, and the redemption of Jesus
Christ, is too glorious an object to behold with the eyes of flesh; such
objects certainly must astonish and strike the spirits of men with their
transcendent brightness: therefore we must look on the beams of this Sun, as
they are reflected in our hearts; and so behold the conformity of our souls,
wrought by his Spirit unto his will; and then we shall know the thoughts of his
soul to us. If men shall at the first ^^ight climb so high, as to be persuaded
of Gods eternal love, and Christ's purchase for them in particular, they can do
no more, but scorch their wings, and melt the wax off them, till they fall down
from that heaven of their ungrounded persuasion, into a pit of desperation: The
Scripture-way is to go downward once, that ye may go up; first go down in your
selves, and make your calling sure, and then you may rise up to God, and make
your election sure: You must come by this circle; there is no passing by a
direct line, and straight through, unless by the immediate revelation of the
Spirit, which is not ordinary and constant, and so not to pretended unto.

I confess, that sometimes the Spirit may intimate to the Soul, Gods thoughts
toward it, and its own state and condition, by an immediate overpowering
testimony, that puts to silence all doubts and obejctions, that needs no other
work or mark to evidence the sincerity and reality of it; that light of the
Spirit shall be seen in its own light; and needs not that any witness of it.
The Spirit of God sometimes may speak to a Soul, Son, be of good comfort, thy
sins are forgiven thee: This may break into the Soul as a beam, darted from
heaven, without reference to any work of the Spirit upon the heart, or word of
Scripture, as a mids and mean to apply it: But this is more extraordinary; the
ordinary testimony of the Spirit is certainly conjoined with the testimony of
our own consciences, Romans 8.16. and our consciences bears witness of the work
of the S^irit in us, which the Spirit discovers to be according to the Wo^d.
The spirit makes known to us things that are freely given, but, by comparing
things Spiritual, with Spiritual, 1 Cor. 2.10.13. The fruit and special work of
the Holy Ghost in us, is the medium, and the Spirits light irradiats and shines
upon it, and makes the heart see the same clearly: For, though we be the
children of light, yet our light has so much darkness, as there must be a
supervenient and accessory light of the Spirit, to discover that light unto us.
Now what is all this to us? I fear that there be many ungrounded persuasions
amongst us, that many build on a sandy foundation, even a strong opinion that
it is well with them, without any examination of their Souls and conversations
according to the Word, and this certainly when the tempest blows cannot stand.
Some teach, that no man should question whether he believe or not, but
presently believe: I think none can believe too suddenly, its alwise in season,
nunquam sera est fides nec paenitentia, its never late, in respect of the
promise, and its never too early, in respect of a man's case. But I cannot think
any man can ^elieve till the Spirit have convinced him of his unbelief: And
t^erefore, I would think the most part of men nearer faith in Jesus Christ, if
they knew they wanted faith: Nay, its a part of faith and believing God, in his
word, and setting to our Seal, that God is true, for a man to ^ake with his
unbelief, and his natural inability, yea, ave^sness to it. I would think that
these who could not believe in Christ, because they ^ought honor one of
another, and went about to kill him, they had done well to have taken with that
challenge of Christ's, and if men ought to take with their sin, they ought to
search and try their sin, that they may find it out, to take with it. I wonder,
since Antinomians make unbebelief the only sin in the world, that they cannot
endure the discovery and confession of it, it seems they do not think it so
heinous a sin. I confess, no man should of purpose abstain from believing in
Christ, till he find out whether he has believed or not, but what ever have
been, he is bound presently to act says in Jesus Christ, to flee unto him, as
a lost sinner to a saving Mediator. But that every man is bound to persuade
himself at the first, that God has loved him, and Christ redeemed him, is the
hope of the Hypocrite, like a spiders web, which when leaned to, it shall not
stand; that man's expectation shall perish, he has kindled sparks of his own, a
wild fire, and walks not in the true light of the Word, and so must ly down
in sorrow. Many of you deceive your selves, and none can persuade you that ye
do deceive your selves, such is the strength of that delusion, and dream. Its
the great part of the hearts deceitfulness, to flatter it self in its own eyes,
to make a man conceive well of himself and his heart, I beseech you, do not
venture your souls salvation to such groundless opinions; never to question the
matter, is to leave it alwise uncertain. If ye would judge your selves
according to the Scriptures, many of you have the marks and characters of these
who are kept without the City, and are to have their part in the lake of fire.
Is there no condemnation for you, who have never condemned your selves?
Certainly, the more you are averse to condemn your selves, this sticks the
closser to you. You are not all in Christ, all are not Israel, who are of
Israel, many, (nay, the most part) are but said Christians, have no real union
with Christ, or principle of life from him; your love you carry to your selves,
makes you easily believe well of your selves; know, that self-love can blind
the eyes, and make you apprehend that God loves you also. Nay, every one
readily fancies that to be, which he desires to be. I beseech you, consider if
you have any ground for your hopes, and confidences, but such as these that
will not bear out always. It would be no disadvantage to you, to have your
hope shaken, that in stead of a vain presumption, you may have the Anchor of
hope, which shall be fixed within the vail. I think one thing keeps men far
from the Kingdom of God, because they know not that they believe not in him: we
had gained much ground on you by the Word, if we could persuade you, that ye
believe not, and have not believed from the Womb. We might then say to you, as
Christ to his Disciples, ye believe in God, believe also in me: Ye have given
credit to God the Judge, and Lawgiver, pronouncing a curse on ^ou, and a
sentence that ye have hearts desperately wicked, now, believe also in me, the
Redeemer: Ye have believed God in the Law, in as far as ye have judged your
selves under sin and wrath, now believe Me in the Gospel, that brings a ransom
from wrath, and a remedy for sin. Its this very unbelief, that is the original
of the wo^lds perishing, unbelief of the Law, ye do not consider ye are under
the condemnation of it, ye do not believe that ye have not yet ^ed to Jesus
Christ to escape; and these two keeps souls in a deep sleep, till judgment
awake them.

But unto every one of you, I would give this Direction, Let not examination of
what you are, hinder you from that which is your chief duty, and his chief
commandment, to believe in him. I know many Christians are puzzled in the matter
of their interest, and alwise wavering, because they are more taken up with
that which is but a matter of comfort and joy, then that which is His greatest
honor and glory, I say, to consider the precious promises, to believe the
excell^^cy and virtue of Jesus Christ, and love him in your souls, and delight
in him, is the weightiest matter of the Gospel; to go out of your selves daily
into his fullness, to endeavor new discoveries of your own naughtiness, and his
grace, this is the new and great commandment of the Gospel, the obedience of it
is the most essential part of a Christian-walk. Now again, to know that ye do
believe and to discern your interest in Christ, this is but a matter of
comfort, and of second concernment: Therefore, I say, when ever ye cannot be
clear in this, ye should be alwise exercised in the first. For its that we are
first called to, and if Souls were more exercised that way, in the
consideration and belief of the very general truths and promises of the Gospel,
I doubt not, but the light of these would clear up their particular interest in
due time; these things ye ought to have done, and not to leave the other
undone. It is still safest to wave such a question of interest, when its
plunging, because it puts you off your special duty, and its Satan's intent in
it. It were better if ye do question, presently to believe and abide in him,
till it were put out of question.

SERMON IV.
Verse. 1. That walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.


CHrist is made to us of God, both righteousness and sanctification: And
therefore, these who are in Christ, do not only escape condemnation, but they
walk according to the spirit, and not according to the flesh. These two are the
sum of the Gospel, there is not a greater argument to holy walking then this,
there is no condemnation for you, ^^^ther is there a greater evidence of a Soul
escaped condemnation, then walking according to the Spirit. We have spoken
something in general of the evidence that may be had of a man's state, from his
walking, and the Spirits work in him; we would now speak of the conjunction of
these two, and the influence, that that privilege has on this duty, and
something of the nature of this description, who walk not after the flesh, but
after the spirit.

In the creation of man, man was composed of soul and body, there was a right
order, and subordination of these, suitable to their nature, in his soul he
reached Angels above, in his body he was like the beasts below; and this part,
his flesh, was a servant to the Soul, that was acted and affected according to
the desires and motives of the Soul. Now sin entering, as it has defaced all
the beauty of the creation, as it has misplaced man, and driven him out from
that due line of subordination to God his Maker, (for he would have been equal
to God,) so it has perverted this, beautiful order in men, and turned it just
contrary, has made the servant to ride on horses, and the prince to walk on
foot. This is the just punishment of our first sin, Adams soul was placed by
creation under the sole command of its Creator, above all the creatures, and
his own senses, but in one sin, he proudly exalted himself above God, and
lamentably subjected himself below his senses, by hearkening to their
persuasion, he saw it was good, and tasted it, and it was sweet, and so he ate
of it. What a strange way was this? to be like God, he made himself unlike
himself, liker the miserable beasts. Now I say, this is the deserved punishment
of man, his soul that was a free Prince, is made a bond slave to the lusts of
his flesh; flesh has gotten the Throne, and keeps it, and lords over the whole
man. Now therefore, it is, that, the whole man unregenerat, is called flesh, as
if he had no immortal spirit, John 3.6. That which is born of the flesh is
flesh, and this Chap. verse. 8. here a description of natural men, they that are
in the flesh. Because flesh is the predominant part that has captivat a man's
reason and will. Nay, not only the grosser corruptions in a man, that have
their use and seat in his flesh and body, are under that name, but take the
whole nature of man, that which is most excellent in him, his Soul and Spirit,
his Light and Understanding, the most refined principles of his conversation,
all these are now but flesh: Nay, not only such natural gifts, and
illuminations, but even the light of the Gospel, and Law of God, that someway
enters his soul, changes the nature and name, its all but darkness and flesh
in him, because the flesh has a dominion over all that, the clouds and vapors
that arises from the flesh, bemists and obscures all these, the corruptions of
the soul is most strengthened in this fort, and most vented here: Sins become
connatural to the flesh, and so a man by the flesh, is ensnared and subjected
to sin. Christ comprehends all our prerogatives and indowments under this, John
1.13. born not of flesh and blood: And Matthew. 16.17. flesh and blood has not
revealed these things to thee. Even all the outward of Religion, and all the
common privileges of Christians may be called so: What has Abraham sound
according to the flesh? Romans 4.1. Phil. 3.3. Which imports so much, that all
those outward privileges, many illuminations, and reformations, may so far
consist with the corruption of man's nature, may unite so with that, as to have
one name with it; its not all able to conquer our flesh, but our flesh rather
subdues all that, and makes it serve it self, till a stronger than it come,
even the Spirit to subdue it, and cast it out of the house. Thus the Image of
God in man is defaced: Nay, the very image and nature of man, as man, spoiled;
the first creation, sin has marred, and disordere'd it. Now, when this second
creation, or regeneration comes, the creature is made new, and formed again by
the powerful Spirit of Jesus Christ, this change is made, flesh is put out of
the Throne, as an usurper, the spirit and soul of a man, is put in a Throne
above it; but is placed according to its due order, under a holy and spiritual
Law of God. And thus Jesus Christ is the repairer of the breaches, and restorer
of the ancient paths, and old wa^^s to dwell in. Now, the soul has a new rule
established, to act according to, and new principles to act from. He whose
course of walking, was after the corrupt dictates, and commands of his fleshly
affections, and was of no higher strain, then his own sparks of nature, and
acquired light would lead him to, now he has a new rule established, the
Spirit speaking in the Word to him, and pointing out the way to him: and there
is a new principle, that Spirit leading him in all truth, and quickening him to
walk in it: Now this is the souls perfect liberty, to be from under the
dominion of sin, and lusts, and thus the Son makes free indeed, by the free
Spirit, the Son was made a servant, that we might be made free, no more
servants of sin in the lusts thereof: and the Spirit of the Lord, where he
comes, there is liberty, there the Spirit and reasonable soul of a man is
elevated into its first native dignity; there the base flesh is dethroned, and
made to serve the spirit and soul in a man. Christ is indeed the greatest
friend of men, as they are men, sin made us beasts, Christ makes us men.
Unbelievers are unreasonable men, (...) brutish, yea, in a manner, beasts, this
is an ordinary compellation in Scripture, faith makes a man reasonable, it
gives the saving and sanctified use of reason; its a shame for any man to be a
slave to his lusts and passions, its the character of a beast upon him, he that
is led by senses and affections, is degenerated from humane nature; and yet
such are all out of Christ, sin reigns in them, and flesh reigns, and the
principles of light and reason within, are captivated, incarcerated within a
corner of their minds. We see the generally received truths among men, that God
is, that he is holy, and just, and good; that Heaven and hell is, these are
altogether ineffectual, and have no influence on men's conversations, no more
then if they were not known, even because the truth is detained in
unrighteousness, the corruptions of men's flesh are so rank, that they overgrow
all this seed of truth, and choaks it, as the thorns did the seed, Matthew. 15.7.
Now, for you, who are called of Jesus Christ, O know what ye are called unto.
Its a liberty indeed, a privilege indeed, ye are no more debtors to the flesh,
Christ has loosed that obligation of servitude to it. O let it be a shame unto
you, who are Christians, to walk so any more, to be entangled any more in that
yoke of bondage. He that rules his spirit, is greater then the mighty, then he
that takes a city. Thus we are called to be more then conquerours; others when
they conquer the world, they are slaves to their own lusts, but let it be far
from you to be so, ye ought to conquer your self, which is more then to conquer
the World; its not only unbeseeming a Christian, to beled with passions and
lusts, but its below a man, if men were not now through sin below beasts. I
beseech you aspire unto, and hold fast the liberty Christ has obtained to you,
be not fashioned any more according to former lusts, know, ye are men, that ye
have reasonable and immortal spirits in you, why will ye then walk as beasts?
Understand O brutish, and ye fools, when will ye be wise? But I say more, know,
ye are Christians, and this is more then to be a man, its to be a divine man,
one partaker of the divine Nature, and who is to walk accordingly. Christians
are called to a new manner of walking, and this walking is a fruit that comes
out of the root of faith, whereby they are implanted in Christ: You see these
agree well together, these who are in Christ, walk not after the flesh, etc.
Walking after the flesh, is the common walk of the World, who are without God
and without Christ: But Christ gives no latitude to such a walk; this is a new
nature to be in Christ, and therefore, it must have new operations, to walk
after the Spirit. While we look upon the conversations of the most part of men,
they may be a commentary to expound this part of the words, what it is to walk
after the flesh. The works of the flesh (says the Apostle to Gal 5.19.) are
manifest, and indeed they are manifest, because written in great letters on the
outside of many in the visible Church, that who runs may read them: do but
read that Catalogue in Paul, and then come and see them in Congregations. It is
not so doubtful and subtle a matter, to know that many are yet without the
verge of Christ Jesus, without the City of refuge, you may see their mark on
their brow. Is not drunkenness, which is so frequent, a palpable evidence of
this? your envyings, revilings, wrath, strife, seditions, fornications, and
such like: Oh, do not deceive your selves! there is no room in Jesus Christ,
for such impurities and impieties. There is no toleration of sin within this
City and Kingdom; sinners are indeed pardoned, yea, received and accepted;
drunkards, unclean persons, etc. are not excluded from entering here, but they
must renounce these lusts, if they would stay here; Christ will not keep both,
he must either cast out the sin, or the sinner with it, if he will not part
with it. I beseech you, know what ye walk after; the flesh is your leader, and
whither will it lead you? (O! its sad to think on it,) to perdition: verse. 8.
If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die. Ye think flesh your great friend, ye
do all ye can to satifie and please it; and, O how pleasant is the satisfaction
of your flesh to you? Ye think it liberty to follow it, and counts it bonds and
cords to be restrained: But, Oh! know and consider, that flesh will lead you by
the Kingdom; that guide of your way, to which ye committed your self, will lead
you by Heaven, Gal. 5.21. Its a blind guide; corruption, and humor, and will,
have no eyes, no discerning of that pit of eternal misery: they choose the way
that is best pathed and trodden, that is easiest, and most walk into; and this
certainly will lead you straight into this pit of darkness. Be called off this
way, from following your blind lusts, and rather suffer them to be crucified;
be avenged on them for your two eyes that they have put out, and their
treacherous dealing to you, in leading you to destruction the high way. Come in
to Christ Jesus, and ye shall get a new guide of the way, the Spirit, that
shall lead you in all truth, unto the blessed and eternal life. Christ is the
way ye must walk in, and the life that we must go in to at the end of our way,
and the truth according to which we must walk; now he has given his Spirit the
Comforter to be our leader in this way, according to this rule and pattern,
unto that life: In a word, the Spirit shall lead you the straight way, unto
Christ; you shall begin in him, and end in him; he shall lead you from grace,
to glory; the Spirit that came down from Heaven, shall lead you back to Heaven:
All your walk is within the compass of Christ, out of him is no way to Heaven.

But we must not take this so grossly, as if no other thing were a walking after
the flesh, but the gross abominations among men, though even these will scrape
a great number from being in Christ Jesus; but it must be further enlarged, to
the motions and affections of the unrenewed spirit, and the common principles
according to which men walk. And therefore the Apostle, Col. 3 and Gal. 5.
names many things among the works of the flesh, and members of the old man,
which I doubt, many will account so of: Some natural passions that we account
nothing of, because common, as anger, wrath, covetousness; what man is there
amongst us, in whom some of these mentioned stirs not? Many of your hearts and
eyes are given to covetousness; your souls bow downward as your bodies do, and
many times before your bodies. Is not the heart of men upon this world, and
cannot rise above to a treasure in Heaven? and therefore your Callings,
otherwise lawful, and all your pains and endeavors in them, has this seal of
the flesh stamped on them, and passes no otherwise with God. We see how rank
the corruptions of men are, anger domineering in them, and leading them often
captive; and this is counted a light matter, but it is not so in Scripture: How
often is it branded with folly, by the wise man? and this folly is even the
natural fleshly corruption that men are born with; and in how many does it rise
up to the elevation of malice and hatred of others? and then it carries the
image of the devil, rather then of humane infirmity. And if we suppose a man
not much given to any of these, yet what a spirt of pride and self-love is in
every man, even these that carry the lowest sail, and the meanest port among
men: these that are affable and courteous, and these that seem most
condescending to inferiors, and equals, yet alas! this evil is more deeply
engraven on the spirt. If a man could but watch over his heart, and observe all
the secret reflections of it, all the comparisons it makes, all the desires of
applause and favor among men, all the surmises and stirrings of spirit upon
any affront, O how would they discover diabolick pride? This sin is the more
natural and inbred, for that it is our mother-sin, that brought us down from
our excellency; this weed grows upon a glass-window, and upon a dunghill, it
lodges in Palaces and Cottages: nay, it will spring and grow out of a pretended
humility, and low carriage. In a word, the ambitious designs of men, the large
appetite of earthly things, the over-weaning conceit of our selves, and love to
our selves, the flirring of our affections, without observing a rule, upon
unlawful objects, or in an unlawful manner, all these are common to men, and
men walk after them. Every man has some predominant or idol, that takes him
most up; some are finer and subtiler than others, some their pleasures and
gains without, others their own gifts and parts, within; but both are alike
odious before God, and both gross flesh and corruption before him.

There are two errors among men, concerning this spiritual walking, the one is
the Doctrine of some in these days, the other is the practical error of many
of us. Many pretending to some near and high discoveries, as to Christ, and the
Spirit, have fallen upon the most refined and spiritualized flesh, instead of
the Spirit indeed; they separate the Spirit from the Word, and reckons the Word
and Law of God, which was a Lamp to David's feet, among the fleshly rudiments of
the world. But if they speak not according to the Law and Testimony, (says
Isaiah) it is because there is no light in them: Thus their new light is but an
old darkness, that could not endure even the darker light of the Prophets. If
they speak not according to the Word, it is because there is no spirit in them.
It is not the Spirit the Comforter, which Christ promised to send to the
Apostles, and all that should believe in his Name through their word? for that
Spirit was a Spirit of truth, that should lead into all truth: and lest men
should father their own fancies and imaginations on the Spirit of God, Christ
adds, he shall bring all things to your remembrance: These things that Christ
has spoken, and we have here written. The holy Apostle to the Col. 3. when he
reproves the works of the flesh, and declares they had put them off, he
commends unto them, in opposition to these, Let the word of Christ dwell in
your richly in all wisdom, teaching one another in Psalms and spiritual songs,
with grace in your hearts to the Lord, ver. 16. Here the Spirit, not casting
out the Word, but bringing it in plentifully, and sweetly agreeing with it. The
Spirit that Christ sent, did not put men above Ordinances, but above
corruptions, and the body of death in them: Its a poor and easy victory to
subdue Grace and Ordinances, every slave of the Devil does that: I fear, as men
and Angels fell from their own dignity, by aspiring higher, so these that will
not be content with the estate of Christ and his Apostles, but soar up in a
higher strain of spirit, and trample on that ministration, as fleshly and
carnal, I fear they fall from Jesus Christ, and come into greater condemnation.
Its true indeed, 2 Cor. 3.6. The Letter kills, that is, the Covenant of Works
preaches now nothing but condemnation to men, but the Spirit of the Gospel
gives life; nay, even the Gospel separated from the Spirit of life in Jesus,
is but a savor of death to souls. Shall we therefore separate the Spirit from
the Gospel and Word, because the Word alone cannot quicken us? David knew how
to reconcile this, Quicken me, O Lord, according to thy Word, Psalm. 119.25. Thy
Spirit is good, lead me into the land of uprightness, and quicken me, Psalm.
143.10, 11. The Word was his rule, and the Spirit applied his soul to the rule:
the Word holds out the present patte^n we should be conformed unto; now if
there be no more, a man may look all his days on it, and yet not be changed,
but the Spirit within, transforms and changes a man's soul to more and more
conformity to that pattern, by beholding it. If a man shall shut his eyes on
the pattern, he cannot know what he is, and ought to be; if he look only on the
Spirits work within, and make that his rule, he takes an imperfect rule, and an
incomplete copy; and yet this is the highest attainment of these aspirers to
new light; they have forsaken the Word as their rule, and instead of it, have
another Law within them, as much as is already written on their hearts, which
is in substance this (as they suppose) I am bound to do no more then I have
already power to do; I am not to endeavor more holiness then I have already.
These men are indeed perfect here in their own apprehension; and do not know in
part, and believe in part, and obey in part, because they are advanced the
length of their own Law and rule, their rule being of no perfection. Paul was
not so, but forgetting what he had attained, he followed on to what was before
him, and was still reaching forward. Let not us, my brethren, believe every
spirit, and every doctrine that comes out under that name; Christ has
forwarned us. Let us pray for more of that Spirit, which may quicken the Word
to us, and quicken us to obey the Word; there must be a mutual enlivening, the
Word must be made the ministration of life, by the Spirit of Jesus, which can
use it as a sword, to divide the soul and spirit; and we must be quickened to
the obedience of the truth in the Word. The Word is the seed incorruptible; but
it cannot beget us, or be a principle of a new life within us, except a living
spirit come alongs to our hearts. Know that the Word is your pattern and rule;
the Spirit your leader and helper, whose virtue and power must conform you that
rule, 1 Pet. 1.22. Peter joins these two, the purification and cleansing of the
soul, which Christ attributes to the Word, ye are clean through the word I have
spoken, Joh. 15.3. Peter attributes it to the Spirit working according to the
pattern of truth. Its true, the Spirit of God needs no pattern to look to; nay,
but we must have it, and eye it, else we know not the Spirit of truth from a
lie and delusion; we cannot try the spirits but by this rule, and it is by
making us steadfastly look on this glorious pattern in the Word, and the example
of Christ Jesus his life, that we are conformed unto Christ, as by the Spirit
of the Lord, 2 Cor. 3.13. Certainly that must be fleshly walking, which is
rather conformed unto the imaginations of a man's own heart, then the blessed
will of God revealed in his Word. Can such walking please God, when a man will
not so much as hearken to what is Gods will and pleasure? As other heresies, so
especially this, is a work of the flesh.

Now there is another principle amongst many of us, we account it spiritual
walking, to be separated from the gross pollutions of the world; to have a
carriage blameless before men: this is the notion that the multitude fancy of
it. Be not deceived, you may pass the censure of all men, and be unreproveable
among them, and yet be but walkers after the flesh. It is not what ye are
before the world can prove you spiritual men, though it may prove many of your
carnal. Your outside may demonstrate of many of you, that ye walk after the
flesh; and if ye will not believe it, I ask you, if ye think drunkenness, a
walking in the Spirit? Do ye think ye are following the Spirit of God, in
uncleanness? Is it not that Holy Spirit that purges from all filthiness? Look
but what your walk is, ye that are not so much as conformed to the Letter of
the Word in any thing; who cares not to read the Scriptures, and meditate on
them: Is this walking after the Spirit of truth? If drunkenness, railing,
contention, wrath, envy, covetousness, and such like, be the Spirits way, then
I confess, many of you walks after the Spirit; but if these be the manifest
works of the flesh, and manifestly your way and work, then why dream ye that ye
are Christians?

But I suppose, that you could be charged with none of these outward things,
that you had a form of Religion, and Godliness, yet I say, all that is visible
before men, cannot prove you to be spiritual walkers. Remember, it is a spirit
ye must walk after; now, what shall be the chief agent here? sure, not the
body, what fellowship can your body have with him that is a Spirit? the body
indeed may worship that eternal Spirit, being acted by the Spirit, but I say,
that alone can never prove you to be Christians, we must then layaside a number
of Professors, who have no other ground of confidence but such things as may be
seen of men and if they would enter their hearts, how many vain thoughts lodge
there? how little of God is there? God is not almost in all our thoughts, we
give a morning and evening salutation, but there is no more of God, all the day
throughout, and is this walking after the Spirit, which imports a constancy?
And what part can be spared most, but the spirit of a man? The body is
distracted with other necessary things, but we might always spare our souls to
God. Now, thus should a man obey that command, Pray always, its impossible
that he should do nothing else but pray in an express formal way, but the souls
walking with God, between times of Prayer, should compense that, and thus
Prayer is continued, though not in it self, yet in meditation on God, which
has in it the seed of all worship, and is virtually Prayer and Thanksgiving,
and all duties.

Let us then consider, If our bodies be not more exercised in Religion then our
souls, yea, if they be not the chief agents, how many impertinencies, and
roveries, and wanderings, are throughout the day? the most part of our
conversation, if it be not profane, yet it is vain, that is unprofitable in the
World, it neither advantageth us spiritually, nor glorifies God, it is almost
to no purpose and this is enough to make it all flesh. And for our thoughts,
how do they go unlimited and unrestrained? like a wild Ass, traversing her
ways, and gadding about, fixed on nothing, at least not on God; nay, fixed on
any thing but God. If it be spiritual service, should it not carry the seal of
our spirit and affection on it? We are as so many shadows walking, as pictures
and statues of Christians, without the soul and life, which consists in the
temper and disposition of the spirit and soul toward God.

SERMON V.
Verse. 1. That walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit.


IT is no wonder that we cannot speak any thing to purpose of this Subject, and
that ye do not hear with fruit, because it is indeed a mystery to our
judgments, and a great stranger to our practice. There is so little of the
Spirit, both in Teachers, and those that come to be taught, that we can but
speak of it as an unknown thing, and cannot make you to conceive it in the
living notion of it as it is. Only we may say in general, It is certainly a
divine thing, and another thing then our common or religious walk is. It is
little experience, so we can know the less of it; but this much we should know,
it is another thing then we have attained, its above us, and yet such a thing
as we are called to aspire unto. How should it stir up in our spirits a holy
fire of ambition to be at such a thing, when we hear it is a thing attainable;
nay, when Christ calls us unto himself, that we may thus walk with him: I would
have Christians, men of great and big projects and resolutions, of high and
illimited desires, not satisfied with their seize, but still aspiring
unto more of God, more conformity to his will, more walking after the Spirit,
more separation from the course of the World, and this is indeed to be of a
divine spirit. The divine Nature is here, as it were, in a state of violence,
out of its own element; Now, its known by this, i^ it be still moving upwards,
taking no rest in this place, and these measures and degrees, but upon a
continual motion toward the proper center of it, God, his holiness and Spirit.

We desire to speak a word of these three. 1. The nature of this spiritual
walking; Next, Its connection and union with that blessed state of
non-condemnation; And then, of the order of this, how it flows from a man's
being implanted in Christ Jesus: Which three, are considerable in the words.

This spiritual walking is according to a spiritual rule, from spiritual
principles, for spiritual ends. These three being established aright, the walk
is even the motion of a Christian within the compass of these, it is according
to the word, as the holy rule, its from the faith and love of Jesus Christ, as
the predominant principle^. Nay, from the Spirit of Jesus living in the heart
by faith, and dwelling in it by love, as the first wheel of this motion, the
Primum Mobile; and as it begins in the Spirit, so it ends there, in the glory
of Jesus Christ, and our heavenly Father: Consider this then, it is not a
lawless walking, and irregular walk, it is according to the rule, and the rule
is perfect, and it is a motion to perfection, not a rest in what is now
attained to. The course of this world is the way and rule of the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 2.2. There is a spirit indeed that works in them, and a rule
it works by; the spirit is that evil spirit, contrary to the holy Spirit of
God, and you may know what spirit it is that works, by the way it leads men
unto; a broad way, path'd and trodden in by many travelers, its the Kings high
street, the common way that most part walks into, according as their
neighbors do, as the most do. But that King is the Prince of this World, satan
who blinds the eyes of many, that they may not see that pit of misery before
them, which their way leads them to. A Christian must have a kind of
singularity, not in opinion, but in practice rather, to be more holy, and walk
more abstracted from the dregs of the worlds pollution, this were a divine
singularity. Indeed men may suspect themselves, that separats from the godly in
opinion, they have reason to be more jealous of themselves, when they offend
against the generation of the just; but if this were the contention and design
of men, to be very unlike the multitude of men, nay, to be very unlike the
multitude of Professors, in the affection and practice of holiness, humility,
and spiritual walking, I think this were an allowed way, though a singular way.
Men may aspire to as great a difference as may be, from the conversations and
practice of others, if there be a tending to more conformity to the Word, the
rule of all practice. The Law is spiritual and holy, says Paul, but I am
carnal; this therefore, were spiritual walking, to set that excellent spiritual
rule before our eyes, that we who are carnal, may be transformed and changed
into more likeness to that holy and spiritual Law. If a man had not an
imperfect rule of his own fancy, and imagination before his eyes, he could not
be satisfied with his seize, but with Paul, would forget them, in a
manner, not know them, but reach forward still to what is before, because so
much length would be before us, as would swallow up all our progress, this
would keep the motion on foot, and make it constant: A man should never say,
Master, let us make tabernacles, its good to be here; no indeed, the dwelling
place and resting would be seen to be above. As long as a man had so much of
his journey to accomplish, he would not sit down on in his advancement, he
would not compare with others, and exalt himself above others, Why? because
there is still a far greater distance between him and his rule, then between
the slowest walker and him. This made Paul more sensible of a body of death,
Romans 7 then readily lower Christians are Reflections on our seize and
comparisons with others, which are so often the work of our Spirits, are a
retrograde motion, it makes no way, but spends the time, is a returning as we
go, whereas we ought to go straight forward. I beseech you, Christians,
consider what ye are doing, if ye would prove your selves so indeed. I know not
how you can evidence it better, then by honoring and esteeming his Word and
Commandments exceeding large and precious, no end of their perfection; the word
is much undervalued in the opinions of many, but it is as little cared for in
the practice of most; there is certainly little of God there, where this is not
magnified and honored. There must be darkness in that way, where this candle
which was a lamp to David's feet, shines not. Some promise to us liberty, but
they themselves are the servants of corruption; it is no liberty to be above
all law and rule: It was innocent Adams liberty to be conformed to a holy and
just command, nay, this was his beauty: The Spirit indeed gives liberty where
he is, but this liberty is from our sins and corruptions, not to them, it
looses the chains of a man's own corrupt lusts off him, to walk at freedom in
the way of his commandments, the Spirit inlargeth the prisoners heart, and then
he runs, but not at random, but the way of his commands, Psalm. 119.32. It was
our bondage to be as wild Asses, traversing our ways, to be gadding abroad,
to change our way. Now, here is the Spirits liberty, to bring us into the way,
and that way is one. Let us then learn this one principle, the Word must be the
rule of your walking, both common and religious. Alas, its not spiritual
walking, to confine Religion to some solemn duties: Remember, its a walk, a
continued thing, without interruption, therefore, your whole conversation ought
to be as so many steps progressive to Heaven, Your motion, should not be to
begin only when ye come to pray, or read, or hear, as many men do, they are in
a quite different way and element, when they step out of their civil callings,
into religious ordinances, but Christians, your motion should be continued in
your eating and drinking, and sleeping, and acting in your callings, that when
ye come to pray, or read, ye may be but stepping forward in the way, out of one
darker obscurer path, into a more beaten way. Remember, this word can make us
perfect to Salvation. It is a principle in the hearts of folks, which is vented
now by many, that the Word does not reach their particular carriages, and
conversations, in civil matters, these are apprehended to be without the sphere
and compass of the Word, while it is commonly cast up to Ministers, meddle with
the word, and spiritual things, and not with our matters. Truly I think, if we
separate these from the Word, we may quickly separat all Religion from such
actions; and if such actings and businesses be without the Court of the Word,
they are also without the Court of Conscience; Conscience, Religion, and the
Word, being commensurable. Therefore I beseech every one of you, take the Word
for the ruling of your callings and conversations among men, extend it to all
your actions, that in all those ye may act as Christians, as well as men. It is
certainly the licentiousness of the spirits of men, that cannot endure the
application of the Word unto their particular actions and conversations.

Now this spiritual walk proceeds from spiritual principles: It is certain, the
Spirit of Jesus Christ is he in whom we live, and move, and have our being
spiritually, without him we can do nothing; and therefore Christians ought to
walk with such a subordination to, and dependence on him, as if they were mere
instruments, and patients under his hand; though I think in regard of
endeavored activity they should bestir themselves, and give all diligence, as
if they acted independently of the Spirit: yet in regard of denial of himself,
and dependence on the Spirit, each one ought to act, as if he did not act at
all, but the Spirit only acted in him. This is the Divinity of Paul, I labored
more abundantly then they all, yet not I, but grace in me. I live, yet not I,
but Christ in me. O how difficult a thing is it to reconcile these two in the
practice of Christians, which yet cannot really be, except they be together? It
is certainly one of the great mysteries of Christianity, to draw our strength
and activity from another, to look upon our selves, and our actings, as these
that can do nothing, as empty vines; and that notwithstanding of all in^used
and acquired principles. Whatever we ought to do, in judging and discerning of
our condition, yet sure I am, Christians in the exercise and practice of
godliness, should look upon themselves void of any principle in themselves,
either to do or think, not that we are sufficient of of our selves: The
proficient and growing Christian, should look no mo^e on his own inclinations
and habits, th^n if he had none; he should consider himself an ungodly man,
that no fruit can grow upon, one that cannot pray, as he is in himself. Bu^
alace, we come to duties, in the confidence of qualifications ^or duties, acts
more confidently in them, because accustomed to them, and so makes Grace and
Religion a kind of Art and Discipline, that use and experience makes expert
into. Learn now this one thing, which would be in stead of many rules and
doctrines to us, to shut out of your eyes the consideration of what ye are by
Gifts or Grace, or experience: Do not consider that, but rather fix your eyes
on the grace of Jesus Christ, and upon the power and virtue of the Holy Spirit,
which is given by promise; that when the way is all the easiest to you, both by
delight and custom, yet ye may find it to your natural principles as
insuperable, as at the beginning; and may still cry, Draw me, and I will run
after thee; lead me, and I will walk with thee. Do not measure thy call into
duties, by the strength thou finds in thy self, but look unto him who
strengthens us with all might. Now the Spirit works in us by subordinat
spiritual principles, as believing in Christ, and loving of him, as our Lord
and Savior; and these two acts drives on a soul sweetly in the way of
obedience. Fear, where not mixed in its actings with faith and love, is a spirit
of bondage; but the Christian ought to walk according to the Spirit of
Adoption, which cries, Abba, Father. Yet how many Christians are rather in a
servile and slavish manner driven on by terrors and chastisements to their
duty, then by love: There is a piece of liberty in Christian-walking, when
there is not a restraint upon the spirit, by this slavish fear; this, I say, is
not beseeming these that are in Christ Jesus; ye ought to have the Spirit of
your Father for your leader and guide. O! how sweet, and how certain and
necessary also, would this walking be? The love of Christ would be an inward
principle of motion, and would make our spiritual actings as easy and
pleasant, as natural motions are. Fear is but a violent principle, that is like
the impulse of a stone thrown upward, as long as that external impression
remains, it moves, but still slower and slower, and at length evanisheth: But
if ye believed in him, and your hearts were engaged to love him, O! how would
it be a pleasant and native thing to walk in his way, as a stone goes
downward. Consider your principles, that acts you to matters and duties of
Religion: Many men there be, in whom appears no difference of their work to
beholders; but, O! how wide a difference does God discern in them? Ingines and
artifice may make dead and lifeless things move and walk as orderly as things
that have life. But the principle of this motion, makes a huge difference; the
one is moved from without, the other from it self. The most part of us act as
irrational and bruit beasts in Religion; nay, we walk as inanimat and senseless
creatures: Its some one or other consideration without us, moves us. Custom,
censure, education, and such like: Ah! these are the principles of our
Religion. How many would have no Religion, no form of it? if they were not
among such company? and therefore we see many change it, according to
companies, as the fish does its skin, according to the color of that which is
nearest it. How many would do many things they dare not for punishment and
censure, and for that same da^ not leave^ other things undone? In a word, the
most part of us are such as would walk in no path of godliness, if it were not
the custom of the time, and ^ear of men, that constrained us. But, my
brethren, let it not be so among you, you who are in Christ Jesus, let this be
the predominant in your hearts to constrain you, not to live to your selves,
but unto God, even this, that ye believe Christ has died for sinners, that
they might live from sin; and from this let your hearts be inflamed with his
love, that it may carry you on in a sweet and blessed necessity to walk in all
well pleasing: Let the consideration of his love lay on a constraint, but a
constraint of willingness, to live to him who has thus loved you. But as the
principle is spiritual, so must the end be; and I think these two complete the
mystery of the practice of Christianity, to act from another principle unto
another end; even as these two make up the mystery o^ iniquity in our hearts,
to act from our selves, unto our selves; every man naturally makes a god of
himself, is his own Alpha and Omega, the beginning of his action^, and the end
of them, which is proper to God. As the fall has cut off the subordination of
the soul to God in its actions, that it cannot now derive all from that blessed
fountain of all-being, and well-being, so is this channel of reference of all
our actions to God stopped, that they do not tend unto him, as they are not
derived from him, and thus they return unto a man's self again. There is one
point of self, and making it our aim and design, which possibly many does not
take heed unto. It is ordinary for us to act and walk in Christian duties, for
our salvation, for obtaining of life eternal, as our chief and only end, which
is but an inferior end; because we ought not to walk mainly for life, but to
life; we should not walk after the command, only, for Heaven, but in the way of
it unto Heaven. Our spiritual walking can never purchase us right unto the
lea^t of his mercies; when we have done all, this should be our souls language,
we are unprofitable servants, our righteousness extends not to thee. What gain
is it to the Almighty that thou art righteous? Yet for the most part, we make
our walking as a hire for the reward. The Covenant of Works, doing for life, is
some way naturally imprinted in our hearts, and we cannot do, but we would live
in doing; we cannot walk unto all well-pleasing, but we would also walk unto
pacifying of God. Self-righteousness is men's great idol, which when all other
baser and grosser idols are down, they do still seek to establish. But
Christians, observe this evil in your selves, and suffer this mystery of
godliness to be wrought in you, the abasing of your selves, the denial of your
selves. I would have you, in respect of diligence and earnestness, doing,
walking, and running, as if ye were to be saved by it only: But again, you must
deny all that, and no more consider it, or lean weight upon it, then if ye
ought to do nothing, or did nothing. But your ends should be more divine and
high, as your nature is, to glorify God in your mortal bodies, since ye are
hi^, and bought with a price. O how ought ye not to be your own? The great
purpose of your obedience should be, a declaration of your sense of his love,
and of your obligation to him: Ye ought to walk in his way, because ye are
escaped condemnation, and saved by him, and not that ye may be saved only. It
is the glory of our Heavenly Father, and the honor of the Redeemer, for
Christians to walk, even as he walked, and follow his footsteps; it commends
the grace of Jesus Christ exceedingly. Therefore this cannot but be the choice
and delight of a believing soul, to walk unto all well-pleasing, to have the
glory of him as their great design to aim at; who for our salvation laid aside
his glory, and embraced shame and reproach. We use to walk in obedience to God,
that we may pacify God for our disobedience: but let a Christian abhor such a
thought, Christ's blood must pacify, but the walking of his child pleases him
in his welbeloved Son. When he is once pacified for sin, when he once accepts
your persons, your performances are his delight: Now this should be the great
scope of a soul, that all its powers should be fixed on, to please him, and
live to him.

Now these three being established, we must conceive that the chief agent and
party in this walking must be spiritual; therefore men's bodies are not capable
of this walk after the Spirit principally. Outward Ordinances are but the shell
wherein the kirnel must be enclosed; all our walkings that is visible to men,
is but like a painted or engraven Image and Statue, that has no breath or life
in it, unless the Spirit actuat and quicken the same. I say not only the Spirit
of God, but the spirit and soul in man; for the Spirits immediate and divine
operations are upon such a suitable subject, as the immortal soul. Verily,
there is a spirit in man, and the inspiration of the Almighty gives him
understanding: We must not abolish the outward ^o^m, because it has some
divinity in it, even the stamp of Gods authority; and therefore, these who are
swelled above ordinances, I fear they be monstrous Christians. A man is
composed of a spirit and a body, acted and quickened by that spirit, without
either of these, he is not a complete man: So I say, he is not a Christian,
that does not worship God in the spirit, and in truth both; and it is not
Religion that excludes either the inward soul-communion with God, or the
outward ordinance, and appointment of God. But alace, this may be our
complaint, we come and worship God, and draws nigh with our bodies, but our
hearts are far removed. Here is the death of many's worship, the soul is
separated from the body of it, there are but pictures and images of Christians;
we have mouths and faces of Saints, but O! how little of divine-affection, or
of soul-desires, breaths in us? We are denyers of the power of godliness, by
resting in a form, and this is the great sin of this generation, the
essentials, the vital-spirits of Christianity, are exhausted, and some dry
bones, like an Anatomy of a Christian, remains behind. I beseech you, gather
your spirits to this spiritual-walking, they only can follow the Spirit, your
bodies are earthly and lumpish, and the way is all upward to the holy hill.
Look inwardly and measure your selves so, outward appearance is no just
measure; retire ^ithin your souls, and engage them in this exercise, and enter
them to this motion, and your spirits will sweetly and surely act your bodies
and externals, in all matters of godliness.

SERMON VI.
Verse. 1. Who walk not after the flesh, etc.


IT is one of the greatest mysteries in a Christians practice, to join these
two together, which the Gospel has conjoined, justification and
sanctification, and to place them in their due order: There is much miscarrying
in both these, either they are sep^rated, or misplaced: But, the truth is, they
cannot really be, except they be jointly; yet, often it falls out, that in men's
apprehensions and endeavors, they are disjoined: This then were the argument
of a living, and believing Christian, to join the study of holiness, with the
exercise of ^aith in Christ, for remission of sin, and righteousness, and not
not only to join it, but also, to derive it from that principle: There is both
an union between these, and an order established in Scripture. The most part of
these that profess the Gospel, are of two sorts; they do either divide
holiness from imputed righteousness, or Christ's righteousness from
holiness: I do not say, that any man truly seeks to be covered with the
righteousness of Jesus Christ, and to have his sins freely pardoned, but he
will also study to walk before God, in all well-pleasing; but the truth is,
many do pretend, and profess to seek salvation, and forgivenness in Christ's
blood, and have the mercy of God, and merits of Christ, always in their mouth,
who yet declare by their conversation, that they do not so much as desire, or
purpose to seek after holiness: I do not speak of these who are Antinomians in
profession, but of a great multitude in the visible Church, who are more really
Antinomians, to wit in practice, then most part of professed Antinomians. You
hear all, of free grace, and free redemption in Jesus Christ, of tender, and
enduring mercies in God, and this you take for the whole Gospel; and presently
upon the notion of mercy and grace, you conclude unto your selves, not only
immunity, and freedom from all the threatenings of the Word, and from hell, but
likewise ye proclaim secretly in your own hearts, a liberty to sin so much the
more securely; the door of mercy cast open in the Gospel, and the free access
to Christ, manifested therein, through the corruption that is within us, proves
the very occasion of many's giving indulgence to their lusts; of delaying
reformation, and turning to God. You all profess, that you seek to be
justified, and saved by Jesus Christ; yea, you persuade your selves, to be
escaped condemnation, by Christ: Now then, conjoyn that profession, and
persuasion, with your walk, and O! how contrary you may find them to one
another? your says is vain, for ye are yet in your sins. Tit. 2.11, 12. The
grace of God appearing to some men effectually, teaches them to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and to live righteously, soberly, and godly
etc. But if we may conjecture your teaching by your walking, it seems the
notion of grace, and the Gospel that is formed in your minds, has taught you
another doctrine, to a vow ungodliness, and follow worldly lusts. Is there so
much as a shadow of this spiritual walking in many? I confess, it is natural
for every man to seek his own righteousness; and it is the arm of God that
must bow men, to submit to Christ's imputed righteousness; yet, the most part
of men, seem to be so far from seeking any righteousness, that they are rather
seeking the fulfilling of their own carnal lusts, working wickedness with
greediness, not caring how little they have to put confidence into; and yet,
certain it is, that how much forever, a man attains to, of a form of Religion,
or civil honesty, he is ready to put his trust in it, and to lean the weight of
his soul upon it: But sei^g this is natural to you all, to seek heaven by doing
and working, I wonder that ye do no more; how do ye satisfy your consciences
in the expectation of heaven, who take so little pains in Religion, and are so
loose and profane in your conversation? I wonder, seeing ye have it naturally
engraven in your hearts, to establish your own righteousness, that ye labor
not to have more of it to fill your eye withal.

But again, on the other hand, there are some men, who have a form of Religion,
and labor to be of a blameless conversation among men, that possibly
persuades themselves, they are seeking holiness, and walking spiritually; but
alace, you may find it but a painted and seeming Religion, that is an
abomination in the sight of God; because it is to them, all the ground of their
acceptance before God. If ever this question was moved in some of you, What
shall I do to be saved? You have condescended on such a walk, such a
profession, for the answer of it; It is natural to all, even these who have
least apperance of godliness: to seek heaven, by doing Gods will; these that
have no more to speak of, then their Baptism, or receiving the Lords Supper, or
attending well the solemn assemblies, will ground their hope of salvation on
those things,: How much more, will civil and honest men (commonly so called)
who pray, and read, and profess godliness, how much more, I say, will they
establish that which they attain to, as the ground of their confidence before
God? Now, this is a general, unknown ill that destroys the world, and yet few
are convinced of it, how hard it is to be driven out of our selves, and to seek
life in another. O! know, that it is in a manner, the crucifying of a man's
self, thus to deny himself, to have a sort of righteousness, and not to trust
in it. Who is he, that cannot endure to look upon himself, for moral vileness?
Alace, men flatter themselves in their own eyes, looks with a more favorable
^ye on their own actions, then they ought: Who is he that abhors himself, even
for abominable works? But who shall be found to abhore himself, for his most
religious and best actions? Who casts these out of their sight, as unclean and
menstruous things? Therefore, I say, though thy righteousness were equal to,
or exceeded any Pharisees righteousness, thou cannot enter into heaven: The
poor Publicane, that was a vile and profane sinner, yet his righteousness
exceeded the Pharisees, though he had none of his own, yet he had a
righteousness without blemish, of Christ's purchasing, having by says fled to
the mercy of God, in, and through a Mediator. It is not more doing, more
praying, more exact walking, that can make you more righteous in Gods account,
in order to absolution from Law-condemnation, then the prof^nest and most
wretched sinner; but, the baser, and viler thou be in thine own eyes, the more
thou hide thy best doings from thine eyes, and look on thy uncleanness, and
betakes thy self to Christ, his unspotted and perfect righteousness; the more
honorable and precious thou art in his eyes. Therefore, God is said to dwell
in the heart of the humble and contrite one, not for the worth of his humility,
and repentance; No, no, but for the pleasure he has in the well-beloveds
righteousness; that is the beautiful garment, only in the eye of a humbled
soul, that sees nothing in it self desirable.

Therefore, I wish, that this conjunction which is made in the Gospel, were
also engraven in your hearts, and on your practices, that is, that you would
seek after ho^^ness, without which, no man shall see God; seek to perfect it in
the fear of God, but not a^ though ye were to be thereby justified, seek it
with that diligence and earnest study, as if ye were to be saved by it, and yet
seek it, so as to be denied to your diligence, or as if ye sought it not at
all. How sweet a conjunction were this in the Christians practice, to walk and
run so after the prize, as if his walking did obtain it, and yet to look upon
his walking, as if it were not at all. Your diligence and seriousness in
godliness should be upon the growing hand, as if doing did save you; yet you
ought to deny all that, and look to the righteousness of another, as if
nothing were done at all by you. How does Paul, Phil. 3.8. unite these in his
practice, I count all loss and dung, to be found in Christ, not having my own
righteousn^sse, and yet I press forward, and follow after perfection* as
having attained nothing yet. One of these two is the Original of many
stumblings and wanderings in our Christian-way, either there is not a necessity
and constraint laid upon the souls of many to walk in all well-pleasing, and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God: We look on it as a thing indifferent, that
is to be determined according to the measure of our receivings from God, or we
look on it as a thing not urging all, but belonging to Ministers, or more
eminent Professors, and hence there arises much carnal liberty, in walking
without the line of Christian-liberty, because there is an indifference in the
spirit that gives that latitude in walking; or else there is not that following
o^ holiness in such a way, as can consist with the establishing of Christ's
righteousness. No denial of our selves, in our actions, we act as if we were
sufficient of our selves and walks a^ if we were thereby justified, and
commends our selves to God in our own consciences, when ever we can have the
testimony of our consciences, for well-doing. And by this means, the Lord is
provoked, because we do not honor the Son, the Father counts himself despised,
and the spirit is grieved and tempted to depart, and leave us to our own
imaginations, till our idol which we established, fall down, and our
understanding return to us.

As it would be of great moment to the peace of Christians, and increase of
holiness, to have that union of Justification and Sanctification stamped on
their hearts, so especially to have the due and Evangelick-method and order of
these impressed on their consciences, it would conduce exceedingly, both to
their quckening and comforting: As there is nothing, that either so deadens or
darkens, and saddens the spirits of the Godly, as darkness in this particular;
the ignorance and mistake of the method and order of that well-ordered Covenant
must certainly be very prejudicial to the life and consolation tendered by the
Gospel. This spiritual walking, it flows from the believers state of
non-condemnation in Christ; he is once in Jesus Christ, and then he walks after
the Spirit of Christ. You may make engines to cause a dead statue wa^k, but it
cannot walk of it self, till it have a principle of life in it. Walking is one
of the operations of life, that flows from some inward principle, and so this
spiritual-walk, and motion of a Christian in his course, is the proper
operation of the new nature, that he is partaker of in Christ Jesus. As then
you know it is impossible that there can be true and un^eigned walking, where
there is no life, no principle within to put the creature to motion, though a
man may by Art, and some external impulse, so act a piece of timber or stone,
as it may resemble to you a walking, like to living creatures, so it is not
possible, that any of the Sons of Adam, who are by nature dead in sins, can
walk spiritually, before they be united to Jesus Christ, by believing in him,
for righteousness and salvation: There may be such a walking of carnal
unregenerat men, as may deceive all the senses, and judgments of beholders,
men may be acted from base external principles, in matters of Religion so that
a beholder shall perceive no difference between them and others, in whom Christ
lives and walks; but before God it is nothing else, but an artificial walk, a
painted and dead business, because, the spirit that raised up Christ, is not
stirring in them, they are not living members of that Head that quickens all,
have not been driven out of their own righteousness, to Christ, the city of
refuge; their principles are no higher then walking to obtain salvation, and
acceptance of God in a legal way, walking to pacify him, walking to please
men and their own consciences, walking for gain or credit, or advantage in the
way, walking according to custom or education in the way. These are not living
principles, but when once a soul has embraced Christ Jesus within it, he
becomes in a manner, a soul to actuat and to quicken that soul, he animates it,
and moves it in Gods ways, according to the Covenant of Grace, I will put my
Spirit in you, and cause you walk in my ways; there is first quickening, and
then walking, You who were dead in sins, has he quickened together with Christ,
Ephesians. 2.1, 5. and then it follows in due order, I will cause you to walk in my
ways, Ezekiel. 36* 27. Christ comes into the heart to dwell, and then he walks in
it, 2 Cor. 6.16. And what is that, Christ to walk in believers, it is nothing
else, but Christ by his Spirit making them to walk in his way; there is so
little in us to principle a spiritual action, even when renewed and quickened,
that we should look on our selves not so much, as workers with him, but as
being acted by him, we should look on soul and body, as pieces of organized
clay, that cannot move, but as it is moved by him as the soul and life of it;
so that according to the Scriptures di^lect, a Christian is nothing else, but
Christ living and wa^king in such a person. This is it which Christ when he is
to go out of the world instructs his Disciples into, Job. 15.1. He is the vine,
and we the branches; the branch must first be united to the tree, and implanted
into the tree, ere it bring forth fruit, without the tree, it withers: So must
a soul be fust ingrast in Jesus Christ, implanted in him by ^aith in his death
and sufferings, before it can grow up into the similitude of his resurrection,
or walk in newness of life, as Paul speaks, Romans 6.4, 5. Without me ye can do
nothing; ye must first be one with him, by believing in him, and receiving him
as a complete Savior, and then the sap and virtue of the tree flows into the
dead branch, and it shoots forth, and blossoms and bears.

Now if this Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles were duly pondered and
believed. O what a change would it make on the lives and spirits of Christians?
since this is the order established in the Gospel, and an order suitable both
to his grace and our necessity, (as all that is in it speaks forth an
excellent contriver) when we go about to establish our souls in another method,
how is it possible that we should not weary and vex our souls in vain? how can
we choose but torment our selves, and intricat our selves still more? Our
method and way is just contrary, we perplex our souls how to find the fruits of
the Spirit of Christ, how to walk after the Spirit, without first closing
entirely with Christ himself. We trouble our selves to find the operations of a
spiritual life, before we lay hold on Christ, who is the life of our souls. It
is made an argument by many, to keep them from believing in Christ, because
they do not find that spiritual life stirring in them. How cross is this to the
declared mind of Christ in the Gospel? It cannot choose but both darken the
spirit more, and dry up the influences of the Spirit of God, because it keeps
thee from the fountain of all consolation You may disquiet your souls by this
means, but you shall never make advantage this way, without him ye can do
nothing: and yet ye will not come to him, because you have done nothing. Its
strange how little reason is in it, if your eyes were opened; you refuse or
delay to abide in the vine, till you bring forth fruit, and fruit you cannot
bring forth, till you be in the vine: you would walk, and you will not have the
life from which you must walk. Paul lived indeed, but what a life? the life
that I live is by the faith of the Son of God; faith in Christ transported him
out of himself to Christ, or received Christ into the soul, and Christ in the
soul, was the life of his soul, Gal. 2.20. your walking is as if a dead man
essay to go. Will one expect figs of thorns, or grapes of thistles? I beseech
you, know what wrong ye do to your selves, and to Christ; ye wrong your selves,
because ye stand in the way of your own mercy, ye stand a back from your life,
him that is the way, the truth, and the life. You would walk in the way, but no
man can walk in this way, but by this way; Christ must quicken you to walk in
himself, ye must get life in him, and not bring it. You are in a vain
expectation of fruits from your selves, they will never see the Sun, and when
you have wearied your self in such a vain pursuit, you must at length come and
begin here. Ye wrong Christ his grace and mercy, this order is suited of
purpose for our desperate condition, and yet ye presume to reject it, and seek
another. You prescribe to your skilful and tender Physician, that which would
undo you: I beseech you, know the original of your miseries, doubts,
barrenness, and darkness: Here it is, you are still puzling your selves about
grace and duties, how to fill your eyes with these, and ye neglect Christ as
your righteousness, as one dead and risen again, and now sitting at Gods right
hand for us, you must first close with him, as ungodly men, though you were
godly, you must shut your eyes on any such thing, and lay living Jesus upon
your dead and benumbed hearts, answer all your challenges with his absolution,
and stand before God, in his clothing, put his garment immediately on your
nakedness, and vileness; and we may persuade you, it shall yield you abundant
consolation, and life, because he lives, ye shall live, and walk. If you were
more frequent and serious in the consideration of his excellent Majesty, of his
beautiful and lovely qualifications, as the Mediator for sinners, and of the
precious promises, which are all, Yea, and Amen, confirmed in him, and less in
the vain and unprofitable debates of self-interest, and such like, I am
persuaded ye would be more fruitful Christians. This is not as the business of
a holy day, to be done at your first coming to Christ, and no more, no, it must
run along all your life, the aged experienced Christian must come alongs as
an ungodly sinner, to a blessed and living Savior, and have no other ground of
glory or confidence before God, but Christ Jesus crucified.

SERMON VII.
Verse. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life in Jesus Christ, has made me free,
etc.


YOU know there are two principal things in the preceding verse, the
privilege of a Christian, and the property or character of a Christian, he is
one that never enters into condemnation, he that believes shall not perish,
Joh. 3.15. And then he is one that walks not after the flesh, though he be in
the flesh, but in a more elevat way above men, after the guiding and leading of
the Holy Spirit of God. Now it may be objected in many consciences, how can
these things be? Have not all sinned, and come ^^ort of the glory of God, and
so the whole world is become guilty before God? Is not every man lying under a
sentence of death? Cursed is he that abides not in all things, etc. How then
can h^ escape condemnation. Again, you speak of walking after the Spirit, as
proper to the Christian; but whose walk is not carnal? Who is it that does not
often step aside out of the way, and follow the conduct and counsel of flesh
and blood? Is not sin dwelling here in our mortal bodies? Who can say, my heart
or way is clean? Therefore both that privilege, and this property of a
Christian, seems to be but big words, no real thing. And indeed I confess the
multitude of men has no other opinion of them, but as fancied imaginary
things, few believes the report of the Gospel concerning the salvation of elect
ones, and few understands what this spiritual walking is; many conceive it is
not a thing that belongs to men who are led about with passions and affections,
but rather to Angels or Spirits perfected.

However, we have in these words an answer to satisfy both objections: He
grants something implicitly, and it is this, it is true indeed, Christians are
under a two^old Law, captives and bondmen to these; A law of sin in their
members, bringing them in subjection to the lusts of the flesh. Sin has a
powerful dominion and tyranny over every man by nature, it has a sort of right
and power over him; and likewise, every one was under a law of death, the Law
of God cu^sing him, and sentencing him to condemnation, because of sin; these
two were joint conquerours of all mankind. But, says he, there is a delivery
from this bondage, freedom is obtained to believers, by Jesus Christ, and so
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ, and so they walk not after
the leading and direction of that law of sin within them, but after the guiding
of our blessed Tutor, the Spirit of God. If you ask how this comes to pass, by
what authority, or law, or power, is this releasement and freedom obtained?
Here it is, by the Law of the Spirit of life, which is in Christ. Christ is not
an invader, or unjust conqueror, he has fair Law for what he does, even
against these Laws which detains unbelievers in bondage: There is a higher and
later Law on his side, and he has power and strength to accomplish his design.
He opposes Law unto Law, and life unto death, and spirit unto flesh; a Law of
Spirit, unto a Law of sin, and flesh; a Law of life, unto a Law of death. In a
word, the Gospel, or Covenant of Grace, unto the Law, or Covenant of Works; the
powerful and living Spirit of grace that wrought mightily in him, is set
^^re-against the power of sin and Satan, in us, and against us; the one gives
him right and title to conquer, the other accomplisheth him for the work; and
by these two, are believers in Jesus Christ made freemen, who were bondmen.
That then which we would speak from these words, is the common lot of all men
by nature, viz. to be under the power of sin, and sentence of death; the
special exemption of believers in Christ, and immunity from this, or delivery
from it, and then the true ground and cause of this delivery from that bondage;
which three are contained in the words. It is a purpose indeed of a high
nature, and of high conce^nment to us all, our life and death is wrapped up in
this; you may hear ma^y things more gladly, but if ye knew it, none so
profitable. Therefore let us gather our spirits to the consideration of these
particulars.

As the first, all men are under the bondage of a twofold Law, the law of sin
within them, and the law of death without them. Man was created righteous, but,
says the wise man, he found out many inventions; a sad invention indeed, he
found but misery and slavery to himself, who was made free and happy. His
freedom and happiness was to be in subjection to his Maker, under the just and
holy commands of his Lord who had given him breath and being; it was no
captivity, or restraint, to be compassed about with the hedges of the Lords
holy Law, no more then it is a restraint on a man's liberty, to have his way
hedged in, where he may safely walk, that he may keep himself within it, from
pits and snares on every hand. But alace! (if we may say, alace! when we have
such a redemption in Jesus Christ.) Adam was not content with that happiness,
but seeking after more liberty, he sold himself into the hands of strange
lords, first sin, and then death. Other lords besides thee, O Lord, have
dominion over us, Isa. 26.13. This is too true in this sense, Adam seeking to
be as the Lord himself, lost his own lordship and dominion over all the works
of Gods hands, and became a servant to the basest and most abominable of all,
even that which is most hateful to the Lord, to sin and death: And this is the
condition we are now born into. Consider it, I pray you, we are born captives
and slaves, the most noble, the most ingenuous, and the most free of us all:
Paul speaks of it as a privilege, to be born free, to be free in man's
Commonwealth. It is counted a dignity to be a free Citizen or Burgess of a
Town: Liberty is the great claim of people now a days, and indeed it is the
great advantage of a people to enjoy that mother, and womb-priviledge, and
right. But, alace! what is all this to be freeborn in a civil society? it is
but the state of a man among men, it reaches no further then the outward man,
his life or estate. But here is a matter of greater moment, know ye what state
your souls are in? your souls are incomparably more worth than your bodies, as
much as eternity surpasses this inch of time, or immortality exceeds
mortality; your souls are your selves indeed, your bodies are but your house,
or tabernacle ye lodge into for a season: Now then, I beseech you ask whether
ye be born free or not; if your souls be slaves, ye are slaves indeed, for so
the Evangelist changes these; Matthew says, in chapter 16.^6. What has a man
gained if he lose his soul? And Luke 9.25 says, What has he gained, if he
lose himself? Therefore you are not free indeed, except your souls be f^ee:
What is it, I pray you, to enjoy freedom among men? I a^k you what are ye
before God, whether bond or free? this is the business in^eed. The Phari^ees
pleaded a claim to the liberty and privilege of being, Abraham's sons and
children, and thought they might hence conclude they were Gods children: But
our Lord Je^us, discovers this mis^ake, when he tells them of a freedom and
libe^ty that he came to proclaim to men, to purchase to them, and bestow on
them; they stumbled at this Doctrine: What, say they, talkest thou to us of
making us free, we were never in bondage, for we be Abraham's chil^ren? This is
even the language of our hearts, when we tell you, that ye are born heirs of
wrath, and slaves of sin and satan, he^e is the secret whispering of hearts; we
be Abraham's seed, we were never in bondage to any. We be baptized Christians,
we have a Church State, have the privileges, and liberties, not only of
Subject^ in the State, but of Members in the Church; why say thou, we are
bondmen? I would wish, ye were all free indeed, but that cannot be till ye
know your bondage. Consider then, I beseech you, that you may be free subjects
in a State, and free members in a Church, and yet in bondage, under the law of
sin and death. This was the mistake, that was a ground of presumption in the
Jews, and occasioned their stumbling at this Stone of salvation, laid in Sion;
you think you have Church Priviledges, and what needs more? Be not deceived,
you are servants of sin, and therefore not free. There are two sorts, or rather
two ranks of persons, in Gods house, Sons, and slaves; the son abides in the
house for ever, the slave but for a time; when the time expires, he must go
out, or be cast out. The Church is Gods house, but many are in it, that will
not dwell in it, many have the outward liberties of this house, that have no
interest in the special mercies, and loving kindness proper to children. The
time will come, that the most part of the visible Church, who are baptized, and
have eaten with him at his Table, and had a kind of frien^ship to him here,
shall be cast out as bondmen, and Isaac only shall be kept within, the child of
the promise. The house that is here, has some inward Sanctuary, and some utter
Porches; many have access to these, that never enters within the secret of the
Lord, and so shall not dwell in the house above: It is not so much the
business, who shall enter into the holy hill, but who shall stand and dwell in
it. The day of Judgment w^ll be a great day of excommunication; O how many
thousands will be then cut off from the Church of the living God, and delivered
over ^o satan, because they were ^eally under his power, while they were
Church-mebers and Abraham's sons? Let me tell you then, that all of us were once
in this state of bondage, which Christ speaks of, He that commits sin, is
the servant of sin, John 8.34. and the servant abids not in the house for ever:
So that I am a^raid, many of us who are in the visible Church, and stand in
this Congregation, shall not have liberty to stand in the assembly of the
fi^st-born, when all the Sons are gathered in one to the new Jerusalem; sin
has a right over us, and it has a power over us, and therefore it is called a
law of sin, the^e is a kind of authority that it has over u^, by virtue of
Gods Justice, and our own voluntary consent. The Lord in his righteou^nesse,
has given over all the posterity of Adam, for his sin, which he sinned, as ^
common person, representing us, he has given us all over to the power of a
body of death within us. Since man did choose to depa^t from his Lord, he has
justly delivered him into the hands of a strange Lord to have dominion over
him. The transmitting of such an original pollution, to all men, is an act of
glorious justice. As he in jus^i^e gives men over to the lusts of their own
hearts now, for following of these lusts. Contrary to his will, so was it at
first, by one man's disobedience many were m^de sinners; and that in Gods holy
righteousness, sin entered into the World, and had permission of God, to subdue
and conquer the World to it self, because man would not be subject to God. But
as there is the justice of God in it, so there is a voluntary choice and
election, which gives sin a power over us; we choose a strange lord, and he
lords it over us: We say to our lusts, Come ye and rule over us, we submit our
reason, our conscience and all, to the guidance and leading of our blind
affections, and passions; we choose our bondage for liberty, and thus sin h^th
a kind of law over us, by our own consent; it exercises a jurisdiction; and
when once it is installed in power, and clothed with it, it is not so easy
again, to put it out of that throne: there is a conspiring (so to speak) of
these two, to make out the jurisdiction and authority of sin over us, God gives
us over to iniquity and unrighteousness, and we yield our selves over to it,
Romans 6.16.19. we yield our members servants to iniquity; a little pleasure or
commodity, is the bait that ensnares us to this, we give up our selves, and
join to our idols, and God ratifies it, in a manner, and passes such a
sentence, Let them alone, he says, go ye every one and serve your idols, Ezekiel.
23. since ye would not serve me, be doing, go serve your lusts, look if they be
better masters then I; look what wages they will give you.

Now, let us again consider what power sin has, being thus clothed with a
sort of authority. O! but it is mighty, and works mightily in men. It reigns in
our mortal bodies, Romans 6.12. here is the throne of sin established, in the
lusts and affections of the body, and from hence, it emits laws, and statutes,
and sends out commands to the soul, and whole man. Man choose at first, to
hearken to the counsel of his senses, that said, it was pleasant and good, to
eat of the forbidden fruit; but that counsel is now turned into a command, sin
has gotten a scepter there, to rule over the spirit which was born a free
Prince, sin has conquered all our strength, or, we have given up unto it all
our strength; any truth that is in the conscience, any knowledge of God, or
Religion, all this is incarcerated, detained in a prison of unrighteous
affections: sin has many strong holds and bulwarks in our flesh, and by these,
commands the whole spirit and soul in man, and leads captive every thought to
the obedience of the flesh. You know how strong it was in holy Paul, Romans 7.
what a mighty battle and wrestling he had, and how near he was to fainting and
giving over: How then must it have an absolute, and sovereign, full dominion
over men in nature, there being no contrary principle within by nature to
debate with it, it rules without much controlment; there may be many
convictions of conscience, and sparkles of light against sin, but these are
quickly extinguised and buried: Nay, all these principles of light, and
knowledge in the conscience, do oftentimes strengthen sin, as some things are
confirmed, not weakened by opposition; unequal and saint opposition strengthens
the adversary, as cold, compassing springs, makes them hotter: So it is here,
sin takes occasion by the command, to work all manner of concupiscence, Romans
7.8. Without the Law, sin is in a manner dead, but when any adversary appears,
when our lusts and humors are crossed, then they unite their strength against
any such opposition, and brings forth more sinful sin. The knowledge and
conscience that many have, serves for nothing, but to make their sins greater,
to exasperat and imbitter their spirits and lusts against God: why torments
thou me before the time? Its a devilish disposition that is in us all, we
cannot endure the light, because our deeds are evil.

Let us but consider these particulars, and we shall know the power and
dominion of sin. First, Consider the extent of its dominion, both in regard of
all men, and all in every man: I say, all men, there is none of us exempted
from it; the most noble, and the most base. Sin is the Catholic king, the
universal king, or rather satan, who is the prince of this world, and he rules
the world by this law of sin, which is even the contradiction of the Law of
God. Who of you believes this, that satan's kindom is so spacious? that it is
even over the most part in the visible Church; this is the Emperor of the
world. The Turk vainly arrogats this title to himself, but the devil is truly
so, and we have Gods own testimony for it: All Kings, all Nobles, all Princes,
all People, rich and poor, high and low, are once subjects of this prince,
ruled by this black law of sin. Oh! know your condition, whose servants ye are;
think not within your selves, we have Abraham for our father, we are baptized
Christians: No, know, that all of us are once the children of satan, and do his
works, and fulfill his will. But, moreover, all that is in us, is subject to
this law of sin; all the faculties of the soul, the understanding is under the
power of darkness, the affections under the power of corruption, the mind is
blinded, and the heart is hardened, the soul alienated from God, who is its
life, all the members and powers of a man yielded up as instruments of
unrighteousness, every one to execute that wicked law, and fulfill the lusts
o^ the flesh. This dominion is over all a man's actions, even those that are in
best account, and esteem among men; your honest, upright dealing with men, your
most religious performances to God, they are more conformed to the law of sin,
then to the law of God, Hag. 2.14. this nation, and the work of their hands,
and that which they offer, is unclean. All your works, your good works, are
infected with this pollution; sin has defiled your persons, and they defile
all your actions, the infection is mutual, these actions again defiles your
persons still more: To the impure, all things are impure, even their mind and
conscience is defiled, Tit. 1.15. Do what you can, ye who are in nature cannot
please God, its but obedience to the law of sin that is in you.

Bu^, 2. Consider the intensness and force of this power, how mighty it is, in
working against all oppositions whatsoever, unless it be overcome by Almighty
power. Nothing but All-might can conquer this power: The spirit that works in
men by nature, is of such activity and efficacy, that it drives men on
furiously, as if they were possessed, to their own ruin. How much has it of a
man's consent? and so it drives him strongly and irresistibly. Much will,
desire, and greediness, will make corruption run like a River, over all its
Banks, set in the way thereof, Counsel, Persuasion, Law, Heaven, Hell, yet men's
corruption must be over all those: Preaching, Threatenings, Convictions of
Conscience, are but as flaxen ropes to bind a Sampson, sin within easily breaks
them. In a word, no created power is of sufficient virtue to bind the strong
man, it must be one mightier then he, and that is the Spirit of Jesus Christ.
Do ye not see men daily drawn after their lusts, as beasts, following their
senses as violently as a horse rusheth to the battle? If there be any gain or
advantage to oil the wheels of affection, O how runs men headlong? there is no
crying will hold them. In sum, sin is become all one with us; its incorporat
into the man, and become one with his affections, and then these command.

SERMON VIII.
Verse. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free, etc.


THat whereabout the thoughts and discourses of men now run, is freedom and
liberty, or bondage and slavery. All men are af^aid to lose their liberties,
and be made servants to strangers: And indeed liberty, whether National, or
personal, even in civil respects, is a great mercy and privilege; but, alace!
men know not, neither do they consider what is the ground and reason of such
changes, and from what fountain it flows, that a Nation of a long time ^ree
from a foreign yoke, should now be made to submit their necks unto it. Many
wonder that our Nation unconquered in the days of ignorance, and darkness,
should now be conquered in the days of the Gospel; and there want not many
ungodly spirits, that will rather impute the fault unto the Reformation of
Religion, that take it to themselves. There are many secret heart-jealousies
among us, that Christ is a hard Master, and cannot be served. But would you
know the true original of our apparent and threatened bondage? Come and see,
come and consider something expressed in these words. All your thoughts are
busied about civil liberty, but you do not consider that you are in bondage
while you are free, and that to worse masters than you fear. We are under a law
of sin and death, that has the dominion and sway in all men's affections and
conversations; and when the glorious liberty of the Sons of God is offered unto
us in the Gospel, when the Son has come to make us free, we love our own
chains, and will not suffer them to be loosed: therefore it is that a Nation
that has despised such a gracious offer of peace and freedom in Jesus Christ,
is robbed and spoiled of peace and freedom. When this Law of the Spirit of life
in Christ is published and proclaimed openly unto Congregations, unto
Judicatories, and unto persons, yet few do regard it; the generality are in
bondage to a contrary law of sin, and this they serve in the lusts thereof.
Yea, (which most of all aggravats and heightens the offense) even after we have
all of us professed a subjection to the Law of God, and to Jesus Christ, the
King, and Lawgiver, we are in an extraordina^y way engaged to the Lord, by
many Oaths and Covenants to be his people; we did consent that he should be our
King, and that we should be ruled in our profession and practice by his Word
and will, as the fundamental Laws of this his Kingdom; we did solemnly renounce
all strange lords, that had tyrannized over us; and did swear against them,
never to yield willing obedience unto them; namely, the lusts of the world,
ignorance of God, unbelief, and disobedience. Now what became of all this work,
you may know, the generality of all ranks have rebelled against that Lord, and
Prince, and withdrawn from his allegiance, and revolted unto the same lusts and
ways, these same courses against which we had both by our profession of
Christianity, and solemn oaths engaged our selves; and so men have voluntarily
and heartily subjected themselves unto the laws of sin, and desires of the
flesh. Hence is the beginning of our ruin, because we would not serve our own
God and Lord in our own land, therefore are so many led away captive to serve
strangers in another land, therefore we are like to be captives in our own
land; because we refused homage to our God, and obeyed strange lords within;
therefore are we given up to the lust of strangers without.

I would have you thinking, and that seriously, that there are worse masters
you serve, then these you most hate, and that there is a worse bondage, whereof
you are insensi^le, then that you fear most, you fear strangers, but your
greatest evil is within you; you might retire within, and behold wor^e masters,
and mo^e pernicious and mortal enemies to your well-being. T^is is the case of
all men by nature, and of all men as far as in nature; sin ruling, commanding
in them, and lording it over them, and they willingly following after the
commandment, and so oppressed and broken in judgment. If you could but rightly
look upon other men, you might see, that they who are servants o^ diverse
lusts, are not their own men (so to speak) they have not the command of
themselves. Look upon a man given to drunkenness, and what a slave is he?
whither does not his lust drive him? let him bind himself with resolutions,
with vows, yet he cannot be holden by them; shame before men, loss of estate,
decay of health, temporal punishment, nay, eternal, all set together, cannot
keep him from fulfilling the desires of that lust, when he has opportunity. A
man given to covetousness, how does he serve that idol? how does he forget
himself to be a man? or to have a reasonable ^oul within him, he is so devoted
to it, and thus it is with every man by nature: there may be many petty little
gods, that he worships upon occasion, but every unrenewed man has some one
thing predominant in him, unto which he has sworn obedience and devotion. The
man most civilized, most abstract from the grosser outward pollutions, yet
certainly, his heart within is but a temple full of idols, to the love and
service of which he is devoted. There is some of the fundamental laws of satan's
kingdom, that rules in every natural man, either the lust of the eyes, or the
lust of the flesh, or the pride of life; every man sacrifices to one of these,
his credit and honor, or his pleasure, or his profit: Self, whatever way
refined and subtillized in some, yet at best it is but an enemy to God; and
without that sphere of self, cannot a man act upon natural principles, till a
higher spirit come in, which is here spoken of.

Oh! that you would take this for bondage, to be under this woeful necessity of
satisfying and fulfilling the desires of your flesh and mind, Ephesians. 2.2. many
account it only liberty and freedom, therefore, they look upon the laws of the
spirit of life, as cords and bonds, and consult to cast them off, and cut them
asunder; but consider, what a wretched life you have with your imperious lusts.
The truth is, sin is for the most part its own punishment; I am sure, you have
more labor and toil in fulfilling the lusts of sin, then you might have in
serving God; men's lusts are never at quiet, they are continually putting you on
service, they are still driving and dragging men headlong, hurrying them to and
fro, and they cannot get rest; what is the cause of all the disquiet, disorder,
confusion, trouble and wars in the world? from whence do contentions arise,
come they not hence, (says James 4.1.) even of the lusts that war in our
members. It is these that trouble the world, and these are the troublers of
Isreal's peace, these take away both inward peace, domestic peace, and national
peace: These lusts, Covetousness, Ambition, Pride, Passion, Self-love, and such
like; do set nation against nation, men and men, people and people by the ears.
These multiply businesses beyond necessity; these multiply cares without
profit, and so bring forth vexation and torment. If a man had his lusts
subdued, and his affections composed unto moderation and sobriety, O what a
multitude of noysom and hurtful cares should he then be freed from, what a
sweet calmness should possess that spirit. Will you be persuaded of it, Beloved
in the Lord, that it were easier to serve the Lord, then to serve your lusts,
that they cost you more labor, disquiet, perplexity, and sorrow, than the
Lords service will; that so you may weary of such masters, and groan to be from
under such a law of sin.

But, if that will not suffice to persuade you, then consider, in the next
room, if you will needs serve a law of sin, you must needs be subject to a law
of death; if you will not be persuaded to quite the service of sin, then tell
me, what think you of your wages? The wages of sin is death, that you may
certainly expect; and can you look and long for such wages? God has joined
these together, by a perpetual ordinance, they come in the world together, sin
entered, and death by sin, and they have gone hand in hand together since: and
think you to dissolve what God has joined? Before you go further, and obey sin
more, think, I pray you, what it can give you, what does it give you for the
present? but much pain and toil, and vexation, in stead of promised pleasure,
and satisfaction. Sin does with all men, as the devil does with some of his
sworn vassals, and servants, they have a poor wretched life with him, they are
wearied and troubled, to satisfy all his unreasonable and imperious commands;
he loadens them with base service, and they are still kept in expectation of
some great reward, but for the present, they have nothing but misery and
trouble; and at length, he becomes the executione^, and perpetual tormenter of
them whom he made to serve him; such a master is sin, and such wages you may
expect: Consider then, what your expectation is, before you go on, or engage
further, death. We are under a law of bodily death, therefore, we are mortal;
our house is like a ruinous lodge, that drops through, and one day or other, it
must fall: sin has brought in the seeds of corruption in men's nature, which
dissolves it, else it had been immortal: But, there is a worse death after
this, a living death, in respect of which, simple death would be chosen rather;
men will rather live very miserably then die, nature has an aversation of it,
skin for skin, and all for life will a man give: Death imports a destruction of
being, which every thing naturally seeks to preserve. But O! what a dreadful
life is it, worse then death, when men will chose death rather then life? O!
how terrible will it be, to hear that word, Hills and mountains fall on us, and
cover us. Men newly risen, their bodies and souls meet again, after a long
separation, and this to be their mutual entertainment one to another, the body
to wish it were still in the dust, and the soul to desire it might never be in
the body: Surely, if we had so much grace as to believe this, and tremble at
it, before we be forced to act it, there were some hope; if we could persuade
our selves once of this, that the ways of sin, all of them, how pleasant, how
profitable soever, whatsoever gain they bring in, whatsoever satisfaction they
give, that they are nothing else, but the ways of death, and go down to the
chambers of hell, that they will delude and deceive us, and so in end destroy
us: If we might once believe this with our heart, there were some hope that we
would break off from them, and choose the untroden paths of Godliness, which
are pleasantness and peace. However, this is the condition of all men, once to
be under sin, and under a sentence of death for sin: Its the unbelief of this,
and a conceit of freedom, that securely and certainly destroys the world, by
keeping souls from Jesus Christ, the prince of life.

But there is a delivery, and that is the thing expressed in the words, there
is freedom from both attainable; and I think, the very hearing of such a thing,
that there is a redemption from sin and misery possible, yea, and that some are
actually delivered from it: This might stir up in our hearts, some holy
ambition, and earnest desire after such a state; how might it awake our hearts
after it, but this is the woefulness of a natural condition that a soul under
the power of sin, can neither help it self, nor rightly desire help from
another, because the will is captive too; this makes it a very desperate and
remediless business to any humane expectation, because such a soul is well
pleased with its own setters, and loves its own prison, and so can neither long
for freedom, nor welcome the Son who is come to make free. But yet, there is a
freedom and delivery, and if ye ask who are partakers of it, the text declares
it to you, even these who are in Jesus Christ, and walk according to the Spirit
of Christ. These all, and these only, who finding-themselves dead in sins and
trespasses, under the power and dominion of sin, and likewise under the
sentence of death and condemnation, begin to lift up their heads, upon the hope
of a Savior, and to look unto their Redeemer, as poor prisoners, whose eyes
and looks are strong entreaties, and in stead of many requests; such as give an
entire renounce unto their former ways, and prevailing lusts, and give up
themselves in testimony of their sense of his unspeakable favor of redemption,
to be wholly his, and not their own. There are some souls who are free from the
dominion of sin, and from the danger of death, some who were once led about
with diverse lusts, as well as others, who walked after the course of this
world, and fulfilled the desires of the flesh, and were children of wrath as
well as others; but now they are quickened in Christ Jesus, and have abandoned
their former way; they have another rule, another way, another principles,
their study is now to please God, and grow in holiness, the ways they
delighted in, in former times, are now loathsome; they think that a filthy
puddle, which they drank greedily of, and now its all, or their chiefest grief
and burden, that so much of that old man, must be carried about with them, and
so this expresses many groans from them with Paul, wa^ is me, miserable man,
who shall deliver me? Such souls are, in a manner (to speak so) half redeemed,
who being made sensible of their bondage, groan and pan^ for a Redeemer: The
day of their complete redemption is at hand, all of you are witnesses of this,
that there are some thus freed, but they are signs and wonders indeed to the
world; their kinsmen, their acquaintance, their friends and neighbors wonder
what is become of them, they think it strange they walk not, and run not into
that same excess of riot with them. But whosoever thou art, that is escaped
from under the slavery of sin, wonder at the world, that does run so madly on
their own destruction, think is strange that thou ran so long with them, and
that all will not run in these pleasant ways with thee; think it strange, that
thou runs so slowly, when so great a prize is to be obtained, an immortal and
never fading Crown. If mortifying and crucifying the lusts of the flesh, if
dying to the world, and to thy self, seem very hard and unpleasant to thee, if
it be as the plucking out of thine eye, and cutting off thine hand; know then,
that corruption is much alive yet, and has much power in thee; but remember,
that if thou can have but so much grace, and resolution, as to kill and
crucify these lusts, without foolish and hurtful pity, if thou can attain
that victory over thy self, thou shall never be a loser, thou cannot repent it
afterward: To die to our selves and the world, to kill sin within: O! that
makes way to a life hid from the world, one hour whereof is better than many
ages in sinful pleasure: Quicken thy self often with this thought, that there
is a true life after such a death, and that thou can not pass into it, but
by the valley of the death of thy lusts; remember, that thou do but kill
thine enemies, which embrace, that they may strangle thee; and then stir up
your self with this consideration, the life of sin will be thy death: better
enter heaven, without these lusts, then go to hell with them.

SERMON IX.
Verse. 2. For the Law of the Spirit of life, in Christ Jesus, has made me
free, etc.


THat which makes the delivery of men from the tyranny of sin, and death, most
di^^icult, and utterly impossible unto nature, is, that sinners have given up
themselves unto it, as if it were true liberty, that the will and affections of
men are conquered, and sin has its impe^ial throne seated there: Other
conquerours invade men against their will, and so they rule against their will;
they contain men in subjection by fear, and not by love; and so when ever any
occasion offers, they are glad to cast off the yoke of unwilling obedience.
But, sin has first conquered men's judgment, by blinding it, putting out the
eye of the understanding, and then invaded the affections of men, drawn them
over to its side, and by these, it keeps all in a most willing obedience. Now,
what hopes are there then of delivery, when the prisoner accounts his bondage
liberty, and his prison a palace; what expectation of freedom, when all that is
within us conspires to the upholding that tyrranous dominion of sin, against
all that would cast it out of its usurpation, as if they were mortal enemies?

Yet there is a delivery possible, but such as would not have entered in the
heart of man to imagine, and it is here expressed, the Law of the Spirit of
Life, etc. this declares how, and by what means we may be made free: Not indeed
by any power within us, not by any created power without us, sin is stronger
then all these, because its imperial seat is within, far without the reach of
all created power; there may be some means used by men, to beat it out of the
outworks of the outward man, to chase it out of the external members; some
means to restrain it from such gross out-breaking^, but ther^ is none can lay
^iedge to the soul within, or s^orm the unde^standing and will, where it has
its p^incipal residence, its inaccessible, and impregnable by any humane power:
no entreaties or persuasions, no terrors or threatenings can prevail, it can
neither be stormed by violence, nor undermined by skill, because it is within
the spirit of the mind: Until at length some other spirit stronger then our
spirit come; till the Spirit of life which is in Christ, come and bind the
strong man, and so make the poor soul free. You heard that we were under a law
of death, and under the power of sin; now there is another Law, answering this
law, and a power to overcome this power. You may indeed ask, by what law of
authority can a sinner that is bound over by Gods Justice, unto death and
condemnation be released? Is there any law above Gods Law, and the sentence of
his Justice? The Apostle answers, that there is a Law above it, a Law after it,
the Law of the Spirit of Life. Jesus Christ opposes Law unto law, the Law of
life unto the law of death; the Gospel unto the Law, the second Covenant unto
the first. Thus it is then, Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, full of grace
and truth, did come in man's stead, when the law and sentence of death was past
upon all mankind, and there was no expectation from the terms of the first
Covenant, that there should be any dispensation or mitigation of the rigor of
it, he obtains this, that so many as God had chosen unto life, their sins and
their punishment might be laid on him, and so he took part of our flesh, for
this end, that he might be made a curse for us, and so redeem us from the
curse: Thus having satisfied Justice, and fulfilled the sentence of death, by
suffering death, him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior, and the head
of all things. In compensation of this great and weighty work given him by his
Father, all judgment is committed to him, and so he sends out and proclaims
another Law in Sion; another sentence, even of life and absolution unto all,
and upon all them that shall believe in his Name. Thus you see the law of death
abrogated by a new Law of life, because our Lord and Savior was made under the
law of death, and suffered under it, and satisfied it, that all his seed might
be freed from it, and might come under a life-giving law; so that it appears to
be true, that was said at first, there is no condemnation to them that are in
Christ, there is no Law, no Justice against them.

But then another difficulty as great as the former, is in the way, though such
a law and sentence of life and absolution be pronounced in the Gospel, in
Christ's Name, yet we are dead in sins and trespasses, we neither know nor feel
our misery, nor can we come to a Redeemer: as there was a law of death above
our head, so there is a law of sin within our hearts, which rules and commands
us; and there is neither will nor ability to escape from under it. It is true,
life and freedom is preached in Christ, to all that come to him for life, to
all that renounce sins dominion, is remission of sin preached: But here is the
greatest difficulty, how can a dead soul stir, rise, and walk? how can a slave
to sin, and a willing captive renounce it, when he has neither to will nor to
do? Indeed if all had been purchased for us, if eternal life, and forgiveness
of sins, had been brought near us, and all the business done to our con^ent,
and that only wanting; if these had been the terms, I have purchased life, now
rise and embrace it of your selves; truly, it had been an unsuccessful
bu^ine^^, Christ had lost all that was given him, if the moment and weight of
our salvation had been hung upon o^r acceptance: T^erefore, it is well
provided for this al^o, that there should be a power to overcome this power, a
spirit of life in Christ to quicken dead sinner^, and ^aise them ^p, and draw
them to him. And so, the second Adam ^ath this prerogative beyond the first,
that he is only a living soul in himself, but a quickening spirit to all that
a^e given him of the Father, 1 Cor. 15.45. So then, as Christ Jesus has law
and right on his side, to free us from death, so he has virtue and power in
him to accomplish our delivery from sin, as he has fair law to loose the
chains of condemnation, and to repeal the sentence past against us, without
prejudice to Gods justice, he having fully satisfied the same in our name; so
he has sufficient power given him, to loose the fetters o^ sin from off us.
When he has paid the price, and satisfied the Father, so that justice can
crave nothing: Yet, he has one adversary to deal with, Satan has sinners
bound with the cords of their own lusts, in a prison of darkness, and unbelief;
Jesus Christ therefore comes out to conquer this enemy, and to redeem his elect
Ones, from that unjust usurpation of sin, to bring them out of the prison by
the strong hand; and therefore, he is one mighty, and able to save to the
uttermost, he has might to do it, as well as right to it.

Consider then, my beloved, these two things, which are the breasts of our
consolation, and the foundation of our hope; we are once lost and utterly
undone, both in regard of Gods justice, and our own utter inability to help our
selves, which is strengthened by our unwillingness, and thus made a more
desperate busine^s: now God has provided a suitable remedy, he has laid help
on one that is mighty indeed, who has almighty power, and by his power he
first conflicted with the punishment of our sins, and with his Fathers wrath,
and has overcome, discharged and satisfied that, and so has purchased a right
unto us, to give salvation to whom he will, be conquered, and by his power
obtain this supreme autho^y of life and death.

Now, having his authority established in hi^ person, the next work is to apply
this purchase, act^ally to con^er this li^e; and therefore, he has almighty
power to raise up dead sinners, to creat us again to good works, to redeem us
from the ty^anny o^ sin and satan, whose slaves we are. He has a spirit of
li^e, which he communicats to his seed, he breaths it into these souls that he
died for, and dispossesseth that powerful corruption that dwells in us. Hence
it comes to pass, that they walk after the Spirit, though they be in the
flesh; because the powerful Spirit of Christ has entered, and taken possession
of their spirits, Isa. 59.20, 21.

Let us not be discouraged in our apprehensions of Christ, when we look on our
ruinous and desperat^ estate, let us not conclude, it is past hope, and past
his help too. We do proclaim in the name of Jesus Christ, that there is no
sinner, howsoever justly under a sentence of death and damnation, but they may
in him find a relaxation from that sentence, and that without the impairing of
Gods justice, and this is a marvelous ground of comfort, that may establish our
souls, 1 John 1.9. even this, that law and justice is upon Christ's side, and
nothing to accuse, or plead against a sinner, that imploys him for his Advocat.
But, know this also, that you are not delivered from death, that you may live
under sin; nay, you are redeemed from death, that you may be freed from the law
of sin, but that must be done by his almighty Spirit, and cannot be otherwise
done.

I know not whether of these is matter of greatest comfort, that there is in
Christ, a redemption from the wrath of God, and from hell, and that there is a
redemption too, from sin, and corruption which dwells within us; but sure I am,
both of them will be most sweet and comfortable to a believer, and without
both, Christ were not a complete Redeemer, nor we completely redeemed. N^ithe^
would a believing soul, in which there is any measure of this new law, and
divine life, be satisfied without both these. Many are miserably deluded in
their apprehensions of the Gospel, they take it up thus, as if it were nothing
but a proclamation of freedom from misery, from death and damnation, and so the
most part catch at nothing else in it, and from thence takes liberty to walk
after their former lusts and courses; this is the woeful practical u^e, that the
generality of hearers, make of the free intimation of pardon, and forgiveness
of sin, and delivery from wrath; they admit some general notion of that, and
stops there, and examines not what further is in the Gospel, and so you will
see the slaves of sin, professing a kind of hope of freedom from death, the
servants and vassals of corruption, who walk after the course of this world,
and fulfill the lusts, and desires of their mind and flesh, yet fancying a
freedom and immunity from condemnation, men living in sin, yet thinking of
escaping wrath, which dreams could not be entertained in men, if they did drink
in all the truth, and open both their ears to the Gospel, if our spirits were
not narrow and limited, and so excluded the one half of the Gospel, that is,
our redemption from sin. There is too much of this, even among the children of
God, a strange narrowness of spirit, which admits not whole and entire truth;
it falls out often, that when we think of delivery from death and wrath, we
forget in the mean time the end and purpose of that, which is, that we may be
freed from sin, and serve the living God without fear. And if at any time we
consider, and busy our thoughts about freedom from the law of sin, and victory
over corruption; such is the scantness of room and capacity in our spirits,
that we loss the remembrance of delivery from death, and condemnation, in
Christ Jesus; thus we are tossed between two extremes, the quicksands of
presumption and wantonness, and the rocks of unbelief and despair, or
discouragement, both of which, do kill the Christians life, and make all to
fade and wither. But this were the way, and only way, to preserve the soul in
good case, even to keep these two continually in our ^ight, that we are
redeemed from death and misery in Christ, and that not to serve our selves, or
to continue in our sins, but that we may be redeemed from that sin, that dwells
in us, and that both these are purchased by Jesus Christ, and done by his
power; the one in his own person, the other by his Spirit within us. I would
have you correcting your misapprehensions of the Gospel: do not so much look on
victory and freedom from sin, as a duty and task, though we be infinitely bound
to it; but rather as a privilege and dignity conferred upon us by Christ* Look
not upon it, I say, only as your duty, as many do; and by this means are
discouraged from the sight of their own infirmity and weakness, as being too
weak for such a strong party: but look upon it as the one half, and greater
half of the benefit conferred by Christ's death, as the greater hall of the
redempti^n which the Redeemer by his office is bound to accomplish: He will
redeem Israel from all his iniquities; with him is plenteous red^mp^ion, P^al.
130.7, 8. This is the plenty, this is the sufficiency of i^, that he redeems
not only from misery, but from iniquity, and that, all iniquities. I would not
desire a believers soul to be in a better posture here-away, then this, to be
looking upon sin in^dwelling, a^ his bondage, and redemption from it, as
freedom; to account ^im^elf in so far free, as the free Spirit of Christ enters
and w^ites that ^^ee Law of love and obedience in his heart, and blots out
these base characters of the law of sin. It were a good temper to be groaning
for the redemption of the soul; and why does a believer groan for the
redemption of the body, but because he shall then be freed wholly from the law
o^ sin, and from the presence of sin? I know not a greater argument, to a
gracious heart, to subdue his corruption, and strive for freedom from the law
of sin, then the freedom obtained from the law of death; nor is there any
clearer a^gument and evidence of a soul delivered from death, then to strive
for the freedom of the Spirit from the law of sin, there jointly help one
another; freedom from death, will raise up a Christians heart to aspire to a
freedom and liberty from sin: And again, freedom from sin will wi^ness and
evidence that such a one is delivered from death. When freedom from death is an
inducement to seek after freedom from sin, and freedom from sin a declaration
of freedom from death, then all is well; and indeed thus it will be in some
mea^u^e with every soul that is quickened by this new Law of the Spirit of Life,
for its the entry of this that expells its contrary, the Law o^ sin. And indeed
the Law must enter, the command and the p^omise must enter into the soul, and
the affections of the soul be enlivened thereby, or rather the soul changed
into the similitude of that mould, or else the having of it in a book, or in
ones memory and understanding, will never make him the richer or freer. A
Ch^istian looks to the pattern of the Law, and the word of the Go^pel without;
but he must be changed into the image of it, by beholding it, and so he becomes
a living Law to himself. The Spirit writes these precepts and practices o^
Christ's, in which he commands imitation, upon the fleshly tables of the heart:
And now the Law is not a rod above his head, as above a slave, but its turned
into a Law o^ love within his heart, and has something like a natural instinct
in it: all that men can do, either to themselves, or others, will not purchase
the least measure of ^^eedom from predominant corruptions, cannot deliver you
from your sins, till this free Spirit that blows where he pleases, come. Its
our part to hoise up sails, and wait for the wind; to ^^e means, and wait on
him in his way and o^der: but all will be in vain, till this stronger one come,
and cast out the strong man, till this arbitrary and free wind blow from
heaven, and fill the sails.

SERMON X.
Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son, etc.


THE greatest design that ever God had in the world; is certainly the sending
of his own Son into the world, and it must needs be some great business, that
drew so excellent and glorious a person out of Heaven: the plot and contrivance
of the world was a profound pi^ce of wisdom and goodness; the making of men
after Gods image, wa^ done by a high and glorious counsel, Let us make man
after our image; there was some thing special in this expression, importing
^ome peculiar excellency in the work it self, or some special depth of design
about it. But what think you of this consultation, let one of us be made man,
after man's image and likeness, that must be a strange piece of wisdom and
grace: Great is the mystery of godliness, God manifested in the flesh. No
wonder though Paul cried out, as one swallowed up with this mystery; for indeed
it must be some odd matter, beyond all that is in the creation* wherein th^^e
are many mysteries, able to swallow up any understanding, but that in which
they were first formed. This must be the chief of the works of God, the rarest
piece of them all, God to become man, the Creator of all, to come in the
likeness of a creature, he by whom all things were created, and do yet consist,
to come in the likeness of the most wretched of all. Strange, that we do not
dwell more, in our thoughts and affections, on this subject: either we do not
believe it, or if we did, we could not but be ravished with admiration at it.
John the beloved Disciple, who was often nearest unto Christ, dwelt most upon
this, and made it the subject of his preaching; that which was from the
beginning, which we have heard, and seen, and handled, etc. Ioh. 1.1. He speaks
of that mystery, as if he were embracing Jesus Christ in his arms, and holding
him out to others, saying, Come and see. This divine mystery is the subject of
these words read, but the mystery is somewhat unfolded and opened up to you in
them, yet so, as it will not diminish, but increase the wonder of a believing
soul. It is ignorance that magnifies other mysteries, which vi^ifie through
knowledge; but it is the true knowledge of this mystery, that makes it the more
wonderful, whereas ignorance only makes it common and despicable.

There are three things then of special consideration in the words, which may
declare and open unto you something of this mystery:

First, what was the ground and reason, or occasion of the Sons sending into
the world; next, what the Son being sent, did in the world: And the third, for
what end and use it was. What fruit we have by it.

The ground and reason of Gods sending his Son, is, because there was an
impossibility upon the Law, to save man, which impossibility was not the Laws
fault, but man's defect, by reason of the weakness, and impotency of our flesh,
to fulfill the Law. Now God having chosen come to life, and man having put this
obstruction and impediment in his own way; which made it impossible for the Law
to give him life, though it was first given out as the way of life, therefore
that God should not fail in this glorious design of saving his chosen; he
choosed to send his own Son, in the likeness of flesh, as the only remedy of
the Laws impossibility. That which Christ being sent into the likeness of
flesh, did, is, the condemning of sin in the flesh, by a sacrifice offered for
sin; even the sacrifice of his own body upon the cross. He came in the
likeness not of flesh simply, for he was really a man; but in the likeness of
sinful flesh, though without sin, yet like a sinner; as to the outward
appearance, a sinner, because subject to all these infirmities and miseries,
which sin did first open a door for. Sin was the inlet of afflictions, of
bodily infirmities and necessities, of death it self; and when the floods of
these did overflow Christ's Humane Nature, it was a great presumption to the
world, who look and judge according to the outward appea^ance, that ^in was the
^l^ce opened to let in such an inundation of calamity. Now he being thus in the
likeness of a sinner, though not a sinner, he, for sin, that is, because of sin
that had entered upon man, and made life impossible to him by the Law; by
occasion of that great enemy of God which had conquered mankind, he condemned
sin in his flesh, he overthrew it in its plea and power against us; he
condemned that which condemned us, overcame it in judgment, and made us free,
by sustaining the curse of it in his flesh, he cut off all its plea against us.
This is the great work and business, which was worthy of so noble a Messenger,
his own Son, sent to conquer his greatest enemy that he hates most. And then in
the third place, you see what benefit or fruit redounds to us by it: What was
the end and purpose of it? verse. 4. That the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us; that seeing it was impossible for us to fulfill the
righteousness of the Law, and so became impossible to the Law, to fulfill our
reward of life; it might be fulfilled by him in our name, and so the
righteousness of the Law being fulfilled in us by Christ, the reward also of
eternal life might be fulfilled by the Law to us; he having removed the
impediment of our weakness, it might be not only possible, but certain to us.

Y^u would consider then, the reason of Christ's coming. God made at first a
Covenant with man, promising him life, upon perfect obedience to his law; and
threatening death, and damnation upon the transgression thereof. You see then,
what was the way of life to Adam in the state of innocence, he was made able to
sati^fie the Law with obedience, and the Law was abundantly able to satisfy
him, by giving life unto him; Gods image upon man's soul instructed him
sufficiently for the one, and the Lords promise made to him, was as sufficient
to accomplish the other; so that there was no impossibility th^n upon the Law,
by reason of the strength which God gave man. But, it continued not long so,
sin entering upon man, utterly disabled him, and because the strength of that
Covenant consisted in that mutual and joint concurrence of Gods promise and
man's obedience, this being broken, the one party falling off, that life and
salvation becomes impossible to the promise alone, to perform. It is sin, that
is the weakness and impotency of man; this is the disease, has consumed his
strength, and concluded man under a twofold impossibility; an impossibility to
satisfy the curse, and an impossibility to obey the command. There are three
things in the Covenant of Works, A command of obedience, and a threatening of
wrath and condemnation upon disobedience, and a promise of life upon obedience;
sin has disabled us every way, in relation to the curse and threatening, man
cannot satisfy it, no price, no ransom ^ound sufficient for the soul, for the
redemption of it is precious, and cease for ever; that curse has infinite
wrath in it, which must needs swallow up ^^^it man. And then in relation to the
command, there is such a diminuti^n of all the powers of the soul; such a
corruption and defilement by reason of the first sin, that wherein man's
strength lay, which was Gods image, is cut off, and spoiled, so that hence^orth
it is become impossible to yield any acceptable obedience to the Commandment:
And hence it is, from our impossibility to obey in time to come, that there is
a holy and faultlesse impossibility upon the promise, to give life unto
mankind; so you see that the law cannot do it, because of our weakness. If
either man, while he was made upright, had continued in obedience, or man now
fallen from uprightness, could satisfy for the fault done, and walk without
any blemish in time coming, then it were feasible for the Law to give life to
us, but the one was not done, and the other now cannot be done; and so the
impossibility of life by works is refounded upon our selves, who would not when
we could, and now, neither will nor can obey. Thus we may see clearly, that all
mankind must needs perish, for any thing that man can do; and according to that
first transaction of God with man, unless some other way and device be found
out, which indeed was far from the eyes of all living, without the reach of
their invention or imagination: I believe, if all the creatures higher or
lower, that have any reason, had conveened to consult o^ this business, how to
repair that Breach made in the Creation, by man's sin, they might have vexed
their brains, and racked their inventions unto all eternity, and yet never have
fallen upon any probable way of making up this breach; they might have taken up
a lamentation, not as the bemoaners of Babylon's ruin, we would have healed
thee, and thou would not, but rather thus, we would heal thee, but we could
not, and thou would not. This design which is here mentioned of repairing
the breach, by destroying that which made it, sin; it lay hid in the depth of
Gods wisdom, till it pleased himself to vent and publish it unto poor forlorn
and desperate man, who out of despair of recovery, had run away to hide himself;
a poor shift indeed, for him to think that he could hide himself from him to
whom darkness is as light, and to flee from him whose Kingdom is over all, and
who is present in all the corners of his universal Kingdom; in hell, in Heaven,
in the utmost corners of the earth: But this silly invention shows how hopeless
the case was.

Though this be the case and condition of man by nature, yet strange it is, to
see every man by nature attempting his own delivery; and fancying a
probability, ye^, a certainty of that which is so impossible, that is an
attaining of life by our selves, according to the Law, and first Covenant of
Works. Though our strength be gone, yet like Sampson, men rise up and think to
walk and rouse up themselves, as in former times, as if their strength were yet
in them, and many never perceives that it is gone, till they be laid hold on by
Satan, according to the Laws injunction, and bound into chains of everlasting
darkness; but then alace its too late, for they cannot save themselves, and the
season of a Savior is gone; and this no doubt will be the accession of the
bitterness and torment that damned souls shall be into, that they dreamed of
attaining life by a Law, that now is nothing but a ministration of death, that
they lost life by seeking their own righteousness; and made the Law more able
to condemn them, by their apprehending in themselves an ability to satisfy it,
and by resting in a form of obedience to it. There is something natural in it,
Adam and all his posterity was once to be saved this way, so the terms run at
first, do this and live, no wonder that something of that impression be
retained, but that which was a virtue in Adam, while he retained integrity, and
fulfilled his duty, is a might^ fault, and presumptuous madness in us, who have
fallen from that blessed estate. If man doing his duty, expected a reward,
according to the promise, it was commendable, but for man now rebellious and
stubborn, and come short of the glory of God, to look for a reward from God,
against whom he warreth continually, and that for rebellion and enmity, it is
damnable. But besides this, I think this principle of self-righteousness is
much corrupted in man now, by what it was in Adam; I conceive though Adam
looked for life upon obedience, according to the promise, yet he rested not on,
and trusted not in his obedience. I believe, a holy and righteous man would be
a humble man too, and would rather glory in Gods grace, then in his own works;
the sense of a free and undeserved promise, would not suffer him to reflect so
much upon his own obedience, or put such a price upon it. But now, its
conjoined with unmeasureable pride, and arises only from self-love: There is no
ground of men's looking to be saved by their own doings, but the inbred pride
and self-love of the heart, together with the ignorance of a better
righteousness. Adam hid himself among the trees, and covered his nakedness with
leaves, and truly the shift of the most part is no better. How vain and empty
things do men trust into, and from them conclude an expectation of eternal
life? the most part think to be safe in the midst or thick of the trees of the
Church, if they be in the throng of a visible Church, and adorned with
Church Priviledges as Baptism, hearing the Word, and such like, they do
persuade themselves, all will be well. Some have civility, and a blameless
conversation before men, and with such acts of righteousness, or rather wants
of some gross out-breakings, do many cover their nakedness. If there be yet a
larger, and finer garment, of profession of Religion, and some outward
performances of service to God, and duties to men, O then! men do in^orce upon
their own hearts, the persuasion of Heaven, and think their nakedness cannot be
seen through it; these are the coverings, these are the grounds of claim and
title, that men have to eternal life, and in the mean time they are ignorant of
that large glorious robe of righteousness, which Christ by his obedience and
sufferings did weave for naked sinners.

But as the impossibility of the Laws saving us, by reason of the weakness of
the flesh, was the ground and occasion of Christ's coming into the flesh, for to
supply that defect, and take away that impossibility, so the sense and sight of
this impossibility in us to satisfy and fulfill the Law, and of the Law to
give life, is the very ground and reason of a souls coming to Jesus Christ, for
the supplying of this want. As the Son should not have come in the likeness of
sinful flesh, unless it had been otherwise impossible, by man's doing or
suffering, that life should be obtained, so will not a soul come to Christ, the
Son of God, through the vail of his flesh, until it discern and feel that it
is otherwise impossible to satisfy the Law, or attain life. That was the
impulsive cause, (if we may say that there was any cause beside his love) why
Christ came, even man's misery, and remediless misery; and this is the strong
motive and impulsive, that drives a poor sinner unto Jesus Christ, the sense
and impression of its desperate and lost estate without him. As there was first
sin, and then a Savior dying for sin, because nothing else could suffice, so
there must be in the soul, first, the apprehension of sin, and that remediless
sin, incurable sin, by any created power or act; and then the sight of a
Savior coming to destroy sin, and the works of the devil, and destroying it,
by dying for it. There is no employment for this Physician, upon every slight
apprehension of a wound, or sickness, till it be found incurable, and help
sought elsewhere, be seen to be in vain; indeed upon the least apprehension of
sin and misery, men ought to come to Christ; we shall not set or prescribe any
measure of conviction to exclude you, if you can but come to him indeed, upon
the least measure of it, you will not be cast out, according to his own word,
but as certain it is, that men will not come to this Physician, till they find
no other can save them. These two things, I wish, were deeply and seriously
thought upon, that you cannot satisfy Gods justice, for the least point of
guilt, and then, that you cannot do any thing in obedience to please God. There
is a strange inconsideration; yea, I may say, ignorance among us, when you are
challenged and convinced of sin, (as there is no conscience so benumbed, but in
some measure it accuses every man of many wrongs) what is the course you fall
on, to pacify it, or please God? Indeed if you can get any shadow of
repentance, if it were but a bare acknowledgment of the fault, you excuse your
selves in your own consciences, and answers the accusation, by it, either some
other good works formerly done, occur to you, or some resolution for
amendment in time coming, and this you think shall pacify God, and satisfy
justice: But alace, you are far from the righteousness of God, and you do err
even in the very foundation of Religion, these are but sparks of your own
kindling, and for all these, you shall lie down in darkness and sorrow; these
are but the vain expiations and excuses of natural Consciences, which are led
to some sense of a Deity, by the Law written in their heart. But, consider this
once, you must first satisfy the curse of the Law, which you are under, before
you can be in any capacity to please him, by new obedience: Now, if you should
undert^ke to pay for your former breaches of the Law, that will eternally ruin
you; and therefore, you see the punishment is lengthned throughout eternity, to
them who have this to undergo alone. Go then, and first suffer the eternal
wrath of an infinite God, and then come and offer obedience if thou can. But
now, thou art in a double error, both of which are damnable; One is, thou
thinks thou art able by consideration, and resolution, to perform some
acceptable obedience to God; another, that performance of obedience, and
amending in time coming, will expiat former transgressions: if either of these
were true, Christ needed not to have come in the likeness of sinful flesh,
because it had been possible for the Law to save thee. But now, the truth is,
such is the utter disability, and impotency ^f man through sin, that he can
neither will, nor do, the least good, truly good and pleasant to God; his
nature and person being defiled, all he does is unclean. And then, suppose that
were possible, that man could do any thing in obedience to his Commands, yet,
it being unquestionable, that all have sinned, satisfaction must first be made
to Gods threatening, Thou shall die, before obedience be acceptable, and that is
impossible too. This then, I leave upon your consciences, beseeching you to lay
to heart, the impossibility you are encompassed with on both hands; Justice
requiring a ransom, and you have none, and justice requiring new obedience
again, and you can give none; old debts urging you, and new duty pressing you,
and ye alike disabled for both; that so finding your selves thus environed with
indigency, and impossibility within, you may be constrained to flee out of your
selves, unto him, that is both able and willing. This is not a superficial
business, as you make it, it is not a matter of fancy, or memory, or
expression, as most make it; believe me, it is a serious business, a soul-work,
such an exercise of spirit, as uses to be, when the soul is between despair
and hope. Impossibility within, driving a soul out of it self, and possibility,
yea, certainty of help without, even in Christ, drawing a soul in to him; thus
is the closure made, which is the foundation of our happiness.

SERMON XI.
Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son, etc.


FOr what purpose do we meet thus together? I would we knew it, then it might
be to some better purpose. In all other things we are rational, and do nothing
of moment, without some end and purpose; but alace, in this matter of greatest
moment, our going about Divine Ordinances, we have scarce any distinct or
deliberat thought of the end and rise of them. Sure I am, we must all confess
this, that all other businesses in our life, is almost impertinent to the great
end, the salvation of our souls, in respect of these, in which God, in a
manner, trysts with men, and comes to dwell with them, these have the nearest
and most immediate connection with Gods glory, and our happiness, and yet, so
wretched and unhappy are we, that we study, and endeavor a kind of wisdom and
diligence in other petty things, which are to perish with the using, and have
no great reach to make our condition either better or worse; and yet, we have
no wisdom nor consideration, or attention, to this great and momentous matter,
the salvation of our souls. Is it not high time we were shaken out of our
empty, vain, and unreasonable custom, in going about such solemn duties? when
the wrath of God is already kindled, and his mighty arm is shaking terribly the
earth, and shaking us out of all our nests of quietness and consolation, which
we did build in the creature. God calls for a reasonable service, but I must
say, the service of the most, is an unreasonable and brutish kind of work,
little or no consideration of what we are about, little or no purpose, or aim
at any real soul-advantage. Consider, my beloved, what ye are doing, undoing
your selves with ignorance of your own estate, and unacquaintedness with a
better; whence it comes, that you live contented in your misery, and have no
lively stirrings after this blessed remedy. That for which we meet together, is
to learn these two things, and always to be learning them, to know sensibly
our own wretched misery, and that blessed remedy, which God has provided, it is
the sum of the Scriptures, and we desire daily to lay it out before you, if at
length it may please the Lord to awake you out of your dream, and give you the
light of his salvation.

You hear of a weakness of the flesh, but you would understand it aright, its
not properly and simply a weakness, that supposes always some life, and some
strength remaining; its not like an infirmity, that only in disposes to wonted
action, in the wonted vigor; but its such a weakness, as the Apostle
elsewhere, Ephesians. 2.1. calls deadness, its such a weakness, as may be called
wickedness, yea, enmity to God, as it is here; our souls are not diseased
properly, for that supposes there is some remnant of spiritual life, but they
are dead in sins and trespasses, and so its not infirmity, but impossibility,
such a weakness as makes life and salvation impossible by us, both utter
unwillingnesse, and extreme inability; these two concurrs in all mankind, no
strength to satisfy justice, or obey the Law, and no willingness either.
There is a general practical mistake in this, men conceive, that their natures
are weak to good, but few apprehend the wickedness and enmity that is in them
to God, and all goodness; all will grant some defect and inability, and its a
general complaint, but to consider that this inability is an impossibility,
that this defect is a destruction of all spiritual good in us, the saving
knowledge of this is given to few and to these only whose eyes the spirit
opens. There may be some struglings and wrestlings of natural spirits to help
themselves, and upon the apprehension of their own weakness, to raise up
themselves, by serious consideration, and earnest diligence, to some pitch of
serving God, and to some hope of heaven. But, I do suspect that it proceeds in
many from the want of this through, and deep conviction of desperate
wickedness, few really believes that testimony which God has given of man, he
is not only weak, but wicked, and not only so, but d^speratly wicked, and that
is not all, the heart is deceitful too, and to complete the account, deceitful
above all things, Jer. 17.15. A strange character of man, given by him that
formed the spirit of man within, and made it once upright, and so knows best
how far it has departed from the first pattern. O! who of us believes this in
our hearts? but that is the deceitfulness of our hearts, to cover our desperat^
wickedness from our own discerning, and flatter ourselves with self-pleasing
thoughts. If once this testimony were received, that the weakness of the flesh
is a desperate wickedness, such a wretched and accursed conditi^n, as there is
no hope therein, as is incurable to any created power, and makes us incurable
and certainly lost, then, I say, the deceitfulness of the heart were in some
measure cured: believe the desperate wickedness of your natures, and then you
have deceived the deceitfulness of your hearts, to your own advantage; then you
have known that which non can know aright, till the searcher of the heart and
^eins reveal it unto them.

Thus man stands environed with impossibilities, his own weakness and
wickedness, and the Laws impossibility, by reason of that; these do shut up all
access to the tree of Life, and are instead of a flaming sword to guard it; our
legs are cut off by sin, and the Law cannot help us, nay, our life is put out,
and the Law cannot quickken us; it declares our duty, but gives no ability, it
teaches well, but it cannot make us learn. While we are in this posture, God
himself steps in to succor miserable undone man, and here is the way, he sends
his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and grace and truth comes by him,
which does remove these impediments, that stopped all access to life.

This is a high subject, but it concerns the lowest and most wretched amongst
us, and that is indeed the wonder of it, that there should be such a mystery,
such a depth in this work of redemption of poor sinners, so much business made,
and such strange things done for repairing our ruins. In the consideration of
this we may borrow that meditation of the Psalmists, Ps. 8.4. Lord, what is
man, that thou should thus magnify him? and make him not a little lower then
Angels, but far higher: for he took not on him the nature of Angels, Heb. 2.14,
16 But took part with the poor children, of flesh and blood. This de^erves a
pause, we shall stay a little, and view it more fully in the steps and degrees
that this mystery rises and ascends up by. But, Oh! for such an ascending frame
of heart as this deserves, its a wonder it does not draw us upward beyond our
own elem^nt, its a subject of such admiration in it self, and so much
conce^nment to us.

Every word has weight in it, and a peculiar emphasis, there is a gradation
that mystery goes upon, till it come to the top; every word has a degree or
step in it, whereby it rises high, and still higher. God sent, that is very
strange, but God sent his Son, is most strange, but go on, and its still the
stranger, in the likeness of flesh, and that sinful flesh, etc. In all which
degrees, you see God is descending and coming lower and lower, but the mystery
ascends, and goes higher and higher; the lower God come down, the higher the
wonder rises up. Still the smaller and meaner that God appears in the flesh,
the greater is the mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh. If you
would arise up to the sensible and profitable understanding of this mystery,
you must first descend into the depths of your own natural wretchedness and
misery, in which man was lying, when it pleased God to come so low to meet him,
and help him: I say, you must first go down that way in the consideration of
it, and then you shall ascend to the use and knowledge of this mystery of
Godliness.

Gods sending, has some weight of wonder in it, at the very first apprehension
of it; if you did but know who he is, and what we are, a wonder it had been,
that he had suffered himself to be sent unto, by us, that any message, any
correspondence should pass between heaven and earth, after so soul a breach of
peace and Covenant, by man on earth. Strange, that heaven was not shut up from
all intercourse with that accursed earth. If God had sent out an Angel to
destroy man, as he sent to destroy Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles. 21.15. If he had sent
out his armies to kill those his enemies, who had renounced the yoke of his
obedience, it had been justice, Matthew. 21.41, and 22.7. If he had sent a cruel
messenger against man, who had now acted so horrid a rebellion, it had been no
strange thing, as he did send an Angel with a fl^mming sword to encompasse the
tree of life, he might have enlarged that Angels commission to take veangence
on man, and this is the wonder, he did not send after this manner. But what
heart could this enter into? who could imagine such a thing as this? God to
send, and to send for peace to his rebellious footstool: man could not have
looked for acceptance, before the throne, if he had prevented and sent first up
supplications and humble cries to heaven, and therefore finding himself
miserable, you see he is at his wits end, he is desperate, and gives it over,
and so flees away to hide himself, certianly expecting that the first message
from heaven, should be to arm all the creatures against him, to destroy him.
But, O! what a wonderful, yet blessed surprisal. God himself comes down, and
not for any such end as vengeance, though just, but to publish and hold forth a
Covenant of reconciliation and peace, to convince man of sin, and to comfort
him with the glad tidings of a Redeemer, of one to be sent in the likeness of
flesh. Its the g^andor and majesty of Kings and great men, to let others come
to them with their petitions, and its accounted a rare thing if they be
acc^ssable and affable. But, that the Lord of lords, and King of kings, who
sits in the Circle of the Heavens, and before whom, all the inhabitants of
the Earth, are as poor Grasshoppers, or crauling worms, about whose throne,
there are ten thousand times ten thousand glorious Spirits ministering unto him,
as Daniel saw him, Chap. 7. v. 9, 10. that such an one, should not only admit,
such as we, to come to him, and offer our suits to his Highness, but himself
first to come down unto Adam, and offer peace to him, and then send his own
Son: And what were we, that he should make any motion about us, or make any
mission to us, Romans 5.10. while we were yet enemies, that we were, when he
sent: O, how has his Love triumphed over his Justice! But, needed he fear our
enmity that he should seek peace? no ways, one look of his angry countenance,
would have looked us unto nothing, thou look upon me, and I am not, one
rebuke of his for iniquity, would have made our beauty consume as the moth, far
more the stroke of his hand had consumed us, Psalm. 39.11. But, that is the
wonder indeed, while we were yet enemies, and weak too, neither able to help
our selves, nor hurt him in the least, and so could do nothing to allure him,
nothing to terrify him, nothing to engage his love, nothing to make him fear;
yet, then he makes this motion, and mission to us, God sending, etc.

God sending, and sending his own Son, that is yet a step higher: Had he sent
an Angel, it had been wonderful, one of these ministering Spirits about the
Throne, being far more glorious then man. But God so loved the world, that he
sent his Son; might he not have done it by others? But he had a higher project;
and verily, there is more mystery in the end and manner of our redemption, then
difficulty in the thing it self; no question, he might have enabled the
creature by his Almighty power, to have destroyed the works of the devil, and
might have delivered captive man some other way; he needed not for any
necessity lying upon him, gone such a round, as the Father to give to the Son,
and the Son to receive, as God to send, and the Son to be sent; nay, he might
have spared all pains, and without any messenger, immediately pardoned man's sin,
and adopted him to the place of Sons. Thu^ he had done the business, without
his Sons, or any others travel and labor in blood and suffering. But this
profound mystery, in the manner of it, declares the highness, and excellency of
the end God proposed, and that is the manifestation of his love: Behold, what
manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, 1 John 3.1. and, in this was
manifested the love of God, toward us, that God sent his onl^ begotten Son in
the world, 1 John 4.9. And truly for such a design and purpose, all the world
could not have contrived such a suitable and excellent mean as this, nothing
besides this could have declared such love; there is no expression of love
imaginable to this, to give his Son, and only begotten Son for us. It had been
enough, out of mere compassion, to have saved us, however it had been; but if
he had given all, and done all besides this, he had not so manifested the
infinite fullness of love; there is no gift so suitable to the greatness and
magnificence of his Majesty, as this, One that thought it no robbery to be
equal with himself. Any gift had been infinitely above us, because from him, but
this is not only infinitely above us, but equal to himself, and fittest to
declare himself.

But then, there is yet a higher rise of the mystery, or a lower descent of
God: for, its all one, God descending, is the wonder ascending, he sent his
Son, man's admiration is already exhausted in that, but if there were any thing
behind, this which follows would consume it, in the flesh. If he had sent his
own Son, might he not have sent him in an estate and condition suitable to his
glory, as it became the Prince and Heir of all things, him by whom all were
created, and do subsist: Nay, but he is sent, and that in a state of
humiliation and condescendency, infinitely below his own dignity. That ever he
was made a Creature, that the Maker of all should be sent in the form of any
thing he had made, O! what a disparagement? there is no such distance between
the highest Prince on the throne, and the basest beggar on the dunghill, as
between the only begotten of the Father, who is the brightness of his glory,
and the most glorious Angel that ever was made. And yet, it would be a wonder
to the World, if a King should send his son in the habit and state of a beggar,
to call in the poor, and lame, and blind, to the fellowship of his Kingdom. It
had been a great mystery then, if God had been manifested in the nature of
Angels, a great abasement of his Majesty; But O! what must it be for God, to be
manifested in the flesh, in the basest, naughtiest, and most corruptible of all
the Creatures, even the very d^eg^ of the Creation, that have sunk down to the
bottom? All flesh is gra^s, and what more withering and fading, even the flower
and perfection of it. I^a 40.6 Dust it is, and what ba^er? Genesis 18.27. and
corruption it is, and what vi^er, 1 Cor. 15.44. and yet, God sent his Son in
the flesh. Is this a manifestation? nay, rather it is a hiding and obscu^ation
of his glory, its the putting on of a dark vail to eclipse his brightness, yet
manifested he is, as the intendment of the work he was about, required,
manifested to reproach and ignominy for our sin. This is one, and a great point
of Christ's humiliation, that he took not on him the nature of Angels, but the
seed of Abraham, Heb. 2.16.

But yet, to complete this mystery more, the Son descends a third step lower,
that the mystery may ascend so much the higher; in the likeness of flesh? not
so, but in the likeness of sinful flesh. If he had appeared in the prime flower
and perfection of flesh, in the very goodliness of it; yet it had been a
disparagement, if he had come down as glorious as he once went up, and now sits
at the right hand of the Majesty on high, if he had been always in that
^e^plendant habit, he put on, in his transfiguration, that had been yet an
abasement of his Majesty; but, to come in the likeness of sinful flesh, though
not a sinner, yet in the likeness of a sinner, so like, as touching his outward
appearance, that no eye could discern any difference, compassed about with all
these infirmities and necessities, which are the followers and attendants of
sin in us; a man of sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; a man, who all his
life time had intimat acquaintance and familiarity with grief, grief and he
were long acquaintance, and never parted, till death parted them; nay, not only
was he in his outward estate, subject to all these miseries and infirmities,
unto which sin subjects other men, but was something beyond all, his vi^age
more marred then any man's, and his form more then the sons of men, Isa. 52.14.
and therefore, he was a hissing and astonishment to many he had no form of, nor
comeliness in him, and no beauty to make him desirable, and therefore, his own
friends were ashamed of him, and hid their faces from him, he was despised and
rejected of men, Isa. 53.2, 3. Thus you see, he comes in the most despicable
and disgraceful form of flesh, that can be; and an abject among men; and as
himself speaks, in Psalm. 22.6. a worm, and not a man, a reproach of men, and
despised among the people: Now, this, I say, is the crowning of the great
mystery of Godliness, which without all controversy, is the mystery in all the
world, that has in it most greatness and goodness combined together, that is
the subject of the highest admiration, and the fountain of the sweetest
consolation, that either Reason or Religion can afford. The mysteries of the
Trinity are so high, that if any dares to reach at them, he does but catch the
lower fall, it is, as if a worm would attempt to touch the Sun in the
Firmament. But this mystery, is God coming down to man, to be handled and seen
of men, because man could not rise up to Gods highness, it is God descending
to our baseness, and so coming near us, to save us. It is not a con^ounding,
but a saving mystery; there is the highest truth in it, for the understanding,
to contemplat and admire, there is the greatest good in it, for the will to
choose and rest upon. Its contrived for wonder and delight, to M^n and Angels,
these three, which the Angelick song runs upon, are the Jewels of it, Glory to
God, peace on Earth, and good will toward men.

SERMON XII.
Romans 8.3. For what the Law could not do, in that it was weak through the
flesh, God sending his own Son, etc.


OF all the works of God toward man, certainly there is none has so much
wonder in it, as the sending of his Son, to become man, and so it requires the
exactest attention in us, let us gather our spirits to consider of this
mystery; not to pry into the secrets of it curiously, as if we had no more to
do, but to satisfy our understandings; but rather that we may see what this
concerns us, and what instruction or advantage we may have by it, that so it
may ravish our affections. I believe, there is very palpable and gross
ignorance in thousands, of the very thing it self; many who profess Jesus
Christ, know not his Natures, or his glorious Person, do not apprehend either
his highness as God, or his lowness as man. But truly, the thing that I do most
admire, is, that these who pretend to more knowledge of this mystery, yet few
of them do enter upon any serious consideration about it, for what use and
purpose it is, though it be the foundation of our salvation, the chief ground
of our faith, and the great spring of our consolation: yet to improve the
knowledge of it to any purpose of that kind, is a thing so rare, even among
true Christians, that it is little the subject of their meditation. I think
indeed, the lively improvement of this mystery of godliness, would be very
effectual to make us really what we are said to be, that is, Christians. There
is something to this purpose, 1 Ioh. 4.2, 3, 15. and 5.1. The confessing and
knowing that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, and is the Son of God, before
his taking on flesh, is made a character of a spiritual man that dwells in
God. Not that a bare external confession, or internal opinion and assent to
such a truth, is of so much value, which yet is the hight that many attain
unto, but it is such a soul acknowledgment, such an heart approbation of this
mystery, as draws along the admiration and affection after it, as fixes the
heart upon this object alone, for life and salvation. The devils confessed and
believed, but they trembled at it, Luke 4.34, 41. He was afraid of what he
knew, but Peter confessed and loved what he knew; yea, he did cast his soul
upon that Lord whom he confessed. It is such an acknowledgment of Christ, as
draws the soul, and unites it to him, by a serious and living imbracement;
such a sight of Jesus Christ, has both truth and goodness in it, in the
highest measure, and so does not only constrain the assent of the mind, but is
a powerful attractive to the heart, to come to him, and live in him. I pray you
consider then what moment, is in this truth, that you may indeed apply your
souls to the consideration of what is in Jesus Christ thus revealed, not simply
to know it, but for a further improvement of it, to seek life in Him, that the
stamp and impression of this Savior may be set so deeply on your souls, as
that you may express this in a real confession of him in your words and works,
Tit. 1.16. Matthew. 7.21. This is indeed to know and confess that Jesus Christ
is come in the flesh, to fetch thence the ground of all our hope and
consolation, and to draw thence the most powerful motives to walking, even as
he walked, to improve it for confidence in him, and obedience to him.

I shall speak then a word of these two great ends and purposes, of Gods
sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, his own glory, and man's
good. The song of Angels at his birth shows this, glory to God in the highest,
peace on earth, and good will toward man. His glory is manifested in it, in an
eminent manner, the glory of his wisdom, that found out a remedy. What a deep
contrivance was it? How infinitely beyond all creature-inventiones? Truly there
are riches of wisdom, depths of wisdom in it. I think it could never have
entered in the thought of men or Angels: all men once to be drowned under a
deluge of sin and misery, and made subject to Gods righteous judgment, and
then to find out a way how to deliver and save so many, all the wisdom that
shines in the order and beauty of the world, seems to be but a rude draught to
this. Then herein does the glory of his mercy and grace shine most brightly,
that he transfers the punishment due to man's sin, upon his own Son, that when
no ransom could be found by man, he finds it out, how to satisfy his own
justice, and save us: truly, this is the most shining Jewel in the Crown of
Gods Glory, so much mercy toward so miserable sinners, so much grace toward
the rebellious. If he had pardoned sin, without any satisfaction, what rich
grace had it been? but truly, to provide the Lamb, and sacrifice himself, to
find out the ransom, and to exact it of his own Son, in our name, is a
testimony of mercy and grace, far beyond that. But then, his justice is very
conspicuous in this work; and indeed these two, do illustrat one another, the
justice of God, in taking and exacting the punishment of sin, upon his own
well-beloved Son, does most eminently highten the mercy and grace of God
toward us, and his grace and mercy in passing by us, does most marvellously
illustrat the righteousness of God, in making his own Son a curse for us. What
testimony can be given in the world, of Gods displeasure at sin, of his
righteousness in punishing sin, like this? There was no such testimony of love
to sinners, and no such demonstration of hatred at sin, imaginable. That he did
not punish sin in us, but transfers it over on the most beloved Son, O what
love and grace; and that he did punish his own Son, when standing in the place
of sinners, O what righteousness and justice. This is that glorious mystery,
the conjunction of these two resplendent Jewels, justice and mercy, of love and
displeasure, in one chain of Christ's incarnation, into which the Angels desire
to look, 1 Pet. 1.12. And truly they do wonder at it, and praise from wonder.
This is it, that the praises of men and Angels shall roll about eternally.
David Psalm. 103.19. foreseeing this day, foretold it, that Angels should praise
Him, and now its fulfilled, when all these glorious companies of holy and
powerful Spirits, welcome the Son of God into the world, by that heavenly
harmony of praise, Luke 2.14.

What lumpishness and earthliness in us, that we do not rise up above, to this
melody in our spirits, to join with Angels, in this song; we, I say, whom it
most concerns. The Angels wonder; and praises and wonders at this, because the
glory of God shines so brightly in it, as if there were many Suns in one
Firmament, as the light of seven days in one. These three especially, wisdom,
mercy and grace, justice, and righteousness, every one of them look like the
Sun in its strength, carried about in this orb of the redemption of man, to the
ravishing of the hearts of all the honorable and glorious companies above, and
making them cheerfully and willingly to contribute all their service to this
work, to be ministering Spirits; to wait on the heirs of Salvation.

Now when the glory of the Highest, raises up such a melodious song above,
among Angels, O what should both the glory of the highest God, and the highest
good of man do to us! When the greatest glory of God, and the chiefest
advantage of man are linked together in this Chain, what should we do, but
admire and adore, adore and admire; and while we are in this earth, send up our
consent to that harmony in Heaven?

In relation to our good, much might be said, but we shall briefly show unto
you, that it is the greatest confirmation of our faith, and the strongest
motive to humility, that can be afforded. Now if we could be composed thus unto
confidence and reverence, to glorify him by believing, and to abase our
selves, to believe in him, and walk humbly with him, upon the meditation of
Christ's coming in the flesh, this would make us true Christians indeed.

There is nothing I know, more powerful to persuade us of the reality of Gods
invitations and promises to us, then this; we are still seeking signs and
tokens of Gods love, something to warrant us to come to God in Christ, and to
persuade that we shall be welcome; and many Christians puddle themselves in the
mire of their own darkness and discouragement, because they cannot find any
thing in themselves, that can give but the least probable conjecture, that he
will admit and welcome them to come to him, or that such precious promises, and
sweet invitations, can belong to such sinners, as they conceive themselves to
be. Truly my beloved, I think, while we exercise our selves thus, we are
seeking the Sun with a candle, making that which is in it self as bright, as
the light to be more dark. The evidence of Gods reality, in offering life to
you in Christ, and his willingness to receive you, it is not without the
compass of his invitation, and yet you seek it where it is least to be found,
that is, in your selves: But indeed, his invitations, in the Gospel, carry the
evidence in their bosom, that which is above all other signs and evidences,
that he did ever send his own Son in the flesh for this purpose; is there any
thing besides this, either greater, or clearer? I think we are like these, who,
when they had seen many signs and wonders done by Christ, which did bear
testimony to all the world of his Divine Nature, yet they would not be
satisfied, but sought out another sign, tempting him, Mat. 16.1. And truly, he
might return this answer to us, O wicked and adulterous generation, that
seeks after a sign, there shall no sign be given to thee, but the sign of the
Prophet Jonas: the greatest testimony that can be imagined, is given already,
that the Father should send his only begotten and well beloved Son, into the
state of a servant, for man: If this do not satisfy, I know not what will. I
see not how any work of his Spirit in us, can make so much evidence of his
reality, and faithfulness in the Gospel, and of his willingness to welcome
sinners. All the works of Creation, all the works of Grace, are nothing to
this, to manifest his love to men, and therefore there is a singular note upon
it, God so loved the world, that he sent his Son, Joh. 3.16. And in this was
love manifested, that he gave his Son, 1 John 4.9. If men and Angels had set
themselves to devise and find out a pledge or confirmation of the love of God,
they would have fallen upon some revelation unto, or some operation upon their
spirits; but alace, this is infinitely above that, his own express image, and
the brightness of his glory, is come down to bear witness of his love: nay, he
who is equal with himself in glory, is given as a gift to men, and is not he
infinitely more then created gifts, or graces, who is the very spring and
fountain of them all? God so loved the world, that truly he gave no such gift
besides, to testify such a love: Therefore, when all that he has done in this
kind, cannot satisfy thy s^rupulous mind, but thou will still go on, to seek
more confirmation of his readiness to receive thee: I think it is a tempting
of the Holy One, which may draw such an answer from him, O wicked and
adulterous person, there shall no sign be given thee, but that which is darker
then the former, that which thou shall understand less; thou may get what thou
seeks, perhaps some more satisfaction in thy own condition, but it shall plung
thee more in the issue, thou shall always be unsettled and unconstant as water,
thou shall not excel. I confess indeed, if we speak of the manifestation of
ones particular interest in these promises, and of an evidence of the love of
God to thee, in particular, then there must needs be something wrought by the
Holy Spirit, on thy soul, to draw down the general testimony of Gods love to
mankind, into a particular application to thy self. But, that I do not speak of
now, because that is the sealing of the Spirit after believing, and because you
are always unsettled in the first, and main point, of flying unto the Son, and
waiting on him for life, therefore have you so much inevidence and weakness in
that which follows. That which I now speak of, is, that if this were cordially
believed, and seriously considered; that God sent his own Son in the flesh, to
save sinners, you could not readily have any doubt, but that you coming to him
for salvation, would be welcome, you could not say, that such precious
invitations could not belong to sinners, or that he could not love the like of
you. Truly, I think, if the general were laid to heart, that God has so loved
mankind, that he gave such a gift unto them, there is none could make any more
question of his reality, when that gift is tendered to any in particular. Nay,
I think it is the inconsideration of this general evidence, and manifestation
of love to the world, that makes you so perplexed in particulars. Could you
have so much difficulty to believe his love to you, if you indeed believe that
he has loved the world, that is, so many thousands like you? Is there so much
distance, I pray you, between you and another, as between him and all? If then
he loves so many miserable sinners, is there any impossibility in it, but he
may love you? for what is in them, that might conciliat his love? I tell you,
why I think the right apprehension of the general truths of the Gospel would be
able, like the Sun in its strength, to scatter all the clouds and mists of our
particular interest-debates; because I find, that these very grounds, upon
which, you call in question your own particular interest, if you did consider
them, you would find they go a further length, to conclude against all others,
and either they have no strength in your case, or they will be of equal force
to batter down the confidence of all the Saints, and the certainty of all the
promises. What is it that troubles you, but that you are sinners, and such
sinners, so vile, and loathsome, from whence you do conclude, not only, that
you have no present assurance of his love, but that he cannot love such a one
as you are: Now, I say, if this hold good, in reference to you, take heed that
you condemn not your selves in that which you approve, that is, that you do not
di^pute against the interest of all the Saints, who were such as you are, and
the truth of these fundamental positions of the Gospel, God so loved the
world, etc. And so you do not only wrong your selves, but all others; and not
only so, but you offer the greatest indignity to him, that out o^ love sent his
Son, and to him, who out of love, came and laid down his life. O consider how
you indignifie and set at naught that great manifestation of Gods love, God
manifested in the flesh, how you despise his love-pledge to sinners, a greater
then which he could not give you, because as great as himself. O that you could
see the consequence of your anxious and perplexing doubts, that they do not
only an injury to your own souls, but they are of a more bloody nature; if they
hold good, they would cut off the life and salvation of all believers, and
which is worse, they will by an unavoidable consequence, conclude an
Ante-chri^tian point, that Christ is not come in the flesh; I beseech you
unbowel your evils, that you may abhor them.

This may strengthen our faith, and minister much consolation, in another
consideration too; that which is laid down, Heb. 2.17. and 4.15. that he was
partaker of our nature, and in all things like unto his brethren, that so he
might be a merciful High Priest, able to succor us, and touched with the
feeling of our infirmities. What strong consolation may be sucked out of these
breasts? when it was impossible that man could rise up to God, because of his
infinite highness, and holiness, behold, God has come down to man, in his
lowness, and ba^eness; he has sent down this ladder from heaven, to the earth,
that poor wretched sinner may ascend upon it; it is come down, as low, as our
infirm weak and frail nature, that we may have easy coming up to it, and going
up upon it to heaven: Therefore his flesh is called, a new and living way,
because a poor sinner may be assured of welcome, and acceptance with one of
his own kind, his Brother, (he was not ashamed to call us brethren,) flesh of
his flesh, and bone of his bone; this may make boldness of access, that we
have not God to speak to, or come to, immediately, as he is clothed with glory
and majesty, and as the Jews heard him on Mount Sinai, and desired a Mediator
between him and them; but that, that great Prophet promised to them, has come,
and we have him between us and God, as low as we, that we may speak to him,
riding upon an ass, a low ass, that every one may whisper their desires in his
ear, and yet as high as God, that he may speak to God, and have power with him.
Truly, this is a sweet trysting place, to meet God in, that no sinner may have
any fear to come to it, to this treaty of peace and reconciliation. How may it
persuade us of that great privilege, that we may become the sons of God, when
the Son of God is become the Son of man, John 1.11, 12. Truly, though it be
hard to be believed, that such as we should become the Sons of the great King,
yet it is nothing so strange as this, that the eternal and only begotten Son of
the great God, should become the Son of wretched man, that highness will be
easily believed, if we consider this lowness. It will not be so hard to
persuade a soul, that there is a way of union, and reconciliation to God, of
being yet at peace with him, if this be pondered, that God has married his own
nature with ours, in one person, to be a pledge of that union and peace. And
then, how much quickening and comfort may it yield us? that he was not only a
man, but a miserable man, and that not through any necessity, but only the
necessity of love and compassion; he had enough of mercy to save us as God, he
had enough of love and compassion as man, but he would take on misery too, in
his own person, that he might be experimentally merciful to us. Certainly, the
experience of misery and infi^mity, must superadd some tenderness, to the heart
of our High Priest: But though it did not help him to be more pitiful, yet it
was done for us, to help us to have more confidence in him, and boldness to
come unto him. What an encouragement is it for a poor man, to come unto (once)
poor Jesus Christ, who had not where to lay his head? He knows the evil of
poverty, and he choosed to know it, that he might have compassion on thee. With
what boldness may poor afflicted, and despised believers come to him? why?
because, he himself had experience of all that, and he was familiarly
acquainted with grief and sorrow, therefore, he can sympathize best with thee.
Let us speak even of sinful infirmities thou art subject to, that there might
be a suitableness in him to help thee; he came as nigh as might be, he was
willing to be tempted to sin, and so he knows the power that temptations must
have over weak and frail natures, but sin he could not, for that had been evil
for us: Let this then, give us boldness to come to him.

I would desire to persuade you to humility from this, according to the lesson
Christ gives us, Matthew. 11.29. Learn of me, I am meek and lowly; and the
Apostle makes singular use of this mystery of the abasement of Majesty, to
abate from our high esteem of our selves, Phil. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. O should not the
same mind be in us, that was in Christ. God abased, and man exalted, how
unsuitable are these, think you? God lowly in condition and disposition, and
man, though base in condition, yet high in his disposition, and in his own
estimation: What more mysterious, then God humbled? And what more monstrous,
then man proud? Truly, pride it is the most deformed thing in a man, but in a
Christian, it is monstrous and prodigious. If he did humble himself out of
charity, and love, who was so high and glorious, how should we humble our
selves out of necessity, who are so low and base? and out of charity and love
too, to be conformed and like unto him. Nature may persuade the one, but
Christianity teaches the other, to be lowly in mind, and esteem every one
better then our selves; to be meek, patient, long-suffering, reason may
persuade it, upon the consideration of our own baseness, emptiness, frailty,
and nothingness. But this lesson is taught in Christ's School, not from that
motive only, the force of necessity, but from a higher motive, the constraint
of love to Jesus Christ: Learn of me. Suppose there were no necessity of reason
in it, yet affection, might be a stronger necessity, to persuade conformity to
him, and following his example, who became so low, and humbled himself to the
death, even for us.

SERMON XIII.
Romans 8.3. -- And for sin condemned sin in the flesh.


THE great and wonderful actions of great and excellent persons, must needs
have ^ome great ends answerable to them, wisdom will teach them not to do
strange things, but for some rare purposes; for it were a folly and madness to
do great things, to compass some small and petty end, as unsuitable as that a
Mountain should travel to bring forth a Mouse. Truly we must conceive, that it
must needs be some honorable and high business, that brought down so high and
honorable a person from Heaven, as the Son of God; it must be something
proportioned to his Majesty and his wisdom, and indeed so it is. There is a
great Capital enemy against God in the world, that is, sin; this arch rebel,
has drawn man from his subordination to God, and sown a perpetual discord and
enmity between them, this has conquered all mankind, and among the rest, even
the elect and chosen of God, these whom God had in his eternal Council
predes^inated to life and salvation; sin brings all in bondage, and exercises
the most perfect tyranny over them, that can be imagined, makes men to serve
all its imperious lusts, and then all the wages, is death, it binds them over
to Judgment. Now this sedition and rebellion being arisen in the world, and one
of the most noble creatures carried away in this revolt, from allegiance to the
Divine Majesty; the most holy and wise Council of Heaven concludes to send the
Kings Son, to compesce this rebellion, to reduce men again unto obedience, and
to destroy that arch traitor, sin, which his nature most abho^s. And for this
end the Son of the great King, Jesus Christ, came down into the world, to
deliver captive man, and to condemn conquering sin. There is no object that God
has so pure and perfect displeasure at, as sin; therefore he sent to condemn
that which he hates most, and perfectly he hates it, to condemn sin; and this
is expressed as the errand of his coming, 1 Ioh. 3.5, 8. to destroy the works
of the devil, all his wicked and hellish plots and contrivances against man,
all that poison of enmity and sin, that out of envy and malice he spued out
upon man, and instilled into his nature, all these works of that Prince of
Darkness, in enticing man from obedience to rebellion, and tyrannizing over him
since, by the imperious laws of his own lusts; in a word, all that work that
was contrived in hell, to bring poor man down to that same misery, with devils;
all that, Christ the only begotten Son of the great King, came (for this noble
business) to destroy it: That Tower which Satan was building up against
Heaven, and had laid the foundation of it as low as hell, this was Christ's
business, down among men, to destroy that Babylon, that Tower of darkness and
confusion, and to build up a Tower of light and life, to which Tower, sinners
might come, and be safe, and by which, they might really ascend into Heaven.
Some do* by these words, for sin, understand the occasion and reason of Christ's
coming, that it was, because sin had conquered the world, and subjected man to
condemnation, therefore Jesus Christ came into the world, to conquer sin, and
condemn it, that we might be free from condemnation by sin. And this was the
special cause of his taking on flesh, if sin had not entered in the world,
Christ had not come into it; and if sin had not erected a Throne in man's flesh,
Christ had not taken on flesh, he had not come in the likeness of sinful
flesh: So that this may administer unto us abundant consolation. If this was
the very cause of his coming, that which drew him down from that delightful and
blessed bosom of the Father, then he will certainly do that which he came for;
he cannot fail of his purpose, he cannot miss his end: he must condemn sin,
and save sinners. And truly this is wonderful love, that he took sin only for
his party, and came only for sin, or against sin, and not against poor sinners:
He had no commission of the Father, but this, as himself declares, Ioh. 3.17.
For, God sent not his Son into the world, to condemn the world, but that the
world through him might be saved. As one observes well, Christ would never have
hinted at such a jealousy, or suggested such a thought to men's minds, had it
not been in them before; but this we are naturally inclined unto, to think hard
of God, and can hardly be persuaded of his love, when once we are persuaded of
our enmity. Indeed the most part of the world fancy a persuasion of Gods love,
and have not many jealousies of it, because they know not their own enmity
against God, but let a man see himself indeed Gods enemy, and it is very hard
to make him believe any other thing of God* but that he carries a hostile mind
against him; and therefore Christ to take off this, persuades and assures us,
that neither the Father nor he had any design upon poor sinners, nor any
ambushm^nt against them, but mainly, if not, only, this was his purpose in
sending, and Christ's in coming, not against man, but against sin, not to
condemn sinners, but to condemn sin, and save sinners. O blessed and
unparalled love! that made such a real distinction between sin and sinners,
who were so really one. Shall not we be content to have that woeful and
accursed union with sin dissolved? Shall not we be willing to let sin be
condemned in us, and to have our own souls saved? I beseech you, beloved in the
Lord, do not think to maintain always Christ's enemy, that great traitor,
against which he came from Heaven: Wonder that he does not prosecute both, as
enemies; but i^ he will destroy the one, and save the other, O, let it be
destroyed, not you; and so much the more, for that it will destroy you: Look to
him, so iniquity shall not be your ruin, but he shall be the ruin of
iniquity; but if you will not admit of such a division between you and your
sins, take heed that you be not ete^nally undivided, that you have not one
common lot for ever, that is, condemnation. Many would be saved, but they would
be saved with sin too; Alace! that will condemn thee; as for sin, he has
proclaimed irreconciliable enmity against it, he has no quarter to give it, he
will never come in terms of composition with it, and all because it is his
mortal enemy; therefore let sin be condemned, that thou may be saved. It cannot
be saved with thee, but thou may be condemned with it.

The word, for sin, may be taken in another sense as fitly, a sacrifice for
sin, so that the meaning is, Jesus Christ came to condemn and overthrow sin, in
its plea against us, by a sacrifice for sin, that i^, by offering up his own
body, or flesh. And thu^, you have the way and means how Christ conquered sin,
and accomplished the business he was sent for. It was by offering a sac^^fice
for sin, to expiat wrath and to sati^fie justice: The sting and strength of
death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, as the Apostle speaks it, 1
Cor. 15.55. we had two great enemies against us, two great tyrants over us, sin
and death. Death had past upon all mankind, not only the miseries of this life,
and temporal death had subjected ^ll men, but the fear of an eternal death, of
an everlasting separation from the blessed face of God, might have seized upon
all, and subjected them to bondage, Heb. 2.15. But the strength and sting of
that is sin, it is sin that arms death and hell against us; take away sin, and
you take away the sting, the strength of death, it has no force, or power to
hurt man; but death being the wages due for sin, Romans 6.23. all the certainty
and efficacy in the wages, flows from this work of darkness, sin. But, Now the
strength of sin is the Law, this puts a poysonable and destructive virtue in
the sting of sin, for it is the sentence of Gods Law, and the justice and
righteousness of God that has made so inseparable a connection between sin and
death; this gives sin a destroying and killing virtue. Justice arms it with
power, and authority, to condemn man, so that there can be no freedom, no
releasment from that condemnation, no eschewing that fatal sting of death,
unless the sentence of Gods Law, which has pronounced, thou shall die, be
repealed, and the justice of God be satisfied by a ransom. And this being
done, the strength of sin is quite gone, and so the sting of death removed.

Now this had been impossible for man to do, these parties were too strong, for
any created power; the strength of sin to condemn, may be called someway
infinite, because it flows from the unchangeable law of the infinite justice of
God; now what power could encounter that strength, except that which has
infinite sterngth too? Therefore, it behoved the Son of God, to come for this
business, to condemn sin, and save the sinner. And being come, he yokes first
with the very strength of sin, for he knew where its strangth did ly, and so
did encounter, first of all, with that, even the justice of his Father, the
hand writing of ordinances that was against us; for if once he can set them
aside, as either vanquished, or satisfied, he has little else to do. Now, he
does not take a violent way in this either, he does it not with the strong
hand, but deals wisely, and (to speak so with reverence) cunningly in it, he
came under the Law, that he might redeem them who were under the Law, Gal. 4.4.
force will not do it, the Law cannot be violented, justice cannot be compelled
to forgo its right; therefore, our Lord Jesus chooses, as it were, to compound
with the Law, to submit unto it, he was made under the Law, he who was above
the Law, being Lawgiver in mount Sinai, Acts 7.38. Gal. 3.19. he comes under
the bond and tie of it, to fulfill it. I came not to destroy the Law, but to
fulfill it, Mat. 5.17. he would not offer violence to the Law, to deliver
sinners, contrary to the commination of it, or without satisfaction given unto
it, for, that would reflect upon the wisdom and righteousness of the Father who
gave the Law: But he does it better, in an amicable way, by submission and
obedience to all its demands, whatsoever it craved of the sinner, he fulfils
that debt, he satisfies the bond, in his own person, by suffering; and fulfils
all the Commandments by obedience: And thus, by subjection to the Law, he gets
power over the Law, because his subjection takes away all its claim, and right
over us; therefore, it is said, that he blotted out the handwriting of
ordinances, which was against us, by nailing it to his cross, and so took it
out of the way, Col. 2.14. having fulfilled the bond, he cancelled it, and so
it stands in no force* either against him or us; thus, the strength of sin
which is the Law, is removed, and by this means, sin is condemned in the flesh,
by the suffering of his flesh, it is fallen from all it is plea against sinners;
for, that upon which it did hang, viz. the sentence of the Law, is taken out of
the way, so that it has no apparent ground to fasten any accusation upon a
poor sinner, that flees in to Jesus Christ, and no ground at all to condemn
him, it is wholly disabled in that point; for, as the Philistines found where
Sampsons strength lay, and cutted his hair, so Christ has in his wisdom, found
where the strength of sins plea, against man lay, and has cutted off the hair
of it, that is, the handwriting of ordinances which was against us.

This is that which has been shadowed out, from the beginning of the world, by
the types of Sacrifices and Ceremonies: All these offerings of Beasts, of
Fowls, and such like, under the Law, held ^orth this one sacrifice, that was
offered in the fullness of time, to be a propitiation for the sins of the world;
and something of this was used among the Gentiles, before Christ's coming,
certainly by tradition from the Fathers, who have looked afar off to this day,
when this sweet smelling sacrifice should be offered up to appease Heaven. And
it is not without a sp^cial Providence, and worthy the remarking, that since
the plenary and substantial One, was offered, the custom of sacrificing, has
ceased throughout the world; God, as it were, proclaiming to all men by this
cessation of Sacrifices, as well as silence of Oracles, that the true atonement
and propitiation is come already, and the true Prophet is come from Heaven, to
reveal Gods mind unto the world. There were many ceremonies in sacrificing,
observed, to hold out unto us the perfection of our atonement and propitiation:
They laid their hands on the beast, who brought it, to signify the imputation
of our sins to Christ, that he who knew no sin, was made sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. And truly it is worth the
observation, that even those sacrifices for sin, were called sin, and so the
word is used promiscuously in Leviticus, to point out unto us, that Jesus
Christ should make his soul sin, Isa. 53.10. that is, a sacrifice for sin, and
he made sin for us, that is, a sacrifice for sin. When the blood was poured out
( because without shedding of blood, no reconciliation, Heb. 10.) the Priest
sprinkled it seven times before the Lord, to shadow out the perfection of that
expiation for our sins, in the virtue and perpetuity thereof, Heb. 9.26. that
he should appear to put away sin, by the sacrifice of himself; to put it away,
as if it had never been, by taking it on him, and bearing it: And then the High
Priest was to bring in of the blood into the holy place, and within the vail,
and sprinkle the Mercy Seat, ^o show unto us, that the merit and efficacy of
Christ's blood, should enter into the highest Heavens, to appease the wrath of
God. Our High Priest by his own blood has entered into the holy place, having
obtained eternal redemption for us, Heb. 9.12. And truly this is that
sacrifice, which being offered without spot to God, pacifies all, ver. 14. Sin
has a cry, cries aloud for vengeance; this blood silenceth it, and composeth
all to savor and mercy. It has so sweet and fragrant a smell in Gods account,
that it fills Heaven with the perfume of it. He is that true scapegoat, who
notwithstanding that he did bear all the sins of his people, yet he did escape
alive, albeit he behoved to make his soul a sacrifice for sin, and so die for
it, yet by this means he has condemned sin, by being condemned for sin, by
this means he has overcome death and the grave, by coming under the power of
death, and so is now alive for ever, to improve his victory for our salvation;
and by taking on our sin^, he has fully abolished the power and plea of them,
as the goat that was sent to the wilderness out of all men's sight, was not to
be seen again. Truly this is the way how our sins are buried in the grave ^f
oblivion, and removed as a cloud, and cast into the depths of the Sea, and sent
away as far as the East is from the West, that they may never come in judgment
against us, to condemn us, because Christ by appeasing wrath, and satisfying
Justice by the sacrifice of himself, has overthrown them in judgment, and
buried them in the grave with his own body.

You see then, my beloved, a solid ground of consolation against all our fears
and sorrows, an answer to all the accusations of our sins, here is one for all,
one above all. You would have particular answers to satisfy your particular
doubts, you are always seeking some satisfaction to your consciences besides
this; but believe it, all that can be said besides this atonement and
propitiation, is of no more virtue to purge your consciences, or satisfy your
perplexed souls, then these repeated sacrifices of old were. Whatsoever you can
pitch upon besides this, it is insufficient, and therefore you find a necessity
of seeking some other grace or qualification to appease your consciences, even
as they had need to multiply sacrifices; but now since this perfect and full
propitiation is offered up for our sins, should not all these vain expiations
of your own works, cease? Truly there is nothing can pacify Heaven but this,
and nothing can appease thy Conscience on earth, but this too. If you find any
accusation against you, consider, Christ has by a sacrifice for sin, condemned
sin in his own flesh; the marks of the spear, of the nails, of the buffettings
of his flesh, these are the tokens and pledges, that he encountered with the
wrath due to your sins, and so has cut off all the right that sin has over
you. If thou can unseignedly in the Lords sight, say, that it is thy souls
desire to be delivered from sin, as well as wrath, thou would gladly flee from
condemnation, th^n come to him who has condemned sin, by suffering the
condemnation of sin, that he might save these who desire to flee from it to him.

SERMON XIV.
Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc.


GOD having a great design to declare unto the world, both his justice and
mercy toward men, he found out this mean most suitable and proportioned unto
it, which is here spoken of in the 3. verse. to send his own Son, to bear the
punishment of sin, that the righteousness of the Law might be freely and
graciously fulfilled in sinners. And indeed it was not imaginable by us, how he
could declare both, in the salvation of sinners; we could not have found out a
way to declare his righteousness and holiness, which would not have obscured
his mercy and grace, nor a way to manifest his grace and mercy, which would not
have reflected upon his Holiness and Justice, according to the letter of the
Law that was given out, as the rule of life, he that does them shall live in
them, and cursed is every one that does them not, etc. What could we expect, if
this be fulfilled (as it would appear, Gods truth and holiness requires?) then
we are gone; no place for mercy: if this be not fulfilled, (that mercy may be
showed in pardoning sin,) then the truth and faithfulness of God seems to be
impaired. This is the strait that all sinners would have been into, if God had
not found such an enlargement as this, how to show mercy, without wronging
Justice, and how to save sinners, without impairing his faithfulness. Truly,
we may wonder what was it that could straiten his Majesty so, that he must send
his own Son, so beloved of him, and bruise him, and hide his face from him,
yea, and torment him, and not let the cup pass from him, for any entreaties;
might he not more easily have never added such a commination to the Law, Thou
shall die; or more easily relaxed and repealed that sentence, and past by ^he
sinner, without any more, then exacted so heavy a punishment from one that was
innoncent? Was it the satisfaction of his Justice that straightened him, and put a
necessity of this upon him? But truly it seems it had been no more contrary to
righteousness to have past over the sinner, without satisfaction, then to
require and take it off one who was not really guilty? The truth is, it wa^ not
simply the indispensible necessity of satisfying Justice, that put him upon
such an hard and unpleasant work, as the bruising of his own Son; for, no
doubt, he might have as well dispensed with all satisfaction, as with the
personal satisfaction of the sinner; but here the strait lay, and here was the
urgency of the case, he had a purpose to declare his justice, and therefore a
satisfaction must be had, not simply to satisfy righteousness, but rather to
declare his righteousness, Romans 3.25. Now indeed to make these two shine
together, in one work of the salvation of sinners, all the world could not have
found out the like of this; to dispense with personal satisfaction, in the
sinner, which the rigor of the Law required, and so to admit a sweet
moderation and relaxation, that the riches of his grace and mercy might be
manifested, and yet withal, to exact that same punishment of another,
willingly coming in the sinners place, to the end that all sinners may behold
his righteousness and justice: and so this work of the redemption of sinners,
has these Names of God published by himself, Exodus 34.6, 7. to Moses, engraven
deeply upon it, mercy and goodness spelled out at length in it, for love was
the rise of all, and love did run alongs in all, yet so, as there is room to
speak out his holiness, and righteousness, and justice not so much to afright
sinners, as to make his mercy the more amiable and wonderful.

I know not a more pressing ground of strong consolation, nor a firmer bulwark
of our confidence, and salvation, then this conjunction of Mercy, and Justice,
in the business: there might have been always a secret hink of jealousy, and
suspicion in our minds, when God publishes mercy and foregiveness to us
freely, O! how shall the Law be satisfied, and the importunity of justice and
faithfulness, that has pronounced a sentence of death upon us, answered? Shall
not the righteous Law be a loser this way, if I be saved, and it not satisfied
by obedience or suffering? how hard would it be to persuade a soul of free
pardon, that sees such a severe sentence standing against it? But now there is
no place for doubting, all is contrived for the encouragment and happiness of
poor sinners, that we may come to him with full persuasion of his readiness,
and inclinableness to pardon, since Jesus Christ has taken the Law and Justice
of God off our head, and us off their hand, and since he has reckoned with
them, for what is due by us, and paid it without us, then we have a clear way,
and ready access to pardon, and to believe his readiness to pardon. And this
is it which is holden out here, Christ condemning sin in the flesh, or
punishing sin in his own flesh; giving a visible and sensible representation of
the justice and righteousness of God, in punishing sin, and that in his own
flesh, offering up himself as the condemned sinner, and hanging up to the view
of all the world, as an evident testimony of the justice and righteousness of
God against sin, and by this means cutting off the very strength of sin, the
Law, by fulfilling it. In Christ's sufferings you may behold, as in a clear
mirror, the hatred and displeasure of God against sin, the righteousness of
God in punishing sin, Him has God set forth to the world to be a propitiation,
to declare the righteousness of God, Romans 3.24, 25. In this crucified Lord, you
may behold the sensible image, and the most lively demonstration of holiness
and righteousness; Christ's flesh bare the marks of both, holiness in hating
sin, righteousness in punishing it, and both in his beloved and only begotten
Sons person; in his flesh: And all for this purpose that the Law might be no
loser by our salvation, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in
us, etc.

This is that which Christ says, I came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill
it; and which Paul seconds, Is the Law then made void by faith, God forbid, it
is rather established, Matthew. 5.17. Romans 3.31. The Law and Justice comes better
to their own, by our cautioner, then by us, there is no such way conceivable,
to satisfy them fully, as this, whether ye look to the Commandment or the
Curse.

The Commandment never got such satisfaction, in any person, as in Christ's, he
has fulfilled it by obedience. It becomes us, says he, to fulfill all
righteousness, Matthew. 3.15. Both Moral and Ceremonial, so that there was no
guil found in his mouth, he knew no sin, he was holy and harmless: His Fathers
will was his souls delight, I delight to do thy will, Psalm. 40.8. It was more
to him then his necessary food, his meat and drink, there was so absolute a
correspondency between his will, and Gods will, and between his way, and his
will, that it was not possible that any difference should fall between them.
His obedience had more good in it (so to speak) then Adam's disobedience had
evil in it, Romans 5.18, 19. Adam's disobedience was but the sin of a finite
creature, but Christ's obedience was the work of an infinite person. I think
there was more real worth in Christ's obedience to the Commands, then in all the
united service and obedience of men and Angels, all the love, delight, fear,
and obedience flowing from these, take them in one bundle, as they will be
extended and multiplied to all eternity, there is something in Christ's, that
elevats it above ^ll, and puts a higher price upon it, the transcendent dignity
of his person, his own Son, made under the Law, Gal. 4.4. That is more worth
then all men and Angels made under it. It had been no humiliation, but rather
the exaltation of an Angel, to be obedient to God, that subordination to a law,
is the highest top of the creatures advancement: but he was such a person, ^s
his obedience was a humbling himself, he humbled himself, and became obedient
even to the death, Phil. 2.8. And though he was the Son of God, yet he stooped,
to learn obedience, Heb. 5.8. Now indeed the commandment come^ to it better, by
this mean^, to have such a glorious person under it, then if it had poor
naughty, us, under it, and that it is fulfilled by him, when otherwise it would
never have been done. I suppose that justice had ex^cted the punishment of us,
as we could never have ended suffering to all eternity, so we would never have
begun new obedience to the command to all eternity; thus, except Christ had
taken it off us, and us off its hand, it should never have been fulfilled,
since it was first broken. Next, the curse of the Law could not ge^ fuller
satisfaction, then in Christ: I suppose. It had f^llen upon the sinner, the^e
is not so much worth in the creatures extremest sufferings, as to compense the
infinite wrongs done to the holiness and righteousness of God, therefore what
was wanting in the intrinsic value of the creatures suffering, behoved to be
made up in the infinite extent of it* and eternal continuance of it upon the
creature. Thus there could never be a determined time a^^igned, in which the
curse were fulfilled; and in which, Justice could say, hold, I have enough. It
is, as if a man were owing an infinite debt, and he could get nothing to defray
it, but poor petty sums, which being all conjoined, cannot amount to any
proportion of it: therefore, since he cannot get one sum in value, equal to it,
he must be eternally paying it, in smalls, according to his capacity; and so
because the utmost farthing cannot be won at, he can never be released out of
prison. But our Lord Jesus has satisfied it to the full, he was a more
stubstantial debtor, and because of the infinite dignity of his Person, there
was an intrinsic value upon his sufferings, proportioned unto the infinitness
of man's sin; so that he could pay all the debt in a short time, which a si^ner
could but have done to all eternity. Now, you know, any man would rather choose
such a cautioner that can solidly satisfy him in gross, and pay all the sum at
once, then such a principal, that because of his inability, cannot amount to
any considerable satisfaction in many year^. And even so it is with the Law and
Justice of God, they hold themselves better contented in Christ, then in us, in
his being made a curse, then the falling of the curse on us, G^l. 3.13. And
therefore God testifies it to poor sinners, deliver them, I have found a
ransom, Job 33.24. And that is the ransom which Christ gave, his life for
many, Matthew. 20.28.

You see then, how this Conclusion follows, that the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, he having fulfilled it, and satisfied it so fully,
both by obedience to the Commandment, and submission to the Curse; it is all
one in Gods account, as if we had done it, because Christ was surety in our
stead, and a common person representing us, and therefore, his paying of the
debt, acquits us at the hand of Justice, and whatsoever he did to fulfill all
righteousness, that is accounted ours, because we were represented in him, and
judicially one with him: And therefore, we were condemned when he was
condemned, we were dead when he died, and so the righteousness of the Law, in
ex^cting a due punishment for sin, was fulfilled for us in him, and it is all
one as if it had been personally in us. And this is laid down as the foundation
of that blessed embassy, or message of reconciliation to sinners, as that upon
which God is in Christ reconciling and beseeching us to be reconciled, 2 Cor.
5.19, 20, 21. Him who knew no sin, has he made sin for us, that we might be
made the righteousness of God in him. You see the blessed exchange that he has
made with us, he has laid our sins on sinless Christ, and laid Christ's
righteousness on sinful us. Christ took our sins on him, that he might give us
his righteousness, and by virtue of this transaction and communication, as it
was righteous with God to condemn sin in Christ's flesh, because our sin was
upon him, so it is as just with him to impute righteousness to us, because we
were in him: And as the Law made him a curse, and exacted the punishment off
him, it is as righteous with the Lord to give us life and salvation, and to
forgive sin, as John speaks, 1 Epist. 1.19. If we confess our sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive our sins.

Now consider this, my Beloved, for it is propounded unto you, as the greatest
persuasive to move you to come to Jesus Christ, there is such a clear and plain
way in him to Salvation. If this do not move your hearts, I know not what will:
I do not expect that your troubles in this world, the frequent lashes of
judgment, the impoverishing and exhausting of you, the plucking away of these
things ye loved, the disquieting your peace so often, that any of those things
that have the image of wrath upon them, can drive you to him, and make you
forsake your way, when such a motive as this does not prevail with you. O what
heart could stand against the power of this persuasion, if it were but righty
apprehended? who would not willingly flee in to this City of refuge, if they
did but know aright the avenger of blood that pursues them, and what safety is
within? You are always imagining vain satisfactions, to the Law of God; how
great weight does your fancy impose upon your tears, your confessions, your
reformations? If you can attain any thing of this kind, that is it which you
give to satisfy justice, it is that wherewith you pretend to fulfill the Law.
But if it could be so, wherefore should God have sent his Son to condemn sin*
and purchase righteousness by him? I beseech you, once know and consider your
estate, that you may open your hearts to this Redeemer, that you may be willing
to be stripped naked of all your imaginary righteousness, to put on this, which
will satisfy the Law fully. Will you die in your sins, because you will not
come to him to have life? Will you rather be condemned with sin, then saved
with Christ's righteousness? And truly, there is no other Altar that will
preserve you but this. Now, if any apprehending their own misery, be hardly
pursued in their consciences, by the Law of God, I beseech you come hither, and
behold it, satisfied and ful^^lled, I beseech you in Christ's stead, to be
reconciled unto God, to lay down all hostile affections, and come to him,
because God is in Christ, reconciling the world, and not imputing their sins,
because he has imputed them already to Christ, him who knew no sin, etc. and
he is in Christ, imputing his righteousness to sinners.

SERMON XV.
Romans 8.4. That the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc.


THink not (says our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ) that I am come to destroy
the Law, I am come to fulfill it, Mat. 5.17 It was a needful Caveat, and a very
timous Ad^ertisment; because of the natural mis-apprehensions in men's mind^ of
the Gospel. When free forgiveness of sins, and life ^verlasting, i^ preached in
Jesus Christ, without our works, when the mercy of God is proclaimed in its
freedom, and fullness, the heart of man is subject to a woeful mis-conceit of
Christ, as if by these a latitude were given, and a liberty proclaimed to men
to live in sin. That which is propounded as the encouragement of poor sinners,
to come to God, and forsake their own wicked way, it is miserably wrested upon
a mistake, to be an encouragement to revolt more and more. Righteousness and
life, by faith in a Savior, without the works of the Law, is holden out as the
grand persuasion of the Gospel, to study obedience to the Law; and yet such is
the perverseness of many hearts, that either in opinion, or practice, they so
carry themselves, as if there were an inconsistence, between Christ and the
Law, between free Justification, and Sanctification, as if Christ had come to
redeem us not from sin, but to sin. Now to prevent this, think not, says he,
that I am come to destroy the Law, do not fancy to your selves a liberty to
live in sin, and an immunity from the obligation of a commandment, because I
have purchased an immunity and freedom from the curse, no, I am come to fulfill
it rather, not only in mine own person, but in yours also. And to this purpose,
Paul, Romans 3.31. Do we then make void the Law by faith? It is so natural to our
rebellious hearts, to desire to be free from the yoke of obedience, and
therefore we fancy such a notion of faith, as may not give it self, to working
in love, as is active in nothing but imagination. The Apostle abominats this,
God forbid, he detests it, as impious and sacrilegious, yea, we establish it.
So then, all returns to this, one of the great ends of Christ's coming in the
flesh, and one main intendment of the Gospel, published in his Name, is not
merely to deliver us from wrath, and redeem us from the curse, Gal. 3.13. 1
Th^ss. 1.10. But also, and that especially, to redeem us from all iniquity,
that we might be a people zealous of ^ood works, Ti^. 2.14. And to take away
sin, and destroy the works of the devil, 2 John 3.5, 8. We spoke something
before noon, how Chr^^t has f^l^^lled the Law, and established it, in his own
person, by obedience and suffering, neither of which ways, it could be so well
contented by any other: but there is yet a third way that he fulfills and
establishes it* and that is in our persons, That the righteousness of the Law
might be fulfilled in us, who walk not aft^r the ^^esh, but after the Spirit.
He has oblidged himself to fulfill it, not only for believers, but in
believers; therefore the promises run thus, I will write my Law in their
hearts, and cause them to walk in my Satutes, Ez^k. 36.27. Jer. 31.33. Not only
I delight do thy will, but I will make them d^light to do it also: And truly in
this respect, the Law is more fulfilled and established by Christ, then ever it
could have been, if man had been left to satisfy it alone. If we had reckoned
alone with the Law, we had been taken up eternally with satisfaction for the
breaches of it, so that there could be no access to obedience of the command,
and no acceptance either: a sinner must first satisfy the curse, for the fault
done, before ever he can be in a capacity to perform new obedience on the terms
of acceptance of it with God. Now the first would have taken up eternity, so
that there can be no place of entr^ to the second; therefore if Christ had not
found out a way of free pardon of the sins that are past, and assurance, of
forgiveness for the time to come, the Commandments of God should be wholly
frustrated, but there is forgiveness with thee, that thou may be feared,
Psalm. 130.4. The word is also, worshipped: Truly my beloved, this is the
foundation of all Religion, free forgiveness, there had been no Religion, no
worship of God, no obedience to his commands throughout all eternity, there
should never have been any fear, any love, any delight in God, any reverence
and subjection to him, if he had not forgiveness, a treasure of mercies with
him, to bestow first upon sinners, and this makes access to stand and serve in
his sight. The cloud of our transgressions is so thick and dark, that there
could never have been any communion with God, if he had not found out the way
to scatter and blot it out, for his own Names sake. Religion then must begin at
this great and inestimable free gift of imputed righteousness, of accounting
us, what we are not in our selves, because found so in another, it begins at
remission of sins, but that is not all, this has a further end, and truly it
is but introductive to a further end; that so a soul may be made partaker of
the gift of holiness within, and have that image of God renewed in holiness and
righteousness. I would have you once persuaded to begin at this, to recieve the
free gift of another righteousness, Romans 5.17. And another obedience, to find
your own nakedness and loathsomness without this covering, and how short all
other coverings of your own works are. O that we could once persuade you to
renounce your selves, to embrace this righteousness, then it were easy to
prevail with you to renounce sin, to put on holiness. I say, first, you must
renounce your selves, as undone in all you do, as loathsome in all that ever
you loved, and come under the wide and broad skirt of Christ's righteousness,
which he did weave upon the earth, for to hide our nakedness. You must once
have the righteousness of the Law fulfilled perfectly by another, before you
can have access to fulfill on jot of it your selves, or any thing you do be
accepted; and till this foundation be laid, you do but beat the air in
Religion, you build on the sand.

Now if once you were brought this length, to renounce all confidence in your
selves, and to flee in to Christ's righteousness, then it were easy to lead
you a step further, to renounce the love of your most beloved sins: and the
more lovely that Christ's righteousness is in your eyes, the more beauty would
holiness and obedience have in them also unto you; then you would labor to
walk after the guidance of the Spirit.

I would have the impression of this deep in your hearts, that the Gospel is
not a Doctrine of licentiousness, but a Doctrine of the purest liberty, of the
compleatest redemption. Many think it liberty to serve their lusts, and it is
indeed as bonds and cords to restrain them. There is no man but would be
content to be saved from the wrath to come, and therefore many snatch at such
sentences of the Gospel, and take them lightly, without consideration of what
further is in it. But truly if this were all, it were not complete redemption;
if there were not redemption from sin too, which is the most absolute tyrant in
the world. I think a true Christian would account the service of sin bondage,
though it were left at his own option; He that commits sin, is the servant of
sin, therefore the freedom that Christ purchases, is freedom from sin, Ioh.
8.38. I will say more, we are delivered from wrath, that so we may be redeemed
from sin, we have the righteousness of Christ imputed to us, that so the image
of Christ may be renewed within us, this is the very end of that. I am sure any
that disce^ns aright, knows sin to have infinite more evil in it, then
punishment has; nay, punishment is only evil, as it has relation to sin:
There is a beauty of justice and righteousness in punish^nt, but there is
nothing in sin, but deformity and opposition to his Holiness, its purely evil,
and most purely hated of God: and if there were no more to persuade you that
sin is infinitely more evil then pain, consider how our pain and punishment was
really transferred upon the blessed Son of God, and that all this did not make
him a whit the worse, but he was not capable of the real infusion of our sin,
that would have made Christ as miserable, wretched, and impotent as any of us,
that would have disabled him so far from helping us, that he would have had as
much need of a Mediator, as we: all which were highly blasphemous to imagine.
Look then how much distance and difference there was between suffering, dying
Christ, and wretched men living in sin, none can say but he is infinitely
better, even while in pain, nor the highest Prince in pleasure, so much
disproportion there is between sin and pain, so much is the one worse then the
other. Do not think then that Christ died to purchase an indulgence for you to
live in sin, truly that were to take away the lesser evil, that the greater may
remain; that were to deliver from one misery, that we may be more involved in
that which is the greatest of all miseries. Nay, certainly if Christ be a
Redeemer, he must redeem us from our most potent and accursed enemy, sin; he
must take away the root, the fountain of all misery, sin; that which conceived
in its womb all pains, sorrows, sicknesses, death and hell. You have the great
end of redemption expressed, Luke 1.75. That we being delivered from all our
enemies, might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness. It was
that, for which he made man at first, and it is that for which he has made him
again, created unto good works, Ephesians. 2.8. It was a higher design certainly, for
which the Son of God became partaker of our nature, then only to deliver us
from hell, no doubt it was to make us partakers of the Divine Nature, 2 Pet.
1.4. and this is the very nature of God, holiness and goodness. As sin is the
very nature and image of the Devil, the great breach of the Creation was the
breaking off of this Image of God, that was the heaviest fall of man, from that
top of divine excellency, into the bottom of devilish deformity. Now it is
this that is the great plot for which Christ came into the world, to make up
that breach, to restore man to that dignity again, so that redemption from
wrath, is but a step to ascend upon, to that which is truly Gods design, and
man's dignity, conformity with God in holiness and righteousness.

O that you could be persuaded of this, that Christ's business in the world,
was not to bring a notion of an imaginary righteousness only, by mere
imputation, but to bring forth a solid and real righteousness in our hearts,
by the operation of his Spirit: I say imputation, or accounting righteous, is
but a mere imagination, if this lively operation do not follow. He came not
only to spread his garment over our nakedness and deformity, but really and
effectually to be a Physician to save our souls, to cure all our inward
distempers. The Gospel is not only a Doctrine of a righteousness without us,
but of a righteousness both without, for, and within us too, that the
righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in us, etc. Christ without,
happiness it self without, cannot make us happy, till they come in within us,
and take up a dwelling in our souls. Therefore I declare unto the most part of
you who pretend to expect salvation by Jesus Christ, that you are yet in your
sins, and as yet you have no fellowship in this redemption. Do you think to
walk after the course of the world, and the lusts of the flesh, to wallow in
these common pollutions and uncleanness among men, swearing, lying,
contention, railing, wrath, malice, envy, drunkenness, uncleanness, and such
like, and yet be in Christ Jesus? Do not deceive your selves, God is not
mocked: He that is in Christ, is a new creature, his endeavor and study, his
affection and desire is toward a new walk, after the Spirit. Are not most of
you carnal, all flesh; the flesh gives Laws, and you obey them? Are not your
immortal souls enslaved to base lusts, to the base love of the world? Are they
not prone to prostitute themselves to the service of your fleshly and brutish
part? Why do you then imagine that ye are in Christ Jesus, partakers of his
righteousness? Consider it in time, that so you may be indeed, what you now
are not, but pretend to be. It is the opinion that you are in Christ already,
that keeps you out of him.

But on the other hand again, there is nothing here to discourage a poor soul,
that thinks subjection to sin the greatest slavery, who would as gladly be
redeemed from the power of it, as from hell: I say to such, whose souls desire
it is to be purged from all that filthiness of flesh and spirit, and whose
continued aim it is to walk in obedience. Though you have many sailings, and
often fall, and defile yourself again, yet this comfort is holden out here unto
you, there is no condemnation to you, Jesus Christ has condemned sin, to save
you, he has fulfilled all righteousness for you, and therefore lay you the
weight of your acceptance and consolation upon what he has done himself, and
not upon what is but yet a doing in you. Do you not find, I say, that the grace
of Jesus Christ, revealed in the Gospel, is that which melts your hearts most?
Is not the goodness of the Lord that which persuades you most? and do not these
make you loath your self, and love holiness? Encourage your selves therefore in
him, hold fast the righteousness that is without you, by faith, and certainly
you shall find that righteousness and holiness shall in due time be fulfilled
within you. I know no soul so wretched, but it may lay hold on that perfect
righteousness of Christ's, and go under the covering of it, and take heart from
it, if so be the desire and affection of their soul be dire^ted to a further
end, to have his Spirit dwelling within them, for the renewing of their heart
in righteousness and true holiness. I do not say that this is a condition which
you must perform before you venture to lay lold on Christ's righteousness
without you, no ways, but rather I would declare unto you the very nature of
faith in Christ, that it seeks delivery from wrath in him, not simply and
lastly, but that a way may be made for redemption from sin, and that there may
be a participation of that Divine Nature, which is most in its eye.

SERMON XVI.
Romans 8.4, 5. who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. For they that
are after the flesh, etc.


IF there were nothing else to engage our hearts to Religion, I think this
might do it, that there is so much reason in it. Truly, it is the most rational
thing in the world, except some revealed mysteries of faith, which are far
above reason, but not contrary to it; there is nothing besides in it, but that
which is the purest reason. Even that part of it which is most difficult to
man, that which concerns the moderating of his lusts and affections, and the
regulating his walk and carriage; there is nothing that Christianity requires
in these matters, but that which may be persuaded by most convincing reasons,
to be most suitable, and comely for men, as man; you may take it in the subject
in hand, there is nothing sounds harsher to men, and seems harder in Religion,
then such a victory over the flesh, such an abstractedness from sensual and
earthly things; and yet, truly, there is nothing in the world, that more adorns
and beautifies a man, nothing so elevats him above beasts, as this, in so much
that many natural spirits, void of this saving light, have notwithstanding been
taken with somewhat of the beauty of it, and so far enamoured with the love of
it, as to account all the world mad, and brutish, that followed these lower
things, and inslaved themselves unto them. I take the two fountains of all the
pollutions, disorders, and defilements among men, to be the inconsideration and
ignorance of God, that eternal Spirit, and fountain-being, and the ignorance of
our own souls, these immortal spirits within us, which are derived from that
fountain-spirit. This is the misery of men, that scarce do they once seriously
reflect upon their own spirits, or think what immortal souls is within them,
and what affinity these have to the fountain of all spirits; therefore, do men
basely throw down themselves to the satisfaction of the lusts of the flesh. Now
indeed, this is the very beginning of Christianity, to reduce men from these
baser thoughts and employments, to the consideration of their immortal souls
within: And O! how will a Christian blush to behold himself in that light, to
see the very image of a beast upon his nature, to look on that slavery and
bondage of his far better part, to the worst and brutish part in him, his
flesh.

If a man did wisely consider the constitution of his nature, from its first
divine original, and what a thing the soul is, which is truly, and more
properly, himself, then his body, what excellency is in the soul beyond the
body, and so, what preheminency it advances a man unto, beyond a beast? He
could not but account Religion the very ornament and perfection of his nature.
Reason will say, that the spirit should rule and command the body, that flesh
is but the minister and servant of the spirit, that there is nothing the proper
and peculiar good of man, but that which adorns and rectifies the spirit, that
all these external things which men's senses are carried after, with so much
violence, do not better a man, as man, but are common to beasts, that in these
things, man's happiness, as man, does not at all consist, but in some higher and
more transcending good, which beasts are not capable of, and which may satisfy
the immortal spirit, and not perish in the using, but live with it: All these
things, the very natural frame and constitution of man does convincingly
persuade. Now then, may a soul think within it self, O how far am I departed
from my original? how far degenerated from that noble and royal dignity, that
God by the stamp of his image once put upon me? How is it that I am become a
slave and drudge to that baser and brutish part, the flesh? I would have you
retire into your own hearts, and ask such things at them. Man being in honor
and understanding not, is even like the beasts that perish: Truly we are become
like beasts, because we consider not that we are men, and so advanced by
creation far above beasts. The not reflecting on the immortal, spiritual nature
of our souls, has transformed us, in a manner, into the nature of beasts,
perishing beasts. Christianity is the very transforming of a beast into a man,
as sin was the deforming of a man into a beast: This is the proper effect of
Christianity, to restore humanity, to elevat it, and purify it from all those
defilements and corruptions that were engrossed and incorporated into it, by
the state of subjection to the flesh; and therefore the Apostle delineats the
nature of it unto us, and draws the difference wide, between the natural man,
and a Christian.

The natures of things are dark and hidden in themselves, but they come to be
known to us, by there operations and acting; their inclinations and instincts
are known this way. Grace is truly a very spiritual thing, and the nature of it
lies high; yet, as Christ could not be hid in the house, neither can grace be
hid in the heart, it will be known by its working; Christ can better be hid in
a house, then in the heart, because, when he is in a heart, he is ingadged to
restore that heart and soul, to its native dignity, and preheminency over the
flesh; and this cannot but cause much disturbance in the man, for a season; to
change governments, to cast out usurpers, and to restore the lawful and
righteous owner, to the possession of his right, cannot be done secretly and
easily, it will shake the very foundations of a Kingdom to accomplish it: so it
is here, the restitution of the soul, to the possession of its right and
dominion over the flesh, the casting out of that tyrannous and base usurper,
the flesh, cannot be done, except all the man know it, feel it, and in a manner
be pained with it. Now the nature of Christianity does lay it self open to us
in these two especially, in what it minds and savours, and how it causes to
walk, life is known especially by affection and motion: A feeling, thinking,
^avouring power, is a living power, so a moving, walking power, is a living
power, and these are here; the Christian is shortly described by his nature, he
is one after the Spirit, not after the flesh, and by the proper
characteristical operations of that nature, first, minding or savouring the
things of the Spirit, which comprehends his inward thoughts, affections,
intentions, and cogitations, all his inward senses are exercised about such
objects, and then he is one walking after the Spirit, his motions are in a
course of obedience, proceeding from that inward relish or taste, that he has
of the things of God. It is not without very good reason, that the name of a
Christian is thus exp^essed, one after the Spirit, that is his character, that
expressed, his nature unto us; whether ye look to the original of Christianity,
or the prime subject of it, or the chief end of it, it deserves to be called by
this name. The original of it is very high, as high as that eternal Spirit, as
high as the God of the spirits of all flesh. Things are like their original,
and some way participat of the nature of their causes; that which is born of
the spirit, is spirit, Joh. 3.6. that which is born of God, who is a Spirit,
must be spirit, 1 John 5.1. How royal a descent is that, how does it nobilitat
a man's nature? Truly all other degrees of birth among men, are vain imaginary
things, that has no worth at all, but in the fancies of men, they put no real
excellency in men. But this is only true nobility, this alone does extract a
man deface vulgi, out of the dregs of the multitude. There is no intrinsic
difference between bloods, or natures, but what this make, this divine birth,
this second birth; all other differences are but in opinion, this is reality;
it puts the image of that blessed Spirit upon a man. Truly, such a creature is
not begotten in the womb of any natural cause, of any humane persuasion* or
intising words of man's wisdom, of any external mercy, or judgment; no
instruction, no pe^swasion, no allurement, nor afrightment can make you
Christians in the Spirit, till the Spirit blow when he pleases, and creat you
again. It must come from above, that power that can set your hearts aright, and
make them to look straight above.

Christ Jesus came down from Heaven into the earth, and took on our flesh, that
so the Almighty Spirit might come down to transform our spirits, and lift them
up from the earth to the Heaven. We cast the seed into the ground of men's
hearts, (and alace, it gets entry but in few souls, it is scattered rather on
the highway side, and cannot reach into the arrable ground of the heart) but
it can do nothing without the influence of Heaven, except the Spirit beget you
again, by that immortal seed of the Word. Therefore we would cease our
wondering, that all the means of Gods Word, and Works do not beget more true
Christians; I do rather wonder that any of Adams wretched posterity should be
begotten again, and advanced to so high a dignity, to be born of the Spirit. O
that Christians would mind their original, and wonder at it, and study to be
like it! If you believe and consider, that your descent is from that uncreated
Spirit, how powerful might that be to conform you more and more to him, and to
transform more and more of your flesh, into spirit? There is nothing will raise
up the spirits of the children of Princes more, then to know their royal birth
and dignity; how should the consideration of this make your spirits suitable to
your state or fortunes, (as we use to say?) You would labor to raise them up
to that hight of your original, and to walk worthy of that high calling. O that
we could learn that instruction from it, which Paul gives, 1 Cor. 1.30, 31 But
of him are ye in Christ, therefore let him that glories, glory in the Lord:
Truly, a soul possessed with the meditation of this royal descent from God,
could not possibly glory in these inglorious baser things, in which men glory,
and could not contain or restrain glo^iation and boasting in him. The glory of
many is their shame, because its their sin, of which they should be ashamed;
but suppose that in which men glory, be not shame in it self, as the lawful
things of this present world, yet certainly it is a great shame for a Christian
to glory in them, or esteem the better of himself for them. If this were minded
always, that we are of God, born of God, what power do ye think temptations,
or solistations to sin, would have over us? he that is born of God sins not,
he keeps himself, and the wicked one touches him not, 1 Ioh. 5.18, 19. Truly
this consideration imprinted in the heart, would elevate us above all these
baser persuasions of the flesh, this would make sin loathsome and despicable,
as the greatest indignity we could do to our own natures; The strength and
advantage of sin, is to make us forget what we are, whom we have relation unto,
to drink us drunk with the puddle of the world, or then with our own jealousies
and suspicions, that we may forget our birth and state, and so be enticed to
anything. If you would have, wherewith to beat back, all the fiery darts of the
devil, take the shield of this faith, and persuasion, how would it silence
temptations? Shall I who am a Ruler, flee, says Nehemiah? Shall I who am born
of the Spirit? shall I who am of God in Christ, abase my self to such unworthy
and base things? Shall I dishonor my father, and disgrace my self?

Then Christianity its chief residence, its royal sent is in the spirit of a
man, and so he he is one after the Spirit. Be ye renewed in the spirit of your
minds, Ephesians. 4.23. As it is of a high descent, so it must have the highest and
most honorable lodging in all the Creation, that is, the spirit of a man,
without this there is no room else fit for it, and suitable to it, in this
lower world; My son give me thine heart, says wisdom, Pro. 23.26. It cares for
nothing besides, if it get not the heart, the inmost Cabinet of the imperial
City of this Isle of Man, for out of it are the issues of life, that flow into
all the members. Do not think that grace will lodge one night in your outward
man, that you can put on Christianity upon your countenance or conversation
without; except you admit it into your souls, it can have no suitable
intertai^ment there alone, its of a spiritual nature, and it must have a spirit
to abide in. Every thing is best preserved and entertained by things suitable
to its nature; such do incorporat together, and inbosome one with another,
whereas things keep a greater distance with things different in nature; a ^^ame
will die out among cold stones, without oily matter. This heavenly fire that
is descended into the world, can have nothing earthly to feed upon, it must die
out, except it get into the immortal spirit, and then furnish (to speak so)
perpetual nourishment to it, till at length all the spirit be set on flame, and
changed, as it were, into that heavenly substance, to mount up above, from
whence it came. Do not think, my beloved, to superinduce true Religion upon
your outside, and within to be as rotten sepul^^^es;: You must either open
your hearts to Christ, or else he will ^ot abide with you; such a noble guest
will not stay in the suburbs of the City, if you take him not into the Palace,
and truly the palace of our hearts is too unworthy for such a worthy guest, it
has been so defiled by sin; how vile is it? but if you would let him ^^ter, he
would wash it, and cleanse it for himself.

Will you know then the character of a Christian? he is one much within, he
has retired into his own spirit, to know how it goes with it, and he finds all
so disordered and confused, all so unsettled, that he gets so much bu^iness to
do at home, as he gets no leisure to come much abroad again. It is the misery
of men, that they are wholly without, carried into external things only, and
this is the very character of a beast, that it cannot reflect inwardly upon it
self, but is wholly spent on things that are presented to the outward senses.
There is nothing in which m^n are more assimilated to beasts, then this, that
we do not speak in our selves, or return in to our own bosoms, but are wholly
occupied about the things that are without us, and thus it fares with us, as
with the man that is busy in all other men's matters, and never thinks of his
own, his estate must needs ruin all his affairs must be out of course. Truly
while we are immersed and drowned in external things, our souls are perishing,
our inward estate is washing away, all our own affairs, that can only and
properly be called ours, are disordered and jumbled. Therefore Christianity
does first of all recall the wandering and vain spririt of man in to it self,
as that exhortation is, Psalm. 4.9. to commune with his own heart, to make a
diligent search of his own affairs, and, O! how does he find all out of course,
as a garden neglected, all overgrowen; as a house not inhabited, all dropping
through; in a word, wholly ruinous, through intolerable negligence. It was the
first turn of the Prodigal, to return to himself, he came to himself, Luke
15.17. Truly sin is not only an aversion from God, but it is an estrangement
from our selves, from our souls, from our own happiness, its ^ madness that
takes away the use of reason, and consideration of our own selves. But grace is
a conversion, not only to God, but to our selves, it brings a man home to his
heart, makes him sober again, who was beside himself; Hence that phrase, 1
King. 8.47. When they shall turn to their own hearts, and return: It is the
most laborious vanity, or the vainest labor to compass heaven and earth, to be
so busied abroad, to know other things, and then to know and consider nothing
of that, which of all things most nearly conc^rns us, our selves what shall it
profit a man, if he gain the whole world and lose his soul, for that is
himself; And what shall it pro^^t, to know all, and not know his soul, to be
every where, but where he ought to be. Well, a Christian is one called home
from vain, impertinent diversions, one that is occupied most about his soul and
spirit, how to have all the disorders h^ ^^^ds in himself ord^rd, all these
distempers cured, all these defilements washed, this is the business he is
about in this world, to wash his heart from wickedness, Jer. 4.14. To cleanse
even vain thoughts, and shut up from that ordinary repair, his own heart; he is
about the enclosing it, to be a garden to the welbeloved, to b^ing forth sweet
fruits; he is about the renewing of it, the adorning of it with the new man,
against that day of our Bridegrooms appearing, and bringing him up to celebrate
the marriage. Though he be in the flesh, yet he is most taken up with his
Spirit, how to have it restored to that primitive beauty and excellency, the
Image of God in it; how to be clothed with humility, and to put on the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, that, he accounts his beauty; how to rule
his own spirit, that he accounts only true fortitude, and thinks it a greater
vassalage and victory to overcome himself, then his enemy; and esteems it the
noblest revenge, not to be like to other men that wrong him; he is occupied
about the highest gain and advantage, viz, to save his spirit and soul, and
accounts all loss, to this, to bring Jesus Christ into the heart; that is the
jewel he digs for, and esteems all du^g, in comparison of it. If you be
Christians after the Spirit, no doubt you are busied this way about your
spirits: For others, they are busied about the flesh, to make provision for its
lusts; and there needs no other mark to know them by. Alas! poor souls, that
you have never yet adverted, that you have spirits, immortal beings within you,
which must survive this dust, this corruptible flesh; What will you do when you
cannot have flesh to care for? when your spirits can have nothing to be carried
forth into, but must eterternally dwell within the bosom of an evil
conscience, and be tormented with that worm, the bitter remembrance of the
neglect of your spirits, and utter estrangement from them, while you were in
the body? then you must be confined within your own evil consciences, and be
imprisoned there for ever, because while yet there was time and season, you
were always abroad, and every where, but within your own hearts and
consciences, and is not that a just recompense.

Then again, as Christianity descends from the Father of spirits, into the
spirit of a man, to lodge there for a while, it does at length bring up the
spirit of a man, and unites it to that eternal Spirit, and so, as the Original
was high and divine, the end is high ^oo. It issues out of that fountain, and
returns with the heart of man, to imbosome it self in that ag^in. And truly,
this is the great excellency of true Religion above, all these things you are
busied about, that it elevats the spirit of a man to God, that it will never
rest, till it have carried it above to the fountain-spirit. Our spirits are
sparks, and chips, (to speak so with reverence) of that divine being, but now
they are wholly immersed, and sunk into the flesh, and into the earth, by sin,
till grace come down and renew them, and extract them out of that dunghill,
and purify them, and then they are, as in a state of violence, alwise striving
to mount upwards, till they be embodied, or rather inspirited (so to speak) in
that Original spirit, till they be wholly united to their own element, the
Divine Nature. You know Christ's Prayer, Ioh 17. that they may be one, as we are
one, I in them, and they in me, that they may may be made perfect in one, v.
22, 23. then spirits have attained their perfection, then will they rest from
their labors, when they are one with him; this is the only Center of spirits,
in which they can rest immovable. You find all the desires and affections of
the Saints, are, as so many breathings upward, pantings after union with him,
and longings to be intimatly present with the Lord; therefore, a Christian is
one after the spirit, groaning to be all spirit, to have the earthly house of
this tabernacle dissolved, and to be clothed upon with that house from heaven:
He knows with Paul, that he is not at home, though he be at home in in the
body, because the body is that which separats from the Lord, which partition
wall, he would willingly have taken down, that his spirit might be at home,
present with the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.1. etc. Who knows (says Solomon) the spirit
of a man that ascends upward, and the spirit of the beast that goes downward
to the earth, Eccles. 3.21. Truly, the natural motion of man's spirit, should be
to ascend upward to God who gave it: When this ^rail and broken Vessel of the
body is dissolved into the Elements, the higher and purer nature that lodged
within it, should flee upwards to Heaven; even as the spirit of the beasts,
being but the prime and fi^er part of the body, not different in nature from
the earth, naturally falls down to the earth with the body, and is dissolved
into the Elements. But I think, the consideration of that woeful disorder, that
sin has brought into the world, that all things in man are so degenerated, and
become brutish, both his affections, and his conversation, that carnal and
sensual lusts, have the whole dominion over men; I say, the serious and earnest
view of this, might make a man suspect and call in question, whether or not
there be any difference between men and beasts, whether or not there be any
spirit in the one, of an higher nature then in the other. Truly, it would hal^
pe^swade, that there is no immortal spirit in man, else how could he be such a
beast, all his time, serving diverse lusts. Can it be possible, might one
think, that there is any spirit in men, that can ascend to heaven, when there
is no motion thither, to be observed among men? I beseech you, consider this,
the spirit must either ascend or descend, when it goes out of the body, as now
in affection and endeavor it ascends or descends while it is in the body;
there is an indispensible connection between these, what way soever the spirit
aims, at which way soever it turns and direct its flight, thither it shall be
constrained to go eternally. Do you think, my Beloved, while you are in the
body, to bow down your selves to the Earth, to descend unto the service of the
flesh all your time, never once seriously to rise up in the consideration of
eternity, or lift up your heads above temporal and earthly things, and yet in
the close to ascend unto Heaven? No, no, do not deceive your selves, you must
go forward, this life and eternity makes one straight line, either of ascent or
descent, of happines^ or misery, and since you have bowed down always, while
in the body, there is no rising up after it, forward you must go, and that is
downward to that element, which you transformed your spirits into, that is the
earth, or below the earth, to hell, your spirits has most affinity with these,
and down they must go, ^s ^ sto^e to the earth. But if you would desire to have
your spirits ascending up to heaven, when they are let out of this prison, the
body, take heed which way they turn, bend, and strive, while here in the body:
If your struglings be to be upward at God, if you have discovered, that
blessedness is in him, and if this be the predominant of your spirit, that
carries it upward in desires and endeavors; and turns it off the base study of
satisfying the flesh, and the base love of the world, if thy soul be mounting
alost, on these wings of holy desires of a better life, then can be found in
any thing below, certainly the motion of thy spirit will be in ^ straight line
upward; when thou leaves thy dust to the earth, An^els waits to carry that
spirit to that bosom^ of Christ, where it longed and liked most to be; but
devils do attend the souls of most part of men, to thrust them down below the
earth, because they did still bend down to the earth.

SERMON XVII.
Romans 8.5. For they that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh,
etc.


THough sin has taken up the principal and inmost Cabinet of the heart of man,
though it has fixed its Imperial Throne in the spirit of man, and makes use of
all the powers and faculties in the soul to accomplish its accursed desires,
and fulfill its bo^ndless lusts, yet it is not without good reason, expressed
in Scripture ordinarily under the name of flesh, and a body of death, and men
dead in sins, are said to be yet in the ^lesh. The reason is, partly because
this was the rise of man's first ruin, or the chiefest ingredient in his first
sin, his harkening to the suggestions of his flesh, against the clear light and
knowledge of his spirit. The Apple was beautiful to look on, and sweet to the
taste, and this eng^ged man: thus the voluntary debasement and subjection of
the spirit, (which was breathed in of God,) unto the service of that dust which
God had appointed to serve it, has turned into a necessary slavery, so that
the flesh being put in the Throne, cannot be cast out; and this is the
righteous judgment of God upon man, that he that would not serve so good and so
high a Lord, should be made a drudge and slave to the very dregs of the
Creation. Partly again, because the flesh has in it the seeds of the most part
of these evil fruits which abound in the world; the most part of our
corruptions have either their rise or their increase from the flesh; the most
part of the evils of men are either conceived in the flesh, or brought forth by
it, by the ministry and help of our degenerat spirits. And truly this is it
that makes our returning to God so hard and difficult a work, because we are in
the flesh, which is like stubble, disposed to conceive flame upon any sparkle
of a temptation; there are so many dispositions and inclinations in the body
since our fall, that are as powerful to carry us to excess and inordinatness in
affection or conversation, as the natural instincts of beasts do d^ive them on
to their own proper operations. You know, the flesh is oft^n times the greatest
impediment that the spirit has, because of its lumpishness, and earthly
q^ality; how willing would the spirit be, how nimble and active in the ways of
obedience, if it were not ^etarded, dulled, and clogged with the heavy lump of
our flesh? The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak, says Christ,
Matthew. 26.41. Truly I think the great re^issness, negligence, weaknes^,
fainting of Christians in their race of Christianity, arises ordinarily from
this weight that is carried about with them, that is must be some extraordinary
impulse of a higher spirit, to drive us on without wearying. And because of
this indisposition of the flesh, we are not able to bear much of Gods presence
in this life, (it would certainly confound mortality, if so much were let out
of it as is in Heaven) no more then a weak e^e can endure to behold the Sun in
its brightness. An^ then the flesh, as it is the greatest retardment in good,
it is the greatest incitement to evil, it is a bosome-enemy, that betrays us to
Satan, it is near us, and connatural to us, and this is the great advantage
Satan has of a Christian, he has a f^iend within every Christian, that
betrays him often: You know the most part of temptation^ from without, could
have no such force or strength against us, if there were not some
predisposition in the flesh, some seeds of that evil within, if they were not
presented with some suitableness to our senses, and they being once engaged on
Satan's side, they easily draw the whole man with them, under a false color and
pretense of friendship; therefore they are said to war against the soul, 1 Pet.
2.11. And they are said easily to beset us, Heb. 12.1. Truly it is no wonder
that the enemy storm our City, when the outworks, yea, the very Ports of the
City are possessed by traitors; no wonder Satan approach near the walls, with
hi^ temptations, when our senses, our fleshly part, is so apt to receive him,
and ready to entertain all objects, without difference, that a^e suitable to
affect them.

You see then how much power the flesh has in man, so that it is no wonder
that every ^atural man has this denomination, one after the flesh, one carnal,
from the predomining part, though the worst part. Every man by nature, till a
higher birth come, may be called all flesh, all fashioned and composed of the
flesh, and after the flesh, even his spirit and mind fleshly and earthly, sunk
into the flesh, and transformed into a brutish quality or nature. Now the
great purpose of the Gospel is, to bring alongs a deliverer unto your spirits,
for the releasing and unsettering of them from the chains of fleshly lusts.
This is the very work of Christianity, to give liberty to the captive souls of
men, and the opening of the prison to them that are bound, Isai. 63.1. The
souls o^ men are chained with their own fleshly ^usts, and if at any time they
can break these grosser chains, a^ ^ome ^iner spirits have escaped out of the
vilest dungeon of the flesh, and cast off these heavier chains that bind the
most part o^ men; yet wholly escape they cannot: There be higher and lower
rooms of this prison, there are some more gross, some more sub^^le c^^ds and
bands of the flesh; and whatsoever it be that holds a man bound, or in
whatsoever house he be imprisoned, its not much matter, since really he is
bound, and his liberty restrained. If a C^ain of Gold bind as fast as a Chain
of Iron, there is no ^eal difference, except that mocke^y is added unto it,
when a man is detained in a Golden Prison, with Golden Chains. Though some men,
I say, escape the grosser pollutions of the flesh, yet they are ^ettered within
some narrow, scant, and but imaginary good things, they cannot go without the
compass of those; every man is confined by nature within the circle of his own
narrow bosom, or if he expatiat into the field of the world; yet how narrow,
how limited are all created objects, for the infinite desires of the soul,
whether it tend to the enjoyment of other creatures, or to the possession of
some imaginary excellency in a man's self, how straightened are they? how
imprisoned in all that compass? There is no true liberty can be found there.
Though some, may be, disingaged from baser lusts, and the common vain
employments of men, yet far they cannot go, they do but engage more with
themselves, the love and estimation of themselves, without that compass they
cannot possibly go, whether from another principle, or to another end; and, O!
how little bound^ is within any created breast for the immortal spirit, that is
so vast and expatiating in its desires, to dwell in?

But here is the perfect redemption that is in Jesus Christ, when he comes into
the soul, he un^etters and releases it, not only of the grosser lusts of the
flesh, but even of th^se subtle invisible bands of self-love, self-seeking, of
all scant, narrow, and particular objects, and sets it at liberty, to expatiat
in that universal good, the infinite fullness of God, and grace which is in
Christ Jesus: And hence a Christian is called one after the Spirit, that is,
whose spirit is rid and delivered from that natural bondage and slavery to the
creatures, and is espoused, at least in affection and endeavor, to the
all-sufficient and self-sufficient God.

We told you that this new nature of a Christian shows it self in affection and
motion, in minding and walking; both are signs of life, and the proper actions
of it. As the natural man is easily known by what he minds and savours, and
what way he walks, so is the spiritual man: Minding, or savouring, comprehend^,
no doubt, all the inward acts of the soul, all the imaginations, cogitations,
thoughts, affections, desires and purposes of the soul: to express it shortly,
there is a concurrence of these two, cogitation and affection; the
understanding and the will in this business. The natural man knows not the
things of the Spirit, so he cannot taste or relish them, since he does not know
them, 1 Cor. 2.14. How can they believe on him whom they have not heard? but
far mo^e, how can men love and desire that which they do not know? Though it be
hard to convince some that they know not God, nor the things of the Spirit,
because they have some form of knowledge, and seem to understand, and can
discourse in Religion; yet I wonder that the most part of men, whose ignorance
is written in their forehead, with such palpable characters, should have so
much difficulty to take with this challenge. I am sure, many that persuade
themselves of Heaven, are yet shut up in that dungeon of natural blindness, and
da^kness of mind, and that so gross and thick darkness, that it is not possible
to make them conceive any notion of spiritual things; the common twilight of
nature is almost exinguished, and little or nothing increased by their
education in the visible Church. How can you prize and ^steem Jesus Christ, of
whom you know nothing but the bare name? How can you favor Heaven, when you
have never admitted one serious thought of the life to come? O that ye could be
persuaded that the grace of God is inconsistent with such gross ignorance, as
is the generality of you; truly grace is a light shining in the soul, that
opens the eyes to see that light that surrounds us in the Gospel. But will you
consider, beloved, how ready you are to receive other things of no moment, how
your memories can retain them, and your understandings receive other purposes
very perplexed and laborious, but for the knowledge of your sin and misery, or
of that blessed remedy showed in the Gospel, we cannot make you capable of a
few questions about them; and if you learn the words by heart, (as ye use to
speak) yet al^ce, the matter and thing it sel^, is not in the heart or mind,
you have nothing but words, as appears; if we ask about that same ma^ter in
other words and terms, it is as dark and new to you, as if you had never heard
it. I beseech you consider, if you do not then mind the things of the flesh
most, when you are not only most capable to know these things that concern this
life, but most ready to entertain such thoughts. You have no difficulty to mind
the world whole weeks and years, but you can never find leisure or time to mind
the li^e to come, and yet vainly you say, you mind it always. I beseech you,
how do you mind God, and the things o^ God, when if ye will but recollect your
thoughts, and gather the sum of them, you will not find one serious advised
thought of him or his matters in a whole week? I profess, I wonder how so many
can enforce upon themselves a persuasion that God is always in their heart, I
think it is the hight of delusion; I am sure he is not in one of ten thousand
thoughts, that travel, walk, lodge and dwell in the souls, of men, and yet they
will needs bear upon themselves that they always mind him. I am sure most of
you cannot say that ever you shut the doors of your hearts upon other vain
objects, that you might retire to secret meditation on God, or conference with
him; and I am as sure that many men have God o^tner in their mouths, by oaths
and blasphemies, and irreverent speaking, and taking his holy Name in vain,
then in their minds, prayers, or praises, or any holy meditations of him: Are
you not as unwilling to fix your minds upon any sad solemn thoughts of Gods
Justice, of hell, of heaven, of sin or misery, of death, as boys whose heads
are ^ull of play, are loath to go to their books. Does not your practice in
this speak, with these wicked men, Job. 21.14. Depart from us, we desire not
the knowledge of the Almighty. How constrained are all your thought^ of
Religion? they are entertained as these whom you would not desire to come
again. But how inconstrained, how free are all other thoughts? our minds can
roave whole days about vanity, about fancies, dreams, nothings; but you neither
like to admit nor retain the knowledge of God in your mind, Romans 1.28. Do you
not intertain any s^rious weighty thoughts of Religion, that by occasion may
enter, as fire-brand^, as hot coals in your bosom? how glad are you to get any
diversion to other things? how willing to shun them, or cast them out? but if
it be any temporal thing, any thing relating to this flesh, your thoughts come
freely off, are steady and fixed as long as you please, your minds can travel
through all the ends of the earth to bring in some fancy of gain or advantage,
or to steal by precious time, and that without wearying. Now all these things
considered, my beloved, are you not carnal? I speak to the most of you, are you
not these who are born of the flesh, since you mind nothing seriously,
resolutely, constantly, and willingly, but the things of the flesh, and the
things of this life? O! it is no light matter to be born of the flesh, if you
continue so, you are ordained for corruption, for death; to be carnally minded
is death, verse. 6. of this Chap.

But I am persuaded better things of some of you, that the true light of God
has shined into your hearts, and revealed more excellent things unto you, then
these perishing fleshly things: Heavenly, substantial, and eternal things in
the Gospel, which you account only worthy of the fixed and continued meditation
of your spirits. I am sure you perceive another beauty and excellency in these
things, then the world does, because the Spirit has revealed them unto you. It
is true that your minds are yet much darkened in the apprehension of spiritual
things, they are not so willing to receive them, nor so ready to retain them;
as you desire, they are very unsettled and unstudy in the meditations of
spiritual things, and there are innumerable thoughts of other things that pass
through your hearts, like common Inn^, uncontrolled, at their pleasure; all
this is true, but I am sure it is the grief of your souls that your hearts are
not so fixed and stablished, as the excellency of these spiritual things
require: I know it will be the aim and real endeavor of any spiritual heart,
to be shutting up all the entries and doors of the mind, that vain thoughts
enter not, yet enter they will, there are so many porches to enter in at, and
our narrow spirits cannot watch at all, every sense will let in objects, and
imagination it self will be active in ^raming them, and presenting them; but
yet the endeavor of a Christian will be, not to let them lodge long within,
Ier. 4.14. If they come in unawars, he will labor to make a diversion to a
^etter purpose, and so still it holds good, that the current and course of a
Christians thoughts and cogitations ar^ upon the things of the Spirit, how to
get his own heart washed and cleansed, how to be more holy and conformed to
Christ, how to be at peace with God, and keep that peace unbroken, how to walk
in obedience to God, and in duty towa^ds men, how to forsake himself, and
withal, to deny himself in all the^e; I ^ay, his most serious and solemn
thoughts are about these things, his resolved and advised thoughts run most on
t^is st^ain, though it be true, that whether he will or not, other vain and
impertinent, or not concerning thoughts, will pass more lightly, and too
frequently through his heart.

The other thing in which this spiritual life does appear, is, the current of
the affections, or that relish and taste of the sweetness of the things of the
Spirit, flowing from the apprehension of them in the mind. When the light i^
discovered indeed, (and O! it is a pleasant thing for the eye to behold it, as
Solomon speaks) then the spirit has found an object suitable to its nature,
and so it relisheth and delights in it: Therefore the word is not simple
minding, or thinking, but savouring, thinking with affection upon them, tasting
and seeding upon the knowledge o^ them; it is a minding of them with ca^e and
delight, with ea^nestness, (...), O taste and see how good the Lord is, Psalm.
34.8. Some things cannot be indeed known but by some sense, you cannot make a
blind man apprehend what light is, till he see it, a dea^ man cannot form a
notion of sounds in his mind, except he once heard them, neither can a man
understand the sweetness of honey, but by tasting it. Truly spiritual things
are of that nature, there is some hidden virtue and excellency in them, which
is not obvious to every man that has bare knowledge of the letter, there is a
spirit and life in them, that cannot be transmitted into your ears with the
sound of words, or infused into ink and paper; its only the inspiration of the
Almighty can inspire this sensible preception, and ^eall taste of spi^itual
things; some powders do not smell till they be beaten, truly till these truths
be well powdered and beaten small by meditation, they cannot smell so
fragrantly to the spirit: As meats do not nourish till they be chewed and
digested, so spiritual things do not relish to a soul, nor can they truly feed
the soul, till they be chewed and digested into the heart, by serious and
earnest consideration; this is that which makes these same truths to be
someway, not the same; these very principles of Religion received and confessed
by all, to be lively in one, and dead in another; it is the living
conside^ation of living truth, the application of truth to the heart, that
makes it lively in one, whereas others keep it only besid^ them in a corner of
their minds, or in a book, in the corner of one hou^e; the same meat is laid to
you all, the most part look on it, others contemplat it, and exercise only
their understandings abo^t it, but there are some who taste it, and find
sweetne^^ in it, who digest it by meditation and solemn a vocation of their
hearts from the things of the world, and therefore some are fed, some are
starved.

Need we to enlarge much upon this subject? Is it not too too palpable that
many who fill up our Churches, are in the flesh, because they do mind and
savor only the things of the flesh, and not of the spirit? Will you seriously
search your hearts, ask what relishes most with them? Can you say, that it is
the Kingdom of God, or the righteousness thereof? Or, is not rather these other
things of food and raiment, and suchlike, that have no extent beyond this
narrow span of time? I am persuaded the hearts of many taste no sweetness in
Religion, else they would fix more upon it, and pursue it more earnestly. Are
not the things of another world, the great things of the Gospel, counted all
strange things, Hos. 8.12. As things that you have not much to do with? Do you
not let the Officers of Jesus Christ, all the sweet invitations of the Gospel,
pass by, as strangers, and as if ye were unconcerned in them? What taste have
they more then the white of an egg? How unsavory a discourse or thought to a
carnal heart is it, to speak of subduing the lusts of the flesh, of dying to
the world, of the world to come? Who finds their hearts inwardly stirred,
upon the proposal of Jesus Christ? But if any matter of petty gain were
proffe^ed, O! how would men listen with both their ears? How beautiful in the
eyes of the covetous mind is any gain and advantage, the sound of money is
sweeter to him then this blessed sound of peace and salvation? How sweet is
pleasure to the voluptuous? What suitableness and convenience is apprehended
in these perishing things? but how little moment or weight is conceived and
believed to be in things eternal? O how substantial do things visible seem to
men, and how triffling do other things invisible appear? But for you whose eyes
are opened, to you Christ is precious, to you the things of the Spirit are
beautiful, and all your grief is, that you cannot affect them according to
their worth, or love them according to their beauty. I say, some there are, who
do see a substance and subsistence only in things not seen, Heb. 11.1. And for
things that are seen and visible in this world, they do account them shadows
only in comparison of things invisible. The world apprehend no realities, but
in what they see, but a Christian apprehends no solid reality in that he sees,
but only in that he sees not, and therefore, as in his judgment he looks upon
the one as a shadow, the other as a substance, so he labors to proportion and
conform his affection to a suitable intertainment of them; to give a shadow or
show of affection to the things of this life, but the marrow and substance of
his heart to the things invisible of another life: Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor.
7.29. etc. Rejoicing, as if we rejoiced not, enjoying, as if we possessed not,
using, as if we used not, half acts for half objects, if we give our whole
spirits, the strength of our souls and minds to them, we are as foolish as he
that strikes with all his strength at the air, or a feather; there is no
solidity or reality in these things, able to bottom much estimation or
affection, only mind them, and use them as in the by, as in passing through
toward your Country.

SERMON XVIII.
Romans 8.5, 6. For they that are after the flesh, do mind, etc. For to be
carnally minded, is death: but to be spiritually minminded, is life and peace.


THere are many differences among men in this world, that as to outward
appea^ance, are great and wide, and indeed they are so eagerly pursued, and
seriously minded by men, as if they were great and momentous. You see what a
strife and contention there ^s among men, how to be extracted out of the dregs
of the multitude, and set a little higher in dignity and degree then they; how
do men affect to be honorable above the base? how do they seek to be rich, and
hate poverty? These differences of poor and rich, high and low, noble and
ignoble, learned and unlearned; the thoughts of men are wholly taken up with:
But there is one great difference, that is most in Gods eye, and is both
substantial and eternal, and so infinitely surpasses all these d^ffe^ences
that the minds of men most run out upon; and it is he^e, the great difference
between flesh and spirit, and them that are after the flesh, and them that are
after the spirit. This is of all other, most considerable, because widest, and
durablest. I say, it is the widest of all, for all other^ put no great
difference between men, as men, they do reach the peculia^ excellency of a man,
that is, the true and proper good of his spiritual and immortal part; they are
such as befalls alike, to good and bad, and so cannot have either much good, or
much evil in them. I have seen folly set in great dignity, and Princes walking
on foot, Eccle^. 10.6, 7. Then certainly, such titles of honor and dignity,
such places of eminency, erected above the multitude, have little or nothing
worth the spirit of a man in them, seeing a fool, a wicked man, is as capable
of them, as a wise man, or a man of a princely spirit; and ^o of all others,
they do not elevat a man, as a man, above others. A poor, unlearned, mean man,
may have more real excellency in him, then a rich, learned, and great person:
But thi^ draws a substantial and vast difference indeed, such as is between
flesh and spirit, such as is between men and beasts. You know what
p^eheminency, a man has over a beast, there is no such wide distance among the
s^ns of men, as between the lowest and meanest man, and the chiefest beast;
There is a spirit in man, says, Elihu, Job. 32.8. An immortal, eternal
substance, of a far higher nature and comprehension. You know what excellency
is in the spirit beyond the flesh, such as is in heaven beyond the earth, for
the one is breathed from Heaven, and the other is taken out of the dust of the
earth; the one is corruptible, yea corruption it self, the other incorruptible.
How swi^t and nimble are the motions of the Spirit, from the one end of Heaven
to the other? How can it compass the earth in a moment? Do but look, and see
what a hudge difference is between a beautiful living body, and the same when
its a dead carcass, rotten and corrupted? It is the spirit dwelling within,
that makes the odds, that makes it active, beautiful, and comely; but in the
removal of the spirit, it becomes a piece of the most defiled, and loathsome
dust in the world.

Now, I say, such a vast and wide difference there is between a true Christian,
and a natural man, even taking him in with all his common indowments and
excellencies; the one is a man, the other a beast, the one is after the flesh,
the other after the spirit. It is the ordinary compellation of the Holy Ghost,
man being in honor, and understanding not, is like the beasts that perish,
Psalm. 49.20. and Psalm. 94.8. Understand ye brutish among the people, etc. and
Psalm. 92.6. The brutish man understands not this: And Eccles. 3.18. That they
themselves may know that they are but beasts. Therefore you find the Lord often
turning to beasts, to insensible creatures, thereby to reprove the folly and
madness of men, Isa. 1.2. and Ier. 8.7. Man has two parts in him, by which he
has affinity to the two m^st distant natures, he stands in the middle, between
Angels and beasts; in his spirit he rises up to an Angelick dignity, and in
his body he fall^ down to a brutish condition. Now which of these has the
preheminency, that he is? If the spirit be indeed elevated above all sensual
and earthly things, to the life of Angels, that is, to communion with God, then
a man is one after the Spirit, an Angel incarnat, an Angel dwelling in flesh;
but if his spirit throw it self down to the service of the f^esh, minding and
favoring only things sensual and visible, then indeed a man puts off humanity,
and has associated himself to beasts, to be as one of them. And indeed, a man
made thus like a beast, is worse then a beast, because he ought to be far
better: it is no disparagement to a beast to mind only the flesh, but it is
greatest abasement of a man, that which draws him down from that higher station
God had set him into, to the lowest station, that of beasts; and truly a
Nebu^hadnezzar among beasts, is the greatest beast of all, far more brutish
then any beast. Now such is every man by nature, that which is born of the
flesh, is flesh, even man, as he comes out of the womb, is degenerated, and
fallen down into this brutish estate, to mind, to savor, to relish nothing,
but what relates to this fleshly or temporal being. The utmost sphere, and
comprehension of man, is now of no larger extent then this visible world, and
this present life: He is blind, and sees not far off, 2 Pet. 1.9. Truly, such
is every man by nature; whereas the proper native sphere of the spirits motion,
and comprehension, is as large, as its endurance, that is, as long as eternity,
and as broad as to reach the infinitness of God, the God of all spirits, now
through the slavery and bondage of men's spirits, to their flesh, its contracted
into as narrow bounds, as this poor life in the flesh; he that ought to look
beyond time, as far as eternity, and has an immortal spirit given ^or that
end, he is now half blind; the eye of the mind is so over-clouded with lusts
and passions, that it cannot see far off, not so far as to the morrow after
death, not so far as to the entry of eternity. And truly, if you compare the
context, you will find, that whosoever does not give all diligence to add to
faith, virtue, to virtue, knowledge, to knowledge, temperance, to temperance,
patience, and to patience, godliness, etc. He that is not exercised and
employed about this study, how to adorn his spirit with these graces, how to
have a victory over himself and the world, and in respect of these, accounts
all things, beside, indifferent, such a man is blind, and sees not far off; he
has not gotten the sight of eternity, he has not taken up that everlasting
endurance, else he could not spend his time upon the provision for the lusts of
the flesh, but he behoved to lay such a good foundation for the time to come,
as is here mentioned: If he saw afar off, he could not but make acquaintance
with those courtiers of Heaven, which will minister an entrance into that
everlasting Kingdom. But truly, while this is not your study, you have no
purpose for Heaven, you see nothing but what is just before your eye, and
almost touches it, and so you savor and mind only what you see.

Is not this then a wide difference between the children of this world, and the
children of God? Is it not very substantial, all others are circumstantial in
respect of this, this only puts a real difference in that which is best in men,
viz. their spirits? The excellency of nature, is known by their affections and
motions, so are these here; the spiritual man savours spiritual things, the
carnal man carnal things; every thing symphathizes with that which is like it
self, and is ready to incorporat into it: things are nou^ished and preserved by
things like themselves. You see the Swine embraces the dunghill, that stink is
only savoury smell to them, because its suitable to their nature; but a man
has a more excellent taste and smell, and he savours finer and sweeter things:
Truly it cannot choose, but that it must be a nature more swinish, or brutish
then ^ swine, that can relish and savor such filthy abominable works of the
flesh, as abound amongst some of you. The works of the flesh are manifest, Gal.
5.19. and indeed they are manifest upon you, acted in the very day time,
out-facing the very light of the Gospel* you may read them, and see if they be
not too manifest in you. Now, what a base nature, what abominable and brutish
spirits must possess men, that they apprehend a sweetness and fragrancy in
the^e corrupt and stinking works of the old man? O how base a scent is it, to
smell and savor nothing but this present world, and satisfaction to your
senses? Truly your scent and smell, your relish and taste, argues your base
degenerat and brutish natures; that you are on the worst side of this
division, after the flesh. But alace, it is not possible to persuade you that
there is no swee^ness^, no fragrancy, nothing but corruption and rottenness,
such as comes out of Sepulchers opened, in all these works of the flesh, till
once a new spirit be put in you, and your natures changed; no more then you can
by eloquence, persuade a sick man, who^e pallat is possessed with a vitiated
bitter humor, that such things as are suitable to his vitiated taste, are
indeed bitter, or make a swine to believe that the dunghill is stinking and
unpleasant. Truly it is as impossible to make the multitude of men to
apprehend, to relish or savor any bitterness or loathsomeness in the ways and
courses they ^ollow, or any sweetness and fragrancy in the ways of Godliness,
till once your tastes be rectified, your spirits be transformed and renewed.

And indeed, when once the spirit is renewed, and dispossessed of that
malignant humor of corruption, and fleshly affection, that did present all
things, contrary to what they are, then it is like a healthful and wholesome
pallat, that tastes all things as they are, and finds bitter bitter, and sweet
sweet; or like a sound eye, that beholds things just as they are, both in
color, quantity, and distance: Then the soul savours the sweet smell of the
fruits of the Spirit, verse. 22. Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, meekness,
temperance, etc. these are fragrant and sweet to the soul, and as a sweet
perfume, both to the person that has them, and to others round about him, and
to God also; these cast a savor, that allures a soul to seek them, and being
possessed of them, they cast a sweet smell abroad to all that are round about,
and even as high as Heaven, a soul that has these planted in it, and growing
out of it, is as a garden enclosed, to God. These fruits are both pleasant, and
sweet to the soul that eats them, and as the pleasantness of the apple, allured
man to taste it, and sin, so the beauty and sweetness of these fruits of the
Spirit, draws the spirit of a man after them, he has found the savor, and
seen the beauty, and this allures him to taste them, and then he invites the
welbeloved to come, and taste also, to eat of these fruits with him. We might
instance this in many things, a Christian relishes more sweetness in
temperance, in beating down his body, and bringing it into subjection, in
abstaining from fleshly lusts, then a carnal man tastes in the most exq^isite
pleasures that the world can afford. A Christian he savours a sweetness in
meekness, and long-suffering, he ^ath more delight in forgiving, and
forbearing, and praying for them that wrong him, then a natural man has in the
accomplishing of the most greedy desires of revenge. O what beauty has
gentleness, goodness, and patience, in his eye? what sweetness is in the love
of God to his taste? How ravishing is the joy of the Holy Ghost? How contenting
is that peace that passes understanding? These are things of the Spirit, that
he minds and savours. Know, Christians, that it is to this ye are called, to
mind these things most, and to seek them most; beware lest the deceitfulness of
sin intise you, through the treacherous and deceitful lusts that are yet living
in your members: If you indeed mind these things, and out of the apprehension
of the beauty, and savor of the sweetness, and smell of the fragrancy of
them, would be content to quite all your corrupt lusts, for to be possessed
with them, then you are on that blessed and happy side of this great and
fundamental division of men; you have indeed the privilege of all others who
are not renewed, what ever be your condition in the world, you are of the
Spirit; and this is better then to be rich, wise, great, and honorable: God
has not given you such things as the world go mad after, but envy them not, he
has given you better things, more real and substantial things, that makes you
far better, and more excellent.

But then, this difference, as it is the widest, so it is the durablest; as it
is substantial here, so it is perpetual hereafter. When all the other
differences between men shall be abolished, this alone shall remain; and
therefore you have it in the next verse. to be carnally minded is death, but to
be spiritually minded is life and peace. This division that is begun here,
shall g^ow wider for all ete^nity; there shall be a greater difference after
this life, and a more sensible separation: Death and life, eternal death, and
ete^nal life, are the two sides of this diffe^ence, as it shall shortly be
stated. When all other degrees, and distances of men, shall be blotted out, and
buried in eternal oblivion, there shall no ves^^ge or ma^k remain, of either
wisdom, or riches, or honor, o^ such like, but al^ mankind shall be, as to
these outward things, levelled and equalized; this one unseen and neglected
difference in the world, shall appear and shine, in that day when the Lord
makes up his jewels, then he will discern between the righteous and the
wicked, between him that fears God, and him that fears him not, Mal. 3.18
The carnal, and spiritual man, have opposite affections and motions; the spirit
of the one is on a journey or walk upward, after the Spirit, and the spirit of
the other is on a walk downward, toward the flesh; and the further they go,
the further distant they are: the one shall be taken up, to the company of the
spirits of just men made per^ect, and to the fellowship of Angels, the other
shall be thrown down into the fellowship and society of Devils: and truly it is
no wonder it ^all so low, for all its motions in the body was downward, to the
fulfilling of the lusts of the flesh. Thus, you see the difference will grow
wider, and more sensible, then it is yet, between the godly and ungodly; in
this world it does not so evidently appear, as it will do a^terward. As two
men, that leave one another, and have their faces on contrary ai^ts, at the
beginning the distance and difference is not so great, and so sensible; but
wait a little, and the further they go, the further they are distant, and the
wider their separation is* Even so, when a Christian begins to break off his
way, from the common cour^e of the world, it does not appear to be so different
from it, as to convince himself and others; but i^ his face be toward
Jerusalem above, and his heart thitherward, certainly he will be daily moving
further from the world, till the distance be sensible both to himself and
others; he will be more and more transformed, and renewed, till at length all
be changed. No wonder then, that these two cannot meet together in the end of
their course, whose course was so opposite: Though wicked men will desire to
die the death of the righteous, yet it is no more possible they can meet in the
end, then Hell and Heaven can reconcile together, because they walk to two
contra^y points.

SERMON XIX.
Romans 8.6. For to be carnally minded, is death: but to be spiritually minded,
is life and peace.


IT is true, this time is short, and so short, that scarce can similitudes or
comparisons be had to shadow it out unto us; its a dream, a moment, a vapor, a
flood, a flower, and whatsoever can be more fading or perishing; and the^e^ore
it is not in it self very considerable, yet in another respect, it is of all
things the m^st precious, and worthy of the deepest attention, and most serious
consideration; and that is, because it is linked unto eternity, there is an
indissolvable knot between them, that no power or art can break or loose. The
beginning of eternity, is continuedly united to the end of time; and you know
all, the infinite extension o^ eternity is uniform, it admits of no change in
it, from better to worse, or worse to better; and therefore the beginning of
our eternity, whether it be happiness or misery, is but one perpetuated and
eternized moment, so to speak. Seeing then we are into the body, and sent unto
the world for this end, that we may pass through into an unchangeable eternal
estate: Truly, of all things it is most concerning and weighty, what way we
choose to this journeys end; seeing the time is short, in which we have to walk,
and it is uncertain too, we ought, as the Apostle Peter speaks, give all
diligence; as long as the day remains, we should drive the harder, lest that
eternal night overtake us. The shortness and uncertainty of time, should
constrain us to take the present opportunity, and not to let it slip over as we
do, seeing it is not at all in our hand, either what is past, or what is to
come; the one cannot be recalled, the other is not in our power, to call and
bring forward, therefore the present moment that God has given us, should be
catched hold on, and redeemed, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.16. We should buy
it at the dearest rate of pains, and expenses, from all those vain,
impertinent, and trifling diversions, that take it up, that we may employ it as
it becomes, suitable to eternity that is posting on. And then as the shortness
of it makes it the more precious and considerable, in regard of the end of it,
eternity: as the scantnesse of a thing increases the rate of it, so that same
consideration should make all worldly things, that are confined either in their
being, or use, within it, to be incosiderable, as Paul, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31.
shows, seeing the time is short, it remains, that we should rejoice, as not
rejoicing; weep, as not weeping; buy, as if we possessed not; use the world, as
not abusing it: Seeing all its worth is to be esteemed from the end of it,
eternity, never ending; then certainly whatsover in time does not reach that
end, and has no connection with it, we should give it but such intertainment,
as a passing bird, that is pleasant to the eye, gets of a beholder, while it is
in its flight: the shortness of the day should make us double our diligence,
and put on the harder in our walk or race, that so we may come in time to our
place of rest; and that same should make the passenger give an overly and
passing look to all things that are by the way, and which he must of necessity
leave behind him. Seeing these things then are so important, let us draw our
hearts together to consider what the Lord speaks to us in this word, for in it
you have two ways, and two ends, opposite and contrary ways and walks, and as
contrary ends; the ways are walking after the flesh, and walking after the
Spirit; the ends to which they lead, are death and life. We spoke something of
the ways, and the wide difference that is between them, what excellency is in
the one beyond the other; but truly it is hard to persuade you to take off your
accustomed ways and walks, because your inward sense, and the inclination of
your hearts is wholly perverted and corrupted by nature. You know the moving
faculty is subordinat in its operations, unto the knowing, feeling, and
apprehending-faculties: The locomotive power is given for a subsidiary and help
to the apprehensive and appetitive powers, because things are convenient and
disconvenient, good or evil, to the nature of the living creature, are without
it; and it could not by mere knowledge, or desire, or hatred of things, either
come in possession of them, or eschew them, therefore God has given them a
faculty of moving themselves to the prosecution and attainment of any
apprehended good, or to the eschewing and aversion from any conceived evil.
Thus when beasts savor or smell that food which is fit for them, their
appetite stirs them up to motion (...) it, to obtain it: Now, I say, if this
inward sense be ^orrup^^d, th^n things that are destructive will be conceived
good, because they are suitable to that corrupt humor or quality that possessed
the senses, and thus all the motion and walk will be disordered. The truth is,
my beloved, our spirits and minds are infected with a poysonable humor,
fleshly passions and lusts are predominant naturally; and as in them that are
in a fever, their organ being distempered with a bitten unsavory humor, the
pleasantest things seems unsavory, because not suitable to that predominant
humor; even so it is wi^h you by nature. That which puts all upon motion, is
out of course, since the first distemper of m^n; your spirits and minds are
fleshly and carnal, they have a strong and deep impression of all the lusts
that are in the body, and are accordingly affected; and therefore you cannot
fitly judge what is good or evil for you, but as these, Isai. 5.20. You m^st
call evil good, and good evil, bitter sweet, and sweet bitter, because you are
already prepossessed thus. And therefore the ways of the flesh, those paths
that lead to destruction, you cannot but look on them as plea^ant, because they
suit and please your corrupted sense or spirit; and so this disordered savor
or smell of some fragrant perfume in the ways of the flesh, puts you upon
walking in these ways; and being thus possessed and engaged, you cannot but
stop your ears to all contrary persuasions; you think it against-your sense and
reason, to tell you that these are loathsome and unsavory, and that the other
ways of widom and spirit, are pleasantness and peace: I say, you cannot
believe this, till your hearts and spirits be purged, and your taste be pure
and uncorrupted. It is certainly upon this ground that our Savior puts such
characters upon the way to Heaven and Hell, to life and death; the one is
strait and narrow, and few walk in it, the other broad and easy, and many walk
in it, Matthew. 7.13. Certainly, it is not the way in it self simply, that admit^
of such a motion, to speak properly, as the thing is, the way to life* by the
guiding of the Spirit, is easiest, plainest, shortest, and broadest: it has
all the properties of a good way, none so pleasant and plain; how sweet and
pleasant sights all the way! its an Alley of delight, the way of his
Commandments, it wants not accommodation in it to refresh the Traveller; the
most delightful company is here; the Father and the Son, who sought no other
company from all eternity, but were abundantly satisfied and rejoiced one
another; this fellowship the Christian has to solace himself with, and he is
admitted to be partaker of that joy: There is nothing that does disbu^den the
soul so of care and anxiety, nothing does rid a man of so many perplexities and
troubles, as this way. But the way of sin in it self is most laborious, most
difficult: it has infinite bywayes that it leads a man into, and he must turn
and return, and run in a circle all the day, all his time, to satisfy the
infinite lusts and insatiable desires of sin. O! how painful and laborious is it
to fulfill the lusts of the flesh; how much service does it impose? how serious
attention? what perplexing c^res and tormenting thoughts? how many sorrows and
griefs are in every step of this way? Do you not perceive what drudges and
slaves sin makes you? how much labor you have to satisfy your lusts? and you
are always to begin, as near that which you seek in the end of your years, as
in the beginning. How thorny, how myry is the way of covetousness? Are you not
always out of one thorn into another, and cut asunder, or pierced through with
many sorrows, 1 Timothy 6.10. Mat. 13.22. Is that a pleasant and easy way, I pray
you, that makes all your sorrow and your travel grief, and suffers not your
heart to take rest in the night? Eccles. 2.22, 23. What pains of body? What
plotting o^ mind? What labor and vexation of both, must a sinner have as his
constant attendants in this way? The way is intricat, deep, unpassable, that
leads to that satisfaction you desire to your lusts; your desires are impotent
and impatient, the means to carry you on are weak and lame, nothing accommodat
or fit for such a journey; and this puts you always, as it were, on the rack,
tormented between the impatience of your lusts, and the impotency of means, and
impossibility to fulfill them. Desires and disappointments* hopes and fears,
divide your souls between them: Such is the way after the flesh, an endle^s
labyrinth of woes and miseries, of pain^ and cares, ever while here.

But these ways receive such names from the common opinion and apprehension of
men; because of our flesh, which is predominant; the way after the flesh being
suitable to it, though in it self infinitely more ^oy^^ome, seems easy and
plain; but the way after the Spirit seems str^it, n^rrow, toy^some and
laborious. Though there be infini^e more room in the way to life; because it
leads to that (...) universal good, it exp^ti^ts toward the Al-fulness of God;
yet to flesh, how narrow and strait is it, because it cannot admit of these
inordinat lusts, that have swelled so immeasurably toward narrow and scant
things? The true latitude of the way of flesh is not great, for it is all
enclosed within poor, lean, narrow, created objects; but because the
im^gin^tion of men supplies what is wanting really, and fancies an infinite or
boundless extent of goodness in these things; therefore the sinner walks
easily, without straitning to his flesh, it is not pinched in this way of
fleshly lusts: But alas, the Spirit is woefully straightened, fettered and
imprisoned, though it be not sensibly found!

What is the reason then that so many walk in the way to death; but because
their flesh finds no straitning, no pressure in it? it is an easy way to their
natures, because suitable to the corruption that is in them; therefore men walk
on without consideration of what follows: its like a descent or going down a
hill, so easy to our flesh; and on the other hand, the way to life, after the
Spirit, is an ascent upward, and it is very difficult to our earthy and lumpish
flesh. Our spirits by communion with, and subjection to, the flesh, are made of
an earthly quality, near the element of the flesh, and so they bow naturally
downward; but if once they were purified and purged, and unfettered by the
Spirit of God, and restored to their native purity, they would more easily and
willingly move upward, as you see the flame does: and till this be done in you,
we cannot expect that you will willingly and pleasantly walk in these pleasant
walks after the Spirit; your walk will never be free and unconstrained in the
paths of godliness. You may from some external motives and impulses move upward
for a season, in some particular duties of Religion, as a stone cast up; but
that impression is not from an inward principle, so it will not be constant and
durable, but you will ^all down to your old byasse in other things, and move
quite contrary, when the external impression of fear of savor, of custom or
education, or such like, wears out. But the true Christian has a spirit within
him, the root of the matter in him, this carries him upward in the ways of
obedience, after the motions and directions of Gods Spirit. At the beginning,
indeed it is strait and uneasy to his flesh, but the difficulty is overcome,
if once you begin well: The beginning (as you use to say) is the half of the
whole. Truly, to be well entered, is half progress, afterward the bulksom and
burdensome lusts of the flesh are stripped off, at least in a greater measure,
and then the spirit moves easily and willingly; this walk becomes a recreation,
that at first was a labor. Now delight and desire are as wings to mount the
soul aloft; now its the good pleasure of the soul to walk to all well-pleasing.
Indeed the way of this world is dirty and filthy; and therefore a Christian had
need to watch continually, and to gird up his loins, that his thoughts and
affections hang not down to the earth, else they will take up much fi^th, and
cannot but clog and burden the spirit, and make it drive heavily and slowly, as
Pharaoh did his Chariots, when the wheels are off. We had need to flee aloft
above the ground, and not to come down too low near it, thinking withal to
double out our journey, for we shall find, that because of the remnants of
flesh within us, that this world has a magnetical attractive virtue, to draw
us down to it, if we be within the sphere of its activity. It is not good
coming near fire with flax; we would endeavor to keep our hearts at much
distance, and disingage them from lower consolations. This world is like the
pestiferous Lake of Sodom, that kills all that flees over it, and makes them
fall down into it; If we fly low upon the surface of it, we cannot choose but
that spiritual life will be much extinguished; but to prevent this, we would
take our flight straight upward after the Spirit, (for that is the proper
motion of the more pure and spiritual part of this world) and give no rest,
till we be out of the reach of that infection, till you be fully escaped the
pollutions of the world.

But if you cannot be persuaded to come off this way, that seems so pleasant to
your flesh, that way which is the very course of the world, (for these are
joined, Ephesians. 2.2.) Then I beseech you, stand still, and consider whither it
will lead; do but stop a little, and bethink your selves sadly and seriously
whither this will take you, where it shall end? And truly that is dread^ul, the
end o^ it is death, a never-ending death. I am sure, if you were walking by the
way, and one came and told you gravely and seriously, That that way is full of
dangerous pits, that there are many robbers in it, waiting to cut your throat,
you would count the admonition worthy of so much notice, as to halt, and
consider what to do: But now, when the Lord himself, that deserves infin^t more
respect and credit then men, gives you warning once, and often, day after day
repeats this admonition to you, sends out many ambassadors to call you off,
makes this word to sound daily in your ear, Oh! why will ye die? such ways
lead down to the chambers of death and hell; to be carnally minded, in the
issue, is death, whatsoever you may promise to your selves. I say, when he
makes a voice to accompany us in all our walkings, this is not the way that
leads to life; why do you not think it worthy of so much consideration, as once
to stop and sift your progress, till you examine what will come of it? Are we
so credulous to men, and shall we not believe God, who is truth it self, who
affirms it so constantly, and ob^e^ts us so earnestly? Are we so wise and
prudent in lesser things, and shall we be mad, self-willed, and refractory in
the greatest thing that concerns us eternally? O! unbelief is that which will
condemn the world, the unbelief of this one thing, that the walking a^^er, and
minding of the flesh, is mortal and deadly. Though all men confess with their
tongues this to be a truth, yet it is not really believed; the deep
inconsideration and slight apprehension of this truth, makes men boldly to
walk, and violently to run on to perdition. Did you indeed believe that eternal
misery is before you at the end of this way, and would you be so cruel to your
selves, as to walk in it for any allurement that is in it? Did you really
believe That there is a precipice into utter darkness and everlasting death at
the end of this alley, would the pleasure and sweetness of it be able to
in^atuat you, and besott you so far, as to lead you on into it, like an Ox to
the slaughter, and a fool to the correction of the stocks? It is strange
indeed, thou you neither will believe that death is the end of these things,
nor yet can you be persuaded that you do not believe it: there is a twofold
delusion that possesses the hearts of men, one is, a dream and ^ancy of
escaping death, though they live in sin; another is, a dream and fancy that
they do believe that death is the wages of sin: We might wonder how they
consist together, if we did not find it by so many experiences. Your way proves
that you do not believe it, that death is the end of it; and then your words
evidence that you do not believe That you are unbelievers of that. O! how
desperate is the wickedness, and how great is the deceitfulness of the heart?
The false Prophet that is in every man's bosom, deceives him, that it may
destroy him. As Satan is a liar and murderer, and murders by lying, so the
heart of man is a self-murderer, and self-destroyer, and that is done by lying
and d^ceiving: There is some lie in every ^in, but there is this gross black
fundamental lie at the bottom of all sin, A conceit of immunity and freedom
from death and hell; a strong imagination of escaping danger, even though such
a way be chosen and walked into, as of its own nature inevitably leads to
destruction: And there is something of this bloody murdering flattery even in
the hearts of Christians; therefore this Apostle gives us an antidot against
it, and labors often to purge it out, by stirring up that knowledge they have
received; Know you not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God? 1 Cor. 6.9. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for what a man sows that
he shall reap, he that sows to the flesh, shall reap corruption, etc. Gal.
6.7, 8. O! that you might listen to this word, to this watch word given you,
and stop your course, at least, for a season, to think what shall be the latter
end; know ye not, that such shall not inherit the Kingdom? know you not that
the way to heaven lies upward? know you not that your way lies downward toward
the flesh and the earth? are you so far demented, as to think to come to Heaven
by walking just downward in the lusts of the flesh? Truly this is the strongest
and strangest enchantment that can be, that you think to sow one thing, and
reap another thing; to sow darkness, and reap light; to sow corruption, and
reap incorruption: Is that possible in nature, to sow nettle-seed, and think to
^eap barley or wheat? Be not deceived, O that you would undeceive your poor
deluded souls! and know that is as natural for Death and Hell to grow out of
sin, and walking after the flesh, as it is for every seed to yield its own
fruit and herb. Do you then think to disolve the course and order of nature?
Truly the flesh is mortal in it self, its ordained for corruption, you see what
it turns to after the life is out, that is an emblem of the state of the
fleshly soul after death. As you did abase your spirits to the service of the
flesh here, and all your plowing, and laboring, and sowing was about it, the
seed which you did cast in the ground was Fleshly lusts, earthly things, for
the satisfaction of your flesh; so you shall reap of the flesh, Corruption,
death and destruction, that shall make your immortal spirits mortal and
corruptible, and subject them to death and corruption with the body, as far as
they are capable; it shall deprive them of all that which is their proper life
and refreshment, and separat them eternally from the fountain of blessedness,
and banish them out of Heaven, unto the fellowship of devils; and Oh! that
corruption of the incoruptible spirit, is worse then the corruption of the
mortal flesh, corruption optimi pessima.

Now, who ever of you is thus far undeceived, as to believe your danger and
misery, and to discern that imbred delusion of your hearts, be not discouraged
utterly, there may be hope of recovery, when you see your disease. I say, if
you see that hell is at the end of your way, then know that He who sent that
voice to call you off that way of death, He leaves you not to your own wits to
guide you into the right way, but He follows with a voice behind you, ^aying,
Here is the way, walk in it, turn not out of it to the right hand or left: and
this voice sounds plainly in the Word, and it is nothing el^e but the sound of
the Gospel, that blessed sound that invites and allures you to come in to Jesus
Christ, the way, truth, and life, the true way to the true life: All other
ways, all other life's, have no truth in them, its but a cloud, a fancy, that
men apprehend and lay hold on. But come to this way, and it will truly lead
thee to the true life, eternal life; if you flee unto him out of the
apprehension of your danger, you have a clear way to come to God, and as plain
a way to attain life and peace. Being in Christ you have assurance of not
falling into condemnation; He is such a way as will hold you in, and not suffer
you to go out of it again to the way of Death. And therefore he will give you a
Tutor, a guider and directer in this way to life and peace, and that is the
Holy Spirit, to lead in all truth, and to guide your feet in the way of his
Commandments; so that in this new and living way of Christ, you shall have both
light of the Word, to know where to walk, and life of the Spirit to make you
walk toward that eternal life; and thus grace and truth is come by Christ.
Indeed you must suffer the mortification of your flesh, you must endure the
pain of the death of your lusts, the cutting off your right hand, and plucking
out your right eye, which would make offend and stumble in the way; but let the
remembrance of the life to come sweeten it all: when men undergo the hazard of
losing life for a little pleasure, when for a poor petty advantage men will
endure so much pains and trouble, O what should eternal life, and such a life,
as the best li^e here is but death to it! how should it mitigat and sweeten the
bitterness of mortification? how should it fortify our spirits to much
endurance and patience? A battle we must have for these lusts that we disingage
from the Devil, and the World besides will lay wait for us in this way: but
when for such small and inconsiderable advantages men will endure all the
disadvantage of war, of a long war; O how should the expectation of this peace,
which incloses and comprehends all felicity, all well-being, animat and
strengthen us to fight in into the City of life and peace eternal!

SERMON XX.
Romans 8.7. Because the carnal mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to
the Law of God, neither indeed can be.


UNbelief is that which condemns the world: it involves in more condemnation
then many other sins; not only because more universal, but especially because
it shuts up men in their misery, and secludes them from the remedy that is
brought to light in the Gospel. By unbelief, I mean not only that careless
neglect of Jesus Christ offered for salvation, but that which is the root of
that, The inconsideration and ignorance of our desperate sinfulness, and
irremediless misery without Christ; which not being laid to heart seriously,
makes such slight and superficial intertainment of a Savior and Redeemer. Man
is truly miserable and unhappy, whether he know it or not; but truly it is an
accession to his misery, that he knows it not, that he neither apprehends what
he is now by nature, nor what he must shortly be made by Justice. Indeed, if
there were no remedy to be ^ound, it were a happy ignorance To be ignorant of
misery: the knowledge and remembrance of it could do nothing but add unto the
bitterness of it: if a man might bury it in eternal forgetfulness, it were some
ease: But now, when God has in His mercy so appointed it, that the beginning
of the belief of sin and misery, shall in a manner, be the end of miser^; and
seeing whether men know it or not, they must shortly be made sensible of it,
when there is no remedy to be ^ound: then certainly it is the hight of man's
misery, That he knows and considers it not. If we would apply our hearts at
length to hear what God the Lord speaks, for he only can give account of man to
himself, we might have a survey of both in these words, and the preceding, of
our desperate wickedness, and of our intolerable misery; for the present, by
nature, we are enemies to God, and shortly we must be dealt with as enemies, as
rebels to the most potent and glorious King, be punished with death, an endless
living death. Experience shows how hard a thing it is to persuade you that you
are really under the sentence of death: you will not suffer your hearts to
believe your danger, left it interrupt your present pleasures of sin: Nay, you
will flatter your selves with the fancied hope of immunity from this curse, and
account it a cruel and rigorous Doctrine, That so many creatures made by God,
should be eternally miserable, or a sentence of it should be past on all flesh.
Now, that which makes us hardly to believe this, is the unbelief and deep
inconsideration of your sinfulness; therefore the Apostle, to make way for the
former, adds, Because the carnal mind is enmity against God. Do not wonder then
that your ways and courses, your affections and inclinations bring forth that
ghostly and dreadful end of death; seeing all these are enmity to the greatest
King, who alone has the power of life and death: They have a perfect
cont^ariety to His holy Nature and righteous Will; not only is the carnal mind
an enemy, but enmity it self, and therefore it is most suitable that the
sovereign power of that King o^ kings, stretched out to the vindication of His
Holiness and Righ^eousness, by taking vengeance on all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men. If rebellion in a State or Monarchy, against these
petty mortal gods, who shall die as men, be so heinous, as to de^erve death, by
the consent of all Nations, how much more shall enmity and rebellion against
the immortal, ete^nal King, who has absolute right and dominion over his
creatures, as over the clay, have such a suitable recompense of eternal death?
Now, my beloved, if you once believed this, the enmity and opposition of your
whole natures to God, you could not but fearfully apprehend what might be the
issue of it, you could not bless your selves as you do, and put the evil day
far off; but certainly you would be affrighted with the terror and Majesty of
that God you have to do with, whom when he awakes to judgment, you can neither
resist nor escape; no standing against his wrath, and no fleeing from it out of
His Dominions; and this would dispose and incline your minds in time to hea^ken
^o the treaty of peace, which is holden out in the Gospel, and to lay down the
weapons of your enmity, and make peace with Him in His Son the Peacemaker.

Amity and Unity is the very being and beauty of the world: This universe is
made up of innumerable different kinds and natures, and all these climb and
walk together by the bond of peace and concord among themselves, and with that
One high understanding that directs all, and supreme will of God that moves
all. It is that link of union with God, that gives and preserves being and
beauty in all the creatures, as the dependence of the ray upon the Sun, or the
stream on the fountain, makes them what they are; which being interrupted, they
cease to be what they were: All things continue as thou have ordained them, for
all are thy servants, Ps. 119.91. You see then this amity and union of
subordination of the creatures to God, is not dissolved to this day: But wo^ull
and wretched man alone has withdrawn from this subordination, and dissolved
this sacred tie of happy friendship, which at first he was li^ted up unto, and
privileged with. Amity and friendship, you know, consists in an union of
hearts and wills, and a communion of all good things; it makes two one, as much
as two can be, by the conspiracy of their affections in one thing, and the
joint concurrence of their endeavors to communicate to one another what each
has, it takes away propriety, and it makes a community between persons. Now
how happy was that amity? how blessed that friendship between God and man?
Though man's goodness could not extend to God, yet his soul united to God by
love and delight, and all that God had given him, returning that to the proper
owner, acknowledging his absolute dependence on him, and claiming interest and
propriety in nothing, not in himself; and then on the other hand, the love and
good will of infinite God placed on man, and from that fountain all the streams
of happiness issuing forth toward man, the fullness of God opening up it self
to him, and laying out it self toward him, God so far descending, as in a
manner to become the creatures, to expose and dispose Himself, and all in him
for poor man's use and comfort.

How joyful was that amity! but the breaking of this bond of peace is as sad
and grievous. There was a woeful interposal between God and us, which has
separated these chief friends ever since the beginning, and that is sin, the
seeds of all enmity and discord* this has rent asunder the bond of amity, this
has made such a total aversion of the soul from God, and imprinted such an
irreconciliable e^mity in the heart, against the holy will of God, that there
is no possibility to reunite again, and restore the old friendship, as long as
the soul is not quite changed and transformed: that first creation is so marred
and defaced, that there is no mending of it till a second creation come. The
carnal mind is not simply an enemy, but enmity it self; an enemy may reconcile
again, and accept terms of peace, but enmity cannot reconcile to amity, without
the very destruction of it self: the opposition of the heart is so perfect,
that as soon may enmity unite with amity, and become one with it, as a carnal
natural-mind can submit to Gods holy will. That which was at the beginning
voluntary, is become necessary, and turned into the nature of an inbred
antipathy, that no art can cure. The fall was such a disjoynting of the soul
from God, that no skill but infinite wisdom, no strength but Almighty power can
set it right, and put it in the first posture again. It is true, there are not
many who will openly and expressly denounce war against Heaven; it is not so
incident that any man should have explicit plain thoughts of hatred against
God, there are some common principles engraven by God in all men's minds, which
serve as his witnesses against men, that God should be loved, served, adored,
and worshipped; that there is nothing so worthy of the desires of the soul. Now
this general acknowledgment deludes the most part, for they take it for granted
that they do love God with their heart, because their consciences bears witness
that they ought to love him, as if it were all one to know our duty, and to do
it. Who is there but he intertains himself with this good opinion of himself,
that his heart is good and true to God; for, say you, Wh^m should I love if I
love not God, I were not worthy to live if I love not Him? It is true indeed
that you say, but if you did know your hearts, you would find their faces
turned backward, and averted from God, and ^ould no more please your selves in
such a confession of the truth, then the Devil has reason to think himself a
believer, because he is convinced that Christ is the Son of God, and confessed
it too; no more then the son that promised to go to the Garden to work, and
went not, had ground to think himself an obedient son, Mat. 21.30. Such a
confession of duty may be extorted from damned spirits, and therefore you would
not draw this vail over the wretched wickedness of your natures, to the end
that you may conceive well of yourselves: It is so far from extenuating or
excusing, that the very conviction of the great obligation to love and obey
God, is the greatest aggravation of the enmity: it is this which makes it the
purest malice, and per^^ctest hatred, that knowing the goodness of God,
convinced of our bound duty to love and serve him, yet in the very light of
such a shining truth, to turn our hearts away from him, and exercise all acts
of hostility against him. That you may know then wherein the enmity of your
hearts consists, I shall instance it in three branches or evidences: There is
an enmity in the understanding, that it cannot stoop to believing of the truth;
there is an enmity in the will, that it cannot subject to obedience of Gods
holy cammands; and this is extended also to a stubborn rebellion against the
will of God, manifested in the dispensations of his providence: In a word, the
natural and carnal mind is incapable of faith, of obedience, and of submission.
There are many truths revealed in the Scripture, that the natural man cannot
receive or know, for they are foolishness to him, 1 Cor. 2.14. Some spirits
there are lifted up above others, either by nature, or education, in which this
rebellion does more evidently appear; reason in them contends with Religion,
and they will believe no more then they can give a reason for. There is a
wisdom in some men, that despises the simplicity, or the inevidence of the
Gospel, and accounts it foolishness: The carnal mind will needs start out from
implicit trusting of God, when once its possessed with some imagination of
wisdom; therefore how many are the insurrections of of men's spirits against
Gods absolute power over the creatures, against the mysteries of the holy
Trinity and Incarnation, against the resurrection of our bodies? In these, and
such like, the pretended wisdom of men has taken liberty to act enmity, and to
dispute against God. But truly, the rebellion and insubjection against the
truth of God, is more generally practiced even by the multitude of men, though
in an unfree hidden way; How few do believe their own desperate wickedness,
though God has testified it of man? Does not every one apprehend some good to
remain in his nature, and some power to good? what an impossibility is it to
persuade you, that all mankind are under the sentence of eternal condemnation,
that children who have not done good or evil are involved in it also? Your
hearts rises against such doctrines, as if they were bloody and cruel
inventions. To tell you that many are called, and few chosen, that the most
part of them who prosesse the truth, are walking in the way to Hell, and shall
undoubtedly fall into it: you may hear such things, but you bless your selves
from them, and cannot be persuaded to admit them into your mind^: The hearts of
men will be giving the very lie to the God of truth, when he speaks these
things in his word, God forbid that all that be true! If we should expound the
Law unto you, and show you that the least idle word, the lightest thought, the
smallest inward motion of the heart deserves eternal misery; that anger, is
murder in Gods sight; that lusting, is fornication; that covetousness and love
of the world, is idolatry; these things you cannot know them or receive them;
ther^ are so many high imaginations in your minds that exalts themselves
against the knowledge of God, so many thoughts that are mustred and set in
battle array against the holy truths of God, that truly no weapons of humane
persuasion, or instruction, can be able to cast down your misapprehensions and
imaginations, or reasonings of your hearts, or able to scatter these armies of
rebellious thoughts, and bring them in captivity, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Man's darkened
mind is a strong hold, that all the repeated and continued beatings of the
word, the multiplying precept upon precept, and line upon line, cannot storm
it, to make any true light shine into it. It is a dungeon, a pit so shut up and
enclosed, no door nor window in it; so that albeit the Sun of Righteousness
shine upon it, and round about it, there is no beam of that light can enter in
the hearts of many thousands: the generality are drowned as yet in a deludge of
ignorance, under the very light of daily preaching. It is a night of as thick
darkness within men's souls, as if there were no light about us: Certainly this
declares the hight of enmity, the strength of the opposition; this prison of
your minds is a strong hold indeed, that is proof of all preaching or
instruction; and certainly they will hold out, till Almighty power storm them,
and beat or batter op^n some entry in your souls, to receive this shining light
of the Gospel.

Then there is a rebellion of the will, against Gods holy will revealed in his
Law or Word: It cannot be subject to the Law of God. It neither is, nor can;
for enmity and antipathy is sunk into its nature so, that it is the most
deformed monstrous thing in the world: If the disfigured face of man's soul
were visible, O how ugly were it! How would you loath it? If there were a
creature that could do nothing but hate it self, and sought its own
destruction, that were a hateful enough object; but self-hatred and enmity is
nothing so deformed and abominable, as for the creatures will to be set in
opposition to the holy will of Him that made it. It needs not much
demonstration this, if you had but a little more consideration: look back upon
the ^eno^ of your ways, set them beside the Will and Commands o^ God, and what
find you? whether ag^eement or disagreement? Take a view of the current of your
inclinations and affections, and compare that with the holy Will of God, and
what find you? friendship or enmity. You cannot digest the reproach of that, to
be called enemies to God, but, I pray you consider if there be not as perfect
contrariety in your desires, affections, inclinations, and actions to the will
of God, as if you did profess it, what would you do if you professed your
selves enemies to God? could you possibly vent your enmity any other way then
this, in withdrawing from the yoke of his obedience, in revolting from that
alledgiance you owe to Him? you could wrong him no further then by setting your
hearts and ways contrary to his heart and ways, in loving what he hates, and
hating what he loves, for his own blessed being you could not impair it. Now
consider, if that be not acted as really as if you did profess it; Can you
say, that cursing, swearing, lying, railing, anger, strife, envy, revenge, and
such like works of darkness, are the things which his soul loves? Are these
suitable to his holy will? And yet these are your inveterated customs, to which
your natures are so inured and habituated, that you can no more forsake them,
then hate your selves. Are filthiness, drunkenness, Sabbath-breaking,
covetousness, and love, of the world, are these his delight? And yet these are
your delight. Again, is it not his will that ye should purge your selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and perfect holiness? is not righteousness
that which he loves? and truth in the inward parts: Does not he look to a
contrite heart, and account that a savoury sacrifice? Is it not his royal
statute and commandment (of which not one jot shall fail) that ye should deny
yourselves, love your enemies, forgive them that offend you, sanctify his Name
always in your hearts? and especially on the holy Sabbath: That ye should
watch unto prayer, be sober in the use of the world, be much in watching for
his second coming again? Now what repugnance is in your hearts and ways to all
these? Do not the conv^rsations of men display a Banner against the Gospel? and
proclaim as much in reality, as is said in words, in Psalm. 2. Let us cast his
cords behind us, and cut his hands. These things are unsavory unto you, you
smell nothing pleasant in them; but only in the puddle of the world: in running
at random at your own liberty, after your own imaginations, That you account
only liberty. O! when shall your hearts be subdued, and your affections brought
in captivity to the obedience of Christ: When shall you be delivered up to the
truth! and so made to obey from the heart, that form of doctrine and sound
words, Romans 6.17. This is the strongest hold that Satan has in man's heart, His
will and affections: and this keeps out longest against Jesus Christ; till he
that is stronger come, and bind the strong man, and cast out the enmity, and
make all captive, to his loving obedience, and willing subjection, 2 Cor. 10.4,
5.

Then thirdly, The enmity of the soul of man, is acted in his rebellion,
against the will of God manifested in his works, In his unsubjection, and
unsubmisive disposition, toward the good pleasure of the Lord, in carving out
such and such a lot in the world: It is certain, that as the Will of God is the
supreme rule of righteousness, so it is the sovereign cause and fountain of all
things; and therefore, how infinitely is the creature bound to subject to him as
a Lawgiver? by pleasant and willing obedience, to his righteous and reasonable
commands: and to submit to him as the absolute ruler, by quiet and humble
condescendance, to all the dispensations of his providence. Now you know (if
you know any thing of your selves) how cross and opposite, these hearts of
yours are to His good pleasure; how they are set just contrary: and whence
flows all the murmurings, grudgings, discontents, griefs, cares and
perplexities of men? but from this fountain, The rebellion of the heart against
God. There is nothing in all the creation, mutinous and malecontent, but the
Heart of man. You see frequent examples of it, in the murmurations of the
people in the wilderness. It is frequently styled A tempting of the Lord, Exodus
17.2. Importing a high provocation of his holy Majesty; a special incitement,
as it were, and motive to declare his absolute power and righteousness against
such; and therefore these are often conjoined, Psalm. 78.17, 18. They finned yet
more, by provoking the most High: and they tempted God in their heart: And its
added verse. 19. Yea, they speak against God. Wherein you may observe, a
gradation of agrravations of this enmity: when men have already deserved
infinite punishment at his hand, and may always look within, and find an answer
to all the murmurings of their hearts, as having sinned so often against him;
yet then, to ^ise up against his good pleasure; and after we have so often
sinned, to repine at any thing coming from him. And this certainly, is a high
provocation of the most high God: it puts a kind of necessity upon him, to
inflict that which thou indeed deserves; and then, this inward heart burning
against God, it breaks out often in words, against that most high and holy one
so, verse. 40, 41. and verse. 56, 57. Provoking, which is the plain expression of
murmuring, in the margent is rendered, rebelling against Him: and so in verse.
8. When a short account is given of them, when the Character or An^gram of such
a people is expressed, its set down thus, A stubborn and rebellious generation.
Therefore Paul, considering this woeful and wretched posture of the soul, set in
opposition to the always blessed will of God; and the madness and folly of it,
he exhorts us, neither murmr ye, as some of them murmured, and were destroyed
of the destroyer; for these things happened for ensamples, etc. 1 Cor. 10.10,
11. Truly, there is nothing either more deformed and vile in it self, or more
disquieting and tormenting to the soul, or more dangerous in the consequents of
it, then such a posture of spirit, a discontented humor against Gods
providence. Whether it be in withholding that good thing from us which we
desire, or sending that which crosses our humor; whether sickness, or want,
or reproach, or disrespect; whatsoever it be that the heart is naturally
carried to pursue or eshew. What more abominable and ugly visage, then the
countenance of an angry and furious person? but when this is against God, it
adds infinitely to the deformity and vileness of it. I do well to be angry is
the Motto of a discontented soul. It erects an imaginary sovereignty against
true sovereignty: it sets up an Antiprovidence; it establishes another Divine
power and wisdom; and brings the Majesty, highness and holiness of God, down
to be tread upon by the creature. And then it is its own tormenter: a sin that
needs no punishment, but it self: the insurrection and mutany of the heart,
against Gods will, sets all the powers of the soul out of course, vexes, pains
and disquiets all. There is no peace and tranquillity, but in the complacency of
the heart, with Gods heart, as Ephraim was like a bullock unaccustomed with the
yoke, Jer. 31.18. The more he fretted and spurned at his yoke, the more it
galled him, and g^ieved him, till he was instructed, and then he was eased.
This fills the soul with hideous tormenting thoughts and cares: this feeds upon
its own marrow, and consumes it (as some have made the Emblem of envy) which is
a particular kind of this enmity: as if you would imagine a creature, that did
waste and consume all its moisture and marrow, and feed upon the destruction of
it self. Now, this is but the prelude of what follows: this self-punishment is
a messenger to tell what is coming^, That the most high God is engaged in his
power against such a person, and shall vent his displeasure to their eternal
displeasure; that is the fruit of this enmity.

SERMON XXI.
Romans 8.7, 8. The carnal mind is enmity to God: and cannot be subject to his
Law. So then they who are in the flesh, cannot please God.


IT is not the least of man's evils, that he knows not how evil he is; therefore
the Searcher of the heart of m^n, gives the most perfect account of it, Ier.
17.12. The heart is deceitful above all things, as well as desperately wicked.
Two things superlative and excessive in it, bordering upon an infiniteness,
such as sin is capable of, Wickedness and Deceitfulness: and indeed, that which
makes the wicked heart desperately and hopelesly so, is, the deceitfulness of
it: there are many specious coverings gotten, to palliat this wickedness and
enmity, and so many invisible and spiritual wickednesses in the heart, that it
is no wonder, that they lu^k and dwell without observation. Sin is either
covered with some deceivable pretext of another thing, or altogether escapes
the dim eyes of men, because of its subtle and spiritual nature. Both are in
this business: the enmity of man's heart against God is so subtle a thing in
many, and it is shrouded over with some other pretenses in all, that few get
the lively discovery and sense of it. It is true, it is very gross and
palpable in most part of men; visible I mean upon them, though not to
themselves. Any, whose eyes is opened, may behold the black visage of rebellion
in the most part of the actings and courses of men, as the Apostle Gal. 6.
speaks, the works of the flesh are manifest. Truly this enmity against God is
too too manifest in most part, the weapons of your warfare against God, being
so carnal and visible, your opposition to his holy will and ways being so
palpable. There is an enmity acted by many in the tenor of their conversation,
without God in the world, and against God; as appears in all your inveterat and
godless customs of lying, swearing, cursing, drunkenness, railing,
Sabbath-breaking, neglect of prayer, and such like: which carry in their
fore-brow this inscription, Against the known God, opposite to that of the
Athenians altar. The God whom you pretend to know and wo^ship, His Name is
every day blasphemed, His word slighted, His will disobeyed, as if you had
proclaimed war against him. But there is in some (and I fear a great many) not
only an acted, but an affected enmity too. Enmity rising up to the maturity and
ripness of malignity, and hatred of the Image of God, in all his children. Some
are not willing to go to Heaven, yet they do not disturb others in their
juorney: they can let others be religious about them, and rawly desire to be
like them; but others there are, who will neither enter into Heaven themselves,
nor let others enter, as Christ speaks of the Pharisees, Matthew. 23.13. They
hate the light of another conversation, because their own deeds are evil, and
are reproved and condemned by it. Its said Rev. 11.10. The witnesses tormented
them that dwelt on the earth. It is strange, what a torment it is to the world,
that the godly are in it! piety is an eyesore to many: if they could extirpat
all that bears that image, they would think it sweet as bread, Psalm. 14. This
is a more open and declared enmity against the God of Heaven; and yet I know it
lurks under the mask of some other thing: you pretend to hate hypocrisy only.
Alas! what a scorn is it for profanity to hate hypocrisy? sure it is not
because it is a sin, but for the very shadow of piety it carries: you hate the
thing it self so perfectly, that you cannot endure the very picture of it. Do
not deceive your selves, the true quarrel is, because they run not to the same
excess of riot with you: if they will lie, cozen, defraud, swear, and
blaspheme as other men, you could endure to make them companions, as you do
others; and the principle of that is, the enmity that was placed in the
beginning: that mortal irreconciliable feud, betwixt the two families, are two
seeds, of Christ and Satan.

But (as I told you) this enmity acts in a more subtle and invisible way in
some, and is painted over with some fair colors, to hide the deformity of it:
not only the grosser corruptions of men carry this stamp, but take even the
most refined piece, or part in man; take his mind, take the excellency of his
mind, even the wisdom of it; yet that has enmity incorporated into it, and
mixed with it throughout all; for the wisdom of the flesh is enmity with God,
as it may be read, (...), the very prudence and reason of a natural man, which
carries him to a distance from, and opposition with, the common defilements in
the courses of men; yet that has in its bosom, a more exquisite and refined
enmity against God; and so the more spiritual and purified it be from grosser
corruptions, it is the more active and powerful against God, because it is, as
it were, the very spirit and quintessence of enmity. You see it, 1 Cor. 1. how
the wisdom of God is foolishness to the wisdom of the world, and then again,
that the wisdom of the world is the greatest folly to the only wise God. Men,
that have many natural advantages beyond others, are at this great
disadvantage, They are more ready to despise godliness, as too base and simple
a thing, to adorn their natures: As Christ said of rich men, it may be said of
wise men, of learned men, of civil and blameless persons, who have a smooth
carriage before the world, how hard is it for such to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven? hard indeed, for they must be stripped naked of that, ere they can enter
through this narrow gate; I mean, the opinion and conceit, of any worth or
excellency; and so diminished in their own eyes, that they may go through this
needles eye, without crushing.

The stream of enmity runs underground often, and so hides it self under some
other notion, till at length it burst forth openly: I find it commonly run in
the secret channel of amity or friendship, to some other thing opposite to God:
So James 4.4, the amity of ^he world is enmity with God; and 1 John 2.15. He
that loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him. There are two dark
and underground conduits, to convey this enmity against God, Amity to the
world, and Amity to our selves, self-love, and creature-love. We cannot
denounce war openly against Heaven, but this is the next course, To join to, or
associat with, any party that is contrary to God; and thus under the covert of
friendship to our selves, and love to the world, we war against God, and
destroys our own souls. I say, first, Amity to the world carries enmity to God
in the bosom of it: and if you believe not this, hear the Apostles sharp and
pungent question, you adulterers and adulteresses, know you not that the Amity
of the world is Enmity with God? He does not speak only, to persons guilty of
that crime, but to all natural men, who are guilty of an adultery or whoredom,
of a more spiritual nature; but as abominable and more dangerous. There is a
bond and special tie betwixt all men, and God their Maker, which oblidgeth them
to consecrate and devout themselves, their affections and endeavors to his
honor, especially when the Covenant of the Gospel is superadded unto that, in
which Jesus Christ our Lord reveals himself, as having only right to us and our
affections; as willing to bestow himself upon us; and notwithstanding of all
the distance between him and wretched sinners, yet filling it up with his
infinite love, and wonderful condescency, dimitting himself to the form of a
servant, out of love, that so he might take us up, to be his chaste Spouse, and
adorn us with his beauty. This he challenges of us, whoever hear and profess
the Gospel: This is you^ profession (if you understood it) That Jesus Christ
shall be your well-beloved, and ye his; that you shall separate your self to
him, and admit no stranger in his place: that the choice and marrow of your
joy, love, and delight, shall be bestowed on him. Now, this bond and tie, of a
professed relation, to that glorious Husband, is foully broken by the most
part, by espousing their affections to this base world. Your hearts are turned
off him unto strangers, that is, present perishing things: whereas the
intendment of the Gospel is, To present you to Christ as pure Virgins, 2 Cor.
11.2. Truly your hearts are gone a-whoring after other things: the love of the
world has withdrawn you, or kept you in chains: these present things are as
snares, nets and bands; as an harlots hands and heart, Eccles. 7.26. they are
powerful enchantments over you, which bewitch you to a base love, from an
honorable and glorious love. O that you would consider it, my beloved! what
opposition there is betwixt the love of the world, and the love of the Father;
betwixt amity to that which has nothing in it, but some present bait to your
deceitful lusts; and amity to God, your only lawful Husband. Affection is a
transforming and conforming thing, Si terram amas terra es, the love of God
would purify thy heart, and lift it up to more similitude to him whom thou
loves; but the love of the world assimulats it unto the world, makes it such a
base and ignoble piece, as the earth is. Do you think marriage-affection can be
parted? My wel-beloved is mine, therefore the Church is the Turtle, the Dove to
Christ; of wonderful chastity: it never joins but to one, and after the death
of its marrow, it sighs and mourns ever after, and sits solitarily. You must
retire, my beloved, and disingage from the love of other things, or you cannot
love Christ: and if you love not Christ, you cannot have peace with the Father:
and if you have not that peace, you cannot have life: this is the chain of
life, the first link begins at the divorcement of all fo^mer loves and beloved
idols: once the soul must be loosed in desire and delight, and that link must
be fastened upon the most lovely and desirable object, Christ, the desire of
the Nations: and this draws alongs another link, of peace and life with it. Do
not mistake it, Religion would not hinder or prejudge your lawful business in
this world: O it were the most compendious way to advance it, with more ease to
your souls! But certainly it will teach you to exchange the love of these
things, for a better and more heart-contenting love.

Then Amity to our selves is Enmity to God, and truly this is the last strong
hold that holds out longest against God: when others may be beaten down, or
surrendered: possibly a man may attain to this, To despise these lower things,
as below his natural dignity and the excellency of his spirit: some may
renounce much of that friendship with worldly and temporal things, as being
fordid and base: but the enmity gets in to this strong and invisible tower of
darkness, self-love, and pride: and therefore the Apostle John makes this the
last and chiefest, the pride of life, 1 John 2.16. When the lusts of the eyes
and flesh are in some measure abated, this is but growing: and what decreaseth
of these, seems to accresce unto this: as if self-love and pride, did feed and
nourish it self upon the ashes or consumption of other vices. Yea, it draws sap
from graces and virtues, and grows thereby, till at length it kill that which
nourished it: and indeed the Apostle James seems to proceed to this, verse. 5,
6. when he minds us that God resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble; Does the Scripture say this in vain, says he? Is not self amity as
well enmity, as the amity of the world? and therefore God opposes himself unto
it, as the very grand enmity: self is the great lord, the arch-rebel, the head
of all the opposition, that in which they do all center; and when all the
inferior Soldiers are captives, or killed, this is last in the fields, it
lives first in opposition, and dies last, prunum vivens, and ultimum moriens.
When a man is separated from many things, yet he may be but more conjoined to
himself, and so the further disjoined from God. Of all the vile rags of the
old man, this is nearest the skin, and last put off: Of all the members, self
is the heart, first alive, and last alive: When enmity is constrained to render
up the outward members of the body, to yield them to a more smooth and fair
carriage, to a civil behavior, when the mind it self is forced to yield unto
some light of truth, and knowledge of the Gospel; yet the enmity retires into
the heart, and fortifies it the stronger, by self-love, and self-estimation; as
in winter, the encompassing cold, makes the heat to combine it self together in
the bowels of the earth, and by this means the springs are hotter then in
summer; so the surrounding light of the Gospel, or education, or natural
honesty, drives the heat and strength of enmity inward, where it fortifies it
self more: This is that accursed Antiperistasis, that is made by the
concurrence of some advantages of knowledge, and civility, and such like. The
blood of enmity against God, gets in about the heart when it is chased for fear
out of the outward man: Therefore the very first and fundamental principle of
Christianity, is, Let a man deny himself, and so he shall be my Disciple; he
must become a fool in his own eyes, though he be wise, that he may be wise, 1
Cor. 3.18. he must become as ungodly, though godly, that he may be justified by
faith, Romans 4.5. he must forsake himself, that he may indeed find himself, or
get a better self in another, he must not eat much honey, that is not good, it
would swell him though it be pleasant: he must not search his own glory, or
reflect much upon it, if he would be a follower and friend of Christ. Look how
much soever you engage to your selves, to esteem, or desire to be esteemed of
others, to reflect with complacency on your selves, to mind your own
satisfaction and estimation in what you do, so much you disingage from Jesus
Christ, for these are contrary points: Its a direct motion toward Christ, its
an inverse and backward motion toward our selves; and so much as we move that
way, we promove not, but loses of our way, and are further from the true end.
Ezekiels living creatures, may be an emblem of a Christian motion, he returns
not as he goes, he makes a straight line to God, whithersoever he turn him; but
nature makes all crooked lines, they seem to go forth in obedience to God, but
they have a secret unseen reflection into its own bosom. And this is the
greatest act of enmity To idolize God, and Deifie our selves: we make him a
cipher, and sacrifice to our selves: his peculiar incommunicable property, of
Alpha and Omega, that we do sacrilegiously attribute to our selves, the
beginning of our motions, and end of them too. This is the crooked line, that
nature cannot possibly move out of, till a higher spirit come, And restore her
that halted, and make plain her paths.

That which is added, as a reason, explains this enmity more clearly; Because
it cannot be subject, etc. Truly these two forementioned amities of the world
and of our selves, do withdraw men wholly from the orderly subjection, that
they owe to the Law of God. Order is the beauty of every thing, of nature, of
art, of the whole universe, and of the several parts, kingdoms and republics
of it. This indeed is the very beauty of the world, all things subordinat to
him that made them; only miserable man has broken this order, and marred this
beauty, and he cannot be subject (...) cannot come again into that orderly
station and subordination he was once into. This is the only gap, or breach of
the creation. And it is some other engagements, that draws him thus far out of
course, The base love of the world and the inordinat love of himself, O these
make his neck stiff! that it cannot bow to the yoke of obedience: these have
opposite and contrary commands, and no man can serve two masters: when the
commands of the great Lord, self, comes in opposition with the commands of God,
then he cannot be subject to the Law of God. For a time, in some things, he may
resemble a subjection, when the will of self, and the will of God commands in
one point, as sometimes they do by accident; but that is neither frequent nor
constant.

Not only, he is not subject, but there is worse in it, he cannot be subject to
the Law of God. This is certainly, to throw down the natural pride of man, that
always apprehends some remnant ability in himself: you think still to make
your selves better, and when convinced or challenged for sins, to make a mends
and reform your lives. You use to promise these things as lightly and easily,
as if they were wholly in your power, and as if you did only delay them for
advantage; and truly it seems, this principle of self-sufficiency is engraven
on men's hearts, when they procrastinat and delay repentance, and earnest
minding of Religion to some other fitter season, as if it were in their
liberty, to apply to it when they please: and when you are urged and persuaded
to some reformation, you take in hand even as that people, Ier. 42.6, 20. Who
said, all that the Lord has said, we will do: You can strike hands, and engage
to serve the Lord, as easily, as that people in Joshua 24.18, 19. But we may
say, Oh that there were such a heart in you! but alas, such a heart is not in
you! you cannot serve the Lord, for He is holy and jealous, and ye are not only
weak, but wicked. I beseech you then, believe this one testimony that God has
given of man, even the choicest thing in man, the very wisdom of a natural man,
It is not subject to Gods Law, and it cannot be better, neither can it be
subject: resolution, industry, vows and covenants will not effect this, till
the most High break and bow the heart. And not only is this enmity against the
old law of commandments, an antipathy at them, as crossing our lusts, but even
against the new and living Law, of the spirit of life in Christ.

Here is your misery, you can neither be subject to the Law as commanding to
obey it, or threatening for disobedience to it, nor to the Gospel as promising
to believe and receive it. The Law commands, but your law countermands within.
The Law threatens and sentences you with condemnation, but you have some
self-pleasing delusion, and dream in your heads, and blesses your selves in
your own hearts, even though ye walk in the imagination of your hearts,
contrary to the Law, Deuteronomy. 29. It is strange that you do not sore-apprehend and
fear hell! but its this delusion possesses the heart, you shall not die: It was
the first act of enmity, not only the transgression of the command, but
unbelief of the truth of the curse: and that which first encouraged man to sin,
encourages you all to ly into it, and continue in it, a fancy of escaping
wrath. This noise fills the heart: Satan whispers it in the ear, go on, you
shall not die. Thus it appears, that the natural mind cannot be subject to the
Law of God, no persuasion, no instruction, can enforce this belief of your
damnable condition upon you.

But then when the enmity is beaten out of this sort, and a soul is really
convinced of its desperate and lost estate, when the heart is brought down to
subjection, to take with that dreadful sentence; yet there is another tower of
enmity in the heart, that can keep out against the weapons of the Gospel, such
as Paul mentions, Romans 10.2. Being ignorant of the righteousness of God, they
went about to establish their own, and could not submit to the righteousness of
God. There is a natural pride and stiffness of heart, that we cannot endure but
to have something in our selves, to rest on, and take pleasure into: and when a
soul sees nothing, it rather vexes and torments it self, as grieving because it
has no ornament, or covering of its own, nor rejoiceth and delights in that
righteousness of God revealed in Christ. O the difficulty to bow down so low,
as to put on another righteousness over our nakedness! and should it be called
submission? is it not rather the elevating, and ex^lting of a soul; yet in
respect of our natural posture of spirit, it is a matter of great difficulty,
to make a self condemned sinner submit to thi^, To be saved freely, without
money or price, by another ransom. What empty, vain and frivolous expiation,
and satisfactions will souls invent, rather then trust all to this? How long
will poor souls wander abroad, from hill to mountain, seeking some inherent
qualification, to commend them, and leave this Garden and Paradise of delights,
which is opened up in Christ? souls look every where for help, till all hands
fail; and then necessity constrains them to come hither, but indeed when
necessity b^ought in charity, and amity keeps in, when once he knows what
entertainment is in Christ. As for you, who as yet have not stooped to the
sentence of wrath, how will you submit to the righteousness of God? but I
wonder how you imagine this to be so easy a thing, To believe. You say You did
always believe in Christ, and that your hearts are still on him, and that you
do it night and day. Now, there needs no other argument, to persuade that you
do not at all believe in the Gospel, who have not apprehended no more
difficulty in it, no more contrariety to your rebellious natures in it: let
this one word go home with you, and convince you of your unbelief, The natural
min^ is not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can it be. How then do
you come so easily by it? certainly it must be fained and counterfit.

SERMON XXII.
Rom 8.8. So then they that are in the flesh, cannot please God.


IT is a kind of happiness to men, to please them upon whom they depend, and
upon whose favor their well-being hangs. It is the Servants happiness to
please his Master, the Courtiours to please his Prince, and so generally,
whosoever they be that are joined in mutual relations, and depend one upon
another; that which makes all pleasant, is this, To please one another. Now,
certainly all the dependencies of creatures one upon another, are but shaddows
unto the absolute dependence of creatures upon the Creator, for in him we live
and move and have our being: the dependence of the ray upon the Sun, of the
stream upon the fountain, is one of the greatest in nature; but all creatures
have a more necessary connection with this fountain-being, both in their being,
and well being: they are nothing but a flux and emanation of his power and
pleasure, and as the Psalmist expresses it, he hides his face, and they are
troubled, he takes away their breath, and they die, and return to their dust:
he sends forth his spirit, and they are created, and he renews the face of the
earth, Psalm. 104.29, 30. You may extend this to the being and well-being,
happiness and misery of creatures, our souls which animat our bodies, are but
his breath which he breathed into the dust, and can retract it when he
pleases: the life of our souls, the peace, and tranquillity, and satisfaction
is another breathing of his spirit, and another look of his countenance, and as
he pleases to withdraw it, or interpose between his face and us, so we live or
die, are blessed or miserable. Our being or well-being, has a more
indispensible dependence on him, then the image in the glass has upon the
living face.

If it be so, then certainly of all things in the world, it concerns us nearest
how to please him and be at peace with him. If we be in good terms with him, in
whose hand our breath is, and whose are all our ways. Dan. 5.23. Upon whose
countenance our misery or felicity hangs; then certainly, we are happy: if we
please him, it matters not whom we displease; for he alone has absolute,
uncontrolled and universal power over us, as our Savior speaks, over both soul
and body. We may expect that his good pleasure toward us will not be ^ai^fied,
but in communicating his fullness, and manifesting his favor to us, especially
since the goodness of God is so exundant, as to overflow even to the wicked
world, and vent it self as out of superabundance, in a river of goodness
throughout the whole earth; how much more will it run abundantly toward them
whom he is well pleased with, and therefore the Psalmist cries out, as being
already full in the very hope and expectation of it, That he would burst, if he
had not the vent of admiration and praise, O how great is His goodness, and how
excellent His loving kindness laid up for them that fear him! Psalm. 31.19. and
36.7. But on the other hand, how incomparable is the misery of them, who cannot
please God; even though they did both please themselves, and all others for the
present: to be at odds with him, in whom alone they can subsist, and without
whose savor, is nothing but wretchedness and misery, O! that must be the worst
and most cursed estate imaginable: to be in such a state, as do what they can,
they cannot please him, whom alone to please is of only concernment, what can
be invented to that? Now, if you ask who they are that are such? the words
speak it plainly, in way of inference from the former doctrine, Therefore they
that are in the flesh, cannot please God. Not, they in whom there is flesh; for
there is remnants of that in the most spiritual man in this life: we cannot
attain here to Angelick purity, though it should be the aim and endeavor of
every Christian. But they that are in the flesh, or after the flesh, importing
the predominion of that, and an universal thraldom of nature unto it, which
indeed is the state of all men that are but once born, till a second birth
come, by the Spirit of Jesus Christ.

The ground of this may be taken from the foregoing discourse, and it is
chiefly twofold, one is, because they are not in Jesus Christ, in whom his soul
is well pleased; another is, because they cannot suit and frame their carriage
to his pleasure: since all mankind has fallen under the displeasure of the
most high God, by sinning against him, in preferring the pleasure of the flesh,
and the pleasure of Satan, to the pleasure of God, there can be no atonement
found to pacify him, no sacrifice to appease him, no ransom to satisfy his
Justice, but that one perfect offering for sin, Jesus Christ, the propitiation
for the sins of the elect world. This the Father accepts, in the name of
sinners; and in testimony of his acceptance, he did two several times, by a
voice from Heaven, declare first to a multitude, Matthew. 3.17. and then to the
beloved Disciples, Matthew. 17.5. and both times, with great Majesty and
solemnity (as did become him) that this is his well-beloved Son, in whom his
soul is well pleased. It pleased God, to make the stream of his love, to take
another channel after man's sin, and not to run immediately toward wretched man;
but he turned the current of his love another way, to his own Son, whom he
choosed for that end, to reconcile man and bring him into favor: and his love
going about, by that compass, comes in the ^ssue, toward poor sinners, with
the greater force. He has appointed Christ the meeting place with sinners, the
dayes-man to lay his hands on both; and therefore he is God to lay his hand on
God, and Man to lay his hand on man, and bring both into a peaceable, and
amicable conjunction. Now then, whoever are not in Jesus Christ, as is spoken,
verse. 1. certainly they cannot please God, do what they can; because God has
made Christ the Center, in which he would have the good pleasure of sinners
meeting with his good pleasure; and therefore without faith it is impossible to
please God, Heb. 11.6. not so much for the excellency of the act it self, as
for the well-pleasing object to it, Christ. The love of the Father is terminat
in Him, His Justice is sati^fied in Him. His love is well pleased with the
excellency of His person: He finds in him an object of delight, which is no
where else: and His Justice is well pleased with the sufficiency and worthiness
of His ransom: and without this compass, there is neither satisfaction to the
one, nor to the other: so then whatsoever you are, how high soever your degree
in the world, how sweet soever your disposition, let your natures be never so
good, your carriage never so smooth, yet certainly there is nothing in all,
that can please God, either by an object of love, or a price for justice. You
are under that eternal displeasure, which will fall on and crush you to pieces:
mountains will not be so heavy, as it will appear in that great day of his
wrath, Rev. 6. I say, you cannot come from under that imminent weight of
eternal wrath, unless you be found in Jesus Christ, that blessed place of
immunity and refuge, if you have not forsaken your selves, and your own
natures, and denied your own righteousnnss as dung, to be found in him,
clothed with his righteousness and satisfaction. If the delight and pleasure
of your soul, do not co-incide and fall in at one place, with the delight and
good pleasure of the Father, that is, upon his well-beloved Son. Certainly, the
pleasure and good will of God has not as yet fallen upon you, and met with
you; therefore if you would please God, be pleased with Christ: and you cannot
do him a greater pleasure, then believe in him, Joh. 5.23. that is, absolutely
resign your selves unto him, for salvation and sanctification.

The other ground is, Such as are in the flesh cannot frame their spirits,
affections and ways, to Gods good pleasure; for their very wisdom, the very
excellency that is in them, is enmity to God, and cannot subject to His Law;
and therefore they cannot please him. I am sure, you may easily reflect upon
your selves, and find not with much search, but upon all these, as the Prophet
Ier. 2.34. speaks, that it is not the study and business you have undertaken,
To please God, but the bent, and main of your aims and endeavors is, to please
your selves, or to please men. This makes many men's pains, even in Religion,
displeasing to God; because they do not indeed mind his pleasure, but their
own, or others satisfaction: what they do, is but to con^orm to the custom of
the time, or commandments of men, or their own humor, and all this must needs
be abominable to God. Truly, that which is in great account among men, is
abomination to God, as our Savior speaks of the very righteousness, and
professed piety of the Pharisees, Luke 16.25. the more you please your selves
and the world, the further you are from pleasing God. The very beginning of
pleasing God, is, when a soul falls in displeasure at it self, and abhorrency
of his own loathsomness; therefore it is said, The humble and contrite spirit I
will look unto, and dwell with him, and such sacrifices do please God, Isai.
66.2. P^al. 51.17. For the truth is, God never begins to be pleasant and lovely
to a soul, till it begin to fall out of love with it self, and grow loathsome
in its own eyes. Therefore you may conclude this of your selves, That with many
of you God is not well please^, although you be all baptized unto Christ, and
do all eat of that same spiritual meat, and drink of that same spiritual drink,
though you have all Church Priviledges, yet with many of you God is not well
pleased, as 1 Cor. 10.2, 3, 4, 5. not only because these works of the flesh
that are directly opposite to his known will, such as fornication, murmuring,
grudging at Gods dispensation, cursing and swearing, lying, drunkenness, anger,
malice, stri^e, variance, and such like, abound as much among you as that old
people; But even these of you, that may be free from gross opposition to his
holy will, your nature has the seed of all that enmity, and you act enmity in
a more covered way: you are so well pleased with your selves, your chief study
is to please men: you have not given your selves to this study, To conform your
selves to the pleasure of God; therefore know your dreadful condition, you
cannot please God, without whose favor and pleasure, you cannot but be
eternally displeased and tormented in your selves. Certainly, though now you
please your selves, yet the day shall come, that you shall be contrary to your
selves, and all to you, as it is spoken as a punishment of the Jews, 1 Thessalonians 2
15. and the^e are some earnest of it in this life: many wicked persons a^e set
contrary to themselves, and all to them: they are like Esau, their hand against
all, and all men's hand against them; yea, their own consciences continually
vexing them: this is a fruit of that ^^ndamental discord, and enmity between
men and God, and if you find it not now, you shall find it hereafter.

But as for you that are in Jesus Christ, who being displeased with your
selves, have fl^d in to the well-beloved, in whom the Father is well pleased,
to escape Gods displeasure; I say unto such, your persons, God is well pleased
with in Christ, and this shall make way and place for acceptance to your weak
and imperfect performances, this is the ground of your peace and acceptance:
and you would take it so, and it shall yield you much peace, when you cannot be
pleased with your selves. But I would charge that upon you, that as you by
believing are well pleased with Christ, so you would henceforth study, to walk
worthy of your Lord into all well-pleasing, being fruitful in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God, Col. 1 10. This is that, to which you
are called, to such a work as may please him, to conform your selves even to
His pleasure and will: If you love him, you cannot but fashion your selves so
as he may be pleased. O how exact and observant is love of that which may
ingratiat it fell in the beloveds favor? It is the most studious thing to
please, and most afraid of displeasing. Ene^h had a large and honorable
testimony, as ever was given to man, that he pleased God, Heb. 11.5. I beseech
you be ambitious of this after a holy manner: labor to know his will, and that
for this end, that you may approve it, and prove it, that you may do that good
and acceptable will of God: let his pleasure be your rule, your law, to which
all within you may conform it self. Though you cannot attain an exact
correspondence with his pleasure, but in many things you will offend; yet
certainly this will be the resolved study of your hearts, how to please him;
and in a^ far as you cannot please him, you will be displeased with your
selves: But then, I would advise you, in as far as you are displeased with your
selves, for not pleasing God, be as much well pleased with Christ, the
pleasing-sacrifice and atonement; and this shall please God as much as your
obedience could do, or your disobedience can displease him. To Him be praise
and glory.

SERMON XXIII.
Romans 8.9. But ye are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be that the
Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man, etc.


APplication is the very life of the Word, at least it is a necessary
condition, for the living operation of it: the application of the Word to the
hearts of hearers by Preaching, and the application of your hearts again to the
Word by meditation, these two meeting together, and striking one upon another,
will yield fire. Paul speaks of a right dividing of the word of truth, 2 Timothy
2.13. not that ordinary way of cutting it all in parcells, and dismembering it,
by manifold divisions, which I judge makes it loss much of its virtue, which
consists in union, though some have pleasure in it, and think it profitable;
yet I do not see that this was the Apostolic way, that either they preached it
themselves or recommended it to others; but rather he means, the real
distribution of the food of souls unto their various conditions, as it is the
duty of a Steward to be both faithful and wise in that, to give every one their
own portion: And as it is the Pastors duty thus to distribute the Word of God
unto you, so it is your part to apply it home to your selves, without which
application, the former division of the Word aright, will not seed your souls:
If every man act not the Pastor to his own heart, it cannot profit. Now indeed,
the right application of the Word to souls, is the difficultest part of
Preaching, and it is the hardest point of hearing; in which there needs both
much affection and much direction, the one to be serious and earnest in it, the
other to be wise and prudent in it: without suitable affection, it will not
pass into the substance of the soul to feed it, no more then the stomach can
digest meat, that wants convenient heat; and without discretion and wisdom, to
choose our own portion, it will not yield convenient food, but increase humors
and superfluities, or distemper our spirits. That which I look at in these
words, is, the discretion and prudence of this wise Steward in Gods House,
after he has represented the wretched and woeful estate of them that are in the
flesh, how their natures cannot but act enmity against God, how their end is
death and destruction, he subjoyns in due season a suitable encouragement to
believers, you are not in the flesh, etc. Because there is no man so sensible
of that corruption that dwells within, as he that is in part renewed; as pain
to a healthful body is most sensible, and as the abundance of light makes a
larger discovery of what is disordered and defiled in the house; therefore such
upon the hearing of the accursed estate of men in nature, of their natural
rebellion against God, and Gods displeasure against them, they are most ready,
I say, to apply suc^ things to themselves, to the weakening of their own h^nds,
and sadning of their hearts, as the upright-hearted Disciples were more ready
to take with the challenge of betraying Christ, than the false-hearted Judas:
Therefore the Apostle prevents such an abuse of the Doctrine, by making
application of the better part unto the Romans, but for you, ye are not of the
flesh, etc. Indeed, self-examination is necessary, and its like the chewing of
the meat before it be sent into the stomach, it is as necessary and precedent
before right application. I wish that every one of you would consider well what
this living Word concerns you! it is the ground of all our barrenness, no man
bring^ this home to himself which is spoken to all: but truly the Lord ^peaks
to all, that every man may speak to himself, and ask at his own heart, what is
my concernment in it? what is my portion? As for you whom the Lord has put
upon this search of your selves, and has once made you to find your selves in
the black roll of perdition, under the hazard of the eternal weight of Gods
displeasure, and there has showed unto your souls a way of making pea^e with
God, and a place of refuge in Jesus Christ, which has sometimes refreshed and
eased your hearts, and only was able to purify your consciences, and calm the
storms that did arise in them; if it be henceforth your study To walk to please
him, and this engagement be on your hearts, To make no peace with the flesh,
and corruption that dwells in you, then, I say, the Lord he calls and accounts
you, not carnal but spiritual: though there be much carnality in you, yet he
denominats from the better part, not from the greatest part, you are not after
the flesh, but after the spirit. Though Isaac be a weak young child, and
Ishmael the son of the bondwoman be a strong man; yet thou art in Gods account
esteemed according to the promise, which shall be the ground of thy stability:
Isaac must abide in the house for ever, and grow stronger and stronger, and
Ishmael must be cast out and grow weaker and weaker: the one is ordained for
destruction, and so is called the old man, drawing near to its grave; the other
for life: and so is a new man, renewed day by day. Thus they are in Gods
promise, and you would learn thus to look upon it, not according to their
present inequality in strength, but that future inequality and difference,
which is wrapped up in the promise of God, and the seed whereof is in you.

As there is a woeful penury and scantnesse of examination in the most part of
men, who are wholly spent without, and take no leisure to recognize their own
souls; so there is a miserable excess, and hurtful superfluity of examination
and disputation among many of Gods children, who are always in reflection, and
almost never in action, so much on knowing what is, that they take not much
leisure to do, or pursue what is not. Truly, I think when the Apostle commands
u^ to examine, whether we be in the faith, and prove ourselves, he did not
mean, to make it our perpetual exercise, or so to press it, as we should not
endeavor to be in the faith, till we know whether we be in it: that were no
advancing-way, to refuse to go on in our journey, till we know what progress
we have made, as the custom is. But simply and plainly, I think, he intended
to have Christianity begin at examination, as the first returning of a soul,
must needs be upon some inquiry and search of the way, and knowledge upon
search, that our former way was wrong, and this is only right. But if this be
the Porch to enter at, will you sit down and dwell in it, and not go on into
the Palace it self? Because you must begin to search what you have learned
wrong, that now you may unlea^n it, will you be ever about the learning to know
your condition; and by this means never attain to the knowledge of the truth?
But when you have upon any inquiry, found your selves out of the way, you
should not entertain that dispute long; but hea^ken to the plain voice of the
Gospel that ^ounds unto you, This is the way, walk in it; I am the way, says
Christ, enter at me, by believing in me: Now, once having found that you are
unbelievers by nature, to suspend believing, till you prove whether you be in
the faith, is unreasonable and impossible; for certainly having once ^ound your
selves void of it, you must first have it, before you know that you have it,
you must first apply to action, and afterward your examination shall be more
easy.

But I would tell a more profitable improvement of such representations of the
sinful and miserable estate of the ungodly world, then you use to make of it:
and, I think, it is that the Apostles intend, in the frequent turning the eyes
of Saints about, to the accursed state of the world; partly consolation, and
partly some provocation to suitable walking: things that are opposite, a^e best
known by compa^ison one with another; each of them casts abroad a light to see
the other by. Therefore it is that the Apostles do frequently remind the
converted Gentiles, of the wretched estate the world lies into, and themselves
once were into. You see it, 1 Cor. 6.11. And such were some of you, but now ye
are washed. And Ephesians. 2.1. You who were dead in sins has he quickened. There
is not any thing will more commend unto a Christian the grace of God toward
him, nor to look abroad round about him, and take a view of the whole world,
lying in wickedness; and then to lock backward to what himself once was, and
compare it with what the free grace of God has made him. O what a
soul-ravishing contemplation is that! 1 Ioh. 5 19. And we ^now that we are of
God, and the whole world lies in wickedn^sse: how does this highten the price
of grace, and how much does it add to a souls inward contentment, to think what
it was of it self, and what it would undoubtedly have been, if not thus
wonderfully surprised! One used always to look to those below him, that he
might n^^ en^y these above him. Truly it might do well here, when a Christian
is grieved and disquieted, because he has not attained to that desired measure
of the Image of God, and fellowship with him, To cast a look about him, to the
miserable and hopeless estate of so many thousands, who have the image of Satan
so visibly engraven on them, and have no inward stirring after this blessed
Image; and reflect a little backward, to the hole of the pit whence he was
taken, to look upon that primitive estate that grace found him into, so
loathsome as is described, Ezekiel. 16. Would not such a double sight, think you,
make him break out in admiration, and be powerful to silence and compose his
spirit? O to think, that I was once in that black roll, of these excluded from
the Kingdom! such were some of you, and then to consider, That my name was
taken out, and washed by the blood of Christ, to be enrolled in the Register of
Heaven; what an astonishing thing is it! you see, in nature, God has appointed
contrarieties, and varieties to beautify the world; and certainly, many things
could not be known how good and beneficial they are, but by the smart and hurt
of that which is opposite to them: as you could not imagine the good of light,
but by some sensible experience of the evil of darkness: Heat, you could not
know the benefit of it, but by the vexation of cold. Thus he makes one to
commend another, and both to beautify the world. It is thus in art,
contrariety and variety of colors and lines, make up one beauty: diversity of
sounds makes a sweet harmony. Now this is the art and wisdom of God, in the
dispensation of his grace, He sets the misery of some, beside the happiness
of others; that each of them may aggravat another: he puts light beside
darkness, spirit, sore-against flesh; that so Saints may have a double
accession to their admiration at the goodness and grace of God, and to their
delight and complacency in their own happiness: he presents the state of men
out of Christ, that you may wonder how you are translated, and may be so
abundantly satisfied, as not to exchange your portion for the greatest Monarchs.

Then, I say, this may provoke us, and persuade us to more suitable walking.
Does he make such a difference, O do not you unmake it again! do not confound
all again, by your walking after the course of the world: conformity to the
world is a confusion of what God has separated: Has infinite grace translated
you from that kingdom of darkness to light, O then walk in that light, as
children of light! are ye such, own your stations: consider your relations,
and make your selves ashamed at the very thoughts of sin: he points out the
deformed and ugly face of the conversation of the world, that you may fall in
love with the beauty of holiness: as the Lacedaemonians wont to let their
child^en see their slaves drunk, that the brutish and abominable posture of
such in that sin, might imprint in the hearts of their children a detestation
of such a vice. Certainly, the Lord calls you to mind often what you have been,
and what the world about you is; not to engage you to it, but to alienat your
minds from the deformity of sin, and to commend to you the beauty of obedience.
You would learn to make this holy use and advantage, of all the wickedness the
world lies into, To behold in it, as in a glass, your own image and
likeness; that when you use to hate or despise others, you may rather loath
and dislike your selves, as having that same common nature; and wonder at the
goodness of God that makes such difference, where none was. This were the way
to make gain of the most improfitable thing in the world, that is the sins of
other men; for ordinarily the seeing and speaking of them, does rather dispose
us, and incline us to more liberty to sin. Many look on them with delight, some
with contempt and hatred of these that commit them, but few know how to speak
or look on sin it self with indignation, or themselves, because of the seeds of
it within them with abhorrency. I would think if we were circumspect in this,
the worse the world is, we might be the better, the worse the times are, we
might spend it better, the more pride we see, it might make us the more humble,
the more impiety and impurity abounds it might provoke us to a further distance
from, and disconformity with, the world: Thus if we were wise we might extract
gold out of the dunghill, and suck honey out of the most poysonable weed. The
surrounding igno^ance, and wickedness of the world, might cause a holy
Antiperistasis in a Christian, by making the grace of God unite it self, and
work more powerfully; as fire out of a cloud, and shine more brightly, as a
torch in the darkness of the night.

As for you, whose woeful estate is here described, who are yet in the flesh,
and enemies to God by nature, I would desire you to be stirred up at the
consideration of this, that there are some who are delivered out of that
prison, and that some have made peace with God, and are no more enemies but
friends, and fellow-Citizens of the Saints. If the case were left wholly
incurable and desperate, you had some ground to continue in your sins and
security; But now when you hear a remedy is pos^ible, and some have been helped
by it, I wonder that ye do not upon this door of hope offered, b^s^ir your
selves, that you may be these who are here excepted, But you are not in the
flesh: since some are, why may not I be? Will you awake your selves with this
alarm! If you had any desire after this estate, certainly such a hope as this,
would give you feet to come to Jesus Christ; for these are the legs of the
soul, some desire of a better estate, and some probability of it conceived by
hope.

SERMON XXIV.
Romans 8.9. -- If so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man, etc.


But will God in very deed dwell with men on earth! 2 Chronicles. 6.18. it was the
wonder of one of the wisest of men: and indeed, considering his infinite
Highness, above the hight of Heaven; his immense and incomprehensible
greatness, that the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain him; and then the
baseness, emptiness and worthlessnesse of man, it may be a wonder to the
wisest of Angels: and what is it, think you, the Angels desire to look into,
but this incomprehensi^le mystery, of the descent of the most High, to dwell
among the lowest and vilest of the creatures! But as Solomon's Temple, and these
visible symbols of Gods presence, were but shadows of things ^o come, the
substance whereof is exhibited under the Gospel* so that wonder was but a
shadow or type of a greater and more real wonder, of Gods dwelling on the earth
now. It was the wonder, shall God dwell with man, among the rebellious sons of
A^^m! But behold a greater wonder since Christ came, God dwelling in man, ^^st
personally in the Man Christ, in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwelt
bodily, then gra^iously in the seed of Christ, in man by His Spirit; and this
makes men spiritu^l, if so be the Spirit of Christ dwell in you. You heard of
the f^^st in-dwelling, ver. 3. God sending his own Son in the likeness of
sinful flesh, the inhabita^ion of the Divine Nature in our flesh, which had the
likeness of sinful ^^esh, but without sin; for he sanctified himself for our
cause. And truly, this mysterious and wonderful inhabitation, is not only a
pledge of the other, That God shall dwell in sinful men by his Spirit; but in
order of nature, it has some influence upon the other, without which God could
not have dwelt in us. There is so much distance and disproportion between his
Majesty and us, that we could not be well united, but by this interveening, God
coming down f^^st a step, into the holy nature of the Man Christ, that from
thence he might go into the sin^ul nature of other men. Our sin^ul and
rebellious nature behoved to be first sanctified this way, by the pers^nal
in-dwelling of God in our flesh; and this had made an easy passage into sinful
Us, for His Spirit to dwell into us powerfully and graciously; therefore the
Spirit of Christ is said to dwell in us, Christ's Spirit, not only because
proceeding from Him as from the Father; but particularly, because the
inhabitation or operation of the Spirit in us, is the proper result and fruit
of that glorious union of our nature with him. He took our flesh, that he might
send us His Spirit. And O what a blessed exchange was this! He came and d^elt
in our nature, that so He might dwell in us: He took up a Shop, as it were, in
our flesh, that He might work in us, and make us again conformed to God.

We shall not cut this asunder into many parts; you see the words contain
plainly The very essential definition of a spiritual man, and of a Christian.
You find a spiritiual man and a Christian equivalent in this ver. that is to
say, they are taken for one and the self same thing, and so they are reciprocal
of equal extent and restraint; every Christian is one after the Spirit, and
whosoever is after the Spirit is a Christian: one of Christ's, and one after the
Spirit is one thing. Now the definition of the Christian is taken from that
which really and essentially constitutes him such. He is one in whom the Spirit
of Christ dwells, that makes him one after the Spirit, that makes him one of
Christ's, because it is the Spirit of Christ. As if you define what a man is,
you could not do it better then thus, he is one endowed with a reasonable soul:
So the Apostle gives you the very soul and form of a Christian, which
differenceth from all others. As the soul is to the body to make up a man, so
the Spirit of Christ is to the soul and spirit of a man, to make up a
Christian: as the absence or presence of the soul makes or unmakes a man, so
the absence or presence of this Spirit makes or unmakes a Christian, for you
see he makes it reciprocal. If you be Christian^, the Spirit dwells in you, but
if the Spirit dwell not in you, you are not Christians.

A word then to the first of these, that a Christian and a spiritual man are
commensurable one to another. It is true, there are Jews who are not Jews
inwardly, but only according to the letter, Romans 2.28, 29. And so there are
Christians, so called, who are but so outwardly, and in the letter, who have no
more of it but the name and vi^ible standing in the Church; but we are speaking
of that which is truly that which it is called, whose praise is not of men but
of God. The name of ^ man may be extended to a Picture or Image, for some
outward resemblance it has of him, but it is not a proper speech: no more is
it proper to extend the Name of Christians unto the Pictures or Images of
Christians, such as are destitute of this inward life. You may be properly,
according to Scripture Phrase, members of the visible body; but you cannot have
that real and blessed relation to Jesus Christ the Head, which shall be the
source of happiness to all the living members. I wish you would take it so,
and flatter your selves no more with Church-titles, as i^ these were sufficient
evidences for your salvation. You would all be called Christians, but it fears
me you know not many of you the true meaning and signification of that word,
the most comfortable sense of it is hid from you. The meaning of it is, That a
man is renewed by Christ in the spirit of his mind. As Christ and the Spirit
are inseparable, so a Christian and a spiritual nature are not to be ^ound
severed. Certainly, the very sound of the name whereby you are called, imports
another nature and conversation then is to be ^ound in many: You cannot say
that you have a shadow of spirituality, either in your affections or actions;
or that you have any real design and study that way, but only to please your
flesh, and satisfy the customs of the world: why do you then usurp the name
of Christianity? this is a common sacrilege, to give that which is holy unto
dogs. Others give it to you, and you take it to your selves. But know that
though you please your selves and others in this; yet without such a renovation
of your natures, and such a sincere study to be inwardly and outwardly
conformed to the profession and name of Christianity, you have not your praise
of God, and him whom God praises and allows not, he cannot bless for ever. I
am persuaded, there are some who are not only in the letter, but in the Spirit,
whose greatest desire and design is, To be indeed what they profess; and such
their praise is of God, and if God praise them now, they shall be made to
praise him for ever hereaf^er: such are allowed to take the name, and
honorable style of Christianity unto them: You are Christ's, nearly interessed
in him: and if you be Christ's own, he cannot be happy without you; for such was
his love, that he would not be happy alone in Heaven, but come down to be
miserable with us: and now that he is again happy in Heaven, certainly he
cannot enjoy it long alone, but he must draw up his members unto the fellowship
of that glory.

Now the other thing, that which gives even being to a Christian, is, The
Spirit of Christ dwelling in him. Of this inhabitation we shall not say so much
as the comparison, being strained, will yield, neither expatiat into many
notions about it: I wish rather we went home with some desires kindled in us,
after such a noble guest as the Holy Spirit is, and that we were begun once to
weary of ^he base and unclean guests that we lodge within us, to our own
destruction. That which I said, that the Spirit is to a Christian what the soul
is to a man, if well considered, might present the absolute necessity and the
excellency of this unto your eyes. Consider what a thing the body is without
the soul, how defiled and deformed a piece of dust it is, void of all sense and
life, loathsome to look upon. Truly the soul of man by nature is in no better
case, till this Spirit enter; it has no light in it, no life in it, it is a
dark dungeon, such as is described, Ephesians. 4.18. Having the understanding
darkened, being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that is in
them, because of the blindness of their hearts. You have both in that word,
d^rknesse and deadness, want of that shining light of God in the mind, ^o that
it cannot discern spiritual things, that makes to our eternal peace: all the
plainness and evidence of the Gospel, though it did shine as a Sun about you,
cannot make you see or apprehend either your own misery, or the way to help it;
because your dungeon is within: the most part cannot form any ^ensible notion
of spiritual things, that are daily sounding unto them in the Word. The eye of
the mind is put ou^, and if it be darkness, how great is that darkness?
Certainly the whole man is without light, and your way and walk must be in the
dark, and indeed it appears that it is dark night with many souls; because if
it were not dark, they could not run out all their speed among pits and snares,
in the way to destruction. And from this woeful defect, flows the alienation of
the whole soul from the life of God; that primitive light being eclipsed, the
soul is separated from the influence of Heaven: and as Nebuchadnezzars soul
acted only in a bruital way, when driven out amongst beasts; so the soul of
man, being driven out from the presence of the Lord, may act in a way common to
beasts, or in some rational way in things that concern this life, but it is
wholly spoiled of that divine life of communion with God: it cannot taste,
smell or savor such things. O if it were visible unto us, the state of the
ruinous soul, we would raise a more bitter lamentation over it, then the Jews
did over Jerusalem, or the Kings and Merchants have reason to do over fallen
Babylon! Truly, we might bemoan it thus, how is the faithful city become a
harlot, righteousness lodged in it, but now murderers, Isa. 1.21. Man was once
the dwelling place of princely and divine graces and ve^tues, the Lord himself
was there, and then how comely and beautiful was the soul! But now it is like
the desolate cities, in which the beasts of the desertly, and there houses are
full of doleful creatures, where Owls dwell, and Satyrs dance, where wild
beasts cry, and Dragons in the pleasant Palaces, Isa. 13.21, 22 and Ier. 50.39.
So mighty is the fall of the soul of man, as of Babylon, that it may be cried,
It is fallen, and become the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul
spirit, and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird, Rev. 18.2. All the beasts
flock now to it, all the birds of darkness take their lodging in it, since
this noble guest left it, and took away the light from it; for the Sun has not
shined on it since that day: All unclean affections, all beastly lusts, all
earthly desires, all vain cogitations, get lodging in this house, the Bethel is
become a Bethaven, the house of God become a house of vanity, by the continual
repair of vain thoughts: the house of prayer, is turned in a den of thieves and
robbers: that which was at first created for the pure service and worship of
God, is now a receptacle of all the rebellious and idolatrous thoughts and
affections: the heart of every man is become a Temple full of Idols.

This is the state of it, and worse then can be told you: Now judge if there be
not need of a better guest then these. O what absolute necessity is there of
such a Spirit as this, to repair and reform the ruinous spirit of man, to
quicken and enlighten the darkened mind of man! even that Spirit, that made it
at first a glorious Palace for God, that Spirit that breathed the soul into the
formed clay, must repair these breaches, and creat all again. Now when the
Spirit of Christ enters into this vile and ruinous cottage, he repairs it, and
reforms it, he strikes out lights in the heart, and by a wonderful eye salve,
makes the eyes open to see: He creats a new light within, which makes him
behold the light shining in the Gospel; and behold all things are new, himself,
new, because now most loath-some and vile; the world new, because now appears
nothing but vanity in the very perfection of it; and God new, because another
Majesty, glory, excellency and beauty shines into the soul, then ever it
apprehended. And as the Spirit enlightens, so He enlivens this Tabernacle or
Temple, He kindles a holy fire in his affections, which must never go out; it
is such as cannot be kindled i^ it go out, but by the beams of the Sun, as the
Poets fancied the Vestalfire. The spirit within the soul is a fire to consume
his corruption, to burn up his dross and vanity: Christ comes in like a
refiner, with the fire of the Spirit, and purges away earthly lusts, and makes
the love of the heart pure and clean, to burn upward toward Heaven. This Spirit
makes a Christian-soul move willingly toward God, in the ways that seemed most
unpleasant: It is an active principle within him that cannot rest, till it rest
in its place of eternal rest, and delight in God. And then the Spirit reforms
this house, by casting out all these wild beasts that lodged in it, these
savage and unruly affections that domineered in man: this strong man entering
in casts them out: there is much rubbish in old waste Palaces, Neb. 4.2. O how
much pains is it to cleanse them ^ our house is like the house of these Nobles,
Ier. 5.27. Full of deceit, as a cage is full of birds, and our heart full of
wickedness and vanity, Jer. 4.14. Certainly it will be much labor, to get
your unclean spirits cast out, that is the grosser and more palpable lusts,
that reign in you; but when these are gone forth, yet there is much wickedness
and uncleanness in the heart, of a more subtle nature, and by long in
dwelling almost incorporated and mingled with the soul; and this will not be
gotten out with gentle sweeping, as was done, Luke 11.25. that takes away only
the uppermost filth that lies loosest, but this must be gotten out by much
washing and cleansing; and therefore the Spirit enters by blood and water.
There are idols in the heart, to which the soul is much engaged, it unites and
closes with them, Ezekiel. 36. and these must be cleansed and washed out. There is
much deceit in the heart, and this lies clossest to it, and is engrossed into
it: and indeed this will take the help of fire to separate it; for that is of
the most active nature to separate things of a diverse nature: the Spirit must
by these take out your dross, and all this the Spirit will not do alone, but
honors you with the fellowship of this work; and therefore you must lay your
account, that the operation and reformation of this house, for so glorious a
Guest, will be laborious in the mean time: But O how infinitely is that
compensed! one hours fellowship with him alone, when all strangers are cast
out, will compense all, will make all to be forgotten; the pain of
mortification will be swallowed up in the pleasure of his inhabitation: When I
shall awake I shall be satisfied with thy likeness. When He shall take up house
fully in you, it will satisfy you to the full. In the mean time, as he takes
the rule and command of your house, so for the present he provides for it, the
provision of the soul is incumbent to this Divine Guest: and O how sweet and
satisfying is it! the peace and joy of the Holy Ghost, which are the
intertainment that he gives a soul, where he reigns, and has brought In
righteousness, Romans 14.17. What a noble train does the Spirit bring alongs
with him, to furnish this house? Many rich and costly ornaments hang over it,
and adorn it, to make it like the Kings Wise, all glorious within, such as the
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, 1 Pet. 3.4. which is a far more precious
and rich hanging, than the most curious or precious contexture of corruptible
things: the clothing of humility, simple in show; but rich in substance, 1
Pet. 5.5. which enriches and beautifies the soul that has it, more than all
Solomon's glory could do his person; for better is it to be of a humble spirit
with the lowly, then divide the spoil with the proud, Prove. 16.19. In a word,
the Spirit makes all new, puts a new man, a new fashion and Image on the soul,
which suits the Court of Heaven, the highest in the world; and is conformed to
the noblest and highest pattern, the Holiness and Beauty of the greatest King.
And being lodged within, O what sweet fruits is the Spirit daily bringing forth
to feed and delight the soul withal! Gal. 5.22, 23. And he is not only a
Spirit of Sanctification, but of Consolation too; and therefore of all, the
most worthy to be received into our hearts, for he is a bosome-comforter, Ioh.
14 16. when there is no friend nor lover without, but a soul in that posture of
Heman, Psalm. 88.18. and in that desolate estate of the Churches, Ierem. Lament.
1.2. Among all her lovers she has none to comfort her, verse. 17. Spreading
forth her hands, and none to comfort her, verse. 21. Sighing, and none to
comfort her: In such a case to have a living, and overrunning spring of
comfort within, when all external and lower consolations, like winter-brookes,
that dry up in summer, have dried up and disappointed thy expectation; sure
this were a happy guest, that could do this. O that we could open our hearts to
receive him!

SERMON XXV.
Romans 8.9. -- If so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man, etc.


THere is a great marriage spoken of, Ephesians. 5. That has a great mystery in it,
which the Apostle propounds as the samplar and archetype of all marriages, or
rather as the substance; of which all conjunctions and relations among the
creatures are bu^ the shaddows. It is that marriage between Christ and his
Church, for which it would appear this world was builded, to be a Palace to
celebrat it into; and especially the upper-house, Heaven, was made glorious for
that great day, where it shall be solemnized. The first, in order of time, that
was made by God himself in paradise, certainly to represent a higher mystery,
The marriage of the second Adam with his Spouse, which is taken out of his
bloody side, as the Apostle imports, Ephesians. 5. Now there is the greatest
inequality and disproportion between the parties, Christ and sinners; so that
it would seem a desperate matter, to bring two such distant and unequal natures
to such a near union, as may cast a copy to all unions and relations of the
creatures. But He, who at first, made a kind of marriage between Heaven and
Earth, in the composure of man, and joined together an immortal spirit in such
a bond of amity with corruptible dust, has found out the way to help this and
make it ^easable: And truly, we may conceive the Lord was but making way for
this greater mystery of the union of Christ with us, when he joined the breath
of Heaven with the dust of the earth: in this he gave some representation of
another more mysterious conjunction. Now, the way, that the wisdom and love of
God, has found out to bring about this marriage, is this, Because there was
such an infinite distance, between the only begotten Son of God, who is the
express character of his Image, and the brightness of his Glory, and Us sinful
mortal creatures, whose foundation is in the dust; therefore it pleased the
Father, out of His good will to the match, To send his Son down among men, and
the Son out of his love to take on our flesh, and so fill up that distance with
his low condescendence, to be partaker of flesh and blood with the children.
And now, what the Lord spoke of man fallen, in a holy kind of irony or mock,
Behold he is become as one of us, that men may truly say of the Son of God, not
fallen down from Heaven, but come down willingly, Lo he is become as one of us,
like us in all things, except sin, which has made us unlike our selves. This
bond of union, you have in the verse. 3. Christ so infinitely above sinners, and
higher then the Heavens, coming down so low, to be as like sinners as might be,
or could be profitable for us, in the li^eness of sinful flesh, etc. But yet
this bond is not near enough, that conjunction seems but general and infirm;
both because it is in some manner common to all mankind, who shall not be all
advanced to this privilege. By taking on our nature, he comes nearer to
humane nature, but not to some beyond others; and besides, the distance is not
filled up this way, because there is a great disproportion between that nature
in Christ, and in us: In Him, it is holy, and undefiled, and separated from
sin; but in Us, it is unclean and immersed into sin; so that albeit he be
nearer us, as a man; yet he is far distant and unlike us, a holy, perfect man:
Now, what fellowship can be between light and darkness? as Paul speaks of the
marriage of Christians with Idolaters: much greater distance and disagreement,
is between Christ and us. Therefore, it seems that some of us must be changed
and transformed: But Him it may not be, he cannot become liker us than by
partaking of our flesh; for if he had become a sinner indeed, he would have
become so like us, that he could not help himself nor us either: this would
eclipse the glory and happiness of the marriage: but in that he came as near as
could be, without disabling himself, to make us happy, and so he was contented
to come in the place of sinners, and take on their debt, and answer to Gods
Justice for it; yea, and in his own person, he submitted to be tempted to sin,
though it had been evil for us he had been overcome by it; yet this brings him
a step lower and nearer us, and makes the union more hopeful. But since he can
come no lower, and can be made no liker us in the case we are in; then
certainly (if the match hold) We must become liker him, and raised up out of
our miserable estate, to some suitableness to his holy Nature; and therefore
the love and wisdom of God, to fill up the distance completely, and effectuat
this happy conjunction, that the creation seems to groan for, ( for verse. 22.
the whole creation is pained till it be accomplished) he has sent his blessed
Spirit to dwell in Us, and to transform our natures, and make them partakers of
the divine nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. as Christ was partaker of humane nature: and
thus the distance shall be removed, when a blessed Spirit is made flesh, and a
fleshly man made spirit, then they are near the day of espousals: and this
indwelling of the spirit, is the last link of the chain, that fastens us to
Christ, and makes our flesh in some measure like His holy flesh. By taking on
our flesh, Christ became bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh: But the
union becomes mutual, when we receive the spirit; we become bone of His bone,
and flesh of His flesh, as it is expressed, Ephesians. 5.30. In allusion to the
creation of Eve, and her marriage to Adam: the ground of the marriage is, That
near bond of union, because she was taken out of man, and therefore because of
his flesh and bone, she was made one flesh with him; even ^o the sinner must be
partaker of the Spirit of Christ, as Christ is partaker of the flesh of
sinners: and these two concurring, these two knots interchanging and woven
through other, we become one flesh with him. And this is a great mystery indeed,
to bring two, who were so far assunder, so near other. Yea, it is nearer then
that too; for we are said, not only to be one flesh with Christ, but one
spirit, 1 Cor. 6.17. He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit; because he is
animated and quickened, by one Spirit, that same Spirit of Christ: and indeed
spirits are more capable of union, and more fit to embosome one with another,
then bodies; therefore the nearest union conceivable, is the union of spirits
by affection: this makes two souls one; for it transports their spirit out of
the body, where it lives, and setleth it there where it loves.

Now, my beloved, you see what way this great marriage, that heaven and earth
are in a longing expectation after, shall be brought about. Christ he did
forsake his Fathers house, when he lest that holy habitation, his Fathers
bosom, a place of mavelous delight, Prove. 8.30. And descended into the
lowest parts of the earth, Ephesians. 4.9. And, He came out from the Father into the
world, John 16.28. This was a great journey to meet with poor sinners. But,
that there may be a full and entire meeting, you must leave and forsake your
fathers house too; and forget your own people, Psalm. 45.10. You must give an
entire renounce to all former lovers, if you would be His; all former bonds and
engagments must be broken, that this may be tied the faster: And to hold to the
subject in hand, you must forsake and forget the flesh, and be possessed of his
holy Spirit: as he came down to our flesh, you must rise up to meet him in the
Spirit: the Spirit of Christ must indeed prevent you, and take you out of that
natural posture you are born into, and bring you a great journey from your
selves, that you may be joined unto Him.

This Spirit of Christ is his messenger and ambassador, sent beforehand to
fit you, and suit you for the day of Espousals; and therefore he must have a
dwelling, and constant abode in you. This indwelling, imports A special
familiar operation, and the perpetuity or continuance of it. The Spirit is
every where in his being, and he works every where too; but here he has a
special and peculiar work in commission, To reveal the love of God in Christ,
to engage the soul to love him again, to prepare all within for the great day
of Espousals, to purify and purge the heart from all that is displeasing to
Christ, to correspond between Christ and his Spouse, between Heaven and Earth,
by making intercession for her when she cannot pray for her self, as you find
here, verse. 26. and so sending up the news of the souls panting and breathing
after Christ, sending up her love, groans and sighs to her beloved, giving
intelligence of all her necessities to Him, who is above, in the place of an
Advocat and Interceeder; and then bringing back from Heaven light, and life,
direction from her Head (for the Spirit must lead in all truth) and
consolation, for Christ has appointed the spirit, to supply his absence, and
to comfort the soul in the mean time till he come again: you have this mutual
and reciprocal knot in 1 Ioh. 4.13. Hereby we know that we dwell in him, and he
in us, by the spirit that he has given. It is much nearness to dwell one with
another, but much greater, to dwell one in another: and its reciprocal, such a
wonderful interchange in it, we in him, and he in us: for the Spirit carries
the soul to Heaven, and brings Christ, as it were, down to the earth: He is the
Messenger that carries Letters between both: our prayers to Him, and His
prayers for us, and love tokens to us, the anointing that teaches us all
things, from our husband, 1 Ioh. 2.27. and revealing to us the things of God, 1
Cor. 2.12. giving us the first fruits of that happy and glorious communion we
must have with Christ in Heaven, as you see, ver. 23. of this chap. and sealing
us to the day of redemption, Ephesians 1.13. and 4.30. Supplying us with divine power
against our spiritual enemies, fetching alongs from Heaven that strength
whereby our Lord and Savior overcame all, Ephesians. 3.16. Gal. 5.17. This is a
presence that few have, such a familiar and love-abode: But certainly, all that
are Christ's, must have it in some measure: Now, whosoever has it, its
perpetual, the Spirit dwells in them: Its not a sojourning for a season, not a
lodging for a night, as some have fits and starts of seeking God, and some
transient motions of conviction or joy, but return again to the puddle: these
go through them as lightning, and do not warm them, or change them; but this is
a constant residence; where the Spirit takes up house he will dwell, he
dwells with you, and shall be in you, and abide for ever, Joh. 14.16, 17. If
the Son abide in the house for ever, Joh. 8.35. much more the master of the
house must abide. Now the Spirit where he dwells, has gotten the command of
that house: all the power is put in his hand, and resigned to him; for where he
dwells, he must rule, as good reason is, He is about the greatest work that is
now to do in the world, the repairing and renewing of the ruins and breaches
of man's spirit, which was the first breach in the Creation, and the cause of
all the rest: He is about the cleansing and washing this Temple, and we may be
persuaded that he who has begun this good work, will perform it until the day
of Christ, till we be presented blameless and without spot to our husband,
Phil. 1.5, 6. and this is the grand con^olation of believers, that they have
this presence assured to them by promise; that the Spirit is fixed here by an
irreovcable and unchangeable Covenant or donation, and will not wholly depart
from them, though he may withdraw and leave you comfortless ^or a season, Isa.
59.21.

Therefore I would shut up all in a word of exhortation to you, that since we
have the promise of so noble and happy a guest, you would apply your selves to
seek him, and then keep him; to receive him, and then retain him. It is true
that he must first prevent u^; for as no man can say that Jesus is the Christ,
but by the Spirit of God, so no man can indeed p^ay for the Spirit, but by the
Spirits own intercession within him. Where God has bestowed any thing of this
Spirit, it is known by the kindly and fervent desires after more of it. Now,
since we have such a la^ge and ample promise, Ezekiel. 36.27. Joel 2.28. of the
pouring out of the Spirit, and that in as absolute and free a manner as can be
imagined; and this renewed by Christ, and confirmed by his Prayer to the Father
for the performance of it, Ioh. 14.16, 17. and then we have a sweet and
affectionat promise propounded in the most moving and loving manner that can
be, Luke 11.13. where he encourages us to pray for the Spirit, and that from
this ground, that our Heavenly Father who placed that natural affection in
other fathers toward their children, whereby they cannot refuse them bread
when they cry for it: He who was the Author of all natural affection; must
certainly transcend them infinitely in his love to his child^en as the Psalmist
argues, Shall not he that planted the ear, hear, and he that formed the eye,
see? So may a poor soul reason it self to some confidence, Shall not He who is
the ^ountain of all natural love in men and beasts, have much more Himself, and
if my ^ather will not give me a stone when I seek bread, certainly he will far
less do it? Therefore if we being evil, know how to give good things to our
chilren, how much more shall our Heavenly Father give his Spirit to them that
ask him. Alas that we should want such a gift for not asking it! my beloved,
let us enlarge our desires for this Spirit and seek more earnestly; and no
doubt affection, and importunity will not be sent away empty. Is it any wonder
we receive not, because we ask not, or we ask so coldly, that we teach him in a
manner to deny us, qui ti^ide rogat, I may say frigide; docet negare, ask
frequently, and ask confidently, and His heart cannot deny. O that we could lay
this ing^gement on our own hearts, to be more in Prayer! Let (...) press our
selves to this, and we need not press Him; albeit the first grace be wholly a
surprisal, yet certainly he keeps this suitable method in the enlargements of
grace, that when he gives more, He enlarges the heart more after it, He
opens the mouth wider to ask and receive, and according to that capacity, so
is His hand opened to fill the heart. O, why are our hearts shut, when his hand
is open! Again, I would exhort you in Jesus Christ, to intertain the Spirit
suitably, and this shall keep Him. To this purpose are these exhortations,
Grieve not the Spirit, Ephesians. 4.30. and quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5.19.
There is nothing can grieve Him, but sin: and if you intertain that, you cannot
retain Him. He is a Spirit of holiness, and He is about the making you holy;
then do not mar him in his work, labor to advance this, and you do him a
pleasure. If you make his holy Temple an unclean cage for hateful birds, or a
Temple for Idols, how can it but grieve him? and if you grieve the Spirit,
certainly the Spirit will grieve you, will make you repent it at the heart.
Please him, by hea^kning to his motions, and following his direction, and he
shall comfort you: His office is to be a spring of consolation to you; but if
you grieve him, by walking in the imagination of your hearts, and following the
suggestions of the Flesh, His enemy, no doubt that spring will turn its channel
another way; and dry up for a season toward you. It is not every sin or
infirmity that grieves Him thus, if so be that it grieve thee; but the
intertaining of any sin, and m^king peace with any of his enemies, that cannot
but displease Him: and O what loss you have by it! You displease your greatest
friend, to please your greatest enemy: you blot and bludder that seal of the
Spirit, that you shall not be able to read it, till it be cleansed and washed
again. Now, if any man have not this Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, he is
not a Christian: take this alongs with you, who aim at nothing but the external
and outward show, or visible standing in the Church: if you have not this
Spirit, and the seal of this Spirit found on you, Christ will not know you for
his in that day of his appearing.

SERMON XXVI.
Romans 8.10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, etc.


GODS presence is his working: his presence in a soul by his Spirit, is his
working in such a soul in some special manner, not common to all men, but
peculiar to them whom he has chosen. Now his dwelling is nothing else, but a
continued, familiar and endless working in a soul, till he have conformed all
within to the Image of His Son. The soul is the office-house, or workhouse
that the Spirit has taken up, to ^rame in it the most curious piece of the
whole Creation, even to restore and repair that Masterpiece which came last
from Gods hand, ab ultima manu, and so was the chiefest, I mean, the Image of
God, in righteousness and holiness. Now, this is the bond of union between God
and us: Christ is the bond of union with God, but the Spirit is the bond of
union with Christ. Christ is the peace between God and us, that makes of two
one, but the Spirit is the link between Christ and us, whereby he has immediate
and actual interest in us, and we in Him. I find the union between Christ and a
soul shadowed out in Scripture, by the nearest relations among creatures, (for
truly these are but shadows, and that is the body or substance) and because an
union that is mutual, is nearest, it is often so expressed, as it imports an
interchangeable relation, a reciprocal conjunction with Christ. The knot is
cast on both sides to make it strong, Christ in us, and we in him: God dwelling
in us, and we in Him: and both by this one Spirit, 1 John 4.13. Hereby we know
that God dwells in us, and we in him, by his Spirit which he has given us.
You find it often in John, who being most possessed with the love of Christ,
and most sensible of his love, could best express it: I in them, and they in
me: He that keeps his commands dwells in Him, and he in Him; as the names
of married persons are spelled through other, so does he spell out this
in-dwelling: its not cohabitation, but inhabitation; neither that alone
singlely, but mutual inhabitation, which amounts to a kind of Penetration, the
most intimat, and immediate presence imaginable. Christ ^welleth in our hearts
by faith: and we dwell in Christ by love, Ephesians. 17. and 1 John 4. Death brings
him into the heart; for it is the very ^pplication of a Savior to a sinful
soul. It is the very applying of his blood and sufferings to the wound that sin
has made in the conscience: the laying of that sacrifice propitiatory to the
wounded conscience, is that which heals it, pacifies it, and calms it. A
Christian by receiving the offer of the Gospel cordially and affectionatly,
brings in Christ offered into his house, and then salvation comes with him.
Therefore, believing is receiving, John. 1. the very opening of the heart, to
let in an offered Savior; and then Christ thus possessing the heart by faith.
He works by love, and he that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in
him. Love has this special virtue in it, that it transports the soul, in a
manner, out of it self, to the beloved: Cant. 1.9. anima est ubi amat non ubi
animat: the fixing and establishing of the heart on God, is a dwelling in Him;
for the constant and most continued residence of the most serious thoughts and
a^fections, will be their dwelling in the all fullness and riches of grace in
Jesus Christ: as the spirit dwells where he works, so the soul dwells
where it delights: its complacency in God, makes a frequent issue or
outgoing to Him in desires and breathings after Him: And by means of this same,
God dwells in the heart: for love is the opening up of the inmost chamber of
the heart to Him, it brings in the beloved in to the very secrets of the soul,
to lie all night betwixt His breasts, as a bundle of myrrh. Cant. 1.13. And
indeed all the sweet odours of holy duties, and all the performing of good
works, and edifying speeches, spring out only, and are sent forth from this
bundle of myrrh that lies betwixt the breasts of a Christian, in the inmost of
his heart, from Christ dwelling in the affections of the soul.

Now, this being the bond of union betwixt Christ and us, it follows
necessarily that whoever has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of His, and
this is subjoyned for prevention or removal of the misapprehensions and
delusions of men in their self-judgings* Because self-love blinds our eyes, and
makes our hearts deceive themselves: we are given to this self-flattery, to
pretend and claim to an interest in Jesus Christ, even though there be no more
evidence for it, then the external relation that we have to Christ, as members
of his visible body, or partakers of a common influence of his Spirit. There
are some external bonds and ties to Christ, which are like a knot that may
easily be loosed if any thing get hold of the end of it, as by our relations to
Christ by baptism, hearing the word, your outward covenanting to be his
people: all these are loose unsure knots: It is as easy to untie them, as to
tie them, yea, and more easy; and yet many have no other relation to Christ
then what these make. But it is only the Spirit of Christ given to us that
intitles and interesseth us in Him, and Him in us; its the Spirit working in
your souls mightily and continually, making your hearts temples, for the
offering of the sacrifice of prayer and praises, casting out all idols out of
these temples, that He alone may be adored and worshipped, by the affectionate
service of the heart, purging them from all filthiness of flesh and spirit; It
is the Spirit, I say, thus dwelling in men, that makes them living members of
the true body of Christ, lively joined to the head, Christ, this makes him
yours, and you his: by virtue of this He may command you as His own, and you
may use and employ Him as your own. Now, for want of this in most part of men,
they also want this living, saving-interest in Christ: they have no real, but
an imaginary and notional propriety and right to the Lord Jesus; for Christ
must first take possession of us by His Spirit, before we have any true right
to Him, or can willingly resign our selves to Him, and give Him right over us.
What shall it profit us, my beloved, to be called Christians, and to esteem
our selves so, if really we be none of Christ's? shall it not highten our
condemnation, so much the more, that we desire to pass for such, and give out
our selves so; and yet have no inward aquaintance and interest in Him, whose
name we love to bear? Are not the most part shadows and pictures of true
Christians, bodies without the soul of Christianity, that is, the Spirit of
Christ, whose hearts are treasures of wickedness and deceit, and stor^-houses
of iniquity and ignorance. It may be known what treasure fills the heart, by
that which is the constant and common vent of it, as our Savior speaks, Matthew
15.19. and 12.34, 35. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, the
feet walks, and the hand works: Consider then, if the Spirit of God dwells in
such unclean habitations and dark dungeons, certainly no uncleanness or
darkness of the house can hinder him to come in; but ^t is a sure argument and
evidence That he is not as yet come in, because the Prince of darkness is not
yet cast out of many souls, nor yet the unclean spirits that lodge within:
these haunt your hearts, and are as familiar now as ever. Sure I am, many souls
have never yet changed their guests, and it is as sure that the first guest
that takes up the soul, i^ darkness and desperate wickedness with imparalelled
deceitfulness: there is an accur^ed trinity, in stead of that blessed T^inity,
the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit; and when this holy T^inity comes in
to dwell, that other of Hell must go out. Now, my beloved, do you think this a
light matter, To be disowned by Jesus Christ: Truly, the word of Christ, which
is the character of all our evidences and rights for Heaven, disowns many, as
bastards and dead members, withered branches; and certainly, according to this
word He will judge you: the word that I have spoken shall judge you in the last
day: O that is a heavy word! you have the very rule and method of proceeding
laid down before you, now which shall be punctually kept at that great day:
Now, why do you not read your ditty and condemnatory sentence here registered?
If you do not read it now, in your consciences, he will one day read it before
men and Angels, and pronounce this, I know you not for mine, you are none of
mine. But if you would now take it to your hearts, there might be hope that it
should go no further, and come to no more public hearing: there were hope that
it should be repealed before that day, because the first entry of the Spirit of
Christ, is, to convince men of sin, that they are unbelievers, and without God
in the world: and if this were done, then it were more easy to convince you of
Christ's righteousness, and persuade you to embrace it; and this would lead in
another link of the chain, the conviction of judgment, to persuade you to
resign your selves to the Spirits rule, and renounce the kingdom of Satan: this
were another trinity, a trinity upon earth, three bearing witness on the earth
that you have the Spirit of God.

Verse. 10. All the preceding verses seem to be purposly set down by the
Apostle, for the comfort o^ Christians, against the remnants of sin and
corruption within them; ^or in the preceding Chapter, he person^^^ the whole
body of Christ militant, showing in his own ex^mple how much sin r^mains in ^he
^^lie^t in this life, and this he rather instances in his own person then
another, that all may know that matter of continual sorrow and lamentation is
furnished to the chiefest of Saints; and yet in this chapter, he propounds the
consolation of Christ^^ns more generally, that all may know, That these
privileges and immunities belong even to the meanest and weakest of
Christians; that as the best have reason to mourn in themselves, so the worst
want not reason to rejoice in Jesus Christ. And this would always be minded,
that the ^mplest grounds of strongest consolation are general to all that come
indeed to Jesus Christ, and are not restricted unto Saints of such and such a
grouth and stature: the common principles of the Gospel are more full of this
milk of consolation, if you would suck it out of them, then many particular
grounds which you are laying down for your selves. God has so disposed and
contrived the work of our s^lvation, that in this life, he that has gath^red
much, in some respect, has nothing over, that is to say, has no more reason
to boast then another; but will be constrained to sit down and mourn over his
own evil heart, and the emptiness of it; and he that has gathered less, has
in some sense no want: I mean, he is not excluded and shut out from the right
to these glorious privileges, which may express gloriation and rejoicing from
the heart: that there might be an equality in the body, he makes the stronger
Christian to partake with the weaker in his bitter things, and the weaker with
the stronger in his sweet things; that none of them may conceive themselves
either despised, or alone regarded; that the Eunuoh may not have reason to say,
I am a dry tree, Isa. 56.3. For, behold the Lord will give, even to such, a
place in his house and a name, better then of sons and daughters. The soul that
is in sincerity aming at this walk, and whose inward de^ires ^^irrs after more
of this holy Spirit, he will not refuse to such, that name and esteem, that
they dare not take to themselves, because of their seen and sel^ unworthiness.
Now, in thi^ verse. he proceeds further, to the fruits and effects of sin
dwelling in us, to enlarge the consolation against that too. Now, if Christ be
in you, the body, etc. Seeing the word of God has made such a connection
between ^in and death, and death is the wages of sin, and that which is ^he
(...) compence of enmity and rebellion against God, the poor t^oubled soul
might be ready to conceive, That is the body be adjudged to death for sin, that
^he rest of the wages shall be paid, and sin havi^g so much dominion as to
kill the body that it should exerce its full power to destroy all; seeing we
have a visible character of the curse of God engraven on us in the mortality of
our bodies: it may look with such a visage on a soul troubled for sin, as if it
were but earnest of the full curse and weight of wrath, and that sin were not
fully satisfied for, nor Justice fully contented by Christ's ransom. Now, he
opposes to this misconception, the strongest ground of consolation, If Christ
be in you, though your bodies must die for sin, because sin dwells in them,
yet that spirit of life that is in you, has begun eternal life in your soul^:
your spi^its are not only immortal in being, but that eternal happy being is
begun in you; the seeds of it are cast into your souls, and shall certainly
grow up to perfection of holiness and happiness, and this through the
righteousness of Christ, which assures that state unto you: The comfort is,
it is neither total, for it is only the death of your body; nor is it
perpetual, for your bodies shall be raised again to life eternal, verse. 11. And
not only is it only part, and for a season, but it is for a blessed end and
purpose, it is that sin may be wholly cleansed out, that this tabernacle is
taken down: as the ^eprous houses were to be taken down under the Law, and as
now we use to cast down Pest-lodges, the better to cleanse them of the
infection: It is not to prejudge him of life, but to install him in a better
life. Thus you see that it is neither total nor perpetual, but it is medicinal
and profitable to the soul: it is but the death of the body for a moment, and
the life of the soul for ever.

SERMON XXVII.
Romans 8.10. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, etc.


THis is the high excellency of Christian Religion, that it contains the most
absolute precepts for an holy life; and the greatest comforts in death: for
from the^e two, the truth and excellency of Religion is to be measured: if it
have the highest and perfectest rule of walking, and the chiefest comfort
withal. Now, the perfection of Christianity you saw in the rule, how spiritual
it is? how reasonable? how divine? how free from all corrupt mixture? how
transcending all the most exqui^ite precepts and laws of men, deriving a holy
conver^ation from the highest fountain, the Spirit of Christ, and conforming it
to the highest pattern, the will of God. And indeed in the first word of this
verse. there is something of the excellent nature of Christianity holden out, If
Christ be in you, which is the true description of a Christian, one in whom
Christ is, which imports The divine principle, and the spiritual subject of
Chri^tianity. The principle is Christ in a man, Christ by His Spirit dwelling
in him. This great Apost^e knew thi^ well in his own experience, and therefore
he can speak best in this style, I live, yet not I, bu^ Christ in me, Gal.
2.20. Importing that Christ and His Spirit is to the soul, what the soul is to
the body: that there is a living influence from Heaven, that acts and moves the
soul of a Christian as powerfully, yet as sweetly and pleasantly, as if it were
the natural motion of the soul: and truly it is the natural motion of the soul,
its that primitive life which was most connatural to the soul of man, which sin
did deprive us of: all the powerful constraint and violence that Christ uses in
drawing the souls of men to him, and after him, is as kindly unto them, and
perfects them as much, as that impulse by which the soul moves and turns the
body: a sweet compu^^ion, and blessed violence! Now this should make Christians
often to reflect upon another principle of their life then themselves, that by
looking on Him who is the resurrection and the life, who is the true Vine, and
abiding in Him by faith, their life may be continued and inc^eased. It is
certainly much reflection on Him who is all in all; and less upon our selv^s,
that maintains this life: and therefore, the most part of men being wholly
strangers to this, whether in their purposes, or practices, or judgings of
both, unacquainted with any higher look in Religion, then they use in their
natural and civil actings, it does give ground to assure us that they are
strangers, alienated from the life of God, without God and without Christ in
the world.

But then, the spiritual subject of Christianity is here: Christ in you, not
Christ without you, in ordinances, in profession, in some civil ^arriage; but
Christ within the heart of a man, that as a Christian: It is the receiving of
Christ into the soul, and putting Him on upon the inner man, and renewing it,
that makes a Christian; not being externally clothed with him, or compassed
about with him in the administration of the Ordinances: It fears me, most part
of us who bear that name of Christianity, have no character of it within, if we
were looked and searched. Many are like the sepulchers Christ speaks of,
without painted and fair, within nothing but rottenness and dead bones. What
have many of you more o^ Christ, then what a blind man has of light? it is
round about him, but not within him. The light has shined in darkness, but
your darkness cannot comprehend it: You are environed with the outward
appearances of Christ in his Word and Ordinances, and that is all; but neither
within you, nor upon many of you, is there any thing either of his light or
life? not so much as any outward profession or behavior, suitable to the
revelation of Christ about you: as if you were ashamed to be Christians, you
maintain gross ignorance, and practice manifest ^ebellion against his known
will, in the very light of the Gospel. How few have so much tincture of Christ,
so much as to color the external man, or to cloth it with any blamelessness
of walking, or form of Religion? How few so much as Christians in the Letter?
for you are not acquainted either with Letter or Spirit, either with knowledge,
or affection, or practice. But suppose that some have put on Christ on their
outward man, and color over themselves with some performances of religious
duties, and smooth themselves with civility in carriage; yet alas! How few are
they who are renewed in the spirit of their mind, and have put Christ on their
inward man, who have opened the secrets of their hearts, and received him to ly
all night between their breasts? How ^ew are busied about their hearts, to have
any new impression and dye upon their affections, to mould them after a new
manner, to kill the love of this world, and the lusts of it, and cast out the
rottenness and superfluity of naughtiness which ^bides within? But some there
are, who are pe^swaded thus to do, to give up their spirits to Religion, and
all their business and care is, To have Christ within, as well as without. Now,
if the ^est of you will not be persuaded to be of this number, consider what
you pre-judge your selves of, of all the comfort of Religion; and then Religion
is no Religion, and to no purpose, if you have no benefit by it. And certainly,
except Christ be in you, as a King to rule you, and a Prophet to teach you, to
subdue your lusts, and to dispel your darkness, when he appears he cannot
appear to your comfort and salvation: You are deprived of this great cordial
against death, death must seize upon all that is within you, soul and body,
since Christ the Spirit of life is not within you. Happiness without you, will
not make you happy: salvation round about you, will not save you: If you would
be saved, there must be a near and immediate union with happiness, Christ in
the heart, and salvation comes with him. A Christian is not only Christ
without, not imputing his sins to him, clothing him with His righteousness;
but Christ within too, cleansing the heart from the love of sin, perfecting
holiness in the fear of God. Do not think you have any share in Christ without
you, except you receive Christ within you; because Christ is one within, and
without, and His gifts are undivided. Therefore true ^aith receives whole
Christ, as a complete Savior; even as He is entirely offered, so He is
undividedly received: as He is without, saving us, and within, sanctifying us,
Christ without, delivering from wrath, and Christ within, redeeming from all
iniquity, these cannot be parted more then His coat that had no seam. It is a
heavy and weighty word of this Apostles, 2 Cor. 13.5. examine your selves,
whether ye be in the faith: know ye not your selves, that Christ is in you,
except you be reprobates? I wish ye would lay it to heart, who have never yet
returned to your hearts: If Christ be not formed in you, as Gal. 4.19. You are
as yet among the refuse, dr^sse, and that which must be burnt with fire: you
cannot but be cast away in the day when he makes up his jewels. Where Christ
is, He is the hope of glory, he is an immortal seed of glory. How can you hope
for Christ, who have nothing of Him within you?

Now the other touchstone of true Religion, is, the great comfort it furnishes
to the soul: And of all comforts the greatest is that which is a cordial to the
heart, against the greatest fears and evils. Now, certainly the matter of
greatest fear is death, not so much because of it self, but chiefly because of
that eternity of unchangeable misery, that naturally it transmitts them unto.
Now, it is only Christian Religion possessing the heart, that a^mes a man
completely against the fear either of death it self, or the consequents of it:
it gives the most powerful consolation, that not only overcomes the
bitterness, and takes out the sting of death, but changes the nature of it,
so far as to make it the matter of triumph and gloriation.

There is something here supposed, the worst that can befall a Christian, it is
the death of a part of him, and that the worst and ignoblest part only, the
body is dead because of sin. Then, that which is opposed by way o^ comfort to
counterballance it, is, the life of his better and more noble part. And besides
we have the founta^ns both of that death and this life, man's sin the cause of
bodily death, Christ's righteousness the fountain of spiritual life.

Of death many have had sweet meditations, even among these that the light of
the Word has not shined upon: and indeed they may make us ashamed who prosesse
Christianity, and so the hope of the resurrection from the dead, that they have
accounted it only true wisdom and sound Philosophy, To meditat often on death;
and made it the very principal point of living well, To be always learning to
die; and have applied their whole studies that way, neglecting present things
that are in the by, have given themselves to search out some comfort against
death, or from death. Yea, some have so profited in this, that they have
accounted death the greatest good that can befall man, and persuaded others to
think so. Now, what may we think of our selves, who scarce apprehend mortality,
especially considering that we have the true fountain of it revealed to us, and
the true nature and consequents of it.

All men must needs know that death is the most universal King in the world,
that it reigns over all ages, sexes, conditions, nations, and times: though few
be willing to entertain thoughts of it; yet sooner or later they must be
constrained to give it lodging upon their eye lids, and suffer it to storm the
very strongest tower, the heart, and ba^^er it down, and break the strings of
it, having no way either to flee from it, or resist it. Now, the consideration
of the general inundation of death over all mankind, an^ the certain
appro^ching of it to every particular man's door, has made many serious
thoughts among the wise men of the world. But being destitute of this heavenly
light that ^hineth to us, they could not attain to the original of it; but have
conceived that it was a common tribute of nature, and an universal Law imposed
upon all mankind by nature, having the same reason that other m^tations and
changes among the creatures here below have; and ^o have thought it no more
strange thing then to see other things dissolved in their elements. Now indeed,
seeing they could apprehend no other bitter ingredient in it, it was no wonder
that the wisest of them could not fear it, but rather wait and expect it as a
rest from their labors, as the end of all their miseries.

But the Lord has revealed unto us in his Word, the true cause of it, and so
the true nature of it. The true cause of it is sin, sin entered into the world,
and death past upon all, for that, all have sinned, Romans 5.12. Man was created
for another purpose, and upon other conditions, and a Law of perpetual life and
eternal happiness was past in his ^avours, he abiding in the favor, and
obeying the will, of Him that gave him life and being. Now, sin inte^posing,
and separating between man and God, loosing that blessed knot of union and
communion, it was this other law that succeeded, as a suitable recompense, Thou
shall die: It is resolved in the Council of Heaven, That the union of man shall
be dissolved, his soul and body separated, in just recompense of the breaking
the bond of union with God. This is it that has opened the sluice, to let in an
inundation of misery on mankind: this was the just occasion of that righteous,
but terrible appointment, It is appointed that all men once should die, and
after death comes to Judgment, Heb. 9.27. That since the body had enticed the
soul, and suggested unto it such unnatural and rebellious motions of
withdrawing from the blessed fountain of life, to satisfy its pleasure, the
body should be under a sentence of deprivement and ^orfeitour of that great
benefit and privilege of life it had by the souls indwelling, and condemned
to return to its first base original, the dust, and to be made a feast of
worms, to lodge in the grave, and be a subject of the greatest corruption and
rottenness; because it became the instrument, yea, the incitement of the soul
to sin against that God that had from Heaven breathed a spirit into it, and
exalted it above all the dust or clay in the world. Now, my beloved, do we not
get many remembrances of our sin? Is not every day presenting our primitive
departure from God, our first separation from the fountain of life by sin, to
our view, and in such sad and woeful effects pointing out the heinousness of
sin? Do you not see men's bodies every day dissolved, the tabernacle of earth
taken down, and the soul constrained to remove out of it? But what influence
has it upon ^s, what do the multiplied funerals work upon us? It may b^,
sorrow for our friends, but little or no apprehension of our own mortality, and
base impression of sin, that separats our souls from God. Who is made sadly to
reflect upon his original, or to mind seriously that statute and appointment of
Heaven, in that day thou shall die? It is strange that all of us fear death,
and few are afraid of sin that carries death in its bosom. That we are so
unwilling to re^p corruption in our bodies, and yet we ^re so earnest and
l^borious in sowing to the flesh. Be not deceived, for you are daily reaping
what you have sown: And O that it were all the harvest! but death is only the
putting in of the sickle of vengeance, the first cut of it: But O to think on
what follows, would certainly restrain men, and cool them in their fervent
pursuits after sin!

SERMON XXVIII.
Romans 8.10. -- The body is dead because of sin: but the Spirit is life because
of righteousness.


THE sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, says our
Apostle, 1 Cor. 15.56. These two concur to make man mortal, and these two are
the bitter ingredients of death. Sin procured it, and the Law appointed it: And
God has seen to the ex^ct execution of that Law in all ages; for what man
lives and shall not taste of death? Two only e^caped the common lot. Enoch and
Elias; for they pleased God, and God took them: and besides, it was for a
pledge, that at the last day all shall not die but be changed. The true cause
of death is sin, and the true nature of it is penal, to be a punishment of sin:
take away this relation to sin, and death wants the sting. But in it^ first
appointment, and as it prevails generally over men, a^ulea^a est mors, it has
a sting that pierces deeper, and wounds so^er then to the dissolution of the
body, it goes in to the innermost pa^^s of the soul, and w^undeth that
eternally. The truth is, the death of the body is not either the first death,
or the last death: it is rather placed in the middle between two deaths: and
its the fruit of the first, and the root of the last. There is a death
immediately has ensued upon sin, and it is the separation of the soul from God
the fountain of life and blessedness: and this is the death often spoken of,
you who were dead in sins and trespasses, etc. Ephesians. 2.1 Being past feeling, and
alienated from the life of God, Ephesians. 4.18, 19. And truly this is worse in it
^elf then the death of the body simply, though not so sensible, because
^piritu^l: the corruption of the best p^^t in man, in all reason is worse then
the corruption of his worst part: but this death which consists especially in
the loss of that blessed communion with God, which made the soul happy, cannot
be found till some new life enter, or else till the last death come, which adds
infinite pain to infinite loss. Now the death of the body succeeds thi^ souls
death, and that is the separation of the soul from the body, most suitable,
seeing the soul was turned from the fountain spirit to the body, that the body
should by his command return to dust, and be made the most defi^ed piece of
dust. Now this were not so grievous, if it were not a step to the death to
come, and a degree of it, introductive to it. But that statute and appointment
of Heaven has thus linked it, after death comes Judgment: Because the soul in
the body would not be sensible of its separation from God, but was wholly taken
up with the body, neglecting and miskenning that infinite loss of Gods favor
and face; therefore the Lord commands it to go out of the body, that it maythen
be sensible of its infinite loss of God, when it is separated from the body;
that it may then have leisure to reflect upon it self, and find its own
surpassing misery; and then indeed infinite pain and infinite loss conjoined,
eternal banishment from the presence of that blessed Spirit, and eternal
torment within it self, these two concurring, what posture do you think such a
soul will be into? There are some earnest of this in this life, when God
reveals his terror, and sets men's sins in order before their face, O how
intolerable is it! and more insupportable then many deaths. They that have been
accquainted with it, have declared it, the terrors of God are like poysonable
arrows sunk into Jobs spirit, and drinking up all the moisture of them. Such a
spirit as is wounded with one of these darts shot from Heaven, who can bear it?
not the most patient and most magnanimous spirit, that can sustain all other
infi^mities, Prove. 18.14. Now, my beloved, if it be so now, while the soul is
in the body, drowned in it, what will be the case of the soul separated from
the body, when it shall be all one sense to reflect and consider it self.

This is the sting of death indeed, worse then a thousand deaths, to a soul
that apprehends it; and the less it is apprehended, the worse it is; because
it is the more certain and must shortly be found, when there is no brazen
serpent to heal that sting. Now, what comfort have you provided against this
day? what way do you think to take out this sting? Truly, there is no balm for
it, no Physician for it, but one; and that the Christian is only acquainted
with: He in whom Christ is, he has this sovereign antidot against the p^yson
of Death, he has the very sting of it taken out by Ch^^st, death it self
killed, and of an mortal enemy made the kindest friend. And so he may triumph
with the Apostle, O death, where is thy sting, O grave, where is thy victory!
Thanks be to God in Jesus Christ who gives us the victory, 1 Cor. 15.55. The
ground of his triumph, and that which a Christian has to oppose to all the
sorrows and pains and fears of death mustred against him, is threefold, one,
that death is not real, a second, that is not total; even that which is, and
then that it is not perpetual. This last is contained in the next verse. the
second expressed in this verse. and the first may be understood or employed in
it. That the nature of death is so far changed, that of a punishment it is
become a medicine, of a punishment for sin, it is turned into the last
purgative of the soul from sin; and thus the sting of it is taken away, that
relation it did bear to the just wrath of God. And now the body of a Christian
under appointment to die for sin, that is, for the death of sin, the eternal
death of sin. Christ having come under the power of death, has gotten power
over it, and spoiled it of its stinging virtue, he has taken away the
poysonable ingredient of the curse, that it can no more hurt them that are in
Him, and so it is not now vested with that piercing and wounding notion of
punishment: though it be true that sin was the first in-lett of death, that it
first opened the sl^ue to let it enter and flow in upon mankind; yet that
appointment of death is renewed, and bears a relation to the destruction of
sin, rather then the punishment of the sinner, who is f`orgiven in Christ: And
O how much solid comfort is here! that the great reason of mortality that a
Christian it subject unto, is that he may be made free of that which made him
at first mortal. Because sin has taken such possession in this earthly
tabernacle, and is so strong a poison, that it has infected all the members,
and by no purgation here made can be fully cleansed ^ut, but there are many
secret corners it lurks into, and upon occasion vents it self: therefore it
has pleased God in His infinite goodness, to continue the former appointment
of death, but under a new and living consideration, to take down this infected
and defiled tabernacle, as the houses of leprosy were taken down under the
Law, that so they might be the better cleansed, and this is the last
purification of the soul from sin. And therefore, as one of the Ancients said
well, That we might not be eternally miserable, mercy has made us mortal.
Justice has made the world mortal, that they may be eternally miserable, but
to put an end to this misery, Christ has continued our mortality. Else he
would have abolished death it self, if he had not meant to abolish sin by
death, and indeed it would appear this is the reason why the world must be
consumed with fire at the last day, and new Heavens and earth succeed in its
room, because as the little house, the body, so the great house, the world, was
infected with this leprosy, and so subjected to vanity and corruption because
of man's sin; therefore that there might be no remnant of man's corruption, and
no memorial of sin to inte^upt his eternal joy, the Lord will purify and change
all: all the members that were made instruments of unrighteousness, all the
creatures that were servants to man's lusts, a new form and fashion shall be put
on all, that the body being restored, may be a fit dwelling place for the
purified soul, and the world renewed, may be a ^it house for righteous men.
Thus you see that Death to a Christian is not real death; for it is not the
death of a Christian, but the death of sin his greatest enemy, it is not a
punishment, but the enlargement of the soul.

Now, the next comfort is that which is, is but partial, it is but the
dissolution of the lowest part in man, his body; so far from prejudging the
immortal life of his spirit, that it is rather the accomplishment of that.
Though the body must die, yet eternal life is begun already within the soul;
for the Spirit of Christ has brought in life; the Righteousness of Christ
has purchased it, and the Spirit has performed it and applied it to us: not
only there is an immortal being in a Christian, that must survive the dust (for
that is common to all men) but there is a new life begun in him, an immortal
well being in joy and happiness, which only deserves the name of life, that
comes never to its full perfection, till the bodily and earthly house be taken
down. If you consider seriously what a new life a C^^ist^^n is ^^^a^lated unto,
by the operation of the Holy Ghost, and the ministration of the word, it is
then most active and lively when the soul is most retired from the body in
meditation: the new life of a Christian, is most perfect in this life, when it
carries him the furthest distance from his bodily senses, and is most
abstracted from all sensible engagements, as you heard; for indeed it restores
the spirit of a man to its native rule and dominion over the body, so that it
is then most perfect, when it is most g^thered within it self, and disingaged
from all external intanglements.

Now, certain it is, since the perfection of the soul in this life consists in
such a retirement from the body, that when it is wholly separated from it, then
it is in the most absolute state of perfection; and its life ^cts most purely
and pe^fectly when it has no body to communicate with, and to entangle it
either with its lusts or necessities. The Spirit is life, it has a life now
which is then best when furthest from the body; and therefore it cannot but be
surpassing better when it is out of the body: and all this is purcha^ed by
Christ's righteousness: As man's disobedience made an end of his life, Christ's
obedience has made our life endless: He suffered death to sting him, and by
this has taken the sting from it: and now, there is a new statute and
appointment of Heaven published in the Gospel, whosoever believes in Him shall
not perish, but have eternal life. Now indeed, this has so entirely ch^nged
the nature of death, that i^ has no^ the most lovely and desirable aspect on a
Christian, that it is no more an object of fear, but of desire, amicable, not
terrible unto him: since there is no way to save the passenger, but to let the
vessel break, he will be content to have the body splitted, that himself, that
is his soul, may escape; for truly a man's soul is himself; the body is but an
earthly tabernacle that must be taken down, to let the inhabitant win out to
come near his Lord: the body is the Prisonhouse that he groans to have opened,
that he may enjoy that liberty of the sons of God: And now to a Christian,
death is not properly an object of patience, but of desire rather; I desire to
be dissolved, and be with Christ, Phil. 1.23. He that has but advanced little
in Christianity will be content to die: but because there is too much flesh, he
will desire to live; but a Christian that is riper in knowledge and grace will
rather desire to die, and only be content to live: he will exercise patience
and submission about abiding here; but groanings and pantings about removing
hence; because he knows that there is no choice between that bondage and this
liberty.

SERMON XXIX.
Romans 8.10. The body is dead because of sin: but the Spirit is life, etc.


IT was the first curse and threatening, wherein God thought fit to comprehend
all misery, Thou shall die the death in that day thou eatest: though the
sentence was not presently executed according to the letter, yet from that day
^orward man was made mortal; and there seems to be much mercy and goodness of
God interveening to plead a delay of death it self, that so the promise of life
in the second Adam might come to the first and his posterity, and they might be
delivered from the second death, though not from the first. Always we bear
about the marks of sin in our bodies to this day, and in so far the threatening
takes place, that this life that we live in the body, is become nothing else
but a dying life: the life that the ungodly shall live out o^ the body is a
living death; and either of these is worse then simple death or destruction of
being. The serious contemplation of the miseries of this life, made wise
Solomon to praise the dead more then the living, contrary to the custom of men,
who rejoice at the birth of a man-child, and mourn at their death: yea, it
pressed him further, to think them which have not at all been, better then
both; because they have not seen the evil under the Sun: this world is such a
Chaos, such a mass of miseries, that if men understood it before they came
into it, they would be far more loath to enter into it, then they are now
afraid to go out of it. And truly we want not remembrances and representations
of our misery every day, in that children come weeping into the world, as it
were bewailing their own misfortune, that they were brought forth to be
sensible subjects of misery. And what is all our lifetime, but a repetition of
sighs and groan^, anxiety and satiety? loathing and longing, dividing our
spi^its and our time between them. How many deaths must we suffer, before death
come? for the absence or loss of any thing much desired, is a sep^ration no
less g^ievous to the hearts of men, then the pa^ting of soul and body: for
affection to temporal pe^ishing things, unites the soul so unto them, that
there is no parting without pain, no dissolution of that continuity without
much vexation; and yet the soul must suffer many such tortures in one day,
because the things are perishing in their own nature, and uncertain. What is
sleep, which devours the most part of our time? but the very image and picture
of death, a visible and daily representation of the long cessation of the
sensitive life in the grave; and yet truly it is the best and most innocent
part of our time, though we accuse it often: there is both less sin, and less
misery in it; for it is almost the only leniment and refreshment we get in all
our miseries. Job ^ought it to assuage his grief, and ease his body: but it was
the extremity of his misery that he could not find it. Now, my beloved, when
you find that which is called life, subject to so much misery, that you are
constrained often to desire you had never been born; you find it a valley of
tears, a house of mourning, from whence all true delight and solid happiness is
banished: seeing the very Officers and Sergeants of death are continually
surrounding us, and walk alongs with us, though unpleasant company, in our
greatest contentments, and are putting marks upon your doors, as in the time of
the Plague upon houses infected, Lord have mercy upon us, and are continually
bearing this motto to our view, and ^ounding this direction to our ear^, cito,
procul, diu, to get soon out of Sodom that is appointed for destruction, to fly
quickly out of our selves to the refuge appointed of God, even one that was
dead and is alive, and has redeemed us by his blood; and to get far off from
our selves, and take up dwelling in the blessed Son o^ God, through whose flesh
there is access to the Father; seeing all these (I say) are so, why do not we
awake our selves upon the sound of the promise of immortality and life, brought
to our ears in the Gospel? Mortality has already seized upon our bodies, but
why do ye not catch hold of this opportunity of releasing your souls from the
chains and setters of eternal death? Truly, my beloved, all that can be spoken
of torments and miseries in this life, I suppose we could imagine all the
exquisite torments invented by the most cruel tyrants since the beginning, to
be combined in some one kind of torture, and would t^^n st^etch our imagination
beyond that, as far as that which is compo^ed of all torments, surpasses the
simplest death: yet we do not conceive nor express unto you that death to
come. Believe it, when the soul is out of the body, it is a most pure activity,
all sense, all knowledge: and seeing where it is dulled and dampished in the
body, it is capable of so much grief or joy, pleasure or pain, we may conclude
That being loosed from these stupifying earthly chains, that it is capable of
infinite more vexation, or contentation, in a higher an^ purer strain.

Therefore we may conclude with the Apostle, that all men by nature are
miserable in life, but infinitely more miserable in death: only the man who is
in Jesus Christ, in whose spirit Christ dwells, and has made a temple of his
body, for offering up reasonable service in it, that man only is happy in life,
but far happier in death: happy that he was born, but infinitely more happy that
he was born mortal, born to die; for if the body be dead because of sin, the
spirit is life because of righteousness. Men commonly make their accounts, and
calculat their time so, as if death were the end of it: truly, it were
happiness in the generality of men, that that computation were true, either
that it had never beg^n, or that it might end here; for that which is the
greatest dignity and glory of a man his immortal soul, it is truly the greatest
misery of sinful men, because it capacitats them for eternal misery. But if we
make our accounts right, and take the right period, truly death is but the
beginning of our Time, of endless and unchangeable endurance either in
happiness or misery: and this life in the body, which is only in the view of
the short-sighted sons of men, is but a strait and narrow passage into the
infinite ocean of eternity; but so inconsiderable it is, that according as the
spirit in this passage is fashioned and formed, so it must continue for ever;
for where the tree falls, there it lies. There may be hope that a tree will
sprout again, but truly there is no hope that ever the damned soul shall see a
spring of joy; and no fear that ever the blessed spirits shall find a winter of
grief, such is the evennesse of eternity, that there is no shadow of change in
it.

O then, how happy are they in whose souls this life is already begun! which
shall then come to its Meridian, when the glory of the flesh falls down like
withered hay into the dust: the life as well as the light of the righteou^ is
progressive, its shining more and more till that day come, the day of Death,
on^y worthy to be called the present day, bec^^se it brings perfection, it
mounts the soul in the highest point of the Orb, and there is no declining from
that again. The spirit is now alive in some holy affections and motions,
breathing upwards, wrestling toward that point: the soul is now in part united
to the fountain of life, by loving attendance and obedience, and it i^ longing
to be more cl^^ly united: the inward senses are exercis^^ about spiritual
things, but the burden of this clayie mansion dot^ much dull and damp them, and
proves a great Remora to the spirit: the body indispo^es and weakens the soul
much: its life as in an Infant, though a reasonable soul be there, yet
overwhelmed with the incapacity of the organs, this body is truly a prison of
restraint and confinement to the ^oul, and often loathsome and ugly through the
filthiness of sin: But when the spirit is delivered from this necessary burden
and impediment, O how lively is that life it then lives! then the life, peace,
joy, love and delight of the soul, surmounts all that is possible here, further
then the highest exercise of the soul of the wisest men surpasses the
bruitish-like apprehensions of an infant: and indeed then, the Christian comes
to his full stature, and is a perfect man when he cease to be a man.

How will you not be persuaded, beloved in the Lord, to long after this life,
to have Christ fo^med in your hearts, for truly the generality have not so much
as Christ fashioned in their outward habit; but a^e within da^kn^sse and
ea^thinesse, and wickedness, and without, impiety and pr^fanity: will you not
long for this life! for now you are dead while you live, as the Apostle speaks
of widows that live in pleasure: The more the soul be satisfied with ea^thly
things, it is the deeper bu^ied in the grave of the flesh, and the ^urther
separated from God: Alas! many o^ you know no other li^e then that which you
now live in the body, you neither apprehend what this new birth is, nor what
the perfect statu^e of it shall be afterward; but truly while it is thus you
are but walking shadows, breathing ^l^y, and no more. A godly man used to
calculat the years of his nativity from his second birth, his conversion to God
in Christ: And truly, this is the true period of the ^ight calculation of life,
of that life which shall not see death. True life has but one period, that is,
the beginning of it; for end it has none: I beseech you reckon your years
thus, and I fear that you ^eckon your selves, many of you, yet dead in sins and
trespasses. Is that life, I pray you, To eat, to drink, to sleep, to play, to
walk, to work? Is there any thing in all these worthy of a reasonable soul,
which must survive the body, and so cease from such things for ever? Think
within your selves, do you live any other life then this? What is your life,
but a tedious and wearisome repetition of such brutish actions, which are only
te^minat on the body? O then how miserable are you, if you have no other period
to reckon from, then your birth day! If there be not a second birth day before
your burial, you may make your reckoning To be banished eternally from the life
of God.

As for you, Christians, whom God has quickened by the Spirit of His Son, be
much in the exercise of this life, and that will maintain and advance it: let
your care be about your spirits, and to hearten you in this study, and to beget
in you the hope of eternal life, look much, and lay fast hold on that
Life-giving Savior, who by his righteous life, and accursed death, has
purchased by his own blood, both happiness to us and holiness: Consider what
debtors ye are to Him, who loved not his own life, and spared it not to
purchase this life to us. Let our thoughts and affections be occupied about
this high purchase of our Saviors, which is freely bestowed on them that will
have it, and believe in Him for it: if we be not satisfied with such a low and
wretched life, as is in the body, He will give a higher and more enduring life,
and only worthy of that name.

SERMON XXX.
Romans 8.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, dwell
in you: he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken you, etc.


IT is true, the soul is incomparably better then the body; and he is only
worthy the name of a Man, and of a Christian, who prefers this more excellent
part, and imploys his study and time about it; and regards his body only for
the noble guest that lodges within it: and therefore it is one of the prime
consolations that Christianity affords, that it provides chiefly for the happy
estate of this immortal piece in man; which truly were alone sufficient to draw
our souls wholly after Religion, suppose the body should never taste of the
fruits of it, but die, and rise no more, and never be awaked out of its sleep;
yet it were a sufficient ground of engagement to godliness, that the life and
well-being of the far better part in man, is secured for eternity, which is
infinitely more then all things beside can truly promise us, or be able to
perform. Certainly whatsoever else you give your hearts to, and spend your time
upon, it will either leave you in the midst of your days, and at your end you
shall be a fool; or you must leave it in the end of your days, and find your
selves as much disappointed; or to speak more properly, because when your time
is ending, your life and being is but at its beginning, you must bid an eternal
adieu to all these things whereupon your hearts are set, when you are but
beginning truly to be. But this is only the proper and true good of the soul,
Christ in it, most portable and easily carried about with you; yea, that which
makes the soul no burden to it self, and helps it to carry all things easily;
and then most inseparable, for Christ in the soul is the spring of a
never-ending life of peace, joy and contentation, in the fountain of an infinite
goodness, and it out-wears time and age, as well as the immortal being of the
soul: yea, such is the strength of this consolation, that then the soul is most
closly united, and ^ully possessed o^ that which is its peculiar and satisfying
good, when it leaves the body in the dust, and e^capes out of this p^i^on, unto
that glorious liberty.

But yet there is besides this an additional comfort comprehended in the verse.
read, that the sleep of the body is not perpetual, that it shall once be
awakened and raised up to the fellowship of this glory: ^or though a man should
be abundantly satisfied if he possess his own soul, yet no man hates his own
flesh: the soul has some kind of natural inclination to a body suitable unto
it, and in this it differs from an Angel; and therefore the Apostle when he
expresses his earnest groan for intimat presence o^ his soul with Christ, he
subjoyns this correction, not that we desire to be uncloathed, but clothed
upon it, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 3. If it were possible, says he, we would be glade to
have the society of the body in this glory, we would not desire to cast off
those clothes of flesh, but rather that the garment of glory might be spread
over all, if it were not needful, because they are old and ragged, and would
not suit well; and our earthly Tabernacle is ruinous, and would not be fit for
such a glorious guest to dwell into, and therefore it is needful to be taken
down: well then, here is an overplus, and as it were, a surcharge of
consolation, that seeing for the present it is expedient to put off the present
clothing of flesh, and take down the present earthly house; yet that the day
is coming that the same clothes renewed, shall be put on, and the same house
repaired and made suitable to Heaven, shall be built up; that this mortal body
shall be quickened with that same Spirit that now quickens the soul, and makes
it live out of the body; and so the sweet and beloved friends, who parted with
so much pain and grief, shall meet again with so much pleasure and joy; and as
they were sharers together in the miseries of this life, s^all participat also
in the blessedness of the next: like Saul and Jonathan, lovely and pleasant in
their lives, and though for a time separated in death, yet not always divided.
Now is the highest top of happiness, to which nothing can be added; its
comprehensive of the whole man, and its comprehensive of all that can be
imagined to be the perfective good of man.

It is no wonder then, that the Apostle reckon this Doctrine of the
Resurrection amongst the foundations of Christianity, Heb. 6.1, 2, for truly
these t^o, the immortality of the soul, and the resurrection of the mortal
body, are the two ground-stones, or pillars of true Religion, which if they be
not well settled in the hearts of men, all Religion is tottering and ruinous,
and unable to support it self. That the soul cannot taste death, or see
corruption, and that the body shall but taste it, and as it were salute it, and
cannot always abide under the power of it, these are the prime foundations
upon which all Christian persuasion is built; for without these be laid down in
the lowest and deepest part of the heart, all exhortations to an holy and
righteous life are weak and ineffectual, all consolations are empty and vain;
in a word, Religion is but an airy speculation, that has no consistence but in
the imaginations of men; it is an house upon sand, that can abide no blast of
temptation, no wave of misery, but must straight way fall to the ground. From
whence is it, I pray you, that the persuasions of the Gospel has so little
power upon men, that the plain and plentiful publication of a Savior is of so
small virtue to stir up the hearts of men to take hold on him? How comes it to
pass that the preeepts and prohibitions of the most high God, coming forth
under his authority, lays so little restraint on men's corruptions? that so few
will be persuaded to stop their course, and come off the ways they are
accustomed? that men pull away the shoulder, and stop the ear, and make their
hearts as adamant, incapable of being affected with either the authority or
love of the Gospel? that when He pipes unto us, so few dance, and when he
mourns, so few laments? Is it not because these two foundations are not laid,
and men's hearts not dug deep by earnest consideration, to receive these
ground-stones of Christianity, the belief of their souls eternal survivance
after the dust, and of the revivance and resurrection of the body after it has
slept a while in the dust. I remember, Heathens have had some noble and rare
conceptions about virtue, and some have labored to enamour men with the native
beauty of it, and to persuade them that it was a sufficient reward to it self;
and truly it would far more become a Christian who knows the high and divine
pattern of holiness to be God himself, and so must needs behold a far
surpassing beauty and excellency in the Image of God than in all earthly
things; I say, it would become him to accustom himself to a dutiful observance
of Religion, even without all respect to the reward of it: he would train his
heart to do homage to God, out of a loyal affection and respect to His Majesty,
and from the love of the very intrinsic beauty of obedience, without borrowing
always from such selfie considerations of our own happiness or misery.
Notwithstanding such is the posture of man's spirit now, that he cannot at all
be engaged to the love of Religion, except some Seen advantage concilat it; and
therefore the Lord makes use of such selfie principles in drawing men to
Himself, and keeping them still with Him: and truly considering man's infirmity,
this is the spirit and life of all Religion, Immortality and Resurrection, that
which gives a luster to all, and quickens all, that which mak^s all to sink
deep, and that which makes a Christian steadfast and immovable, 2 Cor. 5.8. It
is certainly Hope that is the key of the heart, that opens and shuts it to any
thing. These the Apostle Peter, 1 Epist. 1. blesses God heartily for the new
birth, and in the expressing of it, makes hope the very term of that
generation, and so it must be a substantial thing. Blessed be God who has
begotten us again to a lively hope: Hope has a quickening power in it, it makes
all new where it comes, and is full of spirit; it is the Helmet and Anchor of a
Christian, that which bears the dint of temptation, and makes him steady in
Religion: No man will put in his plough in this ground, or sow unto the Spirit,
but in hope, for he that sows must sow in hope, else his Plough will not go
deep, 1 Cor. 9.10. This then is the very spirit and life of Religion, the
resurrection of the dead, without which our faith were in vain, and men would
continue still in their sins. Certainly it is the deep inconsideration of this
never-ending endurance of our souls, and restitution of our bodies to the same
immortality, that makes the most part of men so slight and superficial in
Religion, else it were not possible if that were laid to heart, but men would
make Religion their business and chief business.

We have here the two genuine causes of the resurection of the bodies of
Christians, the resurrection of Christ, and the inhabitation of his Spirit. The
influence that the resurrection of Christ has on ours, is lively and fully
holden out by this Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. against them who deny the resurrection
from the dead. If Christ be not raised, your faith is in vain, ye are yet in
your sins, and they that are asleep are perished. Religion were nothing but a
number of empty words of show; Preaching were a vanity and imposture; Faith
were a mere ^ancy, if this be not laid down as the ground-stone, Christ raised,
not as a natural person, but as a common politic person, as the first fruits
of them that sleep, verse. 17, 18, 19, 20. where he alludes to the ceremony of
offering the first fruits of their harvest, Lev. 23.10. for under the Law they
might not eat of the fruits of the land till they were sanctified, all was
counted profane till they were someway con^ecrated to the Lord. Now, for this
end the Lord appointed them to bring one sheaf for all, and that was the
representative o^ all the rest of the heap, and this was waved before the Lord,
and lifted up from the earth, now according to the Apostles argument, Romans 11
16. If the first fruits be h^ly, so is the lump, for it represents all the
lump; and therefore Jesus Christ the chief of all his brethren, was made the
first fruits from the dead, and lifted up from the grave, as the representer of
all the lump of his elect, and so it must needs follow That they shall not
continue in the grave, but must in due time partake of that benefit, which he
was first entered in possession of, in their name, and for them: for if this
first fruits be holy, so the whole lump must be holy; and if the first fruits
be risen, so must the lump. You see then the force of the present reason, If
the Spirit that raised Christ dwell in you, He shall also raise you, namely
because he raised up Christ the very first fruits of all the rest; so that
Christ's resurrection is a sure pledge and token of yours, and both together are
the main basis and ground work of all our hope and salvation, the neglect and
inconsideration whereof makes the most part of pretended Christians to walk
according to that Epicurean principle, let us eat and drink, for to morrow we
shall die; as if there were no life to come, they withold nothing from their
carnal minds, that can satisfy or please their lusts. But for you who desire a
part in this resurrection, and da^e scarcely believe so great a thing, or
entertain such a high hope, because of the ^ight of your unworthiness; as ye
would be awaked by this hope to righteousness, and to sin no more, verse. 34.
of that Chap. So you may encourage your selves to that hope, by the
resurrection of Christ; for it is that which has the mighty influence to beget
you to a lively hope, 1 Pet. 1.3. Look upon this as the grand intent, and
special design of Christ's both dying and rising again, that he might be the
first fruits to sanctify all the lump. Nevertheless it is not he defect of
your bodies, for they are often a great impediment and retardment to the
spirit, and lodges the enemy within their walls, when he is chased out of the
mind by the Law of the Spirit of life; but it is the great design of God
through the whole work of redemption, and the desert of Christ your head; and
therefore you may entertain that hope, but take heed to walk worthy of it, and
that is, if we have this hope, let us purify our selves, let us who believe
that we are risen with Christ, set our affections on things above, else we
dishonor Him that is risen in our name, and we dishonor that Temple of the
Holy Ghost, which he will one day make so glorious.

SERMON XXXI.
Romans 8.11. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Christ from the dead, etc.


AS there is a twofold death, the death of the soul, and the death of the body;
so there is a double resurrection, the resurrection of the soul from the power
of sin, and the resurrection of the body from the grave: as the first death is
that which is spiritual, then that which is bodily; so the first resurrection
is of the Spirit, then the second of the body, and these two have a connection
together, therefore says the Apostle John, Blessed are they who have part in
the first resurrection, for on such the second death has no power, but they
shall be Priests to God, etc. Romans 20.6. Although death must (...) their
bodies, yet the sting wherein the strength of it lies, is taken away by Christ,
that it has no power to hurt him whose spirit is raised out of the grave of
sin: and truly it is hard to tell which is the greatest change, or the most
dificult to raise, a Body out of corruption to life, or to to raise a Soul out
of sin to grace. But both are the greatest changes that can be, and shadowed
out under the similitude of the greatest in nature, for our conversion to God
is a new birth, a new creation, and a resurrection in Scripture style; and so
both require one and the same power, the almighty power of his Spirit, you who
were dead in sin has He quickened, etc. O what a notable change! it makes them
no longer the same men, but new creatures; and therefore it is the death of
sin, and the resurrection of the soul: for as long as it is under the chains of
darkness, and power of sin, it is free among the dead, it is buried in the
vilest sepulcher: old graves, and these full of rottenness and dead men's
bones, are nothing to ^xpresse the lamentable case of such a soul; and yet such
are all by nature: whatsoever excellency or endowment men have from their birth
or education, yet certainly they are but apparitions rather then any real
substance, and which is worse, their bodies is the sepulcher of their souls,
and if the corruption of a soul were sensible, we would think all the
putrifactions of bodily things but shadows of it. And therefore no sooner is
there any inward life begotten in a soul, but this is the very first exercise
of it, the abhorrency of the soul upon the sight and smell of its own
loathsomeness.

Now, there is no hope of any reviving, though all the wisdom and art of men
and Angels were employed in this business, there is nothing able to quicken
one such soul, until it please the Lord to speak such a word as he did to
Lazarus, Arise, come forth, and send his Spirit to accomplish his word, and
this will do it: when the Spirit comes into the soul, he quickens it, and
this is the first ^esurrection: O blessed are they who have part in this! whose
souls are drawn out of the dungeon of darkness and ignorance, and brought
^orth to behold this glorious light that shines in the Gospel, and raised out
of the grave of the lusts of ignorance, to live unto God henceforth; for such
they have their part in the second resurrection to life, for you see these are
conjoined, If the Spirit dwell in you, He shall raise you, etc. You see here
two grounds and reasons of the resurrection of the body, Christ's rising, and
the Spirits indwelling; now I find these in Scripture made the two fountains of
all Christianity, both of the first and second resurrection.

The ^esurrection of Christ is an evidence of our Justification, the the cause
of our quickening or vivification, and the ground and pledge of our last
resurrection: and all these are grounds of strong consolation. The first you
have, Romans 4.25. Christ died for our sins, and rose for our Justification, and
the verse. 34. of this Chap. Christ is dead, yea rather that is risen again; who
then shall condemn? Here is a clear evidence that He has paid the debt
wholly, and satisfied Justice fully: since He was under the power of death,
imprisoned by Justice, certainly he would not have won free, if he had not
paid the uttermost farthing; therefore his glorious resurrection is a sure
manifestation of his present satisfaction, it is a public acquittance and
absolution of him from all our debt, and so by consequence of all he died for;
for their debt was laid upon him, and now He is discharged, and therefore the
believing soul may tremblingly boast, who shall condemn me! for it is God that
justifies. Why? because all my sins were laid on Christ, and God has in a
most solemn manner acquitted and discharged him from all, when he raised him
from the dead; and therefore he cannot, and none other can sue me, or prosecute
a plea against me, since my Cautioner is fully exonered of this undertaking,
even by the great Creditor, God himself. But then, his resurrection is a pawn
or pledge of the spiritual raising of the soul from sin: as the death of Christ
is made the pledge of our dying to sin, so his rising, of our living to God,
Romans 6.4, 5. These are not mere paterns and examples of spiritual things, but
assured pledges of that divine virtue and power which he being raised again
should send abroad throughout the world: for as there are Coronation-gifts,
when Kings are solemnly installed in office, so there are Coronation-mercies,
triumphal gifts, when Christ rose and ascended, he bestowed then on the world,
Ephesians. 4. And certainly these are the greatest, the virtue of his death to kill
the old man, and the power of his resurrection to quicken the new; and by
faith, a believer is united and ingra^ted into him, as a plant into a choice
stock, and by virtue and sap coming from Christ's death and resurrection, he is
transformed into the similitude of both: he grows into the likeness of his
death, by dying to sin, by crucifying these inward affections and inclinations
to it; and he grows up into the similitude of his resurrection, by newness
of life, or being alive to God, in holy desires and endeavors after holiness
and obedience. And thus the first resurrection of the soul flows from Christ's
resurrection.

But add unto this, that Christ's rising is the pledge and pawn of the second
resurrection that is of the body; for He is the head, and we the members; now
it is most incongruous that the head should rise and not draw up the members
after him, certainly he will not cease till He have drawn up all his mem^ers
to him: if the head be above water, it is a sure pledge that the body will win
out of the water; if the root be alive, certainly the branches will shoot out
in Springtime, they shall live also. There is that connection betwixt Christ
and believers, that wonderful communication between them, that Christ did
nothing, was nothing, and had nothing done to him, but what He did, and was,
and sufferd personating them, and all the benefi^e and advantage redounds to
them. He would not be considered of us as a person by himself, but would rather
be still taken in with the children: as for love, he came down and took flesh
to be like them, and did take their sin and misery off them, and so was content
to be looked upon by God as in the place of sinners, as the chief sinner; so he
is content and desirous that we should look on him as in the place of sinners,
as dying, as rising for us, as having no excellency or privelege incommunicable
to us: And this was not hid from the Church of old, but presented as the grand
consolation, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body they shall
rise: and therefore may poor souls awake and sing, though they must dwell in
the dust, yet as the dew and influence of Heaven makes herbs to spring out of
the earth, so the virtue of this resurrection shall make the earth and sea and
air to cast out and render their dead, Isa. 26.19. Upon what a sure and strong
chain hangs the salvation of poor sinners! I wish Christians might salute one
another with this, Christ is risen, and so comfort one another with these
words; or rather, that every one would apply this cordial to his own heart,
Christ is risen: and you know what a golden chain this draws after it,
therefore we must rise and live.

The other cause which is more immediate, and will actively accomplish it, is
the Spirit dwelling in us; for there is a suitable method here too: as the Lord
first raised the Head Christ, and will then raise the Members, and he that does
the one cannot but do the other; so the Spirit first raises the soul from that
woeful fall into sin which killed us, and so makes it a Temple, and the body
too, for both are bought with a price, and therefore the Spirit possesses
both: but the inmost residence is in the soul, and the bodily members are made
servants of righteousness, which is a great honor and dignity, in regard of
that base employment they had once; and so it is most suitable that he who has
thus dwelt in both, repair his own dwelling house: for here it is ruinous, and
therefore must be cast down; but because it was once a Temple for the Holy
Ghost, therefore it will be repaired and built again, for he that once honored
it with his presence, will not suffer corruption always to dwell in it: for
what Christ by his humiliation and suffering purchased, the Spirit has this
Commission to perform it* and what is it but the restitution of mankind to an
happier estate in the second Adam,then ever the first was into. Now since our
Lord, who pleased to take on our flesh, did not put it off again, but admits it
to the fellowship of the same glory in heaven, in that he died he dies no more,
death has no more dominion over him, he will never be wearied or ashamed of
that humane clothing of flesh; and therefore certainly that the children may be
like the father, the followers their Captain, the members not disproportioned
to the head, the branches not different and heterogeneous to the stock, and
that our rising in Christ may leave no footstep of our falling, no remainder of
our misery; therefore the Spirit of Christ will also quicken the mortal bodies
of believers, and make them like Christ's glorious body.

This must be done with divine power, and what more powerful then the Spirit?
for it is the spirits or subtle parts in all creatures that causes all
motions, and works all effects. What then is that Almighty Spirit not able to
do? You have shadows of this in nature, yea convincing evidences; for what is
the Spring, but a resurrection of the earth? Is not the world every year
renewed, and rises again out of the grave of Winter? as you find it elegantly
expressed, Psalm. 107. and does not the grains of seed die in the ^lods, before
they rise to the harvest, 1 Cor. 15. All the vicissitudes and alterations in
nature give us a plain draught of this great change; and certainly it is one
Spirit that effects all.

But though there be the same power required, to raise up the bodies of the
godly and ungodly; yet O what infinite distance and difference in the nature and
ends o^ their resurrections! there is the resurrection of life, and the
resurrection of condemnation, Joh. 5.29. O happy they who rise to life that
ever they died! but O miserable, thrice wretched are all others that they may
not be dead for ever! The immortality of the souls was infinite misery, because
it is that which eternizes their misery; but when this overplus is added, the
incorruptibility of the body, and so the whole man made an inconsumable subject
for that fire to seed upon perpetually, what heart can conceive it without
horror! and yet we hear it often without any such affection. It is a strange
life, that death is the only refreshment of it; and yet this may not be had,
they shall seek death, and it shall flee from them. Now, my beloved, I would
desire this discourse might open way for the hearty and cordial intertainment
of the Gospel, and that you might be persuaded to awake unto righteousness, and
sin no more, 1 Cor. 15.34. Be not deceived, my brethren, flesh and blood cannot
inherit the kingdom of God. Certainly if you have no other image then what you
came in the world withal, you cannot have this hope to be conformed one day to
the glorious Body of Christ: What will become of you in that day, who declare
now by the continued vent of your hearts, that this holy Spirit dwells not in
you? and alas, how many are such? Oh pity your selves! your souls and bodies
both. If for love to your bodies, ye will follow its present lusts, and care
only for the things of the body, you act the greatest enmity and hostility
against your own bodies. Consider, I beseech you, the eternal state of both,
and your care and study will run in another channel. And for you who have any
working of the Spirit in you, whether convicing you of sin and misery, and of
righteousness in Christ; or sometimes comforting you by the word applied to
your heart; or teaching you another way then the world walks into, I recommend
unto you that of the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.58. Wherefore my brethren, be
steadfast, etc. always abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing your Labor
is not in vain.

SERMON XXXII.
Romans 8.12. Therefore brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after
the flesh, etc.


ALL things in Christianity have a near and strait conjunction; it is so entire
and absolute a piece, that if one link be loosed, all the chain falls to the
ground; and if one be well fastened upon the heart, it brings all alongs with
it: some speak of all truths, even in nature, that they are knit so together
that any truth may be concluded out of every truth, at least by a long circuit
of deduction and reasoning; but whatsoever be of that, certainly Religion is a
more entire thing, and all the parts of it more nearly conjoined together, that
they may mutually enforce one another, Precepts and promises are thus linked
together, that if any soul lay hold indeed upon any promise of grace, he draws
alongs with it, the obligation of some precept to walk suitable to such
precious promises. There is no encouragement you can indeed fasten upon, but it
will join you as nearly to the commandment; and no consolation in the Gospel,
that does not carry within its bosom an exhortation to holy walking. Again, on
the other hand, there is no precept but it should lead you straight way to a
promise, no exhortation but it is environed before and behind with a strong
consolation, to make it pierce the deeper, and go down the sweeter. Therefore
you see how easily the Apostle digresseth from the one to the other, how
sweetly and pertinently these are interwoven in his discourse. The first word
of the Chapter is a word of strong consolation, there is no condemnation to
them that are in Christ: and this like a flood carries all down with it, all
precepts and exhortations, and the soul of a believer with them; and therefore
he subjoyns an exhortation to holy and spiritual walking upon that very ground:
and because commandments of this nature will not float (so to speak) unless
they have much water of that kind, and cannot have such a swift course, except
the tide of such encouragements flow fast; therefore he opens that spring
again in the preceding words; and lets the rivers of consolation flow
forth, even the hope of immortality and eternal life: and this certain^y will
raise up a soul that was on ground, and carry him above in motion of obedience;
and therefore he may well in the next place, stir them up to their duty, and
mind them of their obligation, Therefore brethren we are debtors, not to the
flesh. To make this the more effectual, he drops it in with affection, in a
sweet compell^^ion of love and equality, Brethren: There is nothing so powerful
in perswation as love, it will sweeten a bitter and unpleasant reproof, and
make it go down more easily: though it makes less noise than threatenings and
severity and authority; yet it is more forcible; for it insinuats it self, and
in a manner surpriseth the soul, and so preventeth all resistance: as when the
Sun ma^e the traveller part with his cloak, whereas the wind and rain made him
hold it faster; so affection will prevail, where authority and terror cannot:
it will melt that, which a stronger power cannot break: the story of Elijah, 1
King. 19. may give some representation of this, the Lord was not in the strong
wind, nor in terrible earthquake, nor yet in the fire, but in the calm still
voice: The Lord has chosen this way of publishing his grace in the Gospel,
because the sum of it is love to sinners, and good will toward men: he holds
it forth in the calm voice of love, and these who are his ambassadors should be
clothed with such an affection, i^ they intend to prevail with men, to engage
their affections: O that we were possessed with that brotherly love one toward
anot^er, for the salvation one of another! especially, that the Preachers of
the Gospel might be thus kindly affectioned toward others, and that ye would
take it thus, the calling you off the ways of sin as the act of the greatest
love. But then consider the equality o^ this obligation, for there is nothing
pressed upon you, but what lies as heavily upon them that presses it: this
debt binds all: O that the Ministers of the Gospel could carry the impression
of this on their hearts! that when they persuade others, they may withal
persuade themselves; and when they speak to others, they may sit down among the
hearers. If an Apostle of so eminent dignity levelleth himself in this
consideration, Therefore brethren we are debtors, how much more ought Pastors
and Teachers come in the same rank and degree of debt and obligation with
others: Truly, this is the great obstruction of the success of the Gospel,
that these who bind on burdens on others, do not themselves touch them with one
of their fingers; and while they seem serious in persuading others, yet withal
declare by their carriage, that they do not believe themselves what they bear
upon others; so that preaching seems to be an imposture, and affections in
persuading ^f othe^^ to be borrowed as it were in a scene to be laid down again
out of it. But then again, there is a misconceit among people, that this holy
and spiritual walking is not of common obligation, but peculiar to the
preachers of the Gospel. Many make their reckoning so, as if they were not
called to such high aims and great endeavors; but truly, my beloved, this is a
thing of common concernment, the Holy Ghost has levelled us all in this point
of duty, as he has equally exalted all in the most substantial dignities and
privileges of the Gospel: this bond is upon the highest and upon the lowest,
greatness does not exempt from it, and meanness does not exclude from it;
though commonly great persons fancy an ^^munity from the stricknesse of a holy
conversation, because of their greatness, and often mean an^ low persons
pretend a freedom from such a high obligation, because of their lowness; yet
certainly all are debt-bound this way, and must one day give account. You that
are poor and unlearned, and have not received great things of that nature from
God, do not think your selves free, do not absolve your selves; for there is
infinite debt besides that: you will have no place for that excuse, that you had
not great parts, were not learned and so forth: for as the obligation reaches
you all, so there is as patent a way to the exercise of Religion in the poorest
cottage, as in the highest Palace: you may serve God as acceptably in little,
as others may do in much: there is no condition so low and abject, that lays
any restraint on this noble service and employment: this jewel loses not its
beauty and virtue, when it lies in a dunghill, more then when it is set in
gold.

But let us inquire further into this debt, we are debtors, says he, and he
instanceth what is not the creditor, by which he gives us to understand, Who
is the true creditor: not the flesh, and therefore to make out the just
opposition, it must be the Spirit: we are debtors then to the Spirit. And what
is the debt we owe to Him, we may know it that same way, we owe not to the
flesh so much as to make us live after its guidance and direction, and fulfill
its lusts; then by due consequence, we owe so much to the Spirit, as that we
should live after the Spirit, and resign our selves wholly to Him, his guidance
and direction. There is a twofold kind of debt upon the creature, one
remissible and pardonable, another irremissible and unpardonable (so to speak)
the debt of sin, and that is the guilt of it, which is nothing else then the
obligation of the sinner over to eternal condemnation by virtue of the curse of
God: every sinner comes under this debt to Divine Justice, the desert of
eternal wrath, and the actual ordination by a divine sentence, to that wrath.
Now indeed, this debt was insoluble to us, and utterly unpayable, until God
sent His Son to be our Cautioner, and he has paid the debt in his own person,
by bearing our curse, and so made it pardonable to sinners, obtained a
relaxation from that woeful obligation to death: and this debt you see is wholly
discharged to them that are in Christ, by another sentence repealing the former
curse; verse. 1. there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. But there
is another debt which I may call a debt of duty and obedience, which as it was
antecedent to sin, even binding innocent Adam; so the obligation of the debt of
sin has been so ^^r from taking it away, that it is rather increased
exceedingly, and this debt is unpardonable and indispensible, the more of the
debt of sin be pa^doned, and the more the curse be dispensed with, the more the
sinner owes of love and obedience to God, she loved much because much was
forgiven; and the more was forgiven of ^in, the more she owed of love, and the
more debt was discharged, the more she was indebted to Him: and therefore after
this general acquitance of all believers, verse. 1. he presses this obligation
the more strongly, therefore brethren we are debtors: It is like that debt
spoken of, Romans 12. Owe no man any thing, but to love one another, which is not
meant that it is unlawful to be debtors to men, but rather, what ye owe, or all
things else, pay it, and ye are free, your debt ceases, and your bond is
cancelled; but as for the debt of love and benevolence, you must so owe that to
all men, as never to be discharged of it, never to be freed from of it; when
you have done all, this has no limitation of time or action: Even so it is
here, other debts when paid, men cease to be debtors, then they are free, but
here the more he pay, the more he is bound to pay, he owes, and he owes
eternally, his bond is never cancelled as long as he continues a creature
subsisting in God, and abides a redeemed on in Christ; for these continuing his
obligation is eternally recent and fresh as the first day: and this does not at
all obscure the infinite grace of God, or diminish the happiness of Saints,
that they are not freed from this debt of love and obedience, but rather
illustrats the one, and increases the other, for it cannot be supposed to
consist with the wisdom and holiness of God to loose his creature from that
obligation of loving obedience and subjection, which is essential to it, and it
is no less repugnant to the happiness of the creature to be ^^ee from
righteousness, unto sin.

Now, this debt of duty and obedience has a threefold bond, which because they
stand in vigor un^ancelled for all eternity, therefore the obligation arising
from them is eternal too, The bond of Creation, the bond of Redemption, and the
bond of Sanctification, these are distinguished according to the Persons of the
Trinity, who appear most eminently in them.

We owe our being to the Father, in whom we live and move and have our being;
for He made us, and not we our selves, and we are all the works of his hands:
Now the debt accruing from this, is infinite, if men conceive themselves so much
oblidged to others for ^ petty courtesy, as to be their Servants: if they owe
more to their Parents the instruments of their bringing forth into the world, O
how infinitely more owe we to God, of whom we are, and have all! Does the Clay
owe so much to the Potter, who does not make it, but fashion it only? and what
owe we to Him that made us of nothing, and fashioned us while we were yet
without form! Truly, all relations, all obligations evanish when this comes
forth; because all that a man has it less then Himself, then his immortal
spirit, and that he owes alone to God; and besides whatsoever debt there is to
other fellow creatures in any thing, God is the principal creditor in that
bond: all the creatures are but the Servants of this King, which at his sole
appointment bring alongs his gifts unto us; and therefore we owe no more to
them, then to the hands of the messenger that is sent. Now, by this account,
nothing is our own, not our selves, not our members, not our goods, but all are
His, and to be used and bestowed not at the will and arbitrament of creatures,
but to be absolutely and solely at his disposal, who has the sole sovereign
right to them: and therefore, you may take up the heinousness of sin, how
monstrous and misshappen a thing it is, that breaks this inviolable Law of
creation, and withdraws the creature from subjection to Him, in whom alone it
can subsist. O how disordered are the courses and lives of men! men living to
themselves, their own lusts, after their own will, as if they had made
themselves, men using their members as weapons of unrighteousness against God,
as if their tongues and hands and feet were there own, or the devils, and not
Gods. Call to mind this obligation, Remember thy Creator, that memento would be
a strong engagement to another course then most take: how absurd would you
think it, To please your selves in displeasing Him, if you but minded the bond
of creation. But when there are other two superadded, what we owe to the Son,
for coming down in the likeness of sinful flesh for us, and what we owe to
the Holy Ghost for quickening our spirits, and afterward for the resurection of
our bodies, whose hearts would not these overcome and lead captive to his love
and obedience.

SERMON XXXIII.
Romans 8.12. Therefore brethren, we are debtors, not to the flesh, to live after
the flesh:

Verse. 13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die, etc.


WAS it not enough to contain men in obedience to God, the very essential bond
of dependence upon God as the original and fountain of his being! and yet man
has cast away this cord from him, and withdrew from that alledgiance he did
owe to his Maker, by transgressing his holy commandments. But God not willing
that all should pe^ish, he has confirmed and st^engthned that primitive
obligation, by two other as strong, if not more; if the Father did most
eminently appear in the first, the Son is manifested in the second, and that is
the work of the redemption of man, no less glorious then his first creation:
He made him first, and then He sent his own Son in the likeness of sinful
fle^h, to make him again by his Spirit: and now a threefold cord is not easily
broken. It seems this should bind invincibly, and constrain us not to be our
own, but the Lords: and now truly, they who are in Jesus Christ, a^e thrice
indebted wholly to God. But the two last obligations are the most special, and
most wonderful, that God sent His Son for us, to redeem us from sin and misery,
and to restore man to happiness, took on a miserable and accursed habit, that
so glorious a person gave Himself for so base; that so excellent a Lord became
a servant for the rebel; that He whose the earth is, and the ^ulness thereof,
did ^mpty Himself of all to sup^ly Us: and in a word, the most wonderful
exchange ^e made that ever the Sun saw, God for men, His life a ransom for
their life: all the rare inventions, and ^ancied stories of men, come infinitely
short of this: The light never saw Majestty so abased, and love so expressed,
as in this matter: and all to this purpose, that we who had undone ourselves,
might be made up again, and the righteou^nesse of the Law fulfilled in us. At
first He made us, but it cost Him nothing but a word; but now, to buy that
which was taken captive by sin, and a^ so dear a rate, ye are bought with a
price, and this price more precious than the sum of Heaven and Earth could
amount to, suppose by some ra^e Al^bymie the earth were all converted into
Gold, and the Heavens into Precious Stones; ye^ these corruptible and material
things come as far short of this ^ansome, as an heap of dung is unproportioned
to a mass of Gold, or heap of Jewels. Now you that are thus bought, may ye not
conclude, therefore we are debtters, and whereof? of our selves, for we, our
persons, estates and all were sold, and all are bought with this price,
therefo^^ we are not our own, but the Lords, and therefore we ought to glorify
God in our bodies and spirits which are his, 1 Cor 6.20. Should we henceforth
claim an interest and propriety in our selves? Should we have a will of our
own? Should we serve our selves with our members? O how monstrous and absurd
were that! Ce^tainly, a believing heart cannot but look upon that as the
greatest indignity, and vilest impiety, that ever the Sun shined upon:
Ingratitu^e has a note of ignominy, even among Heathens put upon it; they
e^^eemed the reproach of it the compend of all reproaches, Ingr^tum si dixeris,
omnia dixeris. And truly, it has the most abominable visage of any vice; yea,
it is all s^ns drawn through other in one Table. Certainly, a godly heart
cannot but account this execrable and detestable, henceforth to have any proper
and peculiar will and pleasure and cannot but devout it self wholly to His will
and pleasu^e, for whose pleasure all were first created, and who then redeemed
us by the blood of His Son. I wish we could have this image of ingratitude
always observant to our eyes and minds when we are enticed with our lusts, to
study our own satisfaction. But the^e is another bond superadded to this, which
mightily aggravats the debt, He ^ath given us his Spirit to dwell within, as
well as his Son for us. And O the mavelous and strange effects that this
Spirit has in the ^avou^s of men! He truly repairs that image of God, which
sin broke down; He furnishes the soul, and supplies it in all its necessities;
He is a light and life to it, a spring of everlasting life and consol^tion; so
that to the Spirit we owe that we are made ag^in after his Image, and the
precious purchase of Christ applied unto our souls. For Him has our Savior
left to execute his latter-will in behalf of his children. And these things are
but the first fruits of the Spirit, any peace, or joy, or love, or obedience,
are but an earnest of that which is coming: we shall be yet more beholden to
Him, when the walls of flesh are taken down, he will carry forth the soul into
that glorious liberty of the sons of God; and not long after he shall quicken
our very dust, and raise it up in glory to the fellowship of that happiness.
Now, my beloved, consider what all this tends to, mark the inference you should
make from it, Therefore we are debtors, debtors indeed, under infinite
obligations for infinite me^cies: But what is the debt we owe? truly it might be
conceived to be some rare thing, equivalent to such unconceivable benefits: But
mark what it is, to live after the spirit, and not after the flesh, to conform
our affections and actions, and the tenor of our way and course, to the
direction of the Spirit, to have our spirits led and enlightened by the Holy
Spirit, and not to follow the indictment of our flesh and carnal minds. Now
truly, it is a wonder that it is no^ other thing then this, for this is no
other thing then what we owe to our selves, and to our own natures, so to
speak; for truly there is a con^ormity and suitableness of some things to the
very nature of man, that is beautiful, some things are decent and becomes it,
other things are undecent and uncomely, unsuitable to the very reasonable
being of man, so that they put a stain and blot upon it.

Now indeed, there is nothing can be conceived more agreeable to the very
constitution of man's nature then this, that the far better and more excellent
part, should lead and command, and the baser and earthly part should obey and
follow; that the flesh should minister and serve the spirit: Does not even
Nature it self teach it? and yet, no heavier yoke is put upon us, then what our
own nature has put upon (...) already, which indeed is wonderful; and
certainly this wonderful attempering of his Laws unto the very natural exigence
of the spirit of man, make the transgression of them so much the more heinous.

Now, all these three forementioned bonds do jointly bind on this Law upon man,
in general, they oblidge strongly to subjection and obedience to the will of
God; but particularly, they have a constraining influence upon this, living
after the spirit, not after the flesh: our very creation speaks this forth,
when God made man after his own Image, when he beautified the spirit of man
with that divine similitude and likeness, in that he breathed a spirit from
Heaven, and took a body out of the dust, and then exalted that heavenly piece
to some participation of his own nature: Does not all this cry aloud upon u^,
that the order of creation is now dissolved, that the beauty of it is ma^^ed,
that all is turned up ^ide-down, when men's passions and senses are their only
gui^s, and the principles of light in their conscience are choakt, and
^^i^^led? Does not all this teach us plainly that we should not live after the
flesh? that we owe not so much to this brutish part, as to enthrone it and
empower it over us? that it were the vilest Anarchy, and most intole^able
confusion and usurpation, to give it the power over u^, as most men do? that
there can be no order or beauty in man, till the spirit be unfettered from the
chains of fleshly lust^, and restored to the native dignity and preheminency,
and so keep the body in subjection? And indeed Paul was so, 1 Cor. 9.27 I keep
my body in subjection, and beat it down, because it is an imperious slave, an
usurping slave, and will command if not beaten and kept under.

Again, Christ has put a bond upon us to this very same, he has strengthened
this obligation with a ne^ cord, in that he gave his precious life a ransom
for the souls of men, this was the principal thing he paid for (the body only
being an accessory and appendix to the soul) for it is said, The redemption of
the soul is precious, and cease for ever, Psalm. 49.8. and What can a man give
in exchange for his soul, Mark 8.37. For what material thing can equalize a
spirit? Many things may be had more preciou^ and fine than the body, but all of
them have no proportion to a spiritual being. Now then, in that so dear a
ransom, and so infinite a p^ice must be given for the spirit of man, it
declares the infinite worth and excellency of it above the body, and above all
visible things: and here indeed, the greatest confirmation that can be
imagined, God has valued it, he has put the soul of man in the balance, to
find something equal in weight of dignity and worth, and when all that is in
Heaven and Earth is put in the other scale, the soul is down-weight by far*
there is such distance, that there is no proportion; only the life and blood of
his own Son weighs it down, and is an overvalue, and thus in our redemption we
have a visible demonstration (as it were) of the infinite obligation of this
Law, not to live after that contemptible part, our flesh* but to follow after
the motions and directions of an enlightened spirit; not to spend our thoughts,
care and time upon the body, and making provision for the lusts thereof (as
most men do, and all by nature a^e now inclined to do) but to be taken up wi^h
the immortal preciou^ Jewel that is within, how to have it (...) and cleansed
from all the filth, that sin and the flesh has cast (...); and restored to
that native beauty, the image of God in righteousness and holiness. If you in
your practice and affecti^n (...) the scales otherwise, and make the body and
things of the body, ^uppose the whole world down-weight in your affection and
imagination, you have p^ainly cont^adicted the just measu^e of the Sanctuary,
and in effect you declare that Christ died in vain, and gave his life out of an
error and mistake of the worth of the soul: you say, he needed not have given
such a price for it, seeing every day you weigh it down with every triffle o^
momentany fleshly satisfaction.

Lastly, the Spirit binds this fast upon us; for the soul of man he has chosen
for his habitation, and there he delights to dwell, in the heart o^ the
contrite and humble; and this he intends to beautify and garnish, and to
restore it to that primitive excellency it once had. The Spirit of man is
nea^er his nature, and more capable of being con^o^med unto it; and therefore
his peculiar and special work is about our spirits: first, to enlighten and
convince them; then to reform and direct them and lead them; and this binds as
fo^cibly, and constrains a believer certainly to ^esign himself to the
Spirit; to study how to order his walk after that di^ection, and to be more and
more abstracted from the satisfaction of his body; else he cannot choose but
g^ieve the Spirit, his b^st friend which alone is the fountain o^ joy and peace
to him, and being grieved, cannot but grieve himself next.

Now, my beloved, con^^der, if you owe so much to the flesh, whether or not it
be so steadable and profitable unto you? and if you think it can give you a
sufficient reward to compense all your pains in satisfying it, go on; But, I
believe, you can ^eckon no good office that ever it did you, and your
expectation is less: what fruit have you of all, but shame and vexation of
conscience? and what can you expect but death, the last fruits of it? wha^ then
do you owe unto it? are you debtors to its pleasure and satis^^cti^n, which
has never done you good; and will do you eternal hurt* consider whether you
are so much bound and oblidged to it, as to lose your souls for it? one of them
must be: and whether or not you be not more oblidged to God the Father, and his
Son Jesus Christ, to live after the Spirit; though for the present it should be
painful, to beat down your body. You are debtors indeed, but you owe nothing to
the flesh, but stripes and mortification.

SERMON XXXIV.
Romans 8.13. For if ye live after the flesh, ye shall die: but if ye through the
Spirit, etc.


THough the Lord out of his absolute Sovereignty might deal with man in such a
way, as nothing should appear but his supreme Will and Almighty Power, he might
simply command obedience, and without any more persuasions either leave men to
the frowardness of their own natures, or else powerfully constrain them to
their duty; yet he has chosen that way that is most suitable to his own
wisdom, and most connatural to man's nature, To lay out before him the
advantages and disadvantages, and to use these as motives and perswasives of
his Spirit: for since He has by his first creation, implanted in man's soul
such a principle as moves it self upon the presentation of good or evil; that
this might not be in vain, he administers all the dispensation, of the Law and
Gospel in a way suitable to that, by propounding such powerful motives as may
incline and persuade the heart of man. It is true, there is a secret drawing,
withal necessary, the pull of the Fathers arm, and power of the Holy Ghost;
yet that which is visible or sensible to the soul, is the framing of all things
so, as to engage it upon rational terms: it is set between two contraries,
death and life, death which it naturally abho^reth, and life which it naturally
loves: an even balance is holden up before the light of the conscience, in
which obedience and sin are weighed, and it is found even to the convincing of
the spirit of man, that there are as many disadvantages in the one, as
advantages in the other.

This was the way that God used first with man in Paradise, you remember the
terms ^un to, what day thou eats thou shall die: he hedged him in on the one
side by a promis^ of life, on the other by a threatening of death: and these two
are very rational restraint^, ^uited to ^he ^oul of man, and in the inward
principles of it, which are a kind of instinct to that which is app^ehen^ed
good or gainful.

Now, this verse. ^uns even so in the form of words, If ye live after the flesh
ye shall die: you see thi^ method is not changed under the Gospel; for indeed
it is natu^al to the spirit of man, and he has now much more need of all such
pe^swasions, because there is a great change of man's inclination to the wo^st
side; all within is so disordered and perverse, that a thousand hedges of
persuasive grounds cannot do that which one might have done at first: then they
were added out of superabundance, but now out of necessity: then they were set
about man to preserve him in his natural ^^ame and in^linations, but now they
are needful to change and alter them quite, which is a kind of creation;
therefore says David, creat in me a new spirit: and therefore the Gospel
abounds in va^ie^y of motives and inducement^, in greater variety o^ far mo^e
power^ul inducements then the Law. He^e is that gr^a^ pe^swasi^n t^k^n from the
infinite gain or l^sse of ^^e ^^ul of man, which is any thing be able to
prevail, this must do, seeing it is seconded wi^h some natural inclination in
the soul of man to seek its own gain. Yet there is a di^^erence between the
nature of such like promises and threatning^, in the first covenant and in the
second: In the first covenant, though life was freely promised; ^et it was
immediately annexed to per^ect obedience, as a consequent ^eward o^ it, it was
fi^stly p^omised unto complete ^ighteousnesse of men's persons* But in the
second covenant, firstly and principally li^e ete^nal, grace and glory is
promised to Jesus Christ and his ^eed, antecedent to any condition or
qualification upon their part: and then again, all the promises that run in way
of condition, as he that believes shall not perish, etc. If ye walk after the
Spirit ye shall live, these a^e all the consequent fruits of that absolute
gracious disposition and resignation of grace and life to them whom Christ has
chosen; and so their believing, and walking, and obeying, comes in principally
as parts of the grace promised, and as witnesses and evidences and
confirmations of that life which is already begun, and will not see an end.
Besides that, by virtue of these absolute promises made to the seed of Christ,
and Christ's complete performance of all conditions in their name, the promises
of life are made to faith principally, which has this peculiar virtue, To carry
forth the soul to another righteousness and sufficiency, and to bottom it
upon another; and in the next place, to holy walking, though mixed with many
infirmities, which promise in the first covenant was only annexed to perfect
and absolute obedience.

You heard in the preceding verse. a strong inducement taken from the bond debt
and duty we owe to the Spirit, to walk after it, and the want of all obligation
to the flesh. Now, if honesty and duty will not suffi^e to persuade you, as you
know in other things it would do with any honest man, plain equity is a
sufficient bond to him; yet consider what the Apostle subjoynes from the
damage and from the advantage which may of it self be the Topickes of
persuasion, and serves to drive in the nail of debt and duty to the head, if ye
will not take with this debt ye owe to the Spirit, but still conceive there is
some greater obligation lying on you, to care for your bodies and satisfy
them, then, I say, behold the end of it, what fruit you must one day reap of
the flesh and service of sin: If ye live after the flesh ye shall die: but then
consider the fruit you shall reap of the Spirit and holy walking, ye shall
live. It is true, the flesh may flatter you more for the present, but the end
of it will be bitter as death, ampl^ctitur ut strangulet, the flesh embraces
you that it may strangle you, and so if you knew all well, you would not think
you owed it any thing but enmity and hatred and mortification. If your duty
will not move you, let the love of your selves and your souls persuade you, for
it is an irrepealable statute, The wages of sin is death. Every way you choose
to fulfill the lusts of your flesh, and to make provision for it, neglecting
the eternal welfare of your souls, certainly it shall prove to you the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, it shall be as the forbidden fruit, which in
stead of performing that was promised, will bring forth death, the eternal
separation of the soul from God. Adam's sin was an Breviary or Epitome of the
multiplied and en^arged sins of mankind: you may see in this tragedy all your
fortuns (so to speak) you may behold in it the flattering insinuations, and
deceitful promises of sin and Satan, who is a liar and murderer from the
beginning, and murdered man at first by lying to him: you find the hook covered
over with the varnished b^it of an imaginary life and happiness; satisfaction
promised to the eye, to the taste, and to the mind: and upon these inticements
man bewitched and withdrawn from his God, after these vain and empty shadows;
which when he catched hold upon, he himself was caught and laid hold upon by
the wrath of God, by death and all the miseries before it or alter it. Now,
here is the Mapp of the World; for all that is in the world is but a larger
volume of that same kind, the lust of the eyes, the lust of the flesh, and the
pride of life: Albeit they have been known and found to be the notablest and
grossest deceivers, and every man after he has spent his days in pursuit and
labor for them, he is constrained to acknowledge at length, though too late,
that all that is in the world is but an imposture, a delusion, a dream and
worse; yet every man hearkens after these same flatteries and lies, that has
cast down so many wounded, and made so many strong ones to fall by them: every
man trusts the world and his own flesh, as if they were of good report, and of
known integrity; and this is men's misery, that no man will learn wisdom upon
others expenses, upon the wo^ul and tragical example of so many others, but go
on as confidently now, after the discovery of these deceivers, as if this were
the first time they had made such promises, and used such fair words to men.
Have they not been these six thousand years almost deluding the world? And have
we not as many testimonies of their falsehood, as there has been persons in all
ages before us? After Adam has tasted of this tree of pleasure, and found
another fruit growing on it, that is, death; should the posterity be so mad as
to be meddling still with the forbidden tree, and therefore forbidden, because
destructive to our selves.

Know then and consider, beloved in the Lord, that you shall reap no other
thing of all your labors and endeavors after the flesh, all your toyling and
perplexing cares, all your excessive pains in the making provision for your
lusts, and caring for the body only, you shall reap no other harvest of all,
but death and corruption. Death, you think, that is a common lot, and you
cannot eschew it however; nay, but the death here meant is of another sort, in
respect of which, you may call death, life: it is the everlasting destruction
of the soul from the presence of God, and the glory of his power^ it is the
falling of that infinite weight of the wrath of the Lamb upon you, in respect of
which, mountains and hills will be thought light, and men would rather wish to
be covered with them, Rev. 6.16. Suppose now you could swim in a River of
delights and pleasures; (which yet is given to none, for truly upon a j^st
reckoning, it will be found that the anxiety and grief and bitte^n^sse that is
inte^mingled with all earthly delights, ^wallows up the sweetness of them) yet
it will but carry you down ere you be aware, into the Se^ o^ death and
destruction, as the fish that swim and sport for a while in Jordan, are carried
down into the dead Sea of Sodom, where they a^e presently suffocated and
extinguished; or as a Malefactor is carried through a pleasant Palace to the
Gallows; so men walk through the delights of their flesh, to their own endless
torment and destruction.

Seeing then, my beloved, that your sins and lusts which you are inclined and
accustomed to, will certainly kill you if you inte^tain them; then nature it
self would teach you the Law of self-defence, To kill ere you be killed, to
kill sin e^e it kill you, to mortify the deeds and lusts of the body, which
abo^nd among you, or they will certainly mortify you, that is, make you die.
Now, if self love could teach you this, which the love of God cannot persuade
you to; yet it is well, for being once led unto God, and moved to change your
course, upon the fear and apprehension of the infinite danger that will ensue:
ce^tainly if you we^e but a little a^quainted with the sweetness of this life,
and goodness of your God, you would find the power of the former a^gumen^ a
debito, from debt and duty, upon your spirit: let this once lead you in to God,
and you will not want that which will constrain you to abide, and never to
depart from Him.

If you mortify the deeds of the body you shall live: as sin decays, you
increase and grow, as sins die, your soul^ live an^ it shall be a sure pledge
to you of that eternal life: and though this be painful and laborious, yet
consider, that it is but the cutting off of a rotten member, that would corrupt
the whole body, and the want of it will never m^im or m^tilat the body; for you
shall live per^ectly when sin is perfectly expired and out of life; and
according a^ sin is nearer expiring, and nearer the grave, your souls are
nea^^^ that endless life, If this do not move us, what can be said n^xt? What
shall he do more to his Vineyard?

SERMON XXXV.
Romans 8.13, 14. -- But if ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the
body, ye shall live.

Verse. 14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.


THE life and being of many things consists in union, separat them, and they
remain not the same, or they loss their virtue: It is much more thus in
Christianity, the power and life of it consists in the union of these things
that God h^th conjoined, so that if any man pretend to one thing of it, and
neglect the other, he has really none of them: and to hold to the subject in
hand, there are three things, which joined together in the hearts of
Christians, have a great deal of force: the duty of a Christian, and his
reward, and his dignity, his work and labor seems hard and unpleasant, when
considered alone; but the reward sweetens it, when it is jointly believed: his
duty seems too high, and his labor great; yet the consideration of the real
dignity he is advanced unto, and privilege he has received, will raise up the
spirit to great and high attempts, and to sustain great labors: Mortification
is the work and labor; life, eternal life is the reward, following the Spirit
is the Christians duty; but to be the son of God, that is his dignity.

Mortification sounds very harsh at first: the hearts of men say, It is a hard
saying, who can bear it. And indeed I cannot deny but it is so to our corrupt
nature; and therefore so holden out in Scripture, the words chosen to press it,
express much pain and pains, much torment and labor: it is not so easy and
trivial a business to forsake sin, or subdue it, as many think, who only think
it easy, because they have never tried it. It is a Circumcision of the
foreskin of the heart, and you know how it disabled a whole City, Genesis 34. and
how it enraged the heart of a tender mother, Exodus 4 26. It is the incision or
cutting off a member, and these the most dear and precious, be it the right
hand or right foot, which is a living death, as it were, even to kill a man
while he is alive. It is a new birth, and the pains and throws of the birth are
known. Regeneration certainly has a traveling pain within it, in so much that
Paul traveled in pain till it were accomplished in these, Galat. 4.19. Though
men conceive sin in pleasure, yet they cannot be rid of that deadly burden
without throws and pain: and to half this work, or to be remiss and negligent
in it, is ^s foolish and unwise as for a child to stay long in the place of
breaking forth, as the Lord complains of Ephraim, Hos. 13.13. He is an unwise
son, for he should not stay long in the place of breaking forth of children. It
is one of the greatest follies not to labor by all means to be rid of the
in^umbrances of sin. Much violence offered to it, and a total resignation of
our selves to God, may be great pain, but it is short pain; then the pleasure
is greater, and continues: But now Christians lengthen their pain, and draw out
their cross and vexation to a great extent, because they deal negligently in
the business, they suffer the Canaanites to live, and these are thorns and
briers in their sides continually. Then this business is called Mortification,
as the word is here, and Col. 3.5. which imports a higher degree of pain, for
the agonies of death are terrible; and to hold it out yet more, the most
painful and lingering kind of death is chosen to express it, Crucifiction,
Gal. 5.24. Now indeed, that which makes the forsaking of sin so grievous to
flesh and blood, is, the engagements of the soul to it, the oneness that is
between it and our natures, as they are now fallen: for you know pain arises
upon the dissolution or division of any thing that is continued or united; and
these things that are so nearly conjoined it is hard to separat them without
much violence. And truly as the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, so we must
offer violence to our selves, to our lusts and inclinations, who are almost our
selves: And if ye would be truly Christians, this must be your business and
employment, to cut off these things that are dearest unto you, to cast out the
very idols your hearts sacrifice unto: and if there be any thing more one with
you than another, to endeavor to break the bond with that, and to be at the
furthest distance with it: It is easy to persuade men to forsake some sins and
courses, that they are not much in^lined to, and find not much pleasure or
profit by them: You may do that and be but dead in sins; but if you aim at true
mortification indeed, you would consider what are the chief idols and
predominant inclinations of your heart, and as to set your self impartially
against all known sin, so particularly against the most beloved sin, because it
interrupts most the communion of God, and separates from you^ Beloved, and the
dearer it be, the more dangerous certainly it is.

But to encourage and hearten you to this, I would have you look back to that
former victory that Christ has gained in our name, and look about you to the
assistance you have for the present, the Spirit to help you. Truly, my beloved,
this will be a dead business if you be not animated and quickened by these
considerations, that Christ died to sin and lived to God, and that in this He
was a public person representing you, that so you may conclude with Paul, I am
crucified with Christ, Gal. 2.20. We are buried with him by baptism into his
death, Romans 6.4. Consider that mystical union with Christ crucified, and life
shall spring out of his cross, out of his grave to kill sin in you. That the
great business is done already, and victory gained in our head, this is our
victory, even faith. Believe, and then you have overcome, before you overcome;
and this will help you to overcome in your own persons. And then con^ider and
look round about to the strong helper you have, the Spirit, If ye through the
Spirit mortify, etc. Stronger is he that is in you, then he that is in the
world; though he does not vent all his power to you; yet you may believe that
there is a secret latent virtue in the seed of grace, that it cannot be wholly
overcome or conquered, and there is one engaged in the warfare with us, who
will never leave us nor forsake us, who of set purpose withdraws his help now
and then, to discover our weakness to us, that we may cleave the faster to
Him, who never lets sin get any power, or gather any strength, but out of
wisdom to make the final victory the more glorious; in a word he leads us
through weaknesses, infirmities, fainting^, wrestlings, that his strength may
be perfected, in weakness that when we are weak, then we may be strongest in
Him, 2 Cor. 12 9. Our duty then is to follow this Spirit wheresoever he leads
us: Christ, the Captain of our Salvation, when he went to Heaven, he sent the
Spirit to be our guider, to lead us thither where he is; and therefore we
should resign and give up our selves to His guidance and direction. The nature
of a creature is dependence, so the very essence of a Christian consists in
dependence and subordination to the Spirit of God. Nature it self would teach
them that want wisdom, to commit themselves to these that have it, and not to
carry the reins of their own life themselves.

Truly, not only the sense of our own imperfection, of our folly and ignorance
in these things that belong to life, should make us willing to yield ourselves
over to the Spirit of God, as blind men to their leader, as children to their
nurses, as orphans to their Tutors; but also because the Spirit is made our
Tutor and leader: Christ our Father has left us to the Spirit in his
latter-will; and therefore as we have absolute necessity, so he has both
willingness and ability, because it is his office. O Lord, I know, says
Jeremiah, the way of man is not in himself, it is not in him that walks to
direct his steps, Jer. 10.23. O! it were a great point of wisdom, thus to know
our ignorance and folly, and this is the great qualification of Christ's
Disciples, simple as children, as little children, as void of conceit of their
own wisdom, Mark 10.15. And this alone capacitats the soul to receive the
impressions of wisdom: as an empty table is fittest to write upon, so a soul
emptied of it self: whereas self-conceit draws a number of foolish senseless
draughts in the mind, that it cannot rec^^^e the true image of wisdom. This
then, when a soul finds that it has misled it self, being misguided by the
wildfire of its lusts, and has hardly escaped perishing and falling headlong
in the Pit, this disposes the soul to ^ willing resignation of it self, to one
wiser and powerfuller, the Spirit of God; and so he gives the Spirit the
string of his affections and judgment to lead him by, and he walks willingly
in that way to eternal life, since his heart was enlarged with so much
knowledge and love: and now having given up your selves thus, you would
carefully eye your leader, and attend all his motions, that you may conform
your self to them: whenever the Spirit pulls you by the heart, draws at
your conscience, to drive you to prayer, or any such duty, do not resist that
pull, do not quench the Spirit, le^t He let you alone, and do not call you, nor
speak to you. If you fall out thus with your leader, then you must guide your
selves; and truly you will guide it into the pit, if left to yourselves;
therefore make much of all the impulses of your conscience, of all the touches
and inward motions of light and affection, to entertain these, and draw them
forth in meditation and action, for these are nothing else, but the Spirit your
le^^^r plucking at you to follow Him, and if you sit when he ^e^h ^o walk, if
you neglect such warnings, then you may g^ieve him, and this cannot but in the
end be bitte^nesse to you. Certainly, many Christians are guilty in this, and
prejudge themselves of the present comfort and benefit of this inward
anointing, that teaches all things, and of this bosomeguide that leade^h in
all truth; because they are so heavy and lumpish to be led after Him: they
drive slowly, and takes very much pressure and persuasion to any duty, whereas
we should accustom our selves to willing and ready obedience upon the least
signification of his mind: yea, and which is worse, we often ^esist the Holy
Ghost, he draws, and we hold beloved sins, he pulls, and we pull back from
the most spiritual duties: there is so much perverseness and frowardness yet
in our natures, that there needs the Almighty draught of his arm, to make it
straight, as the^e is need of infinite grace to pardon it.

Now, my beloved, if you have in your desires and affections resigned your
selves over to the guidance of this Spirit, and this be your real and sincere
endeavor to follow it, and in as far as you are carried back, or contrary, by
temptation and corruption, or retarded in your motion, it is your lamentation
before the Lord, I say unto you, cheat your hearts, and lift them up in the
belief of this privilege confe^^ed upon you, you are the sons of God: for he
gives this Tutor and Pedagogue to none but to his own children, as many as are
led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God. Suppose you cannot exact^y
follow his motion, but are often driven out, or turned back, yet has not the
Spirit the hold of your heart? are you not detained by the cord of your
judgment, and the law of your mind? and is the^e not some chain fastened about
your heart, which makes it outstrip the practice, by desires and affections?
you are the Sons of God, that is truly the greatest dignity, and highest
privilege, in respect of which, all relation may ^lush, and hide their faces:
what a^e all the splendid and glistering titles among men but empty s^owes, and
evanishing sound^, in respect of this: to be called the Son o^ a Gentleman, of
a Noble-^an, of a King, how much do the son^ ^f ^^en pride th^mselves in it?
But truly, that puts no intrinsic dignity in the persons themselves, it is
a miserable poverty to borrow praise from another, and truly he that boasts of
his parentage, aliena laudat non sua, he praises that which is another not
his own. But this dignity is truly a dignity, it puts intrinsic worth in the
person, and puts a more excellent spirit in them, then that which is in the
world, as is said of ^aleb: and besides it intitles to the greatest happiness
imaginable.

SERMON XXXVI.
Romans 8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of
God.

Verse. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, etc.


CHildren do commonly resemble their parents, not only in the outward
proportion and feature of their countenances, but also in the disposition and
temper of their spirits; and generally they are inclined to imitate the customs
and carriage of their parents, so that they sometimes may be accounted the very
living images of such persons, and in them men are thought to outlive
themselves. Now indeed, they that are the sons of God, are known by this
Character, that they are led by the Spirit of God: and there is the more
necessity, and the more reason too, of this resemblance of God, and imitation
of him in his children; because that very divine birth that they have from
Heaven, consists in the renovation of their natures, and assimilation to the
divine nature; and therefore they are possessed with an inward principle, that
carries them powerfully toward a conformity with their heavenly Father; and it
becomes their great study and endeavor to observe all the dispositions and
carriage of their Heavenly Father, which are so honorable and high, and
suitable to Himself, that they at least may breath and halt after the imitation
of Him. Therefore our Lord ^xhorts us, and takes a domestic example, and
familiar pattern to persuade us the more by, Be ye perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect, Matthew. 5.48. And there is one perfection he especially
recommends for our imitation, mercifulness and compassion toward men, opposed
to the violence, fury, and implacablen^sse, to the oppression and revenge, and
hatred that abounds among men, Luke 6.36. And generally, in all his ways of
holiness and purity, of goodness and mercy, we ought to be followers of Him,
as dear children, who are not only oblidged by the common Law of Sympathy
between Parents and Children; but moreover engaged by the tender affection that
he carries to us, Ephesians. 5.1. Now, because God is high as Heaven, and his way
and thoughts and dispositions are infinitely above us, the pattern seems to be
so far out of sight, that it is given over as desperate by many to attempt any
conformity to it; therefore it has pleased the Lord to put his own Spirit
within his own Children, to be a bosom-pattern and example: and this is our
duty to resign our selves to his leading and direction: the Spirit brings the
copy near hand us, and though we cannot attain, yet we should follow after;
though we cannot make out the lesson, yet we should be scribbling at it; and the
more we exercise our selves this way, setting the Spirits direction before our
eyes, the more perfect shall we be.

It is high time indeed to pretend to this, to be a son or a daughter of God:
its a higher word then if a man could deduce his genealogy from an interrupted
line of a thousand Kings and Princes, there is more honor, true honor in it,
and more profit too, that which enriches the poorest, and e^nobles the basest,
inconceivably beyond ^ll the imaginary degrees of men. Now, my beloved, this is
the great design of the Gospel, to bestow this incomparable privilege upon
you, to become the Sons of God. But it is sad to think how many souls scarce
think upon it, and how many delude themselves in it: but consider, that as many
as are the Sons of God, are led by the Spirit of God, they have gotten a new
leader and guider, other then their own fancy or humor, which once they
followed in the ignorance of their hearts. It is lamentable to conceive how the
most part of us are acted, and driven, and carried headlong, rather then
gently led, by our own carnal and corrupt inclinations; men pretending to
Christianity, yet hurried away with every self-pleasing object, as if they were
not Masters of themselves, furiously agitated by violent lusts, miscarried
continually against the very dictates of their own reason and conscience. And I
fear there i^ too much of these, even in those who have more reason to assume
this honorable title of Son ship. I know not how we are exceedingly addicted
to self-pleasing in everything, whatsoever our ^ancy or inclination suggest, to
us, that we must do without more bands, if it be not directly sinful;
whatsoever we apprehend, that we must ven^ and speak it out, though to little
or no ed^fication; like that o^ Solomon, We deny our hearts nothing they
desire, except the gross^esse of it restrain us. Now, certainly if we knew what
we are called to, who are the Sons of God, we could not but disingage more with
our selves even in lawful things, and give over the conduct o^ our hearts and
ways to the Spirit of our Father, whom we may be persuaded of, that he will
lead us in the ways of pleasantness and peace.

Now, the special and peculiar operations of the Spirit, are expressed in the
following words: There are some workings of the Spirit of God that are but
introductory and subservient to more excellent works; and therefore they are
transient, not appointed to continue long, for they are not his great
intendment; of this kind are these terrible representations of sin and wrath,
of the Justice of God, which puts the soul in a fear, a trembling fear; and
while such a soul is kept within the apprehension of sin and judgment, its shut
up, as it were, in bondage. Now, though it be true that in the conversion of a
sinner, there is always something of this in more or less degrees; yet
because this is not the great design of the Gospel, to put men in fear, but
rather to give them confidence; nor the great intendment of God in the
dispensation of the Law, To bring a soul in bondage under terror, but rather by
the Gospel to free them from that bondage; therefore he has reason to express
it thus, ye have not received the Spirit of bondage again to fear, etc. But
there are other operations of the Spirit, which are chiefly intended, and
principally bestowed, as the great gift of our Father, to express his bounty
and goodness toward us; and from these he is called the Spirit of Adoption,
and the Spirit of Intercession. The Spirit of Adoption, not only in regard of
that witness-bearing and testification to our consciences of Gods love and
^avour, and our interest in it, as in the next verse. but also in regard of that
child-like disposition of reverence and love and respect that he begets in our
hearts toward God, as our Father: and from both these flows this next
working, ^rying, Abba, Father, aiding and assisting us in presen^ing our
necessities to our Father, making this the continued vent of the heart in all
extremitie^, to pour out all that burdens us in our Fathers bosom: and this
give^ marvelous ease to the heart, and releases it from the bondage of
carefuln^sse and anxiety, which it may be subject to, after the soul is
delivered from the ^ear and bondage of wrath.

Let us speak then to these in order: the first working of the spirit^, to put
a m^n in fe^r of himself, and such a fear as mightily straiten^ and embondages
the soul of man: and this, though in it self it be neither so pleasant nor
excellent, as to make it come under the notion of any gift from God, it having
rather the nature of a torment and punishment, and being some sparkle of Hell
already kindled in the Conscience; yet, has made it beautiful and seasonable
in its use and end, because he makes it to usher-in the pleasant and refreshing
sight of a Savior, and the report of Gods love to the World in Him. It is
true, all men are in bondage to sin and Satan, and shut up in the darkness of
ignorance and unbelief, and bound in the setters of their own lusts, which are
as the chains that are put about malefactors before they go to prison, He that
commits sin, is a servant of sin, Joh. 8.34. And to be a servant of sin, is
slavery under the most cruel tyrant: all these things are, yet how few souls do
apprehend it seriously, or are weary of their prison? how few groan to be
delivered! nay, the most part account it only liberty, To hate true delivery as
bondage. But some there are, whose eyes the Spirit of God open^, and lets them
see their bondage and slavery, and how they are concluded under the most heavy
and weighty sentence that ever was pronounced, The curse and wrath of the
everliving God, that there is no way to fly from it, or escape it, for any
thing they can do or know. Now indeed, this serious discovery cannot choose but
make the heart of a man to tremble, as David, my heart trembles because of thy
Judgments, and I am afraid of thee, P^al. 119.120. Such a serious
representation will make the s^outest and proudest heart to fall down, and
^aint for ^ear of that infinite intolerable weight of deserved wrath, and then
the soul is in a sensible bondage, that before was in a real, but insensible
bondage; then its environed about with bitter accusations, with dreadful
challenges, then the Law of God arrests and confines the soul within the bounds
of its own accusing Conscience; and thi^ is some previous ^epres^ntation ^f
that eternal ^mp^isonment and banishment ^^om the pressence o^ God: albe^^t
many of you are free from this, ^ear, and enjoy a kind o^ liberty to ^erve your
own lusts, and are not sensi^le o^ any thraldom o^ your spirits; yet certainly
the Lord will sometime arrest you, an^ b^ing you to this spiritual bondage,
when he shall make the in^q^^ties o^ your heels encompasse you about, and the
cur^es of h^s Law sur^ound: when your Conscience accu^eth, and God cond^mneth,
it may be too late, and out of date.

Alas then! what will you do, who now put your consc^ence by, and will not
hearken to it, or be put in fear by any thing can be represented to you: we do
not desire to put you in fe^r, where n^ ^ear is; but where there is infinite
cause of ^ear, and when it is possible that fear may introduce faith, and be
the forerunner o^ these glad tidings that will compose the soul: We desire only
you may know what bondage you are really into, whether it be observed or not,
that you may fear, lest you be enthralled in the chains o^ everlasting
da^knesse, and so may be persuaded to flee from it before it be irrecoverable.
What a vain and empty sound is the Gospel of liberty by a Redeemer, to the most
part who do not feel their bondage? Who believes its report, or care, much for
it? because it is necessity that casts a beauty and lust^e upon it, or takes
the scales off our eyes, and opens our closed ears.

Now for you, who either are, or have been detained in this bondage, under the
fea^ful apprehension o^ the wrath of God, and the sad remembrance o^ your sins,
know that this is not the prime intent, and grand business to torment you, as
it were, before the time; there is some other more beautiful and satisfying
structure to be raised out of this ^oundation: I would have you improve it
thus, to commend the necessity, the absolute necessity of a Redeemer, and to
make him beautiful in your eyes. Do not dwell upon that, as if it were the
ultimat or last work, but know that you are called in this rational way to come
out of your selves into this glorious liberty of the sons of God, purchased by
Christ, an^ revealed in the Gospel. Know you have not received the spirit of
bondage only to fear, but to drive you to faith in a Savior, and then you
ought so to walk, as not to return to that ^ormer thraldom o^ the ^ear of
wrath, but believe his love.

SERMON XXXVII.
Romans 8.14. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of
God.

Verse. 15. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear: but ye
have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.


THE li^e o^ Christianity, take it in it self, it is the most pleasant and
joyful life that can be, exempted from these fears and cares, these sorrows and
anxieties, that all other lives are subject unto; for this of necessity must be
the force and efficacy of true Religion, i^ it be indeed true to its name, to
disburden and ease the heart, and fill it with all manner of consolation.
Certainly it is the most rich Subject, and most completely ^urnished with all
variety of delights to ente^tain a soul, that can be imagined: Yet, I must
confess, while we consult with the experience and practice of Christians, this
bold assertion seems to be much weakened, and too much ground is given to
confirm the contrary misapprehe^sions of the world, who take it to be a sullen,
melancholic, and d^^consolat life, attended with many ^ears and sorows. It is,
alas! too evident, that many Christians are kept in bondage, almost all their
l^fe-time, through fear o^ ete^nall death, how many dismal representations of
sin and wrath, in the souls of some Christians, which keep them in much
thraldom? at least, who is it that is not once, and often, brought in bondage
after conversion, and made to apprehend fea^fully their own estate, who has
such constant uninterrup^ed peace and joy in the holy Ghost, or lies under such
direct beams of divine favor, but it is sometimes eclipsed, and their souls
fill^d with the darkness of horror and terror, and ^ruly the most part, ta^^e
not so much sweetness in Religion, as make^ them uncess^nt and unwearied in the
ways of Godliness: yet not withstanding of all this w^ must vindicat
Christianity it self, and not impute these things unto it, which are the
infirmities and faults of the followers of it, who do not improve it unto such
an use, or use it so far as in it self it is capable. Indeed, it is true that
often we are brought to fear again, yet withal it is certain, that our
allowance is larger, and that we have received the Spirit, not to put us in
bondage again to fear, but rather to seal to our hearts that love of God which
may not only expel fear, but bring in joy. I wish that this were deeply
considered by all of us, that there is such a life as this attain^ble; that the
word of God does not deceive us in promi^ing fair things, which it cannot
perform, but that there is a certain reali^y in the life of Christianity, in
that peace and joy, tranquillity and serenity of min^ that is holden out, and
that some have ^eally found it, and do find it; and that the reason why all of
us do not find it in expe^ience, is not because it is not, but because we have
so little apprehension of it, and diligence after it. It is strange, that all
men who have pursued satisfaction in the things of this life, being
disappointed, and one generation witnessing this to another, and one person to
another, that notwithstanding, men are this day as fresh in the pursuit of
that, as big in the expectations as ever: and yet in this business of Religion,
and the happiness to be found in it, though the Oracles of God in all ages have
testified from Heaven how certain and possible it is, though many have found it
in experience, and left it on record to others; yet there is so slender belief
of the reality and certainty of it, and so slack pursuit of it, as if we did
not believe it at all. Truly, my beloved, there is a great mistake in this, and
its generally too: all men apprehend other things more ^easable and attainable
then personal holiness and happiness in it; but truly, I conceive there is
nothing in the world so practicable as this, nothing made so easy, so certain
to a soul that really minds it.

Let us take it so then, the fault is not Religions, that these who profess it
are subject to so much fear and care, and disquieted with so much sorrow; it is
rather because Christianity does not sink into the hearts and souls o^ men, but
only puts a tincture on their outside, or because the ^aith of divine truths
is so supe^ficial, and the consideration o^ them so slight, that they cannot
have much efficacy and influence on the heart, to quiet and compose it. Is it
any wonder that some souls be subject again to the bondage of fear and terror,
when they do not stand in aw to sin? Much liberty to sin, will certainly
embondage the spirit of a Christian to fear. Suppose a believer in Jesus Christ
be exempted from the haz^rd of condemnation; yet he is the g^eatest fool in the
world that would on that account venture on satisfaction to his lusts; for
though it be true that he be not in danger of eternal wrath, yet he may find so
much present w^ath in his conscience, as may make him think it was a ^oolish
bargain; he may lose so much of the sweetness of the peace and joy of God, as
all the pleasures o^ sin cannot compense: Therefore to the end that y^u whose
souls a^e once pacified by the blood of Christ, and composed by his word of
promise, may enjoy that constant rest and tranquillity, as not to be enthralled
ag^^n to your old fears and terrors, I would advise and recommend to you these
two things; one is, that ye would be much in the study of that allowance which
the promises of Christ affords: be much in the serious apprehension of the
Gospel, and certainly your doubts and fears would evainish, at one puff of
such a rooted and established meditation. Think what you are called to, not to
fear again, but to love rather, and honor him as a Father; and then, take heed
to walk suitably, and preserve your seal of adoption unb^otted, unrusted: you
would study so to walk, as you may not cast dirt upon it, or open any gap in
the conscience for the re-entry of these hellish-like fears, and dread^ul
apprehensions of God. C^rtainly ^ts impossible to preserve the Spirit in
freedom, if a man be not watchful against sin and corruption. David prays,
re-establish me with thy free Spirit; as if his spirit had been abased,
embondaged, and enthraled by the power of that corruption. If you would have
your spirits kept free from the ^ear of wrath, study to keep them free from the
power of sin, for that is but a f^uit of this: and its most suitable that the
soul that cares not to be in bondage to sinful lusts, should by the
righteousness of God, tempered with love and wisdom, be brought under the
bondage he would not, that is, o^ ^ear and terror; ^or by this means the Lord
makes him know how evil the first is, by the bitterness of the second.

It is usual on such a Scripture as this, to propound many questions, and
debate many practical cases, as whether a soul after believing can be under
legal bondage? and wherein these d^ffer, the bondage o^ a soul after believing,
and in it, first conversion? And how far that bondage o^ fear is preparatory to
faith? and many such like, but I choose rather to hold forth the simple and
naked truth for your edification, then put you upon, or intertain you in such
needless janglings and contentions. All I desire to say to a soul in bondage,
is, to exhort him to come to the Redeemer, and to consider that his case calls
and cries for a delivery: Come, I say, and he shall find rest and liberty to
his soul. All I would say to souls delivered from this bondage, is, to request
and beseech them to live in a holy fear of sin, and jealousy over themselves,
that so they may not be readily brought under the bondage of the fear of wrath
again: Perfect love casts out the fear of hell, but perfect love b^ings in the
fear of sin: Ye that love the Lord hate ill, and if ye hate it, ye will fear it
in this state of infirmity and weakness, wherein we are: And if at any time ye
through negligence and carelessness of walking, lose the comfortable evidence
o^ the Fathers love, and be reduced again to your old prison o^ legal terror,
do not despair for that, do not think that such a thing could not be^all a
child of God, and from that ground do not raze former foundations; for the
Scriptures says not that whosoever believes once in Christ, and receives the
Spirit of Adoption, cannot fear again; ^or we see it otherwise in David, in
Heman, in Job, etc. all holy Saints; but the Scripture says, ye have not
received the spirit of bondage for that end to fear again: it is not the
allowance of your Father: your allowance is better and larger, if you knew it,
and did not sit below it.

Now, the great gi^t, and large allowance of our Father, is expressed in the
next words, but ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, etc. Which Spirit of
Adoption is a Spirit of Intercession, to make us cry to God as our Father.
These are two gifts, Adoption or the privilege of Sons, and the Spirit of
Adoption revealing the love and mercy of God to the heart, and framing it to a
soul-like disposition: compare the two states together, and its a marvelous
change: a Rebel condemned, and then pardoned, and then adopted to be a Son of
God: a sinner under bondage, a bound slave to sin and Sat^n, not only freed
from that intolerable bondage, but advanced to this liberty, to be made a Son
of God, this will be the continued wonder of eternity, and that whereabout the
song o^ Angels and Saints will be: accursed rebels, expecting nothing but
present death, sinners arraigned and sentenced before his Tribunal, and already
tasting Hell in their Consciences, and in fear of eternal perishing, not only
to be delivered from all that, but to be dignified with this privilege to be
the Sons of God: to be taken from the Gibbit, to be Crowned, that is the great
my^tery of wisdom and grace revealed in the Gospel, the proclaiming whereof
will be the joint labor of all the innumerable companies above for all
eternity. Now if you ask how this est^te is attainable, Himself tells us, John.
1.12. As many as believed or received him, to them he gave the privilege to be
the Sons of God. The way is made plain and easy, Christ the Son of God, the
natural and eternal Son of God, became the son of man; to facilitate this, he
has taken on the burden of man's sin, the chastisement of our peace; and so of
the glorious Son of God he became like the wretched and accursed sons of men;
and therefor God has proclaimed in the Gospel not only an immunity and
freedom from wrath, to all that in the sense of their own misery, cordially
receive him, as he is offered; but the unspeakable privilege of Sonship and
Adoption for his sake who became our elder brother, Gal. 4.4, 5. Men that want
children use to supply their want by adopting some beloved friend in the place
of a son: and this is a kind of supply o^ nature for the comfort of them that
want: But it is strange, that God having a Son so glorious, the very character
of his Person, and brightness of his glory, in whom he delighted from
eternity, strange, I say, that he should in a manner loss and give away his
only begotten Son, that he might by his means adopt others, poor despicable
creatures, yea rebellious, to be his sons and daughters! Certainly, this is an
act infinitely transcending nature, such an act that has an unsearchable
mystery in it, into which Angels desire to look, and never cease looking,
because they never see the bottom o^ it. It was not out of indigency he did it,
not for any need he had of us, or comfort expected from us, but absolutely ^or
our necessity and consolation, that he might have upon whom to pour the riches
of his grace.

SERMON XXXVIII.
Romans 8.15. But ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba,
Father.


BEhold what manner of love the Father has showed unto us, that we should be
called the Sons of God, 1 John 3.1. It is a wonderful expression of love, to
advance his own creatures, not only infinitely below himself, but far below
other creatures, to such a dignity. Lord what is man that thou so magnifiest
him! but it surpasses wonder, that rebellious creatures, his enemies, should
have, not only their rebellions ^reely pardoned, but this p^iviledge of
Sonship bestowed upon them; that he should take enemies and make Sons of them;
and not only Sons, but Heirs, Coheirs with his own only begotten Son. And
then, how he makes them sons, is ^s wonder^ul, as the thing it self, that he
should make his own Son, our Brother, bone of our bone, and flesh of our flesh;
and make him spring out as a branch or rod out of the dry stemm of Iesse, who
himself was the root o^ all mankind: This is the way God sent his Son, made of
a woman, under the Law, that we might re^eive the adoption of sons, Gal. 4.5.
The House of Heaven marries with the Earth, with them who have their foundation
in the dust; the chief Heir of that heavenly Family, joyneth in kindred with
our base and obscure family, and by this m^ans, we are made of kin to God, But
of him are ye in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 1.30. It behoved Christ, in a manner, to
lose his own Sonship as to men, to have it so veiled and darkened by the
superadded interest in us, and his nearness to us, he was so properly a Son of
man, subject to all humane infirmities, except sin, that without eyes of ^aith,
men could not perceive that he was the Son of God: and by this wonderful
exchange are we made the sons of God: whoever, in the apprehension of their own
enmity and distance from God, receive Christ Jesus, offered as the peace, the
bond of union between the two Families of Heaven and earth, that were at an
infinite odds and distance, whoever (I say) believes thus in him, and flies to
him, desiring to lay down the weapons of their warfare, their peace is not only
made by that marriage which Christ made with our nature, but they are blessed
with this power and privilege to be the sons and daughters of the Most Hig:
hand from thence you may conclude, that if God be your Father, you can want
nothing that is good: but the determination of what is good for you, whether in
spiritual enlargments, or in the things of this life, you must refer to his
wisdom: for his love indeed is strong as death, nothing can quench it, in the
point of reality and constancy: there is nothing to shadow it out among men;
the love o^ women is ea^nest and vehement, but that is nothing to it, Isa.
49.15. For they may forget, but he cannot. Yet his love is not a ^oolish
dotage, like men that is often miscarried with fancy and lust, but it is a
rational and wise affection, administered and expressed with infinite reason and
wisdom: and therefore, he chooses rather to profit us, then to please us in his
dealings, and we who are not so fit to judge and discern our own good, should
commit all to his Fatherly and wise providence. Therefore i^ you be tempted to
anxiety and carfulness o^ mind, either through the earthlinesse of your
dispositions, or the present straits of the time, you who have resigned your
self to Jesus Christ, would call to mind that your heavenly Father cares ^or
you: and and what need you care too? why not, use your lawful Callings, be
diligent in them, this is not to prejudge that, but if you believe in God, then
you are oblidged by that prosession to abate from the supe^fluous tormenting
thoughtfulness, that is good ^or nothing, but to make you more miserable then
your troubles can make you, and to make you miserable before you be miserable;
to anticipat your sorrows. If you say God is your Father, you are tied to
devolve your selves over on him, and trust in his good will and faith^ulnesse,
and to sit down quietly as children that have parents to provide for them.

Now, the other gift is great too, the Spirit of adopti^n, and because ye are
sons, therefore has he given you the Spirit of his Son, says this Apostle,
Gal. 4.6. And ^o it is a kind of con^ecta^y of the great privilege and blessed
estate of adoption. They who adopt children, use to give them some kind of
token to express their love to them: But as the Lord is higher then all, and
this privilege to be His son or child is the greatest dignity imaginable, ^o
this gi^t of his Spirit suits the greatness and glory and love of our Father.
It is a Fathers gift indeed, a gift suitable to our heavenly Father. If a
father that is ^ender of the education of his child, and would desire nothing
so much as that he might be of a virtuous and gracious disposition, and good
ingine, I think if he were to express his love in one wish, it would be this,
that he might have such a spirit in him, and this he would account better then
all that he could leave him: But if it were possible to transmit a gracious and
well-disposed and understanding spirit from one to another, and if men could
leave it, as they do their inheritance to their children, certainly a wise and
religious parent would first make over ^ disposition of that to his children,
as Elisha sought a double measure of Elijahs spirit, so a ^ather would wish
such a measure to his children, and if it were possible, give it: But that may
not be, all that can be done is to wish well to them, and leave them a good
example for imitation: But in this our heavenly Father transcends all, that He
can import his own Spirit to his adopted children, and this Spirit is in a
manner the very essential principle that makes them children of the Father:
their natures, their dispositions are under his power, he can as well reform
them, as you can change your childrens g^rments: he can make of us what he
will, our hearts are in his hand, as the water, capable o^ any impression he
pleases to put on it: and this is the impression he puts on his children,
he puts his Spirit in their hearts, and writes his Law in their inward
parts, a more divine and higher work, then all humane persuasion can reach.
This Spirit they receive as earnest of the inheritance, and withal, to make
them fit for the inheritance o^ the Saints in light.

Now, the working o^ this Spirit of Adoption, I conceive to be threefold,
beside that of Intercession, expressed in the verse. The first work of the
Spirit of Adoption, that wherein a Fathers affection seems to break first from
under ground, is, ^he revealing to the heart, the love and mercy of God to
sinners. I do not say, to such a soul in particular, for that application is
neither first, nor universal: But herein the Spirit of Adoption first appears
from under the cloud of ^ear, and this is the first opening o^ the prison of
bondage, wherein a soul was shut, when the plain way of reconciliation to God
in Christ, and delivery from the bondage of sin and wrath, is holden out; when
such a word as this comes into the soul, and is received with some gladness,
God so loved the world, that he gave his Son, etc. This is a true and faithful
saying, etc. Come ye that labor and weary, and I will give rest to your souls:
When a soul is made to hear the g^ad tidings of liberty preached to captives,
of ligh^ to the blind, of joy to the heavy in spirit, of life to the dead;
though he cannot come that length as to see his own p^^ticular interest, yet
the very receiving affectionatly and greedily such a general report as good and
true, gives some ease and relaxation to the heart. To see delivery possible, is
some door of hope to a desperate sinner; but to see it, and espy more then a
possibility, even great probability, though he cannot reach a certainty, that
will be as the breaking open of a window of light in a dark dungeon, it will be
as the taking off o^ some of the hardest fetters, and the worst chains, which
makes a man almost to think himself at liberty. Now this is the great office of
the Spirit of the Father, to beget in us good thoughts of Him, to incline us to
charitable and favorable construction of Him, and make us ready to think well
of Him, to beget a good understanding between us and Him, and correct our
jealous misapprehensions of Him; for certainly we are naturally suspicious of
God, that he deals not in sad earnest with us: when ever we see the hight of
our provocation, and weight of deserved indignation, we think him like our
selves, and can hardly receive, without suspicion, the Gospel that lays open
his love in Christ to the world.

Now, this is the Spirits wo^k, to make us entertain that ho^ourable thought of
God, that he is most inclinable to pardon sinners; and that his mercy is
infinitely above man's sin; and that it is no prejudice to His Holiness or
Justice; and to apprehend seriously a constant reality and solid truth in the
promises of the Gospel; and so to convince a soul of righteousness, Joh. 18.
that there is a way of justifying a sinner and ungodly person, without wrong to
Gods righteousness; and this being well pondered in the heart, and received in
love, the great business is done; after that, particular application is more
easy, of which I shall not speak now, because occasion will be given in the
next verse. about the Spirits witnessing with our spirits, which is another of
the Spirits workings: only I say this, that which makes this so difficult, is a
defect in the first: but the common principles of the Gospel are not really,
and so seriously apprehended, because many souls do not put to their seal to
witness to the promises and truth o^ it; therefore the Lord often denies this
seal an^ witness to our comfort. It is certainly a preposterous way S^tan puts
souls upon, first, to get such a testimony from the Spirit, before they labor
to get such a testimony to Christ, and echo or answer in their hearts to his
word: this way it seems shortest; for it would leap into the greater liberty at
the first hand, but certainly its farthest about, because its impossible for
souls to leap immediately out of bondage to assurance, without some middle step:
they cannot pass thus from extremes to extremes, without going through the
middle st^te of receiving Christ, and laying his word up in the heart; and
therefore it proves the way furthest about, because when souls have long
wearied themselves, they must at length turn in hither.

But there is another working of the Spirit, I wish you were acquaint with: as
the first work is to beget a suitable apprehension of Gods mind and heart
toward sinners; so the next is, to beget a suitable disposition in our hearts
toward God as a Father: The first apprehends his love, the next reflects it
back again with the heart of a sinner to Him: The Spirit first brings the
report of the love and grace of God to us, and then he carries the love and
respect of the heart up to God.

You know how God complains in M^lachi, If I be a Father, where is my fear and
honor: ^or these are the only fitting qualifications of Children, such a
reverent respective observance of our Heavenly Father, such affectionat and
humble carriage toward him, as becomes both His Majesty and His Love: as
these are tempered one with another in Him, his Love not abasing his Majesty,
and his Majesty not diminishing his Love: So we ought to carry, as reverence
and confidence, fear and love, may be contempered one with another, so as we
may neither forget his infinite greatness, nor doubt of his unspeakable love:
and this inward disposition engraven on the heart, will be the principle of
willing and ready obedience, it will in some measure be our meat and drink to
do our Fathers will; for Christ gave us an example how we should carry toward
him: How humble and obedient was he, though his only begotten Son!

SERMON XXXIX.
Romans 8.15. -- Whereby we cry, Abba, Father.


AS there is a light of grace in bestowing such incomparably high dignities and
excellent gifts on poor sinne^s, such as to make them the sons of God, who were
the children of the Devil; and heirs of a kingdom, who were heirs of wrath; so
there is a depth of wisdom in the Lords allowance and manner of dispensing his
love and grace in this life; for though the love be wonderful that we should be
called the sons of God; yet as that Apostle speaks, It does not yet so clearly
appear what we shall be, by what we are, 1 John 3.1. Our present condition is
so unlike such a state and dignity, and our enjoyments so unsuitable to our
rights and p^iviledges, that it would not appear by the mean, low, and indigent
state we are now into, that we have so great and glorious a Father. How many
infi^mities are we compassed about with? How many wants are we pressed withal?
our necessiti^s a^e infinite, and our enjoyments no ways proportioned to our
necessities: Notwithstanding even in this, the love and wisdom o^ our Heavenly
Father shows it self, and oftentimes more gloriously in the theater of men's
weakness, infirmities and wants, then they could appear in the absolute and
total exemption of his children from necessities: strength perfected in
weakness, grace sufficient in infirmities, has some greater glory then
strength and grace alone. Therefor he has chosen this way as most fit for the
advancing his glory, and most suitable for our comfort and edification, to give
us but little in hand, and environ us with a crowd of continued necessities and
wants within and without, that we may learn to cry to him as our Father, and
seek our supplies from him, and withal he has not been sparing, but liberal
in promises of hearing our cries, and supplying our wants; ^o that this way of
narrow and hard dispensation, that at first seems contrary to the love and
bounty and riches of our Father, in the perfect view of it, appears to be the
only way to perpetuat our communion with Him, and often to renew the sense of
His love and grace, that would grow slack in our hearts, if our needs did not
every day stir-up fresh longings, and his returns by this means are so much the
more refreshing. There is a time of childrens minority, when they stand in need
of continual supplies from their Parents, or Tutors, because they are not
entered in possession of their inheritance; and while they are in this state,
there is nothing more beseeming them then in all their wants to address to
their Father, and represent them to Him, and it is fit they should be from hand
to mouth, as you say, that they may know and acknowledge their dependence on
their Father. T^uly this is our minority, our presence in the body, which
because of sin that dwells in it, and its own natural weakness and incapacity,
keeps us at much distance with the Lord, that we cannot be intimatly present
with him. Now, in this condition, the most natural, the most comely and
becoming exercise of children, is, to cry to our Father, to present all our
grievances, and thus to intertain some holy correspondence with our absent
Father, by the messenger of prayer and supplication, which cannot return empty,
if it be not sent away too full of self-conceit. This is the most natural
breathing of a child of God in this world, it is the most proper acting of his
new life, and the most suitable exspiration of that Spirit of Adoption, that is
inspired into him: since there is so much life as to know what we want, and our
wants are infinite; therefore that life cannot but beat this way, in holy
desires after God, whose fullness can supply all wants: this is the Pulse of a
Christian, that goes continually, and there is much advantage to the
continuity and interruptednesse of the motion, from the infiniteness and
inexhaustednesse of our needs in this life, and the continual assaults that are
made by necessity and temptation on the heart. But ye have received the Spirit
of Adoption, whereby we cry, etc. He puts in his own Name in the latter parr,
though theirs was in the former part: When he speaks of a donation or
privilege, he applies to the meanest, to show that the lowest and most
despised creature is not in any incapacity to receive the greatest gifts of
God; and then when he mentions the working of that Spirit in way of
intercession, because it imports necessity and want, he cares not to commit
some incongruity in the Language, by changing the Person, that he may teach us,
that weakness, infirmities, and wants, are common to thebest and chiefest
among Christians; That the most eminent have continual need to cry; and the
lowest and obscurest believers have as good ground to believe the hearing and
acceptance of their cries; that the highest are not above the weakest and
lowest ordinance^; and that the lowest are not below the comfort of help and
acceptance in him. Nay, the growth and increase of grace, is so far from
exempting men from, or setting them above this duty of constant supplication,
that by the contrary, this is the just measure of their growth and altitude in
grace: as the degrees of the hight of the Water of Nilus in its overflowing,
are a sure sign of the fertility or barrenness of that year; so the
overflowings of the spirit of Prayer in one, gives a present account how the
heart is, whether barren and unfruitful in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, or
fruitful and lively and vigorous in it. It is certain that contraries do
discover one another, and the more the one be increased, that is, not only the
more incompatible and inconsistent with the other, but gives the most perfect
discerning of it. When grace is but as twilight in the soul, and as the
dawning of the day only, gross darkness and uncleanesse is seen; but the more
it grow to the perfect day, the more sin is sin, and the more its hated, wants
are discovered that did not appear; and therefore it exercises its self the
more in opposition to sin, and supplication to God. To speak the truth, our
growth here is but an advancement in the knowledge and sense of our own
indigencey: Its but a further entry into the idolatrous Temple of the heart,
which makes a man see daily new abominations worse then the former; and
therefore you may easily know that such repeated sights and discoveries, will
but press out more earnest and frequent cries from the heart, and such a
growth in humility, and faith in Gods fullness, will be but as oil to feed the
flame of supplication. For what is Prayer indeed, but the ardency of the
affection after God, flaming up to him in cries and requests?

To speak of this exercise of an holy heart, it would require more of the
spirit of it then we have; but truly this is to be lamented, that though there
be nothing more common among Christians in the outward practice of it; yet that
there is nothing more extraordinary and rare even among many that use it, then
to be acquainted with the inward nature of it. Truly, the most ordinary things
in Religion, are the greatest mysteries, as to the true life of them: we are
strangers to the soul and life of these things, which consists in the holy
behavior and deportment of our Spirits, before the Father of Spirits.

These words give some ground to speak of some special qualifications of
prayer, and the chief principle of it. The chief principle and original of
prayer, is, the Spirit of adoption received into the heart: It is a business
of a higher nature, then can be taught by precepts, or learned by custom and
education^ there is a general mistake among men, that the gift of prayer is
attained by learning, and that it consists in the freedom and plenty of
expression. But O! how many Doctors and disputers of the world, that can defend
all the articles of faith against the opposers of them; Yet how unaquainted are
they with this exercise, that the poor and unlearned, and nothings in the
world, who cannot dispute for Religion, yet they send up a more ^avory and
acceptable sacrifice, and sweet incense to God daily, when they offer up their
souls desires in simplicity and sincerity. Certainly this is a spiritual thing,
derived only from the fountain of Spirts, this grace of pouring out our souls
into him, and keeping communication with him, the variety of words, and riches
of expression, it is but the shell of it, the external shadow; And all the life
consists in the frame of the heart before God; And this none can put in frame,
but he that formed the Spirit of man within him: some through custom of hearing
and using it, attain to a habit of expressing themselves readily in it, it may
be to the satisfaction of others, but alas! they may be strangers to the first
letters and elements of the life and spirit of prayer. I would have you who
want both, look up to heaven for it: many of you cannot be induced to pray in
your family, (and I fear little or none in secret, which is indeed a more
serious work) because you have not been used, or not learned, or such like.
Alas! beloved, this comes not through education or learning, it comes from
the Spirit of adoption: and if ye cannot pray, ye say ye have not the Spirit,
and if ye have not the Spirit, ye are not the Sons of God. Know what is in the
inevitable sequel of your own confessions.

But I haste to the qualifications of this divine work, fervencie, reverence,
and confidence; Fervencie in crying, reverence and confidence in crying, Abba,
Father; for these two suit well toward our Father: the first, I fear, we must
seek it elsewhere then in prayer, I find it spent on other things of less
moment. Truly all the Spirit and affection of men runes in another channel, in
the way of contention and strife, in the way, of passion and miscalled zeal,
and because these things whereabout we do thus earnestly contend, have some
interest or coherance with Religion, we not only excuse but approve our
vehemence. But O! much better were that employed in supplication^ to God that
were a divine channel. Again, the marrow of other men's Spirits is exhausted in
the pursuit of things in the world, the edge of their desires is turned that
way, and it must needs be blunted and dulled in spiritual things, that it
cannot pierce into Heaven, and prevail effectually. I am sure, many of us uses
this excuse, who are so cold in it, that we do not warm our selves, and how
shall we think to prevail with God, our spirits make little noise when we cry
all the loudest; we can scarce hear any whisper in our hearts, and how shall he
hear us? Certainly, it is not the extension of the voice pleases Him, it is
the cry of the heart that is sweet harmony in his ears; and you may easily
perceive that, if you but consider that he is an infinite Spirit, that pierces
into all the corners of our hearts, and has all the darkness of it as light
before him, how can you think that such a spirit can be pleased with lip-cryes?
how can he endure such deceit and ^alshood, (who has so perfect a contrariety
with all false appearances) that your heart should lie so dead and flatt before
him, and the affection of it turned quite another way? There were no sacrifices
without fire in the Old Testament, and that fire was kept-in perpetually; and
so no prayer now without some inward fire, conceived in the desires, and
blazing up and growing into a flame in the presenting of them to God.

The incense that was to be offered on the Altar of perfume, Exodus 30. it
behoved to be beaten and prepared; and truly, prayer would do well to be made
out of a beaten and bruised heart and contrite spirit, a spirit truly sensible
of its own unworthiness and wants: and that beating and pounding of the heart
will yield a good fragrant smell, as some spices do not till beaten: The incense
was made of diverse spices, intimating to us, that true prayer is not one grace
alone, but a compound of graces. It is the joint exercise of all a Christian
graces; seasoned with all* every one of them give some peculiar fragrancy to
it, as Humility, Faith, Repentance, Love, etc. The acting of the heart in
supplication, is a kind of compend and result of all these, as one perfume made
up of many simples. But above all, as the incense, our prayers must be kindled
by fire on the Altar, there must be some heat and servour, some warmness
conceived by the holy Spirit in our hearts, which may make our spices send
forth a pleasant smell, as many spices do not till they get heat. Let us lay
this engagement on our hearts, to be more serious in our addresses to God the
Father of spirits, above all, to present our inward soul before him, before
whom it is naked and open, though we do not bring it. And certainly frequency
in prayer will much help us to fervency, and to keep it when we have it.

SERMON XL.
Romans 8.15. -- Whereby we cry, Abba, Father.


ALL that know any thing of Religion, must needs know and confess that there is
no exercise either more suitable to him that prosesseth it, or more needful for
him, then to give himself to the exercise of prayer: but that which is
confessed by all, and as to the outward performance gone about by many, I fear
it is yet a mystery sealed up from us, as to the true and living nature of it.
There is much of it expressed here in few words, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
The divine constitution and qualification of this divine work, is here made up
of a temper of fervency, reverence, and confidence. The first I spoke of
before, but I fear our hearts was not well heated then, or may be cooled since.
It is not the loud noise of words that is best heard in Heaven, or that is
constructed to be crying to God: No, this is transacted in the heart more
silently to men, but it strikes up into the ears of God: His ear is sharp, and
that voice of the souls desires is shrill, and though it were out of the
depths, they will meet together. It is true, the vehemence of affection will
sometimes cause the extension of the voice; but yet it may cry as loud to
Heaven when it is kept within. I do not press such extraordinary degrees of
servour as may effect the body; but I would rather wish we accustomed our
selves to a solid calm seriousness and earnestness of spirit, which might be
more constant then such raptures can be, that we might always gather our
spirits to what we are about, and avocat them from impertinent wandering^, and
fix them upon the present object of our worship: this is to worship him in
spirit, who is a Spirit.

The other thing that composes the sweet temper of praye^, is reverence: and
what more suitable? whether you consider Him or your selves? If I be your
Father where is my honor, and if I be your Master where is my fear? Mal. 1.6.
While we call him Father, or Lord, we proclaim this much, that we ought to know
our distance from him, and his superiority to us: and if worship in prayer
carry not this character, and express not this honorable and glorious Lord,
whom we serve, it wantes that congruity and suitableness to him that is the
beauty of it. Is there any thing more uncomly, then for children to behave
themselves irreverently and irrespectively toward their Fathers, to whom they
owe themselves? It is a monstrous thing even innature, and to natures light: O
how much more abominable must it be, to draw near to the Father of spirits, who
made us, and not we our selves, in whose hand our breath is, and whose are all
our ways; in a word, to whom we owe not only this dust, but the living spirit
that animats it, that was breathed from Heaven, and finally, in whom we live,
and move, and have our being, and well-being, to worship such an one, and yet
to behave our selves so unseemly and irreverently in his presence, our hearts
not stricken with the apprehension of his glory, but lying flatt and dead
before him, having scarcely him in our thoughts whom we speak to, and finally,
our deportments in his sight, are such, as could not be admitted in the
presence of any person a little above our selves, to be about to speak to them,
and yet to turn aside continually to every one that comes by, and entertain
communication with every base creature; this, I say, in the presence of a King,
or Nobleman, would be accounted such an absurd incivility, as could be
committed; and yet we behave our selves just so with the Father of spirits.

O the wanderings of the hearts of men in divine worship! while we are in
communication with our Father and Lo^d in prayer, whose heart is fixed to a
constant attendance and presence, by the impression of his glorious holiness?
whose spirit does not continually gadd abroad, and take a word of every thing
that occurrs, and so marrs that soul-co^^espondance? O that this word, Psalm.
89.7. were written with great letters on our hearts, God is greatly to be
feared in the assembly of the Saints, and to be had in reverence of all them
that are about him: that one word, God, speaks all. Either we must convert
Him in an idol, which is nothing; or if we apprehend Him to be God, we must
apprehend our infinite distance from Him, and his unspeakable, inaccessible
glory above us. He is greatly fea^ed and reverenced in the Assemblies that are
above, in the upper Courts of Angels, those glorious Spi^its who must cover the
feet from us, because we cannot see their glory; they must cover their faces
from Him, because they cannot behold his glory, Isa. 6. what a glorious train
has he, and yet how reverend are they? they wait round about the Throne, above
and about it, as Courtier^ upon their King, for they are all minist^ing
spirits, and they rest not day and night to adore and admire that holy one,
crying, holy, holy, holy, the whole earth is full of his glory. Now, how much
more then should he be greatly feared and had in reverence in the assembly of
his Saints, of poor mortal men, whose foundation is in the dust, and dwell in
clay; and besides drink in iniquity like water? there is two points of
difference and distance from us, He is nearer Angels, for Angels are pure
spirits, but we have flesh, which is furthest removed from his nature: And then
Angels are holy and clean; yet that is but spotted to his unspotted holiness;
but we are defiled with sin, which puts us farthest off from him, and which
his holiness has greatest antipathy at. Let us consider this, my beloved,
that we may carry the impression of the glorious holiness and Majesty of God
on our hearts, when ever we appear before him, that so we may serve and rejoice
with trembling, and pray with reverence and godly fear: if we apprehend indeed
our own quality and condition, how low, how base it is, how we cannot endure
the very clear aspect of our own consciences, we cannot look on our selves
steadfastly without shame and confusion of face, at the de^ormed spectacle we
behold, much less would we endure to have our souls opened and presented to
the view of other men, even the basest of men; we would be overwhelmed with
shame if they could see into our hearts? Now then, apprehend seriously what He
is, how glorious in holiness? how infinite in wisdom, how the secrets of your
souls are plain and open in his sight? and I am persuaded, you will be composed
to a reverend humble and trembling behavior in his sight.

But withal, I must add this, that because he is your Father, you may
intermingle confidence; nay you are commanded so to do, and this honors him as
much as reverence; for confidence in God, as our Father, is the best
acknowledgment of the greatness and goodness of God, it declares how able he
is to save us, and how willing, and so ratifieth all the promises of God made
to us, and sets to a seal to his ^aith^ulness: there is nothing he accounts
himself more honored by, then a souls full resigning it self to him, and
relying upon his power and good will in all necessities, casting its care upon
Him, as a loving Father, who cares for us. And truly, there is much beauty and
harmony in the juncture of these two, rejoicing with trembling, confidence with
reverence, to ask, nothing doubting, and yet sensible of our infinite distance
from him, and the disproportion of our requests to his Highness. A child-like
disposition is composed thus, as also, the temper and carriage of a Courtier
has these ingredients in it. The love of his Father, and the ^avour of his
Prince, makes him take liberty, and assume boldness, and withal he is not
unmindful of his own distance from his Father, or Master, Let us draw near with
full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22. There is much in the Scripture, both
exhorted, commanded, and commended, of that (...), that liberty and boldness
of pouring out our requests to God, as one that certainly will hear us, and
grant that which is good. Unbelief spoileth all, its a wretched and
base-spirited thing, that can conceive no honorable thoughts of God, but only
like it self; but faith, which is the well-pleasing ingredient of prayer: the
lower thoughts a man have of himself, it makes him conceive the higher and
more honorable of God, My ways are not as your ways, nor my thoughts as your
thoughts, but as far above, as the Heaven above the Earth, Isa. 55.8. This is
the rule of a believing souls conceiving of God, and expecting from him: and
when a soul is thus placed on God, by trusting and believing in him, it is
fixed, My heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord, Psalm. 112.7. O how wavering and
inconstant is a soul, till it fix at this Anchor, upon the ground of his
immutable promises? It is tossed up and down with every wind, its
double-minded: Now one way, then another; now in one mind, and shortly changed:
and indeed the soul is like the Sea, capable of the least or greatest
commotion, Iam. 1.6, 7, 8. I know not any thing that will either fix your
hearts from wandering in Prayer, or establish your hearts from trouble and
disquiet after it, nothing that will so exonor and ease your spirits of care as
this, To lay hold on God as All-sufficient, and lay that constraint on your
hearts, to wait on him and his pleasur^, to cast your souls on his promises
that are so full and so free, and abide there, as at your Anchor-hold, in all
the vicissi^udes and changes of outward or inward things. In spiritual things
that concerns your salvation, that which is absolutely necessary, you may take
the boldnesses to be absolute in it, and as Job, though he should slay me, yet
will I trust in thee; and as Jacob, I will not let thee go till thou bless me:
But either in outward things, that have some usefulness in them, but are not
always fittest for our chiefest good; or in the degrees of spiritual gifts,
and measures of graces, the Lord calls us without anxiety to pour out our
hearts in them unto him; but withal we would do it with submission to his
pleasure, because he knows best what is best for us. In these, we are not bound
to be confident to receive the particular we ask, but rather our confidence
should pitch upon his good will and favor, that he will certainly deny nothing
that himself knows is good for us: And so in these we should absolutely cast
our self without ca^efulnesse upon his loving and fatherly providence, and
resign our selve^ to him to be disposed (...) in them as he sees convenient.
There is sometimes too much limitation of God, and peremptoriness used with him
in such things, in which his wisdom craves a latitude both in public and
private matters, even as men's affections and interests are engaged; but
ordinarily its attended and followed with shame and disappointment in the end:
and there is on the other hand intolerable remisseness and slacknesse in many,
in pressing even the weightiest petitions of salvation, mortification, etc.
which certainly arises from the diffidence and unbelief of the heart, and the
want of that rooted persuasion, both of the incomparable necessity and worth of
the things themselves, and of his willingness and engagement to bestow them.

The word is doubled here, Abba, Father, the Syriack and Greek word signifying
one thing, expressing the tender affection and love of God toward them that
come to him. He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a
rewarder of them that seek him deligently; so he that comes to God must
believe that he has the bowels and compassion of a Father, and will be more
easily inclined with our importunat cries, then the fathers of our flesh: he
may suffer his children to cry long, but it is not because he will not hear,
but because he would hear them longer, and delights to hear their cr^ oftener.
If he delay, its his wisdom to appretiat and endear his mercies to us, and to
teach us to press our petitions, and sue for an answer.

Besides, this is much for our comfort, that from whomsoever, and whatsoever
corner in the world prayers come up to him, they cannot want acceptance: All
Languages, all Countries, all Places are sanctified by Jesus Christ, that
whosoever calls upon the Name of the Lord, from the ends of the earth, shall be
saved: And truly it is sweet meditation to think, that from the ends of the
earth, the cries of souls are heard; and that the ends is as near Heaven as the
middle; and a Wilderness as near as a Paradise; that though we understand not
one another, yet we have one loving and living Father that understands all our
meanings; and so the different Languages and Dialects of the members of this
body make no confusion in Heaven, but meet together in his heart and affection,
and are one perfume, one incense, sent up from the whole Catholic Church,
which here is scattered on the earth. O that the Lord would persuade us to cry
this way to our Father in all our necessities!

FINIS.

