Mercurii, 31 mo die Jan. 1693.
Ordered,

THat the Thanks of the House be given to Dr. Birch, for the Sermon by him
preached before this House yesterday, at St. Margarets Westminster: And that he
be desired to Print the same. And that Sir Thomas Dyke and Mr. Hungerford do
acquaint him therewith.

Paul Jodrell, Cl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, AT St Margarets
Westminster, JANVARY 30. 1694.

By Peter Birch, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Not in the Pall mall, and are to be Sold by Randal
Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1694.

2 SAMUEL I. 21. Ye Mountains of Gilboa let there be no dew, neither let there be
rain upon you, nor fields of offerings: for there the shield of the mighty is
vilely cast away, the shield of Saul, as though he had not been anointed with
oil.
THis is part of the lamentation of David over Saul, and an expression of his
grief so raised and extraordinary, as nothing but the greatness of the occasion
could excite, nor any raptures but those of a King and Prophet present us with.

It is over the fall of a Prince, that was literally the Lords anointed and his
Successor, or if any prefer the being Vicegerents to their inferiors, that was
the desire and choice of the people; Saul being advanced to the throne when
Israel first grew weary of the Theocracy, and desired a King after the form of
other nations. Besides that after his unction he had a new heart given him, and
was numbered among the Prophets; so that his obsequies were fit only to be
solemnized by one like himself, the known inheritor of his Kingdom and Spirit.
To whose tears also it must needs have been a considerable addition, that he
had then raised an army, which though not immediately employed against his
master, yet we find offered unto Achish, and that it made the rear of his
battle when he went out to fight against Israel; and therefore it is no wonder,
that he whose heart smote him for offering violence but to the skirt of his
Prince's robe, should be overwhelmed at his death.

But besides these appropriate circumstances, there are sufficient in this
pathetick story to warrant our Churches accommodating it to the present
solemnity. For although few Texts of Scripture are exactly suited to those of
providence, and much less to that crime without a precedent, in which all the
villainies of our late confusions were completed, yet does this noble instance
of David's piety to Saul teach us that our duty is practicable, even against an
apparent interest, and the highest provocations.

We need not then spend time in making out the parallel, or enquire whether God
really suffered his anointed to fall by the hands of one he had disobediently
saved; it is enough for us that David believed the Amalekites relation, and that
his carriage herein is recorded for our example, to guide posterity in the same
course. He was at that time under more true discouragements from his duty, than
ever any rebel since invented false ones; he had a just declared title to
succeed, had saved the honor of his Country, and was the darling of his
people, and yet had grievances alone to plead, where he had merited rewards.
For he was openly persecuted by Saul, with a malice that seemed equally
incapable of end or increase; one that all his services and submissions
together could never allay, that had endangered the life of Jonathan for
interceding, and could ungratefully welcome him from the slaughter of the
Philistines, with seeking to strike him to the wall with a Javelin: that as
himself complains, pursued him like a Partridge on the mountains, and made his
days as a shadow that declineth.

And yet when this heir of the kingdom saw the Crown and his Enemy fall into
his hands together, he does not basely trample upon his misfortunes, or draw
arguments from providence to conclude him rejected of God, but forgetting his
revenge, he first vindicates the majesty of Saul by the death of his destroyer,
and then he piously laments over him; not with a transient and retired grief,
as if he alone had been concerned, but after the same manner as the Gospel now
provides, that supplications, prayers and intercessions be made for Kings, i.
e. composed and solemnly performed in our daily offices; so he likewise frames
this divine lamentation, enters it in his book of Jasher, where his other hymns
and spiritual songs were written; and having, according to the use of ancient
times, given it a title from the most eminent passage, as was the bow of
Jonathan, he to make the sorrow universal, commands it to be taught the
children of Judah; that all might learn with one heart and mouth to weep over
the light and beauty of Israel. Ye mountains of Gilboa, etc. If the whole earth
was once accursed by heaven for the sin of man, it is but just that you, O
unhappy Mountains, should for ever bid adieu to its blessings, upon which the
light of Israel was extinguished; you deserve to lose your fertility, and be
given up to perpetual barrenness; and may this expiate, may you rather never
more yield an increase sufficient for an offering unto the Lord, than that his
heritage should be brought to confusion, and the blood of his anointed be
required at our hands.

These two parts therefore, the malediction, and the reason of it: I shall
distinctly consider, with relation to the present solemnity. And

1. Of the malediction, Let there be no dew, nor rain upon you, nor fields of
offerings. This we need not force into a Prophecy, as if no rain or dew had
ever since fallen upon Mount Gilboa; and much less are we to esteem it only the
rage of the Poet, all rapture and hyperbole; for if we pass on to its ground
and design, or compare it with other the like passages in several of the
Prophets, it will appear so far above a curse of fancy and presumption, as to
be founded upon one that is real and perpetually threatening. It Is comment
enough but to repeat that one parallel instance of Job's cursing the time of
his birth, c. 3. Let. says he, the day perish wherein I was born, and the
night in which it was said there is a manchild conceived. Let that day be
darkness, let not God regard it from above, neither let the light shine upon
it. Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it,
etc. All which is not a piece of blasphemy or distrust in God, but a designed
demonstration of the bitterness of his troubles, and the contempt he had of
that life which sustained them; for Job is before said, c. 1. 21. not to have
charged God foolishly; he was long since resigned and had commenced the
standard of patience. And therefore those who first ignorantly call this
murmuring, and then excuse it by infirmity, they might as well apologize for
the Savior of the world himself, who with strong cries prayed the Father that
cup might pass from him, to drink of which he came down from heaven.

But if we consider David as a man after God's own heart, and to have been in
all the other circumstances of this story most eminently careful of his duty to
Saul; then the Text likewise must be interpreted by the same rule as that of
Job, not as a flight in Poetry, but for a just grief and a deprecation of that
guilt wherein the whole land was involved, and which hangs over all Countries,
that embrue their hands in the blood of God's Vicegerents.

From all which it seems an easy consequence, that if David sorrowed and feared
so much, for the death of a King slain in battle and open hostility, if he so
carefully propagated his grief, lest the curse should spread and become
national, if so high a concern was necessary for one that had been so highly
provoked, therefore

1. The like duty is now universal, namely, that we also join in an united and
public lamentation for that still more innocent blood of the Martyr of this
day. And

2. That the neglect of it, and an insensibility of the guilt, will certainly
bring upon us the curse insinuated in the Text.

Now both these particulars suppose our sins and our duty to outlive the vulgar
opinion; that as some crimes are too great to be expiated by the punishment of
one only generation, so also there are some duties that survive the party to
whom they were due; we do not perform all the last offices to the deceased upon
his first interrment, but his funerals return upon every instance designed to
preserve his memory, and in this sense our Lord's death is said to be still
showed forth, by a commemorative sacrifice, and that it shall be so till he
come to judgment. Nay every man that is not ignorant of himself must
acknowledge, that the soul is able to produce the same effects by reflex acts
as when the object is present to us, so as to fancy a past diversion is to act
it over again, and to call back the most trifling endearments of a deceased
friend is to make all our sorrows bleed afresh, and to renew those passions we
at first entertained him with. Upon this at least are built all those commands
of meditating, considering, and calling to remembrance things past; as the only
true way to be affected with them.

Since then the duty still remains, and that the very presence of this
honorable Assembly supposes it, we may reflect on the two principal
aggravations of those sufferings we are this day commanded to lament over; to
the end we may at this distance pay some faint honors to our late martyred
Sovereign, and may not be partakers of the sins and the plagues of his
murderers. Now the

1. Of these aggravations we may justly esteem the private worth of his person.
To form a just Idea of which, and much more to draw his Image, or venture upon
his Character, would require a Soul as great as his was; 'twere a profanation
in any ruder hand to attempt it, but yet the perfections which were obvious,
and within the reach of every the meanest beholder, are sufficient to raise our
grief and admiration.

Had all they of his own household been his foes, and conspired to conceal him
from the World, yet it must have suspected something great from that blood, in
which Nature had united all the gallant dispositions of the chief Christian
Families. But when once these had gathered strength, and rendered his manhood as
august as his birth, then he appeared with all that was requisite to make him
good as a Man, or honorable as a King: There Plato might have seen Learning on
the Throne, and Philosophy in Purple. In him were all those Virtues crowded
together and enobled, each of which had eternized its Hero; he little needed
the common allowances that are made to other Sovereigns, from whose faults
their very enemies, if honorable ones, use to retire with respect; for if he
had any, they were in those generous excesses of Pardon and Liberality, which
distinguish Princes from the vulgar; that common topic of praising him from
comparison, is a real diminution to his greatness; he that says he was valiant
as Caesar, tells but half the truth, for his Courage was equally great on the
Scaffold as in the Field; he owed not his bravery to passion or example, but
his resolution was ever strongest in Retirement, and he showed most gallantry
when he had most leisure to fear. To compare his Temperance or his Contempt of
the World to that of a beggarly Philosopher, were to commend his phlegm or his
poverty; but he wanted neither great desires nor great temptations, nor any
help of envy to declaim against other men's pleasures, because he could never
taste them himself.

As for the meekness of Moses, the patience of Job, and the zeal of Josias, all
these met in his breast* and together made up a perfect man; one that all the
industry of his enemies could never search out a plausible accusation against,
though their malice pursued him through all the most private actions of his
life. The truth is, in him they had nothing to revile but his Virtues, and were
it fit to mingle his glory with their reproaches, these could never be so
perfectly summed up as in their calumnies; that which they blasphemed for
Tyranny, was a Bounty that scattered among them all his Royal Prerogatives, and
left them nothing to murder but Himself: these strangers to a meek and quiet
spirit had the insolence to call his a defect of understanding: Obstinacy in
their mouths was in him a firmness to his duty, and Superstition a regularity
in Devotion. Nothing certainly but their furious zeal durst have styled him an
enemy to Religion, of which his life was the greatest ornament; and his death
the most devout example: None else had forehead enough to pronounce him
unworthy to reign, and perhaps in that inglorious quality a Classis was never
yet outdone, but by those who have since pretended him unable to write.

Upon the whole matter, if we seriously reflect on the many afflictions which
surrounded the head of that excellent Prince, how little he deserved the least
of them from any man, nay how much otherwise he merited from most of the chief
actors; and yet against how many fair hopes they prevailed, and with how many
sad circumstances they were increased, as if all that related to him were but
so many appendages of his sufferings; but with what an unshaken constancy he
bore them all; we must hence conclude, that he was separated by God's especial
appointment to give a new example of fortitude to the decaying Virtue of the
age, and to confirm the belief of past Miracles to one in which they are ceased.

And thus in King Solomon's phrase it happened to the just man according to the
work of the wicked, and we may well take up his Fathers complaint, How are the
mighty fallen, and the weapons of war perished! How is the beauty of Israel
slain upon thine high places! Thou, O unnatural country, no longer merits the
common blessings of heaven, the rain or the dew, and much less those
distinguishing enjoyments, by which it has hitherto divided thee as well in
happiness as in situation. Why are thine houses yet safe from fear, and the
rod of God not upon thee! Wherefore do the wicked still live, become old and
mighty in power? why are the old arts but still advancing to thy ruin? but
that thou may at length meet a vengeance worthy of God, and drink up the
dregs of his fury.

2. The other great aggravation of our grief is, that in all the guilty parts
of our Sovereign's Martyrdoms his own people had so great a share. I am not
ignorant how many scrupulous consciences there are, that are truly tender of
nothing but a just reproof; and how impossible it is for him that tells them
the truth not to be accounted an Enemy, and used so upon occasion; 'twere
indeed a mighty step toward their conversion, if those men could bear sound
doctrine, who have hitherto, like Pliny's peevish creatures, had their gall in
their ears. But although there is an indemnity for their persons, there is no
oblivion indulged their rebellions, we are not bound to spare the crime, or cry
peace to the wicked, when God says there is none; and therefore since their
general and dreadful impenitences creates a necessity of yearly declaring who
were his Murderers, and who still abhor their principles; I hope it will not be
interpreted an invective to give this short account of the action.

When therefore the mercy of God had made the goods of our Church pay for the
purity of its doctrine, and had advanced a private quarrel into a glorious and
public reformation, it was of his permission, who always leaves a way open to
punish us without a miracle, that some of its enemies were still left as thorns
in our sides, and that out of their corruption were hatched a new race of men,
who having first sowred all the benignity and generosity of nature, were fit
only for executioners, and to be poured out among his other plagues, as a just
punishment of our sies. These, like their brother vermin, were fed only by the
rotten members of Church and State; whoever had his ambition checked, or hated
the rest of his brethren, knew presently where to herd, and find companions
that were friends to none but themselves.

Now of these and the Emissaries that bred them, was made up that rod of God
which had been a long time shaked over us, and at length inflicted the stroke.
For when once our vice and carelessness had made them considerable, and they
could find faults to libel; after a luxurious peace had rendered an honest zeal
too weak for a false one, then were all those sects and heresies called out of
their several shades, to overspread the land, and mingle a perverse spirit in
the midst of our councels. Hence all our Sovereigns bountiful concessions met
evil surmises and seditious comments, and these were seconded by mutinous
petitions, seditious clamors, and at length open assaults. When once the age
was enough infatuated to give them admittance, this new race of Saints soon
preached and prayed it into blood and disobedience; the violation of rights,
multiplying widows and orphans, rapine and oppression were to them but sins of
daily incursion; and few were backward in doing that work of the Lord
negligently.

But these were only the beginnings of sorrow, nor could an unnatural and
servile war produce any victories on the side of rebellion but what were so
also. With these men to overcome and to extirpate were the same thing, they had
just as much reverence for the Crown as they had for the Miter, and kept their
oaths to both alike; till at length by such judges as these the chief pillars
of Church and State were made perfect through sufferings; and to fill up the
measure of their sins, the great Defender of them both. The subject would be
too tedious and ungrateful to recount all the insolences of his mean
conquerors, the melancholy and terrors of a suspected prison, the barbarous
forms of such a trial and such an execution, with the other unparrallel'd
circumstances of the crime.

But it is high time to observe, that to the honor of our Church established,
and may it so continue, it was no way accessory to this direful fact. She had
always the same Enemies and the same fate with her King, they were ever
persecuted, oppressed and defamed, and have ever fallen together; her obedience
was a nobler thing than to let them perish unattended; and perhaps in the sad
instance now before us it was necessary to have her constancy tried, that so
famous an example might guide us hereafter, if ever the like occasion returned.

And yet notwithstanding we were not immediately of accession to so vile an
action, our sins contributed to the judgment, and by consequence we are bound
to mourn for it. In such a day of rebuke and confusion as this, God
particularly takes notice of our behavior, and sees every mourner in secret:
he also beholds the riotous eater of Flesh, and him that drinks Wine, when the
Lord calls us to weeping, fasting and mourning. And I hope we shall never
forget our interest, by growing weary of the duty.

II. The other general inference from David's malediction, was that without a
like serious and particular humiliation, the curse insinuated in the Text will
certainly overtake us. The sin indeed is passed away, together with the time in
which it was committed; and there are who seem willing we should forget there
was one, but the guilt of it remains, and makes us truly debtors to the justice
of God. For if under the Law, the shedding of any innocent blood was so crying
a sin, that when the murderer was not known the whole land was responsible, and
must be purged by a general Sacrifice; how unpardonable is it under the Gospel,
where he that loves not his Brother is a murderer, and he that resists
receives to himself damnation, for any to kill and take possession of the
Throne?

Such bold and daring transgressions as these are above the cognizance of an
earthly Tribunal, it is God alone who can inflict an equal punishment, and who
knows how to supply what is wanting toward expiation. And were it fit for us
to pry into the secrets of heaven, we might reasonably ascribe it to an
inquisition after this blood, that we so long heard the cries of the oppressed,
and there was none to comfort them; that we beheld Servants on Horses, and
Princes walking as Servants on the Earth; that our Laws, our Liberties, and our
Religion, were a prey to such as scoffed at Kings, and made Princes a scorn;
and that after we were restored to them again, by a Miracle as great as our
Ingratitude, yet then also God took the Sword into his hand, that he raised up
a foreign enemy to make War upon our Coasts, that he sent the Pestilence into
our Streets, and a devouring Fire to lay waste our Metropolis.

And is any so blind as not to see this among the causes, why distress and
perplexity still remains upon the Nation? Men's hearts failing them for fear,
and for looking after those things which are coming on the earth. Is it not
Judgment-like, that our excellent Religion, which has no foreign dependencies,
and whose prosperity alone is founded on that of our Country, should yet be
forced to truckle either to the practices of Rome, or to a riot of Enthusiasts;
and that we are still threatened in their turns, either with no Church at all,
or the worst among Christians? are we not still left open to a bitter and hasty
Nation, to land upon our Coasts, and possess the dwelling places which are not
theirs? Are not our very blessings all turned into a curse? our boasted freedom
is now only a liberty to bite and devour one another; our long cried up liberty
of Conscience proves one of Impiety, Licentiousness, and Error, and at best
serves for a step to Dominion more than Devotion; our Laws are indeed open, but
to the continual conspiracies of false witnesses against the Lives and Fortunes
of the Innocent; but if the Fountain also is troubled, as the many attempts to
clear it insinuate, if there be wickedness in high places, or it were possible
to believe the reports, of Patriots that prefer others safety to our own, of
Fathers that were never Sons, of Guardians that sell their Trust, or the like
Contradictions in Morality, then we may conclude that God's anger is not yet
turned away, but his hand stretched out still, and the vengeance impending.

And thus I have attempted some poor account of the malediction, in order to
avoid the like; it remains to consider the reason of it, For there the Shield
of the Mighty was vilely cast away, the Shield of Saul as though he had not
been anointed with Oil.

This expression of David's grief we have no reason to ascribe to any personal
obligations, and therefore it must be interpreted as a confirmation of the
practice of all wise and civilized nations, who have been always so sensible of
the advantages of Government, as both to solemnize the birth of their Kings
with all the expressions of public joy, and to attend their deaths with as
great demonstrations of mourning. Nor was it anciently esteemed an empty
ceremony to have the memory of a judgment preserved by a solemnity, but as
necessary to imprint a sense of its misery, and to endear the contrary
blessing; the multitude being wholly led by their senses, and the wisest hardly
escaping the being affected by them.

We are not then to look upon David's action as private only and temporary,
which cannot be drawn into example; but it expresses the settled and public
opinion of the whole Jewish Church. For he might formerly have as easily cut
off Readiness head as he did his garment* but that faith Optatus, Timuit Oleum,
the holy Oil was upon his head, and his character sacred. And I hope we, who
pretend to a better information than the Jews ever had, shall not be less sound
in the doctrine of civil obedience, or think it altered by the late exercise of
that provisional power, which is necessarily reserved to a free people upon all
extraordinary emergencies. All these are questions of law and constitution, and
were of old so little thought to belong unto Divinity, that ours is the first
State Schism known in the world; and therefore our Superiors owe very little to
the controvertists on either side.

But the time allows not a just prosecution of the subject, and much less a
digression from it; if then we recollect the whole, we have heard the guilt and
still feel the consequences of this wicked action; it has brought us nigh unto
cursing, for it was this villainy which first forced the posterity of that pious
King out of their Country, and their Religion together, and which, as a
consequence of that, has entailed upon us disputed titles, and for ought yet
appears endless wars.

The way then to appease the wrath of God, and to wash out the guilty stain of
our Sovereigns blood, is not to unite in forgetting it, or to add impudence to
the crime, by seeking to depress his credit, but to make the remembrance of his
undeserved sufferings still more solemn and effectual, that the shame justly
due, and so often charged to the account of our Nation for them, may be an
instrument to turn us from our transgressions, and make us bring forth fruits
meet for repentance. It is yet in the power of an humble repentance to make God
shine upon our Councels, and go forth with our Armies, and though our
short-sighted reason can see nothing before us but blackness and darkness and
confusion, yet he can by unforeseen ways easily disperse the storm, and
establish our happiness as the strong mountains.

And in order to attain that happy end of our follies, give me leave to
conclude with King Solomon's axiom, Prove. 29. 25. The fear of man brings a
snare, but whosoever puts his trust in the Lord shall be safe. We are fallen
into those dregs of time, wherein hypocrisy and profaneness seem to divide the
world between them, and all true and unaffected piety is out of countenance;
wherein all the sacred ties to our King and Country appear as loose as our
manners; and in which that generous honesty and integrity, which was once the
glory and the character of our Nation, is all vanished into mean, false and
undermining compliances. If then we dare own discouraged Virtues, and would
stand in the gap to save the whole from destruction, the true way is not to
follow a multitude to do evil, or to join in those fashionable flatteries that
are ruin to the embracers; much less are we to put any confidence in our
selves, whose strength is but weakness, but we are according to the wise man's
direction to trust in the Lord, that is, in the constant sense of Holy Writ, to
make our ways so direct as may encourage our affiance in him. And if God be for
us, who can be against us? May he therefore endue us all with this wisdom from
above, and only true greatness of mind, that we may keep innocence, and do the
thing that is right, and this shall bring us peace at the last.

Now to God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, be all glory and
honor, world without end, Amen.

FINIS.

