A BILL of SALE.
In Westminster Hall, on the 22d. of January, will be Sold by Inch of Candle,
these following Goods, in several Parcels.
The First Lot.
1 ONE curious Web of the King's own Spinning, before he went off, by the Name
of the Holy League, made with the French K. for extirpating Heresy: At the
price of an English Crown; to advance a Dutch Stiver. 2 Another curious piece
of the same Spinning, sent to the same K. to Establish the Protestant Religion,
by Introducing a French Army: at the Rate of 500 Thousand pounds; to advance
30000 Men. 3 2 I arge Pieces of Liberty of Conscience, the one Changeable, the
other Mazarene Blew, by setting up of Popery, at the loss of a Kingdom; to
advance the Church of England. 4 One Kemnant more ditto, by the Name of
Toleration, at the same Rate; to advance on the same manner. 5 3 Pints of Q.
Mary's Milk, found by the Lady Powis upon her Smock, before the Birth of the P.
of W -- s: valued; Kingdoms; to advance a P -- sh Successor. 6 3 Grains of the
D. of Berwick's most Refined Wit, with as many more extracted from the Brains
of his disbanded Dear Joys: valued; pence half a grain; to advance a new
Farthing each bidding. 7 2 Whole Pieces of the Ld. Peterborough's Religion,
both Changeable Green: valued at 10000 Oaths, when he was clapped in the Tower;
to advance 500 each bidding. 8 The very same Scarlet Cloak, Hat and Feather,
Father Petre had on, when he made his escape into France; whereof, Father
Gregory is to have the Refusal; valued at a 100 Thousand Guinneys; to advance
1000 each bidding. 9 The Holy Robes, and Consecrated Vestments of the Right
Reverend Fathers, Dr. Ellis, and Dr. Hall; when they were made Bishops, since
changed into Red Coats: valued 100 pound; to advance 50 for a pair of Oars. 10
6 Large Canonical Gewns and Cossacks, cut out of St. Paul's own Cloak, for the
Roman Priests to scamper off in vissible: each valued at 20 pound; to advance 5
pound each bidding. 11 2 Consecrated Grid-Irons, brought from the Chapel of
the Benedictins in St. Johns's, which cost 100 pound each, to broyl Heretics:
now we can afford it at so many Shillings; to advance a Benedictin Monk each
bidding. 12 2 Brace of monumental Spits, brought from the same place, to roast
them by Couples: valued Purgatory; to advance 6 Masses each bidding. 13 6 Dozen
of new fashioned Bridles, made in Southwark, to extort them to Abjuration:
valued at 20 Shillings a Bridle; to advance 6 pence each bidding. 14 2 Foot of
the self same Rope, the Ld. Chancellor long since fancied in a Dream, now come
to pass in the Tower: vallued at the price of a Purse and Mace; to advance a
Gibbet. 15 2 Foot of the self same stuff, supported the Ld. Moulgrave's Pride
at White Hall, now cringing at St. James's: valued once at 20000 pound, now
scarce so many pence, to advance a half penny. 16 2 Pieces of the Ld.
Feversham's Courage, half penny broad, proportionable to his Conduct: vallued
at the price of a Blew Garter; to advance a new Crevat-string, Orange Color.
17 The self-same blank Commission, granted to the Ld. Powis, to be Ld.
Chancollour of England: vallued then at 4000 pound, per annum, now at nothing;
to advance propottionably. 18 2 Large Sheets of the Ld. Salisbury's Pardon,
under the great Seal: valued at the same Rate; to advance on the same manner.
19 The Ld. Arrundell's Privy Seal: valued at the Rate of an Halter, Orange
Tawvy; to advance a Popish Counselor. 20 3 Infallible Articles of the Ld.
Bellasis's Depositions, proving the Legittimacy of the Prince of Wales: valued
3 pence, to advance a new Farthing. 21 4 Invisible Boxes full of Sacred
Relics, taken by the Mobile, from the Embassadour's Chapel in Wild-Street:
valued 80000 pounds, to advance a broken Statesman. 22 1 Rich Crown Jewel,
dropped out of the Queen's own Box, stole away by the Itallian Priest: vallued at
the price of a double Clout, to advance a Surreverence. 23 3 Else of the
Countess of Dorchester's Virginity, full yard wide, and a little better, by the
Stan dard: valued once at 20000 pounds; to advance a Crown each bidding. 24 3
Else of the Lady Mary Ratcliff's Chastity, stole away by the French Fiddler,
who Married the Mother, and Buggered the Daughter: valued at 10000 pounds, to
advance for a P -- sh Squire. 25 A new Mathemattical Nut-cracker, for his
Monki-ship the Ld. Walgrave, to keep his Chops going at home, while the
Squirril his Wife is playing with her Tail abroad: valued at a Guinney, to
advance half a Crown. 26 12 Spick and span new Halters, Eleven whereof for the
dispensing Judges, the other for the late Speaker Williams: valled a Mark, to
advance 13 pence half penny. 27 As many new Maiden Blocks, whereon Ax was never
yet laid, since the making, for the Popish Converts, and Councels: valued 10
Shillings a piece, to advance a Traytor's Head: 28 2 Curious fine spun Bills,
one for the discovering the Intrigues of State, the other the Birth of the
Prince of Wales of the Ld. Chancellour's own drawing, to be presented to the
House this Session: valued his Neck, to advance upon Discretion. 29 2 Pots of
round and sound pickled Protestants, amongst whom is Peterborow, Sunderland,
Huntingdou, Le'strange, Lobb and Pen: valued two Marks each Pot; to advance a
Noble, or counterfeit halfpenny each bidding. 30 A new Book of Rates, of the
Custom, Trade and Manufacture of this Kingdom, to be presented the same day:
valued once at 2 Millions, spent upon the Priests; now to be converted to its
proper Use.
ADVERTISEMENT.
WHereas, there are several Popish Priests, M^nks and Jesuits; with as many
Irish Cutthroats, still lurking in this City, contrary to the late Order of
Council, and the Fundamental Laws of the Realm. These are to give notice, that
if any Person or Persons, shall discover either Priest or Papist, after the 22
d. aforesaid; so that he be brought, dead or alive, before the Bar of the said
House, shall have the price of a she Wolf's Head for his Reward.

Printed in the Year, M.DC.IXXX.IX.


