A Certain Sound; OR, An Alarm sounded, TO THE Persecuting Episcopalians, in,
and about the Cities of London and Westminster, those Bloody Cities, in many
Whoredoms; And to the rest of that Sect throughout the Nations, who profanely,
bloodily, or maliciously, now have, or heretofore have had any hand in
persecuting the Innocent Servants, and Prophets of the Most High, for the
exercise of their pure Conscience to the Lord God their Creator.

London, Printed in the Year, 1665.

A certain Sound; or, an Alarm sounded, to the Persecuting Episcopalians, etc.
TO that Spirit, in the power of the living God of Heaven and Earth, I affirm;
that there is an immortal Lilly sprang up, as also an eternal River flowing
freely (without money or outward price) through the Nations; the Root of the
one being as far out of your reach to destroy (though you do dig as deep as
Hell) as the immense Fountain and everlasting Current of the other is out of
your vultrous sight, which way to withhold from the heart and conscience of the
truly thirsty: For our Testimony in the Light of Jesus, from that eternal
Fountain, is powerful and clear, and shall have its full and infallible effect,
though now resisted by the whole seed of evildoers to the utmost of their
perishing strength; and the numberless and most immerciful Cruelties which you
inflict upon the innocent People of God, are so far from depressing the
everlasting Gospel which we preach, Us, or our faithful Testimony therein and
against your false ways and abominations, that it does, and shall add life and
growth to the truth of our for-ever blessed and most precious Cause, and cause
your selves indellibly to be recorded to Posterity as you are, when the Name of
the holy Witnesses to, and Martyrs for, the Truth of our God shall remain as a
sweet smelling savor, living for ever, though their Bodies die by your hands.
And some of our very little ones [now living] shall rejoice in their souls
before the Lord God of their Fathers, that they were the offspring of a
Martyr, or that their parents in any measure stood faithful to God in this your
day of heavy Persecution. And that I am in the eternal sight of this, if my God
think me worthy, I am ready to seal with my Blood, though my Sepulcher, for
declaring this Truth, should be on the Bridge and four Gates of your City.

And, as though that accursed womb of your bloody Cities, to wit, Newgate* that
now dismal Pesthouse, were not big enough to devour the Sheep of Jesus your
Savior, in which, as Prisoners for the Truth, at least Forty of his innocent
Lambs called Quakers have laid down their Lives (through, as is most like, the
Pestilential infection of that place) since the Lord's just hand of Vengeance
has brought it upon these your Cities of many Whoredoms, as the beginning of
their sorrows: Beside, about Sixty of the same Royal Seed and Fold, have been
Prisoners till death in that one Goal since your Act against Conscience was
made, also sealing their Testimony with their Blood, as became the Martyrs of
the Most High. And yet, as if all this innocent Blood, with the rest of your
innumerable Imprisonments, Blows, and Bruises, unjust Fining, Praemuniring,
Confiscating of Estates, making Widows and Fatherless, ruining Families,
frequent shedding our Blood in your Streets and Canels, at our holy Meetings,
etc. were not enough even to implore as it were Gods further Vengeance upon
your heads, When as the Blood of one innocent man is fully able to overthrow a
Nation, much more a hundred, two profane superstitious and hypocritical Cities.
you drag and drive from that your Goal of Newgate at one time, Besides at
three other times very lately before you dragged out of that Goal, and in like
manner forced on shipboard, eighteen innocent true men, called Quakers; whereof
one of them, through your most savage usage, immediately as you had forced him
on Shipboard fell down upon the deck, and soon after dyed.
to the Waterside, and there force into a Barge, Boat, or Boats, Fifty four of
the Servants of your Creator, from thence hurry toward an old sorry rotten
Ship, which was ordered to receive and transport them beyond the Seas, like
Slaves and Vagabonds, for no other offense given to you, on their parts, but
only serving the living God according to his most holy way: to which bad Vessel
side these freeborn Innocents being come, and not having freedom in the Lord,
at the command of your Goalors and their Accomplices, voluntarily or actively
to go in to the In which one among your selves (in no mean authority) said, he
would not sail to Gravesend in, to have her.
Ship themselves, thereby to acknowledge a crime, or that criminal, which God,
in the Law of his Christ our Redeemer, allows (to wit) their meeting often
together to wait, and call upon his most holy Name in Spirit and Truth, without
restriction of time, place or number; for obeying this Royal Law of God,
conferred on the Universe in the Messiah, our Immanuel, the absolute Supreme
and alone Head of our Church, and disobeying your Edict to the contrary, they
are sentenced to Banishment; I say, because of this, with a good conscience,
they could not voluntarily go into the Ship, and consent to their own
unnatural, as well as unlawful, Banishment and Slavery. The Soldiers, and some
of the superactive baser sort (of whom Paul complained) that were employed by
you to drive and hale the Innocent, like Sheep to your slaughter (who resisted
them not) without tenderness or contrition, by way of scorn, cried, Throw out
the Tackle, throw out the Tackle, that we may hale up the Kings Goods: which
accordingly they did, fastening it about the Bodies of the Innocent, and so
slung up into the Ship the Lambs of the living God, as they do Cattle and other
Lading: who indeed, as found faithful (notwithstanding the derision of the
Ishmaels of this age) are the good and peculiar Treasure of the KING of Kings,
for whose sake earthly Kings and Rulers have, and again will be rebuked in the
day of further Revelation of his most terrible Indignation, which hastens.

Being thus inhumanely, and utterly contrary to the Law of this Land, forced on
Shipboard; their Lodging (such as it was) was appointed under a base low Deck,
where they were ramm'd together like other Stowage; and this very bad Ship
being bulgy, leaky, or the like, the Water came in upon them, and ran
frequently under them where they lay: by which means, and the suffocatious heat
that might arise through their being so cramb'd together (it is like) the
Pestilence increased among them, whereof at least Twenty seven of the Bodies of
these [so misused] fifty four are dead. And notwithstanding the Ship is yet
unsailed, riding at anchor in the River of Thames, Gods just judgment having
overtaken her Master, who was about three moneths-since clapped up in prison for
debt, the Mate having left him and the Ship, several of the Mariners being dead
of the Pestilence, others of them come away, whether convinced of the
unlawfulness of their undertaking, I shall not here determine, having not
spoken with the men face to face; but of this I am certainly informed, That the
more ruffinlier sort, who stayed behind, did, or threatened to fire Guns after
them, when they left the Ship and came on Shore: this being put altogether,
Viz. what has befallen the Ship-Master, his Mate leaving him, the death of
several of the Mariners, and some of them forsaking the rest, the Ship as yet
unable to sail, having been cleared at the Custom-house about a Quarter of a
year since; Who sees not the hand of God against these accursed undertakings?
Yet so blind, or rather wilfully wicked you are, that I have not heard that any
one, in considerable authority, has so much as endeavored that the rest of
these, yet living Innocents, might be released from their, so unjust, cruel
Bondage and Banishment; but on the contrary, I have heard some in their
stiffneckedness blasphemously say, Cannot your God defend you from the Plague,
in Prison, out of Prison, at Sea or Land? etc.

To such I plainly answer, as a living man yet upon the Earth; My God can
preserve me if he please, and I do believe in my heart will, if it be for his
glory, and that he has any further service for me to do among ye; if not, his
eternal will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven. And I am as fully assured,
that if it had stood with his most holy will, and that in his uncomprehensible
wisdom he had seen it meet, to have made those Innocents further or otherwise
more eminently serviceable to Him, and his Truth upon the Earth, He could and
would have delivered them out of your hands, or in your hands, under this your
most vile usage, preserved them from your drinking their innocent blood; but
then, if not for this, and such like doings, how should the measure of your
iniquities be filled up? However, we have not at any time preached or affirmed,
that our outward bodies were immortal, but liable, for the confirmation of our
immortal Testimony, even to suffer by your Spirit and Generation much outward
misery, unnatural cruelties, death, and what not; as was our blessed Savior,
his holy Disciples and Followers by those Jews and Monarchs of Old, in whose
days they appeared on the Earth; and they were as obnoxious and odious to
their then Hierarchy and Monarchy as the right true Christian man, called
Quaker, is now to yours; and all your Jewish usage of us his now Disciples and
Servants, we as really feel, as he and his did theirs. Nevertheless, were I
sure to dye many deaths by your hands, whilst I continue in Gods fear, I cannot
fear you, because you are so very wicked and unjust:

But, If you could the Soul destroy, as well as the Body kill;
You were indeed then much to be feared for doing ill.


And that it has pleased the infinite wise God that in this common calamity,
which is come upon the Nation because of your unparalleld abominations (and
that no flesh may arise to glory in his sight) some of our bodies who have not
sinned with you, fall with, or rather by you, do not therefore rejoice as the
former Jews (uncircumcised in heart and ears) did, over Jesus the just one, and
the then holy People that believed in his testimony; saying, That he was as one
smitten or forsaken. He that has saven others let him now save himself. And
that his good Apostle was a perverter of their Laws; a sower of Sedititon; a
turner of the world upside down, etc. I say, do not hereby stiffen your necks,
nor strengthen your ungodly hands against the Lord and his Anointed, because
the outward Bodies of the Godly and Profane dye alike: for when they (the
former Jews) thus drank innocent blood, and magnified themselves against the
innocent and righteous, then lo their destruction was nigh; and behold yours
slumbers not, and the dregs of the Cup, without mixture of pity, you shall as
surely drink at the hands of our God, as you now Torment, Banish, and drink the
Blood of us his People and Servants. And alas, poor animals, for what you can
in the mean time do against our Rock, or us in him; You do but in your most
impetuous wills fight with the wind, and in very great confusion beat the air
of your own imaginations; for we know right well you are limited by him whose
Seed you would limit. And I sensibly declare unto you, by the authority, and in
the power of the living God, the Root of that Lilly or Vine from which we
sprang up, into which by the grace of his Eternal Love we are ingrafted, and in
which, through infinite mercy, we grow and prosper in the Lord, cannot be
prevailed against; and in the end you will as surely feel and find it so, as
ever you were born. For the Mountain of the House of our God, is, must, and
shall be established upon the Top of all unholy Mountains whatsoever. And have
you not heard, and every since we were a People, we have carried our Lives in
our hands? And is it not manifestly seen and known to all men now living in
these Nations, who are not wilfully blind, that through the God of our Life
that strengthens us, we have not valued our Liberties, outward Estates,
Preferments, even Lives and all, to the death, in comparison of our Faithful
Testimony for Gods immortal and most glorious Truth, before you, that now are,
were in outward Power? And have we not in this your day of thrice woeful and
heavy Persecution, again and again confirmed and sealed this our Testimony with
our blood, and the purely offering up of all that has been near and dear unto
us as men? And is there not so much as one considerate considerable Gamaliel
among you, to consider these things? However, let not the profane, so much as
think in their dark sensuality, who were never known of themselves, to conquer
any thing, but themselves with Drink, Whordoms, Violences, Oaths, and such
like Bestialities, to overcome us who believe and walk in the Light, who have
taken up the Cross of Christ Jesus for our Armor, in which we sensibly feel
the power of God leading to, and surrounding us in his salvation. Nay, nay, be
it known unto you all, that do but so much as think or wish ill to Israel this
day, there are among us who in the power of the Lamb are more than Conquerors
over whatsoever it is possible for you to say, do, or think to do against us for
Truth: and unto such a strange thing cannot befall, neither any evil tidings
from you affright them, because we fear not as you fear, neither hope as you
hope; for while we live, we love to serve our Creator, choosing gladly to obey
the motions and commands of the Law of his Spirit, written in our hearts,
rather than so much as taste of the pleasures, or rather bondage, of your not
to be paralleled wickednesses, which shall last you but for a season (mark that)
so that when he who gave us breath (creating us and you to serve and obey him)
is pleased to call for our souls, standing in his fear (out of your false fear,
vain hope and glory) we are ready with joy and gladness to answer to his
command, who says, Come ye blessed, enter into eternal rest, prepared for the
Lambs of the fold, etc. But with the Swearer, Liar, Whoremonger, Superstitious,
Idolater, and ungodly profane Persecutor of Gods Innocent Flock, it cannot be
so; for they shall then dread (though they now make merry over the Lords
Witness and Witnesses) that most dreadful and irrevocable malediction, Go ye
cursed; yea, when such come to dye, the Light of Christ Jesus (with which every
man is enlightened that comes into the World) shall arise in the Conscience to
the utter condemnation of all those who in their lifetime have despised or
disobeyed it. Then shall the betrayers of the Just, and hard-hearted
imprisoners of the innocent to death, for obeying it, know what it is to be a
Judas or a Pharaoh: Then shall the worldly-wise and rich, with the false
divining Hireling, their frontier and leader, who serpent-like, to save self,
have bowed to, and even twisted about every green and dry tree, that in the
deceit has stood up, feel the Parable of Dives, and know that Lazarus the
poor, poor in Spirit, in the faithfulness, is the Seed that does and must
inherit.

Now if you be men, and would be deemed in any measure rational to posterity,
for what you do, and have done against us, positively declare what is the evil
these People called Quakers, as a people, have done, or if you have ought
against them but for their worshipping the living God of Heaven and Earth, in
Spirit, Truth, and Righteousness: nay farther, if they have left undone any
thing that they ought to have done; in the Spirit of God, and according to the
Scriptures of Truth, make it appear: for our souls delight to be, and are
subject to the higher, or highest power: and in my heart I intend most
willingly, and for conscience sake, actively to be obedient to every Ordinance
of man, which is, or shall be made for the Lords sake; I say, by plain
Scripture, command of Jesus our Lord, or pure example from his holy Apostles,
detect our principle and practice if you can; and without supposition or false
allegation, orderly set forth to the world what detriment we have brought upon
the good People of these Nations, since it pleased the Lord first to raise us
up therein; and also what the evil is that we have done you, who have thus
spilt and drank our blood without Mercy. Have we done ought against you, except
reprove you for your rending and damming, Superstition and Idolatry, profane
and unmanly, as well as antichristian Persecution, with the rest of your
superabounding evils and uncleanesses, in which you wallow, that you might
repent, amend your lives and be saved? I say again, produce your charge against
us under your hands, plainly and directly setting forth and declaring matter of
Fact only, without allegation, dubious supposition, or any manner of
clandestine trick or intreague of State Policy, dissonant to Scripture, or
foreign to the matter; that it may be transmitted to the ends of the earth, or
at least so far as your spirit has traduced, or made odious, us, or our
Principle; that all reasonable and unprejudiced people in the world, may judge
whether it bear in it cause enough thus to kill us in your Coals and Holes,
force and banish us out of our Nation, where of we are as freeborn as your
selves. And when you have thus manifestly, plainly and publicly emitted your
charge into the world, then lay by your Swords, Clubs, Goals, and ungodly Laws,
and bring forth your Priests also, (with whom, if not for whom you thus engage
Soul and Body) and let them publicly, thoroughly, and equally dispute your and
their Religion, and what they can vive voce, face to face say, or rather prove
against us, or our Principle in Religion, who in the Spirit of Truth serve and
fear the Lord, by you called Quakers. I am sure, if they (your Priests) be
spiritual men, or but so much as spiritually minded, it cannot be denied on
their parts: And this would be a good way to try Spirits, and for you and them
to try and hear Truth, and be tried by it (and true Religion is a Spiritual,
not a State matter) and whosoever is found in the Error, let the smooth stone of
David be slang into their hearts by the hand of a holy man to convince, and the
Sword of the Lord run through and through them, as his most holy Spirit shall
give utterance. And if to that they will not submit, leave it to the Lord of
the Harvest; for further, or contrary to this, no Man, or Power upon Earth,
has Commission from Christ Jesus to act.

So consider well what Church you are of, and whose Servants and Ministers you
are, that instigate the Rulers (who are too apt of themselves) to imprison and
hew down the Innocent with carnal swords, promp and help Parliaments to make
Laws against us, move the inferior Magistrates to execute them, and cause
dissolute Soldiers to tear us out of our holy Meetings, from thence drag and
drive us into your Goals and Dungeons, there to be kept till Banishment or
Death; whereby (in the Curse) you rend assunder the endeared Husband from the
tender and faithful Wife, (whom God has joined together) dislocating the
blessed Child from the righteous Parent, the faithful Servant from his honest
Master, and calling the Master from the Servant, etc. If this be Christian or
Apostolical, I know not what is Antichristian and Diabolical. Most certain I
am, Precept from Christ, Example from his Apostles, or the least seeming
vestage in any of their Writings for such doings you cannot pretend, and the
right generous English Spirit abhors such Salvagism as Hell. Then in this
matter who are you like, or to whom may I compare you but your selves? Except
in that of your Oaths of Allegiance and Supreamacy, you run parallel with the
Roman Episcopalians in the late Marian Persecution, with the Sacrament of their
Altar; the one they used as a Roman Gin against the then Martyrs, the other you
impose as an Antichristian Snare upon Us, the now obeyers of the true Christ,
who says, Swear not at all* etc. For oftentimes when neither your selves,
your late made cruel Edicts, nor the Multitude, (who for the most part have
been for you, against us) can raise seeming plausible matter enough against the
truly Innocent, to ensnare and incasserate their persons, Then I have often
seen and observed your last subterfuge to be, (viz.) O but will you take the
Oath of Allegiance! and sometimes it is, Will you take the Oaths of Alleagiance
and Supremacy? For the denial of both, or either, great are the numbers of us
that have been imprisoned, even several to Death; and yet I have not known any
Roman Catholic that has suffered either Imprisonment, or so much as loss of
Preferment [among you] for refusing the latter, whenas they do acknowldge a
foreign Head, and he is but a man: and it is as well known that we Christians
do, nor ever did acknowledge any other Head of our Church but CHRIST alone; so
that if I were of an aggravating spirit, I might say, Why Us, and not the
Papists? But it is not my principle to irritate or stir up any against another
to ease my self; but I feel who you favor and who you hate.
whenas for pure Consciencesake we who profess Christianity, and are Christians
indeed, as well as in words, cannot, may not, dare not swear, by Heaven, Earth,
Evangelists, or any other Oath whatsoever, because the promised Messiah, and
performed Oath of God, of whom Oaths under the Law were a Type, has commanded
us in express words, But I say unto you, Swear not at all; but let your yea, be
yea, and your nay, nay, etc. and his Apostle James says, Above all things, my
Brethren, swear not This could not be meant profane swearing, for under the
Law that was forbidden, viz. Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God
in vain; but Judicial swearing was by the Law of Moses allowed.
: So that being absolutely commanded by the Son of God, and precautioned, or
rather confirmed by his good Apostle, whose indispensable Commands and Doctrine
should be Catholic; however, to us that are not our own, but bought and
reredeemed with a price, even the Blood of our immaculate Lord, it suffices;
and therefore we dare not, may not turn his immortal Law behind our backs, nor
tread his most precious Blood under our feet. And I do believe in my heart,
most of you cannot but know beforehand, even before you offer us an Oath, that
it is our avowed Principle not to swear at all; and we dare not assume that
unholy liberty, or accursed dispensation, to break that most sacred, most
royal, and indispensible Law of our Redeemer; as many of you lately did for
your ungodly ends, when against your Consciences, and against your earthly
King, you swear, To be true and faithful to the Commonwealth, as it was then
established, without King or House of Lords. Nay, with us it is nothing so; for
the truly Faithful most gladly suffer the loss of all, even to the Death,
rather than against their Conscience break one iota of their KING of Kings
Command; and he that wilfully breaks one, is guilty of all: even so he that is
not faithful in a little, shall never be made a Ruler in much. So that I cannot
say, for what you do against us, (as also against your own souls and
consciences) as Christ said to the old Jews, You know not what you do: but I
can truly say, You know not, or at least wisely consider not what will follow
for these your most unreasonable outrages.

Indeed, most of our present Adversaries are men of Oaths, much addicted to
Swearing and Cursing; for, and under which the good People of the Land do
bitterly mourn, and they themselves shall howl, though at the present they
trample under their feet, as a thing of naught, the Name of our God, imploring
him often to damn and sink them; insulting over his Innocent Seed, plowing
broad, deep and most inhumane furrows on the backs of his righteous People at
their pleasure, contrary to all Law and good Reason: Not less than five or six
thousand of us, called Quakers, imprisoned at a time, since you called
Episcopal Protestants came into outward power.

Thus have you killed us all your day long, and exposed to outward ruin the
Families of the Faithful in the Land, making many Widows, oppressing their
Fatherless, even as it were chopping them and theirs in pieces, as flesh for
your Cauldron, according to the Edict of your own hearts lust; yet in all this
you are no Conquerours; and which is far worse, for all this you shall come to
Judgment: For the Mower says, All flesh is grass; And, accursed is the man
that trusts in man, or makes flesh his arm.

And, Lord, if what is already done, and in their hearts to do, be not enough to
fill the measure up of those, who on thy holy People, for their pure
Conscience, do impose. On me lay on thy pondrous weight, give me but strength
to bear; permit them, Lord, my blood to drink, and flesh to tear. Yet, Lord,
I Am not in the have, but on thy holy leisure cry, How long, how long! O Lord my
God, most holy, just, and high. For, Lord, I know deliverance to thy Seed, nor
evil to the City can be done, Good or Vengeance wrought thereon, but by thy
holy self alone. Therefore freely, and with all my heart, the manner, way, and
final disquisition of these things I leave to thee, my God, who art the King of
Kings, transmuter and establisher of all things.

Vita, Veritate omniaque.
E. B.

THE END.

