Doctor BIRCH's SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, November.
5. 1689.

Mercurii 6 Die Nov. 1689.
RESOLVED,

THAT the Thanks of this House be given to Doctor Birch, for the Sermon
Preached before them Yesterday at St. Margarets Westminster; And that he be
desired to Print the same; And that Sir Thomas Clarges do acquaint him
therewith.

PAUL JODRELL, Cl. Dom. Com.

A SERMON Preached before the Honorable House of Commons, November 5. 1689. By
P. BIRCH, D. D.

In the Savoy: Printed by E. Jones; and are to be sold by W. Not in the
Pall Mall, and R. Tailor near Stationers' Hall. 1689.

JOHN XVI. 3. And these things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the Father, nor Me.
THIS is the Reason our Lord assigns of the Jewish Zeal against his Followers,
why they put them out of their Synagogues, and thought whosoever killed them,
did God Service: And the Account so well agrees to their Successors in the same
bitterness of Spirit, that it can be no Immodesty in us to ascribe that
Ignorance to a part, which Christ himself charges, for the same cause, upon the
whole Visible Church of God.

The Jews, at that time, had all the Advantages of Possession; They had a
Church of God's own founding; One that had continued in a constant and visible
Succession for many Ages: That had no need of the Modern Arts, to found its
Doctrines on the Credit of a Dream, or cast out Devils where Men were hired to
be possessed; but which had seen the Rod of Moses strike a Living Stream out of a
Rock, and the Sea divided to give them passage and protection: One, which had
the Oracles of God committed to it, and which truly sat in Moses's Chair. And
therefore for these Rulers of God's chosen People, the High Priest, and all the
State of the Elders, to be charged with Folly, to see their Statutes and
Ordinances in danger to be set at naught, and themselves robbed of their
Prerogative by a few illiterate Fishermen, were Provocations that seemed to
justify their Zeal, and make their Fury Religious. For to tell them, They knew
not God; was next to affirming, He had left himself without Witness: And, To
reject their Authority; was to Resist the Ordinance of God, who had said, The
Priests Lips shall preserve Knowledge, and the People shall seek it at their
Mouths.

But on the contrary, our great Prophet and Teacher, who knew what was in Man,
and how little all these boasted Privileges would avail in the sight of God,
plainly charges these Unnatural Heats upon their Ignorance; They knew not that
a God of Mercy and Compassion excuses no Wrath that is cruel, and that fierce
Anger was not made for Man: They understood not how great the Presumption was,
to fancy his Cause needed the support of their Sin; That nothing which is Evil
and Injurious, can be made fit for our Election; and that no Intention is good,
which puts us upon the choice of Ill Means. And for this Reason, to the end his
Disciples should not be offended, nor prefer Authority to Truth, does our
Savior here affirm, These things will they do unto you, because they have not
known the Father, nor Me.

The Words are plainer than any Comment would make them; and they are designed,
in their First Intention, to arm the Holy Apostles against the Malice of their
own Countrymen. They were the First Persecutors of Men, who believed in the
same God with themselves: For what we read of Socrates, Anaxagoras, and others,
being condemned by the Court of Areopagus, was not for Worshipping the Gods in
a wrong manner, but for Contemning all. But in every Age we find the Jews
Constant Promoters of the Heathen Cruelties: And if we may guess at the Reason
of their Passion, by the first Spring of it, it does not seem to be a true Zeal
for their Law, lest the Christians should only change the Customs which Moses
delivered them, but rather an Indignation or Envy to be so much over-matched by
their Glorious Works, and Excellent Abilities. St. Luke relates, Act. 5. That
by Verse. 12.
the Hands of the Apostles were many Signs and Wonders wrought among the
People, then rose up the High Priest, and they that were Verse. 17.
with him, and were filled with Indignation, and laid their Hands on the
Apostles, and put them in the Common Prison. Afterward when they could not
silence these Witnesses of our Lords Resurrection, they Verse. 33.
took Counsel to slay them, and so literally fulfilled the Praediction in the
Text.

But this is written likewise for our learning who come after; for no Prophecy
of the Scripture is of a private or proper Interpretation; it ought not to be
confined to that single Occasion upon which it was first uttered, but is a
standing Instruction for all the Succeeding Necessities of the Church. And
therefore we who now celebrate a Deliverance, wherein this Scripture is
fulfilled in our Ears, who labor under the like unjust Sentence, as the
Apostles once did, and still hear Murder called a Sacrifice unto God, may
safely conclude, that the Admonition belongs to us of the Present Generation,
no less than it did to them, who first received it; and though we have no great
hopes it will convince Gainsayers, yet it may serve to fortify our selves,
and to make us all sensible of Gods Mercy, in so long escaping that Fury, which
first made Jewish Zealots and then Christian; which particularly inspired the
Conspirators of this Day, and which we have reason to Fear, was not buried in
their Graves, but will be always urging to the like Attempts.

For which Good Purposes, I shall endeavor some account,

1. Of the Falseness of that Principle, upon which these Violences are
generally built, namely, That they are Designs for God, and Hallowed by their
being so.

2. Of those Mistakes which corrupt and misguide our Zeal to intemperate
Degrees. And,

3. We may reflect on that wonderful Act of God's Providence, in so eminently
protecting us, and the Gratitude we owe Him, who so does His Mavelous Works,
that they ought to be had in Remembrance. And,

I. If we enquire what it was, which so far transported the Jews against the
Holy Apostles, we shall find it none of the weighter Matters of the Law,
Judgment or Mercy, for these the Apostles observed better than themselves; but
that which inflamed their Zeal, was Traditions of their own, the Commandments
of Men, and not of God. And of this our Savior convinces them, Matthew. 15. in
an eminent instance; They had a custom of Devoting their Goods by Vow; this the
Pharisees adjudged Obligatory, though a Father were in want, and so made the
Vow take place of the Commandment; now it is hardly imaginable, how they came
to prefer this mad Practice to so plain and natural a Duty, but that our Lord
insinuates the Reason, The Vow was of their own devising, and that made them so
fond of it.

Here then we have a plain discovery, what makes our Zeal intemperate; it is
that which makes every Affection so, the being Lovers of our selves, and
leaning to our own Understandings; for this never fails of making us seek to
impose upon other Men; one effect of which always is, that we proportion not
our displeasure to the weight of the things contended about, but to the
opposition we meet with; and this easily leads us into a Fond Belief, that the
Goodness of the Intention will sanctify our Excesses. It was St. Paul's own
case whilst he lived a Pharisee, he says, Act. 26. That he verily thought with
Verse. 9.
himself he ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus of Nazareth;
and yet we never find this pleaded as a Justification of his Fact; but though
he obtained Mercy because he did it ignorantly 1 Timothy 1. 13.
in Unbelief, yet he still confesses himself to have been a Blasphemer, and a
Persecutor, and Injurious; and he afterward pronounces, That whosoever does
Evil, that Good may come, his Damnation is just.

The Reason of this Declaration we find to have been a Slanderous Report, that
he Rom 3. 8.
held the contrary: And it seems to have been a Calumny upon our Savior
himself; for before his Exposition of the Decalogue, Matthew. 5. he forewarns his
Followers, That they should not think he came to destroy the Law and the
Prophets; and the following words show the great Reason he had to do so; For
verily I say Verse. 8.
unto you, till Heaven and Earth pass, one jot, or one tittle, shall in no wise
pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled. This is spoken of the Moral Law, for
the Ceremonial ceased at his coming, and the Judicial was of no force but in
the Commonwealth of Israel; and the profession is of absolute Necessity to the
receiving of the Gospel: For if that were not agreeable to the Common
Principles of Good and Evil, implanted in us already, we could have no
sufficient Motive to obey it; because the same God; who is the Author of our
Faith, is also Author of our Reason; and gave us that to judge of our Faith by;
so as for him to evacuate any Moral Command, is to contradict himself. To say
there may be new Rules of Justice, Temperance or Fidelity, is no better sense
than that there may be a new Truth in a Necessary Proposition: For the Law
written in our Hearts was at first given us to guide Mankind to the End of his
Creation, and therefore must be as Immortal as our Nature: That which was
restored by the Sanctions of Christianity, was this very Law, and as such, it
was received by the World.

And it could not be received upon any other account: For the Learned part of
the World was before instructed, that True Religion and Undefiled was ever the
same, only Time, and the Necessities of Men, have varied it in the manner of
expressing it. It was always true, That God is the most Excellent Being in
Himself, and the greatest Benefactor to us; and therefore to love and serve him
out of a prevailing sense of his Goodness, was always to be Religious; and he
that in every Nation thus worked Righteousness, was accepted of him. So
likewise in the Duties relating to one another, the Reason of them never
changes, though the Laws vary which are built upon it: We must, for instance,
live in some Society or other, because one part cannot say to another, I have
no need of thee; and therefore we are bound for our own good to all those
Duties by which Societies are supported. We may all want our Neighbors
Assistance, and therefore ought in good Reason to supply him in his turn: If we
do not our Neighbors Justice in their Possessions, we cannot long expect to be
safe in our own. And in all these cases, it is Equity and Right Reason which
makes the Law Obligatory, though that determines the particular Act. The common
Reason of Mankind obliges us not to invade one another Property, but it is the
Municipal Law of the Country which teaches us what it is to do so, by defining
what shall be esteemed Theft, Murder, or Adultery. When therefore we find
Constitutions to vary, this is not an Alteration in the great Fundamental
Principles of Reason, but it arises from the different Circumstances Men are
under; or at most, only proves that one Body of Men is not so wise as another.

And for this cause, the old Christian Apologists, who best understood the
Things they wrote about, did not begin their Method of Conversion where the
Modern Controvertists do, by trying the strength of a Man's Faith, and gageing
his Credulity by first propounding of a Mystery: But they represent the
Doctrine of Christ as an higher and a more excellent Improvement of Morality
than ever was before: They deny not that the same Virtues are found in the
Heathen Moralists which are in the Christian; but they affirm these are better
taught, and encouraged by more certain Promises of an Eternal Reward. As for
the Powers now claimed, to give away Heretical Kingdoms, to dispense with the
Faith of Treaties, to commit Massacres in cold Blood, and the like Works of
Darkness, these were never thought a part of Religion; and had they been so,
this alone had been a sufficient Conviction that it was not from God. And
therefore we need not wonder, that those Unbelievers, who border on Christians
that teach such things, continue in their Infidelity: For so far as they
believe these a part of Christianity, so far they are in the right not to own
it; and there is no way to convince them, but by separating this Corruption
from the Truth of the Gospel.

In a word, there must be some defect in every Action that thwarts the Original
Design of all Religion: And though we cannot always see the Deficiency of a
Cause, yet we may be fure there is one, wherever the product is bad; and
consequently whatsoever Passion hurries us on to Actions of Fraud or Injustice,
it can be no part of the Wisdom from above, or an effect of saving Knowledge,
but of the blindness of our Minds, as our Savior declares in the Text.

II. It was next propounded to consider, How Men come to he misled into so
gross and palpable an Error, and by what Steps and Degrees their Zeal becomes
so intemperate. Now the Zeal we have either for or against any thing, does
evidently depend upon the Judgment we make of it, and consequently it is
perverted whenever it is ill placed, and must necessarily err when it has not
Knowledge for its Guide: So that to recount all the Errors that mislead our
Affections were an endless Task, because they are as numerous as the ways by
which we come to be mistaken. In general, every inordinate desire is able to
make our Zeal so, and at the same time persuades us we do well to be angry:
Pride, Covetousness, or Ambition, or whatsoever rules the Man, and carries the
main of our Actions after it, presently calls down Fire from Heaven to devour
the Adversary, and proclaims Hostility against all that hinders our Enjoyment.

But there are two special Causes of these dreadful Effects, which seem to
outmatch all the rest: The one is, the resigning up of our Passions to the
disposal of other Men; and the other is a belief of secret Impulses, and
immediate Inspirations. And,

I. The greatest Number of Zealots are never at the pains of a Rational assent,
by themselves examining the Motives of their Opinion, but they are moved purely
from without, and so are the miserable Subjects of other Men's Excesses: They
first deny Reason its Native Right, and then choose their Faith without its
guidance, till by having Men's Persons in admiration, they are brought into
their power to be abused at pleasure. It is this giving possession of our
Understandings that has in all Ages made Divisions of so quick a growth: We
all know there must be Heresies, and that they are no more strange in the State
Ecclesiastical than Mutinies in an Army; or Rebellions in a Kingdom: For none
of all these Bodies consist only of good Members and the bad will be always
disturbing them. But this sort of Quarrels would be still the more harmless, of
Men would but judge for themselves, and not be at the Mercy of every bold
Seducer. None would be tempted by that restless Ambition of being Head of a
Party, unless the World afforded Fools to follow him, and that he expected the
Fiercest Maintainers amongst those who examined him least.

Perhaps this is one Reason why the hottest Disputes have begun about the most
trivial Matters; because to deceive the hearts of the simple, there is always
to be made a pretense of some peculiar Excellency; but that is not so easily
formed in the plain necessary Duties, as it is in Niceties of Opinion. And
therefore we may observe the Controversies about the Commandments to have been
all along the fewest: We never read of a Schism or a Persecution in behalf of
Morality; for to force Men to do Justice, and remember Mercy, would sooner
create Enemies than Admirers; and besides, there are few busy Spirits at
leisure to mind such common Seize. But if any dare oppose what a Leading
Man thinks fit he should believe; if his Creed consists not of the same Number
of Propositions, and he is bold enough not to be brought under Bondage to any,
then he is presently voted a Malefactor, let it be in a great Matter or a
small. Thus the whole Body of the Eastern and Western Churches fell out, and
separated about the time of keeping their Easter; chiefly because Victor Bishop
of Rome had less humility than his Predecessors, and found the Pre-eminence of
his Church worth the contesting for; The Eastern again fell out among
themselves about the use of Images; and to complete the folly, we of the
Western are devouring one another, for things in the greatest part of which our
Faith is not concerned.

This indeed has not always been due to the Blindness, but to the Treachery of
Guides; they have always stole something or other in the Scuffle: And for this
we need no other Arguments, than to observe the several Crusades and holy Wars
that have been set on foot for Domestic Reasons. But there is one Injustice we
still continue to the Memory of those Times, we admire them who were Learned in
these Controversies, and managed them for their Profit, who had more Wit and
less Honesty than themselves, whilst we forget to pay Reverence to those only
wise and good Men, who scorned to be the Instruments, and so died peaceably,
without Recording their Follies.

And if this Disease was so far advanced under the Primitive Integrity, how
much have we to fear in these still more perilous Times? Never certainly was so
strong a Delusion, as to believe the Infallibility of a single Person, and a
present Teacher against all the Principles of Reason, and Evidence of our
Senses: No wonder the Obedience of such Votaries is blind, and that in the Arts
of Revenge they come at length to be as Spiritual as their Leaders. For without
this putting themselves into other Hands, one would think it impossible to find
Men so hardened against all Compassion, as to attempt the Murdering of a Kingdom
in its Representatives. It would be uncharitable to believe it, were not the
Actors seized in the attempt, their Materiels seen and exposed, and Confession
made by themselves at their Deaths: The Apology also, That they were a few
Malcontents, who grew desperate upon Personal Provocations, might seem
plausible, but that no Injuries were then pleaded, and their own dying Words
gave Testimony that it was Religion alone which encouraged them. And indeed it
looks too much like the Action of a Party, because they have so often fallen
into the like practices in other Countries, witness all that innocent Blood
which has been shed in our Neighbor-Nations, with almost as little warning as
this would have been. But nothing better is to be expected where the Scriptures
are denied, and the People hear of no other Morals but what these Guides will
teach them.

II. There seems little need of External Encouragements, so long as that
terrible Motive continues in the World, the belief of immediate Inspirations,
and that Men are extraordinary Instruments of God's Judgments by a secret
Impulse; for this is easily taken up, and only wants Confidence to manage it.
The Pretenders to this, first formed themselves into a Sect amongst the Jews,
and they gave so dreadful an Example of an enraged Zeal, that one would think
it a sufficient warning to all after-Ages to beware of its Transports: The
Historian tells us of these Zealots, that under pretense of imitating Men of
Heroical Impulses, they committed all kinds of Rapine and Murder upon their own
People, that by their mad defense of the Temple they destroyed it, and that
their intestine Quarrels more contributed to the enslaving of their Country,
than all the Arms of its Enemies.

This perhaps may be called an extraordinary Case, and a part of that Vengeance
which the Jews drew upon them and their Children by their Crucifying the Lord
of Glory: But the Christian Story likewise informs us of the like Calls from
Heaven, there we meet with impulses to Murder, Sacrilege and Adultery, and
with Men of that reprobate Sense, as to Glory in their Shame. It was not only
Montanus, who had his Paraclete, but all the greatest Corrupters of
Christianity have also pretended to Divine Inspirations; most of the Romish
Errors have grown into a part of their Faith, by the like Artifices; they could
not always argue Men out of their Money and Sense together, but they could
fright them into the Snare, and find out Men who had Forehead enough to tell
who they saw in Purgatory, and what Communion they had with Saints and Angels.
It were happy also, if the Emissaries of that Church had never sown the like
Enthusiams in ours, and that they found not their account in putting those out
of the reach of Conviction, who are deluded by them. As for us, who suffer by
these pretended Gifts of Gods Spirit, we should beware of the other Extreme,
the denial of his saving Graces, and guard our Faith against such Delusions, as
tend to render that tremendous Article of Gods Grace, a Subject of unprofitable
Talk.

III. Having thus attempted to show the Falseness of that Principle, upon which
the Enemies of the Truth have persecuted its Professors, with the chief
Mistakes which lead Men into it; it remains in the last place, to apply this to
the Circumstances we are under, and make that sober use of the Admonition for
which it was intended. The Context informs us, that our Lord spoke these
things, to the end his Disciples might not be offended and fall, but when the
time either of Trial or Deliverance came, remember he had told them of it: This
likewise is the end of all these Public Commemorations, that we may keep the
great Goodness of GOD in remembrance, and mention it with Honor, and a
Distinguishing Observation. And,

1. We are not to let these remarkable Events pass over our Heads. without
Observation, but to regard the Works of the Lord, and the Operation of his
Hands. His ways are sought out of all those who have Pleasure therein, whilst
the Wicked will not seek after God, nor is God in all his Thoughts.

There is an Art of God no less in Governing the World, than in Creating it;
and to meditate upon it with a due Reverence, was anciently esteemed a Mark of
Piety, and the principal part of their Worship. But in what Rank soever we now
place the Duty, it certainly puts the truest and best Difference between Man,
and the Beasts that perish: Their Senses are as quick as ours, and for ought we
know, they argue as right as our selves, so far as concerns the Action of their
Life; but it is Man alone who is enabled to look up to the First Cause of all,
and by the visible Things of Creation and Providence, to find out the great
Creator. This also is the most Valuable Distinction between one Man and
another: One grows wise enough by Experience to choose the Good, and refuse the
Evil; the Other sees many Things, and observes not: One has his Senses
exercised, and grows up to a perfect Man; the Other has no depth of
Consideration for any thing to take root in, and so never brings any Fruit to
perfection.

It is indeed far above the best of our Capacities to see the Reason of all
Divine Proceedings: His Way, says David, is in the Sea, his Paths in the great
Waters, and his Footsteps are not known: Many Occurrences, big with Wonder, and
rare Accidents, do, like the troubled Water, close up again, and their way is
not seen. But this is one of the Difficulties which was intended to quicken our
Diligence; We are not discouraged from the Labors of the Field, because we
know not how the Plants increase, and how their Seeds come to open into so
curious a variety of shape and color. No Man refuses to eat, because he knows
not how his Meat is assimilated: And we cease not to boast our Knowledge,
though we cannot explain the common Works of Nature, how the Moon knows her
certain Seasons, and the Sea its Tides. And therefore we who believe it, may,
without any presumption, go on to study that Providence which is too wonderful
for us: And that we may not judge amiss, give me leave to mention only these
two obvious Rules.

The first is, to weigh the Judgments of God by their End and Design; and the
next, to consider their dependency upon one another, and how each particular
concurs to make up the Beauty of the whole. For, although we are but of
yesterday, and know nothing, yet we are certain, where an infinite Wisdom is
concerned, there can be no room for chance, and that where this directs, those
things are beautiful in their Season, which alone looks like Deformity. They
seemed very odd Means of his Advancement, to have Joseph first hated of his
Brethren, then sold into a strange Country, and there unjustly cast into
Prison; and yet, without every one of these Misfortunes, he had never been
brought into Pharoah's Presence, and saved his Fathers House. It is to such
bold Transgressions as were this Day attempted, that we owe the Laws which
preserve us; and it was to the Violence of those who would have Rooted out at
once our Liberties and Religion, that we owe the Present Establishment of both;
had the Enemies of our Holy Profession been contented to lead us Blindfold into
the midst of Samaria, a great part of us had never opened our Eyes, and seen
the Danger; but every Advance of theirs, helped on our Deliverance, and
increased the Triumphs of this Happy Day.

If then we have seen the Hand of God in protecting his People, and that never
any put his Trust in the Lord, but he did deliver him; if we have seen him
pusle the Wisdom of the Wise, and overturn them in the midst of their Strength:
These are Experiences that deserve our Regard, and that should give us a strong
Confidence in GOD, who has done so great Things for us.

2. Last of all, We are to act conformably to those Sentiments which a due
Estimation of these Benefits inspires us with, and so to make what Retribution
we are able. We indeed cannot properly be said to Recompense the Almighty,
because we have nothing but what we have received from him: But he is pleased
to declare, That He who offers Him praise, honors Him; and therefore we are
bound to pay these Praises due, in some proportion, to the Mercies we enjoy.

There is a natural Equity, that where the benefit is Public, the
acknowledgement should be so too; and therefore, since the Blessings we now
Commemorate, were extended to the good of Society, and make Kingdoms Happy, we
are bound to Praise God with the Multitude; and to enter only into our Closets,
would be interpretatively to Contemn him before the Congregation. Man was not
made a Sociable Creature for every thing else, but the Acts of his Religion,
and all Nations have ever made their Worship as Solemn as they could, although
they differed in the Objects of it; if we respect that which God ordained, the
Religion of the Jews was perfectly National, and the Unity of the Christian
Church, as well consists in one Visible Communion, as it does in one Common
Faith; for else there could be no Schism without Apostasy.

If therefore we are obliged to a Public Homage in the ordinary Acts of our
Worship; much more when we come to honor GOD not only as our Common Parent,
but as the Father of our Country; as He that has divided us from the Nations
round about, as well in Happiness as in Situation; who has not given us over
to the Will of our Enemies, but has still confounded their Devices, and kept
the Simple by their Right; whose Hand is not yet shortened, that it cannot save;
but who can make our Happiness as the strong Mountains, that all the Storms of
Envy and Malice shall break against it.

Above all, To the Praises of our Lips, we should add the Obedience of our
Lives; and so raise our selves up into his Protection, who is the hope of all
the Ends of the Earth. We are not thus wonderfully delivered out of our
Distress, to add Sin to Sin, and to make God's Benefits the Instruments of his
Dishonor: It is not to practice those Crimes our Selves, which we condemned in
others, but to be a People Zealous of Good Works, and to bring forth Fruit unto
God. There is so general a Corruption of Manners, and our Discipline is so far
lost, that it is a Task worthy the Wisdom of this August Assembly to find out
the Means of its Restoration, and to keep up the Bank against that Flood of
Wickedness which is visibly breaking in upon us. In particular, I hope there is
that Generous English Spirit left among us, that will not suffer our Common
Mother to be torn and vilified, till we come to a Contempt of all things
Sacred: If we once lose the Encouragements of our Learning, and the Distinction
of our Orders: If that Noble Provision which is made for our Education, be once
neglected, and those Schools of the Prophets be turned into little Seminaries,
where Men forget that Modesty is a Virtue, and learn to talk without thinking,
we shall in a few Years sadly find, that Rome will have none left to Oppose her.

This is not spoken to the reproach of any, but out of a deep sense of our
Folly, and an ardent desire that we may not turn our Blessings into a Curse. If
therefore we would complete these Blessings, and transmit them down to a late
Posterity, the Way is open, and the Means is certain: Let but our Vices
diminish, and so will our Dangers; God will still be our Mighty Savior and
Deliverer, and so lead us through Things Temporal, that we finally lose not the
Things Eternal.

Now to God, etc.
FINIS.

