A Word of Reproof, And Advice to my late Fellow Soldiers and Officers of the
English, Irish and Scottish Army; With some Inrhoad made upon the Hireling and
his Mass-house, University, Orders, Degrees, Vestments, Poperies, Heathenism,
etc. With a short Catologue of some of the fighting Priests, And for just cause
given, have given them a blow in one of their eyes, (picked out of the whores
head) which they call, A Fountain of Religion, but is a sink of iniquity.

Also a word to those old Creatures who are old in iniquity, and in the fallen
estate, yet deny falling away.

Likewise a word to those Magistrates and Rulers who whip, or suffer to be
whipped or imprisoned the Saints of the most High as Vagabonds, amongst whom
there is no Beggar.

As also a word to that bad Generation of people, who in their reprobate minds,
and with their unwholesome tongues blaspheme and belie the dreadful and just
God, in saying that he has created some men intentionally to be damned, and a
particular number to be saved and damned. Wherefore then does the Hireling
preach, and for what has he his hire? Mark, the decrees of God are yea, Amen,
and unalterable.

A word to these who are called Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords,
Barrons, Bannerets, Baronets, Knights of all sorts, Esquires and Gentlemen (so
called.)

Also let that Generation that desire a sign, read some of the Examples that
have befallen the Persecutors of the Innocent.

By a lover of good Men, good Laws, good Governments and Governors, good
Judges and Ministers, as at the beginning: Who hates nor fears no man, and is a
lover and honourer of all men in the Lord, but cannot give flattering Titles,
or respect the person of any man. E. B.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

And I said, hear, I pray you, O heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the house of
Israel; Is it not for you to know judgment? Who hate the good, and love the
evil, who pluck off their skin from off them, and their flesh from off their
bones; Who also eat the flesh of my people, and flay their skin from off them,
and they break their bones, and chop them in pieces, as for the pot, and as
flesh within the cauldron, Micah 3. 1, 2, 3.
FRIENDS,
I Do believe that very many among you are not unsensible of your own
unfruitfulnesse, and unfaithful dealing to Godward; and I know that ye may not
deny, but if ye had stood in your former integrity, that is to say, when ye
were little in your own eyes, when compassion was no stranger, and tenderness
was well known amongst ye, then was the hireling and all his Jewish, and Popish
trumpery sentenced, and liberty of conscience vowed; I say if ye had stood in
that integrity, ye might have been instrumental to have saved much of the
innocent blood that has been shed, for which I know the Lords hand will be
speedily and eminently revealed upon some amongst ye, who have connived at
cruel murders, when as the blood of the innocent has been laid before ye; as
James Parnels in the first place was; but since him many others have drank of
the same cup, even to death; And I am sure the Lord will rebuke princes for our
sakes, and let the most sturdiest oak amongst ye know that the indignation and
fierce wrath of the dreadful God is kindled, and his righteous judgment is
nigh, even at the door, and a sudain and terrible breach will he make amongst
ye, at unawares, when ye look not for his coming; for verily his righteous
spirit is grieved at the cruelties that are done, and although ye hedge your
selves up with many spears and think to surround your selves with battleaxes,
yet the same spirit, which ye have many of ye like fools gone about to limit,
will suddenly break through all your contrivances, and a day of mourning will
overtake ye, although for the present ye are not troubled like other men; but
suffer the Prophets, and messengers of the living God to be slain before your
faces; yea I know the righteous have perished, and none of ye have laid it to
heart, so as to remedy it, and if any of them be moved of the Lord to come
among you, some of ye have even shamefully and cruelly entreated them, madly
resisting the holy One in his way; but let the most surliest among ye know that
the blood of the innocent has reached heaven, and he will not spare ye.

And now that none of ye from the General to the meanest sentinel may be
ignorant what innocent blood I mean; It is the blood of such who did believe,
and declare that Christ is come in the flesh, and so durst not uphold a Jewish
or Popish priesthood by paying of them tithes; and some for going into a
Mass-house, and desiring the hireling to fear the Lord, and turn from the evil
of his ways, or asking a sober question, and for not swearing, which is the
breach of an especial command of Christ, who says swear not at all; many
others dragged out of their peaceable meetings, without the breach of the least
Popish law whatsoever, and thrown into dungeons, and nasty holes, amongst
thieves and murderers; other being upon their knees at prayer, have been taken
up by the hair of the head, and some thrown into prison without so much as a
Mittimus, and there kept for many months; others have been stoned, knocked down
with clubs and stones, mangled with swords, and run into the body, and
abundance of such cruelties I might name, besides the exceeding great number of
our friends that have been whipped as vagabonds, and committed to prison for
vagabonds, and yet, be it known to the whole World, we have not a beggar
amongst us.

One and the same woman has been committed for not coming, and coming to the
Steeple-house, although she spoke not a word to either Priest or people; others
have been invited by the Magistrates in my hearing to the Steeple-house to have
a dispute, and yet afterward was committed to prison, but the cause of the
innocont which of ye have pleaded? or what Justice has there been done to the
poor Nazarenes? when any of us have been falsely, and contrary to all manner of
Law, imprisoned for the space of a year more or less, there is some would have
us call it a favor, when as for shame they are forced to deliver us.

When some of the Lambs of God have been brought to the bar, the Judge has
asked the plaintiff, what he had against the Prisoner, he answered, he abused
me, he abused me; wherein? why said the plaintiff, he bid me fear the Lord, and
this he called an abuse; and many such rediculous absurdities I might name,
that has been committed by the Antichristian Romish Clergy, and those upon
whom that beast rides, in these our yet bad-reformed times; but I shall wade
further into that Sea anon.

Friends, It is not unknown to me, the exceeding largeness of your borders in
the earth and your being at much ease in the flesh, having more then heart can
wish, many of ye not having the least sympathy with Jacobs troubles, being as
ye think safely wrapped up in fig leaves, having on a phylactary of the best
make, yet the dreadful God of hosts will fall in among ye at unawares on every
hand, if ye speedily repent not, and lay to heart the sufferings of the
innocent, and forthwith relieve the oppressed, your latter end will be worse
then your beginning; where is that spirit of tenderness that was once among
ye, that dearly loved mercy and justice? have ye turned the love of God
backwards? Oh! ye have given him just cause utterly to forsake ye; have ye sold
your selves to do wickedly? and instead of growing from strength to strength,
and from grace to grace, ye have turned the grace of God into wantonness and
oppression, swearing, and for swearing, vowing and not performing, all which
the Lord our God hates; and let not the most lofty Ceader of ye all be
deceived, the Lords arm is not shortened, and asuredly he will visit for these
things.

What, has victories, treasures and spoils so puffed ye up, that ye quite
forget your selves, and your poor brethren? and because ye have overcome the
oppressors, do ye therefore oppress? but the same Lord lives as ever, and
that's our assurance, that he will make all his enemies his footstool (appease
that in your selves which would be angry) and honestly consider if ye do not
uphold the enemies of God, and Gods people at this day, yea I know there was a
spirit amongst ye once, that would have grieved in your very hearts, and have
thought it your very shame, that the people of God should have lain rotting in
Goals even to death for not swearing, or putting off a hat, and for not putting
into the hirelings mouth, which ye all may, and I do believe for the most part
do know that he is even your own implacable enemy; do not all go along with
them like fools to the stocks, till a dart strikes sheer through your livers? I
say there was a time when the hireling and his Jewish and Popish trumpery was
all sentenced, and the brand of the conqueror, and other Tyranies vowed to be
taken off, but ye are for-sworn, and the Lord will not hold them guiltless,
that have so often called God to witness, and not performed, as some of ye
have done, although you may say in your hearts, he defers his coming; and
because judgment is not speedily executed, therefore the wicked are set in
their heart to do evil; and my friends, I am sure the blood of the innocent
shall never cease to cry, till such time that the seed of God be delivered, and
fully discharged from their deadly prisons, and nasty holes, where many of the
most precious Saints of the Lord are thronged, where some already have sealed
their Testimony with their blood, and several others are languishing even at
the brink of death; and all this, and much more is suffered to gratify the
hireling that irreclameable relic of popery.

May not all that are wise in heart plainly see that the Priests of this Land
war with flesh and blood, and for principalities, and powers, and their weapons
are indeed carnal, and not spiritual, who no longer then their mouths are
cramed and filled, they prepare war, and murders men for their bellies, and
have had the blood of several already? Oh cruel gluttony, and most accursed
appetite, that nothing can stanch or satisfy but blood! Oh, let them have
blood to drink, and let the whores cup be filled brim full with the indignation
and dregs of the wrath of the Almighty God. If we were the wolves, as the
hirelings says we are, and they the sheep or Lambs, I am sure all people will
confess with me, that it is not the nature of sheep and Lambs to devour and
kill the wolves, but the wolves did of old, as these do now, kill the sheep,
and devour the innocent Lambs.

I have read and do believe that the good Shepherd laid down his own life for
the Sheep, but I do not read that he ever took away the life of any. So my dear
Friends, honestly consider who ye are for, and who ye uphold; for verily, if ye
lay down your lives and perish for and with their deceit, I am bold in the
Lord God to declare it unto you all, from the highest to the lowest, that they
are falling, and mine eye sees it; and it is impossible for ye to defend or
secure them from the just name of Antichrists false prophets, deceivers, greedy
dumb dogs, who can never have enough, but still seeks for his gain from his
quarter; (mark that, he seeks it) as the false Prophets did of old; for there
is few or none that are not forced, yea very few that brings his gain to him,
but himself, or some one for him seeks all the quarters of the field till he
finds the poor brow-sweating husbandman (who eats the bread of carfulness
all the year long) no sooner he finds him, or his corn or hay, but he presently
tells out the tenth sheaf, or tenth Cock, and so sets his thiefs mark upon it,
and calls it his own. Compare him to the false prophet, which is spoken of in
Mich. 3. read the whole Chapter, and see if there be any more difference then
there is betwixt a thief and a ravenous Lawyer, or a Judge, whose hands and
affections may be full of bribery, and yet hangs a thief. Friends, lay aside
prejudice, and honestly Judge.

Ye may remember that Moses said, a Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things (mark, and truly consider the
word all*) he does not say, him shall ye hear in some things only, but him
shall ye hear in all things; and it comes to pass, that he that will not hear
this Prophet, shall be cut off. Now that Prophet who was the Promise, the Vow
and Oath of God, commands in express words, saying, Swear not at all; though it
was said by them of old, thou shall perform thy Oaths to the Lord, but I say,
swear not at all; and I am sure he that goes about to enforce any one to swear
by any Oath, obeys not that Prophet, and is to be cut off; and that Prophet
strictly and positively commands his Ministers, saying, Be ye not of men called
Masters, without the breach of which command and title of Master, the hireling
is not complete.

For when a youngling goes first to Oxford* to learn the trade of Devination,
they call him a fresh-man, and continues for three years or thereabouts by the
name of an undergraduate, and then he takes the degree of Batchelour, but yet
he may not preach, except it be by that which they call Ex Gratia; and in other
four years time, he commonly takes the degree of Master, and then he has
authority to say what he pleases, for an hour together, and calls it the Word
of God; and he must not be contradicted, upon pain of six months imprisonment,
although half his discourse consists of what Ovid, Plato, Aristole and
Diogenes, etc. did, which they call Heathens; and yet what he says in that
place, must pass for sound doctrine, and they call it the Word of God; for when
he steps into his stall, and has spoken some words, which he calls prayer, he
bids them hearken to the Word of God, and there like a Lawyer or a Trumpeter he
sells them his The false Prophet steals the word from his Neighbor, and boasts
in other men's lines.
own breath, and the words of the forementioned heathenish Authors, with many
more that he has thieved together and stolen from his neighbor, which with
his title of Master is an infallible mark of the false prophet. Yet your
divelish law is such, that none must speak to him in the time of his false
worship, his going to or coming from the Mass-house, and at ^is own house he
will not be seen; so that as far as in you lies,) (...) ^^use the people to
perish for want of knowledge; but that w^^^h limits the Holy One, must be cut
off; for he speaks where he will, and when he will, and by whom he will,
although it be by the Carpenters Son, or Peter a fisherman, who has no
Letters, and was no Orthodox man (upon your account) yet it shall break all
your bonds asunder, and shatter all your contrivances to dust. Why will ye
believe a swearing Priest, that desperately and wickedly breaks the absolute
command of Christ, and teaches others so to do? Christ says, Swear not at all
(mark) not at all, What not a Judicial oath before a Magistrate, being called
thereunto by the Authority of the Nation? Nay, Swear not at all, neither by
Heaven nor by Earth nor by any other Oath (Judicial, or) whatsoever; thus said
the great Prophet, the Everlasting Priest, the Son of God, the Savior of the
World; and it very shortly comes to pass that he that will not hear him, shall
be cut off from amongst the people, and no swearer or liar can possible enter
the Kingdom: and he that will swear will lie, and the liar is for the lake, and
shall have his portion without, with dogs, witches, and sorcerers.

Paul who was a Minister of Christ, he exhorted the people, saying, so walk as
ye have me or us for an example; I leave it to all that have any soberness;
and have not made a bargane with Hell and Death, if it be in the least safe for
us to walk as we have the hireling for our example, that will swear, and teach
others to swear, and say its lawful, and strike with his fist, and knock men
down, and imprisons men to death for their bellies, as many of the Goals in
England can witness* proud, covetous, heady and high-minded undeniable they
are, and are these men to be learnt of? surely nay; with my very life I deny
them to be of God, or Christ, who says, Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly,
and He nor none of his Ministers did ever imprison any, stock, whip or murder
any; but their own backs they willingly gave to the smiter, and their cheeks to
have the hair plucked off, and were accounted as the offscouring of the earth,
their names cast out as evil doers, and were shamefully entreated, persecuted
and killed, as false, yet true, and were called pestilent fellows, subverters
of the Law, and turners of the World up-side down, ringleaders of Sects, etc.
So suffers the servants of the living God at this day, and as they have done
unto me, so will they do unto ye, says Christ; The servant is not greater then
his Lord; and he that will live godly in Christ Jesus must suffer persecution.

And all this was done to them of old, as is to us at this day, even by the
same Generation of highpriests, high in profession, and spoke as big swelling
words, and made as much ado about their New Moons, Sabbath-dayes, Tithes,
Temple, Circumcision, Bull, Goat, Ram and heifer; all which were but a shadow
of good things to come; as the Priests of England do about their Masse-house,
Gleab-land, Tithe-sheaf, Lamb, Calfe, Wool, Goose, Pig, Mortuary, Peter Pence,
Bread, Wine, and Baby-baptism; but as they did, these do now hate the Light,
but it was, and is because their deeds were and these are evil, and did as
these do now, deney to hear the prophet in all things; and it came to pass
that they were cut off, and these inevitably shall be.

And my dear friends, if ye share with their iniquities, ye shall partake with
their plagues; search your selves, and consider with that of God in your
consciences, for there truth will speak; And see if many amongst ye are not
run, and running headlong into the unbelieving state, seeking honor one of
another; ones a Knight, and another is a Lord, and another angry because he is
not a Lord; but amongst ye all the heritage of the Lord God is neglected.

Which amongst ye, that most of all quarrels for these bubbles, that has not
said it would never be a good World so long as there was a Lord in England? and
likewise swore against a house of Lords, and yet love and retain the name, the
nature and the same thing, Oh! deny your selves of these nothings, and take up
the cross, which will cross nothing but your lusts, and see if it be possible
for ye to be re-discipled once again; for verily at the present ye are not so
much as in the way to please God; Was there any of this stuff amongst ye some
years since? remember your selves, have ye paid your ^ows, and kept your
integrity? the lying lips, and the deceitful tongue the Lord hates, and think
ye the Lord will not visit for these things?

Yea, His dread and terror will fall amongst ye shortly, if not suddenly, and
although ye may hate to be reformed, and laugh me to scorn, or persecute me to
death, yet its the truth of the living God to every individual amongst ye;
there was once a praying spirit amongst ye, that would have said, Lord honor
us with success and victory, and we will honor thee with doing of justice,
and relieving the oppressed; and liberberty of conscience was promised with
hands lifted up, with tears in your eyes erected to heavenward, with many a
true sigh and groan which could not be uttered; and if ye did not promise to
the Lord before the battle at Dunbar, that that grand Idol, and oppression of
Tithes should be taken off, if the Lord delivered ye that day, then say I am a
liar; The Lord has performed, but ye have failed; and instead of giving all
power, all glory, and all honor to God, ye honor one another with blaspemous
titles, the hireling being your example, who write to one another at this day
by the name of reverend Brother, reverend Sir, and reverend Master, which is
blasphemy; for reverend is the name of him, and only him, that made heaven and
earth; may it please you^ worship, may it please your Lordship, may it please
your honor, etc.

Now if all honor (mind the word, all, which will not admit of the word, some,
to be joined with it in that place) does belong to God alone, as I am sure it
does, there is not the least of Room for your fond appellations which ye give
and receive one of another; How can ye believe, that receives honor one of
another? Oh! Let Moab come down before she be compelled to serve, and the Lord
stain all your honors in one day; for I am sure some of ye he will overtake
with speed, and their memories shall rot, but the name of the just shall live
for ever; therefore let every soul of ye be subject to the higher powers, which
is higher and above the transgressor; and see if yet there be any remorse in ye
toward your poor brethren, who as I said before are languishing in nasty
holes, and several dead, most of them dead and alive, being such who have
freely offered up their lives with ye, in the actual service for the
Commonwealth, in the heat of It is the same man that was called Round head,
that is called Quaker; therefore let all that are in authority, be ashamed to
see us thus dealt with.
the day; and I am sure we have not forfeited our right in the least, or
purchased your indignation, by either plots or rebellion against ye, although
ye have sufficiently provoked us, by suffering far more to be laid upon us,
then as we are men could be borne, and me thinks our peaceable, patient, and
innocent carriage cannot but smite ye to the very heart; I am sure it has
reached Heaven, and if ye were not in the deepest slumber, even the sleep of
death, ye would not lame your selves to uphold the interest of a company of
gormandizing Priests, who creep into the Mass-house, and there speak a
devination of their own brain, or make a plot in the week days, and there
discover it, and bid others keep holy upon that day, upon which they keep
market; and tell the people if they do not pay their Tithes, they rob God; and
it may be threateneth those that are behind to sue them, or send them to prison
forthwith; so that upon that day which he exhorts others to keep holy, he does
all manner of work that tends to his quarterly gain.

Can that be the Ministry of Christ that murders men for their bellies? Nay,
it is impossible; for the Ministers of Christ labored with their own hands;
and took by violence from no man, neither were they so much as burdensome to
any, much less stocked, caused to be whipped, imprisoned, or smote with their
hands, but with them labored, and knocked down no man, nor imprisoned any man
to death for their bellyes, but in this some of these at this day do glory.

And yet if any be moved of the Lord to tell any one of these cruel men that
their glory is their shame, or their belly is their God, its much if some
Priest-ridden Justice or another do not send him to the Goal for it.

I shall also show ye the rope of sand wherein many of these Priests have been
wrapped: Henry the 8. was a Papist; the same Henry the 8 was a Protestant, and
called himself Defender of the Faith. Edward the 6 a Protestant, Queen Mary a
Papist, Queen Elizabeth a Protestant again. King James was both for and against
Bishops. King Charles he was called a Church-Papist, yet loved Bishops and Book
of Common Prayer so well, that an open war was declared against him, which has
cost an innumerable quantity of blood and treasure; he and his Bishops
extirpated, swore, vowed and declared against, and others have taken
possession; yet I shall seal it with my blood, That there is 1200 Priests in
England that are as bad as those 12 Bishops were; so that at the best we are
but where we were, after all this fighting, killing, and being killed, pulling
down, and setting up; and all men may plainly see, that have not done away
reason, and sold themselves to the spirit of prejudce, that the best of their
religion is but till further order, and the change of a King, or the change of
a Queen, or the alteration of a government puts them out of order, and to seek
for their religion, tell they have received further order from man, or at least
till they have studied what religion the King or Chief Ruler adheres to, and
there they will seemingly imitate; There they were, and there they are tell
further order, and the best of their Religion will reach no further, but tell
further order.

See what the Ploughman in his complaint says of these wicked men in the Reign
of K. Edward the third; here follows somewhat subtracted forth of his
complaint, the thing being too large to insert verbatim.
AH Lord, though that the Plowman may not have so much silver for their prayers
as other men, for See the plowmans complaint in K. Ed. thirds time, Foxes Acts
and Monuments, Vol. 1. p. 524.
they know not so well to prize their prayers as these other chapmen; But Lord,
our hope is, our prayers be never the worse, though they be not so well sold as
other men's prayers.

They turn thy words into songs and tales, and so men do now, they sing thy
words merrily, and that singing they call thy service; but Lord, I trow the
best singers thou hear not most, but he that fulfilleth thy words, he thou
hears full well, though he weep more then sing; and I trow that weeping for
breaking of thy commandments be more pleasing to thee then singing of thy
words, and forsaking of travel which God commands, and give their selves to
idleness, that is the mother of all naughtiness. Lord, Mary thy blessed
Mother, and Joseph touched often times thy body, and yet wrought with their
hands, and lived in as much cleanness of soul as our Priests do now; But Lord,
men make now great stonen houses full of glassen windows, and calls them
thine houses and Churches; but thou say those that did worship in such had
been worthy of death. Lord, in thy Gospel thou say that true worshipers of
God worship him not in the Hill beside Samaria nor in Jerusalem neither, but
true worshippers of God worship him in spirit and in truth. And Lord God, what
a worship is this, to build thee a Church of dead stones, and rob thy quick
Churches of their bodily livelihood, to cloth stocks and stone with See pulpit
clothes and many gilded coats, painted windows with pictures of many a
monstrous beast.
silver and gold, and other good colors, and I see thine own images go in cold
and in heat in clothing all to broken, without shoon and hosen, and hungered
and athirst; feeding themselves and not thy flock, hiding. Thee that art our
light, and those that were fed they slew, and those that were broken they knit
not together, but rattled them with sternship and with power; And Lord, these
hired men they nefeeden thy sheep in thy plenteous Leasow, but feeden thy sheep
with sweines and false miracles, and tales; but at thy truth they ne come not.
For Lord I trow thou sendest them never; And of these hired men speaks
Jeremiah, and thou say in that word by him, I ne send them not, and they run
quickly, but I ne spoke unto them. For if they had stood in my council, The
Spiritual man is locked in Prison, by those that have the Key of Cunning.
they would have turned people from the evil of their ways, and their evil
thoughts; For Lord thou say, thy Word is as a fire, and a hammer breaking
stones, but from the least to the most, they study covetousness, and from the
Priest to the Prophet, all they have done guile. And Lord, this is much
mischief and matter of sorrow, and yet there is more; For if a lewd man (that
is a lea-man) teach thy people truth of thy Words, as he is upholden by thy
Commandment of Charity, he shall be forbidden, and put in prison if he do it.
And so those that have the key of cunning, have Tho. Cromwell, Earl of Essex;
and Sr. John Old-castle, testified against Tithes; and it is verily believed
that both were put to death for their Testimony.
locked the truth of thy teaching under many Wards, and hid it from the
children; But Lord, since thy teaching is come from Heaven above, our hope is,
that with thy Grace it shall break these Wards, and show him to thy people, to
keel both the hunger and thirst of the soul; And then shall no shepherd, nor
no false hired man beguile thy people no more. Lord, thou give us a
Commandment of truth, in bidding us say, yea, yea, nay, nay, and swear for
nothing; and truly Lord, I trow, that if thou were now in the World, and
taughtest as thou did sometime, thou should be done to death; for thy
Teachings is damned for Heresy of the Wise men of the World.

So that by this ye may plainly see, that the hireling in former ages was
testified against; and the Lord was not without a witness, though oppressed
then, as at this day.

And as for the Tithes, which Antichrist the Pope vomited forth of his mouth,
and was first introduced by Augustine, one of his Friars here in England; I
might say something in particular of it; but being a Christian, and believing
and knowing that all shadows and types whatsoever must give leave to the
substance; and also, knowing that the good thing is come, and the great Prophet
heard; And others who believe in Christ, having more then sufficiently refell'd
what is possible to be said in honor of that Idol; Therefore I set my feet
upon that dunghill, being with my self by all the reasonable and unconcerned
men in the Natons, trodden upon in their hearts.

And for such as are yet unsatisfied, I refer them to Anthony Persons Book; and
The book is sold by Giles Calvert, at the sign of the black spread Eagle, at
the west end of Paul's; the price about six pence.
I do not question but it may satisfy, settle and establish all men against
the very foundation, birth and bringing in of that bad thing; except I say, the
greedy receiver, who is so greedy of filthy lucre that he can never have
enough; and is unsatisfied, unsettled and unstable in all his ways.

For when a Priest dies, and the Parsonage be great; Oh! how the rest will
swarm about the Donator, and hunt like dogs that runs for the carcass of a dead
horse; and it may be ten of them at least shall pretend a call; and if by
whining, flattery, symony, or subtility any one of them can procure it, its
much if in his very first Sermon he be not so profane as to begin with a lie
in his mouth, and tell the people, being called amongst ye by the Lord, and
brought into this place by his Providence; Whereas indeed it is the gain of
that quarter, which its like may be much bigger then that from whence he came,
and it is theirs, and not them for which he really came, or hunts; and that is
his call.

Yea, I know some of them may fitly be compared to Crows, Dogs and Rooks, that
when the Beast is sick, the Ravens will pick his eyes out before the dogs shall
get him; so some of them in my knowledge have been trying for the Parsonage
before the incumbent has been quite dead. Now from the bottom of my heart I do
believe, that the Cut-purses and Goal-birds, are not more disingenious toward
one another (as men) then some of these men are, in case a fat Parsonage be to
be parted by the teeth amongst them; so that their godliness is not great gain,
but their great Parsonage is their great gain, and their quarterly gain is
their God.

And that they are very disingenious (hear what I have farther to say of them)
I have many times asked several of these hired men, why they did pillage and
take away from those that did not hire them, set them a-work, nor come to hear
them.

Their common answer was, and is, Their Church was open, So does ^^e gates of
Hell, and who as will may enter.
and who as will may come; and it is not our faults (say they) if they come
not. I answer, so is every trades-mans shop in the Nation, or very same Parish;
and he may as well say to those which are not his, but another man's customers;
My shop stands open, and I have as good ware as another, and thou may have
it if thou will, its my trade, and my goods are to be sold. (Answer) I like
them not, I will not have them. Now I appeal to any reasonable man upon earth,
if he (the said tradesman) should lay hold on me, and take away my cloak,
coat, bed-cloaths, brass, pewter, cattle, corn, etc. for his goods, which I
like not, and by me refused; and by him undelivered to me. Admit him to be a
seller of good books, as the Bible, and other Just men's works and writings. I
say, I appeal to the whole World, whether this man that so takes away my goods,
be not as real a thief in the sight of God, and good man, as him that robs upon
the high way. And by this, all true men may plainly see the unjust afflictions,
persecutions, bondage and oppression the seed of God lies under at this day by
the seed of the evil doers and cruel men, who lie in wait to devour widows
houses, and destroy the innocent; Even as a troop of Robbers lie in wait for a
man to murder in the way by consent, they hunt every man his neighbor with a
net. And that they may do evil with both hands earnestly, some of us they did
distrain, and sue in the Exchequer for one and the same matter, Where the
greedy Lawyer asks for a reward, and the great man utters forth his
mischievous desires; so they wrap it up, Mich. 7. 2, 3.

Let no Government nor Governor so much as pretend to Liberty of Conscience,
whilst these evil beasts and slow-bellies are suffered to pillidge, and by
violence take away and make havoc of true men's estates, crambing of their
persons in bad Prisons, and there murder them for their dishonest gain, which
the Pope has allowed them. Oh! was ever the like rapines committed upon the
godly of this Nation, by any but Queen Mary? Oh! bloody and unequal has your
Government been to the upright-hearted; but the Lord will visit in his fierce
wrath for these things, and it cannot long stand, nor the upholders thereof; Is
this like Justice, or can ye look God in the face, and call it so? or is it in
any manner seemingly equal, that I should be forced to pay wages to him I
neither hire, hear, nor set at work? Do we require them or ye to pay or give
any thing to any of those, who Minister to us? Nay, they sow spirituals and
want not carnals, and their belly is not their God; they only eat what is
freely set before them, asking no questions for Conscience sake, they preach
the Gospel and live upon him, and the lambs lack not, and the good thing is not
with holden, and the true Lilly takes no thought for to morrow, what he shall
eat, or what he shall put on; but is clothed upon with the righteousness, in
which is fullness without measure, where excess is not known, nor want heard of,
(but the Lion lacks, and is a beast of prey.)

I say come to this which is equal before God, and amongst men; let every
Society in the Nation maintain their own preachers, let the Episcoparian and
Presbyterian who are Ephraim against Manasseh, and Manassh against Ephraim, and
both as one against Judah; and for the most part equal enemies to this
Commonwealth; let them have their Tithemong^r if they will, provided their
hireling, and his Popery be not burdensome to any of the people of God, let
them give him the one half of their estates, if they please; but let not all
the honest people of the Nation be forced to give the sixth or seventh part of
their estates, to maintain their Popish worship. Oh! that is an unreasonable
^oak, to be compelled to uphold that with my outward substance, which I am
convinced in my Conscience to be blasphemous; with my life, I affirm it, he or
they who impose it, are no Christians.

Let the Baptists, and all the gathered and Congregational people maintain
their own Teachers (as I believe they do) for with a man's own he may do what
seems to be good in his own eye; and that is truly equal, and not to go like
thieves, and reap where they have not sown, and pluck where they have not
planted, and eat the milk of other men's flocks, etc.

Let the Mass-house and Bells, and Parsonage houses, with the Gleabelands be
sold, to pay the Impropriators, and then let him that will have such men as
these, who now live idly, upon the sweat of other men's brows, set them at work,
hire them, pay them, and hear them; and let him that has stolen steal no more,
but labor with his own hands, and that is equal; and he that does so, does
equally. And that Governor and Government that patronizes such equal doings,
may stand, and be a blessing to the Nation, and the people will bless God for
him or them; but he that feeds oppression, and upholds inequality, few and
troublesome shall be his or their days, and their short, yet tedious reign shall
go out like the snuff of a candle; Therefore be wise, O ye Rulers, for who
knows what one day may bring to pass, or what may be brought to pass in one day.

And there is a smoother tongued sort, amongst these deceivers, that I have
heard often affirm (if a man would do away his reason and believe them) that it
is not they which persecute and imprison, but the chief Magistrate; the same
says their father the Pope.

If any Clergyman belonging to the whole See of Rome, be but known to have a
hand in blood, he is for ever made ir^egular; But that Prince that fills his
inquisition the fullest, and burns most Heretics (as they call them) he shall
have the largest pardon, for so many sins to be committed, and his name shall
be had in most reputation amongst them, otherwise he shall be cursed, if not
excommunicated.

By this let the simple-hearted compare and infer, etc. Now my belief is, that
if the Priests of England have freely received, and will freely give, and not
exact, torture and murder the innocent for their bellies, nor be burdensome
to no man, but freely give, and freely receive, and he which preaches the
Gospel to live upon it, I do believe in my very heart God will be very well
pleased. Priest, try him and trust in him, and do not take the benefit of a bad
Law which thou have procured by thy sollicitous implacability; For verily it
quite lames thee, and all reasonable men see thee, and the feeble insufficiency
of thy Gospel which can neither stand, nor procure thee meat for thybelly,
without the help of an outward Law and Sword, which is only to protect men's
persons, and not to suffer a cruel man to take away from a poor man, and a
faithful denizen of the same Nation, a hundred pounds for a hundred shillings.

So do not cover thy self under the Magistrate, and sneak to them, and make him
or them the absolute Author of thy wickedness; but leave off thy filthiness,
and let him that has stolen, steal no more, but rather restore, and learn to
labor with thy own hands, and the labourer is worthy of his hire, and the
workman of his meat, and I am freely content that he which hireth any man
should be forced to pay him his wages; but I am sure it is not in the least
equal amongst men, for me to pay another man's workman, although all the work
he does may seemingly be logically or syllogistically true. Ergo, it may or it
may not, admit all that he does to be of the best sort, that is false, and his
divinations, and immaginations almost like truth it self, I hire him not, I set
him not at work, I Will not pay him his wages, I Will give him no meat.

And if for this my Testimony against the hireling, which I still say, could
not stand, nor have a being as a mercenary hireling, if it were not for the
Sword; I say, if for this my Testimony my life be called for, I may not say, I
matter it; for my Redeemer lives, and I know for this very end and purpose has
he raised me up, even to bear my Testimony with my life to the death, against
the false-hired Antichrist of this Nation, even to the Gates of Rome his
Original, and very late Antecessor. And this am I truly bold in the Lord to
declare without fear, what is possible to be done against me, by them or their
adherents, although I know they are the only preparers of War against the
innocent.

And these bad men come from Oxford and Cambridge* which they call the two
Fountains, Nurseries and Eyes of the Nation, and Religion; but indeed they are
the two sinks of iniquity.

And when a youngling goes first thither to learn the trade of Preaching,
before he has the authority of a Law, to take away the sixth or seventh part
of any man's Estate in the Nation. When he comes first to Oxford, before they
have taintted him, or made him stink with their abominations, they call him a
fresh man; and those that are in mess with him, like greedy dogs rob him of his
very meat, and get him in a ring, and tear his clothes off his back, and make
Rhimes upon him, and if he complain they beat him, and to cozen or steal any
thing from him, these cage of unclean birds think that their honor; and this
the World calls an Academy for the Education of young Gentlemen, and a place to
train up able Ministers. And out of these two Fountains ( Oxford and Cambridge,
or rather sinks of iniquity) uncontradictably flows the grand grievances of
this Commonwealth.

In the first place, from thence comes that spiritual and temporal thief, the
most pestilent hireling; from thence comes the terrible and lawless Lawyer,
under whose oppression the whole Nation smarts, who with the Priests swallow up
the one half of the land, the Lawyer as well as the other, according to his now
ungodly practice and constitution, utterly oppressive, and altogether useless,
being the badge of the conqueror; who squeese the people most grievously, and
utterly undoes many, yea, very many.

From thence comes the Atheistique Physician, who has authority to give what
he will to men; And if he poisons them, its a Doctor has done it, and there is
an end.

From thence comes the Conjuror, Astrologer, and Fortunetelling witch; and all
these are bad and cruel grievances, and hated of God, and his arm is made bare
against them. And was (as it is now) fully seen by all the honest people of
England, within these ten years, and then all these Monsters were eve^ at the
pits brink, ready to be cast in from whence they came* Then was the good
Physician nigh, O ye army-men, and a Chancery was setting up in every man's
breast, and the Witch had but little life left, and the hireling with all his
enchantments, and what he could possibly say, for his deceit, was become to ye
as a thing of naught, and God was teaching his own people then as he does at
this day, and that covetous man was thought useless, and his brawling by ye
was very little, or not at all regarded; and have ye seen the Son, and many of
ye tasted of the good word of God, and the World to come, and the power of an
endless life, and yet believe lying lips, and cherish deceit, and maintain
oppression, licking up that which ye once even with detestation vomited forth?
and are ye not bewitched in running after the hireling into the Masse-house, to
look for the Truth, where, and from whom I believe in my heart most of ye know
its not possible to be found? Nay verily, those that believe in Christ, sees
him as he is nigh them in their hearts, and in their mouths, for he has
enlightened every man that comes into the world, and the spiritual eye sees
him a Savior nigh them, and in them, who saves his people from their sins, and
lets them see their sins, and perfects them from their sins, if they serve no
other gods but him. And why do ye yet hope for the thing seen? Oh he is come a
light into the World; but the World founded in your hearts which slew and
slayes the Lamb, that receives him not, but loves darkness rather then light,
but it is because your deeds are evil, and so does not like to retain God in
your knowledge, although he has been there and ye did once know God, and that
grace of God which brings Salvation has appeared unto ye, and to all men, but
some give themselves up to a reprobate mind, and to believe lies (Mark) they
give themselves up, the light being two low a thing, and perfection to high,
and there all the wordly wise men in the World at this day perish; which of the
Rulers has believed on him? none but a poor people, that for conscience sake
cannot be subject to the cursed Popish laws, and heathenish customs, not a
mighty man, nor a Noble man, not a Lawyer, nor one of them which the World
calls an Orthodox man hardly among them; For there is no Worldly preferment nor
treasure to be desired, for he has not whereon to lay his own head, and his
visage is, and was more marred then any man's, a stumblingstone, and a rock of
offense he is, but blessed are they, and only they that are not offended at
him nor his little ones, for verily they are to him as the apple of his eye*
and woe to them that despise him in his members, although they are not found in
the palace, nor on the throne, nor in the high places committing spiritual
wickedness, making ungodly gain of the Prophets, his and the Apostles words,
as it was of old, not many mighty, not many noble; and although many are and
may be called, few are chosen for the way is straight, and few there is that
enters; yea, the way is straight, and the lusts of the flesh, and the pride of
life, comes not there, and whose life is without his portions without; and in
the eternal kingdom there is no room for the bending, twining, sycophant, who
has the persons of men in admiration, because of dishonest gain, I say such
enters not into his rest, neither know they the true Sabbath, although they
keep a great bussle and sow pillows under one another elbowes, and cry, the
ordinances, the ordinances, and have their set days times, and places for
their worship, giving one another bread and wine once in a weak, or once in a
month, and eats, drinks, and puts on unworthily all the week and month
besides; and it may be when they have consulted, and contrived beforehand a
thing in their own hearts, and in their own imaginations it is already done;
then these pretend (in their own wills) to fast and pray, and days must be set
apart for fasting and praying, when as the jaws of the wicked, in the general,
and in their own particulars are not broken; fasting and prayer in my very soul
I own; But what mean ye, that ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the faces
of the poor, says the Lord of hosts; think ye that I will visit for these
things? yea, he will vex ye in his fierce wrath, and remove ye in his hot
displeasure; and whilst ye regard iniquity in your hearts, I will not hear
your prayers, nor have respect unto your fasts says the Lord, (Mark) if ye
regard iniquity in your hearts, or feed oppression, or suffer the witch or
prisoner in your own particulars, in and amongst you to live, I will not hear
your prayers says the Lord; nay the Lord loves and hears the prayers of such
as pay their vows, and keep their integrity, and tremble at his word; and the
broken and the contrite spirit, and the upright hearted the Lord delights in,
and those that walk humbly with their God, and are not exalted above what is
called God, because of this worlds preferment; I say, with the singlehearted,
and such who despise not the day of small things, who speaks the truth to and
of their neighbor, and do to all men as they would they should do to them;
Such he delights to dwell with, but the lying lips and the deceitful tongue God
hates, and the prayers, fasting, fond humility and hanging down the head for a
day like a bul-rush are all abomination before the just and holy God; and
whilst ye regard iniquity, and have respect to the workers thereof, the Lord
has no regard to your set days, services and pretended humiliations, I say,
whilst ye regard iniquity, and live in uncleanness and pride of life, ye are
but mockers of the righteous God who will not be mocked by ye, for his eyes are
pure, and cannot behold the beholders and upholders of oppression.

Oh my friends, how can ye pray, talk of God, conscience, and liberty of
conscience, whilst ye suffer your poor brethren to be tormented and afflicted
with cursed laws made in the reprobate will of a dark Pope? and do ye not
augment fuel to his fire, and call it liberty of conscience? Is not his 3
months imprisonment made six? I believe that if it should have been said to
many of ye within this ten years, that these cruelties should have been acted,
inflicted, and tolerated to be acted and inflicted upon the innocent, by a
law, and true liberty of conscience infringed and wholly struck at, whilst
some of ye had breath; I do believe that ye would have answered as one man, as
the King did the Prophet, Do thou think thy servants are dogs? that these
things shall come to pass in our days; But many were deceived in ye, and so
was I, and in the end ye will deceive your own precious and immortal souls.

And the Priests, for whom ye have thus ha^arded, and made your selves enemies
to God and good men, are most exquisite and absolute enemies to your selves,
Magistrates, Government, and Governors longer then they please them, and boast
of their Diana; and for plotters and plot-contrivers, disturbers of
governments, sowers of seditions, and causing other men to be seditious, they
are at this time, and have been of old, the very pests of this Nation, and he
that is, or shall be acquainted with the History of England cannot but witness
with me against them, But that they are so fresh in most men's memories, I could
name some of their late Tragedies, for which some few of them have felt the
hand of Justice; but thus much I know is well known to most men, that those
whom they bless, the people bless, and whom they curse, the people curse; also
this may be taken notice of, that they never did, nor do adhere to the Rulers,
but when they would have their own turns served, or are necessitated, or their
false ways and worship in Jeopardy by the people of the Lord, making some
in-rode or other upon their deceit; at other times it is I and my King, and i will
be ruled, if he will be ruled by me; and if the Rulers should but deny them their
end, for which they only flatter them and others; I say it is well if they do
not teach the people to rebel and say, to kill them is no murder, and
themselves have a hand in it; and if the Rulers should but demand one or two
years revenue of these men throughout the Nation, of that which indeed is none
of their's, (and they say themselves tithes is the chief Magistrates, and he
may do what he will with them) or sell but their Mass-houses with the jangling
Bells, although it were to carry on a war with Rome against the very Pope
himself, I say it is well if they did not thereby take occasion to prepare and
hatch a War at home, and curse the Magistrates bitterly, and do what in them
lies to poison the people, and disaffect them to the present Government,
notwithstanding at present they cry a loud for, and to it, (but it is for their
augmentations) and bless it, but it is with the same mouths they will curse it if
crossed, and do it as much harm, as now they do it good in praying for it, which
is none at all.

Oh Friends! Why will ye join your selves, to that unprofitable harlot, who ye
long since know was deviated, and utterly whored from all that is truth; and I
do believe it is fully known to many among ye they that are gone out of the
way, and altogether become unprofitable, I know none of them that does good, no
not one, for the most part their throats are an open Sepulcher, and the poison
of Asps is under their lips, and Gods fear is not before their eyes, the best
of them is but as a bryar, and the most upright is sharper then a thorn hedge,
Micah 7. 4. For out of the evil thoughts of their ^ee Ti^us I. ^hap. 7. to ^he
end.
hearts proceeds persecution, murderers and blasphemies, and unto them in
their unbelieving state and damnable doctrine of imperfection nothing is, nor
indeed can be pure, but even their minds and consciences is wholly defiled,
and although they may profess to know God, in their practices they absolutely
deny him; for in preaching up sin term of life, which is the Devils kingdom,
they are abominable, ^au^s Ep. ^o the Lao^iceans, v. ^. 9.
and unto every good work reprobate, they are hurters and doers of violence to
good, sober and temperate men, i^ they put not into their mouths, self-willed,
soon angry, strikers, and given to filthy lucre they are, they are high-minded
and John 5. 19. Read Rev. 20. Rev. 13. 15.
unruly, vain talkers and deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped and turned
away from, although they have subverted whole houses and Nations, teaching
things that are utterly false, for filthy lucres sake, and such are liars, evil
beasts and slow-bellies, and this witness is true; wherefore let them be
rebuked, and their mo^ths stopped. For with the whole World they do lie in
wickedness, and the number that Satan has deceived by them is as the sand of
the Sea, and they have had power to kill the Saints that would not worship the
image of the beast, and has caused all, both small and great, rich and poor,
bond and free, to receive a mark in their right hand, or in their foreheads;
And none could buy or sell, save he that had the mark, or the name of the
beast, or the number of his names, read Rev. 13. and if the present Rulers of
the earth have not drunk of the whores cup, how came these Priests by this Law?
I say, is not the Popish Queen outdone, and her three months imprisonment made
six? so that these have a Law at their command, and I am sure a terrible Law
has it been to usward: Such a Law the Jews had, and by our Law, said they, he
ought to die, for he is a blasphemer; and what was his blasphemy? Why say they,
he says he is the Son of God; So as false, yet true, they put the holy One to
death; and the English Priests Original, was set over the Originals head by
Priest-ridden Pilate; Oh my dear friends! perish not with them, nor for and
with their gainsaying generation; but like wise men, keep your eyes in your
head, and let that woman which has so fowlly transgressed be silent; and let
not transgression plead for, and uphold transgression, and transgressors; But
ask your husband at home, for the wo-man is not permitted to speak in the
Church, nor about Church matters, but the the Daughters of the Lord, as well as
his Sons, shall, and at this day do prophecy, and God is one in the Male, as
in the female, and the Womb that is barren, is accursed, as well in the Male,
as in the Female, but the Woman is to be silent in them both; But the seed and
birth which is immortal, which sins not, does, and may speak, if the Lord open
the mouth in the Female-man, as-well as in the Male-man; and if the Lord open
the lips, let the whole creation show forth his praises, but let Eve for ever
be silent; And I know from the Lord God the barren womb is cursed, and such who
cannot in some measure witness the marriage, are undone; but the true Virgin
that has not many lovers, is a holy state, and she which is begotten of God,
as the Lord moves, may utter words, and Minister to the seed in others that all
may be edified, the deaf made to hear, the blind to see, the sick healed, and
the saving health made known, the dead raised, the Lame walk, and the dumb made
to sing for joy, and in this Ministry and Gospel Phaebe, and Pris^illa may
labor with Paul, or any other the holy Women at this day; a seal of whose
Apostle-ship I am, and if you keep your eyes in your head, and behold the
Original in ye, and ask that Husband at home, ye will seal to, and witness
with me, that God is truth, and is one in the Male and in the Female; for it is
the fools eye that is abroad, but the wise man's eye is in his head, and the
head of every man is Christ Jesus; and he gives to all men and women, a measure
of himself to profit withal, and all his gifts are good and perfect, and leads
to no other thing but unto perfection; but no Bastard, nor the thief who steals
the words from his neighbor, and boasts in the lines of other men, shall never
inherit, though he be as goodly to look at, as Ishmael and as Orthod^x as the
high Priest, yet he is the son of the bond-wo-man within, from whence death,
immagination, and brain-study speaks a devination of its own; there the
merchants of spiritual Babylon trade, which is called confusion; but all this
while the royal seed is in bondage, and the voice of the King is not heard
within, without which the children of the Kingdom cannot live, and the voice of
a stranger the sheep will not hear, and the thief or spiritual vagabond,
although it be Cain or Lord Esau himself, with the Son of the free and
firstborn must not co-habit; for the life of the one is the death of the
other, and that must become a servant which has caused the seed to bow; they
who know the Original, know and feel what I say, and the simple hearted that
are among ye may understand me right well; but for those who are withered under
the name of professors, and are only old in profession and iniquity, who rise
up early to contrive for self, in whom the earth has choked the seed, by them
I do not expect to be rightly understood, or justly construed, for their life
at the present is not in that which discerns and judges all things, and in the
Lords work they have been very unfaithful; I shall not say much, but it is very
much if ove^ the Lord trust some of them again, but rather suffer a stranger to
take and do that which was once in their posession* and will it not be just, if
he who formed them, do show them no favor, but smite them as they have
suffered others to be smitten? and will it not be equal if the Lord reveal
himself most eminently against them, ^uite racing down their magnificency, and
for ever lay their honor in the dust.

And if any who are in authority, be yet indeed really affected with the ways
and false worship of the hireling, and offended with me for this my Testimony
for the Lord, and against the false hireling; We who are called Quakers shall
in the fear of the Lord be willing to meet them, or a chosen number of them
face to face, before the chief Rulers, Parliament or Council, and there approve
our selves in our practice for religion by the words of the Scriptures, and the
example of the holy men of God, and if we refute not the common hireling, and
whatsoever he is possibly able to say for himself, or against us (proving what
he says by Scriptures) let the reasonable magistrates be judge; I say, if we
do it not, let us be used more bloodily and cruelly then we yet are (if
possible) and we shall in that matter freely submit unto, and be convicted by
the Scripture, which some of them are so impudent to say we deny, and is their
own rule, though that which gave them forth is our rule, and is not contrary to
the Scripture, so far as they are not polluted by false meanings put upon them,
which in their purity in themselves do not own; But however there is sufficient
to silence the brawling hireling, for warrant from them he has none for his
preaching for hire, or a set maintenance by a Law; I say again, let us
discourse our Religion with the false hired man, before ye, and if then it be
found that we hold any thing for Religion, which is contrary to sound Doctrine,
or in the least derogatory to Scripture; and if our practice, faith, hope, and
order be not according to the command of the Lord Jesus, the example of the
Prophets, the Apostles, the holy men of God and Ministers of Christ, then
countenance, or discountenance as ye shall see cause.

And till then in the fear of the Lord God I warn you all, from him that sits
upon the throne, to the meanest officer of peace or war, Soldier or Subject
whatsoever, speak not evil of Dignities and Powers, and things ye know not, but
at least stand still and behold the salvation of our God, and lend not your
power to the slaying of the innocent Lambs of Christ; for verily if the Rock
fall upon ye, or ye upon it, it will grind ye all to dust.

Therefore my dear friends, do not presume to sin all the days of your
appointed time, and clap hands with the oppressor, and uphold a bad generation
to do wrong to the innocent, but be ye holy, and do equally, be ye perfect as
the heavenly Father is perfect, and as he is, so be ye in this (very) evil
World, that when ye come to die, ye may have nothing else to do but to die, and
enter into the rest. Wherefore be wise in heart, for the Lord requires truth
in the inward parts, and that ye do unto all men as ye would be done unto.

Nicodemus says unto them; Does our law judge any man before it hear him and
knows what he does? Jo 7. 50, 51. And I would have ye to exceed Nicodemus or
at least be as noble as he was, who came to Jesus, but by night; the Officers
answered, never man spoke like this man; Then answered them, the Pharisees, Are
ye also deceived? have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him?
but this people who know not the Law are accursed, John 7. 46 47 48 49 Should
thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the Lord? Therefore wrath is
upon thee from before the Lord; and Jehosaphat went out again through the
people, from Beer-sheba to Mount-Ephraim, and brought them back unto the Lord
God of their fathers; And he set Judges in the Land thorowout, and said to the
Judges, take heed what ye d^; for ye Judge not for man, but for the Lord;
Wherefore now let the fear of the Lord be upon ye, take heed, and do it, for
there is no iniquity with the Lord our God, nor respect of persons, nor taking
of gifts. And he charged them, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear of the Lord
faithfully, and with a perfect heart, 2 Chronicles. 19. 2 4. 5 6, 7 9. And the Lord
will show himself strong in the behalf of them, whose hearts are perfect
toward him.

I say Joshua went through the Land, and set Judges in every City, and brought
them back unto the Lord God of their Fathers, he also overthrew the
high places, burnt up the groves, destroyed idolatry, raced down the Images,
and stamped to powder the things and places which were polluted, though once
commanded of God, and that it is as needful for some to go through England and
our Cities to place and set Judges as at the beginning. I shall here lay open,
and before the World, some few of the Idolatries, and heathenish customs, that
are in use and practice in one of our Cities namely Oxford, which ye hirelings
call one of the famous Universities, nurceries for Religion, springs,
fountains, or eyes of the Nation, from whence comes the blind guides, who
leads the blind, and blinds too too many; but I think if the Nation were
blind of that eye, and that spring were dried up, which indeed is but a
standing puddle, and that deceit might no more issue out of her, happy were it
for many precious souls, which are ruined by the breath, and stink of her
nostrils, And if she has not need to be visited, read some few of her
statutes, which are as follows, and then judge her, and her tradesmen, and
when thou have read them, if she be worthy of life, let her have it, if of
death, let her die, for there is thousands of witnesses against her, and her
Popish offspring, in this the day of the Lord, everlasting praises be given to
his Name, who has made known, and revealed his truth to babes, and the
contemptible and despised ones of the World, and has hid it from the wise and
vultrous eye.

In the first place see what the Independants in King James his reign had
against the Universities and their brood, for which they were called Brownists
in the Book entitled, An Apology or defense of such true Christians as are
commonly, but unjustly, called Brownists, Printed 1604.

The third Petition, page 58, 59.

The seventh Position.
That the due maintenance of Ministers should be of voluntary and free
Contribution and not by Popish Lordship and Livings, or Jewish Tithes and
offerings; And that therefore the Lands and like Revenues of the Prelates and
Clergy yet remaining, may be taken away, and converted to better use, as those
of the Abbeys and Nunneries have been heretofore, to the honor of God, and
great good of the Realm.

Whereunto are subjoined the proofs of the Scripture, and several Arguments
deduced from Scripture, to prove the unlawfulness of them.

The twelfth Position, page 75, 76.
That all Monuments of Idolatry in garments, or any other things invented or
dedicated heretofore by the Heathens or Anti-Christians, to their false
worship, ought to be raced and abolished, and not suffered to remain, to
nourish superstition, much less employed to the Worship of God.

Whereunto are added proofs of Scripture to enforce it.

The thirteenth Position, page 77.
That Popish degrees in Divinity, and the studying of profane, Heathen
writers, with other lik^ corruptions should be removed.

With proofs of Scripture, and several reasons to confirm the same.

And if any now say what are Idolatrous, Popish ceremonies and degrees to us of
England? I answer, There are the same now in use, which were of old. For
instance in Oxford, all the formalities and habits which were formerly counted
superstitious by all the then called Puritans, are now again, not only in
fashion and credit amongst them of the University, but also accounted
necessary; so that if any Scholar of the University, for Conscience sake
cannot wear them, he must loose his vote and privilege, and not take any
degree.

It Is true, that while the Army continued in Action, it was thought necessary to
lay them aside (at least for a time) for fear of scandal, and provoking tender
conscienees, but since the Army have forgot to look after them, they are a
licking up their old vomit, and all the vestments and formalities appointed
them by their father the Pope in use and credit, defended in their speeches at
the Act, and those men counted factious who witness against them, though of
their own fraternity.

And if any one will compare the Oxford statutes with the description of theirs
in other Antichristian Popish Universities beyond Seas, he may see that there
are not only the same superstitious ceremonies, and Idolatrous habits, but far
more in number and greater in pomp then there are in the very greatest Seats of
Antichrist beyond Sea.

And for their sakes who cannot come to see them, or it may be never heard of
them, I have subjoined a little Catalogue of them (which are yet in practice)
to omit the more notorious (which are not observed since the Wars) to satisfy
the World what Reformation we are to expect from such men.

A faithful and short Relation of some few of the Statutes, Stat. A^ad. Oxon.
yet in force, and other customs and affairs of the University of Oxford, the
Colleges and Governors of them.
THE form of creating Sophisters is thus, A Master Tit. 6. sect. 1 par. 4.
makes a speech in a high desk, in the praise of Aristotle's * Logic, and then
after comes See the Judgment of Melan^htho^, in his Apology for Luther, in his
2 Tom. page* 193. What is that to us what Aristotle an unholy man said, but this
belongs to Christians, to learn first how not to sin; but now as of old,
Christ's Doctrine is vitiated with humane disputations, which is mixed with
their Philosophy; but he that is born again, knows that which they called
Theology to be profane.

2. Also read Hieron. first book, contra Pelag. What is Aristotle to Paul, or
Plato to Peter, and in his Epistle 22 ad. Estoch. p. 62. What communion has
ligh^ with darkness, or consent gives Christ to Belial, the Psalms with Horas,
or the Evangelists with Maro, or the Apostles with Cicero; we must not drink of
the Cup of Christ and the cup of Devils; and he that learns these things, and
says, he is a Christian, the Spirit of God, the true Judge says, he lies,
thou may be a Ciceronian, but no Christian.

See Tertullian in his book, to preserve from Hersiees, Chapt. 7. forewarnes
them, that all Heresies take their rise from Philosophy, out of which arises
all fables, genealogies, unfruitful and endless questions, and serpentine words
that eat as a canker; from which says he, the Apostle Paul naming Philosophy,
that ingenders strife, they must needs shun; but tells them that they are to
preach the Lord in simplicity of their hearts, who is to be s^ught after in
simplicity, and not in curiosity by Stoic and Platoniq^e Dialects; these
things being short of Christ, and shut out of the Gospel.

4 And Libinus laments in his book, Tom. 2. page 51. The great contempt that
was come upon the Greek tongue by reason of the Christians; and says, that he
is afraid that all learning, not only Rhetoric, but also the Gr. tongue should
be suppressed by a Law. And did not the Christians burn their books of curious
Learning and Arts, to the value of fifty thousand pieces of silver? so mightily
grew the Word of God Mark, the Word of God grew, when the books of Arts were
burnt, and prevailed, see Acts chap. 19. v, 19, 20.

5. Machiv. in Lev. disput. de Repub. lib. 2. cap. 5. So far I commend the
diligency of the first Christians, the Institutors and Moderators in their
Religion, in that they did extirpate all Ethnicks, superstitions, with all
Poets and Histories, all Idols, and suppressing all that might bring those
doleful superstitions again to their memory.

6. And Celsus objected it to Orig. in his third book, Adversus Celsum; That
the Christian Teachers, such as propagated the Gospel, were Weavers (or Combers
of wool) Fullers, and illiterate, and exceeding rustic.


down one or two stairs, and gives him that is created the book of Aristotle's
logic into his hand, then a plain hood, which he puts about his neck, and
without this ceremony none may take his next Degree.

After Disputations are ended Tit. 6. sect. 2 par. 6
on Ash Wednesday in every School, the Senior of each company of determining
Batchelours, in the name of the rest standing about him, must kneel down on his
knees before all the company in every School, and give thanks to the Dean, him
that presented him, and all the Senior Batchelors, in these words:

I give thanks to the Chancellor and Proctors of this famous University, and to
the Master that disputed, and the Batchellour that answered, by whose means I
have undertaken this work, and intend, (God willing) to perfect it this Lent.

This Ceremony is so far from being neglected, that they rather take a pride
to do it every year.

The Inceptors in Divinity, Tit. 7. sect. 1. par. 2.
Physic and Law, must at the Act solemnly beg of each of their Professors
their fatherly blessing, and each Professor must give his fatherly blessing to
the Inceptors of each Faculty; but the Prefessor of Divinity must bless all of
each Faculty. Oh unblest, flat, dark, black Popery.

The formalities of determining Batchellours are, A square cap, a black stuff
hood, tipped or edged with cats-skin, and over that a hood of lambskin, But are
in the nature of that that will kill a Lamb.

The habits of Masters at the Act are, a four-corner-cap, a large taffata hood
of any light color to cast over their shoulders, Goloshoes in stead of
slippers; by which slippers or goloshoes is signified that they are to stay at
home and study longer, and that they are not yet fit to go into the Country to
preach.

Doctors of Divinity wear a scarlet gown, a black saten hood par. 5^
over that, a square cap, boots But in all these abominations they are out, yea
quite out from all that is called God, and for all their pretended
preparations, they will not stir from their monastry or present quarter, except
for a great personage, or a better quarterly gain.
pulld up, with spurs, by which is signified, as themselves confess, that they
are then fit to go out into the Ministry; but rather this Popish Ceremony is
deduced from Christ's saying, Be ye shod with the preparation of the Gospel As
that of a Lambsskin hood, to intimate The Prophets and Apostles who wandered
about in sheeps skins, and goats skins.

When any man is made a Batchellour of Divinity, it is done Tit. 9. sect. 3.
par. 4. sect. 4. par. 18.
with these words, I admit you to read any of Saint Paul's Epistles etc

After the Act there is a dispensation proposed that the Doctors may have leave
to put off their boots, and the Masters their slippers, till which time they
may not do it by the Statutes; and at other times it may be are drunk and
cannot do it.

When any Master is to take his degree, he is bound a day sect. 5: par. 1.
before (rain or shine) to go bare headed from the Schools to the
Vice Chancellor, from him to the Senior Proctor, from thence to the Junior
Proctor, however so far distant by reason of their several Colleges, with a
Beadle and a Master going before him in their formalities; and the Master must
speak for him to the aforesaid Chancellor and Professors in these words
Supplicamus Dominationi vestrae, etc. That is, We supplicate or beg your
Lordships, or at least your Worships, to be pleased to be at congregation on
the morrow.

If a Doctor takes his degree, he is likewise to go bare headed after his
Professor to both the Proctors, and the Proctors accompanying him to the
Vice Chancellor, must speak for him in these words, Supplicamus Reverentiis
vestris, etc. That is, We Holy and Reverend is the Name of him that made heaven
and earth, and only him, who abhors your blasphemy.
do supplicate, or humbly beg your Reverence to be present at congregation on
the morrow And then the Vice Chancellor must answer, Interer^, That is, I will
be present.

The Masters and Doctors are bound to wear their formalities as long as they
stay in the University.

A Doctor of Sacred and holy Theology, as they call it, for sect. 6. par. 2.
his degree is to preach a Latin Sermon, dispute in the Divinity School, and
to read six Lectures, expound any part of the Scripture, or any of the
Apostolical Epistles.

It Is ordered that all Doctors, heads of Colleges, Fellows, Studients,
Scholars, and all that are initiated into Orders, Tit. 14 par. 1.
do wear black or sad colored clothes, as it becomes those of the Clergy to
do. Their outside is a true figure of their inside.


That no Scholar go to a Conventicle under pain of expulsion. ( Mark that.)

That none swear (but when he is lawfully required to it) under the pain of
paying four pence; So that there they may swear cheaper then any where else in
England.

When any one goes out Doctor of Divinity, he has the Bible given to him, and
a Ring of gold put on his finger, and after that the Professor must give him *
a kiss before the whole The kiss is in imitation of the Patriarchs, who fell
upon one another necks and kissed, and Paul's saying (to the Church of Corinth)
Greet ye one another with a Holy kiss; (mark) it was to be a Holy kiss.

The square cap which is worn by this Popish brood, signifies the helmet of
Salvation, which they wear against the enemies of Christ.

The Ring which the Doctors give in the University, signifies with what
inviolable infidelity they kept the Spirit of Christ.

The Gloves signify, that they are to keep their hands undefiled from all
worldly matters; but it is most evident, that they are the wordlings of this
world; and for cruel hearts, and bloody hands, who may be compared with them?

Oh mankind! consider them, and be not deceived by them; for verily they are
not of God.

Much of their orders, and now practiced fopperies are related by Hospinian in
his Book, concerning Monks, and other Popish orders, page 270.


University.

The Senior Master of the Act who represents the rest, does receive a book of
Aristotle and a kiss from the Proctor, as Clemens Roman, in his 1 Book, cap.
6. Its said, Abstain from all books of the Gentilts; what have thou to do with
other men's sayings, and Laws, or false Prophets? which truly, turns weak men
from the true faith; and in the council of carthage, a Cannon said, that a
Christian shall not read a Heathen or Gentiles Book.

Gratian says, the Priests of God, we see have omitted the Evangelists, and
Prophets reading comedies, and love, or lust books, and have turned them into
singing verses.

Gregory Magnus, prohibited all prelacy in general from reading heathen Authors.

Gaud. de mor. Sec: Just. part 2. c. 26. page 90. True Christians we never read
they learnt Philosophy in Schools, but rather turned all from it.

Scip. Amirat. Dissertat Pollit. Lib. 3. p. 92. After Constantine, etc. had
taken off the persecution from the Christians, he left it simply to every man's
choice, what form of Religion he would be gathered in, the same Eusebius
teache^ in his ^ book, cap. 59. that none may be burdened: Tertul. ad
Sca^ulam, says, the law of man has power only upon the natural part, but
every man is to fear that which himself knows: and not another man's Religion,
neither is it Religion to think on Religion, to take up the form, and not the
life, as also says Lactant. Oper. Lib. 5. de just. page 353. Oh! What an
honest mind these sufferers had, and felt, even that nothing humane was to be
weighed, or valued with their religion, and they chused in it rather to die,
then to kill others to defend it; see likewise Themistius his 12 oration made
to Jovinian the Emperor, all which oration, was in commending him and
exhorting him to continue to give tolleration in religion.

Also see Julian the Emperor, as bad as he is made, what he did for the
Christians, very justly (said he) I have statured in favor of all the
Gallileans, that none bring a matter against them, neither draw them into the
Temple, nor from any other thing; but let them have their own liberty, and they
that wrong them, or contems this law let him die, for I would have none forced,
or drawn beyond their own Rock: Therefore again, I often admonish that none do
injury to the Gallileans; but suffer them to use their own Religion in the
truth according to their own mind, rather using them with mercy, then with
hatred for they are worthy who have so exceedingly endured calamity with
patience.


pledges of his being admitted Master.

The Doctors of Physic and Law do receive a Ring, a kiss and a Book of
Justinian or Galen.

Besides, when any Master or Doctor takes his degree, he must first kneel down
to the Vice Chancellor, then afterward, rise, and kiss him, and he must kiss
both the Proctors, and the Dean who presented him, and this is done before the
whole University in the Congregation.

When any one gives testimony that such a man is worthy of a degree, (without
which none can proceed) he must kneel down before the Vice Chancellor, and
Proctors and speak, Batchellours for Batchellours, Masters for Masters, Doctors
for Doctors, all kneel on a cushion, in their formalities before the
Vice Chancellor.

The three Esquire Beadles at the Act, and upon any solemn occasion, besides
their round velvet caps and gilded staffs, have each of them a chain of gold
about their necks, which reaches four double below their middles.

The other three Yeomen Beadles go more plain, with Prunello, or Calimancho,
round caps and silver staves.

When any preaches at the place called (Saint Mary's Church) one of the esquire
Bedles who is called the Divinity Bedle) Was there any of this foppery when
Christ or his Apostles went into the Temple or Synagogue? and I am sure he that
is a Christian is like Christ, and he that is at this day his Minister, is
found in their steps, out of all these inventions, immitations, sorceries and
witchcrafts: Take with ye neither staff, nor scrip, nor money, and go and teach
all Nations, and when they come back, lacked they any thing? and lo he is with
his Ministers, to the end of the World, and does not change, but is the same
yesterday as to day and for ever.
with his gilded staff, is to fetch him that preaches from his chamber, and
wait on him to the pulpit, and so back again.

Tuesdayes and Thursdayes in Lent (by reason they dispute then, only tell
eleven) are called gracious days.

In some Colleges the Beadle-clerk does read (by virtue of his office) a piece
of a chapter in one of the Gospels to the Doctors or Rector when he or they
begin dinner, and when the Senior Doctor will have him leave off, he says to
the boy, Tu autem, and the boy must answer, Domine miserere nostrum, that is,
Thou Lord have pity on us: This last was practiced very lately in the
University, but whether they are shamed out of it, I cannot certainly affirm.

But at this day in Queens College the Junior Scholars, (whom they call
Tabitors) repeat a piece of Aristotle's Logic Is this Popery yea or nay? and do
ye think that there is so much done to the Pope himself? and do not these
wretches at this day set themselves in Gods room, and are worshipped as Gods,
but indeed, they are naught but belly-gods; and if these Poperies and whoredoms
do not stink and are rotten ripe for destruction, let the simple-hearted of the
whole Nation judge.
without book, kneeling upon their bare knees to the Fellows at dinner,
holding their hands across, which signifies in the name of the holy cross to
defend them from all danger. Where is the Jesuit and Popery these brawlers
talk of? is he amongst the Quakers (so called) or amongst the Colleges, and
Priests in Oxford?

In some Colleges after dinner they drink one to another, or one table to
another, bowing and putting off their Hats, and doing their honors to each
other, as they call it, and this they call a grace cup, or cup of charity, and
say it was first instituted, and is a good custom, to maintain charity amongst
them.

This drink is allowed to each, meal gratis.

After Disputations are ended on Ash Wednesday, the determining Batchelours
make a But the supper of the Lord, and the bread which came down from Heaven,
they know not; but except ye eat his flesh, and drink his blood, ye have no
part in him; and he that eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, shall hunger
no more.
Feast in every College at night, which they call Aristotle's supper.

In some Colleges in Oxford, as New-Colledge, All Souls College, etc. the
Scholars and Junior fellows must go bareheaded in the Court or Quadrangle, and
that if no body be there or in fight, and though it rain never so much, under
pain of not being fellow, and yet it may be this fellow will babble to others,
and tell them that the Hat is an indifferent thing, and may be put off or kept
on, and is but a civility, but himself is so uncivil, that he puts it off to
stocks and stones, and in obedience to a Popish Law.

At the place called Christs-Church College, the Scholars and Batchelours are
not suffered to go out at the great Gate, or come in that way, in Honor and
Reverence to the Dean and Canons Lodgings, though their Coaches * and Horses
Quaery, Whether Coaches were not one of the greatest crimes against the late
Prelacy, and did not the man called Dean Owen, mouth and roar against them and
it?

2. Quaery, Is not the man called Dean Owen far more fantastic and ridiculous
in his habit, then any of the the old Prelates were? provided, he have on his
ranting Band-strings, his velvet Gippo with silver or gold Buttons, his treble
Cuffs, his Gloves with gold fringe and imbroidery, his Breeches with two or
three setts of points, one above the other, insomuch that they make him
straddle, and throw his legs like a Ranter, his great lawn boot-tops; I say,
cloth him with this Harness, or with that which some in Oxford calls his
thanksgiving suit, and set him on a Stage, and let his name be obscured; let
sober men judge, whether he be most like a Mountebank, a Stage Player, or a
Priest; but to make him more uggly, let him bring in his hand his fannatique
Pamphlet, which he has lately put forth against the people of God, called
Quakers; in which scornful railing piece he calls them fannatique, and being it
is in the Roman tongue, it may be the Pope has given him an allowance for it.

Quaery, Whether he did not write his Pamphlet in Latin on purpose to
strengthen the Pope, and the rest of his fraternity beyond the Seas, he being
by his name of Dean, the only El^e and Popeling left in this Nation; and
knowing if any manner of truth take place, so as to go through with Reformation*
Deans must down in the particular as well as in the general, and although he
snort, swagger and snuff, and would be as big as Cardinal Woolsey, his late
Predecessor (who built the Mass-house of which this man is Dean of) I say,
quaery that in his heart. However, honest men bring him upon the Stage for his
Deanery in the first place, and let his fantastique habit serve afterward for
a player if he will not work, though at the present he have the Popes allowance
and is more then full of scorn and dirision against the innocent; but the hand
of the Lord is against him, and the hurter of Israel shall not want his reward.

Quaery, If that Dean Owen, and the rest of the fatlings with and about him, be
not idle droans; Why do not he and they go among the Infidels, and there preach
the Gospel (if that which they preach be Gospel?) I am sure, it is not selfish,
chargeable, nor tied to a place; and says the Apostle, so have I strived to
preach the Gospel, where Christ has not been named; but this man is so far
from stirring out of his Popish den, that he has done what in him lies, to
hinder those that freely receive and freely declare the Word of the Lord, and
the Gospel of Jesus Christ, where he is not known, or at least forgotten, since
and in the dark night of Apostasy, when Danes and all the Popish Priests who
preach for hire, were set up. Oh! let their names be cast out as evildoers,
even so be it, Lord God most Holy, Just and True.


pass through it, and it is a common high way through it at this day for the
Town; and this is always put in execution.

The Doctors besides the distinction of facing of their Gowns with velvet, do
constantly every first day and more (especially when they preach) wear many
yards of black silk scarcenet about their necks, over their Gowns, which
besides the great breadth of it, reaches down to the very ground, on both sides.

And some of them preach with great treble Cuffs, French Band-strings of 6 or 7
s. a pair, half Shirts ruffled out, velvet Gippoes plain, or with silver
Buttons, great sets of points round their knees, diamond Rings, Gloves with
rich gold fringe, and embroidery, Canonical Coats; and much more such trumpery,
which I believe, few that lives in Oxford can be ignorant of.

As also, their wifes gorgious apparel, the whole City takes notice of to be
very excessive.

Concerning their Preaching, and paying their first fruits, etc.
WHen any Parsonage falls to the gift of the University, it is conferred on him
who has or can get most votes amongst the Masters; but if the Parsonage be not
good, there is none of them will stand for it.

When any benefice falls to any private College in the University, it is
proffered by the Rector or his Deputy, at the meeting of the Fellows, or else
at dinner or supper, to the Fellows according to their seniority, and they
presently ask what it is worth a year; which if it be two hundred pound or
thereabouts per annum, the Senior most commonly accepts of it. If but four
score pound a year, or very far off from his Friends, or in a factious place,
as they call it, amongst Anabaptists, Quakers, Army, Independants, or the like;
then they accept not of it, but say, send it down; and so when none of the
fatlings in the College accepts of it, some serviture or other, whose friends
or allowance cannot maintain him longer in the University, is necessitated to
accept of it; and hence it is a common Observation, that they that have good
Friends or good fellowships, seldom go out into the Country, unless he get a
very fat benefice.

They who intend to get a personage, learn to write short hand, to furnish
themselves with Sermons, go to hear all that preach, buy good store of
practical Divines, conform themselves in their habit, sit in a place in the
Mass-house, where they are sure to be seen by the great ones, which by way of
jear, some amongst them call, being of the Visable Church; and all this they do
to get the Doctors hands to their certificate, without which they cannot pass
the Commissioners; but I never read of any but the Pope, and his offspring
here in England, that did so much as pretend to know God, that used any of
these practices, to make their Ministers; but these are of man and by man, and
not of the Lord Jesus, and they (infallibly) run when he never sends them, and
as themselves are, so are their converts, for at the best, they can but beget
their own image, which may plainly be seen to be the very quintensence of the
mystery of iniquity.

They who desire rather to be chaplains to great persons, and Ladies, learn to
dance and sing, and do their honors hamsomly, study polite and humane
learning, the better to please their Masters with fine words and elegant
expressions, and these things they presume will make them acceptable, and these
are not called (by them) plain Priests, but Gentlemen of Divinity.

At the Act and Commencement, most of the booksellers in town writes upon a
great piece of board, a catologue of the In London the Priests works are stuck
upon the posts and pissing places, the Reverend, D. W. works. And next to it,
sticks a paper intimating where is a stage play, interlude or opera; under it
the works of Mr. such a ones, direction for prayer or preaching, with such
ribaldry, etc. and on the side hand of that sticks, the paper of a wide-mouthed
Montebanck, who says he will cure all the World of all diseases, but he
deceives, and kills more then he cures, as does the Priest who murders for his
belly.
names and titles, of all such Sermons, preached at Funerals, on thanksgiving
days, fast days, and the like occasions, also all tracts, treatises,
meditations, controversies, translations out of other Authors, also all
Catechisms, and the like which have been lately published, imprinted, or
reprinted, which the Country Priests buy off, and carry home, so that thereby
they may be prepared, and ready to preach almost upon any subject or occasion
in a short times warning, three or four years after.

Nay, are not there some Country Priests who allow stipends to their Friends
in the City, who write short hand; to take such men's Sermons who are counted
best preachers, and every week to send them down by the post or Carrier into
the Country against the next first day; Let every Priest exaamine his
conscience; for this has been practiced in some places.

It was used not long since in the Mass-house which is called Saint Mary's; for
him that preached to say in his prayer, good Lord bless the right honorable
the Chancellor, the revered, the Vice-chancellors, all the Doctors, both the
proctors, etc. and this was done to the Vice-chancellors face, for he is not to
be absent, but this profane custom the Independents did nibble at about a
year or two since, by which some of the most Popish did begin to imitate, but
whether it be left, or at this day practiced, I cannot Justly tell.

At the Act on the day called Hen. 8 as soon as he had renounced the Pope, took
to himself the Priests first fruits, which before were payable as an offering
to the Pope: From Whence all the Kings, Queens and chief Magistrates have, and
do at this day assume the same.

And the office where these firstfruits are received, and by the Priest at this
day paid, or offered, is kept in a house belonging to the Palace in
Westminster, called by the name of Hell; I say in Hell the hirelings offer
their first popish fruits: But from the eternal Hell there is no redemption:
Therefore beware offerer and receiver, for that offering was, and is Popish and
Hellish.


Saturnday, a profane fellow, (whom they call a Terrae filius) makes a
profane Atheistique, obcoene filthy speech, in the Mass-house, where the next
day the Drs. preach, and the day after again another Terrae filius comes up and
does like his predecessor, and this is the fruit of them called Ministers.

And although this cursed practice is constantly performed with, as much
filthiness as it is possible any one thing can be of that nature, yet the
University will not consent to lay it away; so that the next year the same
abominations are like to be committed.

Whereas reading of Homilies (which were the Sermons of the Fathers translated
into English) was cried out against in King James, and Charles's reign by the
then called Puritanes.

Now they write the same out in paper (which is cut according to the bigness
of their Bible, and put into the midst of their book) and this they read to the
people, and is called the Ministers notes or expounding.

All the Colleges in Oxford, except two or three at most, keep up their
painted windows and * Martial. Bristol. Brevia^orbi. in his Apologetical
History, Bertius and others, have seemed to justify the Romish Church, by
saying that it was an evident sign that the rulers of England did in their
consciences like the Romish Religion, because they liked and maintained their
pictures and ceremonies.
wainscot, with the pictures of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and Martyrs;
so that it is said by Travelers, they are not inferior to them in the
Jesuits Chapel in Antwerp.

And although in some colleges, a piece of a window was taken down; yet in
most Colleges they are not touched, under pretense it would be very chargeable
to put up new glass, and that now, none did reverence them, etc. Besides, I
do^ believe they cannot space so much of their pride, and out of their bellies.

But the Idolatrous Jews might have said far more for their calf which was made
of gold, that it was of exceeding great vallue, and we are loath to burn it, or
have it burnt, and loose the good gold, though it offended the Holy God; or
might they no^ have said, their groves were pleasant shades in so hot a Country
as their's, or might serve to build houses, or at least for fuel in the Winter?
but since once abused, the Lord commanded that they should be burnt, ( Mark)
since they had been once abused, and Idolatry had been there committed, and
they were set apart, and dedicated for a wrong end, they must be thrown down
and burnt; and if the Scripture be your rule; by what rule stands your
Mass-houses, which were erected, consecrated, and dedicated by the Pope, where
sacrifices to Devils has been offered, and the Name of the pure and Holy God
been blasphemed, and thousands of poor souls have been deceived? But the Lord
raised up himself, a Josuah, in our day, here; as heretofore, to have executed
his commands upon the Idolatrous high places in England which were built for
Idolatry, and they, and their Images, and Prie^ts should have been thrown down.

For the neglect whereof the Lord is angry, and our Joshuah has been
unfaithful, or at least too too long defered it; for down they must, and if
they were as high as the mount besides Samaria, they shall become a heap, or if
they were as deep as Iacths well, because their water stinks, and is not bought
without money and without prize, but is a standing puddle, therefore they shall
be dried up; or if they were as ancient as Jerusalem it self, where the Lord of
life was crucified by a cursed Law, (as bad as that which upholds the Priest
and his Mass-house) I say if they were as high as the mount, or as deep as the
Well, or as ancient as Jerusalem; or as tall as Babylon the tower of confusion;
yet they shall become an utter Chaos, and a confused heap, and the confusion
which is preached in them is their figure; and although there were in them a
brazen Serpent of Moses own making; having been once polluted, it must be
broken in pieces, and he that stands for them cannot stand, and he that stamps
them not to dust, shall be broken to pieces. Come up Priest with all thy trash,
parts, Read these Scriptures. Micah 1. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, Deuteronomy. 12. 2. 3. 2
Kings 18. 4. and 23. 6. Lev. 18. 3, 4. 25. 27. Exodus 23, 24. Deuteronomy. 12. 4. 2
Corin. 5. 17. Rev. 18. 4. Genesis 35 4. Number 33. 52. Deuteronomy. 12. 2, 3, 4. Isa. 27. 9.
Zeph. 1. 4. Rev. 2. 14. Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26. 9. 21. Zech. 13. 2. Hos. 2. 16. 17.
Isa. 1. 29. and 2. 20, 21, 22. Jug. 2. 13, 14. Isa. 30. 22. 23
and parcels, thy Jewish Tithes and Popish vestments, bring all the Orders the
Pope has left thee, fetch with thee thy cannonical weeds, bring all thy stuff
upon thy back if thou come (which God hates) Bring all thy dark deceit under
thy black long robe, and put all thy bloody persecution into the Scale, and yet
thou art to light, and by and in the light seen to be lighter then vanity it
self, show thy Masse-house inside and out, with all her christened bells which
jangled the Papists to her, to hear their Mass; and now you called Protestants,
to hear the hireling speak a devination of his own brain, who kills men for
his belly.

Bring all the Popish crosses upon her top, and sides with all her painted
windows and whited walls ( thine own image) leave no part of her fair outside
behind thee; And although she has been salted, blessed and consecrated by thy
Antecessor, and many a goodly monument is in her, and very many pounds thou
gets yearly by her; yet be not grieved to see her fall, or made a dung-house
your their mother Church, Grandum Paul's; the temple of Diana of whom these
whelps were born, wherein the hireling preaches, trades, and gets vast sums,
by boasting in the Saints, Prophets, Christ, the Apostles and holy men's words,
which were not given forth to be traded in, in the idolatrous Mass-houses, by
these hired men.

I might also ask the Priest, why that so many of the Scriptures are left out
of the Bible? or whether the Pope did give him the same authority to tithe the
Scriptures (and keep them to himself) as well as men's estates? and whether they
are not wilfully omitted, because they make against the Hireling? or which of
the copies we are to believe, since there is fifteen of the New Testament? Or
what translation we are to give most credit to, since that of the Genevah
differs from that of King Jame^? and Br^ughton the great Lingui^t, says that
the translation of the old Testament, is perverted in eight hundred forty eight
places? so that it is plain we must neither believe Priest of England, nor Pope
of Rome for the interpretation of Scriptures, but even that which gave it
forth, which was before they were, which is the interpretator one of a thousand.

Here follows a Catalogue of those Scriptures which are mentioned, but not
inserted in the Bible.
The prophecy of Enoch mentioned, Jude 14. The book of Jehu mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 20. 34. The book of the battles of the Lord, mentioned, Numbers 21. 14.
The book of Nathan the Prophet, the book of Iddo, The Prophecy of Ahijah
mentioned, 2 Chronicles. 9 29. the book of Hosai conserning Manasses, 2. Chron. 33.
19. the book of Shemajah the Prophet mentined. 2 Chronicles. 12. 15. the book of
Jasher mentioned, 2 Samuel 1. 18. the book of Gad, 1 Chronicles, 29. 29. The first
Epistle to the Corinthians mentioned, 1 Cor. 5. 9. The first Epistle to the
Ephesians mentioned Ephesians. 3. 3. The Epistle to the Laodiceans mentioneded
Colos. 4. 16. The books of Henoch mentioned in the Epistle of Thaedeus Origin
and Tertullian, The Books of Solomon's three thousand Proverbs, and one thousand
songs, with his Books of the nature of Trees, Plants, Beasts, and Fishes
mentioned, 1 Kings 4. 32. 33. The Epistle fathered upon Barnabas; the
revelation of Peter; the Doctrine called the Apostles, mentioned in Eusebius,
Lib. 3. cha. 22.
So that I say it is very possible that what did not make for the Pope, and the
advantage of his hirelings, was, and is on purpose left out; for it is like the
first Cannon that warranted the books of the New Testament to us, was made by a
council at Carthage which was subservient to Popery several hundred years;
after the death of Christ, many parts of the New Testamant, which are now
allowed, being till then in dispute and denied, as Eusebius says, namely the
revelation of John, the Epistle of Jude, the last Epistle of Peter, the second
and third Epistles of John the Epistle of James; See Eusebius. Lib. 3. chap. ^2.

So that if the Council of Carthage did not distinguish those Scriptures which
were written by devine inspiration, from those which were not, the Priests of
England may yet go to Carthage or the Pope, the Priests Original, to know the
truth, but I believe that neither council of Carthage, Pope of Rome, or
assembly of Priests in England, with the help of their two Universities, (which
are their two eyes picked out of the Whores head) can interpret Scripture
aright, but for the most part are, and have been doers of wrong, and that
knows not the Scriptures nor that which gave them forth.

Therefore Contrymen consider these men; wise men believe them not, for as
sure as the Lord lives, they are a lie; Princes be not deceived by them, least
ye perish in the gainsaying with them. Men of War once again, draw out your
spiritual weapons, and defend your selves, and rid your hands of that Popish,
Jewish and Antichristian power, which in this the Lords day could not stand,
but by your consents.

Some of ye had bread in your own houses, and have ye spent all your former
estates, and quite lost your possession? and will ye spend-thrifts go to buy of
a Bankrupt Priest the fag-ends of Popery, such as preach in Mass-houses, and
compass the whole earth for their gain, from their quarters? Oh! believe them
not, their best deeds are Forgery, their assureances are naught, their words
are cancelled; the Law giver has viewed their filthy statutes, the
mighty-Councellor has broke their bonds asunder; their best seals is but a
waffer, and what they sell, is stolen from their Neighbor; and their
gatherings are crumbling, and molders, like the very dust which is their meat,
an^ there they are; and for that they murder.

Friends, I know you see the thief; Oh! Consent not with him; if ye do, ye
perish.

I say, there was that among ye, and in ye once, that was for God, and utterly
against the Popish brawling Hireling; and verily that which is for him in this
the day of the Lambs persecution, is absolutely against the true and living
God; who covered your heads in the day of battle. When I am sure it was not
unknown to many of ye, that the Tithe-mongers were (as one man) your implacable
enemies.

My dear Friends whom, the Lord witnesses, I love, and my soul truly
travelleth for; Consider what ye were ten years since, and what year now; feel
in your selves, and speak with the witness of God in your Consciences, for
that is it which I speak to, and let us be upon a search, in the cool of the
day, laying aside rage, fury and preferment, and see who they are, and what
they are, that ye are growing to, and who grows to ye, and who grows from ye.

The people of God ye have shamefully persecuted, and thrust out of your Army,
recruiting yourselves (in my knowledge) in their rooms with very vicious and
wicked men; and does the Hireling tell ye that this is a good way to prevent
Heresies factions and rents in your Army? Repent of these dealings, least the
Lord forthwith rent ye all to pieces, and there be not one of ye left that has
a hand in these wickednesses, to pi^h against the Wall. Therefore my Friends,
in time consider what ye are growing to, and what ye are growing from, thus
much I may justly tell ye, that vice is not punished, or in the least looked
after, as it has been heretofore; Nor indeed is it like, when as ye put honest
men from among ye, for no other cause, but for bearing their Testimonies
against vice; for the breach of any manner of Law whatsover, either military or
civil, was not so much as laid to mine, and many others charges, who were most
shamefully entreated and thrust out from among ye.

And I may farther tell ye, if ye proceed in these cruelties; ye will in a very
short time be as unfit to fight the Lords battles, as those were, who fell by
your sword; for from the Lord God I declare it unto ye all, That for the
present the sword of the living God is against ye both; and although the
Hireling may (I say) seemingly for^ifie ye, and tell ye that persecution is a
good way to preserve from rents; Yet in dear love to ye all, I declare that if
ye do not speedily repent, whilst the power is in your hands, and once again
become little in your own eyes, and repair the cruel breaches that ye have
made, and suffered to be made upon the innocent; Verily ye shall be rent, and
with the Hireling fall, and perish like your own dung*

How can this Army look the Nation in the face, and put men out from among them
for their inoffensive conscience, the very thing which drew all men to ye? and
have ye like Machevillians served your own turns, and have ye nothing else to
do, but to revenge your selves upon your selves, and make a prey upon your
brethren? but such doings the Lord hates, and it cannot possibly long stand,
for oppression is one of the wo^st foundations that ever was laid; and if ye
had been faithful, the wicked Priest had never been suffered to have murdered
any for his belly, or have destroyed any man for not paying Jewish or Popish
Tithes; and the blood of one innocent man is able to subvert a Government and
overthrow a Nation; but that evil should fall upon one of ye, is far from my
heart (although your cruel and unjust dealings to meward, and many of us has
given cause enough for us to have cursed ye in the bitterness of our spirits)
Yet the Lord who knows the secrets of all men's hearts bears me witness I do
not only freely forgive ye, but have a dear and unexpressibly love to every
soul among ye, and as for O. P. the Lord witneseth for me, with what integrity,
and simplicity of soul I loved him above any man upon the face of the whole
earth, whilst he served the Lord, and stood in his council, and to this
minute, I have done him no ill. Now therefore be wise, O ye Kings, and be
instructed ye Judges of the earth, seek ye the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling, kiss the Son, least he be angry and ye perish from the way, when his
wrath is kindled, but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in
him; let not the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thought although
the Kings of the earth may set themselves, and the Rulers take council together
against the Lord and against his anointed, saying, let us break their bonds
assunder, and cast away their cords from us; but he that siteth in Heaven shall
laugh, and the Lord shall have them in derision, then shall he speak unto them
in his wrath, and vex them in his sore displeasure.

And friends, the truth is now declared as it was of old, by the stammering
tongue, and it is the illiterate that have the gift of tongues, and though his
visage be marred, and his shape uncomely to the vultrous eye; yet the deaf hear
him, the dumb sing, and the lame leap for joy; and that which was, and has for
a long time been slain, is made alive; and the mighty God of the oppressed is
arisen in great strength, so, as he will slay all that live in pleasure,
fullness and wantonness; and very many shall the slain of the Lord be; and those
who refuse to hear the Prophet in all things, shall be cut off; and terrible
will our God be to all the workers of iniquity, for assuredly the wicked and
all those that forget God, shall be turned into Hell.

And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with him ^n hundred
forty and four thousand, having his Fathers Name written in their foreheads,
and they sung as it were a new song before the Throne, and before the four
beasts, and the Elders, and no man could learn that song, but the hundred and
forty four thousand, Which were Redeemed from the earth.

These are they which were not defiled with women, for they are Virgins: These
are they which follow the Lamb, whethersoever he goes: These were Redeemed
from among men, being the first fruits unto God. and to the Lamb.

And in them there was found no guile; for they are without fault before the
Throne of God.

And I saw another Angel fly in the midst of Heaven, having the Everlasting
Gospel, to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and
Kindred, and Tongue, and people, saying, with a loud voice, Fear God, and give
Glory to Him, for the hour of his Judgment is come, and worship Him that made
Heaven and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of waters.

And there followed another Angel, saying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that
great City, because she made all Nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her
Fornication.

And the third Angel followed them, saying, with a loud voice; If any man
worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in
his hand; The same shall drink the wine of the wrath of God, which is poured
out without mixture into the cup of his indignation, and he shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone, in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the
presence of the Lamb.

And the smoke of their torment ascends up, for ever and ever; and they shall
have no rest day nor night, who worship the Beast and his Image, and whosoever
receives the mark of his name.

And I heard the Angel of the waters say, Thou art Righteous, O Lord which art,
and wast, and shall be, because thou have Judged thus; For they have shed the
blood of the Saints and Prophets, and thou have given them, blood to drink; for
they are worthy. And I heard another out of the Altar say, Even so, Lord God
Almighty, true and Righteous are thy Judgments; for they are the spirits of
Devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of the earth; and of
the whole World; to gather them to the battle of the great day of God Almighty.
And I saw as it were a Sea of glass mingled with fire, and them that had gotten
the Victory over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his mark, and over the
number of his names, stand on the Sea of glass, having the harps of God; and
they sung the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb;
saying, Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty; Just and True
are thy ways, thou King of Saints. Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and give
glory to thy Name? For thou only art Holy, for all Nations shall come and
worship before thee; for thy Judgments are made manifest. (Even so be it,
Amen; Come Lord). Rev. 14. 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Rev. 16. 5, 6, 7.
and 14. Rev 15. 2, 3.

Given forth in the 4th. Month, 16^8. By E B.

THE END
A WORD
To those old Creatures, who are old in iniquity, and in the fallen state, yet
deny falling away; who say, once in Christ, and ever in Christ, when as it may
be, they are at the very same time in a very great rage, disputing and pleading
for sin, Term-of-life.
I Say to such unprofitable talkers, who are willing, and by their own consent
do contract with Hell and Death, who stretch themselves forth in big swelling
words, and think themselves, it may be, much better, because they are crowded
into gathered Churches (as they call them) and it may be of a truth can say
something of an ancient, and past experience, moving, or appearance of God, to
and in them, whereupon their big word and wide-mouthed-boast is; when the poor
Souls, or rather proud Pharisees, are at the very top of their vaunting to wit)
once in Christ, and ever in Christ; such I many times am moved, ask, Whether
they are obeying the Command, doing the Work and Will of Christ, at this time,
now, and ever? (Mark) Once in Christ and ever in Christ; and I am sure, he that
for ever abides in Christ, must now and ever do the Will and Commands of
Christ, and they are not grievous, nor unholy, neither can that man which is
impure, imperfect or unholy, observe, obey or do them in the love and belief of
them; and He now and ever Redeems, and saves his people from their sins ( note
that) for he which sins is of the ^evil; Yea, though he be but proud and
covetous, and as full of persecution as too too many professors are, which is
of the old creature, and such are not new creatures, nor in Christ Jesus* now
and ever; neither are they purified, as he is pure, who is the substance, the
one only one thing needful, who is the beginning and end of all things,
himself without beginning or end, who is not afar of, but nigh at hand, and a
ready helper unto all them who fear him; wh^ is the root o^ ^esse, the Promise
come, the Truth, the Oath and admits not of any swearing whatsoever; that is his
Command, and it is not grievous for his yoke is easy, and his burden is
light, in, and by whom I see light who says, Swear not at all; And he does not
reap, where he has not first sown; For he does enlighten every man that
comes into the World, Male and Female, Bond and Free, Scythian and Barbarian;
and a measure of himself is given to every man continually, to profit with all,
note, to every man; He was not so selfish as many of ye are, who are in this,
and that, and the other form ( I do not say all) who do seclude al^ that are
not with ye in your set days, bread, wine and Baby Baptism, out of the
Everlasting Kingdom, which was before your fables were But he that is in Christ
i^ a new creature; (Mark) he is, he does not say, he was, or he shall be, and
so warm himself by his own coals, by only saying, the Righ^eousness of Christ,
the Righteousness of Christ, is sufficient. But I say, he which confesses and
forsakes his sins shall find mercy; ( Mark that) and forsakes his sins,
coming to see the exc^eding sinfulness of ^^n and confesses and forsakes with
repentance, never to be repented of; That is it which is ever in Christ, and
shall find mercy* and as many as are led by the Spirit of God, are now, and
ever, the sons of God; Such are new Creatures, and only they; So he who is
proud, heady, high minded, covetous, envious, voluptious, seditious, a r^^ler,
brawler, striker, liar, persecutor etc. is not in, but out of Christ Jesus, is
no new creature, is not led by the Spirit of God. For that which is in, and of
Christ Jesus, is equal and does not hurt the creature, the handy work of God
the Creator; but strikes at the power which captivates the creature, and turns
men from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to the Power of God;
and that weapon which convinces and coverts men and women in any measure to
Godward, is not carnal but Spiritual, but the outward sword in its place I
own, which only is to be laid upon the evil-doer, let it be exactly done; but
to touch no man for his Conscience or principle in Religion, provided it be not
bloody, so let the bloody hearted Priest look into himself, who murders men
for his belly; How much better is that then the Romish Jesuit, who kills a
Protestant for a Heritck; and I am sure, those who do so, are not in Christ
Jesus nor new creatures, nor in the Spirit; but of the flesh of old Cain, and
in the condemnation; For the Son came not to destroy, but to save men's lives;
And he and his Ministers struck at, and at this day do strike at the power
only, which captivates the creature [to wit] the spiritual wickedness which
lodges within; Which the carnal weapon cannot reach, and they struck only at
the Herisie, and the error, and that which lead into the error and Heresy,
and not at the creature; neither strove they with flesh and blood, (nor for
earthly benefit) Nay, they were full of patience, gentleness, long-suffering,
forbearing, forgiving all and suffered all things, Yea, themselves to be
defrauded, and labored with their own hands, and were burthensom to no man.

But there is no condemnation to those that are in Christ Jesus (note) that are
in him; and who are in him? Those that walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit; for those who walk after the flesh, cannot please God, and to be but so
so much as carnally minded, is death, and the death is not in the Life, which
Life, is the Light of men.

But some there were who did taste of the power of an endless life, and yet
fell away; and some there were who were grafted into the Vine, and yet became
degenerate plants, and the the righteous man may forsake his righteousness; for
some were washed, others cleansed or emptied, and yet returned like the sow to
the mire, and the dog to the vomit; so that it is plain that a man may fall
away, as Lucifer did, and to the same place; for although they once knew God,
and have tasted, indeed of the power of God, and the endless Life, yet if they
turn that grace of God into wantonness, oppression, pride and excess, and live
above the witness of God, which is a forgetting of God, they shall with the
wicked at last be turned into Hell. Then it will not be a saying, Once in
Christ and ever in Christ; but dying in pride, oppression, persecution and
covetousness, which is the root of all evil; I say to such, Once in Hell and
ever i^ Hell. Therefore on this side, time and the grave, whilst ye have time
prize it, for the time present is all that is yours, and the days past ye
cannot recall, and who knows what one day may bring to pass? Wherefore in the
fear of the Lord, lay aside your empty drowzy, and only professing his Name,
and being in him, whose Life ye are out of; And turn into him the Light, the
Life, who does enlighten every man that comeeth into the World, and that Life
and no other, is the Light of men; him it is by whom the World was made, before
it was made, which is, which was, and is to come, and is already come, who is
the Word of God, the Original, and first born of every creature, the
Everlasting Gospel, which has been preached to every creature, who shows,
reproves and checks in secret, for all your evil deeds done openly and
secretly, and is as secret, as your most beloved secrets. Oh! wait upon him,
and believe in him, for he that knows, obeys and abides in the Life, is a
cohire, and has Life, and shall live for ever; but if ye know him, and obey
him not, he is your condemnation; wherefore let him that knows the Lord, fear
him, stand in awe and sin not, And that is, once in Christ, and ever in Christ.

So blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he comes, shall find doing his
Will, he shall make him Ruler over all his goods; but if that evil servant
shall say in his heart, My Lord deferreth his coming, and in the mean space be
a companion with drunkards; the Lord of that servant shall come in a day, when
he looks not for him, and in an hour that he is not aware of, and shall cut
him asunder, and appoint him his portion with hypocrites, where there is
weeping, wailing, and knashing of teeth. Therefore, watch continually, and pray
without ceasing, for you know not what hour the Lord, comes, and he that is
not upon his guard will be taken, and made a perpetual prisoner.

But it may be alleged, and to me it has been by the highest professor that I
yet ever met with, either preacher or hea^er, has affirmed it come as his
doctrine, and belief, that the bent of men, and Saints do, and will sin and
have their failings whilst they are in the body, and the best of men, that
ever were, had their failings to their dying day; to which I p^ssitively
answer, that which is in the least faileable cannot be sanctified for that
which sanctifies is infallible, and it is impossible that sin and fallibility
can be joined to, or with him who is infallible, and has not union with any
manner of sin, though but a sinful thought; for all manner of sin is evil, and
comes of evil, and is of the evil one, who is as faileable as the faileable
accursed doctrine of imperfection, and it, as him; for he is in it, and it in
him, and he is the only Minister and Father of it; but every gift of God is
perfect; So that imperfection is the Devils gift, but every good and perfect
gift, comes from and is of God (Mark) but imperfections, sin and failings and
all that fails whatsoever, though but an evil thought, comes from, and is of
the imperfect and faileable Devil who abode not in the infallibility; Wherefore
he fails to be s^ved, but is a Devil although he believe, and they are but
poor, or rather no Saints that are not cleansed, purged, washed, and sanctified
throughout, ye are cleansed, ye are washed ye are sanctified throughout; and as
he is, so are we in this present World, and he that fails to witness this
condition, on this side the grave, though he may be covinced of the very truth
it self, he may be called, but never chosen.

Friends, it is a high state, yea the very highest on this side the grave, I do
not say its impossible not to fail, and alone, to live, move, and do all to,
and for the praise and glory of God, and to live and abide in the infallible
and not to fail; but, as the Lords witness I declare it, He who lives and dies
in his sins, imperfections and failings does fail, and falls short of that
Kingdom, where the imperfect or impure cannot enter; for its the pure in heart
that sees God, but the wicked he beholds a far off; and the sinner cannot stand
before the righteous God in judgment; wherefore as many as be perfectly
minded, work out your salvation with fear and trembling, for the night comes,
wherein no man can work.

And there is another sort of idle people, who say Christ has taken away the
guilt of sin, but not the presents of sin, (Oh! seared conscience that has no
guilt for sin) I do not say he has taken the Devil out of Hell, or J^das from
his own place, neither do I say or think the Devil does at this day cease to
seek whom he may devour; Nay I know he is the Prince of the power of the air,
and the Kingdom of darkness is his; Sodom is his throne, and Egypt, and the
dwellers there are altogether within his Dominion, Mystery-Babylon and her
Merchants are his own, and all the children of disobedience, to and all who
live in the mystery of iniquity he is a Lawmakers; also I say he is a roaring
Lion, and continually seeks whom he may devour, and the most upright that is,
or ever was upon the earth, he may tempt, yea, Christ himself, as the words of
the Devil recorded in Scripture do testify, but its no sin to be tempted, but
the sin is to yield to, and do the will of the temptor, and commit the sin; but
blessed are they who stand in the power and fear of the Lord* and endure the
temptation, Adam was never accursed until he had yielded, taken and eaten; so
its sin acted, and the purpose of your corrupt hearts to sin, if not gross yet
little sins, and at least to have your failings term of life, and that is it
which hinders the union, keeps ye in the unbelief and separates betwixt ye and
your maker, and the wages of s^n is death, and such as ye sow, such shall ye
reap, and if with the hands which are defiled (and not in the pure hope which
is perfect) ye plow and sow corruption; What can ye expect to reap, or be in
the harvest or day of the Lord, when he makes up his jewels, but tares,
corruption or reprobate silver; and of failings and imperfection, ye can reap
no other thing; for according to your faith so will it be unto ye, and failings
will fail to be saved, or enter into the rest of him that is unfallible and
without fail saves all those that come unto him by faith and a good conscience
void of offense toward God and man, ( mark) a good conscience toward God, and
void of offense toward man, not striking, spilling of blood, or reaping
ca^nals where they have sow^, neither spiritual nor carnal.

And although imperfection is the practice, and general preached and received
doctrine (of the Church of England so called) I utterly deny it; neither do I
trust to be saved as they believe; but I believe they will take it ill, if I
should say, they who believe they may live and die in some failings should not
go to Heaven; or if I should say, that is the Hypocrites hope, and will fail;
But I do say, if they say its the true hope or living faith which is of God in
and by which the Just lives or if that he which lives and intends to die in
some failings, says the Lord lives with Jeremiah, I say, he, or they swear
falsely.

But if we continue faithful, or full of faith in our measures to the end, we
shall be saved without fail* for he that is in us is greater then he that is in
the World, and he that abides in him is pure without failings, and the wicked
one cannot touch him though he may attempt it hourly, for a stronger then he
keeps the house, and he cannot enter but by our consents, otherwise the whole
creation of mankind would be the Devils; for he is the enemy of mankind and his
nature is to devour; but the true light which does enlighten every man that
comes into the World, and the ligh^ with which every man is enlightened,
comprehends the darkness; but the Devil and darkness cannot comprehend the
light; for he that is in us is far greater then he, and is quick and powerful,
and divides betwixt the precious thoughts and the vile, before they come to
actions; I say if the watch be kept, and the light believed in, which is in ye,
and infallibly is the l^fe of men and shows man all his sins and failings, I
say it will discern the thoughts, and dash the brains of Babylons children
against the wall; Yea that brain which invents and devises evil, and break the
cockatrice egg before it is an egg, and mischief shall not be hatched or
prod^cted; and the same is the sure word of prophecy, which if ye take heed
unto, ye may infallibly do well, though it be as a light shining in a dark
place, tell the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts, for which,
wait that ye may be delivered from all your sins and failings, and become the
Sons of God.

For as much then as Christ has suffered for us in the flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind, for he that has suffered in the flesh, has
ceased from sin 1 Pet. 4. 1.

Therefore let the time p^st be si ficient, for the end of all things is at
hand* and to be carnally minded is death.

And if any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his, and if Christ
be in ye, the bod^ ^s dead because of sin.

By a Friend to perfection, and a believer in that unfallible Jesus, who saves
his people from their sins, failings, and imperfections, but a professed enemy
to that Hellish doctrine of imperfection.

E. B.

THE END
A WORD
To such Rulers and Magistrates who Whip, cause or suffer to be whipped the
Saints of the most High, for Vagabonds (among whom there are no Beggars) and
sends them to Prison for not Swearing, and not taking an Oath, to abjure that
which themselves may be found in, and requires Bonds of the upright in heart,
for the good behavior, a thing which themselves are not truly in; for that is
no good behavior, that oppresses the oppressed, and does violence to the
afflicted, adds grief to him that is a man of sorrows, and grindes him to dust
that is by all men already trodden upon, as the very mire in the streets, mocks
and derides him that is already the byword of the Fool, and song of the
Drunkard; and imprisons him who is the Lord's Feee-man, and in the Lord are we
made Free, and more then Conquerours over what its possible for cruel men to
do, or suffer to be done unto Us.
To such I say,
IN stead of executing, and making just Laws which should reach that of God in
every man's conscience, and be a hook in the nose of the evil doer, and break
the jaws of the wicked, I say, in stead of that ye break the hearts of the
righteous, many of ye, by exercising only your own wills; others by straining
the too many grievous acts, and cruel Edicts lately made, by virtue whereof,
together with your insolency, and tyranical wills, ye snatch up the people of
God, as they travel up and down about their lawful occasions, and this is
common with some of ye to do; when the man is not above ten, fifteen, or twenty
miles from his outward home, nor out of the same County, wherein he, or they
were born; going to, coming from, or being in a meeting with the Lords people.

The inferior Magistrate, who for the most part are made drunk with rage, and
the zeal-drunk Prosolytes who lie in wait as a Troop of evildoers in every
corner, hales the friend of the Lord before that Magistrate and if he be good
for no other thing, he will serve to swear, and to bear false witness for the
Beast, and against the innocent; and to cause him to be whipped for a Vagabond,
and committed to a bad prison among thieves and murderers, under whose
commitment, and cruel usages several of the precious Lambs and servants of the
Lord, have laid down the outward man, and finished their testimony with their
blood. But let all such Magistrates know from the highest to the lowest, that
blood will pursue the vagabond; and let all such swearers know that the curse
of God is entailed upon the h^use of the swearer, and let all the heathen round
about know, that he which whips stocks, prisons and tortures the creature for
his religion, shall never turn any from darkness to light; nor from the power
of Satan to the power of God, although he may mangle and kill the creature, and
wholly mar the workmanship of the Creator; But the true weapon which converts,
is not a carnal whip, but a spiritual sword which will slay the persecutor, and
eats up the habitation of the evil doer, and drives out the transgressor; who
from the beginning was a fugitive, and a Vagabond; who slew his righteous
brother, as ye do now, because he was righteous, and for the same cause; and
the flesh always persecuted the spirit, but the spiritual man never persecuted
any (mark) that, not any, so be certain ye are wrong, and doing of wrong, and
the wages of unrighteousness if ye repent not ye shall receive.

And it may be, some others according to the example of Jesus our Lord, are
moved of him to visit those who are so imprisoned by ye, as is before
expressed, and to Minister to their necessities as need requires; but your in
humanity is such that ye have oftentimes taken them up as Vagabonds But the
wholesome Act made by Queen Elizabeth was to whip Vagabonds, and sturdy beggars,
mark, and sturdy beggars, and if the richest heathen in the Nation can make it
appear that any one that's called a Quaker, and is so owned by us, has asked a
morsel of his bread or a draught of his drink, he shall have a hundred fold
requital, for a beggar we deny, as a thief, for that which begs covets and
desires that which is none of his own, and that which covets will steal; but
the Queen who made a good Act, and is said to be one of our best Princes, here is
ye have most wickedly perverted; and wretched Queen Mary who was bloodier then
the Boar of York, and made a cursed Act against the Protestants of 3. months
imprisonment here is ye have made 6. so compare your selves with the best of
Princes and the worst of Tyrants, and see who ye are most like.
and whipped them also, of the very same cup many of the most dear and precious
Ministers and messengers of the Lord have drank and tasted; being moved of the
Law, to pass from City to City, and from Country to country to visit the seed
of God as the holy men of God did of old; and did not sit down in a personage
house and so became the hireling of a Parish (constituted and appointed by the
Pope Dionisius was the first that caused the division of Parishes in England,
and Augustine a Monk* the first that preached up tithes, to Edelbert, King of
Kent.
Pope, against whom ye would force others to swear) And there Simon Magus-like,
pretend to sell that which cannot be bought for tenths nor fi^ts; but let their
money and Ministry (or rather mystery of iniquity) perish. I say they did not
creep into a Mass-house: with four or five jangling bells in it; and there sing
David's Psalms in Rhyme, and meeter, step from the Pew to the P^lpit: and there
tell the people a story by the glass, and exact the tenth prt of their labors,
and estates for it; and these brawlers are upheld by an Act of Parliament, by
which ye called Justices, and Judges with the composition of your own wills,
pretend to Act, and imprison, stock and whip true men as Vagabonds, but its
because your selves are out of the council, and dwell not in the habitation of
God, and are real wanderers, although ye may have a house called after your
own names as Cain had: a City after his sons; and yet was a Vagabond.

And as for the oath of objuration me thinks ye need not be so busy to
administer to others to swear against the Pope, and all Popery when your
Mass-houses stinks so much of Popery. Your laws your Terms, your Courts, your
Universities, your Colleges, your Orders, your Christened Bells j^ngling to
the Mass-house, with the Popes Cross on the top of her; your Lammas,
Michaelmas, Christmas, and Candlemas, your Tithes, your Gleab Land, your
parso^age-houses, your Mass-houses standing East and West, your mortuaries,
your burial of your dead.

Your manner of mourning for Moondeag from the Idol of the Moon.

Tuescodeag from the Idol Tuesco a goddess.

Wooden'sdeag from the Idol Wooden one of the Saxon gods.

Thorsdeag from the Idol Thor. now called Jupiter.

Frydeag from the Idol Friga another of the Saxons gods now called Diana or
Venus.

Saterdeag from the Idol of Saturn.


them; etc. the names of your months, your weeks, and days of your w^ek; naming
and sprinkling of your children, your wha^ not which pertains to your worship,
and is not all this and very many other things which ye use, Popish, Jewish and
heathenish? and yet ye would force the innocent whom ye know for conscience
cannot swear at all; to take an oath to abjure the Pope, which would be to
swear against your selves, but because of oaths the Land mourns.

And if I hear a wicked wretch swear, and many times blaspheam the name of the
dreadful and living God with bloody oaths, and if I complain of that wicked
man to a Magistrate that he has, in my hearing, sworn many oaths, to the
grief of my very soul, and dishonor of my maker, but except I will also swear
and enter into the same sin, and the guiltless make himself guilty, he which
did in the first place offend the pure God, shall not be punished; but on the
contrary if the true man do but speak to this man called Justice in plainnes of
speech; such as the servants used to the Lord of li^e: and the same Lord to his
servants, or do not put of my hat to him, and bow which I dare not do le^st my
Maker should take me away, I say its much if I go not to prison my self, or at
least exceedingly rebuked, which I my self am a witnest off, and this is
turning of Justice backward, so that except a man will break a positive command
of the Lord Jesus, the sword will not be laid upon the evil doer; but is born
in vain, and not for the praise of them which do well; the wicked Magistrate
bids me ^wear, and says I may swear, or take a judicial oath; the Papists he
says bow down to an image, and wear a crucifix or an agnus dei about thy neck,
its but to put thee in mind and for a remembrance; but Christ the oath and hope
in me, who was before judicial oaths or images were, says swear not at all,
and above all things my brethren says James swear not; and I had rather be
accounted as one of his brethren, by keeping the commands of the Lord Jesus by
not swearing, then by swearing to be made a friend to Caesar or a companion to
the Prince and the command of the most high God is, thou shall not make to thy
self any graven image nor bow down to them, and so let the Papists and ye,
part this matter between ye, for ye are a like guilty, the one breaks the
command of God, the other of Christ; and he that breaks one is guilty of all.

The King bid or commanded that all should bow to his image which he had set
up, the three children refused, and obeyed God rather then the accursed Edicts
of a King, the King gave command that they should be thrown into the fire, and
into the fire they were cast with their hats on; were they Rebels, yea or nay?
and whether is it better to obey God or men judge ye? But except I will rebel
against the Lord, and make my self a transgressor of the royal Law; I shall not
have the benefit of your Law, and except I will swear* I cannot desend or come
by my own, nor hardly keep my self out of a Goal, So vile are your Laws, and
many the Ministers of them; and the guilty do go free, and the heart of the
righteous is grieved, and the righteous man does perish; and few or none lays
it to heart; but the Lord our God, treasureth up all these things with many
more of your iniquities, and if ye think he will not visit for these things,
ye deceive your selves, and are deceived because the truth does not guide ye^.

The good Magistrate is worthy of double honor but it consists not in my
hat; for that waxes old, as does my other garments, and may be burnt, and
turned to ashes, and become dong, or I may throw my hat upon the ground and set
my feet upon i^, is then the Magistrates honor in the dust? and do I tread upon
his honor when I tread upon mine own hat? Nay, the good Magistrate is still
worthy of double honor, and for a good man some will dare to die, and so I
dare for the good Magistracy; ^ut to sawn and c^ing to any man's person, I may
not; It is the good Magistrate that's worthy of double honor, the office (good
Magistrat^) in the man, not the bad man because he is in the office; and to
every ordinance of man I submit and am no rebel, therefore let me (and all
Gods people) have the benefit of your best Laws. And your worst does not
require me to put of my hat, swear, or appear by an Attourny, my self being in
the Nation and willing to appear, but admit ye had a corrupt Law, or an act for
every violence which is acted; I believe some of ye heretofore when ye lived
under the oppression of wicked Magistrates and unright^ous Laws, (which are
yet standing) would have said that the welfare of the people was above the
Salus populi suprema lex.
Law.

Paul says that an oath is for the end of strife among men, ( mark) but the
same Paul says walk not as men but as Saints; and although they of old time
swear to the Lord and performed their oaths to the Lord, and the Lord
performed THE substance to them which oaths was a type of, and the oath and
vow is come in the flesh, who says swear not at all; but if Paul or John who
was the greatest born among women should should affirm or had affirmed it to be
lawful to swear, i will not believe John but rather choose to hear, believe and
obey the great and mighty Prophet in all things, but the persecutor, and he
that will not hear this Prophet, and bring all his deeds to the light, and to
the witness of God in him, and there try if they be wrought in God, shall be
cut off; Notwithstanding he may pretend to have an Edict or a law from man, for
what he does. And if he commit murder, and all manner of wickedness most
greedily, man can pardon one another by an Act, or call it chancemedly, man
slaughter, petti-laseny, etc. and Hang another man for the fame fault because
he cannot read, and this amongst the rest is persecution, and is not equal nor
doing as a man would be done unto.

And like a naked and simple hearted man, I shall hear declare unto all the
world the words of the living God to me when I was but only able to die for
the truth, and not able to write, dispute or controvert for it, when as
heretofore I have met with an able skilful cunning deceiver.

This was the word of the Lord, and thus said the Lord unto me, If an Angel
should pretend to come from heaven and should affirm unto thee, that that
Ministry is of God or Christ, which in the least persecutes, stocks, whips
imprisons, strikes or causes to be stricken, swears or causes others to
swear for his dishonest gain believe him not; For they obey not the great
Prophet and they shall be cut off.

But we, as the holy men did, gladly suffer all wrongs, and our selves to be
defrauded, freely giving up our outward man and substance without resisting to
death, to the merciless persecutor; but the mercen^ry hireling who is the only
cause of our persecution, is so far from being found in these the holy men and
Ministers of Christ's practices, that they wrong all men, and all men are
defrauded by them, most cruelly exacting where they never lent, pulling where
they never planted, clothing with the fleece they never wrought for, feeding
with the fat and sweet they never sweat for, in short by force they exact and
reap all manner of carnals, where they have not sown spirituals, nor carnals;
And them who are called teachers have and do exceedingly Err, and greater
injustice and crueller rapeness were never committed by men, then there has
been by this Legion of evil doers, but for their labors if they repent not,
they shall be called the least in the Kingdom Isaiah said they were all blind
and ignorant and dumb dogs that never had enough, and Jeyemiah; said that the
Prophets prophesied falsely, and the Priests did bear rule by their means, and
Ezekiel said they fed themselves, and not the flock; Micha said they Preached
for hire, and Divined for money, and Hosea said they were as a Troop of robbers
that did wait for a man, so the company of Priests did murder in the way by
consent; Reader I pray thee read Isai. 56. 10. 11. Jer. 5. Ezekiel. 34. Mich. 2.
11. Hosea 6. 9. and compare the English Priest and see if there be any more
difference then there is betwixt a Monk, and a Monk and a Pope, and a Pope.
.

And the Rulers that suffer these things, are become blind and in a deep sleep,
yea, a very deep sleep, even the sleep of death, but let all such know that
their Rewarder slumbereth not, neither can his vengeance tarry long, and the
despised light within, if they repent not, shall be their sure condemation; for
the righteous Spirit of the holy One is grieved, and it shall not always
strive, and woe be to them who set him at naught, and persecute whips, terrifies
or suffers them to be persecuted, whiped or terrified, who speak in his Name,
thrusting, causing or suffering to be thrust into dungeons, Bridewells, and bad
places, amongst bad people there to be kept in bonds under the hands of cruel
men till death, for the testimony of Jesus? Oh! bloody and great, yea very
great cruelty, was ever the like done by any who did but so much as profess
liberty of conscience. But let all such know from the highest to the lowest,
yea to him that sits upon the Throne, to him that grinds at the Mill, they do
resist the mighty Prophet whom the Lord our God has raised up, and he is come,
and they shall be cut off, and mine eye sees it; and then the condition of poor
Lazarus who is hardly thought worthy to live, will far transcend Dives and all
his fellow Gluttons, and these that are at ease in the flesh, and are not
troubled like other men; and lie roleing upon their b^ds of pleasure, spending
that which was their day in madness, mirth, and folly and making merry over the
humble witness o^ God, saying to themselves tush no eye sees us, but let all
such know they are seen, and he that beholds them is not afar off, and a day
comes shortly if not suddenly; when the very highest among them shall be
disrobed and utterly made bare, and the greatest that is born among women,
shall not hide himself from the vengeance of my God; who is the avenger, and
revenger of the righteous, and vengeance is mine says the Lord and I will
repay it Blessed are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted.

Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are they who hunger and thirst, after righteousness.

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness sake for theirs is the
Kingdom of heaven.

Blessed are ye when men shall revile ye and persecute ye, and shall say all
manner of evil against ye falsely: rejoice and be exceeding glad for great is
your reward in heaven.

And the Devil shall cast some of ye into prison, and ye shall have tribulation
for ten days.

How long Lord, how long, holy, just, and true.


.

By an owner of the sword in its place, true Majestracy, true Ministry, Justice
and sound Judgment (Oh! let it flow down like a mighty torrent) but an enemy
to Tyranny, Truce Breakers, Rapines, Swearers, Liars and false prophets, who
preach for hire, and Divine for money. E. B.

THE END.
A few WORDS
To that bad Generation of people, who in their reprobate minds, blaspheme and
belie the dreadful and Just God, In saying, That he has made and created some
men to be damned, or that a set number are ordained from all Eternity to be
saved, and a set number to be damned.
BUT let all such know, that the liar is for the lake; for the Just God, who is
equal in all his ways, has not made any man to be damned, nor created any to
that intent, and the destruction of every man is of himself; for God made man
after his own image and likeness, and those that are godly are like God, but
man has sought out many inventions, and the heart of man is deceitful and
desperately wicked, and that continually, but God is now and always upright in
all his wa^es* and his Name is Love, and his Nature is Love, and he is a God of
Love, and all the works of his hands are good, and he loves them, and he is a
loving Father; and he who says, the Father decrees a Soul to Hell from all
Eternity, before the creature has transgressed, or that he was created to do
wickedly, he accuses the Just God falsely; but the same Soul that sins, as Adam
did, shall dye; for transgression brings death, and then, and not till then he
becomes a vessel of dishonor. But he was not intended so by the Holy God in
his Creation; And if from all Eternity, a certain and set number be created,
predestined, and foreordained to be saved, and damned; for what does the
Hireling preach, and for what has he his hire? I am sure, the decrees of God
are yea, Amen, and unalterable; ( Mark that) Judicious Reader, and do not be so
ignorant, as to give thy money to that Priest, who holds or preaches that
doctrine; for under one of the two decrees thou already art.

And I do believe, there is hardly a Hireling in England, that will deny it as
his belief; but that there is and was from all Eternity, a certain and a set
number predestined to be damned and saved.

Oh! how has and does this deceiver stand, and is upholden and maintained in
idleness, to make Merchandises of precious Souls for his dishonest gain.

Oh! who is able to reckon up their deceipts, or the number of the innocent
that has and are at this day deceived by them.


but the Soul which sins, shall dye the death; for the potter has power over
the clay, and though he hide himself in the remotest part of the Garden, he
will find him out, and a vessel of dishonor he shall be; and yet after they
have sinned, he desires not the death of a sinner, although he be dead in sins
and trespasses, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness, and live.
For, as I live, says the Lord, I will not the death of a sinner. ( Mark) of a
sinner; but the persecutor, and he whose tongue is at liberty, who defiles his
body, which is the Temple of the Lord, him will God destroy, although he be the
fattest Bull in Basan, or the mightiest Cedar in all Lebanon, he is but clay in
the hands of the Potter, and a vessel of dishonor he will make him. But he
that lives in his fear, and stands in his council, and is obedient to the
Fathers Commands, which are all possible, and in no wise grievous, him, he
makes a vessel of honor, and he is to him as the apple of his eye. Be Holy, be
Perfect, be Just in all your doings, all men, and let all (Mark all) that are
athirst come, and buy milk freely, and take of the water of Life without money,
and without price. Oh! Come all; and it is in vain to invite them that are
predestined from all Eternity to be damned. What I say unto one, I say unto
all, watch; and those that are decreed to Hell, need not watch; but the Lord
wills that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth;
and he is not like Pharaoh, who willed the people to make brick without straw.
Oh! the Creator does not so, for a measure of himself, he has given to every
man to profit withal. (Mark) to all, so that if he require the full tale of
brick, he does Justly, and his doings are Just, and he is equal in all his
ways; and let not him that is formed, though a subject or a King, say to him
that has formed, Why have thou made me so? But come unto him, or look unto him
all the ends of the earth, and be saved; and the Gospel has been preached to
every creature under Heaven, and it is he that knows the Fathers Will and does
it not, which shall be beaten, but it is impossible that he can do it who never
knew it; but knowledge is a delitious fruit, and pleasant to the eye, upon
which the reprobate feeds, and whom I will, I ha^den; but first he wills that
all men should be saved, or else he might have said, except Judas, except
Pharaoh, except Esau, except Pilate the Priests friend, but Gods enemy; Christ
knew from the beginning who should betray him. ( Mark) he knew it, but he did
not will him to do it, for if he had, it could not have been called treachery in
Judas; Nay, he wills not the death of a sinner, but he wills that all the
ends of the earth should look unto him, and be saved; that is his Will and
purpose, for which purpose he has and does enlighten every man that comes
into the World, that all men through him might believe and be saved; (Mark and
note that) he wills all men, I say, he did not except Judas, Pilate and
Pharaoh, if they were alive, and had not sold themselves to do wickedly, for
which cause they were given up to a reprobate mind; but there is and was some
that will not come unto him that they may have life; Wherefore such are
ordained to condemnation of old; but they that come unto him, he will in no
wise cast off, and whom he loves, he loves to the end, and he that loves him
keeps his Commands, and he that keeps them not, is of the Devil, and he that is
of the Devil, has no part in him; for God and Belial are not one in any one
thing, neither do they live together; and where Jerusalem is, Babylon cannot
stand, and where the Light with which every man is enlightened bears Rule,
there is no darkness at all, and when it is disobeyed, if heeded, the darkness
may be felt.

Jacob have I loved, and Esau have I hated, before either of those two children
had done good or evil. Yea the thing Jacob he loved, and the thing Esau he
hated, before either of those two children were begotten or born after the
flesh; and those two seeds he only loves, and hates at this day, and see that
there be not a Cain, nor an Esau be among ye, but let the worm Jacob be
cherished; for it loves the Light, and is the heritage of God; but let
murtherous Cain, although he has been Prince of the whole City, and all has
been called by his sons name, and Lord Esau of the mount come under; for though
there was a time when the seed bowed, Jacob's got past; and let the elder serve
the younger; for he sold his Birthright for his belly. Mark, he had it. A
Birthright, or a Right-birth, but he sold it, and afterward sought it with
tears; It was not the earth he wept for, although he sold his Birthright or
Right-birth, which was immortal, for that which was earthly, divelish and
sensual.

The great God who created Heaven and Earth, wills that all mankind should
come to the knowledge of the truth, and be saved, and wills not the death of
one soul of his whole handiwork, and the work of his own hands he cannot
destroy, and that is the infallible and true light, the Son of the Father, who
enlighteneth every individual man and woman that comes into the World, that
all through him may believe and be saved, and it is the particular sins of
every particular man and woman that is the cause of death, reprobation and
c^nd^^n^tion; and that soul which sins shall die; but for the word Original
fin, I do not find it in the whole Scriptures, but is a contrivance of the
false Prophets, like unto their baby-baptism; but he that believes in the Light
of Christ which he is enlightened with, and brings all his deeds to the light,
and dwells and abides in the light, and has the hope in him; He purifieth
himself as he is pure, and the wicked one cannot touch him.

Again and again, I say, if a certain, and set number from all eternity be
predestined to be saved and damned, What does the hireling preach for? or for
what has he his hire? I am sure the decrees of the living God, are yea, and
Amen, and unalterable.

And there is another vain sort of people who are as ignorant as they who say
that the Scriptures is the word of God, and Matthew Mark, Luke and John the
Gospel, and that the Latin, Greek and Hebrew is the Original; as for the word
which the Scriptures of truth truly declares of, he was in the beginning,
before the Scriptures began, and Heaven and Earth may pass away, with which
the Scriptures must pass, but the Word lives* and abides for ever, the Letter
kills, but the Word gives Life and is quick and powerful, and sharper then
any two edged-sword, and divides assunder betwixt the joints and marrow, and he
that has the word, has life; and Simon Magus could not buy the Word for
money, but ^ man may buy, learn and have the Scriptures, and be a Judas, and
quote them as the Devil did to Christ, and yet be a devil; and the Word became
flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and His Name is the word of God, and his vesture
is dipped in blood, and the Word is the Light, the Hope, the Way, the Gospel,
the Door, the Vine, the Shepherd, the fairest of Millions, the Original, the
Kin^ and Kingdom, the way to the Kingdom; and this Way, this Word, this Door,
this Hope, this King and Kingdom, this Christ, this Original is above a^, and
all in all, and in ye all, except ye be reprobates; for the Kingdom of Heaven
is within ye, and that which may be known of God is manifest in ye, and these
manifestations within does the Scr^ptures of truth truly declare o^, the same
is the Original, and not the Lat. Gr. and Heb. neither is it so much as a help
to know the true and Living God, for a man may have the tongues of men and
Angels, and yet be without God in the World, and P^^ate may understand the
Latin, Greek and Hebrew full well, and set it over the Originals head, and go
to hell with his understanding, and those that have the tongues may be mad, and
at this day do wrest the Scriptures to their own destructions, for want of
learning; as Peter said, they did of old, calling the book-learnt men an
unlearned generation; and himself had no letters; and it is like Christ spoke
to none of the meanest letter-men, when he said, they had at no time seen the
shape of God, nor heard his voice; and I am su^^ ^^ was because they were not
good Scholars, n^r willing to learn for I am the Lords witness that he is
found of all that truly learn to seek him, and learnt of all those that fear
him, for his very secrets are with them that fear him, and to know and believe
in him, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent is absolute life eternal, and he
that believes not is condemned already, and to day if ye will hear his voice,
harden not your hearts, for it is the same voice within, that calls to ye for
equity and truth in your inner parts, as did to them of old, it is not another
then what the Scriptures truly declares of, and let him that preaches, or
brings a Gospel contrary to that which they delare of, be an athema maranatha;
so it is not sufficient to have the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, and be accounted
Orthodox and an able Diviner, when the womb is barren, and the eye not kept in
the head, and that which brought the wo-to-man, or the wo-man prevail, which is
not permitted to speak in the Church, but is to be silent, and ask the husband
at home (whether they be married, or unmarried according to the flesh) and
happy, and only happy are they who are espoused to the Lamb, and can witness
the eternal marriage, the unseparable tie, which neither heights nor breadths
nor depths, nor lengths, nor tribulation, persecution, principalities, or
powers whatsoever can separate.

And he that has the word of God abiding in him which was in the beginning
(before the Scriptures, Prophets, holy men and Apostles were) by whom the World
was made before it was made, He deserneth all things, judges all things, (
Mark) all things, Orthodox, and non- Orthodox, Pilate and his Original, and
himself is judged of no man.

And the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men, and that
is the true light that does enlighten every man that comes into the World.

And this is the condemnation, that light is come into the World, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil, for every one that
does evil hates the light, neither comes to the light, least his deeds should
be reproved; but he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds might
be manifest that they are wrought in God, John 3.

And this is my testimony for the Original, the Lord Jesus, and is according to
the word, that Original which was in the beginning before the Scriptures began,
to and against all Babilonians, from whence came, and is derived all confusion
and diversity of tongues, but in the beginning, it was not so; for God was the
Word, and the Word is God.

E. B.

THE END.
A WORD
To those who are called Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Viscounts, Lords, Barons,
Bannerets, Baronets, Knights of all sorts, Esquires, Gentlemen, and to the
women who are called these men's Ladies, upon which rabble of appellations
depends and hangs most of the bad people of this Nation; And who is the
deboicher and vitiator of women-kind, I leave it to that of God in the
Conscience of these who are called Lords and Ladies, Gentlemen and Gentlewomen
to judge.
AH! Poor men and women, repent, repent, repent, for the Lords righteous
Judgment is nigh, even at the door, to be poured forth against many of you,
who even hate to be reformed; but like evil men and deceivers, wax worse and
worse, being as it were rivetted to all manner of sin, and grown old in
iniquity; And although you are called Lords, Ladies, Gentlemen and Women, yet
for the most part ye are ungentle, untame and without the yoke, your tongues at
liberty to blaspheme the Name of the dreadful, pure and living God, and
Ishmael-like, scoff and speak evil of dignities and things ye know not,
cursers, swearers, fighters and killers one of another, fierce despisers of
them that are good many of you are, and yet calls yourselves Gentlemen, etc.
When as patience and long suffering is the thing ye truly know not, and
soberness with many of ye makes no long tarrying, and with your lusts ye are
led captive at the Devils will, and amongst many, yea, very many of ye,
oppression is your constant in-mate, envy, cruelty, lust, exaltation and pride,
the very beloved of your bosoms; and in your own particulars ye hurt the
innocent, ye grieve that which would be righteous, ye slay and make merry over
the witness, swallowing down the cups of pleasure and iniquity, as the Ox
drinks water, ye oppress the seed, ye put the Lord of Life to open shame, ye
crucify him afresh, and that continually; In spiritual ^^^ne and Egypt all the
day long ye are content to dwell, and in the night season lie down in your
beastialities, and in the morning ye rise up early to drink wine, take
pleasure, and commit sin with greediness, boiling in your own lusts,
overwhelmed in gluttony, and wholly swallowed up in all manner of worldly
delight, being dead whilst ye seemingly live, and thus does many of you consume
yourselves, substance and precious time; And do ye think to live Dives his
live, and not dye his death? Can ye think to sow to the flesh all manner of
corruption all the days of your lives, and not reap the same in the day of the
Lord? And do ye think as the tree falls it will not lie, and as death leaves,
Judgment will not find? ( and from Hell there is no Redemption) Oh friends! I
can truly say, my bowels ernes for ye, who are called Nobles, and are great in
the earth, above any sort of people that are without. Also I know and feel,
that the witness of God lies near in very many of ye, although the lofty and
surly nature is not willing to bow, nor sink down and become one with the
witness, which is meek and ^owly, and calls upon ye in secret for purity in
your inner parts. Oh! let the consideration of Eternal Life constrain, and even
necessitate ye to turn in the eye of your mind to within, and consider what ye
shall do to be saved, for verily the eye of the Lord is pure and runs to and
fro through the whole earth, and all that is earthly, and cannot behold your
present iniquities. Wherefore in the fear of the Lord, cease to do evil, and
learn to do well, and let the time past be sufficient, least the Lord forthwith
dash ye in pieces, and sweep ye from the face of the earth, and your memories
utterly rot. Therefore seek the Lord with all your hearts, whilst he may be
found, for this is the day of your visitation; but your day passes away, and
the night swiftly comes wherein no man can work, yet a little while and the
Light is with ye; I say, commune with your own hearts, and be still, and in the
cool of the day, when your lusts boil^ not, sink down willingly, join and
adhere to the measure of God in your consciences which is given to man to
profit withal; Oh take it for a leader for it is the true Light which does
enlighten every man that comes into the World, that all men through Him might
believe, the same is a swift witness; for the Lord against all the evil of
your doings, and cannot nor ever did consent to sin; the same is truth, and
leads into all truth, and was before the man of sin, the house of Ham, the
stock of Nimrod the cunning hunter, Ishmael the scoffer, Lord Esau of the
Mount, bloody Cain, or the Dukes of Edom were, and is before all invention, or
the ridiculous Tithes, about which many of you fight, kill, boast and rend many
a bloody oath, and when ye have all done, it may be, prove your ancester an
ancient murderer, come into England with William of Normandy, killed an
English man, and took his possession; and as your selves sprang from blood,
rage and cruelty, so in the same many of ye continue, but beware that your
latter end be not worse then your beginning; great quantities of earth ye have,
and the Lords hand is in no ways shortened toward ye; But verily very many of
ye spend it wholly upon your lusts, and that is not the end for which it was
given; but ye are to honor God with your substance and whatsoever he has
given ye, and he that defiles his body, defiles the Temple of the Lord, and him
will God destroy; Therefore whether ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, learn
to do all to the praise and glory of God, and do not Lord it over Gods heritage
in the General nor in your own particulars, for Christ is in ye, except ye are
reprobates; and this know, that no man was, or ever shall be heir of two
Kingdoms, and God and Mammon ye cannot please, and if ye truly serve the one,
the other with all his lusts ye must deny ( Mark) all his lusts ye must deny,
and a death ye must feel upon your present lives, and that ye may come to know
the birth which is immortal; seek to know the Lord, if it be but as a consuming
fire, to burn up and consume your lusts which separates between ye and your
maker, for he that envies is a murderer, For love is of God, and every one
that loves is born of God, and knows God. If we love one another God
dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us: God is love, and he that
dwells in love, dwells in God, and God in him. Herein is our love made
perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of Judgment, because as he is so
are we in this (present) world: there is no fear in love, but perfect love
casts out fear, because fear has torment: he that fears is not made
perfect in love. If any man say, I love God, and hate his Brother, he is a
lvar. For he that loves not his brother whom he has seen, how can he love God
whom he has not seen? And this Commandment have we from him, that he who
loves God, loves his Brother also, 1 John 4. 7, 12, 16, 18, 20.
and he that lusts after a woman, has committed adultery; and I say unto ye
all above men and all things, swear not.

And to see a great man a good man, is a rare thing, even an ornament in his
Country, a strength to the righteous, a sinew to the feeble, a nerve to the
oppressed, a help to the helpless; and of all men, if ye could but see and
trust in the truth, as it is in Jesus, how transcendently happy might ye be,
even in this life, beloved of God and good men, and all evil men ma^de to fear
ye; And I do believe many of ye cannot but see the hireling and his
covetousness, deficiency and deceit, and in some measure see the truth, and
the vessel to be good; but to sea in it ye dare not go, for if the greatest of
ye deny the hireling his ungodly gain, a war he will prepare, and the waves
will beat, the billows boil, and the storms arise; But help us Lord and we
cannot perish, although the greedy man may toss us from one Goal and Dungeon to
another, and if there in faithfulness to the Lord we lay down or lives, yet we
live for ever and have life Eternal; And that is much better then the airy title
of Duke, Lords, Knights, etc. which put them all together, will not buy a
morsel of bread in this very life, and in the life to come the Beggar as the
King, and his Nobles, and Tophet is not prepared in vain; and it is well if
some of ye who are called Noblemen, and calls your selves Christians, be not
found in the day of the Lord more ignoble to the now despised Christians then
Festus, Agrippa, or Claudius Lycias were to Paul (who were called heathens) but
were truly Noble to Paul, and such Nobility I own who puts no man to death,
nor hurts no man tell the accuser, and the accused comes face to face, and
sends no man to prison, nor keeps any in bonds without signifying the cause,
and having a just Law from the Lord for his or their detention, that's equal and
just, which the Lord help ye to know and obey, for its the just which suffers
in ye, and the seed is oppressed and kept in bondage in your own particulars;
So wait upon the Lord in his fear, which is the beginning of wisdom, and ye
shall hear a voice behind ye, saying, this is the way, oh! walk in it; and if
ye be obedient, ye shall eat the good of the Land, and obedience is better then
sacrifice, and to hearken then the fat of rams; and although your sins be as
scarlet, and for number as the sand upon the Sea shore, yet if ye believe in
the Light, and love the Light, and bring all your deeds to the Light* and see
if they are wrought in God, ( I^ so, its a good deed, do it,) and that Light is
truth and is no lie, oh! dig deep for it, for its within, though the Inn be
thronged with other guests and a vast quantity of iniquity is above the seed,
and the whole lump is sowred with the wrong leaven, But the grain, the seed, or
lost groat is there, therefore seek diligently and ye shall find, and having
found it, sell all and buy the Pearl, and follow the L^mb whether soever he
goes, through good report and bad; Oh! believe in and love the truth, and abide
in the truth, and the truth shall make ye free, and purge away all your dross
and Tynne, then are you free indeed and the blood of Jesus shall cleanse ye
from all sin and filthiness both of flesh and spirit and if you forsake your
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive ye your sins, and your transgressions
he will remember no more.

And ye who are called Dukes, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, etc. for the most part
have your Education at the same fountain from whence comes the hireling and
there have them for your Tutor, and Teacher, and as yet few or none of ye
exceed or are much wiser then your Teachers to salvation; Neither indeed are ye
like to learn of him who receives the wages of unrighteousness, and stands not
himself in the council of the Lord; For if they had stood in my Council, says
the Lord, they would have turned many from their evil ways; and had they been
the Ministers of Christ, the World had not been so full of wickedness, as at
this day it is; but indeed their converts are like themselves, proud, covetous,
high-minded, and guilty of all manner of evil, as the best of them will confess
themselves to be, and that their best doings is sinful, and full of sin; and if
so, which indeed they are, it is impossible they shall convert one Soul to God;
for the prayers of the wicked are abomination to the Lord, and the very best
sacrifice that can be offered by the hands of an unclean persecutor, who hurts
or envies his Brother, or imprisons for his belly, is but as the cutting off a
dogs neck, for he that envies is a murderer; and it is natural for every
father to beget a child after his own image; and to speak to the very rational
part in ye all, If a man were to teach another man a science or a trade, he
cannot, neither is it possible for him to teach another to do that which
himself cannot do, neither thinks possible to be done, (Mark) the best of the
Priests prayers and teaching are sinful, as themselves confess, and their
imperfect prayers, may beget imperfection, lust and uncleanness, which shall
never en^^r the Kingdom, nor dwell with the holy true God.

So if ye exceed not the wisdom of your tutors and Teachers; and learn of the
light, and believe in the Light, which was before Pope, College or Priest was,
although every man of ye could preach and pray as well as they can, which is
not hard to do; I say, both ye and your prayers are abominable in the sight of
the pure God, who has no regard to the preaching and prophesying of sinful
Prophets, and themselves as well as their hearers may be cast-awayes.

And this is a great evil among ye who are called lords, knights, etc. who have
great estates, upon which account poor men oftentimes lends ye great sums of
money, and those great estates for the most part ye entail or pass away by
some private dispossession, and by wicked fraudulent ways, (and in this the
wretched Lawyer befriends ye) undoes many poor men, and at your deaths your
heirs takes the benefit of the wicked Laws, and says to their fathers
creditors, he possesses nothing but what he was born to; but the Lords curse
is upon that birth and heir-ship, so that when ye dye, your names stink, and
generations curse ye, and the child that is unborn is occasioned to speak evil
of ye; and in defense of this birthright as they call it, to be sure the
wretched Lawyer will take your heirs part although he knows the whole matter to
be unjust, and it may be himself had the greatest hand in the former cheat; so
they do not help your sons to heir your estates only, but your iniquities also.

And if I should be accounted a sower of sedition, or a subverter of the Laws,
a turner of the World up-side down, a pestilent fellow, or a Ringleader of the
sect of the Nazarenes, and thought not worthy to live, and should be put to
death for it; Yet I freely declare, that I trust in, and steadfastly believe
and hope in my God, that he will assuage the pride, allay the malice, quite
confound, for ever entinguish, and utterly make rotten and blot out the name of
Pope at Rome Tithe-monger or Hireling in England, with his Mass-houses and all
that is Popery whatsoever, devouring Lawyer, Dukes, Lords, Knights, Courts of
honor, and the thing that is now called Gentility. But a Nobleman, or a
Gentleman I truly love, who are truly so?

By a true lover of a True, Just, Meek, Gentle, Nobleman, who hates nor fears
no man, and cannot give flattering titles, or respects the person of any man.
E. B.

POSTSCRIPT.
DVkes and Marquesses I deny, but the Millitary chief or inferior Captain or
leader I own, Earls I deny, but when we have a King like David or Moses, let
that king have his companions; but let not an evil doer live in the Court, and
such companions will need no Esquires, neither desire their sons to be lifted
up with the title of Lords or Barons, where the whole household serves the Lord,
and are believers, such seeks no honor one of another; Viscounts I deny; but
let there be many good Governors in every County, for they are very much
wanting, notwithstanding there may be a Vis-count two or three; Bannerets,
Baronets, Knights of all sorts I deny, but the just Soldier whether he be
horse or foot, I own in his place, a place for whom I find, for when the
Soldiers came unto Christ, and asked him, Master, what shall we do? Be content
with your wages, and do violence to no man, accuse no man falsely.

But for the whole rabble of Duke, Marquess, Lord, Knight Gentleman by
patents; I find no room, place or example or allowance for in Scripture; but
that only declares of, ( as I do believe) one Lord, one God over all, blessed
for ever, amen, who made all kindreds, tongues and Nations of one blood; and
all these earthly Lords, and who exercise unjust dominion are come up since,
and in the Apostasy, for in the beginning it was not so; and those who are
rede^med from the earth, and risen with Christ, and only seeks the things
above, Fathoms and comprehends all these things, and are come to the beginning,
are in that which was before false Prophets, Anti-chri^^, Babylon, Pope or
Whores cup was, of which the Kings of the earth have drank, and been made
drunk, in which drunken fi^, and when all the Nations reeled under the
persecution of the beast and false Prophet, and the Saints and Martyrs blood
was swallowed down as other cups of pleasure, and the woman was fle^ into the
Wilderness, and the man-child was caught up to God; I say in that black dark
night of Apostasy, when none was able to make war with the beast, when the
Kings of the earth fought for the earth was created, and by the beasts power,
at this day is created, Lords, Knights, etc. and having lost the Cross of
Christ, the power of God within, a painted cross is borne in your ensign
without, and that is the sign of your Christianity, and so into sects and
opinions, and the Irreligious have, and do kill one another about Religion,
precedence names, titles, and the earth, and all this is earthly Devilish and
sensual.

THE END.
Here follows a relation of some signs, examples, and judgments, for the
accursed Generation, who desire a sign (for many to my face have temptingly
said, show us a sign) but they are miracles to those that believe, and let such
reach hither their hands, and with me feel, and see the wounds that the Lord of
life has received in his members, by this unnatural, and unparaleld
Generation, to whom and upon whom these examples are, and have been shown, as
it is written, the wicked shall not live out half their days; but let the
despisers behold, and wonder, and perish, for the work is wrought in their
days, although they cannot believe.
EXAMPLES.
ESSEX, John Clerk Priest, for 20. l. Tithes by him demanded of Robert Nicol of
Coln-Engain, by warrant from Dio^ysius Wakering, and William Harlackenden,
Justices so called, took and drove away from him Cattle worth 50 l. and his
greedy mind not therewith satisfied, sought after his body to; but those his
persecutors aforesaid being at London at that time, he threatened to go to
London to get a Warrant from them to put him in prison, but the Lord prevented
him, for he came home, and died in few days after.

SUFFOLK, Robert Newton Jailer of Edmund-bury and his wife, who had been very
cruel to George Fox in the 55 weeks imprisonment he suffered under him, by
beating him very often, and taking from him his bed, clothes, and a coat, and
after his release, detained him twenty eight weeks more, for (as he pretended)
a years sufficient lodging, both the jailer and his wife not long after was cut
off by death.

SUSSEX, Priest Cussin^, who caused Thomas Leycock to be imprisoned a whole
year in Horsham Goal, for speaking a few words to the people in love to their
souls, after he, the said priest had done, soon after this persecution, he was
cut off by death.

John Chatfield Priest of Horsham, who caused Thomas Leycock and Bryan
Wilkinson to be imprisoned, and caused Thomas Patchins Cattle to be drove away;
soon after fell into a dropsy, and remained in a miserable condition half a
year, and then died.

Priest Cuffly of Arundel, who was a chief instrument in Thomas Leycocks
persecution, and did strive with the Magistrates of Arundel, to have had Joseph
Fuse (who had faithfully served the Parliament in the wars 11 years) sent over
Sea as a bond-slave, suddenly after this he died.

The Priest of Green, who caused Alice West to be sent to prison, for speaking
some few words in the Steeple-house, suddenly after died.

Edward Haughton Priest of Nuthurst who was the first in this county, that
caused friends to be robbed for Tithes, was soon after cut off by death.

Priest Channel called a Doctor, one of the chiefest high Priests so counted in
this Nation, a great opposer of truth, was stricken with madness, and is out of
his natural senses.

A Tythe-monger in the Parish of Beding, who wickedly and maliciously trod out
the corn of Minion Brocket, making havoc of the same, within a week after was
cut off by death.

John Gurden a Justice so called, an eminent persecutor of the innocent people
of God in this county, whose name has spread to New England among his brethren
of the inquisition there, has been smitten by the Lord in a great weakness of
body, and dimnesse of eyesight, and has appeared as one likely to pine away
under the hand of the Lord, which is evidently turned against him, since he
became such a cruel persecutor.

Roger Gratick a Magistrate, and Priest Snelling consenters to much of the
persecution of this county, both slain with a thunder bolt in one day.

NORFOLK, John Benton, being one of Priest Claphams, witnesses of Wramplingham,
whom he procured to swear against Benjamin Lines, in a matter concerning
Tithes, who was so evidently forsworn, and his partner with him, that the
Justices themselves would not accept of their testimony; and soon after which
time, the said John Benton got into the Steeple-house of Wramplingham, and
there hanged himself in a Bel-rope.

Edw. Humt keeper of the prison of Norwich, who after Geo-Whit^head was
discharged at the Sessions, brought his action against him for 4 d. a night;
and although he had layn on the floor most part of the time, yet was by him
unjustly detained; but the Jailer was soon after cut off by death.

HARTFORD-SHIRE, Geo-Fage an unmerciful Bailiff, who for 5 s. Tithe, took away
goods worth 4 l. from Richard North, and entered into his house, none being
within but two poor children, ransacked the poor man's house, and took the very
covering from off the bed of the children, and exposed them to sufferings in
the midst of winter; for which the Lord God visited him, and cut him off
suddenly, before he had made sale of the goods.

GLOUCESTER-SHIRE, The first three friends that were committed in the County of
Gloucester the two Justice of peace which did commit them, the one called by
the name of Justice Webly, and the other called by the name of justice Raymond;
these three friends did all live in or about Thornbury, and were called to the
Bar that Assi^e next holden for the County of Gloucester, one of these Justices
which did commit them, being come into the Town that morning when the Assize
did begin, was struck with the hand of God so that he was speechless for many
days, and faint to lie in the Town before they could get him to his own house,
and since is dead, never coming to Assizes or Sessions more; and the other
Justice which committed them, was suddenly after put out of Commission, and
since is dead.

And likewise at the first coming of Friends into the County of Gloucester,
there was a man called by the name of a Captain, that did send to a Justice of
the Peace, wishing him to take a course with these people called Quakers, and
with some bitterness said, else he would take a course with them himself; but
within a few days after near his own dwelling at an Alehouse, he fell out
with a Rag-man, and killed him, insomuch that the said Captain was tried for
his life the next Assi^e following.

There were three young Women that were friends coming from a meeting, and in
the way as they came, there were people setting of Beans, and amongst them
there was a man and a great Boy, which Boy laid himself down over the
foot-path, and laying hold on one of the young women, did abuse her in such an
unseemly manner, as with modesty cannot be expressed, until the other two did
pull her from him; and afterward did set dogs on them, and both the man and
the boy did follow them with clods and stones for a great way; and within a
short time after, the same man and boy being together, so fell out that the boy
was wounded by the man, and within 24 hours after, died; and the man was tried
at the Bar for his life this last Assi^e held for the County of Gloucester.

Richard Hobbs* who had sworn in behalf of Priest Davis of Frampton, for Tithes
against John Tyler to the value of 16 or 20 s. for which the said Tyler was
ordered to pay ^0 l. 1^ s. besides 3 l. 10 s. charges; The aforesaid Rich.
Hobbs being thatching a Rick of Wheat, was questioned by the man he wrought for
about his swearing, and showed what error he had run himself into: he seemed
to be troubled for it, and said, if he had known so much before as he did
since, he would not have done it; and in a little space after the man was gone,
the said Rich. Hobb^ saw on his hand and on the Rick of Wheat the appearance of
fire, and being troubled thereat, left off his work, and went to his Master,
and told him of it, who would have persuaded him it was not so, but he affirmed
it to be so; and not many days after, the said Rich Hobbs (he being Clerk of a
Parish, and as he was Ringing a Bell) was taken up with the Belrope; and tossed
up and down, that the scull of his head was broken, and his body sore bruised,
that he lay for dead in the place; but being recovered again, he was carried to
his house, where he lay senceless 2 or 3 days, and so died.

HEREFORD-SHIRE, Henry Davis of little Ducburch, a Persecutor of many friends;
who meeting James Merrick of Ross, and because the said James did not speak to
him, turned his Gun after him, and threatened to shoot him; and in a short time
after, the said Henry Davis fell off from his horse, and broke his neck.

WORCESTERSHIRE, EVISHAM; George Kemp Mayor of ^visham, being the first, and
also an eminent Persecutor of the Innocent people of God in Evisham; shortly
after the heat of his persecution, was out off by death.

Rich. Martin, another of the persecuting Justices, was shortly after sued at
the Law by his only Son, and thereby being forced to leave his habitation,
soon after died.

Edwa^d Youn^, Mayor of Evisham aforesaid, who exceeded all his Brethren in
persecution; not long after he was out of his Maiorality, he also was cut off
by death.

Samuel Gardner, one of the persecuting Justices of Evisham aforesaid, not long
after his persecuting the people of God, he fell distracted, so that he was
kept tied in his bed.

Thomas Ordway, one of their Council, a great professor of the Scriptures; a
friend to truth lent him a book, which was in answer to a Catechism set forth
by 42 Priests, and after he had looked over it, he wrote on the backside of the
book, It is pity but all such books were burned, and them that made them, and
set his name to it; but very suddenly after was he cut off by death.

HUNTINGTON-SHIRE, Thomas Lawrence Priest, who had sued 4 of the Parish of Coln
in the Exchequer, and one of the 3 friends meeting him on the way, asked him
what he sued him for; the Priest very wrathfully and churlishly answered him, I
will speak with you another time; but within 10 days he was cut off, and his
body laid in the earth.

LINCOLNSHIRE, Francis Ball of Sibsey, who sued and cast into Prison Edmund
Woolsey, for Tithes, and the said Francis had told several people, that he was
persuaded, that if Edmund Woolsey did believe in his Conscience that he the
said Francis Ball had right unto the Tithes, he would have paid it him; and yet
for all that he the said Francis Ball kept him in Prison. But the Just
indignation of the Lord is since fallen upon the Family of the said Francis
Ball, for his Wife presently after died, and two more of that Family, the
Daughter, and her Child; and the people hereabout concluded it to be a just
Judgment from the Lord.

DERBY-SHIRE, One Brittlin of Thorncloft, a Steward of a hundred Court, who had
Judged Thomas Boyer to pay about 4 times what the principal of the Tithe came
too; soon after the Lord did cut him off by death.

SHROP-SHIRE, Edw. Dod, who wrote a false accusation against Friends, and is a
great Proselite of Sam. Smith Priest of Cresit, who caused many Friends to
suffer; fell off from a Bridge and broke his leg; and the Priest came to visit
him, and said, one step further, and into Hell; and he said, his people were a
damned Crew, and he had preached 7 years to them, and not one brought to the
knowledge of God.

HAMP-SHIRE, Justice Cobb who had been a great Persecutor of Friends in
Winchester Goal, and would not suffer Stephen Bevi^ Prisoner, to work in the
Prison on his own Calling; and he being Judge at another Sessions, would no^ do
any thing toward the releasement of the Servants of God in Prison, though
their unjust imprisoment was laid before him, but gave order to restrain other
Friends from coming to them; and several papers being sent to him for Justice,
the last of which was, that being six men and one women in Prison, that the
women or any one of them might have the liberty to go forth and provide
necessaries for the rest, to bring them in work, and carry out work, and bring
in food and such things as were necessary, which reasonable and righteous thing
was by him denied; and within a few days after the said Justice Cobb went to
his bed, not appearing to be sick, and in the Morning was found a dead Corpse.

Pistor Hide a Councellor, who sometimes sat as Judge where Friends have been
tried, who refused to do them Justice, and several times acted unjustly against
them, went forth in the streets at Winchester, (being the place of his
residence) where were dogs fighting, which he did strive to part, and presently
afterward went into his house, and sat down, and was suddently struck dead:

Martin Miller, being Clerk to William Wither Justice, who committed James
Potter, being at Harrow was strock down by the horses, and the harrows drawn on
him, and he was sorely bruised and torn, and lived a few days after, and was
by this accident much troubled in conscience for what he had sworn against
James Potter.

A laboring man being at work in harvest upon the abovesaid Justice Withers
land, was suddenly struck dead in a tempest of thunder and lightening.

WIL^SHIRE. William Stompton Priest, who for seven shillings tithes caused to
be taken from Richard Hawkins eleven sheep, worth fifty five shillings at five
shillings a sheep, and sold them at two s. and six pence a sheep; But Jeremy
Wig who bought the sheep died presently after; and the said Priest also soon
after was fain to have his leg sawn off, and said he would forgive any one that
would knock him on the head, and died a miserable death.

SOMERCET-^HIRE. Thomas Dowlesse who had much abused two friends, John Dandee
and Peter Walter; As Peter Walter was speaking to the people, this Dowless did
often swear he would stop his mouth with his staff, and did often strike the
said Peter Walter, endeavoring to hit him on the month, and in a short time
after the said Dowless being at work (and he having but one eye before) a stick
strok in that eye, and put it out, and so remains blind.

Thomas-Edwards Priest of Kingston-Seymor who caused Edmund Beeks of Bl^^kwel,
to be committed to prison, the said Priest being at the Town of Axbridg, and
being drunk, fell off from his horse, and broke his neck, by which means Edward
Beeks was freed out of prison.

William Cole of Naylsey called Justice, who before had sent Edith Michel, and
William VVilley to prison only for going to the Steeple-house, and the one of
them did not at all speak to the Priest; shortly after a man was brought before
him for stealing of Sheep, the said Justice Cole, told him that he would send
him to the Goal to the Quakers, and he and they should be sent altogether to
the Gallows; soon after the said William Cole being providing to ride abroad,
was suddenly taken ill, and died the same day.

Nathaniel Sanders, and John Langley, called Churchward ens of Keynsham, who
had taken goods from friends, for their Steeple-house, died both in the
forepart of their year; John Laungley upon his deathbed said, he was persuaded
the Quakers were an honest people, and whereas he and Nathaniel had taken goods
from them, he had paid the sums of money charged on them, and gave a charge
to his Servant, that if he died, those goods should be restored to them again,
and he took his servant-maid by the hand, and made her promise him to do it.

Robert Allen of Bath, who had very much abused Thomas Morford in the street,
and had beat him with a great staff, this Robert Allen had a fine lusty young
boy that was able to go up and down, miserably scalded to death.

John Boyse Mayor of Bath aforesaid, who had committed the above said Thomas
Morford to Prison for declaring against the deceit of the Priest, by which he
remained in prison near two years, this John Boyse Mayor, was smitten with a
sore disease in his legs and lims, for the most part of his Majorality, also
the Jailer was smitten with the same lamenesse; so as he was fain to leave the
Prison, and then came another, who Tyranized over the said Thomas Morford, and
forced him out of his room, and from his bed, and other abuses, and the Hand of
the Lord fell also on him, and cut him off by death suddenly.

Thomas Hurlstone of Milbury Osmond a common disturber of Friends in their
meetings, and at one time climed upon a wall behind John Scaff while he was
speaking to the people in a meeting at Evershot, and fell down upon him, and
struck him down to the ground, from the place whereon he stood, and when he had
so done, went his way, and received six pence in strong drink for his
wickedness.

And at another meeting in the same Town of Evershot, as John Scaff was
speaking to the people, the said Thomas Hurlstone came into the street, without
the door of the said house, in a very rude and brutish manner, with a bull
hide about him, and the horns on his head, sporting among the rude people,
endeavoring to make a disturbance; the said Hurlstone would often mock, and
scoff, and deride the people of God, and as he met them, would be thrusting out
his tongue at them.

And at another meeting at the same Town, on the same day there was to be a
Bull-baiting, not far from the said Evershot, unto which the said Thomas
Hurlstone was going, and as he was passing through Edminster, he told some
people that he should have been to day at the Quakers meeting, but that he was
going to the Bull-baiting, and was boasting how he had served John Scaff, and
being at the Bul-baiting, the Bull broke forth, and came full at the said
Thomas Hurlstone, and struck one of his horns under his chin near his throat,
up into his head, into or near his brain, and he falling down, yet rose up
again, and with his tongue hanging out of his mouth, and presently sunk down
and died.

Humphry Smiths Testimony of some Examples, as he was an eyewitness of.
DORSET-SHIRE, When I was Prisoner in Dorchester, the hand of the Lord was havy
upon them, like as his hand was heavy upon Ashdod and the Philistines, who had
taken and kept the Ark of God, for about twenty or more died in that time I was
there, that were in the Goal, and prisoners in it, and great was the cry
concerning it, so that the report was, the plague was there, and Judge
Nicholas, who cannot stand in Gods Judgment, durst not come near for fear of
the hand of God, but had a place set up in the field, to keep the Assi^es in.

And also in Dorchester Prison, a most wicked man being condemned to die, came
a beging to our Chamber door, and being not spoken to, was filled with envy,
and came into the chamber, and shut the door, having murder in his heart; the
which I perceiving, I rose up in the strength of the Lord, by which he was
overcome, without any outward resistance, and though I afterward laid his
murtherous intentions to his charge several times, yet he never denied it; and
shortly after the heavy Judgments of the Lord came upon him, that for many
days and nights, he could not forbear quaking and trembling (the Devils
trembled, I ^n. ^) in most dreadful horror, that many people wondered at him,
who though he had food, looked as if he had been almost famished, and could not
die, until his flesh rotted away in many places, and he most ghastly to behold;
he often uttered horrible words from the pit of darkness, at last dying in a
sad and miserable manner, terrible to the beholders.

James Munden Priest of Burton, having some Queries delivered to him by Francis
Tailor, he said he would go and fetch a warrant to have him before a Justice
that day, but the Justice not granting it, he sent the Queries back to Francis
Tailor, and when his wife came unto him, she in a rage tore the paper of
Queries, and said to him, that as she did tear that paper, so the Devils should
tear his soul in hell hereafter, (a bad answer to the Queries) and other times
she abused friends in their meetings, and her children threw stones at them.
Not long after, this Priest was suddenly struck dead, and never spoke word
more, though he had been preaching two several times that day, (or rather
deceiving the people words) and the wages of unrighteousness being cursed to
him, he died in debt, and left his wife and children in poverty and misery.

Also a young man of the same Parish, and a follower of the same Priest, being
very bitter to friends, and sought occasion against his own brother; Upon him
also the Judgments of the Lord came, and after he had been speechless for a
time, he roared and howled in a loud and hideous manner, being in a distracted
condition, and had many to hold him; he shortly after died, and many were
amazed at him.

Edward Ireland a tithing-man, dwelling in South Periot, who scoffed at
friends, and persecuted them with much cruelty, and took some out of there
houses, and carried them before some called Justices, and in the eleventh
month, 58. he went to Blanford Sessions with Jeremiah French the Priest of
South Periot, who went there to lay in false information against John Gundry,
who was cast into prison by Jeremiah French, the said Ireland also having a
hand in it, and at that Sessions John Gundry was brought forth and so fined,
forty shillings to the Protector, and forty shillings to the Priest; but
Jeremiah French and Edward Ireland, rode away from Blanford, toward South
Periot, before those called Justices had really fined John Gundry, or remanded
him to prison again, and yet as they rode homeward through Evershot, Edward
Ireland boasted that John Gundry would be sent to prison again; who came home
to his house, but within two days the Lord struck him dead suddenly in his
house, which struck a dread in many which had a hand in persecuting the Lords
people, but especially one Richard Farnham who had also been a great persecuter
of the Lords people in that place, who came in to see Edward Ireland at the cry
of the people, and when he came into the house, he fell down as dead, and many
of the people there ran about him, and did shake him up, and did strive much
about him; so he recovered life again, but the dread of the Lord lay upon him,
that he was sick for a time after, and then for a short season the Lords people
had rest from their persecutors.

D^VO^. When I was prisoner at EXETER, a Murderer being condemned to die, was
brought into the Chamber to us, and his hands unbolted, and a naked knife in
his hand, and so left with us; but the Lord preserved us from any hurt by him,
and he was afterward hanged for killing a man with a knife.

The Mayor of Tiverton in Devon-shire, by whose order many friends had their
goods spoiled and taken from them, and many were put into prison, was about the
fourth or fifth month in the year 1658, cut off by the hand of God in a
miserable manner, his bowels consuming within him; and as one Fowler of the
same Congregation and fellowship with him, and of the same Town told a friend,
it lay upon him to go to see the Priest, and to acquaint him that it was the
hand of God upon him for his cruel usage of those people called Quakers.

One of the Constables of EXETER, a notorious Professor, hanged himself in his
own house.

The Bridewel-keeper who had done very much wrong to friends who were under his
custody, and to others that came to visit them in prison, making several lies
against them, soon after hanged himself by his bed side.

It is reported that many of the Professors in Exon have hanged and drowned
themselves since first that place begun to persecute the people of God.

As Thomas Salthouse and Miles Halhead were traveling toward Plymouth, in
obedience to the Lord, were apprehended at Honington, and sent to EXETER by a
guard of Musketeers and from thence to TA^NTON with a sealed letter and a
guard, to Colonel Buffet, who as he was enjoined by the said letter, wrote
another to send them from Tything to Tything until they came to their own
Countries; but the officer that had the pass, and was to be their convoy to
the next Tything had not gone above a mile, until he fell down in the mire, and
could not stand upon his feet, although they lefted him up; thus the Lord made
way for their enlargements, and manifested his Righteous Judgments upon the
Persecutors of the innocent; so the Justice, seeing the hand of the Lord
against their formed weapons and instruments employed against the servants of
the Lord, released them.

The first that rose up against the people of God in this County, was one
Thomas Pentlow, called Justice, that in two years space committed 9 of the
servants of the Lord to Prison, and not one of them was proved transgressors,
either of the Law of God, nor the Nation, and some of them kept above a whole
year in Prison, and immediately after the beginning of his persecution, the
Lord smote him with an incurable disease in his body, that he never went forth,
as formerly he did many times, but lay roaring night and day, near two years;
and when he lay thus in torment, he committed every one of the people of the
Lord to Prison that was brought before him, though not any Law was
transgressed; and never repented to the day of his death.

Next one John Brown called Justice, committed one Henry Williamson to Prison,
for going into Kettering Steeple-house, though he never spoke one word, but
stood peaceably all the time; and as soon as the Priest had done, the people
dragged him forth by the hair of the head, and struck him on the head and face
with their Bibles, and he never speaking one word; and John Brewa was an eye
witness to this barbarous usage of him, and never reproved the rude people for
it; but committed him to an Alehouse, with a charge that none of his friends
should come near him; and the next day, contrary to all Law, committed him to
the common Goal, and there he has continued 42 weeks, and never any accuser
appeared against him. And it was observed, that just forty weeks after, as it
was accounted, it being the just account of women, his Wife brought forth a
man-child into the World, so deformed in many parts of the body, many of the
members being out of order, as hardly ever any was seen to be the like; and as
soon as it was born, he would not let it be seen by Neighbors, but by those
that were there at her delivery, and so keeps it priprivate to this day; and it
is observed, that he used all the members of his body to act wickedness against
the innocent, so the Lord visited his sin upon his child, which that night
might be begotten.

This Brown called Justice, committed Marmaduke Storr, and one John Whitehead,
one week after the committing of the other, because they could not for
Conscience sake swear to the Oath of Objuration, though they denied what was
contained in it, and kept them 41 weeks in Prison; And another time he and one
Robert Buyclrek of the Peace, came with armed Soldiers where there was diverse
of the people of the Lord assembled at a meeting in Isham on a first day, and
came violently into the house, and haled the people forth of doors, and struck
some of them, and said, they would break up their meetings; and committed one
Thomas Stubs to the house of Correction from the Meeting, with a strickt charge
that he should be severely whipped, which was done; and since has committed
diverse other friends to Prison; and said to one John Garret, that he hoped to
have a place in Heaven at Gods right hand, for his punishing of the Quakers,
and wished he had more power in his hand; this deformed child of his is never
able to go while it lives, and all his other children were very sickly, and
this has been healthful and lusty, and is above three years of age, and kept
privately.

One Peter Whaley Mayor of Northampton, who was mad to persecute Friends, in
the year of his Maiorality did many wicked actions, as committing some Friends
to Prison, and much abusing Friends that came to visit Friends that were in
Prison, he making them passes, and sending them from Constable to Constable;
and in the middle of his year he went forth of the Town, and the Lord struck
him off of his horse, and he died; and one that lay in Prison, for speaking to
a Priest that he had formerly committed, was as soon as he was dead,
immediately released.

One William Somes a Carpenter in Willingborrow, a lusty young man, was at the
Towns end a sawing with another, one evening as William Dewsberry and Francis
Ellington, and another Friend was passing to a Meeting, William Dewsberry
seeing him, spoke these words to him, Fear God and repent, and give heed to the
Light of Christ in your Consciences, or else you perish eternally, with some
other words to this effect; the said William Somes began much to laugh and to
jear at him, but William not regarding that, passed away; and immediately he
was struck with lameness and pains that instant, and so has continued near ^
years, and can hardly speak any plain words, and has lost the use of his limbs
of the one side.

One Oliver ^letsoe ^ Draper in Wellinborrow* having much enmity against
Friends, as Friends have passed by his shop to Meetings, he would encourage his
son about 12 years of age, to abu^e them by throwing dirt and stones at them as
they passed by; presently after, the house that he lived in, being a stone
built house, one morning about eight in the morning, the house over his shop
fell down to the ground: and his son that formerly abused Friends with his
servant was accidentally in the street, not knowing any thing, that the house
fell down to the ground, and one of the stones fell upon the boys head, and had
very nigh slain him, much wounding him, and great loss came to his father, the
house falling upon all his goods, and much of the goods were buried so under
the rubbish, that they were never found until they were rotten.

One Squire Willmor so called, of Sywe^l, having one Richard Brown Tenant to
him, and Rented a farm of him and his predecessors 30 or ^0 years; the said
Richard owning truth, and having meetings kept at his house in Sywell, the rich
man sent to him, and told him that if he would not give over having meetings
kept at his house, he should not stay any longer then until his year was up, he
saying to him that he co^ld find no other fault with him in any thing; but the
said Richard would not yield to him to deny meetings, he put him forth of his
farm; and immediately after, this great man having but one son and heir, the
Lord struck him with death; and that as he would not suffer an Heir of Heaven
to dwell in one of his houses, except he would deny his God; so his son and
heir should not live in any of his fathers possessions, but in the house of
darkness was shut up, to the great grief of his father.

One Robert Guy who is Clerk of the Peace, who has been one of the greatest
enemies to the people of God in this County, and has dealt subtly with the
servants of the Lord, and have stirred up the Magistrates against Friends, when
they have been brought to Sessions before them; did say to Francis Ellington
one day, that the false prophets that Elija slew might as well plead they were
persecuted then, as the Quakers in England. The said Francis was brought to the
Sessions, and there two wicked men did falsely swear against him, and say, That
he did curse and deny the true God that made Heaven and Earth, at a Meeting;
and though they swore this, yet as soon as the Jurymen were gone forth, they
did in the presence of the Court, one of them, deny it again, and confessed the
truth; and yet Robert Guy would take no notice of it, neither would he suffer
one of the said Francis Ellingtons witnesses to declare what he did speak,
being 5 of them, except they would first swear, which he knew they could not,
and so suffered the innocent to be committed in Prison; and he himself did
afterward charge the Jailer privately to whip him, once in two weeks, or else
(he told the Jailer) he should loose his place, which the Jailer confessed to
the said Francis; but this was observed, that the said Francis one day meeting
with the said Guy upon the road, was moved of the Lord to speak to him, and bid
him give over persecuting the people of God, otherwise the Judgment of the
Lord would suddenly overtake him; and this was three days before the Sessions,
and he not believing, but suffered the said Francis to be cast into Prison, and
there to be by his private order whipped once a fortnight, and to be kept from
his Wife and six small children, and from his trade and employment, to the
ruining of him and his Family; Just seven days after, the Lord struck his Wife
with death, and made 7 or 8 children of his motherless, and in one week his
Family were all disperced, and his children put forth, and his house left
desolate to this day. So our God is known by his executing Judgment, and the
wicked are trapped in the works of their own hands, and thus in all ages has
the Lord been known, and it is left upon record, and in this age all the
children of the light see the Lords footsteps, praises be to him for ever.

Also one Wyat living at bugbrook, a great professor for many years, hearing
that a Neighbor living in the same Town owned Truth, and began to go to
Friends Meetings, he wrote a whole sheet of paper against the Truth of God, and
most blasphemously belyed the people of God, which he in scorn called Quakers,
and sent this his Letter to his Neighbor aforesaid, and challenged him or any
of his Friends to give him an answer unto it; but in a few weeks after before a
friend could return him an answer; the Lord answered him by taking away his
life.

Also one John Palmer, whom the World calls Quaker, sent a book which was set
forth by a friend to a Priest living three miles from Harborrow, and desired
him to read it, the Priest was troubled at what was written in the book, and
said that he would write another to confute it: and while he was writeing
against the truth, the Lord struck him with death suddenly, that he died, and
never finished that work.

Also one Thomas Hensman, one who was Warden, so called, of Willingborrow, and
when any friends were moved to go to the Steeple-house, he would be always
ready at the command of the Priest, there to hale them forth of the
Steeple-house; and he did once at the desire of the Priest swear falsely against
one Elihu Hunt, that she disturbed the Priest, when she did out ask him one
question after he had done; and by his swearing Thomas Pentlow committed her to
Prison; presently after, the Lord smo^e the said Thomas with an uncurable
disease, and when he lay upon his deathbed he declared to Neighbors, that
nothing troubled him so much as swearing and persecuting the said Elihu, and
wished that he had never had a hand in it, and at the same time died.

Henry Wood of Bury in Lancaster, riding to Manchester market, Priest Bradsham
rod up to him, and called him knave, and took away his hat. At Bo^ton the said
H. Wood was much misused, and had his hair pulled off his face, by T. Tislesly.

Dol Hodgkin, was struck by the Priest of Wakefield, and had like to have been
killed with a hammer, by a blacksmith.

YORK. Priest of Warsworth struck and punched G. Fox. The same Priest took away
Thomas Rawlinsons hat.

LONDON. Priest Griffin of Bred-street, struck Robert Ingram sorely over the
head with a Cane many blows.

The Priest of Heburn, struck Jo. Sley several times over the breast.

And those things have happened for the Admonition of the children of those who
have persecuted the innocent without cause, and are written for the
encouragement of such as may hereafter be persecuted for the testimony of
Jesus, that they may look unto him and be saved, who has delivered us out of
six troubles, and in seven he will not forsake us.

A Catologue of some few of the fighting Priests.
PRiest Shaw of Aldingham beat Anna Clater.

Priest Roulands of Areloth, beat Robert Cooper, because he would not speak to
him.

Priest Willon of Kerby, struck Luke Benson, till he broke a thick cane
therewith.

Priest Bennet of Cartmel, came out of an Alehouse being in drink, beat
Richard Raper, and boasted, that he beat him, and struck up his heels.

Priest Brook of Cartmel-fell, came drunk into the house, where Thomas Rollison
dwelt, beat him, violently would have cast him into the fire.

Priest Wait of Gargrave stood by, while his wife burnt eighteen sheets of
paper, holding it to the face of William Wa^kinson, to burn him with, but the
Priest never so much as reproved her, or restrained her.

Priest Dorton of Shape being drunk, drew his Tuck at Daniel Tompson, in the
street as he passed, but being horsed, he fled and escaped, he beat Richard and
William Stray, pulled them by the hair, luged his ears, and came to William
Strayes house with his tuck to seek him, and threatened his wife therewith.

Priest Ripling of Crosby, came rideing into the meeting* where the people of
God was meet, and rid through them with violence.

Priest Nichols of Acton, beat James Parnel, and broak his head against a stall.

Priest Warwick of Aspeater, beat John Grave and his wife, and shed the blood
of Jonah Person, at a meeting.

Priest Burton of Sedburg, beat John Blackling, and pulled him by the hair of
his head in his high place.

He also beat Richard Speight, and John Hall as is said at Huperam Chapel.

Priest Cowleden of Langsterdale beat Edward Edwards, and shed his blood upon
the high way; Also he beat James Tenart.

Priest Atkinson of Granton beat Bernard Addisom in the highway, and broke his
staff over his face.

Priest of Marrick beat Christop. More, and also he beat Joseph Longsdale in
Richmond marketplace for reproving him for it.

Priest More of Richmond beat Christoph. More with a flayl, insomuch that its
like he had killed him if help had not come.

Priest Confit of Barton beat Dor. Tod for coming to visit his wife.

I Christo. Iron upon a first day, was coming from a meeting of Friends, and
coming along the Highway, I lighted of one Parson Feak of Standrop, in the
county of Durham, who did rageingly fall upon me, and did beat me, and so
passing along the way, and my mouth never opened, nor one word said, he came
again, and gave me a great blow, and made me stagger, and struck off my hat,
and had a Rapier-staff that he had at Steeple-house, which he drew a part forth
of the Scabbard, but put it up again, and thus the Parson did to me, and not
one word, and thus we parted.

This same Feak beat Thomas Tailor, Christopher Atkinson, and Thomas A^ery,
coming along the high way, coming from Ravensworth Castle.

Priest Feak of Staindrop, beat Christo. Atkinson, trailed him at the horse
side by the hair of the head, by the highway, and his wife behind him, bunched
him on the face.

Lewis Floid Priest of Otteringam did tear William Dewsbu^ies hair off his
head, and struck him as they passed together near Oteringam in much rage and
fury.

Thomas Andrews Priest of Wellingborow laid violent hands on Anne Ellington,
and drew her to the fire to have caused her to have burned a letter she carried
to him, and bruised the sinnew of her arm.

Priest Tho. Shaw of Aldingham, beat James Lancaster for speaking to him in
private, he also beat Miles Falhead, and shed his blood.

Linc. Flecher Priest of Dean in Cum bad the people fight for the Gospel* and
caused Thomas Stubs to be extremely beaten.

Matthew Bake^ a great High Priest, who said that Adam before he fell, had a
dark light of nature in him that showed him sin, etc. A friend in the truth bid
him prove it, but he could not, his lies being laid upon him, he got up in a
great rage, and struck F. Ellington.

As Rob. Chintin was going to a meeting, Priest Fortrey asked him why he run
after other men's wifes, (there being a woman or two before, going toward the
meeting) and with many other obscene unclean words, rayled at him, and beat him
with his staff, so that for a month or more his han^ was Iame.

Thomas Curtis of reading being in the Steeple-house there, asking Priest Web a
question, was sorely pulled by the hair of the head, by the priests adherents.

The aforesaid Curtis was also abused, and smote by the priest of Causham,
until the Mayor himself came and took him forth of the Steeple-house.

Priest Feak of Stanethrop, beat Christopher Jones of Barnard Castle.

Priest Jenkins with four men, to whom he gave bond to save harmless for
whatsoever they did, who by false warrant seized upon, and drove away 100
sheep, and other Cattle from Captain John Elliot; his shepherds wife owning one
sheep, and desiring to have it, one of this priests men knocked her down, and
broak her head in two places, and for some time she lay for dead, continuing
deaf unto this day; the aforesaid Captain Eliots wife being there also, the
priest bid one of his men knock her down, and kill her* and he would bear him
out; at which command one of them struck her on the breast with a great staff
which might have killed her, but she having a young child which did suck,
preserved her, but the child sucking the putrified milk, took a vomiting and
died; and this is murder in the sight of God and men.

And no murderer, nor striker shall inherit the Kingdom.

THE END.

