^ OR ^HE Calamities of ENGLAND With the AUTHORS of them (...) ^^eat HAPPINESS
and Happy GOVERNMENT OF K. CHARLES II ENSUING, Miraculously FORESHEWN by the
Finger of GOD in two wonderful Diseases, the REKETS AND KING'S EVIL: Wherein is
also shown and proved,

I. That the ^EKETS after a while shall seize on no more Children, but (...)
VANISH through the MERCY of GOD, and by MEANS of K. CHARLES II.

II. That K. CHARLES II is the LAST of KINGS which shall so HEAL the KING'S EVIL.

Discovered by the Hand of the Lord upon his unworthy Servant, and his
Majesty's Subject JOHN BIRD

And by (...) public for the Glory of GOD, Honor of the KING, and comfort of
the PEOPLE of God.

Joh. 16 13. -- and he will show you things to come. (...). Printed for Fra.
Soul, and are to be sold by Robert Harrison the next Shop to Gre^ Church in
Leaden-H^^^ Street. 1661.

To our Dread Sovereign Lord CHARLES II By the Grace of God, of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, King.
SIR,
I Here humbly offer into your Royal Hands a Message sent from Heaven for your
Majesty's acceptance. Written it is in the mystical Characters of Two Diseases,
and partly upon your Royal Hands, which now heal one of these Diseases, and
shall do the other. The signification whereof in sum is to show, How
miserable your Kingdoms have been through want of your Royal Father first, and
since of your Majesty; How happy these your Dominions shall most certainly be
made by your Religious, Just, and Merciful Government; and lastly, what shall
be done by Almighty God for you here upon the earth, in recompense of your
Royal Fathers our Late Sovereigns precious blood, your Majesty's Wrongs and
Afflictions, your Constancy in the true Religion against so many Temptations,
your Maintaining of the Honor of God in your religious care of Gods Worship,
and your Compassion and Love toward your Majesty's poor oppressed Subjects. Nor
let it seem more strange unto your Majesty, that Diseases should portend such
great matters, than a Star, that Star, which with the next rising Sun after
your joyful Nativity, shining with the glorious Sun as gloriously in his
ascension, and even at midday, should design your Majesty's Person, and
future Glory, which undoubtedly it did. For there is a similitude and
proportion betwixt sins and calamities on the one side, and bodily Diseases on
the other; for both disquiet and disease us; as likewise therefore betwixt the
healer of the one, and the taker away of the other.

Far be it from me, Gracious Sovereign, to require from your Majesty credit to
what I shall affirm (nor is it just I should) upon my bare assertion. Let your
Majesty's Reason and Royal Wisdom judge, whether that I deliver be probable
or not. For such Reason as is gross and depraved, or merely Natural, cannot
pierce into those deep matters, but such which is fine, and yet helped and
directed by rule of Holy Scripture. For Ignorance, Prejudice, and Rashness
cannot, and Interest will not discern these Mysteries.

Let not the meanness of the discoverer discredit the truth of these things to
your Majesty, which may call to mind, that the glad tidings of our Saviors
Nativity was by the Angels first made known to Shepherds.

If I shall speak (Royal Sovereign) in some places very freely, or peradventure
too boldly, give me leave, or pardon me, Merciful Prince, who being a great
King, cannot but be very sensible what a crime it should be for a credited
Messenger to temper the Message of the King of Kings.

It now remains, that these things which are to come be believed, that Almighty
God be entreated, and have the Glory of all; on your Majesty's part, that you
prepare your self for the embracing so great Hopes; on your Subjects, that we
all repent, and with humble thankfulness for so great mercies toward us, our
Love and Reverence toward so blessed a Prince our Sovereign be increased. And
that all this may be done, is and shall be the continual prayer and earnest
endeavor of,

Your Majesty's ever Loyal and Loving Subject, JOHN BIRD.

The EPISTLE to the READER.
IT is now twenty years ago since when this formerly united Kingdom divided
into parties, that I also clave in my opinion to one (for who could do
otherwise?) even to that side, which so much pretended to the love of Religion
and Justice, that these and not self-love was their end. What I did was
altogether from the first to the last peaceably, which notwithstanding, the
distinction spoiled my aged Father for the same cause and myself of our goods
and quiet habitation. We bare it patiently. But this Virgin Assembly quickly
forgot the guide of her youth (although she still wiped her mouth, and said;
She had committed no evil) to the neglect and perverting of all Justice. And
here I left them. What comfort had I then in this my condition? If I lost what
I had for Christ's sake, as God and my Conscience are witness I did, I am
promised Recompense in this world a hundredfold, and do acknowledge that I
have found it, though not in riches. For first I am hereby more assured,
because I abhor all Injustice, that I am in that small number which the
Scripture so often calls Just men. Secondly, I am comforted, that such times
have been of old, and such as God detests, and will punish, Jer. 5. 1. Lastly,
in abundant recompense to the utmost of what the Lord hath-promised, such
Secret Mysteries from the first to the last have been from God revealed unto
me, as may appear in a Treatise written by me called ROMAVATUM, wherein the
History of the Religion, Policy, and Destruction of the City of Rome is
discovered to have been portended in the Theology, and Fables of the ancient
Heathen Greek and Latin, etc. not quite finished, Next (through the mercy of
God) in my Annotations upon Ezekiel, chap. 1. etc. now ready for the Press;
beside this here presented. Reader farewell, and let God have the praise of all
which is true herein, as from whom it came; all the errors and imperfections I
challenge as mine own, excepting some few mistakes of the Printers.

From my Chamber in Sion College in London, Jan. 24. 1660. JOHN BIRD.

LEst I should incur your blame for not presently falling upon the main work,
in showing you instantly, how the REKETS and KING'S EVIL foreshew and declare
the promised things, and that I may not justly deserve worse, in telling you so
great a Paradox, having not first made known unto you, how such a matter may be
done; I judge it here fit to let you know that I have prepared this other as a
better way, which may by Gods assistance bring you to a fuller and clearer view
of whatsoever is pretended in the Title, if you enter upon it, and go along
orderly, as it here lies before you.

IN old time when Israel was in Egypt, and afterward when Israel and Judah
dwelt in their own land, and when the Jews were carried into Babylon, the
Almighty Lord was wont to send them Prophets in evil and sinful times, Prophets
so inspired with his Spirit, that they knew infallibly, and did show unto that
people most certainly, what things, both good and bad, and how they should
befall them; that their oppressors and the wicked might not live secure, nor the
oppressed and righteous be discouraged. But in a short time after our Saviors
Ascension, such Prophets which were thus miraculously instructed ceased to be
among men. By which difference of the times, those from these, it might at
first seem, either that God loves not the Christians so tenderly as formerly he
did the children of Israel, or (at least) that the Christians now adays have no
need of such forewarnings as the children of Israel were wont to have. Divine
and miraculous premonitions were so usual to them, that they accounted it, and
complained of it as an affliction, when they wanted them. This appears true
from the words of Asaph, a man left in Judea, when the rest were carried into
Babylon by Nebuchadnezzar, complaining of the want of a Prophet, and Signs
(which they were formerly accustomed unto) to declare and foretell how long
their captivity after the present destruction of the City and Temple was yet to
last. For thus he speaks, Psa. 74. 9. We see not our Signs, there is no more
any Prophet, neither is there among us any that knows how long. Albeit
Jeremiah the Prophet had formerly prophesied unto them of 70 years captivity,
and Daniel, and Ezekiel were both now in Chaldea, and did prophecy. Whereby it
appears, as I said, that Asaph was left in the land, and that he speaks of
the remainder of the Jews which were left in the same place with him, and
lastly, that this Psalm was written after the carrying away of Jeremiah into
Egypt. Concerning the difference of those old times before our Saviors coming
from these, although we should grant it true, and we must grant it to be so in
some kind, touching Prophets, yet is the Assumption false to conclude from
thence; That God loves not the Christians so tenderly as formerly he did the
children of Israel; for how little soever the Lord loves any of his children,
he accounts and names them his Jewels, and is as tender of them as of the
apple of his eye, who spared not his only and beloved Son, but gave him to dye
for the least of them all. But this is an inestimably greater favor then to
premonish and forewarn them of that which is to come; a thing which he has
done even to his greatest enemy the devil (though for a different end from that
for which he forewarns his children) letting him know his secret counsel
touching Saul and his Sons. For did not the Lord reveal unto Satan, that Saul
and his three sons should be slain (even as it came to pass, and the Spirit
told Saul) the day following? 1 Samuel 27. 19. And while we consider, that the
Lord is unchangeable in his love, For he is not a man that he should repent,
this cannot be the cause, want of Gods love, that Christians are without
divining Prophets. In the second place, as little reason is there to say, That
we which are Christians have no need of forewarnings of our suffering, nor of
our deliverance. As if the oppressions in Egypt were more than under the Pope,
and these not sevenfold greater then those; as the burning in a fiery furnace
or in fire than making and burning of brick by, and in such a place; or the
thraldom of the body greater then of the soul; or the length of the captivity
under Pharaoh which lasted not in all two hundred and fifteen years, more
tedious then under Antichrist, who began to reign above a thousand years ago.

Whereupon neither of these two Causes being to be admitted, want of love from
the Lord toward his people, and no need of Premonitions, and likewise
necessarily admitting, and confessing it to be truth, Fully illuminated, and
infallibly inspired Prophets have not been found (and are not now to be
expected) much after our Saviors leaving the earth, it behooves us to enquire
after the reason of this thing. Of which by Gods grace I find there are Two
Causes.

1. Why we may not look for such Prophets in these times which are fully
illuminated and infallible, is the End and the consideration thereof, for which
such Prophets were sent by Almighty God for the information of his people,
which being accomplished and come and past, that which points to that end is
not necessary any longer. Such Prophets were instituted to be forerunning Types
and Figures of Christ, thereby to signify that there was a Prophet to come
after them like unto themselves, but greater, who should fully and infallibly
know the Lords mind and counsels. For thus says Moses of our Savior who was
to be exhibited in the flesh, and making himself the Type of Christ, Deuteronomy. 18.
15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee,
of thy brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall hearken. In respect of whom,
some, though not all of the Prophets, had power, at some, not at all times, to
work certain Miracles, and alluding to this it is said, The Prophets were unto
John.

2. Prophets were more fully enlightened before our Saviors coming, than in
these times there can be found any, for another cause, even for their sakes to
whom their Prophecies and Messages were sent, that is, because of the people.
The Prophets were sent principally to call men to repentance; thus speaks the
Lord, Jerem. 7. 25. Since the day that your fathers came forth out of the land
of Egypt unto this day, I have even sent unto you all my servants the Prophets,
daily rising up early, and sending them, V. 26. Yet they hearkened not unto me,
nor inclined their ear, but hardened their neck, they did worse then their
fathers. The different condition of the people therefore is a second cause, why
the old Prophets were more enlightened and infallible, then the Prophets or
Preachers, which now are (for so are Preachers called by the Apostle Paul) or
necessarily are required to be. In those old times the understanding of the
people of Israel concerning God and heavenly things was very small; witness
the Apostles themselves, who were conversant with Christ, when Peter reproved
our Savior speaking of his suffering death, telling his Master, that this
should not befall him; that he should not dye. Yea, the Lord threatens his
people blindeness of mind, and stupidity of understanding greater then formerly
they had, by the mouth of Isaiah, calling it fatness of heart; for fat is
insensible. For which cause if the Prophets should not have shown before their
eyes great and wonderful matters, they would not have believed; and if such
Prophets had not also had extraordinary knowledge, they would have wanted a
guide, if they had not also been endued with infallibility, the people would
certainly have fallen into errors. And notwithstanding all this, scarcely did
they then believe the Prophets. For how soon had they forgotten the miracles
which Moses did before them? when being told more then once, that God had
promised to bring them into the land of Canaan to give it them for a
possession, after that he had performed his promise in bringing them out of the
land of Egypt, had led them by a pillar of fire and a cloud, yet being pursued
by the Egyptians they murmured against the Lord, believed not his servant
Moses, concluding they should be then slain by the Egyptians, Exo. 14. 12.
Isaiah who was so far acquainted with the Lords mind, that he expressly told
King Hezekiah as a sign which was required by the king, by the going back of
the shade of the Sun on the Dial of Ahaz ten degrees, the recovery of the
king, and the lengthening of his life fifteen years, 2 King. 20. yet
complains the Prophet that what he prophesied was neither understood nor
believed, Isa. 53. 1. Who has believed our report, and to whom is the arm of
the Lord revealed? Likewise when Jeremiah prophesied to the Jews, and what he
foretold of their captivity came fully to pass, then false Prophets which
prophesied of their sudden return were more credited by the People. For that
remnant of the People which was left behind by Nebuchadnezzar in Jerusalem,
after thrice carrying them away into Chaldea, the first in the third year of
Jehojakim, Dan. 1. 2. the next in Jehojakims, the third in Jehojachins reign,
and with him, plainly did not believe Jeremiah, nor Ezekiel prophesying unto
them the destruction and burning of their City and Temple, boasting
notwithstanding that they should not be, nor the City any more taken, calling
Jerusalem the Caldron, and themselves the flesh, Ezekiel. 11. 3. concluding
thereby, that the City was made for them, and they for the City, so as that
they should not be parted.

So for the Necessity of the work, that the children of God might have a firm
foundation on which their faith should be built, the Holy Penmen of Scripture
were fully inspired by God, so as no word in Holy Scripture written by the
Prophets and Apostles is there found which God did not miraculously inspire
into the minds of those Holy men. Concerning his Apostles and Evangelists
Christ promised, that they should be guided into all truth, Joh. 16. 13. and
Peter says, 2 Pet. 1. 20. That no Prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation; whose meaning is not, as the Papists pretend, That no private
or single person may expound the Scripture; nor as it is by us commonly
expounded, That every Penman of the Books of God was inspired by Gods Spirit,
and wrote not his own private conceits; but this, No Prophecy of the Scripture,
so called because it contains the Almighty's counsel, is of any private
interpretation; not only as it is free from the mixture of humane inventions,
which are contrary to the mind of God, but there is not one word therein nor
syllable which was not dictated unto them by the holy Ghost. And this is fully
to my purpose. For we know that the Scripture is the Word of God, and he that
expounds and applies it as he ought, preaches nothing but the Word of God,
but the first is of no private, but the other is of private interpretation.

But for the times which followed, the Lord promised they should be such, as
that in them old men should dream dreams, and young men should see Visions, and
that their Sons and their Daughters should prophecy, Act. 21. 17. and that
their servants and handmaids should have Gods Spirit poured upon them, Joel 12.
29. signifying that in those times which began sooner after our Lords
Ascension, and now are, very ordinary and mean persons should have such an
extraordinary measure of Divine knowledge exceeding the foregoing ages, as that
they may be accounted all Prophets and Prophetesses. But Daniel declares in
what manner and by what means this great knowledge shall be attained, thereby
expounding what the Prophet Joel, and out of him S. Luke speaks, Dan. 12. 4.
Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Where by running
to and fro is to be understood Labor and Search, that is, Study. So for that
these times are within the ages of great light, which as it was promised, so we
have by experience found it fullfilled, that common people which are bred up
under able Teachers and Prophets, and which give themselves to search into the
written Mysteries of Salvation, are not so fat-hearted and stupid as not to
understand, and not to believe the Word of God preached unto them, but are able
by Gods Spirit to search the Scriptures, and to discern whether those things
which are delivered unto them from their Prophets be true or not. And therefore
for this cause there is no need of a fully illuminated Prophet to be among us,
either lest we should want sure guides, or be deluded with errors, having both
the Old and New Testament for our direction, which sure word of Prophecy the
ancients were partly or wholly without.

As for the foreknowledge of things which are to come, there is nevertheless
still and will be a profitable use and necessity thereof; and a part thereof
contained in the Visions which are written in Holy Scripture, and the searching
of them commended unto us by the Spirit of God, saying, Whatsoever was written
in former time was written for our learning, another part in those Signs which
God has sent and will send into the world as miracles to be considered by us.
For the words of our Savior fully declare, that there should be Signs of
things which were to follow in the heavens, on the earth, and in the waters,
Luke 21. 25. And there shall be Signs (says he) in the Sun, and in the Moon,
and in the Stars, and upon the earth; distress of Nations with perplexity, the
Sea and waters roaring: v. 26. Men's hearts failing them for fear, and looking
after those things which are coming on the earth. But to what purpose had the
Prophecies and Visions of Daniel and Ezekiel, and the most mystical Vision of
the Canticles, and those of the Revelation of S. John, with others, been as
they are left unto us unexpounded, if God had denied wholly unto us a
Prophetical Spirit to presage what was to be afterward, and what was contained
in the Holy Visions? For there is little difference whether the Lord sends the
Vision to us at first, or by them unto us, what he intends to do.

Therefore it is to be gathered from the forenamed Scriptures by diligently
weighing and comparing them one with another, that the distinction of the Old
Prophets which lived and prophesied before our Saviors Incarnation (I
understand Prophets or Seers, most properly so called, for the other were their
ordinary Preachers, as may be collected from sundry Scriptures, especially from
Neh. 6. 7.) from those which have since and now live under the Gospel, does
consist in two things: 1. In a more full, evident, and more infallible
Discovery of Gods secrets unto those old Prophets, for the Causes which have
been alleged.

2. In causing the Prophets to whom such Visions came, to understand them,
either instantly, and at first sight of them, or if not with the sight of them
immediately, yet at least after Fasting and Prayer, all concurring nevertheless
to declare, that the Revelation of them came immediately from God, and was not
helped then forward with Study and Labor.

For the first Difference, although S. Paul acknowledges, that he with the
rest of his brethren knew in part, and prophesied in part, yet is that so to be
understood, as with relation to the more perfect knowledge, and revealing Gods
mysteries in the life to come, and partly that we should know, that neither S.
Paul himself, nor the Prophets before him did partake of all Gods mind and
counsel. The Apostle knew not certainly, whether a believing husband having an
unbeleeving wife, yet content to dwell with him, ought or ought not to put her
away, 1 Cor. 7. 12. But for what he did know, and the necessary things which
were to be known, he and the rest of the Prophets may be said, according to
Christ's promise to his Disciples, to have all things shown unto them.

Touching the second Difference, it is evident that Ezekiels Vision which he
saw, Ezekiel. 1. 1. was immediately understood by him. For the heavens (says the
Prophet) were opened, and I saw Visions of God; and v. 3. And the hand of the
Lord was there upon him, which is, in that very place, the illuminating Spirit
of God was upon me. Unto Daniel the words of the Angel are, Dan. 9. 23. At the
beginning of thy supplication the commandment came forth, and I am come to show
thee; for thou art greatly beloved, therefore understand the matter, and
consider the Vision. This you see was granted upon supplication; but in these
later times, as it is first the Lords gift to set us to consider those Visions
which he sends, it is next the Lords blessing upon our labor and study, or,
running to and fro, in making us understand them. Nor are such Visions sent
immediately or conveyed mediately unto us in these days understood at the first
instant, as then they were, nor much of such Visions to be understood, although
in their own nature capable of being understood, until a certain time come. I
shall not need to use any other testimony hereof then that of Daniel, Dan. 12.
9. And he said, Go thy way Daniel, for the words are closed up, and sealed till
the time of the end.

But whether now adays God has sent Visions, and Signs of things to come, and
what he intends to bring upon the earth, or to acknowledge our Blessed Saviors
words true, that there shall be Signs, etc. or rather that they are not now to
be expected, but nearer the end of the world, let us hear the words of that
wise heathen man Cicero, whether it be found true by experience, that God has
sent forewarnings unto the world of what matters of great moment he intends to
do. For to do so in behalf of his great love to his children, and their
necessities is most reasonable. Thus writes Cicero, in his first book De
Divinatione, Vetus opinio est jam usque ab heroicis ducta temporibus, eaque and
populi Romani, and omnium gentium firmata consensu, versari quandam inter
homines Divinationem, quam Graeci (...) appellant, id est, praesensionem, and
scientiam rerum futurarum. It is (says he) an old opinion derived from those
long-past forgotten times of the ancient Heroes, that there is such a kind of
Divination to be found among men, as is the foreknowledge and foresight of
things ensuing, which the Greeks name Prophecy. This the Philosopher proving,
not from the bare opinion of one or two, nor of all nations, which in such a
case were little worth; but the opinion being grounded upon the particular and
concurring observations, and experiments of all, is to be esteemed an argument
of great moment. For the same Author in the same book a little after adds,
Gentem quidem nullam video, neque tam humanam atque doctam, neque tam immanem
atque barbaram, quae non significari futura, and a quibusdam intelligi,
praedicique posse censeat. Which is, I can find no Nation, neither civil and
learned, nor savage and barbarous, which is not of this opinion, That future
things are not only foreshewn, but that some there be which can understand
them, and foretell what shall come. This observation and opinion grounded
thereon, of all nations, I shall confirm by the Judgment of an Author a
Papist in Profession, yet in his opinion a very Atheist, who instructing
Princes in all kind of wicked Arts, which may serve to advance their
greatness, even to the mocking of Almighty God, by making a semblance of
Religion to delude the people, is forced to confess, though unwillingly, and
against himself, that Troubles and Wars are ordinarily and miraculously
foreshewn to such, whom it concerns to know them. Machiavil is that man who
in his first book and 36. Chapter of his Discourses upon Livy, writes in the
Italian tongue what sounds thus in English, Great Troubles which are to befall
Cities and Provinces are usually foretold; and this is done, either by certain
Signs and Tokens, or else by the Presages of men. Then afterward he proceeds
in this manner, As I shall willingly confess, the Cause I am ignorant of, so
that notwithstanding the thing is true, it cannot be denied, by examples which
may be produced both in former and later times, but I must acknowledge, that
all great Troubles which have befallen any City or Country have been commonly
foreshewn and premonstrated, either by Presagers or some Revelation, or by
Prodigies and Signs in heaven. Who lastly in the same place is driven to
acknowledge, that these Premonitions and Forewarnings do proceed from a knowing
and Loving Nature, in naming and describing of which Machiavil goes no farther
then the Heathen which taught him, calling them Spirits and Intelligences.
Unless happily (says he in the said Chapter) the air be full of Spirits and
Intelligences, which foreseeing things which are to ensue, and grieving at men's
adversities do by such forerunning Signs make them known to men, that they may
make timely preparation and defense against them.

Next, among those which profess Christianity, whether they be of the Church of
Rome, or of the Reformed Religion, it is a received opinion on both sides, That
God does give miraculous Forewarnings in these days. I shall not need name more
then those three great lights of the Reformed Protestant Profession, Orthodox,
Judicious, and Learned, Calvin, Perkins, and Ussher, which every one
acknowledge what I have said, touching miraculous Admonitions, the first in his
Comment upon Mebuchadnezzars dream; the second, where he advises to examine
when a man pretends Revelations, whether the man be honest which is the
relator, and also not distempered in his mind; the third in his Treatise De
Successione Ecclesiarum, where he makes mention of the Prodigies which
happened about the year M. after our Savior.

But the ancient Heathen did make such an account of Prodigies, that they
instituted certain Officers which were named for their number, at first Quinque
viri, afterward Decemviri, last of all Quindecimviri, that is, the Five, Ten,
Fifteen Men, whose office was to perform Rites and Ceremonies, and they were
(as Livy shows) to look after those Portents, by consulting their ritual books
for the finding out such Rites and Expiations as might divert the anger of
their gods, which they judged those Portents did foreshew. If the Heathen by
the light of natural reason had so much knowledge as to judge such strange
things must contain mysteries within them pertaining to their Gods, it is a
great folly unbeseeming Christians so to be deluded with the Philosophy of
Aristotle's School, as to attribute all wonderful works whether in heaven or on
earth, either to the workmanship of Nature, or to the errors thereof; that
School being more athiest then the unlearned and barbarous nations. To which
sort of men Professors of that false-named science called wisdom, as the name
Philosophy sounds, but as S. Paul truly speaks, unduly so called in sundry
matters. If you shall show a Sign in Heaven or earth, which has formerly
appeared, as Comets, Haloes, Suns, etc. they will render you an imaginary and
natural reason. If such a Meteor appear as was not heard of before, they have
recourse forthwith unto phansy, and frame a cause in their own brains, of that
of which before they never had sight nor experience, concluding it must be so,
because they think it so. Thus do they make Gods Signs called by Heathen men
monstra, ostenta, portenta, and prodigia, which Cicero well observes, because
according to their names they point at something, to be useless things, and of
no effect at all.

Others there are many which do acknowledge, that the Lord does now adays by
wonderful Signs premonish us of things to come, and does point at also as with
the finger such things as we too much neglect, as to bid us regard them, which
will hardly consent, that it is in the power of any man since the days of the
Prophets and Apostles to open the mysteries and untye the riddles of such
Divine Tokens. Whose reason is, because the Infallible Spirit has long since
departed from the children of men. It will not be sufficient to return unto
their reason the Observations of all Nations beforementioned, gathered from
Presagers, nor yet the Observation of Machiavil which I related, yet let them
consider what is spoken by Cicero in his 2. Book de Divinatione; Qualis autem
ista men's est deorum, si neque ea nobis significant in somnis quae ipsi per nos
intelligamus, neque ea quorum interpretes habere possimus? similes enim sunt
dii, si ea nobis objiciunt quorum neque scientiam, neque explanationem
habeamus, tanquam si Poeni aut Hispani in Senatu nostro sine interpret
loquerentur, that is, What I pray mean the gods by this, if they show such
things to us in our dreams, which we can neither understand of our selves, nor
any else make us to understand? for if the gods show us such matters, which
neither we our selves can know what they are, nor any other can declare unto
us, they do just as if Carthaginians or Spaniards should speak in the Roman
Senate without an interpreter. The reason which the Philosopher gives, why
Visions sent by a Divine Power cannot but be of the nature of things which may
be understood, tends to this purpose, to show that otherwise the labor of
sending them such messages were wholly vain; which indeed is true, it being
repugnant to the wisdom of the Almighty to do any thing, much more great and
extraordinary things to no purpose.

But it is clear from Holy Scripture, that such extraordinary Divine
admonitions as Visions are, were therefore sent from God unto men, on purpose
that they might be understood, and that they might learn by them somewhat they
knew not, or disregarded before. These are the words of Elihu Jobs best friend,
Job 33. 14. For God speaks once, yeatwise, yet man perceives it not, v. 15.
In a dream in a Vision of the night, when deep sleep falls upon men in
slumberings upon the bed.

Wherefore it is to be concluded, that it is the fault of men, that Gods Signs
and wonders are disregarded.

To the reason which was objected, the Departure of the Infallible Spirit from
the children of men, so as if for that cause we cannot now be assured of Gods
secret Counsils, I answer, Although we have not at this time, as of old it was,
with the Prophets and Apostles, a full and clear light like unto theirs, there
is yet light enough given to men, that will pray for, and search after it, for
a sufficient understanding of such Signs and Visions as the Lord sends in
these times. The Ministers of the Gospel in these ages are not endued with that
light of knowledge in the ways of God as the Prophets and Apostles were, who
were promised that they should be led into all truth, as befitting such rules
as were to be delivered by them for all posterity, to be perfect, yet is there
sufficient knowledge given unto them, to the begetting of faith, and salvation
of men's souls, and this above other men; Romans 10. 14. How then shall they call
on him in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him of
whom they have not heard? and how shall they hear without a Preacher? Which
Preachers of Gods Word therefore have sufficient knowledge for the work of the
Ministry, and building up of the Church their appointed work, as the Prophets
and Apostles had more light and infallibility in them befitting their
business. Even so, although the infallible Spirit remain not among the Sons of
men in all parts of Gods Word, yet is there enough to be obtained for the
sufficient understanding of his Mysteries, whether written or sent
miraculously, that is of his word and wonders. For if this be not so, to what
purpose is the accounting of the Number of the Beast commended to our search
(although shown to John alone) precisely? Rev. 13. 18. Here is wisdom, let him
that has understanding count the Number of the Beast. All in vain were this
Admonirion, if we must despair by any means to attain the knowledge of the
Beasts Number. Although we must acknowledge the difference betwixt the
knowledge which the Apostle had of it, and ours; by him it was presently seen
and understood, by us after much search, and hardly yet to perfection.

Moreover, it will undoubtedly be objected and in favor of the former Reason,
That there are at this day none to be found which can presage aright of things
by any Signs or Wonders whatsoever, nor which do profess the knowledge of Gods
Mystical and Miraculous Messages, whether of things past, present, or to come;
or if perchance some few do, they are all by constant experience found either
willful and impudent Impostors, or Brainsick, or downright Madmen.

Whereunto, passing by all those Testimonies formerly alleged (albeit among
the rest Machiavil is not to be despised, a man neither so foolish, nor yet of
so easy belief, that he should affirm there were presagers of future troubles,
if happily a wise man might judge such presages casual) and by Cicero
comprehended under the general acknowledgement of all nations, I may say, there
are that think Savanarola had a foresight of such a Prophetical nature in
certain things, and some also of our own nation to have had the like, which I
shall not name in this place.

But although I should grant that no man has been able to interpret Prodigies
or Visions, which we have met with, it does not therefore necessarily imply,
that the thing is not to be attained by any man. May a man therefore determine
that there was no way to attain the knowledge of the Greek tongue in England,
because until Linacre brought the same into this Kingdom, peradventure there
was no man found skilful therein? Some Arts have quite perished (if we may
believe Authors) which no man yet has regained, yet we must not therefore
conclude, that the refinding of them is impossible; for it might rather have
been thought so before their first invention. Shall we say, because the Natives
of America are wholly ignorant of the Mathematiks, that therefore those
Sciences are impossible to be learned by them? For it is not a firm Argument to
reason from what is not to what cannot be. As little reason have we to argue,
That Divine and Miraculous Visions cannot be understood, because men every
where persuading themselves that such strange Signs are natural, seduced by
the false Doctrine of the Peripateticks School which feigneth such causes of
their generation, oftentimes grossly absurd, neglect the study of them, and
wonder at it in others. As for those which pretend their Revelations, of which
there have been many these last years, partly mere Impostors to fill their
bellies, and to get a name, partly men of more Phanfie then Judgment, which
strongly imagine what they desire should be, and what they much think of in the
day, dream of peradventure in the night, and biased by their desires and hopes
give such interpretations to their dreams, which they call Visions, as serve
their turns and fit their phansies, and publish them for truths, such men with
the Astrologians and monthly Prognosticators, all their foundations being
false, no man may expect truth from them. In which sort of men we may plainly
discern the malice and subtlety of the devil, who, as he has ever been
accustomed as well by fraud as by force to hinder Gods Glory, and the good of
the Church, and to steal honor unto himself, does by ways sometimes alike,
othertimes contrary oppose whatsoever makes for the foregoing ends. At that
very time when Jeremiah prophesied truth, Hananiah a false Prophet prophesied
lies, to please the people, and discredit the Prophet, Jerem. 28. 10, 11. In
those days in the land of Chaldea unto the Jews did Daniel and Ezekiel
prophecy as true Prophets: But at that time of their captivity how many were
there which in that place being false Prophets divined lies unto them? For thus
says the Lord, Jer. 29. 8. Let not your Prophets, nor Diviners, which be found
in the midst of you deceive you, neither hearken to your dreams which you cause
to be dreamed. When Elijah was a faithful Prophet, and with him Micaiah, unto
Ahab, 1 King. 21. and 22. beside Zedekiak, who smote Micaiah on the cheek for
speaking truth, it is apparent that there was a great number of false Prophets
like unto Zedekiah, 1 King. 22. 23. And lest the Apostles should gain credit to
their preaching by working miracles, and prophesying things to come, the devil
opposes this work by his Prophets. For then were Simon the Sorcerer, Act. 8.
Elymas the Sorcerer, Act. 13. a Damosel having a divining wicked Spirit, Chap.
16. and certain vagabond Jews, and 7. sons of one Sceva a Jew, Exorcists or
Conjurers, Chap. 19. Even so, lest at such a time when there is great need, in
times of great fears, troubles and dangers, to be forewarned of the issue of
things, when the Church of God is in great distress and greater fears, yea,
when Divine Premonitions, Visions, and Prodigies are found, the devil instructs
and persuades hypocrites, and crack-brain'd men and women with Astrologians to
delude some, whose apparent deceits joined with the Doctrine of Aristotle's
School harden others which are more wise, in an obstinate incredulity to the
dishonor of Almighty God, making them affirm, that no future thing is
foreshewn in these days miraculously, and that such and such things which
indeed are, be no portentous Signs. And which is more, as if it were true, as
it is indeed true, that we may expect in troublesome times miraculous Signs
and Tokens, as well and as much as the children of Israel their usual Signs,
the devil has so much prevailed with some, that they have feigned that they
have seen Visions, some of them only that people may wonder at them, others
that they may get a little money by publishing their false Visions, to the
belying of God Almighty (a fearful sin) and delusion of the people. Besides,
God has not granted to every man such a measure of wisdom, as if he would, he
should be able to understand the meaning of Gods secret Messages, For as
Quintilian says, even in Schools we may pick out some fit to make Soldiers,
others husbandmen. God has given sundry sorts of gifts to several men,
according to the words of Paul, speaking of the diversity and dispersing of
divine gifts, 1 Cor. 12. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. says. To another (he gives)
the working of miracles, to another (not every one) Prophecy. Nor were there
under the Law very many presaging Prophets, much less in one place, and at one
time.

In David's time we read of Samuel, Nathan, and Gad, who was called the Kings
Seer. In the time of Eli the priest no Prophet before Samuel, and after Malachi
unto our Savior there were as few. When those Prophets were most in number, so
much as we have light from Holy Scripture, the Jews for the space of seventy
years the time of their Babylonish Captivity enjoyed two in Judea, Urijah, Jer.
26. 20 in the days of K. Jehojakim, and Jeremiah under Jehojakim, Jehojakin and
Zedekiah; two likewise in Chaldea, Daniel from the beginning of Jehojakims
reign, Dan. 1. Ezekiel in the fifth year of Jehojachins captivity, Ezekiel. 1.
toward their coming out of their captivity, Haggai, and Zechariah in both
places. By which account the Jews for the space of their captivity in those
whole 70 years had but six Prophets sent unto them, and in the time of
miserable afflictions. Now, although I cannot but acknowledge that I have not
heard almost of any Prophet of future events in these times, who has not been
a deceiver or deceived, or who has used any lawful way to expound Divine
Visions, saving Interpreters of Holy Scripture; whose rules, if men would
follow them, and adjoyn fasting and prayer after the Prophet Daniels example in
the like cases, they would some of them using the right means undoubtedly
attain the desired end. For it makes no difference, but there is still the
same way of interpreting Visions sent from God and enrolled in Scripture, or
sent from him and presented before our eyes, yet so as what I laid down before
as a rule be remembered, what the old Prophets understood in an instant, or soon
after, and fully, we have it not given to us to find out, but by labor, and
by degrees, and (using fasting and prayer as common to both) not to perfection.
Whereunto let this be added, because Christian people are according to promise
more enlightened in their understandings then those of old times, those
Prophecies and Visions which are now to be interpreted are by those that hear
them expounded, to be examined in the balance of right reason agreeable to the
Holy Word, when most of the old Visions were to be credited because a Prophet
pronounced them who could not lie. For this was appointed to be the touchstone
of a Prophet, the certainty of his predictions in the event, Deuteronomy. 18. 22. When
a Prophet speaks (says the Lord) in the name of the Lord, if the thing
follow not, nor come to pass, that is, the thing which the Lord has not
spoken; but the Prophet has spoken it presumptuously; thou shall not be afraid
of him.

Now let us see, since the Lord has used in evil and wicked times to send
among his people Admonitions, and Forewarnings also of their sorrows like as of
their deliverances, their captivity in Egypt, and going out, their going into
Babylon and their return, and when there is no cause imaginable why he should
not do the like unto us in England, if God has not by immediate and wonderful
Messages from himself, warned us of our sins, and forewarned us of our
afflictions, and what will be the end of them. For the calamities which the
children of God have suffered in these Three Kingdoms of England, Scotland,
and Ireland, are so great, as like and equal to them, never any Nation upon
whom the Name of God has been called, has undergone by whomsoever,
considering that monstrous and universal Massacre in Ireland as the chief part,
and the general Injustice, and Hypocrisy in England, and sufferings from our
own brethren who professed so frequently love, pity and compassion toward us, (a
treachery which we never suspected) the next.

If therefore the Lord is wont to foreshew great troubles, is it improbable
that he has forewarned his dear children of the greatest which ever befell the
Church of God? And if all injustice be a sin, and oppression a crying sin, is
it unlikely that the greatest Injustice and Murder that ever was committed
(all circumstances considered) since the crucifixion of our Savior Jesus
Christ, the Murder of our Innocent Sovereign Lord King CHARLES the first, and
the revenge thereof should be also foreshewn us? Nor is what I speak concerning
Gods foreshewing of matters concerning the Church so strange a Doctrine, and
incredible, but that diverse Reverend and Learned men have observed the
Portents, and applied the Events unto the Signs when they have plainly seen
them fulfilled; among the rest and above others the Magdeburg Century Writers
have done it carefully, collecting the Signs and Portents which befell in
every age; and while others say, That Signs are interpreted when they are
fulfilled, implying thereby that they were of that nature that they were
capable of being expounded before their fulfilling. Whenever such miraculous
Signs are expounded, though after their events, God procures unto himself the
praise of his Providence, Foreknowledge, Power, and Truth, etc. but if we
neglect to consider such Signs we deprive our selves of our own mercy, by
neglecting those comforts which the Lord of tender mercies sends expressly to
support his fainting children under the rod of their enemies. For but consider,
if the Signs which are sent by him to premonish, if, as it is in Job, man
regards not, we do not unthankfully frustrate the end (I say) and scope for
which they were sent. As for the end and issue of these evils in this and in
the two other counited Kingdoms, as he has dealt with other nations; it is not
improbable but he has in his great and endless Mercy so dealt with us,
signifying together with their calamities how he would farther and at last show
himself toward them. The Lord unto the servitude which the Israelites were to
endure in a land which was not theirs 400 years, does annex this comfortable
news and the issue of their captivity, and in a Vision, that in the fourth
generation they should come out thence, and with great substance, Genesis 15. and
by Moses did promise them the possession of the land of Canaan. On the
contrary, he has unto the pomp, pleasures, and delicacies of the City of Rome
foretold and foreshewn the burning and devastation thereof, and that it shall
never be built again, by the Type of a Millstone cast into the Sea by an Angel,
and saying, Rev. 18. 25. Thus with violence shall that great City Babylon be
thrown down, and shall be found no more at all. Wherefore it is full as likely
that Almighty God with our Sins and Sorrows has foreshewn, whether he will
utterly forsake England, and cast us off, or with our true repentance which he
will give us, take away our long continued miseries.

Listen now, O Reader, I bring you glad glad tidings from a far Country, as
cold water to thy thirsty soul, but according to the sense of the holy Proverb,
that i, such news as have been expected these twenty years, but hitherto in
vain, and therefore almost despaired after so many changes and frustrated
expectations; said to be from a far Country, when they are long in coming, as
if from far, and so in great danger of miscarrying, because I tell you what is
much feared. And this is sent thee O England from thy merciful God by the hands
of him, from whom, considering the crimes of too many, undeserved, in respect
of so many frustrations of hopes and promises made by all others much feared,
even by our Gracious Lord King CHARLES, through the Power and Mercy of God
Almighty restoring him unto his just and undoubted Right and Inheritance of his
Three Kingdoms, and for the sakes of that small number who have mourned and do
mourn for all the abominations of this Kingdom so long continued, and who have
continually sought the Lord to give us our True and Lawful Sovereign (whom
blessed be the Lord we now enjoy to the gladding of our hearts) for the
establishing of Gods own and true Religion and Justice in the Land, and for
showing Mercy to the poor afflicted and oppressed. Among which mourners and
opp^essed the Writer of this Relation is certainly not the least, but who has
continually prayed unto our Gracious God to bring us once again our King, our
good Josiah. The Lord is my witness I flatter not, for if I should use
flattering Titles God would soon take me away. This Elihu has taught me, Job
32. 21. But what I judge to be truth and fit to be spoken I here deliver; That
as Josiah had the praise of being the best of all the Kings of Judah which went
before and followed after him, 2 Kin. 23. 25. And like unto him was there no
king before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and with all his
soul, and with all his might, according to all the law of Moses, neither after
him arose there any like him; So shall King CHARLES II. prove unto us the best
of Englands Kings, and the express Antitype unto good Josiah. And it is not
without example for one eminent person to be Type of the other. Antiochus
Epiphanes the Greekish King in sundry chief respects (for small and single
serve not the turn) was the Type of the Bishop of Rome. For in as many and
such, nay more ways does our Sovereign resemble Josiah, and how he shall
express him more exactly in what of his Majesty in his blessed Government we
shall enjoy, will follow by Gods assistance in this Discourse. Josiah was named
three hundred years before he was born, and by the name Josiah designed to
defile the altar of Bethel by burning men's bones thereon, 1 King. 13. 2. which
was so fulfilled by that King according to the Prophecy, 2 King. 23. 16. So
shall it be made apparent anon in due place, that King CHARLES II. was
appointed by Almighty God to the great work of reforming Church and State,
(which Josiah also did before him) twice three hundred years before his
restoring to his Three Kingdoms, by a plain description of his Royal Person. K.
Josiah made a covenant with God, both he and his people, 2 Chr. 34. 31, 32. and
he caused them to stand to it, and he himself kept it, so has, and will our
Gracious Sovereign. King Josiah was the son of a murdered father, so was the
precious Innocent blood of our Royal Sovereigns Father shed. King Josiahs
Father King Amon was conspired against by his own servants, and slain in his
own house, 2 Chronicles. 33. 36. In like sort our Sovereigns Father King CHARLES I.
was designed to death in his House of Parliament, adjudged to death by some of
his servants, and killed at the gate of his own House, and all by conspiracy.
But the People of the land (they were the Commons in the Jewish Parliament)
slew all those which conspired against K. Amon, v. 25. So let the Parliament of
England imitate them to the full, whom they imitated in this part, which made
Josiah his son king. So much in this place touching the great Instrument of
Gods glory and our deliverance sent from heaven, until I shall proceed to make
this my assertion good touching his Royal Majesty our Sovereign.

I have declared and proved unto you how probable it is that Almighty God had
given us warnings and forewarnings of these our evils, and the issue, and do
now proceed in order to declare that it is not only likely so to be, but so in
truth and in deed. But here I shall first admonish those that have read thus
far, or hear of this Treatise, that they prejudge not the thing esteeming it a
Fable, but to follow the advice of S. Paul, who admonishes us not to despise
Prophecy, and not to streighten the word in its due signification, as if it
were only to be understood of preaching, knowing that the commandments of God,
according to the Psalmist, are exceeding broad, in which breadth many things
there are on the right hand commanded, as on the left hand forbidden, which do
not at first sight appear. For I cannot but foresee, that some will smile at
what they read, whom I advise they take heed of contemning that which for
ought they or any man living can deny, may all prove true; which if it do, they
despise not me the writer, but him who sent the Message, who has told us, That
he will not be mocked. Others, no doubt, unwilling to have these things fall out
true, because it serves not their particular interesses, will show their teeth,
not laugh, at what I have here written, like those Jews which for the like
cause censured our Saviors miracles as Diabolical even against their
knowledge. To these and the like men I say, they despise not this but him which
sent it. As for such men who more favorably will call it pretty, and censure
the Discourse to be the fruit of a melancholic fancy, if it did extend no
farther then to touch the person of the Writer, as if the argument were not
skilfully enough handled, and no more, all this (I say) will be easily confessed
by me, but when it pierces to the matter it self, as if it were an argument to
play withal, and not rather as it ought to be thought a Discovery to be
admired, let every such commender know that God despises such cold praises. It
was truly spoken by Agellius book 19. c. 3. Turpius esse exigue atque frigide
laudari, quam insectanter and graviter vituperari, that is, It is more to the
disgrace of a man to be sparingly and coldly praised, than bitterly and most
reproachfully to be reviled. But he that will ponder and well consider the
things which are delivered, shall (I trust in God) find the words of reason
and soberness, and no melancholy, nor other humor in them at all. The man who
is weak of understanding, although the book be little, yet is it too big for
him to swallow; such a one is desired to lay it by. Let the man of wisdom and
judgment read it with the strictest observation, and the Lord give him
understanding. Now to make what I have promised to appear true in every part,
that as well our sins and with them our troubles the Lord was pleased before
they were in being to make known unto us, as that after all our vexations and
afflictions we shall be delivered from all those burdens which lie upon us,
and that by the hand of our Gracious Sovereign, whom God preserve, CHARLES II.
we shall be freed (I say) and made a happy people, and that we only may not be
thought to reap the benefit of his Royal Government, what Recompense shall
accrue from God unto our good King, first take a view strictly of Isaiahs
Prophecy, Chap. 1. In this Chapter you shall find the same sins to have been
committed then by the Jews, which we labor under at this day, the same
Hypocrisy and sin of Murder, by which not only our late Sovereign, but diverse
of his Innocent Subjects have had their blood spilt, to the defiling and making
guilty too many of this our land. Our great Oppressions and Oppressors are
parallel to those there named in the Prophet. And as they were promised
deliverance (but that afar off, and not yet accomplished) so are we, and ours
near at hand, through the Mercy of God toward those that fear him, by the
administration of our Good King. V. 16. Wash you, make you clean (says the
Prophet) put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do
evil. V. 17. Learn to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, plead for the widow.

Have not our Sins been such, as that the Cause of the Oppressed, the Poor, the
Fatherless, and the Widow, has not so much as come before those which sat in
Parliament, a Court of the utmost redress? Or, if peradventute by unwearied
labor and violent importunity they have prevailed so far as to be heard, have
they judged the cause of the Poor and Fatherless, and not perverted their
Judgment? and have they pleaded for the widow, and not wrested her cause to
please and favor the rich man? Who is ignorant, that they have not so done?
And thus complains the good Prophet, V. 23. Thy Princes are rebellious and
companions of thieves, every one loves gifts, and follows after rewards;
they judge not the fatherless, neither does the cause of the widow come unto
them.

Our great Governors also were Companions of Thieves; because they suffered us
without all remorse to be robbed or spoiled, no great matter of whom, and yet
farther; because they took bribes, by doing whereof they become Thieves
fellows, in that they require gifts as a Thief does a Travelers purse, or else
we and our cause shall fall under them. Of which sort of gifts, though given
secretly, and in the bosom, some have come to light notwithstanding; and of
the rest we may definitively pronounce, They were Receivers and Expecters of
Bribes, because, then them no greater Respecters of Persons in Judgment to be
found; as we learn from Solomon Pro. 28. 21. To have respect of persons is not
good, because for a piece of bread that man will transgress. May we not
likewise say properly with the Prophet, ver. 21. How is the faithful City
become an harlot? it was full of judgment; righteousness lodged in it, but now
murderers.

The hypocritical service of God which the Jews performed, consisting in
outward and formal worship, how like was it to our wonted frequent Praying,
Fasting, and Thanksgiving, and the most strict enjoining of rest on the
Sabbath? For the Lord took no pleasure neither in those, because not proceeding
from syncerity, nor in the outward hypocritical worship of the Jews, saying, v.
13. Bring no more vain oblations, incense is an abomination unto me; the New
Moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with, it is
iniquity, even the solemn Meeting.

And for the reason, for which God did despise all this, was not the cause of
the Jews and ours here in England all one? expressed, v. 15. Your hands are
bloods, that is, defiled and polluted with innocent blood.

To which people for their great sins their heavy punishment the Prophet
expresses, v. 7. Your Country is desolate, your Cities are burnt with fire,
your Land strangers devour in your presence, and it is desolate as overthrown
by strangers.

Part of this has been fulfilled upon the Nation of the English, in Fire,
Sword, and Famine in the Kingdom of Ireland by the bloody Irish, and the other
part in England, when we were devoured by friends and foes in a consuming war,
of our own nation and our neighbors, as if we were eaten up by strangers.

All which sins of these sinful Jews, of which the Lord complains, as well of
the great as of the small, and the negligence of those which should have
applied the remedies, and the general despair, none hoping for amendment, the
Prophet does Allegorically describe in the nature of a spreading disease from
head to foot, and seizing upon the vital parts. For thus speaks the Prophet, v.
6. From the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it,
but wounds, and bruises, and putrefying fores, they have not been closed, Heb.
crushed, neither bound up, nor mollified with ointment, and before, ver. 5. The
whole or every head is sick, and the whole or every heart faint. Yet to put
them in comfort in such a hopeless condition of sin, and sorrow, when he had
before told them in the same verse, Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will
revolt more and more, he foretells them of better times, and a change from
all their wickedness and afflictions, by sending them good Magistrates, and
taking away wicked men, in the following verses. Ver. 24. Therefore says the
Lord, the Lord of hosts, the mighty One of Israel, Ah, I will ease me of mine
adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies.

Ver. 25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross,
and take away thy tinn.

Ver. 26. And I will restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as
at the beginning, afterward thou shall be called the City of righteousness,
the faithful City.

In which part of the Prophecy, as the Jews estate runs parallel to England, as
I have shown, and as under the Type of a disease in the same Chapter the
Prophet describes allegorically their sins and sufferings, so has the Lord God
miraculously by two Diseases of the body of man described unto us mystically,
the people of England, and such as resemble the Diseases set down in the Text,
our sins, and our calamities. And as by Isaiah are described the instruments of
their woe, under the notion of a disease, no less are the Authors of our
miseries comprehended in the mystery of the forenamed diseases, and over and
above what Person shall be our deliverer. Observe, that it is there said, ver.
5. Every Head is sick, and every Heart faint; and v. 6. From the sole of the
Foot even unto the Head, there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises,
and putrefying or corrupt sores. Like unto this Disease are those Two Maladies,
one whereof is called the Rekets, the other the Kings evil. They are thus
alike, the Rekets is a disease of the head, yea, of every head, for it is not
that disease if it be without that Symptom any time; the King's Evil is a
noisome infirmity full of bruises, or hollow apostemated swellings, and sores
which run with filthy mattur.

But that I may persuade my Reader, that these Two Diseases may signify
somewhat more, then what all diseases do, Gods just displeasure against, and
punishment of sin, I shall show examples of diseases in Holy Scripture, which
do plainly confirm what I here affirm of these. One of these diseases is
mentioned, Exo. 9. ver. 8. And the Lord said unto Moses, and unto Aaron, Take
to you handfuls of the ashes of the furnace, and let Moses sprinkle it toward
the Heaven, in the sight of Pharaoh.

V. 9. And it shall become small dust in all the land of Egypt, and shall be a
boil breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast throughout all the land
of Egypt.

V. 10. And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh, and Moses
sprinkled it up toward Heaven, and it became a boil breaking forth with blains
upon man and upon beast.

V. 11. And the Magicians could not stand before Moses, because of the boyles;
for the boil was upon the Magicians and upon all the Egyptians.

This plague of a noisome and grievous sore, named before in Exodus a boil
breaking forth with blains upon man and upon beast, by reason of which, neither
the Magicians, nor Egyptians could stand before Moses, is in a Vision shown
unto John, in this manner, Rev. 16. 2. And the first (Angel went, and poured
out his vial upon the earth, and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon
the men, which had the mark of the Beast, and them which worshipped his Image.

The disease in the Story written by Moses, and the Vision thereof in the
principal matters showed unto John, did in brief portend and foreshew, That in
a place a part of Spiritual Egypt, which is Rome, a certain man should take the
ashes of the furnace, Henry VIII. which was himself, and advancing dust and
ashes toward Heaven in the Popes place, by the Oath of Supreme Head of the
Church, which should so fall upon the men of knowledge, and others void of
wisdom, Clergy and Laity, that it should beget boiles and blains, that is, be
loathsome and troublesome. For while the Clergy, who had sworn to the Pope, were
compelled to swear the same to K. Henry, they as men troubled with sore boiles
knew not which way to turn themselves to find rest; if they swear to K. Henry
they wounded their consciences, if they denied it they suffered death. And as
bodies full of boiles and botches are loathsome to be looked upon, so this oath
when it was taken, could not but make them odious to those that knew it was
done out of fear, not from their hearts.

So could not the Magicians stand before Moses, nor those Clergy men, but all
that well could, hid themselves, or fled. For the Vial fell upon those which
had the Mark of the Beast, and them which worshipped his Image; By the Mark is
to be understood the Sign of the Cross, because a Saltier Cross in this form
X is the Mark of the Beast which is the Pope, noting numerically among the
Greeks six hundred, being the round Number of his Name, which in full is
DCLXVI. And those that worshipped the Image of that Peast, are those which adore
the Host or Sacrament of the Altar. Because the Bread and Wine hallowed by
superstitious Consecration from the Priests mouth, is made to have life, and to
become of those Elements a living Christ Soul and body: It is called the Image
of the Beast because found out by the Pope, and established by him under the
name of the Sacrament of the Altar, who is that Beast in the Apocalypse, as is
elsewhere abundantly proved, and this is the sense of these words, Rev. 13 15.
And he had power to give life unto the Image of the Beast, That the Bishop of
Rome should give life unto dead creatures of Bread and Wine making them a
living Christ by his authority.

So much briefly for the First Disease which was Portentous; The Second
follows, and this is the Leprosy, which, as it was in some respect a
punishment of sin, particularly the Leprosy of Miriam, Numb. 12. and of
Gehazi, 2 King. 5. 27. and that of K. Azariah, 2 King. 15. 5. and it was called
the Plague of Leprosy, and simply the Plague sundry times, Lev. 13. and 14.
(for the Malady was Painful and Loathsome, and the cause of solitary habitation
to the Leper) so for the kind and Nature of it, this disease was such an
extraordinary Messenger of God, as which did contain in it a figure of the
Pollution and Odiousness of Sin, the diffusive nature thereof, with the
Punishment, and the Deliverer from the guilt and punishment also, a Person
which should free us from both, the Son of God Christ Jesus. Leprosy was then
in the highest, when the Disease was as white as Snow; such a Leper was Gehazi
in the place abovenamed; and thus was Moses's hand leprous as snow, Exodus 4.
6. It seized likewise upon sundry parts of the body, and sometime the whole, as
the head, forehead, beard, and sometime garments of skin, and of woollen, and
linen, and diverse times houses. In which cases, and in such parts of the body,
the Leproste was either a bright spot with white hair growing in it deeper then
the skin, and spreading, or a white rising in the skin, turning the hair white,
or in some case yellowish thin hair, and where appeared quick raw flesh in the
rising in men's bodies, or a white reddish sore in a bald head or forehead. In
garments if there did appear a greenish or reddish spot and spreading. The
Leprosy in a house were hollow strakes greenish or reddish, appearing deeper
then the wall, and spreading. See of all thls, Lev. 13. and 14.

The uncleanness of sin defiling the soul was signified, when the Leper having
a covering upon his upper lip, his clothes rent, and his head bare, was to cry
twice, Unclean, Unclean, to note defilement of his soul by sin, and his body by
Leprosy, Lev. 13. 45, 46.

The Leprosy in the garments and in the house judged by the color, deepness,
and spreading, did insinuate the spreading contagion, and from without, and
outward senses the inward motion thereof into the heart and affections, and by
example, as our garments are carried and worn outwardly, and in our houses as
spreading in a family among our servants, children, and betwixt husband and
wife. The Separation and living apart of the Leper notes, That the society of
the wicked is to be avoided, and the abovenamed Levitical Law is applied unto
the company of sinners, 2 Cor. 6. 17. Wherefore come out from among them, and
be ye separate, (says the Lord) and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you. The pain and torment of the Leprosy consists in itching and
burning, the later whereof is to be gathered from Moses, Lev. 13. 24. of both
which some kind of lepers found at this day do tell us, and Writers do
declare. That which among the Israelites was white as snow, and burning,
figureth the pains of Hell, on the right hand, as it were, and the Duration and
Perpetuity of Hell Torments, as on the left hand. For the snowy whiteness is
the whiteness of salt, and one is very like the other, and it has this
whiteness to signify salt, not snow, unto us. Burning is signified by salt in
two respects, 1. Because saltness is the effect and fruit of burning, as we see
in ashes of wood: 2. for that salt whether it be taken inwardly, or applied
outwardly, causes a sense of burning. We use to say, As salt as fire,
understanding so salt, as if we were burnt with it as with fire. Touching the
continuance of the Pains of Hell, Salt signifies that also, for the property
of salt is to keep from corruption and decaying. In which sense, the phrase of
Holy Scripture is, a Covenant of salt; signifying a Covenant which is never to
be broken, but to endure for ever.

The Lake of Sodom the moniment of Gods vengeance upon those sinsul Cities
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Cities about them, is used by the Holy Ghost as a
Type of Hell, the place and condition of the damned, and called the Lake of
Fire burning with Brimstone, Rev. 19. 20. because in that lake called the Dead
Sea, and Asphaltitis, is found much (...) in Latin Bitumen, which by the Poet
Ovid is shown to be a matter apt to take fire, and unquenchable, though by him
distinguished from Brimstone, and is a pitchy substance known to Apothecaries,
although in some place it is by the Interpreters of the Bible called Slime,
Genesis 14. 10. it is called by another Hebrew word, and by a Greek word so
interpreting it, Brimstone, Deuteronomy. 29. 23. and in the abovenamed place in the
Revelation, Ovids words make it of the nature of Brimstone notwithstanding,
Metamorph. Book 14.

Lurida supponunt faecundo Sulphura fonti,
Incenduntque cavas fumante Bitumine venas.
Blew-burning Brimstone's cast into the Spring,
And smoking Earth-pitch fires the veins within.
This place as it is a Figure of Hell in respect of the matter of unquenchable
fire contained in it, being a remainder of that Brimstone which being kindled
fell from Heaven, and destroyed those Cities, and so likewise was it a Type of
Hell in relation to the saltness of that Lake, called also, the Salt-sea
(being so exceeding salt that no living creature is found therein) as it were
painting unto us the Duration of their Torments, and their bodies preserved
from Corruption. All the qualities of this Lake, for which it is by God
Almighty constituted a Modle of Hell, are not necessarily to be reckoned up,
but some of them are sufficient to have been expressed to instruct and direct us,
while the other are not mentioned, that we may take pains to search after them.
For thus we find in an expression of that Lake, Brimstone sometimes left out
of the description, and only Fire mentioned, Rev. 20. 14. And death and hell
were cast into the Lake of Fire. But of the Saltness of that place, and as to
a Punishment, it is confirmed, Deuteronomy. 29. 23. And that the whole land thereof is
Brimstone, and Salt, and Burning, that it is not sown, nor bears, nor any
grass grows therein, like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrha, Admah and
Zeboim, which the Lord overthrew in his anger and in his wrath. I might take a
view of some other things pertaining to this disease of the Leprosy, wherein
some other matters are pointed at, but what I have already spoken will be
enough to denote what it typifies in the Nature of Sin, and the Punishment. But
the great thing which was intended by this strange disease, and for which cause
it was sent, and when that was come, ceased to be any more; and the chief Scope
unto which the Leprosy by the Wisdom of the Lord aimed, was his Son Christ
Jesus, which was then to come; the Leprosy the Shadow, Christ the Substance.
And as when the Body comes, the Shadow thereof gives place, in like manner when
our Lord and Savior had suffered the pains of death for the sins of the world,
and made us clean being our High Priest, from our uncleanness, so many as he
ordained to eternal life, whom he pronounced clean as a good and skilful
Priest, saying, Joh. 13. 10. You are clean, but not all; then afterward began
the Leprosy quickly after his death to depart. For the chief thing which was
signified by the Leprosy was now come, and the Mystery sulfilled; our Priest
was come, and made us clean. For now no such Leprosy found in Palestina nor
any where among the nation of the Jews. And the Ceremonies and Rites used in
cleansing the Leper do point out our Savior, and what he did and suffered for
us. In the Cleansing of a House healed of the Leprosy, use was made of two
living Birds, Cedar-wood, Scarlet, and Hyssop; one of which birds was to be
killed over running water in an earthen vessel, and dipping the living bird,
the Cedar-wood, Scarlet, and Hyssope, in the blood of the slain bird, and in
the running water, and sprinkling the House seven times, it is said, Lev. 14.
52. that with all the forenamed things the Priest shall cleanse the House; and
ver. 53. But he shall let go the living bird out of the city into the open
fields, and make an atonement for the House, and it shall be clean. Who, to
whom God has given but an ordinary understanding, willl not acknowledge here,
that the shedding of the blood of one bird (and the other let fly) into running
water, and in an earthen vessel, into running water as to go into the Sea;
whither all running water is carried, and all rivers run, to be conveyed all
the world over, for from thence come all fountains, did signify so much
touching the shedding of our Saviors blood for all the world? Or who can then
doubt that the receiving of it in an earthen vessel, did betoken our Saviors
taking our flesh upon him, whose bodies as his being originally from the earth,
are called earthen vessels? Nor can we gainsay the flying away of the other
bird, one of the same kind, did declare our Saviors resurrection and
ascension into Heaven; as birds are called fowls of Heaven. It will certainly
be granted, that the Cedar signified two things; his Cross, as it is a tree, on
which he suffered death, and the excellency of his person above all other men;
as the Cedar in loftiness excels all trees. And eminent men are
metaphorically by the Prophet called Cedars, Ezekiel. 17. 3. 22, 31. and by the
Holy Penman 2 King. 14. 9. The Scarlet being lambs wool so died figured his
innocent, patient, and bloody death. But the Hyssope a low shrub growing upon
the wall, as Scripture calls it, and in a relation of Solomon's History of
Trees is opposed unto the Cedar, the lowest to the highest, and in the
Ceremonials appointed in cleansing the leprous House being joined to the Cedar,
points at our Savior Jesus Christ, in his humility, who humbled himself to
take our trail nature upon him, yea, the form of a servant, descending from
heaven, and disrobing himself of his transcendent glory. With this dipped in
blood of the Paschal Lamb were the lintels and two side-posts of the Israelites
doors to be sprinkled for ever. Exodus 12. 22, 23, 24. And a sponge filled with
vinegar put upon hyssope, Joh. 19. 29. was given to our Savior on the cross;
both examples declaring unto us that by the blood shedding and sharp sufferings
of him that made himself of no account we should be delivered. Thus God did
guide the hearts and heads of all his enemies, though ignorantly and
maliicously to set forth the honor of his Son. But David expressly does by the
name of Hyssope understand no other thing, no not in ceremony, but our Savior
Christ himself, where he prays unto the Lord, to purge him with hyssope, Psa.
51. 7. Purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean; wash me and I shall be
whiter then snow. As for washing liquid and thin substance is proper; but no
other water whatsoever has the power to make clean and white bloody sins, but
the blood of the Lamb of God. So much for these two Prodigious Diseases and
their Significations.

Now I shall show you Reader, that some Remedies and Medicines have also been
appointed by Almighty God to typifie things of great moment, present, and to
come. I could find out some more of this nature, but I hope to satisfy my
Reader with two. The First of these two Remedies so significative, is the
precious liquor or oil of Balm, whose plant grew not at first in Egypt, and
thence by the gift of the Queen Sheba unto Solomon, transplanted into the land
of Canaan, as Josephus inconsiderately affirms. For the Holy Scripture
declares the contrary, where it first shows, that the Ishmaelites transported
from Gilead into Egypt, Spicery, Balm and Myrrh, Genesis 37. 25. which had not
been done, if the Balm tree had grown and yielded Balm in Egypt. Again, Balm is
by Jacob to his Sons named among the best fruits of the land, which he was
minded to send as a present into Egypt, Genesis 43. 11. And Pliny in his Natural
History, Book 12. 25. acknowledges that tree to be peculiar to the land of
Judea, and therefore not elsewhere originally to be found. I shall not follow
much the praises which are given unto this excellent Oil of Balm, by Pliny or
other ancient heathen Writers, as of the incomparable sweetness thereof to the
smell above all other liquors, nor touching the price thereof, which Pliny
avers to have been sold for twice the weight thereof in Silver. Nor will it
make much matter what particular diseases, they say, it was helpful against,
which is affirmed to have been very effectual against the pain of the Head;
and Dimness of sight. But in what God shall here enable me to speak thereof,
the Scripture shall be my guide and Experience. The Scripture does commend this
liquor of Balm as an incomparable medicine, taken according to the literal
under the mystical sense thereof, against diseases otherwise incurable, and to
be a taker away of pain, Jer. 8. 22. Is there no Balm in G^lead? Is there no
Physician there? why then is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered? And cha. 46. 2. Go up into Gilead, and take Balm, O virgin the
daughter of Egypt; in vain shall thou use many medicines, for thou shall not he
cured. Likewise Cha. 51. 8. Babylon is suddenly fallen, and destroyed; howl for
her, take Balm for her pain, if so be she may be healed.

These were the natural virtues of Balm; but this was not the end and scope of
the Prophet, as if he would have the people of Judah in their spiritual disease
of sin take and use a natural and outward Remedy pertaining to a Bodily
Disease. For what could natural Balm do in help to recover the miserable and
deplorable estate of the Egyptians destined to destruction (whose many Remedies
mentioned were no other then sundry ways and means affaied to avoid ruin)
though they should have gone unto the mountain of Gilead, and fetched Balm from
thence where it grew? Besides, how could that medicinable oil prevail to help
the fall and destruction of the City of Babylon? For it was not the sickness
of the body under which the Babylonians labored.

Wherefore observe, that if we must not understand these things according to
the Letter, because the disease and pain is not to be taken literally, it
behooves us here to find out what is meant by Disease and want of health and
Pain; which are of such a nature, as that they can be taken away by Balm in
what sense soever taken, and by no other thing; So doing we shall find what I
did at first affirm concerning natural Balm to be true.

I said before, that sins were named diseases, and that Afflictions and
Punishments were called by the name of Diseases. I shall yet farther prove it
unto you, Psa. 41. 4. Heal my soul (says David) for I have sinned; and Ezekiel.
34. 4. The diseased have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which
was sick, neither have ye bound up that which was broken, etc. In which place
the people are likened to a flock of sheep, their sins of errors in Judgment
and Life, and Troubles in Conscience, called by the names of Diseases,
Sickness, and Breaking of Bones; their Prophets and Teachers are named
Shepherds; as often in other places. And when Christ healed men, he forgave
them their sins, as healing of men is interpreted forgiving of sins; for when
our Savior had made mention of the grosness of the peoples hearts, the
darkness of the eyes of their minds, he concludes, they were obstinate and
refused to be healed, Mat. 13. 14. and in the same history repeated by Mark,
cha. 4. 12. this healing is called forgiveness of sins. That (says the
Evangelist) seeing they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they may hear,
and not understand, lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins
should be forgiven them. The heathens themselves esteemed Vices, Diseases and
Maladies of the Soul. Cicero in Tusculane Questions, Book 3. has these words,
At and morbi perniciosiores, pluresque sunt animi. That is, But for the
Diseases of the mind, they are more hurtful, and of greater number, meaning,
then those which are of the body. Afflictions and Punishment are called by the
name of Diseases, when as Sorrow for sin even to despair is called broken
bones, Psa. 51. 8. and the same by Solomon is named wounding of the Spirit.

Wherefore Sins Transgressions and Afflictions being the Diseases of these
people the Jews, Egyptians, and Babylonians, and the Remedy prescribed unto
them all being Balm, and Balm only, what can hereby be signified, but He that
was the only Fountain opened for sin and uncleanness, the only Medicine
against these maladies, He that heals sickness both of Soul and body, the
precious blood of him, called by David for his humility Hyssope, for the
medicinable quality of his blood Balm? Which counsel in respect of the Times is
thus to be applied. When the Jews were without Natural Balm, as now they are,
and fick, and miserable, as they also be, and the Spiritual Egypt, and
Spiritual Babylon (both which places typifie and note Rome,) now tending to
destruction, had no Remedy left for their miseries, but all of them by faith in
one and the same Jesus to apply that universal Medicine Balm. Which Medicine
the miserable Jews deny, and the Roman^sts under value his blood, scarce
equalling it to their own merits, and the Virgin Mary's love.

Notwithstanding of such things as do point at matters of moment not only past,
or present, but to come, whether singly or jointly, there is a difference. Some
there be which do only in an ordinary manner, and secondarily without any
wonder set forth such things; of which sort are the Paschal lamb, betokening
Christ who was to be revealed, in his innocence; the Priesthood of Aaron, and
the shedding the blood of Sacrifices prefiguring Christ's Priesthood, and
offering up himself a bloody Sacrifice: Hyssope betokens his humility, and
multitude of things of that sort. A second sort of things there is and Persons,
which figure the things forenamed in an extraordinary principal manner, and are
accompanied with wonder; these like extraordinary Ambassadors are by the Mercy
of the Lord sent to point out great and most weighty matters unto us. The
Rainbow was a Seal that God would never destroy the world again by waters. The
water gushing out of the Rock in the wilderness of which the Israelites drank,
did by miracle and by extraordinary example, and by principal intention
prefigure Christ's blood, of which his children drank by faith, 1 Cor. 10, 4.
And did all (the Patriarchs) drink the same spiritual drink, for they drank of
that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ. Such was the
Manna which rained in the wilderness for the food of the Israelites, the same
spiritual meat, ver 3, by the Apostle interpreted, Christ.

And of this second sort of Signs was Balm, extraordinarily, principally, and
wonderfully betokening Jesus Christ. It was a liquor, if we may believe Pliny
in the place aforesaid, issuing out of the sides of the wounded tree, and
(though not at first) turning to a red color, so resembling blood, and for the
precious medicinable nature of it, most like out Saviors blood, and by the
miraculous ceasing at first (as it may be thought, by that great scarcity of
the oil from such a multitude of Trees mentioned in Pliny) of the Balm it self,
and soon after of the tree, even to this day, that it was of those Types of
Christ, which when he came, ceased to be, and that wonderfully. And to this
very time the Prophet alludes, when he says, Is there no balm in Gilead? Is
there no Physician there? even to the later times of the Jews after our
Savior. As if he should have said, Although there be no, Balm, yet there is
notwithstanding a Physician there, yea, because there is no Balm in Gilead,
look for a Physician in that place, for the Soul-sick Nation by faith in him.
Which Lord in mercy make haste to give that miserable people. And of this
portending Medicine Balm hitherto.

The Second Medicine Prodigious showing in part what was present, and what to
come, mentioned in Holy Scripture, is the Pool of Bethesda, which cured those
which were put therein, with what disease or infirmity soever they were
troubled. Of which water and the Medicinal quality thereof, hear what S. John
writes, chapter 5. ver. 2. Now there is at Jerusalem by the Sheep-market a Pool,
which is called in the Hebrew Tongue Bethesda, having five porches.

Verse. 3. In these lay a great multitude of impotent folk, of blind, halt,
withered, waiting for the moving of the water.

Verse. 4. For an Angel went down at a certain season into the Pool, and
troubled the water; whosoever then first after the troubling of the water
stepped in, was made whole of whatsoever disease he had.

That the water of this Pool did not by any natural virtue cure all sorts of
diseases, I need use no Argument to prove. For although there have been found
and now are certain waters, which do cure or help some Diseases, but no waters
were ever heard of that could cure other diseases, much less all of what kind
soever. The Text it self shows, by what power this virtue was given to the
wate, expressing, That an Angel went down at a certain season, and troubled the
water, and so at that time and no other it became helpful. This needs no words
more to show how wonderful it was, so far from observation of the like and
course of all natural Medicines. Wherefore I conclude, that this miraculous
Pool was a true and appointed Type of Christ and his blood, because of the
universal extension of the curing by the waters; of his blood (I say) which was
shed for all our sins and soul diseases, and sicknesses, which by faith it
cures and takes away. For when the water was troubled, at that time only it was
endued with sanative virtue, which was when the water in its substance
resembled blood; at which time of its stirring and troubling the water being
made thick by the mixture of the earth from the sides and bottom of the Pool;
and when the mixed substance by standing still of the water settled again, the
water becoming and losing the likeness of blood, which happily at that time of
stirring it might attain in color also, the medicinable quality vanished
therewith. If the water which issued out of the rock in the wilderness was a
Type of Christ's blood, for as much reason and more agreeable to outward sense
must the water of this Pool be a Figure of the same. Yea, I doubt not but that
the water which came out of that rock which signified Christ, should have been
a troubled water and thick like unto this, but that a clearer liquor was
permitted unto them by indulgence, lest it might offend their stomachs; here a
more gross and blood-like water fit enough to bathe in, was more perfectly to
paint out our Saviors blood. And these two waters, the one to drink, the other
to bathe, allude to the words of our Savior, saying, My blood is drink indeed,
Joh. 6. 55. and of Saint John, Revel. 1. 5. speaking of our Savior, that he
Washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Lastly, it appears that this Pool of Bethesda, was in all the forenamed
respects a Type of our Saviors blood, and a shadow of him; for after his
death, this wonderful quality of curing all diseases left it for ever. So far
concerning Diseases and Medicines which were prodigious, showing things, some
past, others present, but chiefly things which were to come, principally,
extraordinarily, and wonderfully, and among other things which they did
signify as with relation to him, they aimed at the Person and Office of Christ
Jesus our Savior.

But whereas all matters of moment have been ordinarily foreshewn which concern
Gods glory, and his dearly beloved Spouse the Church, since KINGS and
Potentates of the earth are such Persons, as upon whom the good and welfare of
the people of God depends, when they are good Princes; but being not so they
are not only Persecutors of the Church themselves, but all their subjects
follow their Princes example; a great part therefore of such matters which the
Lord is pleased to premonish his people of, whether good or evil, is joined
with the Persons and Princes which shall be principal authors of such things.
This is manifest in Nebuchadnezzars first and second Vision, and in many of
Daniels; wherein are foreshewn the different estates of the Four Monarchies in
respect of their Princes, and by Ezekiel, chap. 1. in the Vision of the Four
living Creatures with four Faces, applied distinctly unto the Church, how those
Princes of the Four Monarchies should exercise their authority toward the Jews
their Subjects and Captives. Insomuch that not only Josias was forenamed who
should be a Pious and Excellent Prince unto the Jews, near three hundred years
before his birth, but Cyrus also a heathen Prince, who should be Gods Shepherd
to help and cherish his people, many years before he was born; pointing and
showing them as with the finger, a King, who contrary to the nature of other
Princes should send them home freely out of their captivity assisting them in
whatsoever they could desire. So it is not without example, that a Prince
should be designed by name, (if otherwise by some way equivalent to a name, it
will be the same thing) to some great work some ages before he was.

Now having laid a strong foundation (as I suppose) for what follows concerning
the Matter, which I have before affirmed to have been comprehended in the two
forenamed Diseases the REKETS and KING'S EVIL, I come at length to make good my
assertion, by making it by Gods grace appear to a judicious and competent
Reader to be altogether true. And first of all it will be needful that I
describe unto you the Disease at large, with the necessary circumstances
thereunto belonging.

The Description of the REKETS.
THe REKETS is a Disease so strange, and which is therefore to be wondered at,
that it was not heard of in our fathers times, but began in our memory, and not
many years ago, and in that part of the Kingdom, (according to the report of
the most diligent Searchers and learned Writers thereof the Authors De
Rachitide) which is most healthful, either Dorset, or Somersetshire, not in
London, nor in a Marish country, Neither did this New Disease arise from
contagion at first, nor does it now, as the Venereous does. For no Country was
found infected with this malady until England was, seizing upon young infants,
not in the womb, not until nine ot ten months of age, lest any man should
suspect it might arise from the infection of their parents. Nor does this
Malady accrue by default of the nurse, nor by evil attendance; for it lays
hold wheresoever it pleases Almighty God, on rich and poor, even where
greatest care is had, and spares as often such as are much, or altogether
neglected. To find out the Cause of which disease, the Physicians have most
diligently looked about from one Cause to another so much, and so far as to the
stars, but seldom higher, till at the length they acknowledge, They lose
themselves.

And now I proceed to the DESCRIPTION of the REKETS at the full, from the First
and Pathognomik Sign thereof through each degree, unto the utmost extent of
the same, not as it is in every single Patient affected with the REKETS, but
taken, collected, and put together from all and every childs Symptoms which
is troubled therewith.

The REKETS is a disease laying hold on young children about nine or ten months
old, in which the Childs HEAD is always OVERGREAT; for when other Symptoms
are wanting (which notwithstanding is seldom or never) that One is never
absent while the REKETS are present.

I proceed to the other Signs; all of which are rarely missing together, or if
happily, only in the beginning of the sickness.

With the Head the FACE of the child has an appearance of SOBER GRAVITY, much
differing therein from the looks of other children.

The NOSE which is the ordinary Purging place of the Head and Brain is dry
without distillation of Rheum in those children, and is UNPURG'D.

Those children which lie under this Infirmity are of much more WIT and
UNDERSTANDING then others of so small age.

The TEETH of them, if they were first sound, turn all ROTTEN, and fall away,
or else they TOOTH very LATE.

The ARM-BONES become CROOKED.

The WRIST-JOYNTS and ANCLE-JOYNTS grow KNOPPY, called DOUBLE-JOYNTS.

The FLESH of the whole BODY is PINED.

The BELLY appears OVERGROWN.

The RIBS toward the Breast are found VERY THICK, and the EXTUBERANCIES named
KNOTS.

The SHIN-BONES of these children RISE very HIGH, and appear SHARP, HIGH in the
MIDDLE, and DECLINING ABOVE and BENEATH.

Their THIGH-BONES and LEG-BONES are CROOKED.

The BREAST like in shape for sharpness to the BREAST of a FOUL, and KEELE of
a SHIP.

The use of their FEET, although when they were younger they could walk, is
TAKEN AWAY.

Lastly, not only their stature by the bending of their Leg and Thigh-bones is
shortened, but their GROWTH is HINDERED.

The REMEDIES vulgarly commended against the REKETS.
I Shall not have any thing to do here with those various Remedies which have
been invented against this disease. Nor indeed is it easy to set down the
greatest part of them, many of which and of the best of that sort are compiled
in that Learned Treatise De Rachitide. But I shall reckon up such Remedies as
as are Empirical, and go current among the people universally, nothing
depending upon Reason and Experience together as others do; although these also
have had their influence upon, and gotten credit (I know not for what cause)
among the learned also. Of this sort are Three in Number.

1. REMEDY is SWINGING such children from side to side, TOSSING them UP and
DOWN, and Turning them TOPSEY TURVEY.

2. LIFTING the sick children up by the ARMS. 3. Letting them BLOOD BEHIND the
EAR. So much at present for the DESCRIPTION of the REKETS and REMEDIES; I come
now to the other Disease called the KING'S EVIL; the REKETS answering to EVERY
SICK HEAD, the KING'S EVIL to the WOUNDS, BRUISES, and PUTREFYING SORES
described in the forenamed place by Isaiah. Which later Disease is not
wonderful in it self, I confess; for what nation is there which is not and
has not been troubled with that disease which the Greeks call (...), the
Latins Struma, and Scrofulae? but how many nations are there whose Kings have
such a Divine virtue given unto them, that with the Touch of their Hands they
can heal this Evil, beside the KINGS and QUEENS of ENGLAND, and the FRENCH
KING? This power God has bestowed neither upon any Prince, nor private person
beside. Which cure is performed at this time by our ROYAL SOVEREIGNS HANDS, he
truly acknowledging in the rite of healing, GOD to be the AUTHOR thereof, in
these words, I TOUCH, and GOD HEALS. For as the former Disease the REKETS is a
wonderful Disease in its Nature, this is much more to be wondered at in the
CURE. What notable Cures have been done in QUEEN ELIZABETH'S time by her Royal
Hand, read the Learned Treatise of D. Tooker de Charismate Sanationis. Let
those which doubt hereof (which I know some do, which nevertheless love and
honor the King) repair to the Court with his Majesty's leave, and there behold
multitudes touched by his Royal Hands, and comparing the condition of such who
have been touched afterward with what it was before, shall find this virtue
ascribed to his Majesty, true, and so resolve their doubts. Yet what does this
wonderful Remedy work in the minds of those which behold, and feel it, more
then wonder and astonishment? Does it cause any other effect in the most wise
and learned? Certainly it does not; only they account the utmost of the thing
to be a singular blessing to our Nation whose King God has endued above other
Princes with such a blessing to his subjects. But we know that miraculous
mercies have been Signal also; else the raising of the dead man by the touch of
Elisha's dead body. 2 King. 13. 21. and the restoring of life unto the child
of the Shunnamite by him had not been wrought, but to show the virtue of
Christ's death, and the applying of Christ unto us, who are dead in sins, as the
Prophet joined his own unto the childs body, 2 King. 4. 34. although they were
mercies withal. Moreover it increases the wonder of our Kings Gift of
Healing, that his power extends not so far, as to heal all other diseases, like
as the Struma, why not the Fever, the Gout, Palsy, etc. and that all
Patients, and why every one, receive not benefit by his Royal Hands? All this
must of necessity cause wonder in those that consider all this, even to
astonishment. But wonder never was the utmost end, for which the Lord at any
time did send his Miracles; which indeed is nothing more than an inthralling
and captiving of the understanding and reason, that it can move no farther;
which comes short in us of the end which the Lord aims at in his mavelous
works. Much less does wonder distinguish one work from another. Our Savior did
his Miracles to show, and make them know, he was the promised Messiah, which
when they saw, all men (as the Evangelist tells us) marvelled. But did this
effect answer the end which the Lord intended thereby? Plainly it did not. Much
less does astonishment and amazement at the sight of the Lords mighty and
strange works, make any the least difference between them; but that one Answer
must be given of them all; as, I wonder at these strange things, or, God knows
what they mean. Admiration indeed is the way which God has ordained for men to
look up for a higher Workman than ordinary (as when a man is led into a maze or
labyrinth, he is taught by nature to seek a way out) which needs must be the
Author of so great a matter; and as the work it self is not light and vulgar,
that is wrought, so must it be for some extraordinary end, which ought to be
sought out.

The wondering at these two Diseases has seized upon many, but it has pleased
Almighty God of his mere mercy to make known unto me the Causes why they were
sent, his love unto King Charles II, and his Pity toward the long distressed
people of England, by the Gracious and Happy Government of our Royal Master:
For what am I in knowledge or learning more (nay I am less) then others, that I
should attribute the knowledge of these Mysteries to my self? But in a time of
great wickedness and affliction, in a time of the sadness of my heart,
presently after the Lord had delivered me from a sickness past hope of
recovery, about ten years since, (which is not hard to prove) the Lord made
this known unto me (Blessed be his Holy Name) so that there is nothing altered
in the Interpretations, saving that of late some few things have by Gods Grace
been added as an enlargement.

But that I may find out the signification of the second Disease the
KING'S EVIL, it will be necessary that it be enquired, whether the cure of this
Disease has always been performable by our Kings of England, and if not, who,
and what he was, who first of our English Kings had this Gift of Healing given
unto him, as it is called the Disease of the KING'S EVIL for being cured by the
King.

The Gift of healing the Struma now called the KING'S EVIL, we shall find to
have been given by the Lord, first of all Kings of England, to King Edward III,
before the Conquest, commonly named Edward the Confessor, by the following
words of Ailredus, Abbot of Revesby, De Vita and Miraculis Edwardi Confessoris,
among the ten English Historians, printed at London for Cornelius Be, 1652.
page 390. Adolescentula quaedam nuptiis tradita duplici laborabat incommodo;
nam faciem ejus morbus deformaverat, amorem viri sterilitas prolis ademerat.
Sub faucibus quippe quasi glandes ei succreverant, quae totam faciem deformi
tumore faedantes, putrefactis sub cute humoribus sanguinem in saniem vertebant,
inde nati vermes odorem teterrimum exhalabant. A little after he annexeth this
which follows, Jubetur autem in somnis adire Palatium, ex Regiis manibios
sperare remedium, quibus si lota, si tacta, si signata foret, reciperet ejus
meritis sanitatem. In English thus, A very young woman which was married, was
afflicted with two infirmities, for her face was not only disfigured by a
Disease, but she was barren also, which drew away the affection of her husband
from her. For under her jaws there grew a sort of kernels which by their
swelling made her look deformedly, and the humors corrupting under her chin,
turned her blood into mattur, which breeding worms sent forth a very stinking
savor.

At length she was warned in a dream to go to the Court, and that the King
should cure her, so that if she were washed, stroak'd, and signed by the Kings
hands, she should receive a perfect cure by the Kings merits. Then this Author
declaring her repair to King Edwards Court, and likewise the performance by the
King in the Ceremony, of what was desired, adjoyns to his former Discourse that
which follows, Subito rupta cute cum sanie vermes ebulliunt, resedit tumor,
dolor omnis abscessit, ammirantibus qui aderant tantam sub purpura sanitatem,
tantam Sceptrigeris manibus inesse virtutem. that is, All on the sudden the
skin breaks, the worms, and mattur drop out, the swelling falls, all the pain
goes away, all that stood by being amazed to see such a cure to be performed in
Royal Robes, and such virtue to proceed from hands which held a Scepter.

For not only the mention of healing the Struma in this manner is first found
in the History of King Edward, and the praise thereof attributed to him, but
those last words of Ailredus, Ammirantibus qui aderant tantam, etc. declaring,
that those which saw this cure performed by the King, were thereupon amazed
seeing so strange an effect, do argue, that this kind of cure was not
performed by any other King before, nor by himself until this time. And to this
Prince Tagautius a French Writer ascribes the first cure of this disease in
such manner in England. Institution. Chirurg. lib. 1.

In the next place, let us consider the Nature of the King's Evil, which is a
Malady most like to the Disease in Isaiah, spoken of before, consisting in
Bruises and putrified and corrupt Sores; and to this we may join the other part
of the Description, in Wounds also. For what are those apostemous Swellings in
this Disease, but of the nature of Bruises, which contain corrupt blood or
(...) in them: And nothing more common in the Disease then Corrupt and Mattury
Ulcers. And wounds are properly taken for solution of continuity, as Physicians
call it, without sanics or corruption, and from an outward cause, so the word
here expounded wounds signifies such a solution of continuity, and is a part of
the disease of that state, not of sin, but of suffering, from cruel men and
unjust: as in this disease of the King's Evil, where the swellings, if the bones
be rotten, or the corruption cannot otherwise easily break out, are oftentimes
wounded by the Chirurgians knife.

Thirdly, We are to consider more accurately the Person to whom the Lord first
gave this great Gift of Healing the King's Evil. First, in respect of his
DIGNITY and DESCENT; Secondly, in regard of his ORDER and PLACE of SUCCESSION.
Thirdly, in the addition of his new SIR NAME. Fourthly, In respect of his
ADVENTURES. For all which in few words this may suffice. First, he was by his
DIGNITY King of England, and by his DESCENT King Edward III before the Conquest
was the natural and legitimate son of Egelred, which Egelred was the son of
King Edgar, and younger brother unto King Edward II, who for that he was
innocently murdered by the counsel of his Stepmother (as is supposed) Queen
Alfrith; after that he had reigned King a very short time, was surnamed the
Martyr; according to Ailredus in the said History, page 409. speaking thus,
A^^rat interim boati regis and martyris Edwardi hujas nostre pricipis patrui
praeclara solemnitas, qui ab impiis sine culpa perc^^ptus creditur innocentiae
martyri^ coronatus, that is to say, It was upon the great Feast day of S.
Edward King and Martyr, Uncle to our Sovereign that now is, who, for that he
was causlesly murdered by wicked (...), is believed to have received the crown
of martyrdom for his innocence.

Thus much for this K. Edwards DIGNITY and DESCENT, who first of our English
Kings healed the KING'S EVIL.

Secondly, for what concerns this King Edward in his ORDER and PLACE of
SUCCESSION; he being the brothers son (as was abovesaid) to Edward the Martyr,
was notwithstanding the Fifth King in ORDER and COURSE of reigning from the
former Edward, taking both terms inclusively, and accounting those Kings which
reigned together for one, and by the name of one, of which Holy Scripture
affords us more then one example. Thus Edward the Martyr the First, Egelred the
Second, Edmund Ironside the Third, Hardicanutus the Fourth, Edward the
Confessor the Fifth.

Thirdly, for his new SURNAME the CONFESSOR; that he was ordinarily called
Edward the Confessor, and for his HOLINESS, witnesses Henry Knighton Canon of
Leicester, in his first book. chapter 8. De Eventibus Anglia, Iste supradictus rex
sanctus Confessor dictus est Edwardus III, says he, that is, This holy King
Edward III was named the Confessor. Whereunto add the words of the Chronicle
attributed unto John Brompton Abbot of Jereval, page 956. of the Edition, 1652.
Iste rex Edwardus ab infantia deum diligens bonas consuetudines suas primarias
pro honor terreno non commutavit, fed cunctis diebus magis ac magis omni
sanctitate, casitute, humilitate, and munditia Deum and sanctam Ecclesiam
dilexit, panperesque ob amorem Dei tanquam fratres suos charos habuit, and
dilectos, and nos largis elecmosynis aperto cord, and voluntate bona saepe
respexit, and plures in Anglia statuit leges bonas, quae pro majari part adhac
in regno tenentur. Which in English is, This King Edward the Confessor from his
childehood fearing God, did not change his wonted goodness for earthly honor,
but daily increased in all kind of sanctity, chastity, humility, and purity,
loving God and holy Church, and such was his love toward God, that he loved the
poor tenderly, accounting them his brethren, and bestowing large and continual
alms upon them in singleness of heart and true affection, and enacted more
good laws in England then were before, which for the most part are of force in
the kingdom at this day.

Fourthly, In what pertains to King Edward the CONFESSORS ADVENTURES; he was by
reason of an Usurper forced to shift for himself, and to live as a banished man
in Normandy; for so writes Ailredus, De Sancto Edwardo Confessore ac Virgin,
page 366. in the forenamed Volume of Historians, Edwardus frater Edmundi filius
Edelredi, qui in Normannia exulabat, that is, Edward the brother of Edmund
(Ironside) who lived in Normandy in Banishment. From which place of his exile
he was sent for, by the testimony of the History called John Bromptons Abbot of
Jerevall, not written but set out by him, Edwardus a Normannia vocatus, King
Edward (says the Historian) was sent for out of Normandy. But how welcome the
King was, and to whom, Let us hear the words of Ailredus in the place
aforesaid, Veniens igitur in Angliam Edwardus ab universo clero and populo cum
maxima exultatione suscipitur. But when King Edward came into England (says
he) he was welcomed by all the Clergy, and People of the land with all
expressions of joy; and some of the reasons of that great and universal
gladness are in the same place expressed by the same Ailredus in this manner,
Homo mansuetus, and magis pace quam armis regnum protegens, habebat animum irae
victorem, avaritia contemptorem, superbiae expertem. which is, He was a mild
Prince, who defended his Kingdom more by peace then by war, of such a frame of
mind that he could bridle his anger, hated covetousness, and was void of all
prids.

Now I shall by Gods grace show unto you, in what manner it has pleased
Almighty God out of these Two Diseases the REKETS and KING'S EVIL, to foreshew
unto us our Public SINS and MISERIES, and the AUTHORS of them, and DELIVERANCE
from them in One, and the SINS we have been publicly guilty of, and our
MISERIES which we have within these twenty years undergone, with the PERSON who
shall by GODS mercy deliver and set us free from these long and miserable
afflictions in the Other, KING CHARLES II our DELIVERER. Of which Two Diseases
I will and may affirm justly, That if it be probable, that the Lord has been
wont to foretell Great Troubles to Nations and Kingdoms, and the issue of
them, and if it be certainly true, that in all respects no Nation under Heaven
upon whom the Name of God or Christ has been called, has felt such miseries
and so great in so short a space as the English have done in the last twenty
years, unless they have been predicted by the REKETS and KING'S EVIL, there was
never of these great things any Divine Forewarning mentioned in any History.
Much less was any Prediction like to these, but such as did quickly vanish
after their appearance, in a moment, as it were; or if any have been of longer
continuance, their matter and argument has not been so copious. But these Two
Diseases the REKETS and KING'S EVIL have been stable and constant, the eldest of
which in the Prodigious Healing thereof has continued six hundred years. The
former of which, as the Leprosy in time of the Law, was to typifie the Great
Cleanser Christ Jesus our spiritual King, who was anointed with oil of Grace
above his fellows, and as the Balm of Gilead, and Pool of Bethesda were made to
foreshew that Merciful Physician, who with his blood should heal our sins and
miseries, and wash us from impurity, was determined to show Gods Providence,
Power, Justiee, and Mercy to poor England by the Hand and Government of his
anointed Servant K. CHARLES II. Whose Person, I say is with the other evils
designed in the second Disease the KING'S EVIL. He is that Physician to cure
those wounds and putrified sores, which our State-Physicians (as they have been
often called) have made and caused. The things which are foreshewn are in
General, our Sins, and our Calamities: 2. The Authors, those that have caused
our miseries, and 3. he which shall be our Deliverer. The method of this
discovery is plain, for the Persons which have been and shall be the Authors of
these contrary effects, are plainly described, as if it were by their names,
these in the one, this in the other Disease. The Sins and Calamities which some
have been guilty of, and which almost all have suffered, are shown unto us, as
under the Allegory and Type of Diseases in so plain a manner, as that the
Diseases are nothing else but in every part and circumstance living pictures of
what we have done and suffered, and but Metaphorical names of the very things.
And either they are the very pictures and likeness of the things which I would
have them signify, and in this respect we give their natural signification, or
else, they are Metaphorical expressions of such things, and bear some good
proportion unto the things which I show they typisie. Which Metaphors are not
wrested and strained, but easy and taken from Holy Scripture, and used here in
that signification in which they are there used. Nor is there any Trope or
Figure which is less hard to be understood, nor more usual in our mother
tongue, or the Latin, Greek, or Hebrew tongues then Metaphors; insomuch, that
for using of names to certain things, we do not only commonly, but by
necessity, borrow the names of other things, that is, use Metaphors. Such are
these expressions in ordinary and familiar use; To be in high or low place,
that is to be honorable, or without honor, and it is taken from places high and
low in a Physical notion; so to be poor, when there is little flesh upon any
creature, is borrowed from that word which properly signifies want of things
necessary, but is made to signify, being lean, etc.

The SIGNIFICATION of the REKETS in each particular.
FIrst of all, let us examine the Name of REKETS, and therein shall we find
the names of those men which have caused our miseries. The word Regentes is a
Latin word signifying those that are Rulers and Governors, whether in the
highest or in a lower degree indifferently, from rego to rule; from which
Latin word Regentes is derived a French word, and English, given to such a
Person which exercises Regal authority though not a King, as the Queen wife to
the French King is by courtesy called Queen Regent to distinguish her from the
Queen mother, as if she had regal authority, and like to the King. The
Vice-roy^ of Scotland are called Regents of Scotland. This is the thing;
Governors taking upon them Regal authority, not being Kings, and under Kings,
are meant by this word REKETS, with no greater alteration of letters, but the
very same which has been found in our English tongue elsewhere. For of Regents
leaving out the letter (n) is made Regets, as of Tenent, which signifies an
opinion maintained by a man, is made Tenet, signifying the very same thing, the
letter (n) being omitted there also; both which words, we know, are used
promiscuously at this day. And both Regent and Tenent Participles of the
present tense, and this from Teneo. Then in Regets the letter (g) is turned
into (k) and of Regets is made REKETS; which change is also found in our
English tongue. Ghaucer in the Shipmans Prologue, no. 13. says, His barge was
called the Maudelain.
For that vessel which the Poet there, and Barclay in his Poem called The Ship
of fools, in sundry places calls a barge, we at this day do name (as is well
known) a bark, with the like mutation of (g) into (k). For the calling of it,
as we do, REKETS pronouncing of it as if it were written with (i) in the first
syllable, there is little difference in the sound whether it be written with
(e) or (i), for the letter (i) there sounds not full, but like the sound of (e)
insomuch that sometimes (e) is pronounced like as we would have (i) pronounced
in RIKETS written with an (i). Thus is the letter (e) ordinarily pronounced in
end, meter, Peter, etc. and in Devonshire well puteus is uttered as if the
vowel and the word were the same with will voluntas.

Thus in the Name of this Disease are in the first place discovered those men
who were the AUTHORS of our late CALAMITIES; for according to the Name of the
Disease they were not Kings, but such as took upon them REGAL AUTHORITY. For
the Disease is not expressed by a word of the singular number REKET, but plurally
REKETS, since not one single person, but many were the causes of our miseries.
And in this Name the Cause is put for the effect, for that those men were the
cause of our evils, the evils are called by the Names of such who were the
Causes of them. The Effects of Original Sin are called the Old man in relation
to Adam, who was the fountain thereof, Regeneration and Holiness called the New
man directing unto Christ Jesus, the worker of it, in Holy Scripture, by a
Metonymy of the Cause put for the Effect. Thus our unjust and usurping High
Governors being by the Name of the Disease marked out unto us; the Nature and
Symptoms of the Disease do pourtray unto us their cunning, fraud,
combinations, injustice, cruelty, with the rest of their eminent Sins.

In the Disease it self let us first consider the Pathognomik, and most
constant Sign and Symptom thereof, which is the HEAD OVERGREAT. For the
understanding whereof if we call to mind, that in Holy Scripture a HEAD is a
GOVERNOR, or person chief in rule, as where the Princes of the Tribes are
styled, the Heads of the children of Israel, Numb. 13. 4. and when the Husband
is named, Head of the wife, Ephesians. 5. 23. (for Head in both Testaments is near
seventy times set for the chief, and for Rulers) and that it is proper not only
to the Hebrew, but to the Greek and Latin nations, and to our own language, to
call Magistrates and Rulers our Heads, we will not I hope deny, but that it is
fitly enough expressed by the OVER-GREATNESS of the HEAD, describing the
OVER-GREATNESS of such men, by assuming unto themselves, and growing to so
great POWER, to have been the most certain and unremoveable cause of our late
afflictions. For much power is called great power, where the Angels are styled,
Greater in Power, 2 Pet. 2. 11. By the Greatness of the head therefore is very
aptly set out unto us the taking and gaining too-much power to have been the
first and great cause of the misery, which we have undergone from those which
were set over us.

In the next place, the SOBER GRAVITY of the FACE of such children comes to be
examined, and we may join thereunto the more then ordinary WIT and
UNDERSTANDING found in such children, far beyond what is found in others of
that age. This argues in what sense and signification head is to be taken, that
is, in no other than as a HEAD of WISDOM, Counseil, and GRAVITY; this last
being a discreet behavior of a man such as may serve for the begetting of awe
and reverence in inferiors, that their governors be not despised; and this is
expressed in, and mesnaged very much by the SADNESS of the COUNTENANCE, Eccles.
7. 5. Anger is better then laughter, for by a sad look the heart is made better.

And whereas it is observed, that the NOSES of such which are troubled with
this Malady are UNPURGED, remaining dry without distillation of Rheum, which in
other children abounds; this is to let us understand, that these our swelling
heads which thus ruled over us, although they seemed to cleanse themselves, by
removing Malignants, which they named PURGING of the HOUSE, again and again
from sitting among them, yet did not these Heads PURGE THEMSELVES from, nor yet
cast out from among them Malignity and Malignants, but did notwithstanding
retein in themselves their sins and vices, such as least become a Court of
Justice, Oppression, and Delay, among many other less scandalous sins. PURGING
in the Scripture is casting away the FILTH of SIN, 2 Timothy 2. 21. If any man
(says Paul) therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto
honor.

From the Nose I come unto the TEETH, which in such children become all ROTTEN,
and FALL out, or else beyond the custom in other young children, they for a
great space TOOTHE NOT. The Signification whereof that we may understand, we
are to consider that the TEETH are those Bones which God has given unto us for
grinding and CHEWING MEAT by which the body is nourished. We likewise knowing
that PREACHING of Gods word is termed FEEDING of Gods flock, because thereby is
administered unto the hearers FOOD for their SOULS, for it keeps the soul by
that profitable knowledge (knowledge being hungered after by the soul as meat by
the body) from eternal death to everlasting life, in feeding upon Christ by
faith. Well therefore may those PASTORS which prepare, by breaking it after
grinding in their minds and hearts, the Bread which came down from Heaven
contained in the Holy Word, be accounted, and be typified by TEETH; in which
sense the same are to be understood, Cant. 4. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of
sheep that are even shorn, which come up from the washing, which all of them
bear twins; and Chap. 6. 5. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from
the washing, whereof every one bears twins, and there is not one barren among
them. The TEETH of the CHILD of GOD, whereof the King is Head, are the
PREACHERS: the ROTTEN TEETH are to be expounded such Ministers which being
CORRUPT and UNSOUND in their LIVES, DOCTRINE and FAITH (unto all which the Holy
Ghost in Scripture gives such names) have been removed from the Church.

But NOT-TOOTHING and LATE-TOOTHING does imply that SOUND PREACHERS which
should painfully, skilfully, and uprightly prepare nourishment for the Body of
Christ which is his Church, should here in England, be MUCH and LONG WANTING,
withdrawing and hiding themselves, leaving the mouth empty as it were, those
places where they should be fixed, as it has proved most true also in the
event, because of unlawful oaths and engagements against their Sovereign, to be
laid upon them, which with a good conscience they could not submit unto and for
the like un just causes.

The ARM BONES of such children as labor of the REKETS turn CROOKED, the
Mystery whereof we shall find by Scripture phrase. ARMS in Gods Word notes
sundry times military Forces and ARMIES, and this not without just reason; in a
fleshly arm men put their confidence and the strength thereof, for by the
strength of their arm they yield their sword for offense and defense, The Arms
of the wicked shall be broken says David, Psa. 37. 17. and in armed men, the
strength, multitude, and valor of them Princes place their confidence. In this
sense Arms are to be taken, where God speaking by his Propher and foretelling
the destruction of the king of Egypts forces by the King of Babylons army,
names the forces and armies of them bo^^ Arms, Ezekiel. 30. 22. I will break his
(Pharaohs) Arm, and ver. 24. And I will strengthen the arm of the King of
Babylon. Now let us search in the same place for the meaning of this word
CROOKED. Here we may find, that whenever men once ENTIRE, and as it were
STRAIGHT, (which figure in the limbs is the just and proper shape) shall become
by what means soever, BOWED from their former STRAIGHTNESS; and turn to be
worse, they are for this declining accounted and reputed CROOKED. For which
cause the Israelites are entitled a crooked generation, Deuteronomy. 32. 5. and for
the same cause the people of the Jews are by S. Paul, who formerly had walked
in the ways of the Lord uprightly, which the Gentiles had not done, meant,
where he says, Phil. 2. 15. In the midst of a naughty and crooked generation.
Hereby the Almighty and Just Lord by inflicting such CROOKED ARMS upon our
children, does not only punish us mediately in the persons of them, but would
have us to be premonisht, that by the Sign of CROOKED ARMS, he was for our
sins sending against us our own not Army but ARMIES (because in Two places) by
SEA and LAND, which ought to be and were at first straight and ENTIRE, but
started aside and revolted from their former integrity, and overruled those
which gave them their power, and put the sword into their hands. Which was most
conspicuous, when by the Army, and the bare name thereof, no particular
accusers once named, the principal in the Parliament of such who stood for
their King and Country, were seditiously impeached of high crimes.

The WRIST-JOYNTS and ANCLE-JOYNTS become KNOPPY, and are commonly called
DOUBLE-JOYNTS. Here the Arms are joined with the Hands in such a firmness that
the joints thereof are of a double strength, that is to say, of a much greater.
The HAND is the more noble and principal member, is proper to man alone,
receives the WEAPON and WIELDETH it, and secondly gives DIRECTION to come and
go, and what should be done, as the Psalmist expre^^^th it, Psa. 123. 2.
Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters, and as the
eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress, showing how by the hand and
beck thereof direction is given from masters and such as have as great power
unto their servants, and those which are under their authority. Moreover, by
this knoppiness of the joint strength is increased in that part. Which if we
take together an Arm and Hand most strongly compacted, it designeth most
aptly, That both the Arms, that is, Armies by Sea and Land, should in an
extraordinary manner combine and unite with their chief Commanders and
Generals, which do receive and mesnage the sword, unto whom as into the Hand it
was committed. Those Generals, Major Generals, etc, were the Hands to direct to
bid come, and go, and show what should be done; All the Forces under them
receive direction from them, and obey their commands. It farther signifies, by
this unnatural doubling, and knoppiness of the joint; above what is by nature
necessary and should be, that certain of the Generals and chief Commanders
would in such a manner unite with the Soldiers; as it appears, when they so
strongly combined with the Armies, that neither the Laws of God nor man and
oaths of fidelity made by them for the King and Parliament, could separate
them, or divide them in their unlawful combination against them whom they had
sworn to obey.

Beside the Greatness of Power, the PINED BODY of the patient, and the BELLY
OVERGROWN do infer, that these our Heads should get unto themselves another
kind of greatness, becoming Great in Wealth and Riches, while the Body of the
Commonwealth pined away, and waxed exceeding poor; the word poor in our mother
tongue signifying properly want of necessaries, and metaphorically, want of
flesh; yet so ordinary is this Metaphor, that it is even to women and children
so common, and so well known, as if it had been said lean; and well may these
two be signified by that one word, because one is ordinarily an effect of the
other. But the Commonwealth the Body, which is no other in persons then the
Mystical Body of Christ our Head, ought to have a proportionable nourishment
with the Head, even as it is in the Mystical Body the Church in spiritual
things; for of it S. Paul speaks, Ephesians. 4. 16. that it is fitly joined from
the Head to the Members, and makes increase of the body to edification. So
ought the Body of the Commonwealth receive meet and proportionable nourishment
with and from the Head. The BELLY ought to prepare nourishment for, not steal
it from the BODY. But how contrary hereunto have our Heads robbed our Body, and
that which ought to have prepared nourishment for it, not consumed it all, the
Belly growing full and swelling, and left England in a starving condition! For
whatever was pretended by them, their Belly was their God. The ANCLE-JOYNTS
likewise in this Disease grow KNOPPY and are DOUBLE, as the former; the Mystery
will better be discovered, when we shall come to examine the nature of the
Thigh-bones, and Leg-bones, and what is the meaning of their being crooked.

Whereas the RIBS of such diseased children about the ends, and toward the
breast are found very THICK, and therefore named DOUBLE, and the extuberancies
named KNOTS, and by this means, as the forenamed Wrist-joynts, and
Ancle-joynts, are made necessarily much stronger thereby then such as are
without such a thickness, Consider this which follows. RIB does typifie in the
REKETS no other thing then what the same word does signify in the Holy Text,
without any forced interpretation, application, or any other way or manner of
straining thereof. Consider therefore the words of the Prophet, Dan. 7. 5. And
behold, another Beast a Second was like a Bear, and raised up it self on one
side, and it had Three LIBS in the mouth of it, between the teeth thereof, and
they said thus much unto it, Arise, devour much flesh. Three coasts of the
world (says Learned Broughton) from the place which before it held, West,
North, and South, as it is declared. Cha. 8. 4. and it is to be expounded of
the Persian Monarchy, and of the conquests of the Persian Kings. In which place
it is plain enough that RIB is the mystical name of a COAST; as our English
name COASTS is nothing in name and thing properly but RIBS, from the Latin.
For in the utmost parts of Kingdoms, and confines of Territories are placed
the chiefest forces and strength to defend the inward parts of such Dominions;
as the RIBS are made of strong bone to defend the Heart and vital inward parts.

By the DOUBLING of the RIBS in this Disease is not only foreshewn the doubling
of the Forces on the Land-coasts, which has been fullfilled evidently before
our eyes in our Castles and Citadels, which those Usurpers thought to secure
themselves by, but specially is signified, the great strengthening of the land
by an extrordinary great Navy of Ships, in which they placed their greatest
confidence. And it is held for so great an advantage which we of this Nation
enjoy above all others; the strength and multitude of our Ships, that it is
almost grown into a Proverb, to say, The walls of England are walls of wood. So
significatively the Knops of the RIBS are called KNOTS, which is a kind of
fast and sometime indissoluble binding of a thing, noting unto us, that by thus
guarding the Seas with such a multitude of strong Ships, they judged they were
so fast and so secure that all the world could not undo them. And so much have
they boasted. The reason farther why Ships are signified by Ribs, is because
Ribs do much resemble Ships in the crookedness of their figure. Virgil giving
an Epithet to Ships calls them, Georgic. lib. 1. curvae carina, and in
Aeneid. lib. 6. curvae puppes, that is, crooked Ships; in respect both of their
keeles and sides. And as the English word RIB, is given to Ships, so the Hebrew
word (...) (...) is attributed to the Side bones of a man, and to the Sides of
the Ark.

The strange RISING of the SHIN-BONES in this Malady which are the middle and
forward part of the BONES of the LEGS cannot well be understood until we first
know what is to be understood by the Thigh and Leg-bones, and the crookedness
of them, the knoppiness of the Ancle-joynts, and the disproportionable rising
up of the SHIN-BONES, in their significations.

The THIGHS and LEGS are distinct parts, yet in Holy Scripture they oftentimes
go under the name of the Legs both. Their office is to support and bear up the
body from falling, and in their figure ought to be upright and straight. The
Two Houses of Parliament under his Royal Majesty our Head, are the Supporters
of the whole Body the Kingdom, while by them are enacted good Laws, and they
maintain the good and punish the evil by doing justice, and not delaying it,
withoutwhich nor Kingdom, nor State can long stand. Often in Holy Scripture is
impartial doing of Justice called judging uprightly, Psalm. 58. 1. Do ye judge
uprightly? and Psa. 75. 2. I will judge uprightly. For he that favors one
more then another inclines his ear to hear, or face to look upon, or hand to
receive a gift from him. They are the LEGS who ought to have been UPRIGHT and
STRAIGHT in judging uprightly. But did they not start aside from their former
and first uprightness, in wresting of Judgment, and delaying of Justice: and
because of such intolerable delays we had not justice from them straight. The
THIGH BONES were the first Parliament.

The LEG-BONES under them are the next succeeding Parliament, not as they were
indeed, but as they assumed the name unto themselves, the Leg-bones being of
the nature of the thigh to sustain and bear up the body, are for their common
office and union, I doubt not, called by the same name both legs. These later
bones in such children are more crooked and more ordinarily, then the
thigh-bones, and do pourtray unto us, That the succeeding Parliament which
followed the first did carry themselves with less uprightness, and did more
often transgress the rules of Justice then those which were their predecessors.
Of the truth of which assertion there are too many examples.

To the Legs are joined the FEET, but under them, principal instruments of
moving the body from place to place, whithersoever we have a mind to go, so
that no going without them or even standing. The feet of such children joined
unto the legs with STRONG KNOPPY ANCLE-JOYNTS, is a proper Type, How all men in
place and power receiving them from the later and succeeding Parliaments,
should by wicked cunning, and by imposing on them unlawful. Oaths and
Engagements be made fast to them thereby, to secure that usurped power, well
knowing, that without such instruments so compacted, they could not go forward
in their designs, nor themselves stand.

Concerning the irregular shape of the SHIN-BONES in such children, first let
us examine the thing it self, and then desiring Gods help, I shall search out
the hidden Mystery. For the former, in a word. The figure of the bone is a
RISING forward of the BONE upon the SHIN very HIGH in the MIDS, and ABOVE and
BENEATH RECLINING. Which figure does as it were in a picture represent and
declare unto us, that great sin of which the succeeding Parliament (a part I
mean of the first, and left behind in the House of Commons) was guilty of. For
this rising of the bone is not in the Thigh but Leg, which I showed to signify
not the former but the after Parliament. Now although this enormous figure
appear in both legs, as if both Houses were guilty of that sin, it is not so to
be understood, but that part which sat in the House of Commons. Two suffered
upon the Cross beside our Savior, both are said to have railed upon him, yet
one only was meant, the other was a true penirent, and honored our Savior.
The Mystery of these bones is, That this part of the House of Commons should
raise themselves too exceeding high, and whereas the FIGURE of such bones does
manifestly paint the instrument by which our innocent Sovereign lost his life,
the EDGE of an AXE, that out of their mouths would proceed that bloody
Instrument (as out of the mouth of Christ a two-edged sword is said, to
proceed, because that which is commanded to be done, comes out of the mouth
which enjoyneth it) by which our Sovereign should lose his Royal Head.

This figure indeed is not like unto the Axe, wherewith his Majesty's life was
taken away, for the edge thereof is straight and not at all reclining, but
being like the Axe which is carried before Traitors, of such a shape as they
commonly call glancing, does more plainly and fully declare the person and
dignity of the King, then if the shape of the edge of the other had been made
upon such childrens legs. Otherwise being even, if the Shin-bone had been never
so sharp, it could not so easily have been apprehended to signify an Axe.
Again, every one that suffers death as a Traitor has not such an axe, or any
born before him, when he goes to his trial; but such only as are persons of
high degree. For which cause the Lord would not that such a monstrous example
of hypocritical and but once paralleled wickedness, that an innocent King
should be accused, condemned, and suffer as a Traitor, against express vows,
should not be written in visible Characters for the eyes of all men.

In the next place I am to consider, that these diseased children, although
when they were younger they were able to walk, afterward in this Disease the use
of their FEET is TAKEN AWAY. We find in Holy Scripture that Walking is working
in Performance of proper Duties, whereour Savior Christ declaring his
resolution not to forbear to preach and heal the sick, he says, Luke 13. 33. I
must walk to day and to morrow; and he admonishing his Disciples of their
duties, bid them, Joh. 12. 35. Walk while ye have light. So these Great
Supporters of this Kingdoms body when they sat in Council together, and to do
Justice and Judgment, when at first for a while they began to walk how soon
after did they leave off performing chief duties, and do nothing at all to the
oppressed, or worse. For the duty of our Parliament is to do that under the
King, which God enjoined King Solomon to do, 2 King 6. 12. To walk in his
Statutes, and to execute Judgment.

The last of this Disease is, that Childrens GROWTH, is HINDERED; whereas some
continue Dwarses hereby for ever. And as these children are hindered in their
growth, so most certainly and fully does the Antitype answer hereunto, showing
that those people which should be sick of these Regents, should grow neither in
Grace, nor Riches, nor in Reputation, nor in any thing that may be called good.
These are the particular Symptoms of the Disease collected from all which are
troubled therewith, and the significations of them, so far as the Lord has
enabled me; I have also examined the Name of the Disease, and found out the
Mystery thereof, but although the REKETS be the general name to all degrees and
sorts of this Malady, yet when the diseased are troubled, with such JOINTS and
RIBS as they call DOUBLE, this they call the TENT. See Arnoldus Bootius in
libello De Affectibus Omissis, in Cap. De Tabe Pectorea. If you then ask me,
What means this Name? I answer, By a Metonymy of the Adjunct it signifies and
expresses Soldiers and Armies. For Castra the Latin word by interpretation
Tents among the Romans is very often put to express an Army or Armies in the
Field, where Tents were used; as among the Holy Writers Tents are put for
Habitations and Houses, because in former times the Israelites dwelt in Tents,
and sometimes Shepberds dwellings, because their habitations in the Fields were
constantly such. But because among us here is no use of Tents but in time of
War, it must signify naturally, according to its Name, and does confirm, that
such Joints were in signification a combining of Generals and Commanders with
Soldiers, of Parl. with Soldiers, and Fortifying by Lands with Soldiers; and
though by Sea, there is no use of Tents, yet the Denomination is given to all,
for the outward likeness of the Types, although proper but to Two of them, and
that not without example; as the Crown and Scepter are used in speech, when by
them we mean nothing but a Kingdom. Thus the Wise God knows every word in
our Tongues, and when men or women give names to things they know not what, nor
why, does oftentimes so overrule them, that they speak the Truth in a Mystery.
So did the High Priest not knowing what he spoke, prophesy of our Savior.

The MYSTERY of the THREE GENERAL REMEDIES.
AFter the Mystery of the REGETS and TENT, and of each SYMPTOM thereof, the
three forenamed Vulgar REMEDIES are not without their Mystery. The first Remedy
is SWINGING such children from side to side, and TOSSING them up and down, and
TURNING them Topsey Turvey. This is ordinarily taken to be, and used as a
Remedy against that Disease, but careful observation and experience teaches
the contrary, that it is vain. Thus for a Remedy against our evil Regents, we
were promised, when we should change from a Kingdom to a Commonwealth we
should have all amended. But that then failing, we were made to believe, how
such a Protector would indeed perform, what others had promised; and when he
had deceived, we must have a piece and the worst piece of a House of Commons to
overruled us, who pleaded the Justice of their own cause, as the rest did,
although the people never received Justice from any of them. And was not this
Tossing England from side to side, and up and down? When we were sometime under
a King and Parliament, we were up, when we were subject to a Few, or One of our
Fellow Subjects, we were down. At last we were turned Topsey Turvey when the
Heels the Soldiers possessed the place and RULE of our Superiors the King and
Parliament. And this was a False Remedy.

The Second REMEDY is the Lifting up such sick children by the Arms. The
meaning of which thing will by Gods grace be understood, if we remember, in
what sense I declared to you from Holy Scripture and the reason thereof, Arms
are to be taken, which is in signification of Armies. This Remedy, Lifting the
sick children up by the Arms, is a False Remedy, and never used with success.
But it is much to be observed, that above all other Remedies which are wont to
be applied to such children, there are none so much abhorred by them as this;
for when it is done they will complain and cry out. The Mystery hereof is, that
when the child of England should be lifted up by the Arms, at which time the
weight of the body depends upon the Arms, that is, the Armies; and at that
time the Arms also are lifted up, and lifting up signifies raising to honor,
Psalm. 113. 7. He raises up the poor out of the dust, and lifts the needy out
of the dunghill, ver. 8. That he may set him with Princes, even with the
Princes of his people, The poor Patients which were troubled with the Regents,
would least of all endure, and most of all complain against the Tyranny of the
Soldiers and Army bearing rule, that is, the Lifting up by and of the Arms.
This was fulfilled to the utmost, when the Agitators of the Army plucked and
threw out of the Parliament house that Piece remaining and left of the Whole
House of Commons, and for a short space, under the greatest indignation of the
people, ruled alone.

The Third REMEDY generally famous, but False is the letting of the diseased
children Blood Behind the Ear. And how true it has been in the Antitype, that
the Head our Royal Head, our Dear Lord the KING should for a pretended cure of
our miseries be let blood behind the Ear, that is, in the Neck by cutting off
his Head, to the increase of our miseries, I abhor to think, and much the
more, because it was plotted and acted by men which were Professors of the
austerest religion. But let not the Profession of Religion be branded for this
cause. Were not those that had the chiefest hand in our Lord Christ's death one
of his Disciples, and the Priests? Is not he that has been guilty of so much
of the blood of the Saints, that the City of Rome is become drunk therewith,
counted the most Holy Father the Pope, and with him the Fathers of the Clergy.
This is the craft of the old Serpent, when he cannot destroy the Church by open
enmity, to endeavor it by seeming friends.

But for the real Cure and true REMEDIES of the Disease we call the REKETS, as
we take it according to the letter, it may for good cause be accounted
wonderful in that regard also, and therein like unto the Leprosy. The Leprosy
was a Disease not curable by any Art or Power of man. For thus answers Ahab
unto the King of Syria, who sent unto him, desiring that he would heal his
servant Naaman of the Leprosy, concluding the curing of that Disease to be a
Divine work above man's strength, 2 King. 5. 7. Am I God to kill and to make
alive, that this man does send to me to recover a man of his Leprosy? To which
purpose and more plainly speaks our Savior, Luke 4. 27. Many Lepers were in
Israel in the time of Elizeus the Prophet; and none of them was cleansed saving
Naaman the Syrian. Even so neither is the malady of the Rekets curable by any
Art or Physician upon the Earth; although, I doubt not, all men both Learned
and unlearned believe the contrary, persuaded from what they see, that diverse
children afflicted very much with this Disease, at length become found and
perfect. But although it cannot be denied, that many children have recovered
from the Rekets to a soundness in every part, yet is the conclusion false, To
assert thereupon, That this Disease has been so cured by Physical Medicines.
And the seeming contradiction is thus reconciled to the truth, by example of
the Leprosy. No Leper was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian, says our
Savior in the place abovesaid, yet we read under the Law a Prescription of the
Rites and Ceremonies to be used in Cleansing of Lepers, under this Title, Lev.
14 2. This shall be the Law of the Leper in the day of his cleansing. Moreover,
it is acknowledged by the words of Almighty God, that in the Legal times Lepers
were cleansed, ver. 3. And the Priest shall go forth out of the Camp (says the
Lord to Moses) and the Priest shall look, and behold, if the plague of Leprosy
be healed in the Leper. Hence by comparing the words in Moses with the speech
of our Savior Christ, the one acknowledging Lepers to have been healed, and
the Form thereupon of their cleansing prescribed, the other denying any then to
have been cleansed, but Naaman the Syrian, we are taught to find aneasie way
out of this appearing Labyrinth, and which does exactly fit the cure of the
REKETS by looking up to God; by whose hand we must know many untoucht by man
were healed; although by man's Art and Power, until our Savior came, no Leper
was cured. It is most apparent to our eyes, that very many children laboring
under the REKETS, have recovered in their Limbs, Ribs, Heads, and Body, but
such as enjoy this mercy, are not made partakers thereof by Physical helps. For
we deceive our selves, while we think, whatsoever is applied to such children,
in such a time in which it pleases the Lord to be in healing them, to be the
very causes of their recovery. As it comes to pass, that such medicines which
are applied unto persons sick of Agues or Toothe-ache, although most of them
are known to be of no force against those griefs at all, if in the use of such
Applications, the Agues and Toothache leave such Patients, which ever almost
sooner or later go away of themselves, are famed for most approved Helps
against the said Diseases. Whence arises such a multitude of False Remedies
against those and other Griefs. And, if it be peradventure of little credit
most confidently to protest mine own experience, which here I do, of the
Remedies against the Rekets, were it a Natural Disease, and such as those
which write of it report it to be, applied by me, before the Lord gave me this
knowledge, to have been without the least success, let the anxious Reader
consider and weigh, that some have been healed without the least Application of
Natural means, others have died of that disease, others have retained the
Symptoms still, against all use of means. Of the First kind of whom Almighty
God is pleased (blessed be his Name) to make my little Son a welcome Example.

Wherefore by the way I advise every man, in the fear of the Lord, and for the
foregoing Reasons, to abstain from Humane help in the REKETS, as the Jews did
most religiously in their Leprosy; and to implore Divine assistance by Prayer
and Fasting. For as in the Leprosy, when our Savior was come and performed
his work he came about of our Redemption, first leprous persons were healed,
afterward all Leprosy vanished, so when He our Gracious K. CHARLES II who now
is come, has performed the work he is come to do of Reformation, the Disease
of the REKETS will be heard of no more in the Land.

But this may not be expected from our Royal Sovereign now, at his first coming
into his Kingdom, until that shall be accomplished which undoubtedly by Gods
grace will be; for till the things typified are come the Types will remain.
Thus the Leprosy and the cure thereof did so design our Savior the Physician
of Soul and Body, and so point at him as it were with the finger, that unto the
Baptist who sent to know of him, whether he were the Messiah, he gave no other
answer, but bid them tell John, that the Lepers were cleansed, etc. yet
notwithstanding was not the Leprosy taken away till after his Passion, when
the Type was fulfilled.

His Royal Majesty shall take away the Disease of the Rekets in two kinds,
First, the Typified Rekets, and each Symptom thereof, removing from us that
which he has put his Royal Hand to already, the Pining of our even famished
Body the Commonwealth, so that betwixt the Head and Body there shall be a due
and meet Proportion, By whose Gracious Favor, neither the Doubling of the
Joints of Armies with their Generals and Commanders, nor of the Parliament with
their Substitutes, not the Ribs doubled in multiplying Ships to guard our Seas,
or Garrisons to fortisie our Land-Coasts. These will not be needful. The Lord
will restore unto us, as he promised the Jews by his Prophet, our Judges as at
the first, and our Counselors both Houses of Parliament, as in the beginning.
The Two Legs, Houses of Parliament shall be no more crooked and unjust, but
upright. The Breast Plate, Armor and Ships in great number shall be put off,
and laid by, and liberty shall not fly away. The Child of England shall be
healed of all her Maladies; Her teeth shall no more hide themselves, yea, the
sound teeth of Orthodox and unblameable Preachers shall fill their empty
places. The subordinate Heads of the People shall purge their own corruption.
In such manner as when our Savior did cleanse the Lepers, he did signify
thereby the taking away of sin.

Secondly, God Almighty has ordained our Lord King CHARLES II to take away the
Typical Rekets, even the Bodily Disease it self. And as our Savior cured Both
the Typified leprosy of sin, and Punishment by his Suffering; and the Typical
in Persons first, and took the Leprosy away at last, and He and none but He
could do it, so King CHARLES II, first taking away the signified Disease by his
Gracious Goodness and Wisdom, shall take the Bodily Rekets quite away, when
this work is done; which the LORD hasten. And his Majesty has given us a great
Essay thereof already, in his Gracious Assent to the Disbanding the Army, in
his Edicts against Drunkenness and Rioting, etc.

To conclude concerning the REKETS; As the Leprosy was such a Disease which
infected no other Nation, but the children of Israel (excepting Naaman the
Syrian, intimating thereby, that Christ should by his Death cleanse the
Leprosy of the sins of the Gentiles) and seems by Tacitus the Historians words
to be imputed to them, and no other Nation beside, although he falsely
concludes, that for such a Disease they were drove out of Egypt, So is the
REKETS the proper Disease unto the Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland,
and to the Kings Dominions, and to no other people beside, unless living in his
Majesty's Kingdoms. And as the Leprosy did portend the Physician thereof
should be the Lords Christ our King, so does the REKETS point at the Lords
Anointed to be the Healer thereof our King.

But my Reader peradventure will say, This being all granted to be true, and
that all this must be performed by a King, yet it still remains doubtful, by
what King all these things shall be wrought. The resolving of which doubt by
necessity brings me to examine the other strange Disease the KING'S EVIL. These
two Diseases do portend and foreshew one and the same thing, the greatness of
our calamities Both and that we shall be delivered from them through the mighty
Hand of the most merciful God. For is it not a very wonderful thing, and above
the thoughts of man, among all other Infirmities of the REKETS, perfectly cured
in like manner, to see and consider the crooked bones of Arms and Legs to
become straight of their own accord? Albeit the Wiseman says, Eccles. 1. 15.
That which is crooked cannot be made straight. Touching the cure of the Struma,
no man of judgment can deny the Hand of God therein. Which Two Maladies, as in
part they do agree, so do they also thus differ; the REKETS beside the Disease
shows who should be the Authors of our evils, under the name of the Disease;
the KING'S EVIL, who should cure us, with the Title of his Dignity. Again, the
REKETS explaineth Fully what the KING'S EVIL delivers more Briefly, and this
is to be done by one Person, our Dread Sovereign, who by the Grace of God given
unto him, as he heals the Bruises and Putrified Sores of those whom he
touches, will take away the Falsness of Doctrine and Blasphemy in Religion,
Injustice, Oppression in the State, and wicked living from all. Which may well
be signified by corruption and putrid Ulcers, by a Metaphorical name: because
these things proceed from a Diseased Soul, are loathsome and odious to God and
man, and stink in their nostrils. To prove therefore King CHARLES II and no
other to be that King which shall perform those great things in England, it
will be necessary to show this unto you by Example of the Leprosy, and thereof
who was or were the First Cleansers, and who the last, that so in like manner,
Who he was who first cured the KING'S EVIL being known, we may know the last,
and he that was presaged thereby. The First Cleanser of the Leper was the
Priest, as appears in Lev. 14. But the Person foreshewn thereby was our Savior
Christ, a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. From which Example
of the Leprosy, two Rules are to be laid down. 1. That the Type and Antitype
be both alike. 2. That there be as much, and more in the Antitype than in the
Type, in the most perfect Antitype. As in the Precedent of the Leprosy; The
Type and Antitype were Both to be Priests, and not so only (I speak of the
Persons) but lest it might be thought, that any of the Priests the Sons of
Aaron, succeeding the First Cleanser before Christ, might be the Person
prefigured, therefore a more excellent Priest was to be still expected, not
such an one as offered up Bulls and Goats, like the Typical Priests, but himself
once for all. According to which two Rules, our Dear Lord King CHARLES II is
the Antitype unto the First Curer of the KING'S EVIL, But because Christ had
many Types of himself which being put together did so describe him, that no man
might mistake him when he was come, for he was not fully prefigured by Priests,
but partly by Prophets, by their foretelling, their raising the dead, as Elias
and Elisha did, etc. by Solomon's wisdom, Jonas's being in the Fishes belly,
etc. But our Lord the King having no such Types of him, beside the First healer
of the KING'S EVIL, as our Savior had, therefore his whole Type is pourtrayed
in Edward the Confessor. Secondly, it will follow that more must be in the Cure
of our Sovereign the Antitype, then was in King Edward the Type, from the
second Rule, lest some other of the Kings of England might be thought Edwards
Antitype: but in the outward and bodily cure they are alike and equal,
therefore that more in the Antitype must be of those forenamed things
signified thereby. I now will show you according to the First Rule, a Full
Equality betwixt King Edward and King Charles, so that no other King but King
Charles II can be the parallel to his Royal Predecessor King Edward the
Confessor. King Edward was banished his Country, so was our Liege Lord King
Charles. King Edward was sent for to come and govern, thus was our Dread
Sovereign humbly entreated by Both his Houses of Parliament, to Assume the
Government of his Kingdoms, and was sent for. And how welcome our King was
unto the Clergy, who expected restitution into their places, and to all
Ministers which before expected to be deprived of all maintenance, as they were
threatened, and how far above the welcome of King Edward the Confessor to his,
who felt and feared no such evil, the different reasons will plainly determine.
And with what gladness of heart his Subjects received King Charles, after their
intolerable oppressions, and never otherwise likely to be removed, no man can
doubt, nor can tongue express; but their Presents, their Triumphs, their
Attendance, their incessant Shouts and Acclamations as in a continued Street
from Dover to London of young and old, to see their King, do plainly testify.
But above all King Edward the Confessor was the Son of Edward the Martyr; even
so our Gracious K. Charles the Confessor was Son to King Charles the Martyr.
And lest it trouble my Reader to imagine how Edward the Confessor may be called
the son of Edward the Martyr, since in property of speech, and by general
consent he is not the Son, but Nephew and brothers son to Edward the Martyr.
All this notwithstanding Edward the Confessor by the Phrase of Holy Scripture
(which we for the most part follow, and ought to follow in this Divine
interpretation) is the Son of Edward the Martyr. For we read, 1 Chro 3 16. And
the sons of Joakim, Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son, when indeed and in
nature Zedekiah was not the son but the uncle of Jeconiah; but cause Zedekiah
was Jeconiahs Successor, he is called his son; as by the same rule, Edward the
Confessor being Successor to Edward the Martyr is called Edward the Martyrs
Son. And yet a farther reason thereof common to both is, That in orderly and
legal Succession the son of either ought to have succeeded his Father, that is,
of Jeconiah, and Edward the Martyr. Here likewise is brought in the second Rule
in some part, Edward was styled the Martyr only (as it is declared) because he
was murdered innocently, Edward was sir-named the Confessor, because he was a
Pious and Charitable man, and enacted good Laws. But for far better cause is
our Royal Sovereign King Charles I named the Martyr, which name his Majesty
took unto himself, is so entitled in the Writings of Learned men, and is so to
be accounted, for giving Testimony with his blood to that which in the secret
thoughts of his heart he judged to be the Truth. King Charles II our Gracious
Sovereign for better cause then his Predecessor King Edward the Confessor has
deserved that name, for his Majesty has made a Holy and Royal Confession with
his mouth. Wherefore I most humbly Almighty God, in whose hand are the hearts
of Kings, so to dispose his Majesty's heart, and I humbly beseech his Majesty
to be entreated that he will not suffer such men who have opened their mouths
in vows to the Most High God to be enforced either to revoke that which cannot
be recalled, or being pious, skilful and faithful laborers, for that cause to
be excluded from working in the Lords Harvest. And I do with confidence
believe, that my prayer is heard in heaven, and will be upon the earth.

Whereunto (if there be need of more marks which may show, that King Charles II
was designed to be the Antitype of Edward the Confessor) though the distance of
time betwixt them be the space of 600 years or more; for Edward the Confessor
died about the year 1066. having reigned much about the time of twenty three
years. See Henry Knighton, and John Brompton in Edward the Confessor, add and
observe, that K. Charles II our Royal Sovereign succeeded his martyred Father
CHARLES I, after so many Governors and Governments and no more, as Edward the
Confessor succeeded after Kings the Martyred Edward. Moreover two of those, one
in the Types, the other in the Antitypes, are strangely of one Name, and in the
same Order of Governing, that is, the III. Let us compare, them.

Edward the Martyr I, Egelred II, Edmund Ironside III, Hardicantus IV, Edward
the Confessor V.
The ANTITYPE.
Charles the Martyr I, Commonwealth II, Oliver Protector bynamed Ironside III
Richard Protector IV, Charles our Gracious Sovereign Confessor V.
Now according to Example in the Balm, according to Scripture and reason, as
that precious oil ceast to be when Christ had suffered, and as the substance
being come, the shadow goes away, and there is no reason to expect a sign when
the thing signified thereby is now come, I conclude, that our Royal Sovereign
will be the last of the Kings of this Nation, to whom God will give the gift of
healing the KING'S EVIL.

Now Reader take here notice of the Pride, Malice, and Subtlety of the Devil,
and his Emulation of Almighty God, who has so wound himself into the minds of
Impostors, and through them into the persuasions of the ignorant and rude
multitude, that the seventh son in order from the first, without any daughter
born betwixt is able to cure that Disease which we call the KING'S EVIL. And
this Imposture is frequently undertaken, and performed by stroaking with the
hand, and the Minister thereof is called a Stroaker. This I say, is attributed
by some to a seventh son, by others to a seventh son of a seventh son. Which,
albeit a lie from the father of lies the devil immediately proceeding, does
nevertheless declare the devils knowledge and foreknowledge of our Royal
Sovereign King CHARLES II his virtue. And as the Lord will win glory unto
himself from all Creatures, and all Things; for to this purpose they were by
him created, so will he likewise from Satan, and his practices, even to
illustrate and confirm, though against the minds of the Serpent, his Glory,
and Truth. This is the matter; the Prerogative which the Lord has given to the
Kings of England, and among, but far above them to our Dread Sovereign Charles
II, the devil having a foresight of, in his counsel which he gives to
Impostors, does secretly thereby acknowledge, and yet defaceth, but not wholly,
by adding somewhat of his own. For it is true, that a seventh son of a seventh
is endued with Power from above, not only to cure the bodily malady called the
KING'S EVIL, as others have had, but to take away the Evil of the Kingdom, and
is his Royal Prerogative, which none of his Predecessors have had. This
Profession of curing this Malady is held out ordinarily in this form, viz. The
seventh son without a daughter born betwixt them cures the KING'S EVIL. In which
expression the devil, as he has wont to do, abuses the truth three ways: 1.
By speaking ambiguously, as he did use in the Oracle of Apollo, leaving it
uncertain whether Son be in those words to be taken according to the common
acception of the word, or otherwise. 2. By leaving out some part of the matter
(which notwithstanding sometimes I have heard used, and which serves to
discovery of the truth) and that is these words, of a seventh. 3. By adding
words thereto wholly false, such are, without a daughter born betwixt, and
putting Son after seventh, so making it to be, of a seventh son. Thus did Satan
speak doutfully, when he told our first parents, They should be as God, or Gods
knowing good and evil. The word there signifying God, and also damned Spirits,
and knowing good and evil to be interpreted both knowledge of speculation, and
knowledge of feeling, joy and sorrow, the later of which, Adam and Eve felt, as
did those lost Angels. As for leaving out part of the truth, the Devil was
guilty thereof, when speaking unto our Savior to fast himself down from a
pinnacle of the Temple, he used this expression, Mat. 4. 6. If thou be the Son
of God, cast thy self down; For it is written, He shall give his Angels charge
concerning thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time
thou dash thy foot against a stone; in which words taken out of Psa. 91. 11,
12, these words are left out by the devil, to keep thee in all thy ways.
Lastly, by adding words the devil corrupts the truth, which he did when he
spoke unto Saul, unto the truth which he spoke in part by aujoyning lies. 1 Samuel 28. And the Lord has done by him (says the devil concerning David truly)
as he spoke by me, which was false; for the Lord spoke not so by the Devil, but
by the true Samuel. What I affirmed before, That a seventh son of a seventh
shall cure the KING'S EVIL, and to be understood in such manner as abovesaid of
the Person of King Charles II, does thus appear. Account all the Descents from
father to son, that is in a right line, from King Henry VII to our Dread
Sovereign now reigning, taking and including both terms, we shall find them to
be seven; so that our Sovereign last in order is the seventh son of a seventh,
understand Henry. For it is common in Scripture not to call the grandchildren
sons only, as Josiah is said Matthew. 1. 11. to have begotten Jeconiah, but those
which after many generations have come out of the loins of a man, by the name
of sons to such a one; as the children of Israel, of Esau. But more nearly to
our purpose, Enoch is called the seventh from Adam Jude 14. in which place son
is to be understood. For Henry VII is the First, Margarite his daughter Q, to
James IV. King of Scotland the Second, James V the third. Mary Q. of Scotland
his daughter the Fourth, James VI King of Great Britain the fifth, King Charles
I, the sixth, K. Charles II, the seventh. And this is a good Argument to prove
that King Charles II the seventh of a sea earth is not to be understood so to
cure the King's Evil as in a literal sense, which some of these, and more of his
Predecessors have done, but in some special and mystical way, as I have
declared. And this computation agrees in another account; if we reckon by the
daughter of Queen Margarite and her issue; for Queen Margarite daughter to King
Henry VII, first married to King James IV, had issue James V, after married to
Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus by him had issue Margarite. As King Henry VII
the first, Margarite Queen to King James IV the second, Margarite her daughter
by Archibald Earl of Angus, and Wife to Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenoix the
third; Henry Lord Darley her son, husband to Mary Queen of Scotland the fourth,
King James his son King of Great Britain the fifth, King Charles I the sixth,
King Charles II the seventh.

For which cause I do humbly beseech the Kings Majesty, that a Law may be
enacted by the King and his Parliament, for the deserved punishment of such
diabolical impostures, as this is which is frequently committed in this land by
seventh sons taking upon them the Royal Prerogative of our Kings, with the
touch of their hands to cure the King's Evil. For the practice here of tends
much to the dishonor of God, and of our good King, and to the delusion of his
Majesty's Subjects.

But one thing more touching the Rekets must not be forgotten, that is to say,
the time when that Disease first seized upon Children in this Kingdom, and had
that name of Rekets given unto it. It was the third year after our Royal
Sovereigns Nativity, or the next unto it, when the weekly Bill of Mortality
mentioned one to have been buried of the Rekets in the Month of May, and no
mention thereof in any of the said Bills before that time. As I have found by
search in the Parish Clerks Register kept in their Hall. For as the time when
Darius took the Babylonian Kingdom is expressed, Dan. 5. 31. to be, when he was
about threescore and two years old, that the Jews might observe (as judiciously
H. Broughton has noted upon that place) that at the time they were carried
into captivity, which was about the time of Darius his birth, the Jews might
then know the Lord had a Deliverer born for them, So the Nation of England may
learn Gods special care, that he did not send them the Disease of the Rekets,
till He was born who should free them from the Miseries signified thereby, and
from the Disease it self. Hitherto of the King's Evil as it pertains to the
King and Kingdom of England.

Whereas I said, The sins and calamities of this Nation with the Causers of
them were pointed at by the Name and Disease of the Rekets, and not the Name of
our Deliverer, but in the other the King's Evil, yet notwithstanding it does
appear who shall be our Deliverer, albeit not in the Name of the Disease, or
the Symptoms of the Rekets, yet in the quality of the Persons which are
troubled therewith. The Patients so afflicted are Children and no other;
partly, but not principally, that we might be left without all pretense of any
other inferior cause, but be constrained to look up to the Hand which has
smitten us; and yet we will not, but in despite of reason seek about after
this and that cause most vainly. Again, partly it is to let us understand, that
the afflictions foreshewn thereby should fall upon the child of God. Thirdly
and principally, the Rekets is laid on children, that by the quality of the
person afflicted by it, it being the child's disease we may understand him that
shall free us from it, and what is signified thereby. As it is called the
King's Evil, not because it is caused by, or laid upon, but cured by the King;
So is it called and to be called the Childs disease, because a child shall
heal it. Surely you will ask me, What child? We find in Holy Scripture that
our Savior has called himself barely by the name of the Son; If the Son shall
make you free (says our Savior) you shall be free indeed. And since we find
that God does communicate his own Name to Princes, calling them Gods, and hence
it seems to have been first used among Princes to name themselves in the plural
number, though single, by the word we and us, imitating as it were the Lord
Almighty who is One and Three, he does seem to express by this word the childs
Disease, the Disease of the child above all other children, the child a son
of the King. After which manner the son and daughter of the King of Spain is
called infant and infanta, that is, the son and daughter child, as being well
enough expressed alone to understand what son and daughter is meant thereby. So
when we say, the childs Diseases (...) may be well understood, that Disease
which the Child (...) above all children, that is, the Kings son shall heal.
In which expression of child is also shown, first that our King shall be when
this is done, a child, albeit not according to the vulgar use of the word in
our English tongue, yet according to the signification of that word which in
the Hebrew signifies sometimes a child in years, else where a young man
(although not very properly by the Translators rendered also a child, where in
Daniel it signifies a young man, calling the three companions of Daniel, three
children) that he shall then be young in years. How great a matter of comfort is
hereby administered unto us that are the people of the land, that the Lord is so
pleased, that the King shall not differ the making us a happy nation to his old
age, but go about it and perfect the Lords work while he is young? Secondly,
here is an Argument of Almighty Gods great Power and Mercy, that he should
frame his Majesty's heart to clemency, as not to suffer him although his Royal
Father was murdered, to break out in cruel and unjust revenge. It is the Lords
doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

And lest any man should thus object, This Disease of the Rekets is common to
women children as well as to men, as that it should not seem thereby to point
at a cure to be performed by the King in regard of the sex, as to be performed
by the son more than the daughter of a King; let him take a view of those great
Types of our Savior the Prophets, whereof although the most part were men, yet
were there among them Prophets of another sex, some also Prophetesses, Miriam,
Deborah, Huldah, and Types of our Savior Christ. I will not dispute here the
reason thereof in them, but great cause there is that this Disease should be
common to both sexes. First, because it is laid upon us by the Lord as a
Punishment, and so indifferently to lie upon both sexes in regard of their
parents sin. Secondly, to premonish us how the Afflictions and Calamities
should lie hard upon women as well as men.

But yet as the Prophets and Prophetesses both aimed at a Christ to come who
was a male (who sometime by ceremony was designed to be such, as in the Paschal
lamb enjoined to be a male of the flock) so did and do both males and females
in this childs Disease point out unto us a Son of a King, a King to be our
Deliverer.

Now it remains, that I give the like account concerning the Struma, as it is
healed by the touch of the hand of the French King. Which healing in such
manner Guido, Tagautius, and Laurentius specially, French Authors do averr, and
Sennertus a famous and very judicious Physician of Germany acknowledges in his
Cure of the Struma, but unjustly ascribes the work by a Divine Dispensation to
the French King only. Of which briefly. As those calamities and corrupt sores
which shall be removed and healed by King Charles II in the kingdom of England,
in such manner must certainly the putrid sores, and bruises, and wounds be
healed in the Kingdom of France. For the Disease is one in both Kingdoms, the
Form of healing the same, by the Touch, and the Healers of like Dignity being
Kings, as to show unto us, these things shall be accomplished by the hands of a
King. But as in these forenamed things there is a Parity in the healing of the
King's Evil by the King of England and French King, so is there a Difference in
the qualifications of the first Healers. For the First Healer of the Kings of
France was not the Son of a Martyr, as was our Sovereign; but the French
Stories tell us, how Clovis the First of that name, and Fifth King of France,
who reigned about the year of our Lord 500. had first of the Kings of that
Kingdom, this gift of healing the Struma, (which since we call the King's Evil)
bestowed upon him. And what was this King? The Story tells us, That he was first
a Heathen and an Idolater, and being afterward converted to the Christian
faith, then this great gift of healing the Struma was from the Mercy and Power
of God bestowed upon him, which has continued through the several families of
their Kings unto them all, even to this day. This King Clovis therefore, who
first cured this Evil in France, is to be the Type, according to the Example in
England, of him that is to be the Antitype in France, to do all those
forenamed things which are prefigured thereby; after which time also no King
of France shall be able to heal in such a manner the foresaid Malady. Whereupon
I conclude, When the French King, or King of France, from being such a one as
King Clovis was, becomes and is turned to such a Christian indeed, as he was
after styled, then at that time by such a King of France shall the wounds,
bruises, and putrid soars of that distressed Kingdom be healed. I need not here
be large; but by what has already been said, will the Judicious Reader
understand, that I mean the corruptions of Religion and Justice, and by such a
King who is of the Reformed Religion, which depends for salvation only upon
Christ the Head. Nevertheless, to determine what Person individually shall be
that King, who shall there perform that great and incredible work, by what is
contained in the Type, is not so easy a thing; because the Antitype (if what I
assert be granted) does not declare what that man shall be, nor at what time it
shall be done. For if the Antitype must necessarily answer to the Type (may
some say) as the Type is of a single Person, who first was an Ethnic, and
afterward became a Christian, so ought the Person which shall perform these
great matters be a single Person, who from a false religion shall be converted
to the true. To which objections I make this Answer, That although it be not
clearly contained in the Type, when and by what Person or Persons, King or
Kings of France these works shall be brought to pass, yet other circumstances
there are pertaining thereunto, which help to signify both Time and Person.
For Almighty God, when he is pleased to work deliverances for his people, is
wont sooner or later to express the Time when such mercies shall be wrought,
and who shall be the Deliverer. That nothing may be wanting to the comfort of
the Lords people, and that his children may follow and cleave unto those that
are so appointed to be their deliverers. That the children of Abraham should be
no longer servants in Egypt, but that in the Fourth Generation they should come
out from thence, it was foretold Abraham, Genesis 15. and that Aaron and Moses
should bring them out of Egypt, God called them by name, Exo. 6. 26. The
abiding of the Jews in Chaldea was determined to be for 70 years, and their
Deliverer Cyrus by name expressed. Therefore it is not without precedent when God
has appointed Salvation, and a Savior, to name the Time and Person, as well
as the thing. But where it is laid down for a Rule, That the Antitype must be a
single Person, as well as the Type; this I deny. Because the Type of a single
Person may prefigure One or More, according to the nature of the things. Adam a
single Person was the Type of all mankind. The Image of one man's Person seen
by Nebuchadnezzar was a Type of the several Princes of the four ensuing
Monarchies. So the meaning of the Healing of the Struma by King Clevis, when of
a Heathen he turned a Christian, is to this effect. When a King of France from
the false shall be of the true Reformed Religion, then shall by such a King
these evils of that Kingdom be taken away. Which may be affirmed, both when the
same Person is converted, and when another King of the true Religion comes in
the room of a former of the false. Having therefore this liberty, to place the
Antitype of King Clovis either on Two Kings, or else on One, as need requires,
I here place it upon Two, and of all Kings, upon King Levis the 14, and King
CHARLES II our reigning Sovereign, the later of which by being enthroned King
of France, God our Mighty and Merciful Lord will enable and incline to do those
great things. For as the Things forenamed shall most certainly be brought to
pass by a King of France, the Lord has left the rest touching the Time when,
and the Performer who, to be collected from probable Arguments. Which probable
Arguments are all for, and none against our Gracious Sovereign, and by
designing his Majesty, the Time and Person are both made known. For it is not
probable, that from the present French King such fruit shall proceed, by his
conversion to the Reformed Religion, or so easing the burdens of his Subjects,
having seized already lately on Aurange and Marseilles two great receptacles
for those of the Religion, and their ancient Liberties, and who still
threatens Geneva.

Now here I must take leave to assume liberty to draw an Argument from that
which is not yet fullfilled, but begun only, accounting it as already done. For
thus does S. Paul, from the certain conversion of the Jews, which was then to
be, but neither in his time, nor to this day fulfilled, Romans 11. persuade the
Christians, not to despise that people, but account them as brethren. And the
Holy Ghost assuring us of the burning of the City of Rome, a thing not yet
accomplished, advises the people of God to leave that City, lest they should
perish with it, Revel. 18. 4. Thus I having already declared and by the
foregoing reasons proved, that K. Charles II will perform by Gods Grace
undoubtedly in England, all the promised matters, do by probable conjecture
infer, that it shall in France be performed by him also. For to do such great
matters is not every day seen; None of all the Kings of France since King
Clovis, nor French Kings have cured the putrid sores of that Kingdom. None of
the 27. Kings and Queens of England from the Confessor have done that till now.
Nor is it probable that any of the French Kings there educated would be of the
Reformed Religion. And as much unlikely it is, that any of those Kings should
take away all the Corruption in Justice and Manners. But, since it must be
done, how probable may it seem, that it can be done by none else, but by him
who has done the like in England, and may do the same in France, unto which
Kingdom he has a most just Title? So much for my first Argument.

Secondly, It is not likely that God will honor him who has not the right as
him who has the just Title to that Crown, with so glorious a work in that
place. For the Crown of France by just Title is devolved upon our Gracious
Sovereign from Edward III King of England in right of his mother Queen
Isabella. She was daughter unto Philip the Fair King of France, which Philip
had three sons successively Kings of France, viz. Lodowik Hutin, Philip the
Tall, and Charles the Fair; all which dying without issue, Isabella their only
sister remaining alive was married unto Edward II King of England, by whom she
had issue Edward III, to whom our Royal Sovereign is the next heir by descent
from him. Against whose right the French do only pretend the Salique Law, by
which no daughter of France is admitted to the Crown, but when and by what
sufficient authority there enacted, their Lawyers give us no satisfaction.

And the Reasons why the Person is not so expressly designed for France, as here
before for England, are of moment. 1. Because by setting us to enquire after
that Prince, who shall work so great a happiness to that Kingdom, we are
thereby driven to find out the causes for which most probably God may give (as
He has formerly given Kingdoms to Princes, and extraordinary possessions to
others) Princes such an opportunity and blessing, we may thereby light upon the
very Person. For God has made all things for his own Glory, and all men, but
specially Princes, induing them for that purpose with great power, and those
which suffer great things for his sake, and stand for him and love his people,
he seldom sends them away without some ample recompense in this life. Yet it
was needful that the King whom the Lord had appointed for the happiness of
England should be more clearly discovered, as it has pleased God to do
touching our Royal Sovereign. For who could conjecture, that a Prince who had
been so exceedingly enraged by the wickedness of some, should be so merciful as
to spare his cruel enemies, and to be so loving and merciful to his people, so
tender toward those whose consciences cannot admit that for fear of man, which
their sincere love to God made them to deny, if God had not more expressly shown
King CHARLES II to be that Good Prince? For which cause the King which shall be
the Deliverer of France is more obscurely figured, because he is already
discovered in the Type of Englands Helper. 2. Because the assurance of what
shall be by our Sovereign done in France to Gods people there (which cannot be
until he rule there as King) shall appear unto his Royal Majesty, when God
shall move his Heart to begin in England first; so that the Lord would have him
to hasten that great, weighty and heroic work.

Now let us look back to the causes which the Lord seems to have respect unto
in making King CHARLES so happy, and see if we can find like Examples. Observe
his unjust and cruel sufferings. Shall a Prince, who, after the murder of his
Royal Father, under the pretense of Justice by the most unjust Judges which
ever sat in Judgment, and by feigned Holiness, was banished with the whole
Royal Family as malefactors, and the King himself made a Traitor, and his
precious life hunted after, shall his Innocence with the rest of that Royal
house, against none of whom the least crime or cause was objected, only make
his people happy? May a King who has suffered such wrongs, and done such
excellent things for God, and his people, expect no blessing, but a bare
restitution? God owes no man any thing, but what we receive is of gift; yet the
Lord Almighty has not wont, but in such cases to show his acceptance and make
recompense. Nebuchadrezzar for fighting against the City of Tire, which
rejoiced at the captivity of the Jews, when they were carried unto Rabylon,
received the Kingdom of Egypt as a reward of his labor; Ezekiel. 29. ver. 18. Son
of man, Nebuchad-rezzar King of Babylon caused his Army to serve a great
service against Tyrus; every head was made bald, and every shoulder was peeled,
yet had he no wages nor his army for Tyrus; for the service which he served
against it.

Ver. 19. Therefore thus says the Lord God, Behold, I will give the land of
Egypt unto Nebuchad-rezzar King of Babylon, and he shall take her multitude,
and take her spoil, and take her prey, and it shall be the wages for his army.

Ver. 20. I have given him the land of Egypt for his labor, wherewith he served
against it, because they wrought for me, says the Lord God.

And did not the Lord bestow upon Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, for her
imprisonment, for maintaining of Gods true Religion, for resisting the
Spaniard, befriending the French against the League, and protecting the
Neatherlands, the Kingdom of Ireland? For what of that Kingdom had all her
Ancestors who were called Lords, and Kings thereof, but charge and trouble,
beside a bare Title? But to her was the Kingdom conquered, and quieted, that,
as the Author of the History called Pacata Hibernia in the Epistle to the
Reader, speaks, Q. Elizabeth might have it justly written upon her Tomb, Pacata
Hibernia, or, Ireland Tamed. But our Royal Sovereign is doing more, and has
begun it already, and suffered longer, and worse, than ever Queen Elizabeth
did. Yet not thou, O Charles, but God which is in thee. Secondly, If we
consider his Majesty's Constancy and Patience in the mids of his great
Tentations. Shall K. Charles II, who was by wicked men banished from his own
Kingdom, forced to remain in the Dominions of a Popish Prince, such a King,
who by no Necessities, nor Solicitations could be drawn to forsake God, to
advance himself, shall he, I say, be miraculously preserved in his escape from
his cruel hunters, and more miraculously in France and Flanders, from Idolatry,
and only be kept to make us happy? God forbid. Had not Joseph, whose bow abode
in strength, whom the archers sorely grieved, shot at, and hated, Genes. 49.
23, 24. a double portion to him and his posterity? Ezekiel. 47. 13. having one
portion for that cause above his brethren given him by his father taken out of
the hand of the Amorite with the sword and with his bow, Genesis 48. 22. But our
Sovereigns bow abode as much and more in strength, when for the solicitations
of the Egyptian Romish harlot he started not aside.

Beside in the very letters of their names there is a parity between the Type
and Antitype (and this sometime happens, not by chance but providence, as
when Mary Aarons Sister a virgin, and Jesus Moses successor prefigured in deed
and names the virgin Mary, and Jesus our Savior) betwixt Clovis and C and
Clovis, as to note, those great evils shall be taken away when C and Lovis
meet, as now they do.

Concerning the Healing of the King's Evil in France, and what is prefigured
thereby thus far.

If any of my Readers shall object, which doubtless most will do, that what I
do presage touching our Royal Sovereign and the Kingdom of France, is no more
then probable; to him I will be bold to say, and let him well consider, that
even among the Sages of the Law, great Probabilities have the esteem of
Certainties, and according thereunto Sentence is pronounced by them. And we
know, that in the difference of the two Harlots about a surviving child, who
should be the true mother thereof, when King Solomon gave sentence on her side
who showed pity toward the Infant, as to be mother thereof, judgment thus
given from probable conjecture, is said to be the Wisdom of God in him, 1
King. 3. 28. Or are our children known to be the fathers, but by probability?
Yea, although we are enjoined to give diligence to make our calling and
election sure, how few of the elect ever attained to that height in this life,
that all his mis-doubtings were taken away, and that he was fully assured of a
future happiness? I must acknowledge that there are degrees of likeliness;
some things which are probable are not yet firm enough to conclude, others of
so high a degree of probability, that according to the example commended by the
Spirit of God in Solomon, they are as strong as the clearest certainties. And
of that sort of probable things which are the strongest or very near them, I
here maintain these sore-named to be.

Thus much pertaining to the cure of the Struma performed by the French King,
and what is signified thereby. And here at last it will not be unseasonable to
explain, what before was partly touched by me, whence it is that neither our
Sovereign, nor yet the French King do heal of the Struma all that are touched
by their hands. 2. That they do not likewise help such as are troubled with the
Gout, Fevers, Palsy, etc. but this Evil only. 3. Kings of this Kingdom, and
of the French nation, although they have erred in the faith, and have been of a
false Church, have healed this Disease, as well as those which have been sound
in the faith, and members of that true Church, of which Christ is Head, in
which small number our Royal Sovereign is one, and a principal. 4. That in some
few although healed at present, the foresaid disease through some occasion
breaks out again.

In answer to the first Objection, first acknowledging, if the healing of this
Evil, were perfectly miraculous, like unto those cures wrought by our Savior,
it should be perfect, in any of which our King should lay his Royal hands, Joh.
7. 23. Are ye angry at me (says our Savior) because I made a man altogether
whole upon the Sabbath day; (Then was there no unsoundness left behind)
therefore we may conclude, this power given unto our Kings, was not for the
same cause for which our Savior and his Apostles healed the sick. To the
second Objection, I confess, that whereas our Savior healed all that were
sick, and likewise the Apostles, yea, the Pool of Bethesda all with what
infirmity soever they were troubled, it was to signify that which the
Scripture elsewhere says, He heals all thy Diseases, that is, all both
outward and inward Diseases, of which sort are sins specially. Wherefore for
some other distinct cause does our Sovereign cure the Struma only. Nevertheless
it cannot be denied, that this virtue given to our Kings is miraculous,
although not to perfection. To the next Objection, I say, That even miracles
themselves were wrought by the hands of the evil as well as the good sometimes,
For is it not written that at the last day, some reprobates should say unto our
Savior, Have we not in thy Name cast out devils? And this was given unto them,
not as it was unto the Apostles, who represented Christ's person, and were as in
Christ's stead; so the gift of healing this Evil, because it was given as a
sign of what was to come, so much as they were Types in being Kings of such a
Kingdom, was given to the evil as well as to the good Kings. Thus to the last
thing which is objected I say, I cannot deny but to have known, how some after
a long continued soundness and being cured of their mattury ulcers, have began
to fall back into the same Disease, and Symptoms, but being touched again have
recovered. All which notwith standing does not disprove the miraculous cure,
but points at somewhat else therein. Now to satisfy the first and second
objection to the full, Our Royal Sovereign does not take away the Struma by
that power which is given him from above, because it is a great evil, for there
are greater which he cannot cure, nor yet because it is a little one, as if his
virtue could extend it self to small Diseases, for we know there are less which
he cannot take away, but for that this Disease which we call the King's Evil is
such a malady which is parallel to the things which are signified, his Majesty
shall help; and other Diseases are not like them. For what likeness is there in
the Gout, Fevers, and Palsy, to the bruises, and putrid sores full of
corruption, of which Isaiah speaks, the corruption of Doctrine and manners
leath some to the eyes, and unsavory to the nostrils of God and man? Erasmus
though tormented with the Stone rejoices, that he did not suffer under some
disease which might make his presence leathed. But the King's Evil we know has
bruises and putrid sores, full of corruption. This Malady therefore the
Providence of God did make choice of to demonstrate what sins and afflictions
our Royal Sovereign through Gods mercy will cure, not for it self, nor for the
sick Patients sakes, but for the cause of that which being most like unto it,
was to be taken away. Nor is it done to perfection in all, some being
remediless, which are touched, that we may know that corruption in justice,
unsoundness in faith and doctrine, shall not and cannot be so universally taken
away by our Good King, but that some (do what he can) tares, and wicked men
will continue among the wheat, and good men. And touching the last Objection,
where it is said, that some which have been healed of this Evil have relapsed,
it does indeed plainly infer, that this healing of the Evil by our Kings must
be in that respect different from the like miracles of old. The smiting of the
rock twice by Moses was his sin, as if the doing of it once had not been
sufficient, and the virtue of causing the water to flow out of the rock had
been in his hand, If once touching by the Royal hand be not ever and altogether
sufficient for the cure, and the second be helpful, it may well signify, that
in this our good Josiahs reformation, men shall not be so fully reformed, as
that none shall endeavor to fall back again, but yet by his Royal hand they
shall be reduced.

A PRAYER.
In the mean time let us beseech Almighty God to plant in our Sovereigns Heart
the awful Fear of his Holy Name, and that his unerring Word may be the Measure
and Rule, by which alone Religion and Justice may be reformed, as by Josiah his
Royal Type was done. Hasten him O Lord herein, that thou may hasten to
reward him with another Crown upon the earth, and a Crown of Glory hereafter
which is void of cares, and fades not. Make me, O Lord, and all his Subjects
unfeignedly to love and honor him for thy sake; and grant we may never forget,
what by woeful experience we have found true, the counsel of thy wise servant
King Solomon, My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
which are given to change. For their calamity shall rise suddenly, and who
knows the ruin of them both? Amen. Lastly, of all which has been spoken, to
God alone be given the Praise and Glory; for from him, and by him, and to him
are all things: He reveals the deep and secret things, he knows what is in
darkness, and the light dwells with him: For thine is the Power and the
Glory, and thou have now made known unto us the Kings matter.

FINIS.

