Bibliotheca Novissima. OR A CATALOGUE OF BOOKS On Diverse Subjects. CONTAINING,
I. Books Lately Printed in ENGLAND. II. Books newly Reprinted. III. Books Now
in the Press: With a short account of the particular Design of several of them.
Together with A Catalogue of BOOKS lately Printed, now Printing and
Reprinting, in France, Germany, Holland, etc.

JUNE 1693. Printed for the Booksellers of London and Westminster, and to be
Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.

To the Reader.
THE Catalogues of Books Printed in London that have been Published of late
Years, relating the Titles of the Books only, are not sufficient to give the
Reader a due Knowledge of what they contain. The intent therefore of this
Catalogue is not only to give the Titles of all the Books that shall from time
to time be printed; but also a particular and impartial Account of the Design
of each (if they have any) and wherein they differ from others on the same
Subject, and the Texts of all Sermons. By this means Persons especially that
are distant from London, and have not an Opportunity of seeing the Books
themselves, may be the better informed of their Use: and this not only of the
Books printed here in England, but also of those printed beyond Sea in France,
Germany, Holland, etc. Together with an Account of what Books are printing or
preparing for the Press, there as well as here in England, as far as we can
have knowledge.

This is our Design, but we cannot say it is here so well performed as we could
wish, by reason of the short time and the little assistance the Publishers have
had, tho they gave notice to all Booksellers. By what is done it may be judged
what would have been, had a reasonable assistance been given, and what may be
done hereafter; this being intended to be published as often as there shall be
occasion; notice being in due time given; Booksellers are desired to send the
Books they would have Inserted, to Mr. Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall,
which shall be carefully returned after an account is taken of them, and the
Titles, etc. inserted Gratis. Also if any Author thinks fit to send any
particular account of his own Work, it shall be likewise inserted, if it appear
agreeable to truth.

This will be of equal advantage to both Buyer and Seller; studious Persons
being as desirous of knowing what good Books come abroad, as the Publishers can
be of having them well known; it is therefore presumed such assistance will
hereafter be given, that the Publishers may be encouraged to continue it.

A Catalogue of Books lately Printed, and now Printing.
Divinity.
THE Genuine Epistles of the Apostolical Fathers St: Barnabas, St. Ignatius,
St. Clement, St. Polycarp, the Shepherd of Hermas, and the Martyrdoms of St.
Ignatius and St. Polycarp; Written by those who were present at their
Sufferings; being, together with the Holy Scriptures of the New Testament, a
complete Collection of the most primitive Antiquity, for about one hundred and
fifty years after Christ: Translated and Published, with a large preliminary
Discourse, relating to the several Treatises here put together, by William Wake
D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Preacher to the Honorable
Society of Gray's Inn. Printed for Richard Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate. Octavo.

A New History of Ecclesiastical Writers: Containing an account of the Authors
of the several Books of the Old and New Testament; of the Lives and Writings of
the Primitive Fathers; a judicious Abridgment and Catalogue of their Works;
their various Editions, and Censures determining the Genuine and Spurious.
Together with a Judgment upon their Style and Doctrine. Also, a Compendious
History of the Councils; with Chronological Tables to the whole. Written in
French, by Lewis Ellies du Pin, Doctor of the Sorbon: And Regius Professor of
Divinity at Paris. Volume I. and II. Containing the Authors that flourished in
the four first Ages of the Church. Folio. Price 16 s.

The Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Volumes of the same, which bring down the
History to the end of the Eighth Century, are now in the Press, and will be
finished next Term. Price to Subscribers 18 s. in sheets. All printed for Abel
Swall and T. Child at the Unicorn at the West end of St. Paul's Churchyard.

* This Book does effectually contain all that the Title promises, and probably
more than a Stranger to it can expect; The abridgment of the Writings of the
Fathers being done with very great judgment and integrity, perhaps beyond any
that has been before, and all Historical matters concerning the Church most
faithfully related: The Doctrine of all those great Men is here very
emphatically and impartially laid down, an exact account is given of the
Controversies they were engaged in, in defense of the Truth, and all their
Arguments, with those of their Enemies are most ingenuously summed up: The
Lives of the Authors are short but very pathetically related; and where any
extraordinary accidents, such as the Persecution, Punishment, or Exaltation of
them has happened, he has always been very particular in giving an account of
it. Among Ecclesiastical Writers, he puts all the Bishops that Wrote, tho but
Letters to their Clergy, which they having always done upon any thing
extraordinary happening among them, gives this Author an opportunity of
relating the occasion, which he never fails to do with all imaginable
ingenuity: By these means a very particular account is given of all
Ecclesiastical Affairs in these times; so that his Book is not only a
Bibliotheca of Ecclesiastical Writers, but a very complete and excellent
Ecclesiastical History. The Author (as plainly appears by his Work) is a Person
of great Ingenuity as well as Learning; he began to write it about the year
1685. when the differences were high between the Pope and the Gallican Church;
which gave him a liberty of speaking more freely, than he would have been
permitted at another time, as appears by the condemnation he has lately
suffered at Paris, his Book being there publicly burnt by Authority; where it
seems they sacrifice every thing to their interest at this time; but the
reputation it has every where else had, has been very considerable, all Parties
having allowed it to be impartially and fairly Written; Our Clergy especially
have given it very favorable Characters in many of their Writings, among which
these two, the Right Reverend the Present Bishop of Worcester, and the Learned
Dr. Cave.

A practical discourse of Repentance, rectifying the mistakes about it,
especially such as lead either to despair or presumption, persuading and
directing to the true practice of it, and demonstrating the invalidity of a
deathbed repentance; by William Pain, D. D. Rector of St. Mary White-Chappel,
and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, 8 vo. sold by J. Wyat at the Rose
in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The fourth Volume, containing one hundred and fifty Sermons on several parts
of Scriptures; by the late Reverend and Learned Divine Thomas Manton, D. D. in
two parts, the first containing 74 Sermons, the second 76 Sermons; with an
Alphabetical Table to the whole, fol. Printed for J. Robinson at the Golden
Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A Practical Discourse of Prayer, by Edw. Pelling, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary
to Their Majesty's, and Rector of Petworth in Sussex, 8 vo. Price bound 1 s.
Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

* This Book shows the Motives that kindle in us a spirit of Devotion, also the
manner and way how to increase them for the due performance of Prayer.

A Practical discourse of Charity in its several Branches, and of the
reasonableness and useful nature of this great Christian Virtue, by Edw.
Pelling D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Rector of Petworth
in Sussex, 8 vo. both printed for William Crook at the Green Dragon without
Temple Bar.

A practical discourse of patience; setting forth the excellency, usefulness,
and rewards thereof; by a Divine of the Church of England, 8 vo. Printed for S.
Lowndes over against Exeter Change in the Strand.

The Works of Thomas Goodwin, D. D. sometime President of Magdalen College in
Oxford, the third Volume, containing discourses, 1. Of an unregenerate man's
guiltiness before God, in respect of sin and punishment. 2. Of man's
restoration by Grace. 3. Of Christ the Mediator, Fol. printed for J. Robinson
in St. Paul's Churchyard, and -- Manton in the Poultrey, and J. Salusbury in
Cornhil.

Practical discourses upon several divine subjects, Vol 2. written by John
Norris, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum, 8 vo.

Practical discourses upon several divine subjects, Vol. 3. written by John
Norris, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum, 8 vo. both printed for S. Manship
at the black Bull in Cornhil.

A second Volume of Discourses or Sermons on several Scriptures; by Ezekiel.
Hopkins late Lord Bishop of Londonderry, 8 vo. printed for Nath. Ranew at the
Kings-Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Divine and moral discourses on diverse subjects, 12 o. printed for S. Keeble at
the Turks-Head in Fleet Street.

Annotations upon some difficult Texts in all the Books of the New Testament;
by Sir Norton Knatchbull Knight and Baronet in 8 vo. printed for W. Graves
Bookseller in Cambridge.

Millennianism, or Christ's Thousand years Reign upon earth considered in a
familiar Letter to a Friend; wherein are all the Opinions of the Ancient
Fathers and Primitive Christians concerning this Doctrine set forth, 8 vo.
price bound 1 s. Printed for W. Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

This Book shows the Opinions of the Rabbis about the Reign of the Messiah on
Earth, also that of the Fathers, as Papias, Justin, Irenaeus, Athenagoras,
Clemens, Tertullian, Lactantius, Damasus, St. Jerome, etc. and explains such
Texts of Scripture as have been made use of about it.

A New Family-book, or the true Interest of Families; being directions to
Parents and Children, and to those who are instead of Parents, showing them
their several duties, and how they may be happy in one another; together with
several prayers for Families and Children, and Graces before and after meat; to
which is annexed a discourse about the right way of improving our Time, by
James Kirkwood Rector of Astwick in Bedfordshire; with a Preface by Dr. Horneck
printed for J. Tailor at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, and J. Everingham
at the Star in Ludgate Street.

The Book of the Revelation paraphrased, with Annotations on each Chapter,
whereby it is made plain to the meanest capacity, 4 to. printed for Will.
Marshall in Newgate-street, and J. Salusbury in Cornhill.

Sacramental Discourses on several Texts, before and after the Lord's Supper;
with a Paraphrase on the Lord's Prayer; by John Shower, 12 o. printed for A.
Chandler, S. Clement, and S. Wade at the Surgeon's-arms in Aldersgate Street,
the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard, and Bible under the Piazza in Cornhil.

Practical Reflections on the late Earthquakes in Jamaica, England, Sicily,
Maltha, etc. Anno 1692. with a particular Historical Account of those other
Earthquakes, by John Shower, 8 vo. price 1 s. 6 d. printed for J. Salusbury in
Cornhil, and A. Chandler in Aldersgate Street.

A Discourse concerning Divine Providence in relation to National Judgments;
printed for T. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Liturgia Tigurina: or the Book of Common prayer and Administration of the
Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and Ceremonies usually practiced,
and solemnly performed in all the Churches and Chapples of the City, and Canton
of Zurich in Switzerland, and in some other adjacent Countries; as by their
Canons and Ecclesiastical Laws they are appointed, and as by the supreme power
of the Senate of Zurich they are authorized, established, and commanded; with
the Orders of the Church, faithfully translated out of the Helvetian, by John
Conrade Werndly, formerly Minister of the French and Dutch Congregation of
Santoft in the Isle of Axholm in the County of Lincoln, and now Minister of
Wraisbury cum Langley in the County of Bucks: printed for R. Baldwin in
Warwick Lane.

Family-devotions for Sunday-evenings throughout the year; being practical
discourses, with suitable prayers; by Theophilus Dorrington; Author of the
reformed devotion, 8 vo. printed for John Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul s
Churchyard.

* The Design of this Book is to revive Family Worship, containing a Sermon and
a Prayer to be read in a Family every Sunday evening. In this Volume there are
13 Sermons and so many Prayers for one quarter of the year: The Author designs
such another Volume toward the Winter, and hereafter so many more as will
complete a course for the whole year.

Brief directions for our more devout behavior in time of Divine Service, with
a short Rationale on the Common Prayer, by H. C. price 4 d. printed for
Jonathan Robinson, at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Conversation in Heaven; being Devotions consisting of Meditations and Prayers,
on several considerable subjects in practical Divinity: Written for raising the
decayed spirit of piety, by Lawrence Smith, L. L. D. Fellow of St. John's
College in Oxford, 8 vo. printed for T. Speed at the three Crowns near the
Royal Exchange, Cornhil.

Serious and seasonable Advice to the English Soldiers of His Majesty's Army,
12 o. printed for B. Aylmer at the three Pigeons in Cornhil, and W. Rogers at
the Sun in Fleet Street.

The folly and unreasonableness of Atheism, demonstrated from the advantage and
pleasure of a religious life, the faculties of human souls, the structure of
animal bodies, and the origin and frame of the World, in eight Sermons,
preached at the Lecture founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire; in the
first year 1692. by Richard Bentley, M. A. Chaplain to the Lord Bishop of
Worcester: 4 to. any of the Sermons may be had single. printed for H. Mortlock
at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall, April 9th. 1693. concerning
the sacrifice and satisfaction of Christ on Heb. 9.26. by John Lord Archbishop
of Canterbury. Published by Her Majesty's special Command, 4 to. printed for
Brab. Aylmer at the three Pigeons in Cornhil, and W. Rogers at the Sun in
Fleet Street.

A Sermon concerning the Unity of the Divine Nature, and the Blessed Trinity,
on 1 Timothy 2.5. By John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, Mar. 12. 1692. being
the second Sunday in Lent, on Mat. 5.43, 44. both printed for Brab. Aylmer, at
the three Pigeons in Cornhil.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall, on Wednesday, March 15. 1692.
on Phil. 4.11. by Charles Hickman, D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to Their
Majesty's; published by Her Majesty's special Command, 4 to.

The Death of King Charles I. proved a downright Murder, with the aggravations
of it; in a Sermon at St. Botolphs Aldgate, London, Jan. 30. 1693. on Matthew.
19.18. to which are added some just Reflections upon some late Papers
concerning that Kings Book; by Rich. Hollingsworth, D. D. 4 to.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall, on Wednesday March 22. 1692.
being the fourth Wednesday in Lent on 2 Pet. 1.4. by J. Lamb Rector of
Wheathampstead in Hertfordshire, and Chaplain in ordinary to Their Majesty's;
published by Her Majesty's special Command, 4 to.

A Sermon preached before the Queen at Whitehall on Easter Day, 1693. on These.
4.18. by E. Young Fellow of Winchester College, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
Their Majesty's; published by Her Majesty's special Command, 4 to. these four
printed for W. Kettilby at the Bishop's- Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A Comparison between a sincere Penitent and a just Person; in a Sermon
preached before the Queen March 8. 1693. By Thomas Mannyngham, D. D. Chaplain
to Their Majesty's, and Rector of St. Andrews Holbourn, 4 to. printed for W.
Crook at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar, and S. Smith at the Princes Arms
in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The great danger and uncertainty of Deathbed Repentance, in a Sermon, at the
Funeral of a young Man at Chiswick in Middle-sex, by J. Ellesby Vicar there, on
Heb. 3.7, 8, printed for Will. Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

A discourse concerning the nature and satisfaction of a good and inoffensive
Conscience; in a Sermon preached in the Cathedral Church of Winchester, at the
Assizes held there, April 11. 1693. by Robert Air, A. M. Fellow of the College
near Winchester, 4 to.

A Sermon preached before the King and Queen at Whitehall, March 12. 1692.
being the second Sunday in Lent, upon Mat. 5.43, 44. by Richard L. Bishop of
Bath and Wells, 4 to. both printed for B. Aylmer at the three Pigeons in
Cornhil.

A Sermon preached to a Country Auditory, upon the last Thanksgiving day, on
the 144 Psalm, ver. 9, 10. by Sam. Clerk, B. D. Minister of Arhesdem in Essex,
4 to.

A Sermon preached before the House of Commons, on Jan. 30. 1693. by R. Bynns,
Fellow of Trin. Coll. Cambr. and Chaplain to the Duke of Somerset, on Isa.
57.1. both printed for William Crook, at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

A Sermon setting forth the duties of Irish Protestants, arising from the Irish
Rebellion, 1641. and the Irish Tyranny, 1688. preached before His Excellency
the Lord Lieutenant, and the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and diverse of the
Commons, in Christ-Church Dublin, October. 23. 1692. by Edward Lord Bishop of
Cork and Ross; printed at Dublin for W. Norman, and reprinted at London for R.
Chiswel.

Diverse Rules for Christian unity opened and urged; in a Sermon preached in the
Cathedral Church at Norwich, October. 16. 1692. by Erasmus Warren Rector of
Worlington in Suffolk, 4 to. printed for S. Oliver in Norwich, and Jo. Robinson
in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's Book, entitled, a Vindication of the Holy
and ever Blessed Trinity, etc. Together with a more necessary Vindication of
that Sacred, and Prime Article of the Christian Faith from his new Notions, and
false Explications of it; by a Divine of the Church of England. 4 to. printed
for Randal Tailor near Stationers Hall.

Sermons preached on several occasions, by John Conant, D. D. printed for R.
Chiswel, and T. Cockeral.

And Enquiry into the Constitution, Discipline, Unity, and Worship of the
Primitive Church, that flourished within the first 300 years after Christ:
Faithfully Collected out of the extant Writings of those Ages. By an Impartial
hand, in two parts, 8 vo. printed for Jo. Robinson at the Golden Lion, and John
Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.

* The design of this Book is in general to represent the Constitution,
Discipline, Unity, and Worship of the Primitive Church, that flourished within
the first 300 years after Christ; but more particularly, and especially to
describe their Opinions and Practices, with respect to those things that are
now unhappily controverted, between those of these Kingdoms, who are commonly
known by the name of Church of England Men, Presbyterians, Independents, and
Anabaptists, etc.

Sermons and Discourses upon several occasions by G. Stradling, D. D. Dean of
Chichester, never before printed, 8 vo.

Twelve Sermons Preached upon several occasions, by Robert South, D. D. six of
them never before printed, 8 vo. Both printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon
in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Mysteries in Religion vindicated: or the Filiation, Deity, and satisfaction of
our Savior asserted, against Socinians and others. With occasional Reflections
on several late Pamphlets, by Luke Milburne, a Presbyter of the Church of
England. 8 vo. printed for W. Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

The Case of Sees vacant by an unjust, or Uncanonical Deprivation Stated, in
Reply to a Treatise, entitled, A Vindication of the deprived Bishops, etc.
together with the several other Pamphlets lately published, in Answer to the
Baroccian Treatise; by Humph. Hody, D. D. Fellow of Wadham College in Oxford, 4
to. printed for Hen. Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Country Curates Advice to his Parishioners, in four parts. 1. Directs us,
how to serve God on the Lords day. 2. On the Weekday. 3. How to discharge our
duty in our several Relations; as Husband and Wife, Parents and Children,
Masters and Servants. 4. How to prepare for death; by H. C. 8 vo. printed for
J. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

De naturali Religione Liber in tres parts divisus, ubi falsa candide
refelluntur, vera probantur vel deteguntur, ac Orthodoxarum Ecclesiarum fratres
ad concordiam vocantur; Authore Petro Chauvin: printed for S. Oliver in
Norwich, and to be sold by J. Robinson, A. Swall, and T. Child in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

Crispinism unmasked, or a discovery of the several erroneous assertions and
pernicious Doctrines maintained in Dr. Crisp's Sermons, occasioned by the
reprinting of those discourses; printed for R. Baldwin in Warwick Lane.

Christ alone exalted in Dr. Crisp's Sermons, partly confirmed in answering Mr.
Daniel William's Preface to his Gospel Truth stated, by alleging Testimonies
from Scripture, and the Doctrine of the Church of England, in the Books of
Homilies and other Orthodox Authorities; showing how he has wronged as well
the Truth, as the said Doctor in the great point of Justification by the
Neonomion Doctrine; humbly offered by S. C. an unworthy Son of the said Doctor,
Author of a Book, entitled, Christ made Sin, reflected on by Mr. Williams, 4
to. price 6 d.

A plain and impartial Enquiry into Gospel Truth, as stated and vindicated by
Mr. Daniel Williams; especially in reference to the Doctrine of Justification,
and the nature of his proceedings, with his Testimonies thereupon; by Thomas
Edwards, Esquire, 4 to. price 1 s.

The true state of Gospel Truth established upon the free election of God in
Christ; the agreement and yet difference between Law and Gospel; so that the
Gospel cannot be styled Law; the inconditionateness of the Gospel-salvation,
the procedure of the day of Judgment; in the way of a conciliatory discourse
upon Mr. Williams his concessions; by T. Beverly, 4 to. price 6 d. these three
printed for W. Marshal at the Bible in Newgate-street.

The Axe laid to the Root, containing an exposition of the Metaphorical Text of
Holy Scripture, Matthew. 3.10. proving that God made a two fold Covenant with
Abraham, and that Circumcision did not appertain to the Covenant of Grace, but
to the external and legal Covenant made with Abraham, and his natural seed, as
such, wherein Mr. Flavel's last grand Arguments in his Vindiciarum Vindex, and
Mr. Rothwel's Paedobaptismus Vindicatus, are answered; to which are added some
short reflections by way of confutation of Mr. Joshua Exel's serious enquiry
into, and certain producing of plain and express proofs, that John Baptist did
as certainly baptize Infants as the Adult; in two parts, by B. Keath, price 1 s.

Mathematical Divinity: Or, a plain demonstration from the Holy Scriptures,
that the times of this world were fore-appointed by the Covenant made with
Abraham, and determined to be according to the measure of the Age and fullness
of Christ; kept secret since the World began, but is now made plain upon twelve
Tables, in a solar Calendar as familiar as a common Almanac: With a full
proof, that this is the last Generation, which shall not pass away till all
things be fulfilled, and the Gates of Righteousness be opened, being the result
of many years study; by Elias Palmer: price 1 s. both printed for J. Harris at
the Harrow in the Poultrey.

A fresh Memorial of the Kingdom of Christ, demonstrating from that solemn Oath
of Christ, Revel. 10. by express Letter of Scripture, and most Historical
matter of fact, it must needs enter its succession 1697, and begin so great and
happy an Era of Time, that in regard to it, it might well be sworn, there
shall be Time (to such as had been) no more, or no further, for ever; by T.
Beverly, 4 to. price 6 d. both printed for William Marshal in Newgate-street,
and J. Salusbury in Cornhil.

A discourse of Earthquakes as they are preternatural and premonitory signs to
a Nation; with respect to what has occurred in the year 1692. and some special
reflections thereon, as also on that security and assurance of mind, which is
attainable in the light and power of Religion under the greatest surprisals and
terrors of fear, with some enquiry upon the grounds of our fears and hopes, as
to the public state of the Church in this day; by R. Flemming Minister of the
Gospel at Rotterdam. Printed for Jo. Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

The Mourners directory, guiding him to the middle way betwixt the two
extremes, defect and excess, for the dead, 8 vo. by Thomas Doolittle, M. A.

The righteous Man's hopes at death, considered, and improved for the Comfort
of dying Christians, and support of surviving Relations; to which is added
deathbed reflections, proper for a righteous Man in his last sickness; by Sam.
Doolittle, 8 vo.

An Exposition of the Assemblies shorter Catechism, with practical references
from each Question; by John Flavel late Minister of the Gospel at Dartmouth in
Devon. 8 vo.

A Present for Servants, from their Ministers, Masters, or other Friends,
especially in Country Parishes. 12 o. Printed for Nath. Ranew at the King's
Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard,

History.
Scrinia reserata, a Memorial offered to the great deservings of John Williams,
D. D. who sometime held the places of Lord Keeper of the great Seal of England,
Lord Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Archbishop of York; containing a series of the
most remarkable occurrences and transactions of his Life, in relation both to
Church and State: Written by John Hacket late Lord Bishop of Litchfield and
Coventry, fol. printed for S. Lowndes over against Exeter-Exchange in the
Strand.

Theatrum Scotiae: Containing the Prospects of Their Majesty's Castles and
Palaces; together with those of the most considerable Towns and Colleges the
Ruins of many Ancient Abbeys, Churches, and Convents in the Kingdom of
Scotland; all very truly Drawn and very finely Engraven on Copper, and printed
on Royal Paper: With a short description of each place. By John Slezer Captain
of the Attillery Company, and Surveyor of Their Majesty's Stores in Scotland.
Vol. I. folio. Price 45 s. Sold by A. Swalle and T. Child at the Unicorn at
the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard.

C. Julii Caesaris quae extant, interpretatione and notis illustravit Johannes
Goduinus Professor Regius, in usum Delphini, 8 vo. juxta Edition. Parisiensem,
Printed for A. Swalle at the Unicorn in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Life of the Emperor Theodosius the Great; written originally in French, by
the famous Albot Flechier, now Bishop of Nismes, of the French Academy, for the
use of the Dauphin; Englished by Mr. Francis Manning: printed for F. Saunders
on the New Exchange, Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon, and J. Knapton at the Crown
in St. Paul's Churchyard. 8 vo.

The Life of Lewis of Bourbon, late Prince of Conde, digested into Annals, with
many curious remarks on the transactions of Europe for this last 60 years, done
out of French, 8 vo. printed for Rich. Baldwin.

New Memoirs and Characters of the two great Brothers, the Duke of Bouillon and
Mareseal Turenne; written in French by James de Langlade Baron of Saumieres;
made English, 8 vo. printed for Tho. Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

The life of the most illustrious Monarch Almanzor, together with the History
of the Conquest of Spain by the Moors, and of the several Revolutions of the
mighty Empire of the Caliphs, and of the African Kingdoms; composed in Arabic
by Abulacius Tariff, Abentariq, one of the Generals in the Spanish expedition,
translated into Spanish, by Michael de Luna, Interpreter to Philip II. made
English by an eminent Hand. Printed for Dan. Brown at the Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar, and Isaac Cleve at the Star in Chancery Lane.

The History of the Life of Katherine de Medicis, Queen Mother and Regent of
France, or the exact Pattern of the French King's Policy. 8 vo. printed for
John Wyat at the Rose in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A Vindication of the Historiographer of the University of Oxford, and his
Works, from the Reproaches of the Lord Bishop of Sarum cast on his Athenae
Oxonienses, etc. in a Letter to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield,
concerning a Book lately published, entitled, A specimen of some Errors and
Defects in the History of the Reformation of the Church of England, by Anthony
Harmer: written by E. D. to which is added the Historiographer's Answer to
certain Animadversions made in the beforementioned History of the Reformation,
to that part of Historiae Antiquitatis Oxon. which treats of the divorce of Qu.
Catherine from K. Henry VIII. printed for R. Tailor near Stationers' Hall.

An Introduction to a Breviary of the History of England, with the Reign of
King William I. entitled the Conqueror: Written by Sir Walter Raleigh Knight,
and dedicated to the then Earl of Salisbury: Never printed before. printed for
Sam. Keeble at the great Turks-head in Fleet Street, and Dan. Brown at the
black Swan and Bible without Temple Bar, 1693.

An Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam, by Monsieur de la Loubere Envoy
Extraordinary from the French King, to the King of Siam, in the years 1687. and
1688. wherein a full and curious account is given of the Chinese way of
Arithmetic, and Mathematick Learning, in two Tomes, illustrated with
Sculptures: Done out of French, by A. P. Gent. R. S. S. Folio. printed for Tho.
Horn at the Royal Exchange, Francis Saunders at the New Exchange, and Tho.
Bennet at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A Collection of curious Travels and Voyages. In two Tomes. The first
containing Dr. Leonhart Rauwolff's Itinerary into the Eastern Countries, as
Syria, Palaestine, or the Holy Land, Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, Chaldea,
etc. Translated from the High Dutch by Nicholas Stophorst. The second taking in
many parts of Greece, Asia minor, Egypt, Arabia Felix, and Petraea, Aethiopia,
the Red Sea, etc. from the Observations of Mons. Belon, Mr. Vernon, Dr. Spon,
Dr. Smith, Dr. Huntingdon, Mr. Greaves, Alpinus, Veslingius, Thevenot's
Collections, and others. To which are added, three Catalogues of such Trees,
Shrubs, and Herbs as grow in the Levant; by John Ray, Fell. of the Royal
Society, 8 vo. Printed for S. Smith and B. Walford, at the Prince's Arms in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

Travels through Flanders, Holland, Germany, Sweden and Denmark: Containing an
account of what is most remarkable in those Countries; together with necessary
instructions for Travelers; and a list of the common Passage-boats in Holland,
with the hours of their going out. The second Edition, wherein is added a
Description of the fortified Towns in Flanders and Holland, with exact Draughts
of Dunkirk, Maestricht, Charleroy, and Aeth, well engraved in Copper. Written
by an English Gentleman, who resided many years in Holland in a public
capacity, 8 vo. printed for Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.

Travels into diverse Parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French Kings
Order, to discover a new way by Land into China; containing many curious
remarks in natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography and History; together
with a description of great Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit
there: By Father Avril of the Order of the Jesuits. Done out of French; to
which is added, a supplement extracted from Hackluit and Purchase, giving an
Account of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia, and the Moguls
Country to China, together with the roads and distances of the places, 8 vo.
Printed for T. Goodwin at the Maidenhead in Fleet Street.

The ingenious and diverting Letters of the Lady -- Travels into Spain:
Describing the Devotions, Nunneries, Humors, Customs, Laws, Militia, Trade,
Diet, and Recreations of that People. Intermixed with great variety of Modern
Adventures, and Surprising Accidents: being the truest and best Remarks Extant
on that Court and Country. In Three Parts complete. 12 o. Printed for Samuel
Crouch, at the Corner of the Pope's- Head-Alley, next Cornhil.

The second Volume of Historical Voyages and Travels over Europe; containing
all that is most curious in Spain and Portugal; done out of French, price 1 s.
the first Volume contains France; printed for H. Rhodes at the Star near
Fleet-bridge.

An Impartial History of the Wars in Ireland, with a continuation thereof in
two Parts, from the time that Duke Schomberg landed in that Kingdom, to the 23
of March, 1692. When Their Majesty's Proclamation was published, declaring the
War to be ended. Illustrated with Copper Sculptures, describing the most
important places of Action. With some remarks upon the present state of that
Kingdom; By G. Story Chaplain to the Regiment formerly Sir Tho. Gowers, now
Earl of Drogheda's, an eyewitness of the most remarkable passages. Those who
have the first part, may have the second part alone. 4 to. printed for R.
Chiswel, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The History of the House of Orange: or, a Brief Relation of the Glorious and
Magnanimous Achievements of His Majesty's Renowned Predecessors, and likewise
of his own Heroic Actions, till the late wonderful Revolution. Together with
the History of William and Mary King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, etc. Being an Impartial Account of the most remarkable Passages and
Transactions in these Kingdoms from their Majesty's happy Accession to the
Throne to this time. By R. B. Price one Shilling

The History of the two late Kings, Charles the Second, and James the Second;
being an impartial account of the most remarkable Transactions, and observable
passages, during their Reigns; and the Dover Treaty, with other secret French
and Popish Intrigues and Designs managed in those Times. Together with a
Relation of the happy Revolution, and the Accession of Their present Majesty's
King William and Queen Mary to the Throne, Feb. 13. 1689.

The History of Oliver Cromwell, being an impartial Account of all the Battles,
Sieges, and other Military Achievements, wherein he was engaged in England,
Scotland and Ireland; and particularly all the Sea-sights with the Dutch and
French, with the Siege and taking of Dunkirk; and likewise of his Civil
Administrations, while he had the Supreme Government of these three Kingdoms,
till his Death. Relating only matters of Fact, without Reflection or
Observation. By R. B. Price 1 s.

Memorable Accidents and unheard of Transactions, containing an account of
several strange Events: As the Deposing of Tyrants, lamentable Shipwracks,
dismal Misfortunes, stratagems of War, perilous Adventures, happy Deliverances,
with other remarkable Occurrences, and select Historical passages, which have
happened in several Countries in this last Age. Printed at Brussels in 1691.
and dedicated to His present Majesty William King of England, etc. Published in
English by R. B. Price 1 s. All four printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Bell in
the Poultrey near Cheapside.

Law.
Instructio Clericalis, directing Clerks, both in the Court of King's Bench and
Common Pleas, in the abbreviation and contraction of words, and thereby the
ready reading of presidents, in filling up and suing out Writs of first
process, in drawing Declarations, making up Issues, engrossing Records, entering
judgments, and suing out Executions; with an Appendix of several English
Presidents, etc. printed for C. Bever, at the Hand and Star within Temple Bar.

The Trial of Charles Lord Mobun, before the House of Peers in Parliament, for
the Murder of William Mountford; which began the 31. of January 1692. and
continued by several Adjournments, till the fourth of February following; the
most Honorable the Lord Marquess of Carmarthen, Lord President of Their
Majesty's Council, being Lord High Steward pro hac Vice: Together with the
Questions in points of Law, put by their Lordships to the Judges; with the
Arguments of my Lord Mohun's Council, and the Opinions of the Judges upon the
said Questions: Published by Command of the House of Peers; printed for Edward
Jones in the Savoy, and published by him and R. Tailor near Stationers' Hall.

Physic.
Promptuarium praxeos medicae, seu methodus medendi, praescriptis
celeberrimorum medicorum Londinensium concinnata, and in ordinem Alphabeticum
digesta, a Johanne Pechey, M. A. Collegii Medicorum Londinensium Collega, 12 o.
Printed for H. Bonwick at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Mineralogia: or, an account of the preparation, manifold virtues and uses of a
mineral Salt, both in Physic and Surgery, which is so safe, pleasant, and
effectual in its operations, that it may be taken by those of all ages and
constitutions with great benefit, and without danger of the least prejudice. To
which is added, a short discourse of the nature and uses of the sulphures of
minerals and metals, in curing the most chronical and pertinacious diseases; by
Chr. Pack, Philo-Chimico-Medicus, 8 vo. printed for D. Newman, at the
King's-Arms in the Poultrey.

Seplasium: The Complete English Physician: or the Druggist's-shop opened,
explicating all the particulars of which Medicines at this day are composed and
made. Showing their various names and natures, their several preparations,
virtues, uses, and doses, as they are applicable to the whole art of Physic,
and containing above 600 chemical processes, a work of exceeding use to all
sorts of Men, of what quality or profession soever. The like not hitherto
extant; in 10 Books, by William Salmon Professor of Physic, 8 vo. Printed for
M. Gillyflower, at the Black-spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall, and G.
Sawbridge, at the three Flower-de-luces in Little-Britain.

Johannis Jacobi Waldschmidt Medicinae Doctoris praxis Medicinae rationalis
succincta, per casus tradita and in appendice monitis
medico-practicis-necessariis illustrata per plurimos morbos; quibus accesserunt
notae ejusdem ad praxin Chirurgicam Barbette; nec non ad casus Baldas Timaei,
omnia ad mentem Cartesii, cum praefatione Johannis Dolaei, 8 vo. Sold by R.
Chiswel.

Curiosities in Chemistry: Being new experiments and observations concerning
the Principles of Natural Bodies. Written by a Person of Honor, and Published
by his Operator, H. G. Printed by H. C. for Daniel Brown, at the black Swan
and Bible without Temple Bar. 1693.

Epistolae Medicinales Variis occasionibus conscriptae. Authore Ricardo Carr,
M. D. and Coll. Reg. Med. Land. Socio. Impensis Dan. Brown ad insigne Nigri
Cygni and Bibliarum extra Temple Bar. 1693.

Quarum Epistolarum hic est Elenchus. 1. De frequenti Pulveris Sternutatorii
usu, quibus noxam afferre, quibus prodesse perhibetur.

2. De fumandi consuetudine, quibus improbanda, quibus and approbanda censeatur.

3. De Liquorum in Coffipoliis nostris virtutibus and vitiis.

4. De haustibus matutinis generosioribus valetudini admodum injuriis.

5. De Aquis Tunbrigiensibus Nephritico consulendis.

6. De Thermis Bathoniensibus uxori nondum gravidae consulendis.

7. Number Matris vel Nutricis lacte commodius aletur infans.

8. Number Tabido iter Monspeliense suaderem; in tabe fontanellarum usus
examinatur.

9. De Capillitii usu, number confert sedandis Capitis doloribus?

10. De Haemorrhoidum fluxu, quibus salutares audiunt.

11. De alvo astricta, quo pacto contrahitur and qualem medelam exigit.

12. Number graviditas ex inspectione Vrinae praedici queat.

13. De Virgints cujusdam Gallicae triginta and quinque septimanis ab omni cibo
potuque abstinentia.

14. De Stri marum ratione, quibus sanandis Contactus Regius celebratur.

15. Number semel per mensem inebriari valetudini conducit?

16. De Monialibus duabus Romany sexum suum immutasse dictis.

17. Cui lectum incoenatum petere conducat, cui contrarium suaderem.

18. Quot horis dormire licebit.

The Physical Dictionary. Wherein the Terms of Anatomy, the Names and Causes of
Diseases, Chyrurgical Instruments and their Use; are accurately described. Also
the Names and Virtues of Medicinal Plants, Minerals, Stones, Gums, Salts,
Earths, etc. And the Method of choosing the best Drugs: The Terms of Chemistry,
and of the Apothecaries Art; and the various Forms of Medicines, and the ways
of compounding them. By Stephen Blancard M. D. Physick-professor at Middleburg
in Zealand. The Second Edition, with the Addition of above a Thousand Terms of
Art, and their Explanation. Printed for S. Crouch, at the Corner of Pope's-
Head-Alley near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1693.

Mathematics.
Synopsis Algebraica: Opus posthumum Joannis Alexandri Bernatii-Helvetii; in
usum scholae mathematicae apud Hospitium-Christi Londinense, a Carolo secundo
fundatae, Editio 8 va. sold by E. Brewster at the Crane in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

An arithmetical treatise of the combinations, elections, permutations, and
compositions of quantities, illustrated by several examples, with a new
speculation of the differences of the powers of numbers; by Thomas Strode, Esquire;
of Maperton in the County of Somerset. 4 to. printed for J. Tailor, at the Ship
in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The new Method of Fortification, as practiced by Monsieur de Vauban, Engineer
General of France. With an Explication of all Terms appertaining to that Art.
Made English with Cuts. The Second Edition: In which is added, exact Draughts
of Dunkirk, Maestricht, Charleroy, Aeth and Mayence. Printed for Abel Swalle at
the Unicorn at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard. 1693.

An Abridgment of the Architecture of Vitruvius: Containing a System of the
whole Works of that Author: Illustrated with diverse Copper Plates, curiously
engraved; with a Table of Explanation, Etymology and Derivation of the Terms
used in Architecture. First done in French by Monsieur Perrault, of the Academy
of Paris, and now Englished with Additions. Printed for Abel Swalle and T.
Child, at the Unicorn in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Gaugers practice; or the practical way how to gauge, and inch Brewers
tunns; and the gauging of casks according to the true rules of Art. With a
table of cylinders in ale gallons and centesimal parts, from 8 to 60 Inches in
Diameter, and 31 Inches in depth; calculated to every tenth of an Inch in
Diameter, and to every tenth of an Inch in depth; by George Ward Philomath.
printed for T. Basset at the George in Fleet Street.

Memoirs for the ingenious; containing several curious observations in
Philosophy, Mathematics, Physic, History, Philology, and other Arts and
Sciences; by J. de la Cross, for May 1693. to be continued monthly; Jan. Feb.
March, April, are already done, 4 to. printed for H. Rhodes at the Star in
Fleet Street, and J. Harris at the Harrow in the Poultrey.

Geography Anatomized, or a complete Geographical Grammar; being a short and
exact Analysis of the whole body of modern Geography; after a new, plain, and
easy Method, whereby any Person may in a short time attain to the knowledge of
that most noble and useful Science, etc. to which is subjoyned the present
state of the European Plantations in the East and West Indies, with a
reasonable proposal for the propagation of the blessed Gospel in all Pagan
Countries, illustrated with diverse Maps; by Patrick Gordon, M. A. printed for
T. Cockeril at the three Legs in the Poultrey, and R. Morden at the Atlas in
Cornhil.

Arithmetic, a Treatise fitted for the use and benefit of such Tradesmen, as
are ignorant in the Art; teaching the nature and use of fractions, both Vulgar
and Decimal, by a new and easy Method, made familiar to an ordinary capacity;
also the mensuration of solids and superficies, etc. By J. Airs at the Hand
and Pen in St. Paul's Churchyard. Printed for Sam. Crouch at the Corner of
Pope's- Head-Alley next Cornhil, and J. Blare at the Looking-glass on
London Bridge, 1693.

Miscellanies.
A Collection of modern Relations of matter of fact concerning Witches and
Witchcraft upon the Persons of People; to which is prefixed a Meditation
concerning the mercy of God, in preserving us from the malice and power of evil
Angels; written by the late Lord Chief Justice Hale, upon occasion of a Trial
of several Witches before him; part 1. price 1 s. printed for J. Harris at the
Harrow in the Poultrey.

The Gentleman's Journal; or the monthly Miscellany, in a Letter to a Gentleman
in the Country, consisting of News, History, Philosophy, Poetry, Music,
Translations, etc. Vol. 2. April 1693. with complete setts for 1692. or single
ones. Printed for Richard Parker at the Unicorn in the Piazza under the
Royal Exchange.

Paul's School Round-hand in 2 Parts. One of the strong Alamode Round-hand, the
other of the Merchant like mixed running-hand now in use; Adorned with great
variety of command of hand, by John Airs at the Hand and Pen in St. Paul's
Churchyard. Sold by Sam. Crouch at the end of Pope's- Head-Alley in Cornhil.

The complete Gardner; or directions for cultivating and right ordering of
Fruit-gardens and Kitchin-gardens, with diverse reflections on several parts of
Husbandry, in six Books; by the famous Monsieur de la Quintinye, chief director
of all the Gardens of the French King: To which is added, his Treatise of
Orange trees, with the raising of Melons, omitted in the French Editions: Made
English by J. Evelin Esquire; illustrated with copper plates, fol. printed for M.
Gillyflower at the Spread-eagle in Westminster Hall, and S. Partridge at the
Post House at Charing Cross.

The Letters of the Reverend Father Paul, Counselor of State to the most
serene Re-publick of Venice, and Author of the excellent History of the Council
of Trent: written to Monsieur del Isle Groslot, a noble Protestant of France,
the learned Monsieur Gillot, and others, in a correspondence of diverse years;
translated out of Italian, by Edward Brown Rector of Sunbridge in Kent, 8 vo.

A Letter by the Lord Bishop of Salisbury, to the Lord Bishop of Coventry and
Litchfield, concerning a Book lately published, called, A specimen of some
errors and defects in the History of the Reformation of the Church of England;
by Anthony Harmer, 4 to.

A Letter to a Friend concerning the behavior of Christians under the various
Revolutions of State-governments, 4 to. these three printed for R. Chiswel at
the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Justice of Peace his Calling and Qualifications. By Edmund Bohun Esquire; 8
vo. Printed for T. Salusbury, at the King's- Arms next St. Dunstan's- Church in
Fleet Street. 1693.

A discourse concerning Generosity, where is endeavored, first to explain the
nature of that principle; secondly, to show the usefulness of it, for the due
government of our actions; and thirdly, to show how Generosity may be acquired,
or afterward improved in our minds: printed for J. Adamson at the Angel and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Phraseologia Generalis; Continens, quaecunque sunt scitu necessaria, and
Praxi, usuique studioscrum Philologicorum, maxim utilia, in cunctis operibus
Phraseologicis, Anglico-Latinis, seu Latino-Anglicanis, hucusque, hic, in lucem
editis; eaque succincte, and methodice, disposita; in gratiam studiosae
juventutis, and ad faciliorem, ac foeliciorem, in studiis suis Philologicis,
progressum.

A full, large, and general Phrase Book; comprehending whatsoever is necessary
and most useful, in all other Phraseological Books, (hitherto, here,
published;) and methodically digested; for the more speedy, and Prosperous
Progress of Students, in their Humanity Studies. By William Robertson, A. M.
Printed by John Hayes, Printer to the University; and are to be sold by Abel
Swall in St. Paul's Churchyard, Daniel Brown without Temple Bar, John
Lawrence in the Poultrey, Henry Bonwick and John Tailor in St. Paul's
Churchyard, London, 1693.

* This Book contains all that is valuable in Cooper's Dictionary, Walker's
Idioms, and Walker's Phrases, and is the most complete of any that have been
published of this nature, formerly sold for 10 s. and now for 5 s.

Justi Lipsii Roma Illustrata, sive Antiquitatum Romanarum Breviarium: Et
Georgii Fabricii Chemnicensis veteris Romae cum Nova Collatio. Ex nova
Recensione Antonii Thysii, J. C. Cui accesserunt in hac Editione Justi Lipsii
Tractatus Peculiares, viz. De Veterum Latinorum Scriptura. De Re Pecuniaria. De
Nominibus Romanorum. De Ritu Conviviorum. De Censura and Censu. De Anno, deque
ejus diversitate: item ratione intercalandi. Cum Figuris Aeneis in usum
Stuaiosae Juventutis, Opus tam ad Historias, quam Poetas, caeterosque Authors
Romanos explicandos, utilissimum. Impensis Abelis Swalle, and Tim. Child, ad
Insigne Monocerotis in Coemeterio D. Pauli. MDCXCIII.

* This Book has had a very general approbation, as appears by the many
Impressions there has been of it beyond Sea. This Edition is very considerably
improved by the addition of the six Treatises of Lipsius, concerning the manner
of writing of the ancient Remans, their Money, Names, etc. Which contain many
things wanting in Rosinus, and other more voluminous Authors, and is in general
a very good Account of the Government, Laws, Religion, Armies, Buildings,
Wealth, etc. of the old Romans, in their most flourishing condition.

MYTHOLOGI'A sive quarundam fabularum explicatio, Linguae Graecae Tyronibus
accommodata; una cum locis Poetarum fabularumque citatis in usum scholae
mercatorum scissorum Londinensis: Printed for C. Coningsby at the gilded
Turks-head in Fleet Street.

Basilii Fabri Sarani, Thesaurus eruditionis scholasticae; sive supellex
instructissima vocum, verborum, ac locutionum; tum rerum, sententiarum,
adagiorum ac exemplorum: quae docentibus juxta at que discentibus ad
intelligendos solutae ac ligatae orationis Auctores, solidamque eruditionem
comparandam, magno adjumento esse possunt. Per Augustum Bucknerum recensitus
and emendatus: cum indice latino rituum and antiquitatum, per Christopherum
Cellarium, fol. Prostat apud Richardum Chiswel ad insigne Rosae Coronatae in
Coemeterio Divi Pauli.

Observationes and conjecturae in Numismata quaedam antiqua PAPEPGON Laurentii
Begeri conciliarii electoralis Brandenburgici, ab Antiquitatibus and
Bibliotheca; accedunt duae Ill. Ez. Spanhemii ad Authorem Epistolae, iisque
interjectae Authoris ad priorem responforia, 4 to.

Homines sub aquis viventes, ductu historiae and physicae, qua veritatem, qua
genuinam vitae rationem, immixtis nonnullis, circa alimentum, respirationem
spiritus, sanguinem, temperamentum, sensus, aquas item, observationibus
illustrati, and luci publicae expositi a Salomone Sprangero Voigtlando, 12 o.
Both sold by R. Chiswel.

Heraldry.
The academy of armory, or a storehouse of armory and blazon, containing the
several variety of created Beings, and how born in coats of Arms, both foreign
and domestic; with the instruments used in all trades and sciences, together
with their terms of Art; also the etymologies, definitions and historical
observations on the same, explicated and explained according to our modern
language; very useful for all Gentlemen, Scholars, Divines, and all such as
desire any knowledge in Art and Sciences, by Randal Holme of the City of
Chester Gentleman-sewer in extraordinary to his late Majesty K. Charles II. and
sometimes Deputy to the Kings of Arms, Fol. printed for the Author, and to be
sold by R. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Regum pariumque magnae Britanniae Historia Genealogica, qua veterum juxta ac
recentium in illa familiarum origines, stemmata and res memorabiliores ordine
ad novissimum Angliae statum aptato, recensentur atque explicantur, additis
Aenets insignium tabulis and indice necessario; studio ac opera Jacobi
Willielmi Im. Hoff. fol.

Excellentium familiarum in Gallia Genealogiae a prima earundem origin usque
ad praesens Aevum deductae, and notis historicis, quibus memorabilia regni
Galliae, Regumque and Clarorum toga and sago virorum facta, moresque ac
dignitates recensuntur, illustratae, cum Iconibus insignium and indicibus
necessariis; Auctore Jacobo Willielmo Im. Hoff. fol. Both sold by R. Chiswel at
the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Poetry and Plays.
The Wary Widow, or Sir Noisy Parrot, a Comedy, Written by Mr. Henry Higden, 4
to. Printed for Abel Roper at the Mitre in Fleet Street.

The Richmond Heiress, or a Woman once in the right; a Comedy, written by Mr.
Durfey.

A very good Wife; a Comedy as it is acted at the Theater Royal. Both printed
for Sam. Briscoe over against Will's Coffee-house in Covent Garden.

A Duke and no Duke: As it is acted by Their Majesty's Servants. To which is
added a Preface concerning Farce: With an account of the Personae and Larvae,
etc. of the ancient Theater, by N. Tate Servant to Their Majesty's, 4 to.
printed for H. Bonwick, at the Red Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The Bacchanalian Sessions; or, the contention of liquors; with a farewell to
Wine, by the Author of the search after Claret, etc. To which is added, a
Satirical Poem on one who had injured his memory, by a friend. 4 to. printed
for E. Hawkins.

Reprinted.
The Works of the learned Isaac Barrow, D.D. late Master of Trinity College, in
Cambridge: Published by his Grace John Lord Archbishop of Canterbury: The third
Volume containing 45 Sermons on several occasions; completing his English
works. Folio. printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil.

State Tracts in two parts; the first part being a collection of several
treatises relating to the Government, privately printed in the Reign of King
Charles the Second. The second part consisting of a farther collection of
several choice Treatises relating to the Government; from the year 1660, to
1689. Now published in a body, to show the necessity, and clear the legality of
the late Revolution, and our present happy settlement under the Auspicious
Reign of Their Majesty's King William and Queen Mary. fol. Sold by R Baldwin,
near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.

The Works of Josephus, with great diligence revised and amended, according to
the excellent French translation of Monsieur Arnauld D' Andilly. Also the
Embassy of Philo-Judaeus to the Emperor Caius Caligula, never translated
before; with the references of the Scripture, a new map of the Holy Land, and
diverse copper Plates serving to illustrate the History. folio. printed for T.
Basset, N. Ranew, R Chiswel, J. Wright, J. Robinson, M. Wotton, G. Convers, and
G. Sawbridge.

The Institution, Laws and Ceremonies of the most noble order of the Garter;
and a brief account of all other military orders of Knighthood in England,
Scotland, France, Spain, Germany, Italy, Sweedland, Denmark, etc. With the
ensigns of the several orders, by Elias Ashmole late of the middle TempleEsq;
Windsor Herald at Arms. The whole Work adorned with sculptures, and furnished
with variety of matter, relating to honor and nobleness. The catalogue of the
Knights, Companions and Officers continued to 1693, folio. Sold by T. Dring, at
the Harrow in Fleet Street.

A Complete Journal of the Votes, Speeches and Debates, both of the House of
Lords, and House of Commons throughout the whose Reign of Queen Elizabeth:
Collected by that eminent Member of Parliament Sir Simonds d' Ewes Baronet.
Published by Paul Bows of the middle Temple Esquire; fol. printed for Jonathan
Robinson in St Paul's Churchyard, Jacob Tonson in Chancery Lane, A. and J.
Churchil in Paternoster Row, and John Wyat in St. Paul's Churchyard.

The happy Ascetick; or, the best exercise: to which is added, a Letter to a
Person of quality concerning the holy lives of the primitive Christians; by
Anthony Horneck, D. D. Chaplain in ordinary to Their Majesty's, and Preacher at
the Savoy: the third Edition corrected and enlarged, with Prayers at the end of
each exercise, 8 vo.

The New-years-gift complete, in six parts; composed of Prayers and Meditations
for every day in the week, with devotions for the Sacrament, Lent, and other
occasions. 24 o. both printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

Officium Eucharisticum: a Preparatory service to a devout and worthy reception
of the Lord's Supper; to which is added a meditation for every day in the week.
12 o. printed for C. Wilkinson, and sold by R. Clavel, at the Peacock in St.
Paul's Churchyard.

Reformed devotions, in meditations, hymns and petitions for every day in the
week, and every Holiday in the year; divided into two parts, the third edition
reviewed. 12 o. printed for R. Cumberland, at the Angel in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

The Christian Monitor, containing an earnest exhortation to an holy Life, with
some directions in order thereto; written in a plain and easy style for all
sorts of People. The 15th edition 8 vo. price 3 d. but those that are disposed
for Charity may have a 100 for 20 s.

A Sermon concerning the Excellency and usefulness of the Common Prayer:
preached by William Beveridge D. D. Rector of St. Peter's Cornhil, London; at
the opening of the said Parish Church; 27. Nov. 1681. The ninth Edition, now
being done into Welsh, for the benefit of those not understanding the English
Tongue. 12 o. Both printed for S. Manship, at the Black Bull in Cornhil.

A mirror for Atheists, being some passages of the life and death, of the right
Honorable John Earl of Rochester; who dyed the 26. of July 1680. written by
his own directions on his Deathbed, by Gilbert Burnet D. D. now Lord Bishop of
Sarum. 8 vo. price 2 s. printed for J. Salusbury at the Sun in Cornhil.

Serious reflections on Time and Eternity, with some other subjects Moral and
Divine, to which is annexed an appendix concerning the first day of the year
how observed by the Jews, and may best be employed by a serious Christian, by
John Shower; the third Edition corrected and much enlarged. 120. printed for S.
Clement, at the Swan in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Human Prudence, or the Art by which a Man may raise himself and fortune to
grandeur; the sixth Edition, corrected and enlarged by the Author, 130. printed
for R. Sare at Grays-Inn-Gate, Holbourn.

Geography rectified, or a description of the World in all its Kingdoms,
Provinces, Countries, Islands, Cities, Towns, Rivers, Bays, Capes, Names,
Inhabitants, Situations, Histories, Customs, Commodities, Government;
illustrated with about 80 Maps: By Rob. Morden; the third Edition with
Additions: To which is added a Geographical Table Mathematically digested, 4
to. Printed for R. Morden at the Atlas in Cornhil, and T. Cockeril at the three
Legs in the Poultrey.

The first book of architecture by Andrea Palladio translated out of Italian,
with an appendix touching doors and windows; by P. le Muet architect to the
French King. Translated out of French by G. R. Also rules and demonstrations
with several designs for the framing of any manner of Roofs, either above
pitch, or under pitch, whether square, or level, never published before: with
designs of floors of variety of small pieces of wood, lately made in the Palace
of the Queen Mother at Somerset House, a curiosity never practiced in England
before: The fifth Edition corrected and enlarged, with the new model of the
Cathedral of St. Paul. 4 to. printed for G. Sawbridge in Little-Britain.

The second Part of the Relation of the late wicked Contrivance against the
Lives of feveral Persons, by Forging an Association under their hands: Being a
farther Account of the said Forgery, and of the two Authors of it, Stephen
Blackhead and Robert Young, alias Youngs, alias Brown, alias Hopkins, alias
Hutt, alias Green, alias Jones, alias Smith, alias, etc. Written by the Bishop
of Rochester; the second Edition: Printed for Edward Jones in the Savoy.

English Examples; to be turned into Latin, beginning with the Nominative Case
and Verb, as it is varied through all moods and tenses; and after fitted to all
the rules of the Grammar, to which are added, some cautions for Children to
avoid mistakes in making Latin, Forms of Epistles, Themes, and other Exercises
for the use of young Beginners at Bury-school. To which now is added, an Index
of all English words that are in this Book with the Latin words proper in them:
The tenth Edition, 12 o. Printed for Richard Chiswel and B. Griffin.

An enquiry into the measures of submission to the supreme Authority, and of
the grounds upon which it may be lawful or necessary for subjects to defend
their religion, lives and liberties: writ at the time of His Majesty's coming
to England, in the year 1688, and now reprinted with a Preface [upon occasion,
of the late Vote of the House of Commons] by the right reverend Father in God,
Gilbert Lord Bishop of Sarum. 4 to. printed for R. Chiswel, at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard.

There is newly reprinted Rich's Testament and Psalms; to be sold either bound
together, or single: wrought off upon fine paper printed for R. Clavel, at the
Peacock in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A new art of short and swift writing without characters, invented some years
since by Mr. Batcliffe of Plymouth; but not published in his life time. By
which rules a common hand will make such expedition, that Sermons, Speeches, or
Trials may be taken with delight, and plainly read though 20 years after: The
second Edition with large additions throughout the whole work 8 vo. price 4 d.
Printed for T. Howkins in George-yard in Lombard Street.

A short Introduction into Orthography, or the Method of True Spelling;
published for the Common Good, but especially for the Use of a Private Grammar
and Writing-school in White-cross-street; by Richard -- Schoolmaster: Printed
for T. Cockeril at the three Legs in the Poultrey.

The Counter-scuffle; whereunto is added the counter rat; written by R. S. 4
to. printed for T. Basset, R. Chiswel, M. Wotton, G. Conyers, and B. Walford.

The Gazetteer's: or Newsman's Interpreter: Being a Geographical Index of all
the considerable Cities, Patriarchships, Bishoprics, Universities, Dukedoms,
Earldoms, and such like; Imperial and Hance Towns, Ports, Forts, Castles, etc.
in Europe. Showing in what Kingdoms, Provinces, and Counties they are; to what
Prince they are now subject; upon, or nigh what Rivers, Bays, Seas, Mountains,
etc. they stand; their Distances (in English Miles) from several other Places
of Note; with their Longitude and Latitude, according to the best and most
approved Maps. Of special Use for the true Understanding of all Modern
Histories of Europe, as well as the Present Affairs; and for the convenience of
Cheapness and Pocket-Carriage, explained by Abbreviations and Figures. The
second Edition, Corrected, much Enlarged and Improved beyond the First Edition.
By Lawrence Eachard, A. B. of Christ's-College in Cambridge. Printed for Tho.
Salusbury at the King's Arms next St. Dunstan's Church in Fleet Street, 1693.

* This Book is very remarkable for the exactness of its Method; and the
careful measuring the distance of Places according to the best Maps.

A most complete Compendium of Geography, General and Special; describing all
the Empires, Kingdoms, and Dominions in the whole World. Showing their Bounds,
Situation, Dimensions, Ancient and Modern Names, History, Government,
Religions, Languages, Commodities, Divisions, Subdivisions, Cities, Rivers,
Mountains, Lakes, with their Archbishopricks, Bishoprics, and Universities. In
a more Plain and Easy Method, more compendious and useful than any of the
lesser sort. Together with an Appendix of General Rules for making a large
Geography, with the great Uses of that Science: Very necessary for the right
understanding of the Transactions of these Times: Collected according to the
latest Discoveries, and agreeing with the Choicest and Newest Maps. The Third
Edition, Corrected and much Improved, beyond the Two first Impressions. By
Lawrence Eachard, A. B. of Christ's-College in Cambridge. London, Printed for
T. Salusbury at the King's Arms next St. Dunstan's- Church in Fleetstreet, 1693.

Books now Printing and Re-printing.
CAmden's Britannia, new translated into English with large and very
considerable Additions; viz. Mr. Selden's, and other eminent Persons Notes and
Corrections: An Account of the Discoveries that have been made since Mr.
Camden's Death, drawn from the printed Histories of particular Counties, and
the Manuscript Collections of diverse curious Persons: An Account of the Seats
of the Nobility, of the Universities, Colleges, Schools, Coins and Buildings of
England: The large Discourse of Mr. Camden concerning the Government of the
Romans and Saxons in England, the Degrees in England, and the Courts of
Britain, much corrected and improved, and some Original Discourses on that
Subject added by an eminent Hand. An Account of those Authors that have
illustrated England in general, or any one Country in particular, will be also
added; as likewise large Indexs and Glossaries, etc. With large Sheet-Maps of
every County, containing all the Towns and Villages, with the Roads, and
Degrees of Longitude and Latitude, new engraved by the best Workmen according
to the last and best Surveys, corrected by Mr. Robert Morden. In large Folio.
Price 32 s. in Sheets to Subscribers till next Term, when it will be raised to
35 s. All which may be seen more at large in the Proposals for printing this
Book by Subscription, to be had of the Undertakers Abel Swall and T. Child, at
the Unicorn at the West End of St. Paul's-Churchyard, and Awnsham and John
Churchill at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row: To whom if any Gentlemen
please to send any Surveys of Counties or Remarks, that may any ways illustrate
this Book, they shall be faithfully returned without damage, and the Favor
gratefully acknowledged.

The Third, Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth Volumes of the New History of
Ecclesiastical Writers. Written in French by Lewis Ellies du Pin. Carefully
Englished. Containing the Authors that flourished in he Fifth, Sixth, Seventh,
and Eighth Centuries; viz. St. Chysostom, St. Jerome, St. Augustine, St. Cyrall
of Alexandria, Theodoret, Isiodore Pelusiota, Philostorgius, Nestorius,
Nonnius, Socrates Scholasticus, Sozomen. St. Hilary, Vincentius Lirinensis,
Cassiodorus, Evagrius Scholasticus, Gregory the Great, Joan. Climacus, Maximus,
Theodorus Archbishop of Canterbury, Venerable Bede, St. John Damascene, with
many others, which here is not room to mention. Together with a History or all
the Councils held in those Times; particularly of the General and Ecumenical
Councils of Constantinople under St. Cyril, of Ephesus, Chalcedon, the second
of Constantinople, and the third of Constantinople. As also an Account of the
Rise and Condemnation of the Donatist, Nestorian, Pelagian, and other Heresies;
and in short, a very particular Account of all Ecclesiastical Writings and
Matters, to the end of the Eighth Century.

All the four Volumes will be published this Term. Price to Subscribers
Eighteen shillings in Sheets. Printed for Abel Swall and Tim. Child, at the
Unicorn at the West end of St. Paul 's Churchyard.

S. Patrum qui Temporibus Apostolorum Floruerunt S. Barnabae, Hermae, S.
Clementis, S. Ignatii and Polycarpi Opera, Gr. Latcum Notis J. Bapt. Cotelerii:
To which is added Dr. Pearson Vindiciae Ignatii, etc. Of which a more
particular Account will be shortly given. Printed for Abel Swall at the
Unicorn, and Sam. Smith and Benj. Walford at the Prince's Arms in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

Origo Legum: Or, a Treatise of the Origin of Laws and their obliging Power; as
also of their great Variety, and why some Laws are immutable, and some not, but
may suffer Change, or cease to be, or be suspended, or abrogated. In seven
Books. By Geo. Dawson, M. A. etc. Folio, Printed for R. Chiswel at the Rose and
Crown in St. Paul 's Churchyard.

The History of the Edict of Nants, containing an Account of the most
remarkable things that have happened in France, upon occasion of diversity of
Religions, since the Publication thereof, and particularly of the Injustice,
Artifices and Tricks that have been put upon the Protestants, to the Revocation
of the same in October, 1685. With an Account of what has happened since the
Edict of Revocation to this present. Written in French, by Mons. Benoist, and
published by Order of the States of Holland. Faithfully Englished, will be
speedily printed for John Dunton at the Raven in the Poultrey.

History of the Devils of Loudun; or of the Possession of the Nuns of St.
Vrsula, and the Condemnation of Vrbain Grandier Curate of the same Town. Being
an exact Account of the wicked Practices of certain Monks and Priests in France
against a Parish Priest whom they long persecuted, and at last caused to be
barbarously executed upon pretense of his having bewitched the Nuns, who were
taught by the Priests to commit very extravagant Actions, in order to compass
their wicked Design. Translated from the French.

Medulla Historiae Anglicanae, a compendious History of the Monarchs of Great
Britain, from the Time of Julius Caesar to the end of the Reign of the late
King James, 8 vo.

The Comedies of Terence, Englished by several Hands; will be speedily
published.

Horace translated after the manner of Monsieur Dacier in Prose, with his Notes
in English, corrected and improved by several Hands.

Two Comedies of Aristophanes, viz. Plutus and Nubes.

Two Tragedies of Sophocles, viz. Oedipus and Electre.

Three Comedies of Plautus; viz. Amphytrion, Rudens and Epidicus.

All Translated after the same manner, with the Notes of Monsieur and Madame
Dacier, corrected and improved by several Hands.

All the Comedies of Monsieur Moliere, being 31 in Number; Englished by several
Hands.

John Sleidan's History of the Four Monarchies, Englished.

Titus Lucretius Carus de Natura Rerum, interpretatione and Notis Illustrat.
Cura Tho. Creech Oxon. Coll. mn. Anim. Socius, 8vo.

C. Valor. Catulli, Sex. Aur. Propertii and Albii Tibulli Opera omnia,
Interpretatione and Notis illustravit Philip. Silvius. T. E. C. ad Vsum
Delphini, 8vo.

C. Crispi Sallustii Opera, Interpretatione and Notis illustravit D. Crispinus
ad Vsum Delphini, 8vo.

Eutropii Breviarium Historiae Roman ab Orb Condita ad Annum ejusdem Vrbis
MCXIX. Interpret. and Notis illustravit Anna Tanaquil. Fabri Filia ad Vsum
Delphini, 8vo.

ANAKPEONTOS TLOY E'L Anacreontis Teli Carmina, plurimis quibus hactenus
scatebant mendis purgavit, Metra restituit, notisque illustravit Wilhelmus
Baxterus, PHilellun. Subjiciuntur etiam aliorum Anacreontica Carmina una cum
duobus Odariis antiquae Poetriae Sapphus. Nec non Anacreontis Vita and
Interpretatio Latina. All printed by Abel Swall and T. Child at the Unicorn in
St. Paul 's Churchyard.

A Volume of Sermons, by William Bates D. D. will be published in Trinity Term.
to be sold by Jonathan Robinson at the Golden Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.

A Survey of the whole Bible, containing an Analytical Account, or Division of
all the Holy Scriptures; affording a pleasant prospect into the several Rooms
of this sacred Edifice, and the variety of Furniture contained in them. This is
a Book exceeding useful both for Ministers to show the Coherence and Connection
of the Text, etc. and also for private Christians in their reading the
Scripture: And is designed as a Supplement to Mr. Clark's Annotations; it is
proposed to be printed by Subscription, and will be published by Michaelmas
next, in 4 to. Price seven Shillings to Subscribers. Printed for Jonathan
Robinson, where may be had Proposals with a Specimen.

This Term will be finished that so long expected Book, The Remains of Monsieur
St. Euremont's Essays, the most pars Translated by Mr. Tho. Brown, printed for
Abel Roper at the Mitre near Temple Bar, and J. Everingham at the Star in
Ludgate Street.

Some BOOKS lately Printed and Printing Beyond Sea.
AMmianus Marcellinus cum notis varior. fol. fig.

-- Idem 4. fig.

Bocharti Opera Omnia, fol. 3. tom.

Cypriani Opera cum notis Episcopi Oxoniensis, fol.

Crenii methodus studiorum been instituendorum. 4.

-- Fasciculus dissertationum 8.

Lactantius de Mortibus Persecutorum cum notis variorum, 8.

ATlas nouveau par Sanson, contenant toutes les Carts Geographiques du Monde
pour l'usage de M. le Dauphin dans un grand Volume fol. 1693.

Architecture nouvelle des Anciens and des Modernes par Vignole and autres,
avec un Dictionaire d' Architecture and des notes par Daviler, 4.2. vol. fig.
1693.

Bentivoglio Lettres diverses Italien and Francois 12.

Course de Philosophy, suivant le systeme and les principes de Descartes, par
M. Regis, 4.3. vol. fig.

Comedies d'Aristophane par Dacier, 12.

Comedies de Plaute, latin and Francois avec les Notes de M. Dacier, 12.3. vol.

Carts Geographiques de Sanson a l'usage du Dauphin en grand Papier.

Comparaison des grands hommes de l'antiquite and des modernes par M. Perrault
de l'Academie des Sciences, 12.2. vol. 1693.

Dictionaire Historique de Moreri, fol. 4. vol. avec additions.

Dictionaire nouveau Francois and Latin de Tachard, Bouhours and autres, 4

Latin and Francois de Tachard, 4.

Elements de Mathematiques du P. l' Amy, 12. fig.

-- de Geometry de Port Royal, 12. fig.

-- de Geometry du P. l' Amy, 8 fig.

Forces de l' Europe avec le Plan de toutes les places fortes, par M. de
Vauban, 4. 1693.

-- 8. fig. Francois and Alleman.

Faussete des Vertus humaines avec les Reflections de M. de la Rochefoucaut par
M. Esprit de l' Academie Francoise. 12.

Geographie universelle par la Croix, 12.4. tom. fig. and Carts. Geometry
practique d' Ozanam, 12.

Genealogy des Dieux, ou method pour apprendre la fable heroique, 12.

Histoire de Guillaume III. Roi d' Angleterre, avec fig. and toutes les
Medailles. fol. 1693.

-- du Prince de Conde, 12. 1693.

-- des Conciles Generaux commencant par celuy de Nicee, 4.

Instruction pour les gens de guerre, pour les arms a feu, Canon, Bombes and
Carcasses, and la maniere de conduire l' Artillery a la maniere des Francois,
12. fig.

Nouvelle Grammaire Grecque de Port Royal, 12.

-- Latin desdits, 12.

Nouvelles Operations de Chirurgie par la Chariere, 12.

Oeuvres diverses de M. Patru, contenant ses Playdoyers, harangues, lettres,
and autres Oeuvres, 12.2. vol. 1693.

-- de Lucrece Latin and Francois, 12.2. vol.

-- de Poesies d' Anacreon, and de Sapho en Verse Francois par Mr. de
Longepierre, avec le Grec a cote, 12. 1693.

Oeuvres d' Horace, 12.10. vol. Latin Francois de la Traduction de M. Dacier
avec Notes.

Pensees ingenieuses des Anciens and des modernes par le P. Bouhours, 12.

Pratique de Geometry sur le terrain and sur le papier par le Clerc, 12. fig.

Parallele ou comparaison des Anciens and des Modernes par Mr. Perrault, 12.
1693.

Quinte Curce Latin and Francois de M. de Vaugelas, 12.2. tom. 1693.

Remarques nouvelles sur la langue Francoise par Bouhours, 12.

Recueil des Poesies des meilleurs Poets Francois, 12.5. tom. par. M. Daunois.

Sophocle Tragedies Grecques traduites en Francois par M. Dacier, 12.

Satyrs de Juvenal and de Perse nouvellement traduits 12.2. vol. Latin and
Francois.

Memoires de Tekeli 12.

Le Cabinet des beaux Arts and des Science par M. Perrault de l' Academie des
Sciences, 4. fig.

Recueil des Traitez de paix enter la France and les autres Estats de l' Europe
4to. 6. Vol. Paris. 1693.

Hist. de l'Edit de Nantes 40. 1. and 2. Tom. Roterdam 1693.

De la Tolerance des Protestants 120. Paris 1693.

Reflections d'un Academicien. Paris 1693. 120.

Reflections sur le Jugement des scavans Paris 1693. 120.

Hist. des Troubles d' Angleterre 4 to. 2. Vol. Paris 1693.

La Bataille de Darius and Alexandre, gravee d'apres le Tableau de M. le Brun.

La Bataille d' Alexandre and de Porus, de mesme.

Le Passage du Granique, de mesme.

La Tente de la Famille de Darius, de mesme.

L' Entree de Babilone, de mesme, all five Engraved by the best Masters, from
the Draughts of Monsieur le Brun, and printed on five large sheets.

Two Prospects of the Basse, an Island in Scotland, exactly Drawn and curiously
Engraven on two large Copper Plates, and printed on a Sheet of Royal Paper.

A Prospect of the new building of Chelsey-College, very finely Engraven, and
Printed on a Sheet of Royal Paper.

Mons. Sanson 's Maps of all the Parts of the World, Corrected and newly
published by his Son; together with Geographical Tables of the Divisions of the
four parts of the World, and of the several Nations of Europe; The whole
Collection being 70 Maps in two large Sheets each, 25 Maps in one Sheet each,
and 19 Tables of the Divisions of the World; all three Sold by Abel Swall and
T. Child at the Unicorn in St. Paul 's Churchyard.

APPENDIX.
DOctissimi Clarissimique Gerardi Joannis Vossii and ad eum Virorum Eruditione
Celeberrimorum Epistolae; quas inter centum ferme numerantur Illustriss. Guil.
Laud Archiep. Cant. Ja. Usserii Armachani, Joa. Seldeni, Hug. Grotii, Claud.
Salmasii, Edv. Pocockii, Tho. Farnabii, Jo. Meursii, Ez. Puteani, Jo. Fr.
Gronovii, Pet. Cunaei, and Gasp. Scioppii, multa praeclara Theologica, Critica,
Historica, Philosophica, complexae; Opus omnibus Philologiae and Ecclesiasticae
Antiquitatis Studiosis utilissimum ex Autographis Mss. Collegit and ordine
secundum singula tempora digessit Paulus Colomesius Ecclesiae Anglicanae
Presbyter. Iterata Editio, rerum Indice uberrimo aucta. Londini; prostant
venales apud S. Smith and B. Walford Societatis Regiae Typographos ad insignia
principis in Coemeterio D. Pauli 1693. folio.

MONASTICON ANGLICANUM: Or, the History of the ancient Abbeys and other
Monasteries, Hospitals, Cathedral and Collegiate Churches in England and Wales,
with diverse French, Irish, and Scotch Monasteries, formerly relating to
England; Collected and published in Latin, by Sir William Dugdale, Knight, late
Garter King of Arms, and now epitomized in English, Page by Page in Folio.
Printed for Sam. Keeble at the Turk's- Head in Fleet Street, and Hen. Rhodes at
the Star at the Corner of Bridelane in Fleet Street.

A Work in the Original in effect the most useful Evidentiary and Repertory of
Titles that is in print, considering, first the vast Quantity of Lands which
formerly belonged to the Religious Houses in this Kingdom. 2. The diverse sorts
of Liberties and Immunities, which most of those Houses and their Possessions
were endowed with. Thirdly, That by the Statutes, 27 H. 8. Chapter 28.. 1. and 31.
H. 8. Chapter 13.. 2.3. It is provided that the King and his Patentees shall have
and hold the said Lands in as large and ample manner as the said Houses enjoyed
them; and in. 21. of the last-mentioned Statute, that such Lands as were before
discharged of the Payment of Tiths should so continue; with many other useful
things both in the Common Laws, History and Heraldry: And as it is in the
Original, so is it in the English Epitomies, being done by one no less learned
than ingenious, which the Reader will easily perceive by his Work; wherein he
will find an Historical Account of the Foundation of all Primitive Churches and
Religious Structures in England and Wales, as well those that were demolisht at
the Suppression of Monasteries as those that are still in being; with the Cuts
of all the Religious Habits, and many other things both useful, pleasing, and
profitable to the Reader.

Plutarch's Lives, Translated by several hands, newly Reprinted. 5. Vol in 8
vo. Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judge's- head in Chancery Lane.

M. Velleii Paterculi quae supersunt. Cum variis Lectionibus Optimarum
Editionum; Doctorum Virorum Conjecturis and Castigationibus; and Indice
Locupletissimo. Praemittuntur Annals Velleiani, 8 vo. Oxon, e Theatro.
Prostant Venales apud J. Crosley, G. West, H. Clements, and J. Howel. 1693.

The Christians Manual, in two parts: 1. The Catechumen, or an account given by
the young Person of his knowledge in Religion, before his admission to the
Lord's Supper, as a groundwork for the right understanding of the Sacrament.
2. An Introduction to the Sacrament, or a short, safe, and plain way to the
Communion Table; being Instructions for the Worthy Receiving the Lord's Supper;
to which is added the Communicants Assistant; being Devotions to that purpose;
fitted to be used before, at, and after the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament:
Collected for, and familiarly addressed to every particular Communicant; by L.
Addison, D. D. Dean of Litchfield, the fourth Edition. Printed for Will. Crook
at the Green Dragon without Temple Bar.

The Gentleman's Journal: or the Monthly Miscellany. In a Letter to a Gentleman
in the Country: consisting of News, History, Philosophy, Poetry, Music,
Translations, etc. for the Month of May 1693. The same for the Month of June,
will be published by the 1st. of July. sold by R. Parker at the Unicorn in the
Piazza, under the Royal Exchange in Cornhil; and R. Baldwin near the
Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane.

FINIS.

