THE BELIEVER's Daily Exercise: OR, The Scripture Precept of being in the Fear
of the Lord all the day long.

Explained and urged, in Four Sermons.

By John Billingsley, Minister of the Gospel.

Genesis 5. 24. And Enoch walked with God, and he was not: for God took him. 1 Timothy 4. 7. Exercise thy self unto Godliness. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Seeing then that all
these things shall be dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all
holy conversation and godliness? LONDON, Printed for Tho. Parkhurst at the
Bible and Three Crowns, the lower end of Cheapside, near Mercers Chapel. 1690.

To his Beloved Auditors the Inhabitants of S. in the County of N. and the
Villages adjacent.
My very dear Friends,
THese Sermons were first Preached in your hearing; at your desire they become
thus public; which I should never have suffered them to have been, had I not
hoped your spiritual good might be some way advanced thereby: For I am
conscious that the World is already full of Books; yea, that diverse have
written on this very Subject, and that I am no ways capable of doing it so
well, as it is done already: But your extraordinary affection to my unworthy
Person and Labors, may (by Gods blessing) make a meaner thing from me more
acceptable, and so more useful to you, than the more Learned Labors of others
that you are less acquainted with. My many infirmities both of body and mind,
tell me, I am like to be of little use in the World; but what little I am
capable (by Divine Assistance) of doing for the glory of God, and the good of
Souls, I am very desirous (if God see it good) it may henceforth be among you.
For this little Book, I desire you will make it your Pocket companion; read it
frequently, and practice it, and I shall have no cause (whatever censure it
expose me to) to repent its Publication, nor you the Perusal of it. That your
best good may be effectually promoted by this and all my poor endeavors, is
the hearty prayer of

An affectionate desirer of your Soul-prosperity, John Billingsley.

The Believers Daily Exercise.
Prove. chapter xxiii. v. 17. Let not thine heart envy sinners; but be thou in the
fear of the Lord all the day long.
THE firmest Believers have their fits of Unbelief, and the strongest Faith has
some intermissions and abatings of its vigorous exercise. Peter that had Faith
to leave the Ship, and set his feet on the Waves, to give his Lord the meeting;
yet when the Winds grew boisterous his unbelief had sunk him, had not Jesus
lent him a hand, and by one word of his mouth stilled a double Tempest, that of
the Winds and Waves without, and that of his Disciples Fear within, Matthew. ch
xiv. from v. 22, to 33.

The People of God are a thinking People: They are apt to take notice of, and
observe those passages of Providence which an unthinking World let slip
unregarded. And in their first thoughts of the Ways of God they are sometimes
mistaken, and often at a stand: And in nothing are they more ordinarily at a
loss, or sooner surprised, than in the consideration of the state of good and
bad men here in this World. They believe a just and holy Providence governs the
Affairs of this lower World; and this puts them sometimes to wonder how it
comes to pass that the Righteous should be so often persecuted and perplexed,
while the wicked are in peace and safety, flourishing like a green Bay Tree,
having more than heart can wish, Psalm. xxxvii. 1. and Psalm. Lxxiii. 3.

And while they are thus intent upon the consideration of the present glory of
the wicked, and the poor and dejected state of the godly, no wonder if the
Tempter pursue his advanta^es against them, and they feel in their hearts some
motions of envy and emulation; thinking the wicked's prosperity too much, and
inordinately wishing themselves a share of it. This the wise men here warns us
against; Let not thine heart envy sinners; q d. Let not their Prosperity seem a
great matter in thine Eye; entertain no thought of wishing to change places
with them; remember in whose choice and appointment both their and thine own
Lot is: Fear God, and thou will not fret at, or envy sinners. The great
Preservative against this, as well as all other vices is, to have the fear of
God always before our Eyes.

Envying sinners is a disease the Godly are sometimes apt to fall into; the
Antidote, prescribed by the best Physician, is, to be in the fear of the Lord
all the day long: This indeed is a Panpharmacon, an All-heal; the fear of God
is an effectual remedy as against Envy, so against Pride, Covetousness,
Sensuality, Hypocrisy and whatever distempers else our Souls are Subject and
Liable to: It is meet therefore that we should always be provided of it, and
carry it about with us continually.

Be thou.] This necessary Precept is directed to every one in particular; Be we
Young or Old, Rich or Poor, Learned or Unlearned, Superiors or Inferiors,
Bond or Free; of whatever Rank or Condition we be, this Precept belongs to us,
and we ought every one to take it to our selves.

In the fear of the Lord.] Have a lively since of the Being, Attributes,
Presence and Providence of God; that he beholds all thy actions, and that he
will render to thee according to thy works. Fear in this place implies
Reverence, Love, and Obedience: Let a Principle of Religion possess thy Soul,
and be the Governor and Director of thy Life and Actions. Walk with God. Live
by Rule, order thy Conversation aright; this is to be in the fear of the Lord.

All the day long.] Continually, throughout thy whole life, every day and in
every part of the day. Religion is to be our whole employment; we are not to
own or allow our selves in any one action that is not Religious: From our
waking in the morning, to our lying down it night, we are to see that we be in
the fear of the Lord. I do not say that we must turn Euchites, and spend all
our time in acts of immediate Worship, Praying, Hearing, Meditation, etc. But
we must do no deliberate act that for its principle and end does not deserve to
be denominated a Religious action. Our very Eating, Drinking, Sleeping, Buying,
Selling, Visiting, Recreating of our selves, must be a walking according to the
Gospel Rule, if we would have peace, and a blessing from Heaven upon us.

The Doctrine I shall give you from the words is this:

Doct. That it should be the continual study and endeavor of every one of us
to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long: Or, The Religious spending of
our whole time should be our daily exercise.

The Method of handling this important truth shall be,

1. To show you what the nature of this exercise is, to open to you this being
in the fear of the Lord all the day long.

2. Why we must be daily taken up and exercised in the religious employment of
our whole time; And here I shall lay down the Reasons and Motives that are
proper to enforce this Practice upon us, and persuade us to it.

3. I shall conclude with some Inferences and Practical Remarks upon the whole.

1. To open to you this being in the Fear of the Lord all the day long: And
this I shall do by laying before you the several parts of your daily duty, that
so you may be directed in the orderly performance of it. Many neglect the great
business of Christianity because they do not well understand what it is; or if
they know something of it in general, yet their notions are but confused, and
they know not how to place and order their duties. For your help in this, I
shall lay before you the following Scheme of good employments for every day;
which whosoever Prudently, Sincerely, Cheerfully and Constantly observes, does
(in some good measure) come up to this Divine Rule, of being in the fear of the
Lord all the day long.

1. If you will be in the fear of the Lord all the day long, you must see that
the fear of the Lord be in you: Look well that a principle of Grace and
Regeneration be wrought in your Soul. A dead man cannot work or walk; you must
make the tree good, or the fruit will be naught. A graceless Soul cannot do a
gracious action; much less is it to be expected that he should engage and
persist in a course of holiness. How many in a pang of Conviction, and under
present fears of Death and Hell, resolve that they will lead new lives, they
will be drunk no more, they will leave their loose Companions, they will Pray,
and Read, and Hear, and do no body knows what? But their goodness is but like a
morning Cloud, and early Dew that soon passes away, they dream of leading new
lives, without getting new hearts: Whereas if you will to purpose reform your
lives, you must begin with your hearts: Get a deep sense of sin, see your need
of Christ, cry to God for Pardon and Grace, be restless till you feel your
Souls possessed with the Spirit of a holy Life, Light and Love, till you be made
partakers of a Divine Nature, new creatures in whom all old things are passed
away, and all things are become new. A new heart is virtually a new life,
inasmuch as it will certainly produce it; whereas a seeming new Life, while the
old unsanctified heart, with its unmortified Lusis, remains, is but a dead
Image, a painted carcass, a thing that as it does not live, so it cannot last.

2. Begin every day with God. When I awake (says the holy Psalmist) I am still
with thee, Psalm. 139. 18. Labor that your first thoughts may be of God, and
Christ, and Heaven. Use your Souls, upon their first release, from the Fetters
of sleep, to work toward God in thankful acknowledgments, and deep admirations
of his goodness, with very humbling reflections on your own frailty and
vileness; Say, Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him, or the Son of
Man that thou visitest him? Psalm. viii. 4. Lift up a Prayer for protection from
sin and danger throughout the new day God is pleased to give you. Think how
many have passed the night in Pain and Misery, and how many Souls may be this
night gone into Eternity, while you have slept sweetly and safely, and bless
God for his mercy to you, and labor to make a wise and holy improvement of it.
Good thoughts at our first waking, season our hearts for all day.

3. Waste no time in needless sleep or waking sloth. How many that are horribly
afraid to die, yet make no matter of giving away a vast proportion, and that of
the very best, the flower of their time, to deaths Image and Brother Sleep? O
think how many are suing out and obtaining their pardon, and making sure their
Salvation, while you lie Sleeping and Snoring; and have not you Souls as well
as they? Have not you as much need of Christ and Grace and Heaven as they?
Remember excessive Sleep is neither good for Body nor Soul. All cannot do with
the like measure of Sleep, but there are very few but might do with a great
deal less than they do: And of those that are not guilty of indulging the Body
in this respect, how many more are there that abridge themselves for the World,
than that do it for God and their Souls? And is the World a better Master,
think you, than God and Christ? And is Gold a better purchase than Grace? And
then when you are awake, slugg not as many do, turning upon their beds like a
door upon its hinges; much less contrive not mischief upon your Beds, let not
contemplative wickedness find that time to steal into your hearts. But shake
off sloth, and as soon as true necessity will give leave, be stirring;
Remember morning hours are the cream of time, more precious than the filings of
Gold or dust of Pearl, therefore throw them not away.

4. Be not long in dressing, and lose not even that time, but think of some
apparel for the Soul. Be not like the gaudy Butter-flies, and gay Peacocks of
our days, that spend their best hours between the Comb and the Glass; and so
their Bodies be but fine, care not how filthy their Souls are. Remember Clothes
came in to cover that nakedness of which sin had made us ashamed, and therefore
they should be a constant memorial to us of the fall of our first Parents, and
ours in them; and to be proud of them, or to make a great deal of stir and do
about them, is very foolish and absurd, as well as wicked. Count that fashion
of apparel the best, that being sufficient for Warmth and Decency truly so
called, requires least time in putting on. To spend an hour every morning in
Tricking and Trimming the Body, and to think half an hour for Reading and
Prayer too much, is to me no very good sign than he or she whose ordinary
practice is such, is a real hearty Christian. And you whose apparel is really
Grave and Decent, the time that is spent in putting it on, let it not be wholly
taken up in that, but let your minds be employed in suitable Meditations: Think
of putting o^ the Lord Jesus Christ, he is the only clothing for your Souls,
that the shame of your nakedness may not appear: You would be ashamed to go
naked into the Company of your Neighbors; O be ashamed of sin which is the
Souls nakedness! While you are dressing, think what Temptations you are like to
meet with in the day, and labor to fence against them; forelay the employments
of the day, meditate on some Scripture promise or the like.

5. Go not out of your Chamber, or Lodging Room (without urgent necessity) till
you have offered up your morning Sacrifice of Prayer and Praise unto God. He
that is to travel among Thieves had need go armed. Origin Complains that that
day he burnt Incense to the Idol, he went out without Prayer. It Is ill going
into infectious places fasting, and it is dangerous going into an infectious
World prayerless. Truly, I cannot but look upon him, as an unreasonably bold
man, that dares go out into the World without Prayer: Do thou know but Death
may meet thee before thou come in again? Do thou know but God may leave
thee to do that, that shall bring upon thee an infamous death and everlasting
damnation?

Take heed to thy self therefore, and go not out till thou have prayed: But
then, see also that thou pray in Faith, and with Fervency: Do not content thy
self to have said a few words by rote, that thou call a Prayer; but pray
with understanding, and pray with Feeling and Affection: Confess thy sins both
of Nature and Life, and beg of God the Pardon of them for Christ's sake; be
earnest for Grace and Sanctification, for guidance and direction to lead a holy
Life, and Support and Comfort, that thou may die in Peace: Pray for the
Church of Christ, yea for the Heathen World, for the Land of thy Nativity,
especially for the Continuance and Success of the Gospel therein: Pray also for
thy Relations, for thy Friends, yea and for thy Enemies. And remember with thy
Confessions and Prayers, to join Praises and Thanksgivings; adore the Divine
Excellencies and Perfections, and acknowledge thankfully the Favors and
Benefits you receive from his hand: Express an hearty sense of Creating,
Preserving and Redeeming Love: Recount the personal, family and public mercies
you have received or shared in; and as you have the Use and Comfort, so let God
have the Praise and Glory of them. If thou be Weak and Ignorant, get some one
that is able and willing to instruct thee: Pray as thou can; make use of some
good form till thou can do better; but take heed of formality, and resting in
the work done; narrowly watch and observe thy heart; thou give God nothing,
if thou give him, not thy Heart.

6. Join reading of the holy Scriptures, and (when time will permit, especially
on the Lords days) the choicest practical Books, with your morning Devotions.
For daily reading the Scriptures, it is of absolute necessity, and no more to
be omitted than Prayer it self: It is the Word of God; you have Christ's
command to search the Scriptures, Joh. v. 39. It is the Godly man's Character,
that his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day
and night, Psalm. i. 2. It is the food of your Souls, without daily supplies
whereof you will famish. Read with deliberation, with intention of mind, labor
to understand what you read, and to feel it; read it as God's Word, and above
all, bring to it a serious* resolution of practicing what you read.

Obj. But I cannot read?

Sol. The more shame for you, if you be grown up, and have your Eyesight.

If you cannot read, do your best to learn, and that speedily. If there were
Lands to be settled upon all that could read the Conveyances of them, we should
see people learn apace; will you do more for Pelf than for your Souls?

However, till you can read, or such of you as having been able to read, may
now be disabled through blindness or weakness of sight, etc. Get others to read
to you, and attend to the Word read with your utmost diligence, as for your
Life. If you refuse this Counsel, Remember when you come to die, or when your
ignorance and folly shall have thrust you into Hell, that you were warned of
the time when you would cry out, Oh! how have I hated instruction, and refused
to be reformed? For good Books, I shall only say, we have great choice of them,
and you will do well to redeem what time you can for the reading of them,
especially, where there is seldom or sorry Preaching, and age or sickness keeps
any from the Public Assemblies; God is pleased to bless these to be the means
of much good to many Souls. Only take heed of erroneous Books of Antinomians,
Quakers, Papists, etc. And of opposing private reading to hearing of the Word
publicly Preached: For my part, I would hear the weakest Minister (supposing
him a true Minister) that ever spoke with a Tongue, rather than stay at home to
read the best Book that ever was written; For God says, Faith comes by
hearing, Romans x. 17. And though he can work Faith by reading, and it may be
hoped will do, where people are deprived of opportunities of hearing, yet that
is not to be expected where they are slighted.

And here for the sake of beginners in Religion, who are often imposed upon, to
the loss of their time, and the danger of their Souls, by ill chosen Books, I
will venture to name a very few, and those not bulky, which I take to be
exceeding sound, and I will add a few hints, how you may read them to best
purpose: I will name but these eight.

1. The Assemblies Confession and Catechisms with the proofs at large; lately
reprinted, in Octavo. 2. Mr. Daniel Burgess 's four little Tracts, Call to
sinners, Questions, etc. Twelves. 3. Showers Reflections on Time and Eternity.
Twelves. 4. Joseph Alleins Alarm to the Unconverted. Octavo. 5. Richard Alleins
Vindication of Godliness, three parts. Octavo. 6. Steel 's Trades-mans Calling.
Octavo. 7. Ford 's Practical use of Infant Baptism. Octavo. 8. Doolittel on the
Lord's Supper, two parts. Twelves.
I would have you read these Books in the order I have named them one at once,
(always continuing the joint reading of the Scriptures with and before all
Books of humane composure;) read one through, yea I would advise thrice over,
before you begin another; with a Pen or Pencil mark weighty and affecting
passages, and at leisure write some of them out, if you can write; else read
them the oftener over.

Now to such as are grown Christians, I commend to you,

A Discourse concerning Old Age, tending to the Instruction, Caution, and
Comfort of aged People; By Rich. Steel, Minister of the Gospel: And,

A Word to the Aged, by Will. Bridge, Minister of the Gospel.

Begin and end every reading with Prayer to God for his blessing, and interline
what you read with frequent pauses of Prayer and Meditation; set your self
heartily and speedily to the practice of every Duty and Direction you meet
with, and depend on God by Faith for Assistance and Acceptance through Christ.
These few Books thus read will yield you more comfort in a dying hour, than
Kings will then be able to fetch from their Crowns, Misers from their Bags, or
hypocritical dogmatists from all their aerie speculations, contentious
wranglings, or haughty and confident (though empty and groundless) pretensions
and expectations.

7. When you go out into tht World, be watchful against it. Remember, you walk
among snares; consider what variety of Temptations you are daily exposed unto,
and be upon your guard; especially look well,

1. When you are alone, to your Thoughts, O what a World of Time do vain
Thoughts that lodge within us rob us of! how many covetous, proud, sensual
thoughts crawl in our Hearts in a day? How do we act over again our former Sins
by Contemplation? How many study and project wickedness, and contrive in their
thoughts how to bring wicked devices to pass? Remember, God sees thy heart, and
will reckon with thee for thy thoughts: See therefore that they be pure, holy,
charitable, humble: Do not look upon thy self as at liberty to think what thou will; He is a Christian indeed that governs his Thoughts.

2. When you are in Company, look to your Tongues; consider your speech: Weigh
what you are a going to say, before you speak it. Do not throw about fire
brands, arrows and death, and say, Am I not in sport? Prove. xxvi. 18, 19.
Remember Life and Death are in the Power of the Tongue, Prove. xviii. 21. The
prodigious licentiousness of the Professors of this Age in this matter, makes
it needful to use more than ordinary Caution, that we catch not the infection.
How common is it in all places, to hear people speaking evil of the things and
persons that they know not? Jude ver. 10. Sure we do not understand the genius,
spirit, and temper of the Christian Religion, whereof we make profession: Does
not Christ say, By thy words thou shall be justified, and by thy words thou
sh^lt be condemned? Mat. xii. 37. Does not the Apostle James say, If any man
among you seem to be Religious, and bridieth not his Tongue, but deceives his
own Heart, this man's Religion is v^in: Jam. i. 26. Alas, alas! that so few that
are called Christians do indeed believe their Bibles to be the Word of God, or
take any care to frame their Lives by the Rules of it. Let your Speech be
alway^ with grace, seasoned with salt, that ye may know how ye ought to answer
every man, Col. iv. 6. O Sirs, where shall one find the company that converses
by this Rule? If talking of fashions, if telling t^les of our Neighbors, if
aspersing the Gov^^nment be this gracious savory speech, we have a great deal
of it every where; besides the lying, swearing, ribaldry, etc. of the openly
profane: These things are a Lamentation, and should be for a Lamentation! O
let us be more wise; consider Sirs, you may do more mischief by your tattling
of things that you understand not, and that do not concern you, in a few
minutes, than the b^st endeavors of your whole life may ever be able to
repair. Remember, your Tongues are your glory, turn them not into shame; but
glorify God with them. Go and visit your sick Neighbors, or such as are
troubled in mind, and instruct and comfort them; Go and reprove plainly those
that are profane and wicked, and beseech them to have some mercy on their own
Souls; stir up such as are able to relieve them that are in want and distress;
Consider one another to provoke to love and to good works, Heb. x. 24. And of
this you will have joy in the day of accounts.

8. Let the main part of every day be spent in the labors of your particular
Calling; unless (as now and then it may happen, but cannot ordinarily) there be
very good reason to the contrary. Look upon your Calling as a main part of the
service of your Generation, which God and your Country expects from you, and
of which you are to be accountable. Diligent labor is a Duty, and there is a
blessing belongs to it: It keeps the Mind from rust, the Body from diseases.
Idleness is the source of wickedness. Quem otiosum invenit Diabolus occupat.
Little do men think what miseries and mischiefs they expose themselves to, when
they grow remiss and negligent in their particular Callings. The Apostle bids
us study to be quiet, and do our own business, 1 These. iv. 11. They that
neglect their own business, often grow pragmatical, and must be meddling with
other folks, the consequences whereof are dreadful. No man fouls his fingers
with doing his own Work, is an Outlandish Proverb that has its weight, and is
worth our thinking of, when we are idle or ill employed. Adam, where art thou?
is a question we should think we hear God asking us every day.

Obj. It may be thy Calling is mean.

Sol. Be content, it is that which the Providence of God has chosen for thee,
and he knows best what is good for every one of us; and he will accept a
day-labourer that is diligent in his Calling, as well as a Knight or a Lord.

Obj. Aye, but mine is the toilingest, drudging, slavish Life in the World.

Sol. The harder labor thy Calling puts thee upon (so it be consistent with
thy health, and proportionate to thy strength) the better it is for thee; the
Body is an unruly masterly Servant, that needs taming; Labor kills Lust. But
if indeed thy Calling be above thy strength, or endangering to thy health, (as
the Apostle says in another case, 1 Cor. 7. 21.) If thou mais^ be free, use it
rather.

And then, in your Calling see that you sincerely aim at Gods glory and public
service, and not merely and chiefly at your own wealth and gain, or the raising
of your Selves and Families in the World. That is all lost labor that
terminates ultimately in self.

9. Look to the exercise of Justice and Charity in buying and selling. And here
our Saviors Golden Rule may serve instead of all particular Rules, Mat. vii.
12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should d^ unto you, do ye even so
to them. Therefore, Draw not immoderately from them to your selves; make no
advantage of their ignorance or necessity; count not every man you deal with a
Knave, (which is a Rule in Commerce, that some people value themselves much
upon, who yet, I suppose, would think it very hard to have the same measure
meted unto them.) Lie not at catch for an advantage; impose not ill wares for
good; break not your day for delivery of goods, or payment of moneys; strive
not to make a great figure in the World, when you know you have not wherewith
to support it, (which is indeed to set up for a common Cheat;) exact not upon
your poor Brethren in cases of Forfeitures, Mortgages, etc. Consider the equity
of Gods Laws to the Jews in such cases, and remember that Christianity requires
of us a more large and extensive Charity. In a word, digest the abovementioned
Precept of our Lord, and ever and anon quicken Conscience to attend to it, and
take your measures of acting thence.

10. Maintain Sobriety, Temperance, and a serious thankful frame of spirit in
eating and drinking. Take direction not from appetite, but from reason, both
for the quantity and quality of your Food. Do not study too much to please, and
do not at all pamper the flesh. Make not provision for the flesh, to fulfill the
lust thereof, Romans xiii. v. 14. Consider the end of the rich glutton, that
fared sumptuously every day, Luke xvi. 19 24. Think how many want what you
waste. Remember, their end is destruction, whose God is their Belly, Phil. iii.
19. Take heed of being bewitched with the love of strong drink: Wine is a
mocker, strong drink is raging, whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise,
Prove. xx. 1. Remember what it did to Noah, Genesis ix. 21.

And then be not content with mere Temperance, in which it may be when you have
done all you can, some Heathens have out-stripped you, but mix your meals with
good discourse; own God in bodily provisions; beg his blessing on them and
seriously bless him for them. Whether you eat, or drink, or whatsoever you do,
let all be done to the glory of God, 1 Cor. x. 31.

11. Be moderate in Recreations, subordinate them to the great ends of your
Life, and see they be lawful and s^asonable. Two Rules Mr. Whate^^y Redemption
of Time.
an Eminent Divine gives about Recreations among others, specially worth our
notice.

1. Never allow your selves any Recreation, till you be come to some degree of
weariness in some pious or honest employment. Begin not the day with Recreation.

2. Spend no more time in Recreation any day, than you spend in the private or
secret duties of Religion. And this Rule, though to some it may seem severe, he
thinks sufficiently warranted by that of our Savior, Mat. vi. 33. Seek first
the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness. I add, Take heed of passion, and the
l^ss of Time; Remember, Recreation is no Man's business: God has not placed us
in the World, as Leviathan in the Sea, to play therein: We must but sip, not
drink of these dangerous sweets; tanquam canis ad nilum, a lap and away: Take
them as that we need, not as that we love. When once Recreations begin to
inveigle our affections, though in themselves they be never so lawful* it is
time to lay them aside.

12. Every day rejoice with trembling. Mix a humbling sense of our own sins,
with a thankful sense of Gods mercies. Indulge not a sullen sorrow, neither let
our Joy degenerate into frothiness and levity. Maintain an evenness of spirit
between the immoderate carefulness of such as are swallowed up of overmuch
sorrow, and the carnal j^llity of such as on light occasions are transported
into ravishment, or on greater ones, forget the causes they have not to be
puffed up, but to be humbled rather. When God gives you the greatest mercies,
think how little you deserve; and when he exercises you with the greatest
afflictions, think he is before hand with you, both in what he has bestowed
upon you, what he offers to you, and what he has laid up for you.

13. Let no day pass without some serious heart-affecting thoughts of your last
day. Pray, Lord, teach me so to number my days, as to apply my heart unto
wisdom, Psalm. xc. v. 12. One being asked what Philosophy was, gave it this
definition; Philosophia est meditatio mortis; and undoubtedly, the through
consideration of Death, has a large place in the Christian Philosophy. The
Gospel Doctrine is Ars moriendi, the Art of Dying; viz. in and to the Lord. And
how unpleasant soever this study may seem to corrupt nature, there is none more
necessary for us than it. Serious thoughts of Death are very powerful to
convince of the evil of sin, of the vanity of the World, of the excellency of
Grace, and the wisdom of laying up Treasure in Heaven. O! did men think, as
they ought, of their latter end, they would not raise such a dust as they do in
the World, for applause and preferment, there would not be such pride and pomp,
such bribery and oppression, such luxury and sensuality among professed
Christians as there is. Serious thoughts of Death would be one of the most
effectual cures of Hypocrisy in the World; for who would very much care what
men say or think of him, that considers how soon he must lie buried out of
their sight, and forgotten by them as if he had never been? When Hypocrites see
they must die, it makes them in earnest, and if they had been so in time, they
had been sincere. Who would trifle with God that knows and considers how soon
he must be at his Bar? It were impossible for men to live as they do, did they
but once every day seriously think they must die; this thought would either
reform them, or torment them: And that sinners seem to be aware of, whence,
because they have no mind of either, they do all they can to put Death out of
their thoughts.

14 Observe and improve the Methods of Providence and Grace every day, and
record your Experiences for future guidance and encouragement. It is a great
point of spiritual wisdom, to notice aright Gods dealings in his Providence
with our selves and others, so as to make just Inferences therefrom, and none
but such: And also to observe the secret approaches of the Divine goodness to
our Souls, in the way of gracious influence, from the Spirit of Holiness.
Whatever God does in the ways of common providence, or special grace, he
expects we should regard and consider, and improve it; when sin finds our
selves or others out, we should lie thereby warned how we meddle with that
which Experience assures us, will cost us dear; when Obedience is rewarded, we
are to observe it for our encouragement, to walk in such ways as God owns; and
in what ways we have found God approaching our Souls with the influences of
special grace, and spiritual consolation, we are to be excited still to wait on
him therein.

15. Let no special opportunity of furthering your Salvation, glorifying God,
or benefiting your Neighbor, slip you unobserved or unimproved. This is to
redeem time. Every hour of every day is to be made the best of, but some are
capable of a special improvement; like a fair Wind to a Mariner, or a fair day
when we are at harvestwork; if we let this slip, such another may not come.
Post est occasio calva. It may be now Christ stands at thy door in the person
of a poor Beggar, send him not away without an Alms; see Mat. xxv. at the
latter end. Perhaps a poor ignorant sinner is by providence cast into thy
Family, or thou meetest with such a one upon the Road, or thou have him upon a
sickbed, willing to hearken to instruction; O do thy utmost to save a Soul
from Death, and cover the multitude of sins! Jam. v. 20. It may be thou art
light into the Company of debauched Sensualists, profane Ranters, Infidel
Scoffers; now give a proof of thy loyalty and fidelity to thy great Lord and
Master. Perhaps thou art under a Cross, and thou feel thy heart sensible and
tender; now set to confessing thy sins, and making supplication for the Life of
thy Soul; now thou have a Sabbath, a Market Day for Heaven, store thy self with
Soul-provision; and sic de caeteris.

18. Share in the sufferings of the whole Body of Christ, and of all the
Members of it, by such a sympathy as may prove you a living Member thereof.
This is the news that a right Christian is inquisitive after, how it fares with
the Churches of Christ, what becomes of the Interest of true Religion in the
World, what hopes there is that the Kingdoms of the Earth may become the
Kingdoms of the Lord and his Christ? If he meets with good tidings as to these
matters, it glads him at the heart: But if he hears of the prevailing of wicked
Errors, and abominable Idolatries, of the Divisions and Scandals of the
Professors of Christianity, of violent Persecutions against the Saints and
Servants of the most High God; this wounds him at the very Soul, he is so
affected, as if he saw one killing his Father, forcing his Wife, or butchering
the fruit of his own Loins. If Sion sit in the dust, he puts on Sackcloth: And
in the particular afflictions of Gods Children that are known to him, he
resents them deeply, cries to God for their deliverance, and he is willing to
be both at cost and pains that they may want no help that he is capable of
affording them. He is not one of the glib-tongu'd, gouty-sisted Professors,
whom the Apostle James characteriseth, James ii. 15, 16. of which sort there
are abundance in our days, that if a Brother or Sister be naked, or destitute
of daily Food, say unto them, Depart in peace, be you clothed and filled,
notwithstanding they give them not those things that are needful for the Body.
If others sufferings do not make us smart, so that for our own ease besides a
great many better considerations, we would do what in us lies to help them out
of them: I will not say we are stark naught, lest I too much discourage you,
but I will say, we are far from what we should be, and it concerns us to strive
hard to become better.

17. Let Heads of Families see they defraud not God of his honor, nor the
Souls of theirs of the means of their Spiritual Life; but keep up Family
Religion with seriousness, life, and constancy. He that provideth not for his
own, especially for them of his own household, has denied the Faith, and is
worse than an Infidel, 1 Timothy v. 8. He is a Murderer that provides not bread
for his Family, unless the Providence of God debar him of all opportunity to do
it; what is he then, that never breaks the Bread of Life to them, but leaves
them to starve and pine away in their iniquities? Prayerless Families are Types
of Hell. O Sirs! let no day pass without calling yours together, morning and
evening, and praying and praising God with them, reading the Scriptures to
them, exhorting them seriously to remember their Creator, and to work out their
Salvation, and to make their Calling and Election sure. How can you think God
should bless your Society or your Labors, while you call not upon his Name?
Whence come such quarrellings and discontents, such crosses and
disappointments, such outrageous wickednesses and disorders in Families, but
from this neglect of daily worship? Oh therefore take heed how you let the
World justle out the daily exercises of Religion, that ought to be in your
Families! For let me tell you, All that the World can do for you, when you have
got the most of it, cannot make up the loss of one hours Communion with God.
What will you say and think then, when for it, you have shut your selves and
yours out from the everlasting enjoyment of God in Heaven?

18. Look upon Relative duties as a main part of your daily business as
Christians: Be well versed therefore in the Scripture-directory for the
discharge of them, and be sure you make conscience of yielding obedience to it.
See Ephesians. v. 22. to chap. vi. 6. Col. iii. 18. to iv. 2. Let yoke-fellows live
together in mutual love and helpfulness: Let the Husband excel in Love, and
walk with his Wife as a man of Knowledge: Let the Wife see that there be a Law
of kindness in her Lips, that she adorn her self with the ornament of a meek
and quiet spirit, that she be not querulous nor imperious, but content with the
station Providence has assigned her, and the place wherein both the Light of
Nature, and the written Law of Scripture sets her. Let Parents take care for
the Children they have been the Instruments of bringing into the World,
especially for their Souls, and to give them Christian Education. Let Children
honor their Parents, reverencing them, loving them, obeying them, requiting
them, and not despise them when they grow old, and their parts decay, or they
have had what they can hope for from them. Let Masters carry to their Servants
with a due mixture of love and awe, provide them what is needful for the Body,
and especially be tender of their Souls, as knowing they must account to God
for the Soul of every Servant that comes under their Roof. And let Servants be
humble, diligent, faithful; and let me add, silent, not carrying tales about
from one house to another, discovering the secrets of the Family in which they
live; this is a base property, and they that are so glib of their Tongues, are
seldom fit for any business that requires either skill or industry.

19. Take heed of Formality, and labor to be sincere in all you do. Let not a
course of serious Religion seem a drudgery to you, but labor to maintain a
holy delight in duties. All this that I have been telling you, will seem to
most (especially to them that have never been used to any such thing, and are
wholly strangers to it) a great deal.

Obj. So much reading and praying, so much laboring such exact watching of our
selves, such inspection into ours; what all this ado for Salvation! Cannot we
get to Heaven at cheaper rates than so? This is a hard saying, who can hear it?

Sol. But I pray Sirs, do not think any of this needless, till you know better
what work is fit to be appointed you, than he that has set you this; nor do not
condemn this as intolerably hard work, till you have tried it; Some that have
tried it have said, they never knew what a pleasant Life meant till then. Is it
such a terrible hard task for a hungry man to be set to a full Table, and be
bid eat heartily? Or for a man that is dropping into his Grave, to be bid drink
this pleasant potion and be whole? Or for a Condemned Malefactor to be bid
thankfully accept his pardon, and be set at Liberty? Or for a banished man to
have leave to return home, if he will but converse an hour or two every day
with his nearest Relation, or his dearest Friend? Why, such is the task that
Sensualists and Hypocrites shrink back so from: If men knew what practical
Religion were, they would equally avoid the opposites, and the Counterfeits of
it; Love would cast out slavish fear: And God would be worshipped with
sincerity and alacrity, instead of those forced shows and that feigned Devotion
that now alas too generally corrupts, yea even nullifies the Christian Worship.

20. Lastly; Close the day, as you began it, with God. Retire, e're you be too
sleepy, and examine your selves how you have spent the day; Look over the
foregoing Rules, and think how you have complied with them, or wherein you have
come short. Thus ask, what State and Condition is my Soul in? Am I truly
regenerate or no? Did I this day awake with God? What were my first Thoughts
upon? Have I not wasted morning hours, or even minutes, in needless sleep or
sloth, in vain imaginations or contemplative wickedness? Have I not been too
long in dressing my body, too curious in my apparel, proud of it? Have I not
lost that time, or have I redeemed it by holy Meditations, Spiritual Projects
and wise fore-casting how I might best serve God the ensuing day? Have I
solemnly sought God in fervent and believing Prayer, and diligent study of his
holy Word? And has not Spiritual Life been wanting in my closet-duties? Was it
as much and more to me that God was by, than if all the World had seen me? Have
I looked strictly this day whatever Company I have been in, both to my Thoughts
and Speeches, that neither were Light, Vain, or Wicked? but Serious, Spiritual,
Heavenly, becoming my high calling, and honorable profession of Christianity?
Especially have I carefully avoided that common and hateful sin of Tale-bearing
and Pragmatical meddling with other men's matters? Have I been diligent in my
particular calling, and that not for Covetousness, but Conscience toward God?
Have I done to others as I would be done by? Have I defrauded nor overreached
none? Have I been sober and temperate in the use of bodily refreshments? Have I
referred them to Gods glory, and seasoned my use of them with the reverent
mention of his name? Have I meddled with no recreations but what were certainly
lawful, and have I used them lawfully? Have I neither been cast down with
causeless or excessive grief, nor lifted up with carnal jollity and frothy
merriment? Have I this day very seriously thought of my last day, and how have
those thoughts affected me? Have I duly noticed and improved the Occurrence, of
Providence and the influences of Grace this day? What special seasons of doing
or receiving good have I had this day and how have I laid hold of them or let
them slip? What sense have I had of Sions sufferings, what Sympathy with
afflicted brethren? Have I done my utmost to relieve and help those that are in
want and distress? Have I been careful to keep up Family Religion, and
conscionable in the discharge of relative duties this day? Has sincerity and
cheerfulness rendered Christ's Yoke easy, and his burden light in all the
variety of employments wherein I have this day served him? Thus take Conscience
to task, about your daily behavior, and labor to be rightly affected with all
the discoveries you make of your State, Frame and Way. Further examine what
temper and disposition of Soul you ar^ ^ow in, whether fit in some measure to
draw nigh to God or not: Read the Scriptures, meditate on what you read, or on
some other heart-affecting Subject, and leave not till you feel your heart
suitably moved therewith; then pour out your Souls again to God in Prayer, and
commit your Souls and Bodies, with Faith and Confidence, to his Love and Care.
As you undress you, think, As I now put off my Clothes, so I must ere long this
Body; As I now lie down in my bed, so shortly must I in the Grave: Think what
an Image sleep is of death, and how easy (if God give the word) the passage is
from the Image to the reality; and how sure the sleep of death is to be
followed with the morning of the Resurrection, when we shall awake never to
sleep again. With such Meditations close your ^yes, and lock out vanity from
your hearts; and let your beloved Jesus Christ lie all night as a bundle of
Myrrh betwixt your Breasts, Cant. i. 13. Thus will there be a settled
correspondence betwixt your Souls and Heaven, you will be its care, and it will
be your hope; and days so spent will not be to be repented of at last.

2. Having thus opened to you what it is to be in the fear of the Lord all the
day long, and how Christians are to be daily taken up in the Religious
employment of their whole time; I now proceed to show you, Why they are so to
do, and what are the reasons and motives enforcing this Practice upon us.

We are to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long, and every day to make
Religion our business.

Reas. 1. Because this is to answer the Ends and Purposes for which God has
given us Life and Time. Wise agents propound to themselves valuable ends in all
they do; the infinite wisdom, therefore, cannot be thought to have made this
lower World, and to have placed man (made after his own Image) therein, but
upon very valuable considerations; not those indeed of profit to himself: (the
absolute and complete perfection of his nature barring all Impotency or defect
to be assisted or supplied; Job xxxv. 6. 7. If thou sinnest, what do thou
against him? or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what do thou unto him?
If thou be righteous, what give thou him, or what receives he of thine
hand?) But the complacency of his own Will in the Communications of his
Beneficence to his Creatures, in proportion to their capacities of receiving:
To enlarge therefore our receptive capacities, that so we may reflect more of
the luster of the divine goodness, is the great end of our being; and likewise
of our continuance and support therein: Now by nothing are our capacities more
enlarged, than by such a continual being in the fear of the Lord as I have
before described. For by doing Gods W^ll we become enlarged in Divine and
Spiritual Knowledge, and our understanding, will and active Powers receive a
joint improvement. He that does the will of my Father (says our Savior) shall
know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, or whether I speak it of my self,
Joh vii. 17. and this is Life Eternal to know the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent, Joh. xvii 3. Knowledge is the groundwork of
Holiness, and Holiness advances Knowledge; and to be thus daily improving in
holy Light, Life and Love is that very end for which God made us at first,
again new made us, redeeming us when we were lost and undone; and for which his
providential care still continues and supports us in the World. Why were we not
swallowed up of Death and Damnation when we had sinned, but that the dead
praise not God? (Psalm. cxv. 17.) Wherefore are we redeemed by the blood of
Christ, but that we should be a peculiar people zealous of good works? (Tit.
ii. 14.) Why are we made partakers of a Divine Nature, but that we should
cleanse our selves from all filthiness of Flesh and Spirit, perfecting holiness
in the fear of God, and showing forth the virtues and praises of him who has
called us out of darkness into his mavelous Light? (2 Pet i. 4. 2 Cor. vii.
1. 1 Pet. ii. 9.) All which we can never do but by denying Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and living Righteously, Soberly and Godly in this present World,
Tit. ii. 12. So that while we live not to God we live beside the end of our
being, we lose our time, and provoke God to strip us of a blessing we no better
know how to value.

R. 2. This is the way to secure our present peace, and future happiness. There
is no way to a settled grounded tranquillity of mind, but by a holy Life. Sin is
the great makebate in Kingdoms, Churches, Families; and it will never let that
Soul enjoy peace in which it resides unpandoned and unmortified: And these two
always go together; unmortified sin is ever unpardoned sin, and guilt still
makes the Soul uneasy. He must be an Atheist or a Brute, that can be secure
and jolly while sin lies at the door, (Genesis iv. 7.) like a Bailiff ready to
drag him before the Supreme Judge, at whose Bar being condemned, he must be
forth with abandoned to Eternal Torments. What comfort can Pleasures, Honors
or Profits yield to that man who is awake, and knows not but he must be in Hell
to morrow?

Besides, it is easy to demonstrate that the happiness of rational Creatures
consists in Communion with God, of which we are altogether incapable whilst we
lie wallowing in the mire of sin. God is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity
(scil. with approbation) Evil shall not dwell with him, Hab. i. 13. The
conviction sinners have of this appears in their shiness to approach the
Sovereign Majesty, especially in secret acts of Worship, after the commission
of any grosser sin: And if we be in such a case that we dare not come to God,
our Life must needs be very uncomfortable. Hence the Prophet Isa. Lvii. 21.
There is no peace (says my God) to the wicked. And the Psalmist, Psalm. Lxxiii.
27, 28. All they that are far from thee shall perish; but it is good for me to
draw nigh to God. Many complain of their present restless uncomfortable
condition, but they neglect the true Method of cure; they would have peace, but
they will not crucify the flesh with its affections and lusts. Sinner, thou
must either leave thy sinful courses, or be a continual torment and vexation to
thy self; unless for a while thou should in Judgment be given over to a
spirit of slumber, and then thou will shortly awake in unsufferable terrors.
But the way to peace is to walk humbly with God, to be constant in the daily
practice of true Piety. See Psalm. cxix. 165. Great peace have they that love
thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Gal. vi. 16. As many as walk according
to this Rule, peace be on them, and on the Israel of God. And as this is the
wav to present peace; so it is also to future everlasting Glory. To them who by
patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, honor and immortality, God
will render Eternal Life, Romans ii. 7. There remains a Rest for the people of
God, Heb. iv. 9. Without holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14. They
only who live to God here are capable of living with him for ever hereafter. As
ever therefore you value peace here, or glory hereafter, let it be your
constant care to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long.

R. 3. Unless we thus make Religion our daily delightful Employment, we are
ungrateful to God who daily loadeth us with his Benefits. Who gave thee thy
Being? Who redeemed thy Life from Destruction, and thy Soul from Damnation? By
whom are all the hairs of thy head numbered, that not one of them fall to the
ground without his will? To whose care and kindness do thou owe thy health,
liberty, peace, plenty, quiet habitation, comfortable Relations, Gospel
opportunities; thy share in Public, National and Church Deliverances? Is it
not God that holds thy Soul in Life, and suffers not thy feet to be moved?
Psalm. Lxvi. 9. Is it not the Father of mercies that crowns thee with loving
kindness and tender mercies? Psalm. ciii. 4 Who forgiveth all thine iniquities,
and heals all thy diseases; v. 3. Is it not his hand that holds thee out of
Hell, and supporteth thee from sinking into the bottomless Pit? Is it not he
that has rescued thee as well as others of late from the devouring Jaws of
bloody Papists; from an horrible slavery of Body, Soul and Conscience, to such
as worship graven Images; from being compelled first to worship, and then to
chew and swallow a bit of Bread, or a thin Wafer under the title and
denomination of thy Lord God, Maker and Redeemer? And what return, think
thou, is due to God for such Mercies as these? Can any less suffice than that
which the Apostle exhorts unto? Romans xii. 1. I beseech you therefore, Brethren,
by the mercies of God, that ye present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And if we have once
sincerely given up our selves to God, we shall then walk with him, and be in
his fear all the day long; and if we refuse this, we are the most ungrateful
wretches breathing. What Monsters of Ingratitude are we, if when God has made
us, and redeemed us, and still preserves us, we deny him our service?
especially when his service is perfect freedom, and in keeping his Commandments
there is great Reward, Psalm. xix. 11. God has made nothing our Duty, but what
is equally our Privilege: And when as an acknowledgment of former kindnesses,
God only requires that we should receive more at his hands, and yet we will
not; we thereby render our selves such a composition of folly and ingratitude
as is beyond parallel. Among Heathens Ingratitude to Benefactors is esteemed
one of the most heinous crimes a man can be guilty of: So that it is become a
common Proverb among them, Ingratum dixeris and omnia; when you have called a
man ungrateful, you have said your worst of him. And if Ingratitude to
fellow creatures deserve so black a brand, what shall we think then of
Ingratitude against our Sovereign Lord, the great Creator, and common Parent of
Mankind? Shun therefore this foul blot by diligence and constancy in a holy
walk.

R. 4. By walking thus with God we set others a good Example, and recommend
Religion to the World. Thus we become the Salt of the Earth, the Lights of the
World, a City set on an Hill, which cannot be hid; our Light so shines before
men, that they see our good conversations and glorify our Heavenly Father.
Mat. v. 13, 14, 16. A holy Life is a continual Sermon. Thus you may all be
Preachers, without invading that Office, which it is the will of God should be
peculiar to those whom he has specially qualified for it, and visibly
separated to it. When you are constantly and delightfully busied in the duties
of Holiness, you manifest to others that Religion is not an impracticable
notion, a mere pleasing speculation, but that the Rules of it may be complied
with. Our Sermons here in the Pulpit would be much more effectual, if you would
but live them over in your Closets, Shops, Fields, Families, and mutual
converses in the World. O what a joy is it to Ministers, and what a glory to
the Gospel of Christ, when we can point with our Fingers (as it were) and say,
There, and there, and there are the Seals of our Ministry: There an ignorant
man or woman instructed; a drunkard, or swearer, or sabbath-breaker, or unclean
person reformed; a covetous muck-worm made free-hearted and open-handed; a
hypocritical Formalist awakened to through seriousness in Religion; one that was
formerly prayer-less, of whom we can now say, Behold he prays; a Family of
the Devils Slaves and Servants, and the Worlds Drudges, that is now become a
Church of Christ, having stated, orderly Worship, and ringing with the praises
of God in emulation, as it were, of Heaven it self; God's will being done in it
as there it is done.

The holy Conversation of the Professors of Religion, is an Instituted Means of
the conversion of the Atheistical, Infidel, Impenitent World: And if we deny
them the benefit of this Means, we little know what we have to answer for, the
Blood of how many Souls may be found in our Skirts: Whereas on the other hand,
if by our holy Life, and good Example we turn many to righteousness, we shall
shine as Stars, or as the Sun in the Kingdom of our Father, Dan. xii. 3. Mat.
xiii. 43. By converting sinners thus from the evil of their ways, we shall save
Souls from death, and cover the multitude of sins, James v. 20. This going
before others with the light of a good Example, is a cheap, yea a gainful way
of promoting their Salvation; which is certainly the best work we can do in the
World, and will yield us the most solid comfort in a dying hour. Oh! be not
content to give others a verbal commendation of Religion, but let your lives
tell them what an excellent thing it is.

R. 5. We had need thus to improve every day, because we know not which shall
be our last day: Therefore if we would not lose our last day, let us take heed
that we do not lose any day. We always carry (as it were) our lives in our
hands, (Psalm. cxix. v. 109.) Our breath is in our nostrils, and God can easily
change our countenances, and send us away, (Isa. ii. 22. Job xiv. 20.) We all
know we must die, but none of us knows the particular time, the year, month,
week, day or hour when. Our Lord's coming, in this respect, is uncertain;
whether at evening, or at midnight, or at the Cock-crowing; we ought therefore
always to watch, that we may be in readiness, Mark xiii. 35. How would we spend
that day which we knew before hand would be our dying day? Would we not be very
serious? Would we not labor to keep our minds very composed? our hearts fixed?
our thoughts and affections heavenly? I do not say we should spend the same
time every day in immediate acts of Devotion as we would do if we knew it to be
our dying day; nor that we should converse always with the same solemnity, as
if we were under that apprehension: But we should every day take as much care
to keep our selves from all known sin, and to be diligent in every positive
instance of our duty, as if we knew we must end the day and our life together;
for we do not know but it may be so. Now, tell me, sinner, could thou be
content to die a drunken Beast, so totally deprived of the use of thy reason,
as not to be able to utter, with sense and seriousness, but so much as, Lord
have mercy upon me? Would it not be a terrible thing to go into Eternity (as
some have done) with an Oath or Curse in thy Mouth? What a case should thou
be in, think thou, if the Dart of Vengeance should strike through thy Liver,
whilst thou art in the very act of filthy Lust, and wallowing in impure
Embraces? If thy Breath should be stopped as thou art uttering a Lie, or a dead
Palsy should benum thy Limbs while thou art driving a cheating or oppressive
Bargain? Surely there is no man so brutish but he would most earnestly
deprecate so sad a doom; and yet sinners boldly venture on these courses daily,
notwithstanding they know not but they may thereby expose themselves to so
dismal a calamity: Whereas, if Death find us in the way of our duty, whatever
that duty be, let it lie in never so ordinary or mean an Employment, we have
cause of rejoicing, and not of fear or sorrow. When we have been most diligent
in spending a day for God, we shall then be most willing (if the good pleasure
of the Lord so be) to die at night: The weary Labourer hastens to receive his
Wages, and cheerfully lies down to rest.

R. 6. The time is coming when we shall wish we had spent our days thus. How
irksom soever a Life of Strict Godliness may now seem to our carnal hearts, and
corrupted natures, yet there is never a one of us but we shall shortly wish we
had been as holy as the holiest, that we had made Religion our business, and
been every day of our lives in the fear of the Lord all the day long. You that
are now strong and healthful, and through the pride of your hearts forget God,
so that God is not in all your thoughts; Who say to God, depart from us, for we
desire not the knowledge of thy ways, (Psalm. x. 4. Job xxi. 14.) Who esteem
fervent praying, no better than whining and canting; and conscientious
strictness in the Government of our selves but needless preciseness, and vain
scrupulosity: Who count him that fears an Oath, or refuses an imposed
Health, a morose Melancholist, an arrand Fanatic, a silly Sneaksby: Who pride
your selves in the vainly assumed Titles of the Wits, as being got above the
fear of power invisible, and disentangled from the Fetters wherewith Religion
binds her Votaries: Who can please your senses, and gratify your appetites in
defiance of Almighty Justice, the threatened Everlasting Torments and all the
Jargon (as with a sneering smile they are wont to call it) of the man in black;
that as they would fain flatter themselves (and glad are they at heart when
they can meet with any one so vile as to give them a color for it) does but
talk vehemently against sin, for an hour or two in the Week, because it is his
trade: There is not one of all these, I say, but will shortly change his note,
and turn his tune: When Death knocks at the doors, and looks in at the Windows,
and out at the Eyes of these brisk merry Blades, these boon Companions; when
nature fails; and their strength is gone, and their departing Soul presageth
irresistibly it is everlasting duration: Oh how will they then befool
themselves? How will their Consciences reproach them? How freely will they give
themselves the Lie? How heartily will they retract their censures of the Godly,
and with that they were not only almost, but altogether such as they? (Acts
xxvi. 29.) And that they might die the death of the righteous, and their last
end be like his, (Numb. xxiii. 10.) Assure your selves, Sirs, there is none of
you that when you come to die, will repent that he has praised so much, or
lived so exactly, or mortified his flesh, and subjected his appetite to his
reason with so much diligence; none repents then of the sufferings and scorns
he has undergone for Christ and a good Conscience. Men then cry out of their
Gluttony, and Swearing, and Sabbath-breaking, and Hypocrisy; and not of their
holiness, and circumspection, and sincerity; but wish it had been a thousand
times more than it was: And what thou will shortly wish thou had been,
methinks if thou art wise, it should be thy hearty study, and chiefest care now
to be.

R. 7. We shall thus make evil days good to us: Days of abounding iniquity in
the World; days of sharp sufferings to our selves, whether from persecuting
malice, or from the immediate hand of God; (as in one kind or other sufficient
unto every day is the evil thereof, Mat. vi. 34.) Yet whatever be the evil of
the day, it will be a good day to us, if we be in the fear of the Lord all the
day long; for then we shall avoid much of the evil of the day, and what of it
is unavoidable God will turn it to our good; for he has said, All things shall
work together for good to them that love him, Romans viii 28. There is no
Antidote against daily temptations like being in the fear of God; nor no
support or comfort under great troubles like this, that they find us in the way
of our duty. Nothing stilleth murmuring and complaining under our sharpest
trials like a holy awe of God, and a sense of his presence and governing
Providence. He that is in the fear of God will not use sinful shifts to escape
sufferings, than which nothing sooner fills the Soul of any man, that is not of
an utterly seared Conscience, with trouble and perplexity. The fear of God will
wean us from the Love of the World, and will subdue those inordinate desires in
us, which (since nothing that we can here compass can ever satisfy) must
necessarily make us a torment to our selves: It will prick the bladder of
pride, quench our covetous thirst after the Mammon of Unrighteousness, and
blunt the Edge of our sensual Inclinations, that we shall be so far from
esteeming any of these our happiness, that we shall count our selves much more
happy in having grace to deny the immoderate gratifications of the animal Life,
than in being never so fully possessed of whatsoever might conduce to our
compliance with them. In a word, the fear of God powerfully prevailing in our
hearts, would make prosperity safe, and adversity easy to us, it would make
our worst days good, and our best days better; whereas he that lives and dies a
stranger to this being in the fear of the Lord all the day long, though he live
an hundred years in prosperity, yet it may be truly said, he has not had one
good day.

R. 8. This will secure a blessing unto us and ours. Religion entails a
blessing upon Families; upon Persons, and their Posterity. Blessed is every one
that fears God, and that walks in his ways, Psalm. cxxviii. 1. God blessed
the house of Potiphar for Joseph's sake, Genesis xxxix. 5. It is a promise to the
truly godly man, that whatsoever he does shall prosper, Psalm i. 3. Happy is the
man that fears always, Prove. xxviii. 14. The curse of the Lord is in the
house of the wicked: But he blesses the habitation of the just, Prove. iii. 33:
Read the 28th Chapter of Deuteronomy; what blessings are there promised to the
careful observers of God's Law? Those that are truly Godly, God will pour out
his Spirit upon their Seed, and his blessing upon their Offspring, Isa. xliv.
3. If we sincerely consecrate and devote our selves in the beginning of every
day to God, we thereby entitle him to our Persons, Possessions, and
Performances, and thereupon all of ours does immediately become his care: He is
as it were in equity bound to take care of his own. He never yet cast off any,
that sincerely cast themselves upon him: And when we consider how needful his
blessing is to the Success of any thing that we go about; We cannot but think
them happy that by taking God along with them continually, are secured of that,
without which all humane forecast and industry is in vain and to no purpose,
Psalm. Cxxvii. 1, 2. Whence come the Crosses, Losses, Vexations, and Ruins that
are in many Families, but from men's neglect or distrust of God? When we cast
him out of our thoughts, it is just with him to cast us out of his care.

R. 9. If we live thus, though we die young, we shall have lived long enough,
and if we die Old, we shall not have lived too long. What an excellent thing
now is Holiness and the fear of God, which reduces short Life and long to an
equality? He that in the time of his Life has learned to know God and Jesus
Christ, to Worship God in Spirit and in Truth, to secure to himself an happy
being for Eternity, and to serve his Generation while he is in this World, has
lived much, though, it be in a little time: Such a Child has lived longer,
than he that is as Old as Methusalem, and yet remains ignorant of these things;
I mean, as to the great ends and purposes of living: For there are those of
whom we may say, as Seneca, non di^ vixit, sed diu fuit: Many have been long,
that have lived but a little while. And further, if he whose walk and course we
have been at large describing to you, if such a one I say live long, he has no
cause to repent of the time he has sojourned here; though he have met with
many Temptations and Afflictions, he has thereby only had an opportunity of
exercising and confirming his Faith, Hope, Love and other Graces, his patience
has had it is perfect work, and he has brought forth fruit abounding to his
account: A long Life well spent is a resemblance of, as well as a preparative
to, Eternal Life. Gray-hairs found in the way of righteousness, are a Type and
Emblem of an happy Eternity: Whereas the sinner of an hundred years old is
accursed, and has cause Isa. 65. 20.
to lament that ever he had a being; he has cause (were it possible) to cancel
and blot our every day of his Life, each day having been only spent in
treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath, and revelation of God's righteous
Judgment, Romans ii. 5.

R. 10. By such a holy improvement of the short and troublesome days of time, we
shall secure to our selves an happy being thorowout the long and endless days
o^ Eternity. If we sow to the Spirit, we shall of the Spirit reap Life
Everlasting, Gal. vi. 7, 8. If we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with him,
2 Timothy ii. 12. The good and faithful Servant shall enter into the joy of his
Lord, Mat. xxv. 21. Wherefore, my beloved Brethren, be steadfast, unmovable,
always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labor
shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. xv. 58. God suffers none of his
faithful Servants to be losers by him, or any thing they do for his honor and
glory. Our light afflictions which are but for a moment work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; while we look not at the things that are
seen, but at the things that are not seen; for the things that are seen are
Temporal, but the things that are not seen are Eternal, 2 Cor. iv. 17, 18.
Surely if we believe an eternity of happiness for holy Souls, we shall not
think any pains in duty, or any patience in suffering, too much for it: Our
discouraging apprehensions of the difficulty of duty, proceed much from the
Wavering and Weakness of our Faith concerning the Reality and Excellency of the
heavenly glory. If we lived as seeing him who is invisible, (Heb. xi. 27.) And
as foreseeing that glory which is eternal; we should lead other manner of
lives, both in respect of grace and comfort, than now we do. Who would not
Watch and Pray, Toil and Labor, Suffer and Wait, that did soundly apprehend,
and firmly believe, that the result of all would be, the Souls being for ever
with the Lord? (1 These. iv. 17.) Oh the glory purchased with the redeemers
blood, and which he has as our forerunner taken possession of, what will it
not excite and enable us to undertake and perform? Did we believe that the
fervent, effectual Prayer of a righteous man avails much (Jam. v. 16.) to the
gaining of Eternal blessedness, we should not so often omit, nor so lazily
perform that duty as we do. Did Faith enliven our Meditations of Heaven, we
should be oftener in them, and continue at them longer, and with more delight.
Did we look upon every alms given by us to the poor as a laying up treasure in
Heaven, we should labor to be rich in good Works. Did we reckon that the more
of the sufferings of Christ are fulfilled in us now, the more of the glory of
Christ shall be revealed in us hereafter, we should even be ambitious of
Martyrdom, and esteem the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures
of Egypt, Heb. xi. 26. But alas, we think Heaven may be had with less ado, or
else we think so poorly of it as if it were scarce worth having. So that there
is too much cause to take up concerning us the complaint of one of the
Ancients, Aut hoc non est Evangelium, aut nos non sumus Evangelici, either this
(that we have in our Bibles) is not the Gospel, or we are not the Gospellers;
so wide is the difference between the Gospel of Christ and the Lives of
Christians. But be assured, my friends, we must bring our hearts and lives to
the Gospel, and make that the Rule of them, if ever we will be happy; For
Christ will never bring down his Gospel to our hearts and lives. If we will be
saved it must be in his way, and on his Terms, and he has said. Without
holiness no man shall see the Lord, Heb. xii. 14. And the unrighteous shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. vi. 9. For without are Dogs, etc. Rev. xxii.
15. Consider therefore, whether you will live a life of present ease, and be
hereafter cast out into eternal Torments; or you will now painfully exercise
your selves unto godliness, and approve your selves Christ's Servants, that you
may hereafter be for ever with him, and behold his glory, John xvii. 24. and
share in that Rest that remains for the People of God, Heb. iv. 9.

Having now shown you what it is to be in the fear of the Lord all the day
long, and given you the Reasons which oblige every one of us to take care that
we daily be so;

III. It remains that I point out to you those Inferences, and practical
Conclusions that follow upon, and flow from the Truths we have hitherto been
discoursing.

Inference I. Must we (as you have heard) be in the fear of the Lord all the
day long? What then shall we think of them that have no fear of God before
their eyes? that are so far from making Religion their daily business, that
they live every day as without God in the World? Ephesians. ii. 12. They say unto
God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, Job. xxi. 14. If
it be so necessary to our present peace and future happiness (as has been
shown) to walk with God continually, what a condition are they in that never
took one step in Heavens way, or so much as once set their faces Sionward? Jer.
L. 5. What shall we think of the Atheistical Crew, that call in question God's
Being, and boldly deny his Providence? The Infidel-scoffers that deny Jesus to
be the Son of God, and ridicule the sacred Records of Eternal Life, that deride
all pretensions to the assistance of the Holy Spirit, and hold the intercourse
and communion of Souls with the Father of Spirits, to be no better than mere
fancy and delusion? How are we to account of the Hypocritical Race of
pretenders to that Religion they never felt the power of upon their hearts, who
often turn Infidels themselves, and draw others into the same condemnation? The
malignant Enemies of practical Religion, who profess to love God, while they
hate their Brethren to the very death, for no other reason, but because they
indeed love him? The lovers of this World, Mammons Idolatrous Worshippers, who
know no godliness but gain, (1 Timothy vi. 5.) and who have no end of living, but
to be rich, and to compass that will deny God, damn themselves, and destroy
their Brethren? The sond admirers of ease and pleasure, that are dead while
they live, (1 Timothy v. 6.) and are willing to purchase a dying Life with eternal
Death, and exchange Angels fare for that of Swine, lovers of Pleasures more
than lovers of God? 2 Timothy iii. 4. The eager hunters after applause, that value
themselves by what others think of them, without staying to consider what they
ought to think of themselves? Those who seldom worship God so much as in
outward appearance, and never in spirit and truth, who make no conscience of
Relative duties, of diligence in their Callings, or of justice in their
dealings; who know not how to govern either their Souls or their Bodies by the
Rules of Religion, or the Laws of Sobriety; what can we think of all these but
that they are evidently the Sons of Death? They are in a sad and miserable
condition, they live at random, and must die at a venture; for there can be no
grounded assurance to such of an eternal well-being. Such as these make a hard
shift to please themselves in the course, but will undoubtedly fool themselves
in the issue of their Life; they will one day wish they had not lived at all,
rather than to have lived thus. A Life void of care, commonly ends in a Death
void of hope. As ever therefore you would die the death of the righteous, see
that you live the life of the righteous; and then, and not otherwise, your last
end shall be like his, Numb. xxiii. 10.

Infer. II. If we must be in the fear of the Lord every day, much more on the
Lords day. We have shown you how you must in a sound sense make every day a
Sabbath, by working for God, and resting in him, and diligent preparing for an
eternal Sabbatism with him; but you are not to pretend this in excuse for your
neglect of sanctifying strictly the Christian Sabbath, the first day of the
week, the day which the Lord has made, (Psalm. cxviii. 24.) in which he calls
us to rejoice and be glad: In which we celebrate the memorial of our Lord's
Resurrection, and consequently of the whole work of our Redemption by him. If
we must walk with God every day, much more on this day; to which a special
blessing is annexed, and on which we have special advantages for the service of
God, and the salvation of our Souls. The cavils of any against the strict
observation of the Lord's day, are easily answered by any one that observes
the dependence of the Life of practical Religion hereupon. I will be bold to
say it, The power of Religion lives or dies according as Sabbath-sanctification
is kept up, or let fall in Churches, Families or Souls. Of other days you are
to consecrate a part to Religious exercises, Acts of Devotion and Worship; but
this day is wholly to be taken up therein: Only God indulgeth us in works of
true necessity, and obliges us to acts of Charity thereon, giving mercy the
preference even to Sacrifice.

I will here briefly heap together a few Directions for Sabbath-sanctification.

1. Discern your obligntion to it in point of duty, and value it as your
Privilege. That God have a seventh part of our time for his Solemn Worship, is
the kernel of the fourth Commandment, and of perpetual obligation, and seems to
have been a part of Gods Law to Adam, even in the state of Innocence. God
appointed and blessed the seventh day of the week, before Christ's coming in
the flesh, for a weekly Sabbath, in commemoration of the worldly Creation; and
added a Law of Ceremonious Rest to the Jews, as a part of their Paedagogy, and
a shadow of things to come, now done away. Christ rose from the dead on the
first day of the week, and after his Ascension on that day, poured forth his
Spirit on his Apostles, to qualify them to declare his Will to Mankind in all
things concerning Salvation. They held and settled Church Assemblies on the
first day of the week, and called it, by way of approbation, The Lords day,
Rev. i. 10. And the Universal Church (as far as appears from Church History,
without the least contradiction till our times; see Dr. Young's Dies Dominica,
and Mr. Baxter's Divine Appointment of the Lord's Day) kept this day, and no
other, as the day of stated weekly Solemnities; and God was with them, and
owned and honored their Assemblies with his gracious presence: And therefore
it seems the effect of strange weakness, or intolerable perverseness, for any
now in these last days, to question what the Universal Church has so long, on
so good reason, practiced. The Lord's Day as the Christian-Sabbath, I take to
have been instituted by Christ, if not while personally on Earth, yet by his
Spirit in his Apostles: And as an attentive Reader of the Scriptures, may there
discern clear intimations of this, so the current practice of the Christian
Church in all times and places, does fully confirm it. Nor ought we to esteem
it any other than a very great Privilege, that we may have a day in seven, to
study the Works and Word of God, to praise his holy Name, to worship him in the
Assemblies of his Saints, to learn his Will for our Salvation. A holy Soul must
needs reckon it self in the Confines of Heaven while thus employed, and bless
himself that he may sometimes retire thus from the World, and enjoy a holy
freedom for spiritual delights, and gladsome preparations for Eternal Joy.

2. Prepare for this blessed day before it come: Think of it, and long for it,
every day, but especially the Evening before; rid your hands in good time of
worldly business, and your hearts of worldly cares: Read, pray, meditate,
catechize your Families; call your selves and yours to an account of what you
and they heard the Lord's Day before; and, if it may be, get to bed sooner that
night than you use to do of other nights, that so you may be under no
temptation to snore away that precious morning, on which our Lord (in testimony
of the accomplishment of our Redemption) rose so very early.

3. Be sure to be up as early on the Lord's Day morning, as is consistent with
your fitness for the blessed Employments of it: And let the thoughts of
Redeeming Love season your hearts at first awaking.

4. Redeem time, that you may add something to your daily Devotions, both in
Family and Closet, and not be put to cut them short.

5. Go with the first to Public Assemblies; but go with hearts prepared, and
behave your selves there with Reverence, Attention, and Affection. Pray in
prayer; hear as for the Life of your Souls, and praise God with joy and
alacrity; stay the Blessing, and rush not into, or out of Church Assemblies in
a rude and hasty manner: Consider God's Angels are there (1 Cor. xi. 10.) and
view your behavior; nay, the God of Angels he looks on.

6. After Public Worship, retire to examine how you have behaved your selves
there: Call to mind what you have heard, digest it by prayer and meditation,
and when you have opportunity, fix it on your hearts and memories by conferring
of it, especially with your inferiors, Children and Servants, whom you may
command thereto.

7. Watch Sabbath time in the Intervals of it, especially at Meals, that they
run not waste. Quicken your selves and others, to thankfulness and joy, with
the serious mention of Redeeming Love. Take heed of vain talk, and idle
unprofitable musings. Let the variety of holy employments maintain your delight
in them.

8. Close the day in God's fear. Reckon your Sabbaths gains; consider your
actions, and the frame of your Souls in them; fix the Word of the day upon your
hearts, and resolve by the Grace of God to be found in the sincere and speedy
practice of it. He who thus regards a day unto the Lord, (Romans xiv. 6.) shall
comfortably experience that the Lord's Day has the seventh days blessing
transferred unto it, and an additional blessing of its own conferred upon it.

Infer. III. Seriousness in Religion is not more ado than needs. Strictness is
not Fanaticism, Religion, in all its parts, is our reasonable service, Romans
xii. 1. We do not serve God for naught: (that true enough, though once said by
the Father of Lies, Job i. 9.) In keeping Gods Commandments there is great
reward, Psalm. xix. 11. All this work you have heard laid open, is of God's
setting us, and we may be sure he will not suffer us to be losers by our care
to please him. And besides, the variety of Employments allotted to us (which
sinners count their burden, and their cumber) is indeed that which sweetens
Religion unto holy Souls. It is not the hardness of the work in it self, but
the unsuitableness of it to our Spirits, that makes it so uneasy to the most;
and when Grace has removed that, the Soul goes on with cheerfulness in those
ways which sinners cannot endure to tread, and do all they can to discourage
others from walking in. When therefore sinners entice thee from the ways of
godliness, and tell thee, What needs so much ado? sure God is more merciful
than to damn men for neglect of secret prayer, for vain thoughts, for foolish
speeches for taking now and then a Cup of Nimis, for making the best of their
own, etc. Sure God will not shut all out of Heaven but a few Puritans and
Precisians; so much reading and praying, etc. will but mope you, or make you
melancholy, or mad; take care of thy Body, and make sure of thy Estate, and
trust God with thy Soul: When, I say, sinners do thus entice thee, consent thou
not, Prove. i. 10. Let no man deceive you with vain words, Ephesians. v. 6. Tell them,
God knows better who he will save, and who he will damn, than any of they; and
he has said, Without holiness no man shall see the Lord; He will pour out his
fury upon the Families that call not upon his Name: Life and Death are in the
power of the Tongue: Drunkards (among others) shall not inherit the Kingdom of
God: Covetousness is Idolatry: It is a little Flock our Heavenly Father will
give his Kingdom to: The Righteous are scarcely saved: The Kingdom of God
consists in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost. What is a man
profited if he gain the whole World, and lose himself, or be cast away? Tell
them, these are the true sayings of God; (see Heb. xii. 14. Jer. x. 25. Prove.
xviii. 21. 1 Cor. vi. 10. Col. iii. 5. Luke xii. 32. 1 Pet. iv. v. 18. Romans
xiv. 17. Luke ix. 25.) And you should be a Fool indeed if you should believe
the silly sayings of blind Earthworms, and prejudiced unexperienced Sots,
before the Word of the Living and True God, the Infinite and Eternal Wisdom.

Infer. IV. What cause have we to lament the Fall of our First Parents, by
which we are disabled for this excellent Life? God Created Man holy and happy,
with wisdom to know his Duty, and power to do it, and holy Love to incline him
to the performance of it. It was easy for Adam to be in the fear of the Lord
all the day long; though it was possible for him, by a faulty omission of
Reasons government over the inferior powers of the Soul, to depart therefrom.
And such was the mutability of his Will, that, being assaulted by Temptation,
he wretchedly yielded, and so betrayed himself and his Posterity into a forlorn
state of wretchedness and impotency; so that now we have none of us by nature
light enough to discern, nor ability to perform aright our Duty, in the most
ordinary instances of Life. Certain it is, we have lost that Moral Liberty of
Will which was the glory of Innocent Adam, and had been our glory, had he stood
and remained in his Integrity. But now the Crown is fallen from our Heads; woe
unto us that we have sinned! Lam. v. 16. We may well name ours Ichabod, for the
glory is departed from us, 1 Samuel iv. 21. We are all shapen in iniquity, and
conceived in sin, Psalm. Li. 5. In our flesh dwells no good thing; when we
would do good, evil is present with us: O wretched ones that we are, who shall
deliver us from the body of this death! Romans vii. 18, 21, 24. By one man sin
entered into the World, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for
that all have sinned, Romans v. 12. We have cause to look our hearts and lives in
the glass of God's Law, and cry out as once a good Man did after a long
Sickness, looking his Face in a Glass, and beholding his pale Cheeks and meager
Visage, Ah! Adam (says he) Adam, what have thou done? Oh! what a condition are
we who sinned in Adam fallen from? and what a sad estate are we fallen into?
our Minds are dark, our Wills perverse, our Affections froward, etc. we cannot
of our selves think one good thought, if we might have Heaven and Eternal
happiness for our pains, 2 Cor. iii. 5. We cannot pray, nor read, nor hear, nor
do any spiritual Duty aright. We have an hereditary Sickness that threatens us
with death, in that it makes us loath the means of Life. Oh what a averseness
to, and unfitness for secret prayer, and meditation, and examining themselves
do even awakened sinners find and feel, till special Grace come in to their
aid? What shifting, what shufling, what excuses, what slightness, what
slubbering over of Duties is there? In a word, Adam's Fall has rendered us all
utterly unable of our selves to do aright any duty to God, our Neighbor, or
our selves.

Infer. V. What cause have we all to lament our past days, because they have
been in too great a measure lost days? If you look back upon the description
that has been laid before you of the everyday work and walk of a serious
practical Christian, and consider how every day of your Life has been spent
since you came to the use of reason, I fear you will most of you have cause to
cry out, not only with the Emperor Augustus, Hem, amici, diem perdidi! Alas,
my Friends, I have lost a day! But Heu, vitam perdidi! Alas, I have lost my
whole Life! Alas, How have our days been squandered away, and our time lavished
out upon unprofitable vanities? Ask one man what he has been doing ever since
he came into the World? And he must (if he say true) tell you he has been
laboring for the meat that perishes, he has been toiling and drudging to add
house to house, and lay field to field, he has been loading himself with thick
Clay, he has been very throng a getting that together that he knows not how
soon he must leave behind him, he cannot tell but before to morrow: Ask
another, he will tell you he has been at the Butterflies work, painting his
wings. tricking and trimming, and making himself fine, and smooth, and brisk,
and gay, with a world of art and cost, setting himself out to the view of
beholders; and to be thought handsome he was willing to wave all the real
accomplishments of humanity; and little thinks the poor spark how soon all his
trimming must be laid aside, and how courfly a fit of sickness, and much more
two or three days Lodging in the Grave will make him look: Another, (or perhaps
the same) if you question him when he is in the right mood to give you an
answer, will tell you he has been Drinking, Dancing, Singing, Feasting,
dallying all his days; Ransacking all the avenues of pleasure, and racking
nature to make her confess some secret source of delight, and trying untrodden
Paths of Luxury, that if it were possible some new mode of sensual
gratification might be found, on which the Preacher had not written, Vanity of
Vanities; but know, O fleshly wretch, that for all these things God will bring
thee into Judgment, Eccl. xi. 9. Another has been climbing hard to reach the
topmost Pinnacle of Honor, Cringing, Bribing, Flattering to get an opportunity
to wrong others, and ruin himself; for man being in honor abides not, he is
like the Beasts that perish, Psalm. Lix. 12. Now alas, what poor employments are
these for that time on which Eternity depends! And yet how few (even among
Christians) lay out their time to any better purposes? Well, Sirs, all your
time that is not laid out for God's glory, the good of others, and the
Salvation of your Souls, is lost time, you had as good, nay better, all that
time have been out of Being. Oh what a World of time do the most give away to
Death? People complain of the shortness of Life, and yet act as if they thought
it too long. What cause have most of us to sit down and sadly say, What have I
been doing hitherto? Am I not even a dying, before I have begun to live? And Oh
that men would sit down and think seriously of it, there might be then some
hope that they would at last in earnest begin to do that, which they should
have been doing all this while.

Infer. VI. What need have we to implore the Grace and Spirit of Christ, to
incline and enable us, to direct and assist us in this necessary work? We have
a great deal of work to do, and it must be done, and we cannot do it of our
selves; what more reasonable then, than that we should speedily and carefully
look out for help? The great Gospel promise is the Promise of the Spirit, we
ought therefore to plead it in Christ's name with God the Father, since he has
said he will give his Holy Spirit to them that ask him, Luke xi. 13. If we have
not the Spirit of Christ, we are none of his, Romans viii. 9. And without special
relation to him, and interest in him, we cannot groundedly hope for assistance
from him, without whom yet we can do nothing, Joh. xv. 5. We are dark, we
therefore need the Spirit to enlighten us; we are weak, we need him to
strengthen us; we are wavering, we need him to settle and fix us; we are often
dejected and discouraged, we then need him to comfort and confirm us. Since
then we so greatly need this blessing on all accounts, how earnest and
importunate should we be for it? How observant of all the blessed Spirits
accesses to, and recesses from our Souls? How careful to cherish his blessed
motions? How loath to grieve our guide? If our Baptism in his name were not a
nullity (which many at least of our scoffers are not yet arrived at the
impudence to assert) our pretensions to his assistance cannot be justly charged
to be Enthusiastical; provided our claims be proportioned to the ends of our
Baptismal Covenant relation to the Holy Ghost, and our holiness of Life and
Conversation manifest their reality. As Enthusiasm (though it seem to look
another way) leads to Infidelity; so Infidelity too often, and never more than
of late, masks it self under the veil of a vehement zeal against Enthusiasm:
But a good understanding of our Baptism, and a practical experience of the main
vital principles of Christianity therein contained, would be an effectual cure
of both. When we know what it is to have the Spirit of Life, living and working
in our Souls, as our Souls in our Bodies, then, and not till then, shall we
know what it is to be in the fear of the Lord all the day long: Some forced
motions in the externals of Religion we may have before, but it is the Spirit
that quickens, Joh. vi. 23. And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there, and
there only is true Liberty, (2 Cor. iii. 17.) Even such as whereby we run the
ways of God's Commandments with enlarged hearts, Psalm. Cxix. 32.

Infer. VII. What care should Parents take to begin, in a way of holy
Education, with their Children betimes; that the best course in the World may
not seem difficult and uneasy to them by disuse? The wise man bids, train up a
Child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it,
Prove. xxii. 6. And undoubtedly one great reason why many frame so aukwardly, in
the matters of Religion, is because they were so long suffered to be utterly
unacquainted with them. O what a difference do Ministers usually find, as to
the Success of their Preaching, between catechized and uncatechised youth? Oh
how hard is it to get people in years, that have been left in ignorance till
then, to learn to understand but the most plain and common principles of
Religion, through want of early instruction, when we tell men of being in the
fear of the Lord continually, the most know nothing what we mean; tell them of
the necessity of Repentance, Faith and Holiness in order to Eternal Life, and
they understand not what they hear; speak to them of the blessed Trinity, in
whose name they were baptized, of the necessity of the Spirits help, and of
regeneration; and it is all one as if we spoke to them in Greek or Arabic;
their minds have never been used to such matters. O you that desire it should
be otherwise with yours, take care of their early instruction, tell them
betimes of their duty in order to Salvation and Eternal happiness, and acquaint
them with the holy Scriptures, teach them to pray, set before them briefly and
plainly the order of their daily duty to God, their Neighbors and themselves,
help them to govern their appetites and passions by reason and the Word of God,
tell them what Christ has suffered in their stead, what benefits he has
purchased for them by his death, and how those benefits come to be applied to
the Souls of his chosen: Labor to work things down into their hearts, and get
them to feel what they know: This is Gods work but it is to be expected in
Conjunction with your endeavor, and Children thus initiated betimes rarely do
amiss, whereas a Child left to himself causes shame, (Prove. xxix. 15.)
Dishonours God, grieves his Parents, and damns himself.

Infer. VIII. What great need there is for us to keep the Christian hopes in
constant believing view, that by them we may be encouraged to so great and
difficult work. The Just shall live by his Faith, Hab. ii. 4. Now Faith is the
Substance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen, Heb. xi. 1.
Moses had respect unto the recompense of reward, Heb. xi. 26. And our Lord
himself endured the Cross and despised the shame, for the joy that was set
before him, Heb. xii. 2. Christianity were not the best Religion, if it did not
propound to us the best Reward, and that with the fullest and clearest
evidence; and we are not Christians if the hope of that reward act us not in
our endeavors of conformity to its blessed Precepts: So widely are they out,
that cry down diligence in the Christian Work and Race, in expectation of the
Rewards of Eternal Glory, as mercenary, and that talk of quenching Hell, and
burning Heaven, to prove the sincerity of their obedience. God help me to obey
and suffer for the joy set before me, and I doubt not but I shall be for ever
in that Heaven where Jesus Christ, now is, and let those that hope to fare
better in newfangled ways of their own devising, let them I say, at long run
bragg as they speed. Man is a creature the very frame and constitution of whose
Soul shows him made to be governed by Hopes and Fears; And no hopes like those
of a happiness complete and everlasting. The Apostolical Canon therefore is,
Heb. vi. 11, 12. And we desire that every one of you do show the same diligence
to the full assurance of hope unto the end; that ye be not slothful, but
followers of them who through Faith and Patience inherit the Promises. He that
will be an Active, Useful, Exemplary, Persevering Christian, must clear and
settle well his hope of Everlasting Life, as that which God who cannot lie has
promised, and often review it by believing Meditation; nothing quickens,
nothing supports like this: Am I lazing and slugging, and moving heavily in the
ways of God? What a Spur is such a thought as this? Do I now act as becomes a
Candidate for Eternal Glory, an Expectant of Heavenly Felicity? Would this pace
content me if I now saw Heaven open to my bodily Eyes? And is it not equally
certain as if I did? So when sinking into discouragement, when drooping and
desponding, when horribly afraid of suffering or the like; say, O my Soul, does
this become a Christian, a Child of God, an Heir, a Coheir with Christ? What, a
Kings Son, the King of Heavens Son, the Heir of a Kingdom, and such a Kingdom!
And thus lean from day to day? (allusion to 2 Samuel xiii. 4.) Oh Sirs, little do
we think what a vigorous Instrument of an holy Life, the Christian hope in our
Souls would prove, were we more careful to get it firmly rooted there, and then
to maintain it in its lively act and powerful exercise.

Infer. IX. How much is it the concernment of all that would be Christians
indeed, to get right notions of Religion? That our Duty is our Interest, a real
pleasure and advancement to our Souls? It Is wrong conceits of Religion, and the
nature of the work it puts us upon, that scareth so many from it. Men will not
hear of becoming Religious, because they take it to be what it really is not,
and have no right understanding what indeed it is. Men think Religion ties them
up from all that is grateful, and fills them continually with fear and sorrow,
and unhinges them for business, unfits them for action, and calls them to part
with all that they at present count valuable, and gives them nothing, or next
to nothing in exchange. This is the notion the World has commonly of Religion;
and no wonder if in this dress it appear very terrible, and be so far from
alluring Lovers, that it affright Spectators. But I pray you, Sirs, you that
labor under these prejudices, come a little nearer, and take a better prospect
of Religion before you renounce her utterly: It may be she is not what you take
her for, perhaps she has charms you never yet discovered; I hope you will not
think it impossible, but Solomon might be in the right, when he said of Wisdom,
or true Religion, All her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are
peace, Prove. iii. 17. What if upon enquiry all your Objections against Religion
prove calumnies? What if upon a true opening of the case, your Scruples all
vanish, and a little light of sober Reason dispel the mists you have
endeavored to benight her with? I hope you will then come over to that side
which hitherto you have so violently opposed, and so malignantly derided: Come
then, and let us reason together: If Religion debar you of no true pleasure,
but call you to exchange sordid and perishing ones, for those that are noble
and durable, will you then become her Votary? Why, so it is; Religion teaches
you Temperance in the use of bodily Pleasures, which alone gives them their
true relish, and renders them safe to be enjoyed; and (which is of more
important consideration) makes their use consistent with the obtaining of those
better Pleasures, whereof she allows and offers you, freer and fuller draughts,
and whereof you can never have too much, and shall not finally want enough. The
pleasures of Knowledge and Love are ever perfecting till we come to glory,
immediately upon our entrance whereunto they are perfected to satisfaction,
though according to some, (see the ingenious discourse of a nameless Author,
called, The Future State) even there they are in a state of perpetual progress
and advance.

Obj. But it may be you will say, Surely Religion cannot be a state of Joy,
when men pass into it through so many fears and sorrows, and when the great
Author of it has clad it in mourning; saying, Blessed are they that mourn,
Matthew. v. 4.

Sol. I answer, Religion only calls for so much sorrow as is consistent with,
or conducive to the greatest joy; and debarreth us only of such joys as will
end in everlasting sorrows. For Religion's taking men off from business, or
unfitting them for it, it is a vain cavil, and contradicted by the Experience
of all Ages; For in every Age, some of the most active and eminent have been
jointly noted for Religion, and for Wisdom, Courage and Success in the
management of Public Affairs, both in War and Peace; as Abraham, David,
Nehemiah, and others. The truth is, Religion, in these things, changes not
men's natural Tempers and Endowments, but taking them as it finds them,
improves and perfects them. And for what Religion obliges us to forego, it is
demonstrable that it calls us to quit nothing but what may well be spared;
and for what is not consistent with our happiness, gives us in exchange what
is alone constituent of it. And if its worst Enemies have no more to say
against it, but that which is so easily refutable, who can wonder if
(notwithstanding all the scorns of profane wits) heavenly Wisdom be still
justified of her Children? (Matthew. xi. 19.) as she will shortly more fully be
by her great Author, who is able to defend her against all her profane
contemners, and malignant opposers.

Infer. X. Great cause there is for all such as know by experience how sweet
and comfortable a thing it is to be daily taken up in the lively, spiritual
performance of Religious Exercises to pity, and by counsel, prayer and example,
do all they can to help the rest (who are the most) of Mankind, yea of
professed Christians, that live as without God in the World, having neither
skill nor will to holy Employments, or the due improvement of their Time. It is
a doleful thing to take a considerate view of the world, and think what God
made man, and placed him upon the Earth for, and what we are redeemed for, and
what large provision of help there is in the Gospel for lost Mankind, and yet
how few do in any measure answer the end of their Beings, or act like persons
that have any hope of saving benefit by Jesus Christ. Not only the Heathen and
Mohammedan World, and the obstinate Infidel Jews, and the Idolatrous persecuting
Papists; but alas, the generality of the Reformed Churches, are a sight fit to
make a sensible heart bleed; abounding so with ignorance, profaneness,
worldliness, sensuality, corruption in Worship, Church-tyranny, Heresies,
Schisms, Divisions, Envyings, and bitter Zeal, that the Tares do in a manner
hide the Wheat; and the Faith even of good men is sometimes put to stagger at
the Promise, That the gates of Hell shall not prevail, Mat. xvi. 18. But oh
that we did rather in our places all do our utmost to promote its
accomplishment! by personal Reformation, by fervent Prayer, by due instructing
and calling upon others, and setting them a good Example, by mourning for the
sins of the Times, and pleading with God his Promises for the Remnant of his
People. If we thus hope, and quietly wait for the Salvation of the Lord, (Lam.
iii. 26.) we may yet live to see the eminent returns of Prayer, and the
glorious accomplishment of Prophecies and Promises, when Salvation shall be to
God's Israel for VValls and Bulwarks, Isa. xxvi. 1. and when Jerusalem's VValls
shall be Salvation, and her Gates praise, Isa. Lx. 18. Even so come Lord Jesus,
come quickly. Amen.

FINIS.

