A BIRCHEN ROD FOR DR. BIRCH: Or Some ANIMADVERSIONS UPON HIS SERMON Preached
before the Honorable The House of Commons, At St. Margaret's Westminster,
January 30, 1694. In a LETTER to Sir T. D. and Mr. H.

Printed in the Year, 1694.

Worthy Gentlemen;
THE Honorable Character which is given of you by all who have the Happiness
of your Acquaintance, emboldens this Presumption from an unknown Hand; I doubt
not but as you have Capacity enough to judge, so you have Zeal enough to resent
the Injury, which the Doctor's Sermon may have occasioned, either to the Memory
of the Sacred Martyr, or the Title and Government of your present Master: and
seeing it is more incumbent upon you than others, to take the Affair into your
Consideration, and represent it truly to those under whose Cognizance it
properly falls, I beg your favorable Censure of the following Animadversions.

A Birchen Rod for Dr. BIRCH.
MEthinks the Doctor has not done the Royal Martyr any great Honor in
comparing him with Saul, who, tho he was the Lord's Anointed, was a very ill
Man, and one who did actually play the Tyrant; and was far more zealous for his
own Honor, than ever he was for the Glory of God, as appears by his laying
hold of Samuel's Garment, after he had denounced the impending Judgments of the
Almighty against him, 1 Samuel 15.30. and saying, Honor me now, I pray thee,
before the Elders of my People: but not one word of desiring Samuel to
intercede with him at God's Hand for Pardon. So that I think it is Very plain
that he was for advancing his own Prerogative over the People, tho he was told
that God had rejected him. And some malicious Persons will not stick to say, that
seeing the Doctor takes the liberty of comparing the Royal Martyr with Saul,
that he cannot be angry at them for alleging, that the words which were put
into Samuel's Mouth to tell the Israelites the Manner of the King that. should
reign over them, seem to have foretold K. Chapter 1. tyrannizing over his Subjects,
and invading their Property by the Ship Money and Loan-money, obliging them to
lend him such Sums as he demanded, take Patents for Knighthood, and serve in
his Fleet and Armies against their Wills, and forcing the Country to be at the
Charge and Trouble of carrying the Baggage of the Court as they removed from
place to place; exactly according to what was foretold of Saul, 1. Sam. 8.11.
He will take your Sons, and appoint them for himself, for his Chariots, and to
be his Horsemen, and some shall run before his Chariots. Ver. 14. And he will
take your Fields, and your Vine-yards, and your Olive-yards, even the best of
them, and give to his Officers and to his Servants. Ver. 15. And he will take
the Tenth of your Seed, and of your Vine-yards, and give to his Officers, and
to his Servants. Ver. 16. And he will take your goodliest young Men, and your
Asses, and put them to his Work. Ver. 17. He will take the Tenth of your Sheep,
and ye shall be his Servants: And all this in direct Opposition to the Law,
which the King was obliged to read and observe, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19. viz. That he
should not multiply Horses to himself, nor cause the People to return to Egypt,
ver. 16. That he should not greatly multiply to himself Silver and Gold, v. 17.
That his Heart be not lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn not aside
from the Commandment to the Right or to the Left; and contrary to the Practice
of good old Samuel, who could ask of them before God, whose Ox or whose Ass he
had taken, whom he had defrauded and oppressed, or of whose Hand he had
received any Bribe? 1 Samuel 12.3.

Or, if some should have a mind to carry the Parallel further, and compare K.
Charles's Spirit of contending with his Parliament to advance an unlimited
Prerogative, to the evil Spirit which was sent from the Lord upon Saul; his
Pretensions to Divinity, with Readiness being among the Prophets; his concluding a
Cessation of Arms with the Irish Papists after they had cut the Throats of the
Protestants, with Readiness sparing of Agag and the Amalekites; his persecuting of
those Ministers who could not comply with the Book of Sports on Sundays, to
Readiness cutting off the Priests of the Lord; his levying War against his
Subjects, to Readiness unjust pursuit of David; his matching his Eldest Daughter
to the Prince of Orange, like Readiness marrying of Michal to David; his seeming
Condescensions to Treaties with his Subjects, as that at Vxbridg, etc. with
Readiness acknowledging of his Faults to David; his continuing Hostility against
them afterward, to Readiness continuing his Persecution of David; his taking upon
him to be the supreme Judge in Church Affairs, and countenancing Bishop Laud's
Innovations, to Readiness usurping the Priestly Office, and offering up Sacrifice;
and his falling upon the Scaffold, by his own stubborn Humor, and the
superstitious Stiffness of his Chaplains, to Readiness falling on Mount Gilboa by
his own Sword, when his Army was defeated by the Philistines: I say, if any
perverse Man should run the Parallel thus, the Martyr's Friends will have but
small reason to thank the Doctor for putting it in their Heads. But the
mischief on it is, our Clergymen are never aware of the Consequences of their
own Doctrine, witness that unhappy one of Passive Obedience, which was good,
nay superlatively good, and the Characteristick of the Church, so long as the
Court and the Church did agree together; but whenever the Court came to touch
the Church in her own Property, then this Characteristick was laid aside, and
Passive Obedience turned to actual Resistance. It was horrid, nay damnable
Doctrine in my Lord Russel, the Earl of Essex, and the Nobility, and Gentry,
and Laity, to Associate for the defense of their Lives, Liberties and Religion,
and Mutinous for them to Petition their Prince on that Head; but it gave the
Seven Petitioning Bishops a Right to the Title of Confessors, to Address and
Cabal against King James, for giving Liberty to Dissenters.

But to come to our purpose. The Doctor, Page 1. says, That no Raptures but
those of a King and a Prophet could present us with Expressions of Grief suited
to the Occasion. By which one would think that the Doctor condemns himself for
meddling with the Subject; for whatever parity there may be in the Occasions,
there is none betwixt the Doctor and David, for I know of no body that looks
upon the Doctor either as a King or a Prophet.

Ibid. He tells us that this Lamentation was over the Fall of a Prince that was
Literally the Lord's Anointed and Successor; or if any prefer the being
VICEGERENTS TO THEIR INFERIORS, the Desire and Choice of the People. So that
here the Doctor concedes that a King may be the Lord's Successor, and the
Peoples Vicegerent too; which I suppose the Jure Divino Men will not thank him
for: Because this seems to insinuate, That Kings may be accountable to God and
the People both, and tacitly to approve of what was done to the Martyr, viz.
The People called Him first to an account as their Vicegerent, and then sent
him to God to give an account as his, according to Mr. Johnson. But that which
sticks in the Doctor's stomach is, that any should Prefer being Vicegerents to
their Inferiors, which I confess is enough to startle any Man of Metal; but
it is a Question worth the Doctor's while to answer, Whether the People in this
case be their Vicegerents Inferiors or not? It would be looked upon as a
Solecism in common Discourse to say, that the King were Inferior to his
Vicegerents, or Deputies and Commissioners in Ireland and Scotland; that a
Colonel were his Lieutenant-Colonel's Inferior, or the Doctor an Inferior to
any of his own Curats: and therefore the Doctor may avoid this Absurdity if he
pleases, by considering, that though the King be Major Singulis, yet he is
Minor Vniversis, and both by Laws Divine and Humane God's Minister for the
Peoples good, Romans 13.4. So that he is Created for them, and not they for him:
And by the Doctor's own Concession, when the Theocracy ceased, Kings of the
Peoples own choice and desire were appointed to succeed: And so careful was the
Almighty of this Privilege of the Peoples, that he did not superceed their
Choice even by his own Nomination and Unction; and long before they had any
King, gave them a Law to Regulate both his Election and Prerogative, Deuteronomy.
17.15. Thou shall in any wise SET him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God
shall CHVSE. One from among thy Brethren shall thou SET King over thee: Thou
may not SET a Stranger over thee. And then as to the Limitation of his
Prerogative, you may read from the 16th Verse to the end of the Chapter. So
that we may see how little of Solidity there is in the Doctor's Witticism of
Kings preferring being Vicegerents to their Inferiors, to their being the
Lord's Anointed, seeing in the Jewish Government they went hand in hand
together: And thus David though Anointed by God's Command, and determined to be
King over Israel; yet e're he entered upon the Government, was first made King
at Hebron by the Men of Judah, who are said to have Anointed him, 2 Samuel 2.4.
and then King over all the Tribes of Israel by the Elders, who first made a
League (or Original Contract) with him, and Anointed him again at Hebron, 2 Samuel 5.3. And we find, that when Rehoboam his Grandson would not grant the
Terms required by the Children of Israel who were come to Shechem to make him
King, that they did thereupon revolt, 1 Kings 12. and God forbad Rehoboam to
make War upon them to reduce them, v. 24. So that if the Peoples Election was
required as to those Kings who were Named and Appointed by God himself, a
fortiori it is much more needful to give a Right to all Kings now, when he
gives us no such positive Indications as to the Person who shall Reign over us:
And therefore, when God by his Providence determines the Peoples Choice upon a
Person or Family, it is reasonable to conclude that it is according to his Will,
if there be nothing in it which contradicts Revelation; so that to be the
Vicegerent of the People, is not a thing distinct from being the Lord's
Anointed, as the Doctor would seem to insinuate: But on the contrary, The
Choice of the People is all the Evidence which we can now have of any King's
being the Lord's Anointed. Not that I think it necessary, that the Choice
should be renewed in a limited Monarchy upon the Death of every Possessor: for
our Laws having provided to settle the Succession on Their Present Majesty's,
and Their Posterity, if God should be graciously pleased to bless the Nations
with such a Mercy as to afford them any, they must in all reasonable
Construction be accounted the Peoples Choice and Desire so long as that Law is
unrepeal'd, of which there will be no hazard, except any of Their Posterity
should be so infatuated as to overturn the Foundations, and destroy these Laws
by which they hold Their Crown; and in that Case it is a hundred to one but the
Original Contract will be enquired into then, as well as it has been now. And
though this Doctrine was in the late Reigns cried down as Rebellious, yet most
thinking-Men are sufficiently convinced, that it was without any shadow of
Justice: and if it be otherwise, as the Doctor would seem to hint by the Tenor
of his Discourse, it shows how well he deserves to eat Their Majesty's Bread,
who would go about to shake Their Title.

Page 2. He mentions a cause for David's Grief, which I am sure he does not
find in his Text, viz. Because he had made up the Rear of Achish 's Battle,
when he went out to fight against Israel. Nor is there the least of Reason in
the Doctor's Argument, that David should be overwhelmed at Saul 's Death,
because his Heart smote him merely for cutting off the Skirt of his Garment;
for the latter was his own Act, but in the former he had no Concurrence, having
been discharged out of Achish's Army long before the day of Battle. But if the
Doctor thinks from this to prove the unlawfulness of taking up Arms in any case
against a King, or any Commissionated by him, he will find himself mightily
mistaken: for we have the Testimony of God himself, that David was a Man
according to his own heart, except in the matter of Vriah; and yet it cannot be
denied but he carried Defensive Arms against his Father and Sovereign for a
considerable time, which if God had disapproved, he would certainly have made
it a part of the Exception, seeing it was not a Sin of Frailty, or the surprise
of a sudden Temptation, but practiced for many Years; and yet we never heard
that David either repented, or that God reproved him for it, as surely he would
have done, had he been guilty of Rebellion, which he himself has declared to be
as the Sin of Witchcraft. Nor could it have been inconsistent with David's
Duty, to have made use of those Arms against Saul, which he carried to defend
himself from him, had God determined the People to invite him to rescue them
from Readiness Tyranny, as the People of England invited his present Majesty to
rescue them from Popery and Slavery: so that there being no Parity in the Case,
his present Majesty never having been the late King's Subject, and having an
Invitation and Concurrence, which David wanted, he was not obliged to make
David's Carriage to Saul the Pattern of his own to the late King, even against
his apparent Interest, and the highest Provocations, as the Doctor would seem
slily to infer in the beginning of his third Page. There being also this
remarkable difference, that Saul, besides the Peoples Choice, was appointed to
be King by God himself; which cannot be said of any Kings now, no not of those
whose Crowns are Hereditary, seeing it was only the Peoples Choice, or at least
Consent, which made them so Originally, as is evident from the Histories of all
Nations.

Page 5, 6, and 7. The Doctor gives us a very strange Commentary on David's
Lamentation, and endeavors to confirm it by as strange an Argument. The
substance of his Commentary is expressed thus, p. 7. That it was a just Grief
and Deprecation of that Guilt wherein the whole Land was involved, and which
hangs over all Countries, that imbrue their hands in the Blood of God's
Vicegerents. Whereas to every intelligent Reader it must appear, that it was a
true Grief for the Judgment of God upon his Country, and his own near
Relations, his Father-in-Law Saul, and his Brother-in-Law Jonathan, whose love
toward himself he owns to have exceeded the love of Women. Nor is it
unreasonable to think that David's Natural Affection to his Wife, should make
him more than ordinary sensible of the Death of her Father: But as it appears
by the Context, the principal Cause of this Holy Man's Concern was, that the
Uncircumcised Philistines should have reason to Rejoice and Triumph, that the
Beauty of Israel was fallen upon the High Places, 2 Samuel 1.20. But there is not
one word of his Deprecating the Guilt wherein the Land was involved, and which
hangs over all Countries that imbrue their hands in the Blood of God's
Vicegerents, as the Doctor would have us to believe, there being not the least
shadow of reason for it. The Israelites fought in his defense, and did not
contribute any way to his Death, if it was not by conniving too much, and not
resisting his Wicked Courses, which brought those Judgments upon himself and
the Nation: and this will not answer the Doctor's Design. Nor could David have
any reason from the Amalekite's story of his having killed Saul, to charge it
upon the Nation of Israel, seeing a Stranger accused himself of the Crime, and
that also with this Alleviation, that it was according to Readiness own desire to
rid him of the Anguish which he labored under, because his Life was yet whole
in him: So that in short one cannot tell what to make of the Doctor's
Expression in this Case, as to that Guilt which impends over all Countries that
imbrue their hands in the Blood of God's Vicegerents, for Saul imbrued his
hands in his own Blood; and if there was any truth in this Amalekite's
Relation, it must be, that he killed him quite, to rid him of his Pain: but if
the Mountains were guilty because they received Readiness Blood, David is so far
from deprecating of the Guilt, that he curses them: and if this last be the
Doctor's meaning, let him curse the Window of the Banqueting House, whence K.
Charles issued to Execution, the Ground whereon the Scaffold stood, and that
which contained the Guard and Spectators: and if neither Dew nor Rain fall upon
them, we shall not be so often troubled with Dirt there as at present; and we
hope that the Doctor will also afford us a Birchen Broom to sweep away the Dust
from thence; for with the one or the other the Street about White Hall is
always infested. This I confess may seem too light for the Gravity of the
Subject; but I hope the Reader will excuse me; for the Doctor's Comment appears
so ridiculous, that I think no Man can read it in Company, without saying Risum
teneatis Amici. And I would further pray the Doctor to tell me, Whether Saul
could at this time be properly called God's Vicegerent, when Samuel told him
long before, that God had rejected him; and he himself did tell the Counterfeit
Samuel, when raised by the Witch of Endor, that God was departed from him? I do
not know the Doctor, but suppose he may have some Curats under him; and if he
has once rejected them, I believe he will scarce allow them to be called his
Vicegerents afterward.

The Doctor will further oblige the Public to answer this one Query more, viz.
Whether the Cavaliers were not more guilty of King Charles's Blood, than the
Israelites were of Readiness, when they fought it to the last in the Field, and
the Cavaliers sat drinking their Master's Health in Taverns, while he was upon
the Scaffold, without any Endeavors to rescue him; in which they might have
been sure of Sir Thomas Fairfax's Assistance, tho a Presbyterian, who designed
to have attempted it with his own Regiment, if he had not been imposed upon and
prevented?

And the Doctor would do well to consider, Whether or not such of the
high-flown Clergy as himself, were not very accessory to that Prince's Tragedy,
by possessing him with false Notions of things; preaching up his uncontrollable
Authority over the Purses, Persons and Consciences of his Subjects, pushing him
on to a War against the Scots, for propagating the Ceremonies, which they
themselves call indifferent, and hindering all Accommodation, when he seemed
inclinable to it, at the Treaty at Vxbridg, etc. as appears by Rushworth's
Collections, Whitlock's Memoirs, and Col. Bamfield's Apology.

But now to the Doctor's Argument for confirming his Comment from the parallel
Instance, as he calls it, of Job's cursing the time of his Birth, Job 3. which,
says the Doctor, was not a piece of Blasphemy or Distrust in God, but a
designed Demonstration of the Bitterness of his Troubles, and the Contempt he
had of his Life. Now suppose all this to be true, the most that it will amount
to, if the Instance, as he says, be parallel, is this, That what David said was
not a piece of Blasphemy or Distrust in God, but a designed Demonstration of
the Bitterness of his Grief, and his Contempt of those Mountains on which that
fatal Defeat was given; but nothing of a Deprecation of that Guilt wherein the
whole Land was involved, for imbruing their hands in the Blood of God's
Vicegerent.

And the Doctor's Argument to prove that Job did not sin in cursing the time of
his Birth, Job 3. because it is said Job 1.21. That in all this Job had not
charged God foolishly; is just as if one should say, Dr. Birch did not offend
the Commons by the Sermon which he preached before them on the 30th of January
last, because he did not offend them in that which he preached before them on
the 27th. And as for the Doctor's Similitude, that we may as well apologize for
Christ's praying that the Cup which he came down from Heaven to drink might
pass from him, as to say first that Job murmured, and then to call it an
Infirmity. I wish the Doctor were either more modest in his Comparisons, or
clearer in his Reasonings: for I suppose it is obvious to every one that there
is a great difference betwixt desiring an Affliction to be removed, and cursing
the time when it happened; the one was a Desire of pure uncorrupted Nature, and
the other an Evidence of murmuring, at least in a Man whose Nature was
corrupted.

As for his odious Comparison, P. 8. of commemorating our Savior's Death, by
which he would seem to insinuate, or at least illustrate our Obligation to an
Anniversary Commemoration of that of K. Charles's. I wonder that Men who are
Divines by Profession, are not afraid of profaning the greatest Ordinances of
the Gospel, by comparing them with such mean things: But I confess I need not,
for it is natural to Men of his Kidney; and they who can pervert the Institution
of Christ so far as to say, Do this, that you may keep an Alehouse, or be an
Ensign, Lieutenant, or Captain of Granadeers; Dragoons, etc. whereas Christ
commanded us to do it in Remembrance of him, may say and do what they will.

Page 9. The Doctor tells us, that to draw King Charles 's Image, or venture
upon his Character, would require a Soul as great as his was; and that it were
a Profanation in any ruder Hand to attempt it; which being compared with what
he says of Saul, p. 2. That his Obsequies were fit only to be solemnized by one
like himself, the known Inheritor of his Kingdom and Spirit, would seem to
infer, that the Doctor himself has a mind to the Throne; for in the following
Pages he very boldly attempts King Charles's Character, and warbles out his
Elegy the best that he can: so that either the Doctor must think himself to be
the known Inheritor of King Charles 's Kingdom and Spirit, or to have a Soul as
great as his was; or, according to his own Proposition, he is a profane Fellow
to attempt his Character, or the solemnizing of his Funeral-Obsequies. But
certainly the Doctor does not think so ill of himself as this last comes to,
and therefore it is probable that he intends the former; and if the Nation have
a mind to choose him for King, the Doctor has one very good Qualification, if
you take his own word for it, which (according to him) their present Majesty's
want, that is, he is a true blew Protestant, the Religion which he tells you,
p. 23. K. Charles's Murder did force his Posterity out of; and by consequence,
King William and Queen Mary, who are both of his Posterity, must be of that
number who were forced out of their Religion. Reader don't laugh, for this is
as good a Consequence as some of the Doctor's.

Page 13. The Doctor quite outdoes David's Lamentation, he did not so much as
imprecate Vengeance upon the Amalekites, tho one of that Nation had confessed
his Murder of the Lord's Anointed, and that the whole were ordered to
Destruction by God himself, he is satisfied with imprecating a remarkable
stroke upon the Mountains where the Defeat of his Country happened. But the
Doctor seems to be very angry that England enjoys the Blessings of Dew and
Rain, that our Houses are safe from Fear, and the Rod of God not upon us; by
which it would seem that the Doctor has a mind to pray in the French, on whose
Assistance the Jacobites lay the Foundation of their Hopes. But his Choler is
further enflamed, that the Wicked do still live and become old and mighty in
Power; and that the old Arts, as he is pleased to express it, are still
advancing to our Ruin. The Doctor would do well to explain his meaning in this
Exclamation; for he is very much concerned that some should still live, much
more that they should become old and mighty in Power. In the late Reigns such
Expressions might by Innuendo's have been made High Treason; for there is no
body that pretends to grow mighty and in Power, but his Majesty; and most
honest Men are sorry that his Might and Power are not much greater than they
are, as they would certainly have been, if Men of the Doctor's Kidney had not
obstructed his Measures: and if by the Old Arts which are still advancing to
our ruin, the Doctor means any of the late Public Acts which were denied the
Royal Assent, the Commons are mightily obliged to him for telling them so to
their Faces.

Page 14. He tells us of Pliny's Peevish Creatures that had Gall in their Ears:
but the Doctor exceeds them by far, for he not only had Gall there, but also in
his Heart, Tongue and Pen; nothing less will serve him than the cutting off of
those whom he calls Wicked, that they should not live. And though to the
Doctor's grief a general Indemnity has secured their Persons, yet that shall not
take off his Pen from stabbing their Reputations, and that of the Government
too; who spare the Wicked, though God says there is no peace to them. And then
to give you a taste of his Charity, he charges the whole Dissenting Party with
being King Charles his Murderers, and imparts his Noble Resolution to the
World, that they shall hear of it once a Year, but hopes that it will not be taken
for an Invective, though you may be sure the Doctor designs it for one, and the
best that his Talent is able to furnish.

But I am afraid that some perverse People will give him Rowland for his
Oliver, and exhibit an Account of the Action thus.

When after our Reformation, in which there was too great an Allay of Carnal
Policy, which is always an Enemy to Gospel Simplicity, some of our lukewarm
Protestants had begun to taste the sweetness of the Popish Ecclesiastical
Courts and Dignities; they did like so well of this Romish Broth, that, as
Bonner prophesied, truly they longed also for their Beef: And though they
abolished the Gross of the Popish Doctrine, yet they retained what ever was
gainful in their Discipline. For as Pardons and Indulgences brought Money to
the Pope, Commutation for Penance brought Silver to our Churchmen, and the
Incomes of Doctors-Commons made their own Commons the better: So that though in
her Public Liturgy she laments the want of the Ancient Discipline, yet she was
resolved in her Practice never to admit it, but would rather tear the Churches
Body than their Popish Ephod; Misrepresented all Enemies to their Ceremonies,
as Enemies to the Civil Government; and joined with the Papists in persecuting
them, as they did John Knox, etc. at Franckfort; and would rather connive at a
Liberty to Papists, than Indulgence to Puritans; insomuch, that they not only
forced some of their own to the Deserts of America, where they found more
Hospitable Entertainment from the poor Heathens, than they found at home from
the Ceremonious Protestants; but they also fell foul upon their Neighbors in
Scotland, influenced their Kings to overturn the Church there, as by Law
Established; whilst at the same time they couniv'd at their Prince's seeking
for Popish Matches; his taking off all Laws against Roman Catholics,
permitting their Priests to swarm in his Dominions; countenanced Plays at
White Hall, and the reading of the Book of Sports through all England on
Sundays; Joined with the Papists to raise an Army to invade Scotland, and
Excommunicated that Church, whilst the Papists did cut the Throats of the
Protestants in Ireland; Preached up the Divine Right of Ship Money, Loan-Money,
and the King's Absolute Power in England; countenanced him in refusing to let
those who were accused of Murdering his Father be brought to Trial, whilst they
railed against Queen Elizabeth for taking off his Grandmother according to Law;
sided with him in denying all redress to the Grievances of his People
represented in Parliament, and preaching up his Prerogative to such a height,
that the Parliament finding them the principal Incendiaries in those unhappy
Troubles, broke the Frame of their Hierarchy all in pieces: After which they
joined with the Irish Cutthroats against their Fellow Subjects, and
countenanced His Majesty's Cessation of Arms with them, whilst they assisted to
carry on the War against his Protestant Subjects, and in fine rendered his
Majesty so deaf to all Proposals of Accommodation with his Parliament; that
though he was inclined of himself to listen to their Proposals, yet they kept
him from it, though at the same time he granted to the Irish Papists, that they
should not be bound to swear Allegiance; that all Laws against them should be
taken away, and that they should be independent on the Parliament of England:
and thus by the stubborness of our high-flown Churchmen, with whom Papists and
Arminians, and all who were Enemies to the Civil Liberties of the Nation
herded, His Majesty was overperswaded to his Ruin. So that it was the Doctor's
Old Race of Saints that Preached and Prayed the Nation into Confusion and
Bloodshed, and the Royal Martyr from his Crown and Life; for had he been but as
willing to secure the Parliament of England in their Just Pretensions, as he
was the Papists of Ireland in their unreasonable Demands, the Parliament and he
both might have been safe form the Fury and Insults of an Anarchical Crew who
ruined them and him too.

Page 16. The Doctor alleges, that the Chief Pillars of his Church and State
were made perfect through sufferings. So that I observe he is more cautious and
afraid of profaning King Charles his Character, than of profaning the Word of
God, and the chief Mysteries of the Gospel by his abusive Metaphors: does the
Doctor think that any but himself can suppose a Parity betwixt the Captain of
our Salvation's being made perfect through sufferings, and those of Laud,
Strafford and King Charles the First? I wonder that the Doctor is not afraid of
making such blasphemous Applications of Scripture Phrases, which are applicable
only to Christ alone.

In the next Paragraph the Doctor is very zealous for the Honor of his
Established Church, which he wishes may so continue; and consequently bewrays
his Apprehensions of Danger, which is a malicious Insinuation against the
Government, as we shall see anon.

Ibid. He says, She had always the same Enemies, and the same Fate with her
Kings; they were ever Persecuted, Oppressed, Defamed, and have fallen together;
her Obedience was a Nobler thing than to let them perish unattended.

But I suppose the Doctor was not aware of what Questions might be raised upon
these bold Assertions: As,

1. Whether or not the Majority both of the Clergy and Laity of his Church did
not comply with Charles the First's Enemies, when the King was no longer able
to protect them?

2. Whether the Presbyterians were not the Men who stickled most against Oliver
for saving the King's Life and Interest, as can be evidenced by the Petitions
and Behavior of the City of London, where Presbytery was most predominant; by
the Behavior of the Presbyterian Members of the House, till they were excluded
by the Army, and forced to disperse some of them beyond Sea, and others into
the Country; by the Opposition made by the Scottish Kirk, Committee of Estates,
Parliament, Army, and Commissioners, to the King's Confinement, Trial and
Execution, protesting against them all, as contrary to the Articles agreed on
with them at the surrender, to the Union of the Nations, His Majesty's just
Right, and the Solemn League and Covenant; And lastly, by Sir Thomas Fairfax's
design to rescue Him after His Sentence?

3. Whether the Majority of the Church-of- England-Clergy did not comply with
the course of the Times both in Church and State, when of the Ten thousand
Ecclesiastics which are generally reckoned in England, not above two thousand
were Nonconformists after Charles the Second's Restoration?

4. Whether the Church of England was oppressed, persecuted, defamed, and fell
with the late King James; and how it came that, according to the Doctor, their
Obedience was not so noble then as not to let him perish unattended; and why
they did not follow the Example, which he says was showed to guide them
hereafter, if ever the like occasion return? Perhaps the Doctor may rejoin,
that if K. James had been cut off, they would not have let him perish
unattended, but they did not think fit to Abdicate with him. But the Answer is
easy; he that will not be faithful in a Little, will never be faithful in Much:
And to tell the Doctor the plain Truth, If the Royal Martyr had imprisoned
their Bishops, fallen foul upon their Colleges, and given Liberty to
Dissenters, he should even have had leave to perish unattended as well as his
Son; and therefore it were best for the Doctor to save his Breath, and not brag
so much of his Church's Loyalty to the Martyr: they cut off his Grandmother,
because they were afraid that she would be their Enemy, and they drove his Son
from the Throne whenever he began to touch their Copyhold, tho they spent
their Lungs in crying down the Bill of Exclusion, so long as they thought that
the Duke was their Friend. And hence I conclude in spite of the Doctor, that
his Church will neither serve God nor the King for naught.

Page 18. The Doctor urges, that he that resists, receives to himself
Damnation. But I wish that he would a little explain himself, whether this
ought to be taken only in relation to Kings, or other Governors also; and if
only to Kings, then whether he does not allow of Rebellion against Republics;
and if he does allow of the latter, how he will reconcile it to the Divine
Command, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Submit your selves unto every Ordinance of Man for
the Lord's sake, whether it be to the King, as Supreme, or unto Governors, as
unto them who are sent by him, for the Punishment of Evildoers, and the Praise
of them that do well.

And I would fain ask the Doctor, that seeing by this Text Obedience is due to
other Governors as well as to Kings, What becomes of the Divine Right of
Monarchical Government exclusive of all others? And seeing other Species of
Government are of Divine Right as well as that, Whether it must not be the
Choice of the People only, that can now determine which of them is most suitable
to themselves? And if the People can determine whether one or more Persons
shall be their Vicegerents, whether it can be properly said any otherwise than
in sensu diviso, that they are their Vicegerents Inferiors? And whether
seeing all sorts of Government are here called the Ordinance of Man, and that
at the same time it is said they are sent by God, the Choice of the People, and
the Lord's Anointed, be not now one and the same thing?

But to come to the Point of Resistance; The Doctor would do well to explain
himself, whether he means Resistance in concreto, or abstracto; if in
abstracto, we are agreed that the Sin of resisting any Government duly
constituted, is damnable as well as all other Sins are; and in so far Passive
Obedience is a true Doctrine: If he mean in concreto, that it is unlawful to
resist the Person or Persons clothed with the Government: I would willingly
know, whether he understands Resistance to the Persons of all Governors in all
cases whatsoever to be damnable; or only the Resistance of such as govern
according to the Laws of God and the Land? If he mean the latter, we are
agreed; but if he mean the former, I would know what is his Reason? and if it be
drawn from that Text, Romans 13.2. Whosoever therefore resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist shall receive to
themselves Damnation; Whether it be not plain from the Text, that the
Government, and not the Governors, are here understood, or at least both in
concreto? And the I would ask the Doctor further, Whether it be not plain from
the third Verse, For Rulers are not a Terror to good Works, but to the evil;
that it is only damnable to resist such as are so, and as all indeed ought to
be; but not those who invert their Commission, and are a Terror to Good Works,
and an Encouragement to Bad? tho at the same time we will allow the Doctor,
that if any private Person or Persons resist the Magistrate by Military Force,
except it be in case of pure Self-defence; I say, in this case we all allow
that such shall be punished, as David did the Amalekite, for putting out their
Hand against the Lord's Anointed, even tho they be guilty of
Maladministration.

But if the Doctor will not allow of this Doctrine, I would fain know how he
can clear his Church from meriting Damnation, for resisting and dethroning the
late King James?

And if he do allow it, I would desire him to answer, why he is so very severe
and uncharitable to the whole Nation, as to imprecate and wish for Judgments
upon them, because a certain Party, without the Consent of the whole, cut off
King Charles the First; who, if our Histories be true, made as great Invasions
upon the Liberty of the Subjects as ever K. James the Second did; but with this
difference indeed, that the Father supported, whereas the Son invaded the
Doctor's Church, which was the cause of his Ruin: for tho they had suffered him
and his Brother tamely to devour most of the Civil Rights and Liberties of the
People, yet whenever he came to touch the Church, they who made Conscience of
excluding him before, made none to kick him out then: So that I am afraid, upon
due Scrutiny it will be found, that it is not damnable to resist the King, but
damnable to resist the Doctor's Church.

But to come to an end with this Point; I would advise the Doctor, that seeing
his Church, and the Party against whom he inveighs, are guilty of the same
Crimes, tho in different degrees, that he would remember the Lord's-Prayer,
which he has said so often, that I don't doubt but he has con'd it by Heart:
and as he and his Church would have the Forgiveness of their own Sins, they
would also show themselves ready to forgive others, and not to rip up old Sores
by a Yearly Commemoration; for the dethroning of King James being of a later
Date than the beheading of King Charles, it is ten to one but it may be as long
remembered. And let the Doctor and his Gang preach while they be weary, and
charge all the Calamities of those unhappy Civil Wars upon the score of
Dissenters, for refusing to obey K. Charles's unjust Commands, and resisting
him when he came to invade their Properties; they will constantly rejoin that
thousands of the Church Communion were Socii Criminis; and that the Ruin of the
King and the Misery of the Nation are owing to those of the Doctor's Kidney,
who preached the King out of his Duty, and the People out of their Liberties,
and by consequence were the chief occasion of his Tragical End: as their
Concurrence all along with the Arbitrary Methods of the two last Reigns does
entitle them to be called the Instruments of our present Miseries.

So that it will appear to every unbiassed Reader, that the Carriage of the
highflown Clergy in times past and present, with their loosing the Reins of
Discipline, and exalting the Hearts of their Kings above those of their
Brethren, is as good an Argument to prove, that they are the Authors of all our
Calamities, as any thing that they can charge upon the Dissenters in relation
to King Charles the First.

Page 19, and 20. The Doctor ascribes it to King Charles's Murder, That his
Church's Excellent Religion, which has no Foreign Dependances, and whose
Prosperity alone is founded on that of our Country, should be forced to truckle
either to the Practices of Rome, or to a Riot of Enthusiasts; and that they are
still threatened, either with no Church at all, or the worst among Christians.

But he does not consider that his Antagonist will reply, That if the
Prosperity of his Church's Religion be founded alone on that of our Country, it
must then be different from the Protestant Religion, which blessed be God has
obtained over so great a part of Europe: For the Protestant Religion has
prospered there, when neither it nor our Country prospered here, as in Queen
Mary's time and since: And as for the danger which his Church is in from
Papists, who are the worst Christian Church, or Enthusiasts, by which he means
Dissenters in general, that are no Church; it were more rational for him to
ascribe the first to the Popish Matches, which his Church allowed their Kings
to conclude; and the great Privileges, which from time to time they granted to
their Religion and its Followers. And seeing Papists are as great Enthusiasts
as any under Heaven, he may also charge his Enthusiasm on that same score. But
seeing he will allow the Papists to be a Church, and the Dissenters no Church;
though the great Body of them do maintain the Doctrine of the Church of England
more sincerely than many of her own professed Sons; we find that the Doctor
himself prefers an Unity in Discipline, to an Unity in Doctrine, and would
shake hands with Papists sooner then Presbyterians, which are far the greatest
Number of the Reformed Churches; and that he looks upon such things to be the
Essential and Constituent Parts of a Church, which do not so much as come
within its definition.

I have all along suspected the Doctor's Enmity to their Majesty's Title,
because of his impugning defensive Arms by which they made a Conquest of
England's Affections, and then had her Consent to sit down on her Throne. But
page 20. he falls foul on his Majesty's Government, reviles the Liberty of
Conscience, of which K. William was the Royal Solicitor, his Laws as Snares to
entrap the Innocent, the Fountain it self to be troubled and muddy; that he
has set up Spiritual Wickednesses in our High Places, and made such to be
Fathers to our Church who were never her Sons. If the Government don't find
themselves obliged to make the Doctor explain his Meaning, it is not fit for me
to enquire further after it: but these are as heavy Crimes, if they be true, as
any that the Church could fasten upon K. James; and therefore K. William has
reason to take heed, for if the Doctor's Faction be strong enough, they will
quickly send him a Bill of Divorce.

But to his Reflections on the Liberty of Conscience, for that was the Thing
which proved K. James's Bane, he says, That it is rather a Step to Dominion than
Devotion, and proves a Liberty of Impiety, Licentiousness and Error, and to
bite and devour one another; and the last, the Doctor is resolved to put in
practice: But cursed Cows have short Horns. If the Doctor would speak out his
true Grievance, it is because he is not at liberty to bite and and devour
Dissenters, and angry that Men of Moderation have by his present Majesty been
preferred to Mitres. What pity it is that never one of them did fall to the Lot
of this Reverend Doctor, who as we have already been informed by himself, has
the Spirit of a King, and that is more than of a Bishop: And if the Doctor
please to put on his Spectacles, he may find that his Church's slackening the
Reins of her own, and neglecting the Use of the Ancient Doctrine and
Discipline, or withdrawing their Concurrence from their Majesty's repeated
Orders, have more influence upon the Impiety and Licentiousness of the Age than
the Liberty of Conscience, which he ought as little to reflect upon as he would
have others to reflect upon his Church, seeing both are alike established by
Law.

Well, but page 22. the Doctor is resolved to try a Healing Touch, though aut
fabrum forceps, etc. he has made a horrible Mistake; and that is, He hopes we
shall not be found less sound in the Doctrine of Civil Obedience than the Jews,
or think it altered by the late Exercise of that provisional Power which is
necessarily reserved to a free People upon all extraordinary Emergencies. This
I suppose the Doctor intends as a Complement to the present Government, but
does not consider that no such provisional Power can ever be allowed by his
Hypothesis, who makes it a damnable Sin to resist any King, denies Original
Contracts, or that they are accountable for their Administration: Or if he do
allow these things, then why so many sly Insinuations against their Majesty's
Title? and why so many Declarations against advancing the old Arts that,
according to him, must tend to our Ruin?

And seeing the Doctor owns that all these are Questions of Law and
Constitution, and were of old little thought to belong unto Divinity; then why
does he meddle with them now? And how comes his Church to assume the Doctrine
of an unlimitted Passive-Obedience and Non-Resistance as her own
Characteristick, and press it upon others on pain of being ruined both in Soul
and Body?

Page 23. he says, That the Murder of K. Charles forced is Posterity out of
their Country and Religion together; which is but very little for the Credit of
his Church, who punished others for saying so formerly: And I suppose his
Friends will give him but little Thanks for this Assertion; which is, in plain
English, as much as to say, that K. Charles II. lived and died a Dissembler
both with God and his People. But (...) Doctor and his Church may do and say
what they please, Their Tongues are their own, and who is Lord over them?

Page 23. The Doctor grows charitable, and having acquainted us with our
Danger, he tells us also how to avoid it: The Way then, says he, to appease
the Wrath of God, and to wash out the guilty Stain of our Sovereign's Blood,
is not to unite in forgetting it, or to add Impudence to the Crime by seeking
to depress his Credit; but to make the Remembrance of his undeserved Sufferings
still more solemn and effectual to turn us from our Transgressions, and make us
bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance. Who can stand before so much Reason?
The Doctor divides his Text like a skilful Workman, and gives you both a
Negative and a Positive Receipt; and that you may not think it lost Labor to
put it in practice, consider what you have already suffered for not obeying the
Doctor's Prescription before you heard it, viz. Page 19. That we so long heard
the Cries of the Oppressed, and there was none to comfort them; that we beheld
Servants on Horses, and Princes walking as Servants on the Earth; that our Law,
our Liberties, and our Religion were made a Prey to such as scoffed at Kings,
and made Princes a Scorn; that God raised up a Foreign Enemy to make War upon
our Coasts, that he sent the Pestilence into our Streets, and a devouring Fire
to lay waste our Metropolis: -- That this is among the Causes why Distress and
Perplexity still remains upon the Nation, Men's Hearts failing them for fear,
and for looking after those things which are coming on the Earth. P. 20. That
we are still left open to a bitter and hasty Nation to land upon our Coasts,
and possess the Dwelling-places which are not theirs. -- Page 23. That it has
entailed upon us disputed Titles, and for ought yet appears, endless Wars. But
that which is worse than all, he says page 13. that we are at length to meet a
Vengeance worthy of God, and drink up the Dregs of his Fury.

Now who would not to avoid all these Evils, if they were sure that the
Doctor's Receipt had had a Probatum est, put it in execution, and make the
Remembrance of the Martyrdom still more solemn and effectual? But what shall we
do for more Men like the Doctor, that may be the known Inheritors of his
Kingdom and Spirit? for he says, page 2. that his Obsequies were fit only to be
solemnized by one like himself: Nay, and that must also be too little; for the
Doctor says this in respect of Saul, who is not to be named on the same Day
with the Royal Martyr.

But now when the Doctor has done his best, and raised his Voice a Note above
Ela, to tell the Presbyterians their Transgressions, and the whole House of
Dissenters their Sins: What if some perverse Fellow from amongst the Herd
should reply upon the Doctor, and find him other Causes for his List of
Judgments, and these more probable by far than any of his own confused Heap; as
thus, That we so long heard the Cries of the Oppressed and none to comfort
them, because the Clergy did preach in Defense of the Prince's Oppression, and
the People did not rescue the Oppressed out of their Hands, and therefore God
made our Sin our Judgment. That we beheld Servants on Horses, and Princes
walking as Servants on the Earth, because God would punish the Pride of our
Princes, who had exalted their Hearts above the Hearts of their Brethren, by
the meanness of those whom they had oppressed and despised. That God raised up
a Foreign Enemy to make War upon our Coasts, because of our going on to do
wickedly; and therefore God would punish both us and our King by the Hand of
those to whom he had been ungrateful for the Kindness which they showed him in
his low Condition. That he sent the Plague into our Streets for our Ingratitude
to himself in turning his Grace into Wantonness, and running into all manner of
Abominations after our King's Restoration; and because we did not look into the
Plagues of our Hearts, God resolved to punish us with a Plague in our Bodies.
That a devouring Fire should be sent to lay waste our Metropolis, where we had
burned the Oath of God which was so solemnly taken by the Representatives of
the Nation, and to purge the City from those Sodomitish Impurities, with which
the Prince had polluted it the first Night of his Arrival, and was but too much
imitated by the Citizens themselves. That Distresses and Perplexities are still
upon the Nation; and that we are left open to a bitter and hasty Enemy, have
disputed Titles and endless Wars entailed upon us, for the reigning Impieties
of the present Generation; and because the Doctor's Church will still hold
their Brethren in Bondage, expose the most solemn Ordinances of the Gospel to
the greatest of Contempt, have poisoned the Nation with dangerous Principles,
deprive the King of the Service of the best of his Subjects; prevent or stifle
the Discoveries of Plots, because so many of her own dear Sons are concerned in
them, and invite the French to restore the late King.

Now I say, If any stubborn Fanatic should reason thus, who shall judge betwixt
him and the Doctor? for both of them to be sure will think their own Cause
best: and let the Doctor clamor till his Tongue drop out against that sort of
Men, they will still tell him, That the bad Example of his Non-jurant Bishops,
the disaffected Practices of many of the swearing Clergy, and the most zealous
Disciples of Passive Obedience, are the principal secondary Causes of our
present Encumbrances; and that if by the Interest of his Church, Charles the
Second was supported in swallowing up the Peoples Liberties, and James the
Second brought to the Crown over their Bellies, all the Miseries which we have
left, do now feel, or are like to suffer in time to come, by the Tyranny of the
Late Reigns, the Wars, Taxes, and disputed Titles in this, are justly
chargeable on the Doctor's Church: and therefore it is pity, seeing they have
been the chief Causers of the War, but their Purses should principally bear the
Weight on it. It would be a good way to prevent their meddling with Affairs of
State in time to come, though all that they are worth can never compensate the
Damages which they have done the Nation. And thus I leave it to the Doctor's
Consideration against the next Thirtieth of January, to tell us whether or not
the Repentance of his Church for these Faults; and many others which might be
enumerated, be not as likely a way to make God shine upon our Counsels, and go
forth with our Armies, as the Nation's repenting for the Murder of K. Charles
the First: for if we must explain the Mind of God by his Providence, as the
Doctor would seem to do; the Repentance of this Crime seems to be demanded of
his Church as the Principal Accessaries, though not the Actors, because the
Miscarriages of our Counsels and Armies have hitherto happened in the hands of
those of his Church; and some will take upon them to prophesy that it is never
like to be otherwise so long as they alone must be entrusted with the
Management. For what reason have they to expect the Blessing of God, who have
all along persecuted their Brethren for things indifferent; profane the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by applying it to the most sordid Uses; admit
the Clean and Unclean to his Table, without any distinction, make no Conscience
of putting their Discipline in Execution against those of their own Society,
but hug the greatest Debauchees as their truest Sons: Or how they can acquit
themselves of their breach of Oath to the late King, contrary to their
Principles of Passive Obedience, which they do so much labor again to revive;
and how they can be faithful to His Present Majesty, who came to the Crown by
such Methods as they do all along condemn, I cannot conceive. And therefore it
were Wisdom in the Doctor to consider whether those of his own Party be
guiltless, before he throw the Stone at others; for if he will needs take the
liberty to speak what he pleases, he must be content to hear what pleases him
not.

Reader, these Animadversions have been writ in so much haste, that I cannot
tell whether they be Sense or Nonsense: I beg thy favorable Construction on my
honest Endeavors, which are truly aimed at England's Welfare.

FINIS.

