BIBLIOTHECA PARLIAMENTI: Libri Theologici, Politici, Historici, Qui prostant
venales In Vico vulgo vocato LITTLE-BRITAIN.

Classis secunda.

Done into English FOR THE ASSEMBLY OF DIVINES.

Anno Domini, 1653.

Books to be sold in Little- Britain.
EX otio negotium, The Art of picking of straws in this grand vacation, by the
late Members of the late Parliament. 2. (...) Newburn-Heath, an excellent Poem
in Praise of one pair of Legs, written by Sir Henry Vane junior. 3. The
Hermaphrodite or half Soldier, teaching the posture of fighting with the word
and the sword, as it was held forth to an Assembly of Saints in the new-
Artillery ground, by Philip Skippon. 4. (...) Or the gravel-pit, clearing the
difference betwixt a Wife and an Handmaid, learnedly disputed by Sir Whimsey
Mildmay. 5. Cervisia Coccina, The Art of turning Leather into Scarlet, by Co.
Thomas Pride. 6. Critica Sacra, wherein, against all contradiction is proved,
that the place which says, The Saints are clothed in White raiment must
hereafter be read in Read coats; by Vavafor Powel. 7. Inverecundus Moechus, Or
the sin of Adultery made plain in a midnight Dialogue, by Mr. Scot. 8. Nove
Virga, A new Art of measuring cloth by the sword, by Hugh-Peters. 9. (...) or,
The sour Saint, being a cluster of Grapes from a withered Vine, by Col. Robert
Tichburn. 10. Loves Masterpiece, A new history, both Natural and Divine;
wherein is set forth to the life, the loves of Mrs. Fenton, and the Parson of
Dulidge, etc. worthy the perusal of all ingenious spirits, to be sold at the
Horns in Paul's Churchyard. 11. Pseudo propheta, or, The pitiful Parliament,
by George Withers the pitiful Poet. 12. Excors Redivivus, An exact and true
history of the Victories obtained by the right valiant Sir James Harrington,
wherein is also shown his wisdom in running away from his whore, by Joshua
Sprig. 13. Semivir, Or the zealous Pander, written by Sir Gilbert Pickering,
with addition of fructification, by an eminent Major in the Army. 14.
Chiromantia, The baudy language of the hand and fingers, invented and found out
by Sir Harry Mildmay, whilst he was pimp to the Duke of Buchingham and now
lately reprinted, at the desire and for the use of Mrs. Lambert. 15. Legenda
Nigra, or an exact catalogue of the new Council of State, by O. Cromwell. 16.
(...) Or the single Eye, and double dealer, showing the reason why Co. Hewson
has a double Conscience, because he has but one Eye. 17. The Ginger-bread
Prophet, or the Althoran of Oliver Mahomet, explained and expounded by Hugh
Peter's late Pastor to a hunger-starved flock as Salem in New England. 18. Icon
Animarum, Or the jumping of wits, in the production of John Tailor the water
Poets Nonsense upon Sense, and the late Parliaments Act of Indemnity both on a
day. 19. Coriatus junior, or, The wandering Jew, by Miles Corbet. 20. The
Rebellion, A Tragedy lately Acted at White hall, by the Rebels of this age, to
be sold at the Bible and States Arms in Little Britain. 21. (...) Comfort and
Counsel for afflicted Consciences dedicated to the Parliament and Army, by J.
Durant Deane of Canterbury. 22. The way to get wealth, and the Knave in grain,
Two Tracts written experimentally, by W. Lenthal Esquire. 23. Vtrum Horum. An
Agreement betwixt the Pope and Cromwell, wherein is clearly proved there is
little difference between them, they being both Saints of the black roll, by a
disbanded Member. 24. The valiant Kid, Wherein is condemned that foolish
practice of fighting Duels, by Sir James Harrington. 25. Hymnus Tabaci, A Poem
in honor, of a Levellers leather Linings, dried over a Closestool, by Pagan
Fisher Esquire. 26. Certamen Religiosum, or a disputation between a Leveller
and an Independent, on that Text of Scripture, Unless ye repent ye shall both
perish. 27. The wandering Knight, or a discovery of a new world 22 leagues
beyond the old Southward to Cape Nusqua^, by several wandering members. 28.
The golden Ass in ten books, by the Lord Major of the City of London. 29.
Hoylii Posthuma, A new way to cozen the devil, a piece of much worth, written
wholly for the benefit of the Parliament and the Army, by Alderman Hoyl
deceased. 30. An excellent new Ballad, entitled The life of a soldier, to the
tune of No body else shall plunder but I, by Major Genesis Lambert, together with
an Appendix de generatione hominum, by Lieu. Genesis Harrison, a practitioner in
that Science. 31. Angliae flagellum, or the unfortunate Politician, by Lieu.
Col. J. Lilburn. 32. De reformatione legum. That the only way to prevent and
determine tedious Law suits, is to undo men quickly: by the Masters of the
Chancery. 33. The thief on the Cross, wherein is shown, that the only way to
make thieves repent, and Knaves honest, is to bring them to the Gallows, made
out in a Sermon upon occasion of the dissolution of the late Parliament. in the
Cathedral rounds of Smithfield by Mr. Vavasor Powel. 34. De salute
conservanda, a Treatise proving, that the only way to keep the people from
Malignant-humours, is to let them blood in the purse. 35. Daemonogie, or the
history of Independency, in two books, by Dr. Nathaniel Homes. 36. The
Sophister. Showing the folly of such as go to Church when they may hear a
Sermon at home, or in a Stable: whereunto is annexed, the confounder of bells,
by Samuel Chidly a simple Saint. 37. Annus tenebrosus, or the further
propagation of Heathenism amongst Christians, as it was held forth in a private
conference by my Lord General to the Lady, whereby she became fully satisfied,
and he much eased. Published to prevent imperfect relations, by W. Dell an eye
witness thereof. 38. Christianographia Britannica; or a continuation of the
famous history of the Knight Don Quixot, in the exemplary lives of the two
Arch-Priests Errant, Vavasor Powel, and W. Cradock. 39. Carnis Resurrection, or
the exaltation of the flesh, by the power of the Spirit, to the comsort of the
dejected; held forth in a close conference over the Butchers wife, by Hugh
Peter's. 40. The artificial Changeling, a Tract proving our Army good
Arithmeticians, since they can do any aditionall sum, amounting to 120000 l.
and upwards; but the peoples grievances are fee forth in the end, because the
soldiery are so well skilled in multiplication and addition, but know not how
to substract.
Acts and Orders.
1. A Declaration and Order of the General and his Council of Officers, for
the speedy raising of 120000 l. a month, for the ease of the people. 2. An Act
for the speedy stopping the mouths of Gods Messengers the Ministers, and to
let the Kingdom know, that a Message from the new Council of State is of more
reverence and authority. 3. An Act for the keeping of M. Prin from going to
take up new Lodgings of his old Landlord at Garnsy, for fear a cross wind
bring him back again to perfect the accounts of the Commonwealth in point of
Sedition. 4. An Act for the speedy relief of those Seamens wives, whose
husbands shall be slain or taken by the Dutch in the present service; that so
they may not thrash for a living in Rosemary-lane, and Cuckold their husbands
to the scandal of the State. 5. An Act for the recompense of the two
Superintendents of Presbytery and Independency, Steven Marshall, and Philip
Nigh, for their former good services in venturing their souls, as freely as
others have done their bodies. 7. An Act giving power to the Wild Baron to
read the Law backward, for the benefit of the State. 8. An Order for the new
casting S. Sepulchers Bell, for the more speedy summoning the Members together
(they living at such distance) when it shall please O. Cromwell to call them
that way, viz. Tyburn. 9. Ordered that such of the Lords and Commons that have
continued faithful to the Cause, do meet in a Committee on London Bridge, in
an upper Room, Acts 1.13. there to lay their heads together for the settling the
peace of the three Nations according to the Mind of God revealed to us by his
holy Prophet Arise Evans, Heb. 10.3, 4. 10. Ordered that John Field shall Pritt
no more Acts or Orders, till he has given all his old ones to the shorten
Alderman. 11. Ordered that Whitehall be hereafter called Jewry, because the
Inhabitants are most Jews that Crucified their King, and intend to make that
place a receptacle for all Gods and all Religions. 12. Ordered that Vavasor
Powell preach the Devil out of Hell, that there may be room for the Members.
13. Ordered that a convenient place be nominated, where Harry Martin may keep
a Regiment of Whores, for the better propagating of the Saints. 14. Ordered by
his Excellency the Lord General, that on Thursday come fornight public
Thanks be given to God in all the Congregated Churches in and about London,
for freeing us from that infectious plague called a Parliament. 15. An act for
the speedy suppressing all Plays, the Fools being all turned Commanders or
Parliament men. 16. An act for the regulating of names, that the well-affected
may not be abused by nicknames, but that every syllable have its full
pronunciation, as, General Monk must heareafter be called General Monkey. 17.
Ordered that John Goodwin and Martin Parker consult about forming some new
Hymns, to be sung for the edification of the Saints; and that Sternhold and
Hopkins be no more used, it having been proved that they were Popishly
affected. 18. An act for the speedy drawing up a Petition to Lucifer in behalf
of Cromwell, that seeing he has done such eminent service for him in this
world, he may not want a place of preferment in his Dominions. 19. Ordered that
every Trooper (whether he can read or not) have liberty to be as David, a man
of War and a Prophet. 20. Ordered that a speedy supply of Physicians and
Chirurgians be forthwith sent to the Portugal Ambassadors, most of them lying
sick of the Pox. 21. An act forbidding any one to stamp the Lord Generals Image
in Ginger-bread, lest the valor of it should bite the children by the tongues.
Cases of Conscience.
1. Whether Balaam's beating his own Ass were a sufficient warrant for the
Foot-man's cudgelling Sir Harry Mildmay. 2. Whether Cromwell has not gotten a
patent for Brimstone, which makes his nose so fiery, and Tiffanies so seldom
worn. 3. Whether when the Parliament go to assemble in Hell, they will not go
near to make that a Commonwealth. 4. Whether Bradshaw deserves not the place
of a President again, there hardly being his president in all the world for his
villainies. 5. Whether the text in Mat. 25.41. belongs not to our State, where
it is said, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the
Devil and his Angels. 6. Whether Mr. Caryl can ever be as poor as Job, whilst
he is twice paid for his Expositions. 7. Whether the Earl of Pembroke did not
do like old Philip's own Son, when he prated with his honor, in purchasing a
Membership in the everlasting Parliament. 8. Whether the Committee of --
dashers Hall do not torment men almost as bad as the Devil did Job. 9. Whether
Prideaux being degraded of his Parliament-trade, may not be looked upon as a
mere post. 10. Whether there was not an Iron-monger spoiled, when Harry Walker
was made a Priest, and whether he being a Priest, can tell what stands for
Pillory in Hebrew. 11. Whether it were Mutton or Veale Hugh Peter's cheapned of
the Butchers wife at White-Chappel. 12. Whether to obey God and the new Council
of State, are not inconsistent. 13 Whether Mr. Knowls was not out the last Fast
day when he brought a Scripture out of the first Epistle of Jude. 14. Whether
it was not policy in Cromwell, in pardoning the prisoners in Newgate, most of
them being his own soldiers. 15 Whether White Hall may not be properly called
a Den of Thieves. 16. Whether the countenance of Miles Corbet and Mr. Gurden,
do not speak their M^thers to be Blackmoors, and their Fathers Jews. 17.
Whether we have not gotten a blessed charge, an everlasting Parliament
metamorphosed into an everlasting Army. 18. Whether when Harry Martin moved the
House to take down Bells, it were not that he would b^g the Ropes to make him
bands of, they so well become him. 19. Whether our Saviors riding into
Jerusalem upon an Asses fool, were any more then a Type of our deliverer
Cromwell's riding into his Throne upon the backs of 120. Asses, to be elected
out of the several Counties for that purpose. 20. Whether Alderman Atkins his
imbecility had ever been found out, if Sir Walter Earl had not smelt it. 21.
Whether Cromwell be not an absolute hater of Images, since he has defaced Gods
in his own countenance.
FINIS.

