A VOYAGE Of the Late King of Sweden, And another of MATHEMATICIANS, Sent by
Him: In which are discovered The Refraction of the Sun, which sets not in the
Northern Parts, at the Time of the Summer Solstice, Var^^tion of the Needle,
Latitudes of Places, Seasons, etc. of those Countries. By Command of the Most
Serene, and Most Mighty Prince, Charles XI. King of Swedes, Goths, and Vandals.

Faithfully Rendered into English.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Castle, next Scotland-Yard-Gate, by Whitehall, School.

TO THE Most Serene, and Most Mighty Prince and Lord Charles XI. King of
Sweden, Goths, and Vandals; Great Prince of Finland; Duke of Schonen, Estland,
Lifland, Carelen, Bremen, Verden, Stetin, Pomerania, Cassuben, and Vandalia;
Prince of Rugen; Lord of Ingria, and Wismar; Palsgrave of the Rhine; Duke of
Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves, and Mons, etc. etc.
My most Gracious King and Master. Most Serene KING, AND MY Most Gracious LORD,
BECAUSE it Pleased Your Majesty, most Serene Prince, to lay Your Commands upon
me, to Write both in our own Language and Latin, what we observed in a late
Northern Journey, concerning the Elevation of the Pole, and other things of
that Nature, I have therefore for a few Weeks past, since our Return, daily
deducted somewhat from my Public Concerns, that thereby I might most humbly
Obey the Commands of Your Most Serene and Royal Majesty. But as the Nature of
Mathematical Sciences is such, that they depend upon Easy Use and Exercise,
but require a more difficult Invention and Demonstration; so our Observations
are made in fewer Hours than Demonstrated. The distinction of the little Wheel
into its known Parts, gives but small Trouble to the Clock-Maker; but the
manner of dividing is not his, and but difficultly Invented. Even Boys at
present do mutually teach one another Arithmetic; but the Practice of it has
been Intricate, the Rules being altogether drawn from the very depths of
Mathematics. The Masters of that Art will peradventure wonder, that at this
day the Mathematicians solve the more difficult Problems by the help of
Addition solely; but when they have gotten the Key they will cease any further
to admire it. For the Ignorant Plough-man will play you upon his Instrument any
French Air, just as well as the most excellent Musician, provided he have but
the Key of it. In a word, all Artifices which owe their Births properly to
Mathematics, are of the same Nature. And because very many not well skilled in
this Learning; and not sufficiently accustomed to distinguish the Truth of
Sense and Reason, have rendered Philosophy only sensible; and by this Error of
theirs, have rendered the way to solid Learning in other Sciences also very
abstruse and difficult; therefore Mathematicians have resolved never to admit
of any thing whatsoever, without clear and perspicuous Demonstration. How
imperfect the knowledge of our Senses is, when destitute of Reason, the Sun
being elevated above the Horizon in the whole World may teach us; which yet
reason dictates to be otherwise placed. I have therefore expounded the Doctrine
of Refraction, and other things not altogether so unknown more at large than
was absolutely needful. And it is well that our Observations come forth in both
Languages, though our Mother Tongue might have been sufficient for our
Countrymen; as it is now usual for the French, English, and other Nations of
Europe, to express Arts and Sciences to their Countrymen. And yet because very
many Foreigners have laid the Seat of their Fortunes in Swedeland; and, besides
that, there be diverse People of the Subjects of Your Most Serene Majesty, who
speak a Language only proper to themselves; the Latin Tongue being familiar to
all in the European World, will best fit every one of them in Particular.

Lastly, because Foreigners born under another Climate and Soil, have a desire
to learn such things from us; as not long since, both the French and Italians
undertook this Journey, not without the greatest labor; so, Great King,
something will redound to the Immortality of your Name, from this Observation
not only begun, but likewise perfected under the Auspicious Influences of your
most Serene Majesty. The World is not ignorant, that God has adorned and
accumulated your Majesty with Endowments of all sorts, which we falling into
the other Extreme do more sparingly commend; whilst studiously shunning the Mob
of Flatterers so much detested by your Majesty, with a tacit Veneration only
honor every Perfection drawn from the heap of your Imperial Virtues:
Outlandish Men will not be silent in it; nor shall after-Ages neglect to extol
it to Heaven with the justest Praises. As for what concerns this little Work, I
ought not to conceal that it is not only below Mediocrity, but I am sensible
will be far beneath the Hopes of your most Serene Majesty: For since the Time
that your Majesty unexpectedly imposed the Province upon me of a most different
Nature from this Affair; for some Years together I threw away the Rule and
Compass, as unprofitable Instruments for the Course of Life which was then to
be taken; and hid those old Masters in a certain Corner of my Library, which
still fills up a little Room in my House at Upsal; but now endeavoring to wipe
off that filthy Rust from my Mathematical Instruments, which they had
contracted by lying by, I have made it my Business, that rather Power than Will
should be wanting in me so far distant from my Books; and because a great
Strife amongst your Subjects in the Veneration of your Serene Royal Majesty
grows daily warmer; as for me, the least share of them, if I cannot act equally
to the rest, yet certainly will never suffer my self to be outdone by any in
Obedience, Reverence, Observance, submissive Respects, and a devoted
Disposition. To the very last I will humbly implore the Divine Majesty of the
Supreme God, that he will vouchsafe perpetually to preserve your Majesty, the
Glory of Kings, (given from Heaven to promote his Honor, and conserve our
Country) healthful, vigorous, undisturbed, and cheerful to us, and to them that
are, and shall be born of us: So wishes, and will ever pray,

Of Your most Serene and Royal Majesty, The Eternally, most Devoted Servant,
John Bilberg.

In Solstitium aestivum a Serenissimo, Potentissimoque PRINCIPE, CAROLO
UNDECIMO, Suecorum, Gothorum, Vandalorumque REGE, In TORNEA Urbe spectatum
expositumque a Celeberrimo Viro JOANNE BILBERG.
TOrna, vetus septem sed nunc nova fama Trionum,
Ultima Botniaci quam maris unda ferit:
Grande tibi cessit, praesens quod suspicit aevum,
Quodque canent semper postera secla, decus.
Nuper Hyperboreum propius cum viserit axem
CAROLUS, Augusti sideris instar habens;
Quaque iit, in plausus sese utraque solveret Arctos,
Et nova conciperet gaudia totus apex:
In te, pervigilem, nocturno tempore, Phaebum
Vidit, pro patria pervigil ipse sua:
Vidit inocciduo radiantem lumine vultum,
Perpetuoque die tum sua Regna frui.
I nunc, quicunque es, nostris atque objice terris
Aeternumque gelu, Cimmeriumque chaos.
Haec lege, quae narrat Bilbergius, (Is quoque tantae
Spectator lucis, Rege jubente, fuit)
Cognosces quanto fulgore hic ferveat aestas;
Quantaque naturae munera mitis alat.
Cognosces, quam pura fluat, qua vescimur, aura;
Quam fit, quod colimus, non sibi segne solum.
Ut nulli faveat Titan impensius orae;
Majores nusquam ducat ut ille moras.
Hibernae noctes tolerentur, and aspera brumae
Omnia nam redimit solstitiale jubar.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. THE Observation of His most Serene Royal Majesty. Page 1. Chap. 2. An
Account of the Longitude of Places. Page 19 Chap. 3. Diurnal and Nocturnal
Observations of the Sun. Page 38 Chap. 4. The Doctrine of Refractions. Page 52
Chap. 5. The Constitution of the Frigid Zone. Page 75 Chap. 6. The Latitudes of
Places observed in our Return. Page 83 Chap. 7. The Figure of the Earth,
Variation of the Needle, and difference of Refractions under the Role, and
Equator. Page 96
A VOYAGE Of the Late King of SWEDEN, etc.
CHAP. I. The Observation of His most Serene Royal Majesty.
IN the Ancient and Learned Ages, when it was the greatest Strife amongst Men,
that Eternity should accompany the Glory of Arts and Sciences, they were
carried in a short time to the height of Learning; for the Romans emulated the
Greeks, the Greeks the Egyptians and both of them the Chaldaeans; but they all
both imitated those who went before them, and were Examples to such as did
follow: Only Epicurus gloried that he had no Master; and that he made the way
for himself unto Truth; but that is the happiness of few People, and rarely
falls out in our Times: We think it is excellent well for us, if we commendably
follow; nor do we wonder that the things which are hidden deeply, should be
slowly discovered; for such is the nature of our present Age, that Men avoid
Difficulties, and treat lighter Matters with a slight hand, and are ignorant of
very many things which they think they know, not so much through weakness of
Judgment as Laziness. It Is apparent, almost to all Men, not only to
Philosophers, but Unlearned, that the Sun, the Moon, and other Stars of this
visible World, keep the Course which the Wisdom of the Supreme Deity ordered
from the beginning; and no body is so silly as not to understand, that at set
times they return to illuminate the several Parts of the World; for it is well
known, that the Earth sometimes is torpid with the sharpest Cold, and bound
together with the hard Frost; and sometimes in one and the same place of the
World is inflamed with the burning Heat of the Weather, and thereupon undergoes
its various Vicissitudes; and Experience joined to Reason does sufficiently,
and too much confirm, that no other Cause can be assigned of that Matter, than
the departure of the Sun, its return, and various Situation; but that some
Countries should burn with the continual Heat of Heaven, and others grow hard
with a perpetual Cold, and yet equally afford Advantages to their Inhabitants,
is that which many Philosophers have called into Question; and is not at this
Day believed, but by those who have found it by Experience. It would be a
pleasant sight to behold the Earth in an Abridgement, to view the Situation of
it, its Form, and Bounds; some Parts very well Peopled, whilst again some
others are frequently void of Inhabitants, through the violence and extremity of
Cold or Heat, for there are many altogether as great Strangers in their own, as
Foreign Countries; and if they know any thing by the Relation of others, yet
they themselves are almost Ignorant of the Matter; and hence it is, that very
often they judge wrong of the Condition, both of their Native and other
Countries: wherefore, seeing it is now long since, that it seemed ill for Men
to be Ignorant both of their own and Outlandish Climates, by degrees a certain
Desire seized upon Noble Souls, by Voyages and Learned Studies, to render this
Knowledge familiar to them. Without this culture of the Mind no Person could
have easily and soon persuaded us, who live in the remotest Northern Countries,
that there are some People who have perpetually their Days and Nights equal; or
these last, that we should undergo so different Changes, to wit, that we should
be sometimes destined to a perpetual Night; and again, under our sometimes
unsetting Sun, have no room left us for Darkness; but that they should rather
cry out,

Triste solum, sterilis, sine fruge, sine arbore tellus,
Frigus iners, illic habitant, pallorque tremorque,
Et jejuna fames. --
Sad Soil, Earth barren, without Fruit or Tree,
Cold, Paleness, Shivering do Inhabit thee,
And meager Hunger. --
The Industry of that Italian is to be commended, who not long since viewed our
Northern Parts, with curious researches. I am willing here to make use of his
Words, out of his Manuscript, that by his Example, we may confirm our own, and
invite others to do the like Matters. In questa (says he) Zona glaciale
boreale, bisogna ammirar la Providenza di Dio, nel vider il Sole, che per sei
settimane resto sobre dell' Orizonte, formando a questa regione non arco ma
Corona, e cosi la Luna e le Stelle; ma queste non apparono per hora, cedendo al
primo luminare, e campeggiono poi altretanto tempo circa il Solstitio hiemale,
cosi loro permettendo quello con la sua contenanza: Pare in un certo modo che
sia degno di non minor osservatione e maraviglia in quest' effetto il sole, di
quello che sarebbe se si vedesse arrestar il suo corso, come nel tempo di
Josue, overo retrocedere, come in quello d' Ezechia, insegnando S. Agostino nel
decimo della citta di Dio, che: Quamvis miracula visibilium naturarum videndi
assiduitate viluerint: tamen cum ea semper intuemur, inusitatissimis
rarissimisque majora sunt. Che se all hora fece il giorno alcune hoar piu long
dell' ordinario, che lo so per settimane e mosi, si come ho detto, onde pare
che di questo specialmente si verifichi il detto del Salmo: Ordinatione tua
perseverat dies. So far he.

But our Weakness, not to say Laziness, causes this difficulty of Believing in
many; who are very seldom persuaded that the things are true, which our
Countrymen, and the Inhabitants of this Kingdom, though of very good Repute,
relate concerning the various Vicissitudes of the Year in distant places.
Nothing certainly being a greater Impediment to a right understanding, than the
prejudicate Opinions of our Infancy, which having sucked in with our Mother's
Milk, and an ill Education, we can hardly at last lay aside in our Old Age; for
who does not, that I may use this Example, persuade himself that he lives in
the upper part of the Earth, and the highest place of it; that others dwell on
the sides, or if he can apprehend it, on the bottom of it? And yet it is
certain, that some do Inhabit Countries farther distant from the Pole, and
others live in places nearer to it. The Experience of those who Travel by Land
or Sea, convinces us of this, which to deny or oppose, is the sign of a Mind
either Distracted, or altogether Perverse. Hence it is, that of late more
Credit is given to some illiterate Sailors, who having sailed round the World,
have asserted that it is round, than to those Ancient Divines and Philosophers,
who contended that the Form of the Earth was not so, only that they might gain
a greater Strength to their Authority and Doctrine. Certainly we admire, that
Men eminent for Learning, at the very mentioning of whose great Names we pay
respect, should ever fall into so absurd Opinions. Tertullian and Austin
thought that they were over-wise, who taught that there were any Antipodes.
Others Ridiculously. (...).
And Posterity perhaps will be surprised, that we, at this time of Day, are
ignorant of many, and those not so difficult Matters neither.

And further, I do believe it is agreed amongst all Virtuoso's, and such as are
given up to Ingenuous Studies, that from the first Moment the Creator of the
World gave to the Sun, as to the Ruler and Governor of the Day, a motion so
equal and constant to it self that every where by equal Circumvolutions, it
makes also alike Courses; and produces sometimes equal, and sometimes inequal
Shadows, and as much as in it lies in places alike, produces effects alike
also; from whence it comes to pass, by the great Providence of God, that the
Sun warping toward either Pole at set times, regulates the Days and Nights,
and gives Light or Darkness to Countries, to be estimated by the Spaces of
Hours, of Days, or of Months; and it ought to seem a Paradox to none, that the
People who dwell under the Equator, and have their Days and Nights perpetually
equal, should not have longer Days than those, who if they live under the very
Poles, will reckon one Night to be of six Months, and the opposite Day to be
equal to it; and that those who are situated between the Equator and the
Poles, however they divide their time, reckon also so many Days and Nights to
be measured in the same Spaces.

No Mathematician is ignorant, that those who live about the 65th. degree of
Altitude, have their whole Day in the Summers Solstice of 24 Hours; or which is
the same, at that time the Sun does not set as well from Natural as Optic
Causes, before the 66th. degree be completed: But very few Mathematicians have
drawn this Knowledge from the Experience of their own Eyes; from whence it
comes to pass, that though the Inhabitants of the Country should assert this to
be true, yet in this Point they would not gain Credit from such as urge only
Natural Causes; and besides, the Variety and Disagreement of the Relaters
increases the obstinate doubts of the Incredulous, since, after the Vulgar way,
some mix incredible Things with Truths. This Assertion moved the most Serene
Prince Charles the 11th. the most Potent King of Sweden, Goths, and Vandals,
and our most Gracious Sovereign, when the last Year he viewed these Regions;
who, as he is endowed by the Supreme Deity with a truly Divine and Admirable
Wit, and adorned with all the Gifts that are most proper for his Royal Post; so
he delights to make the exactest Scrutiny into all things, and to discuss every
one of them in particular, and to give as much credit to every Person as he
deserves; so being now desirous to try with his own Eyes, what Truth there was
in the common Report of the People, and whether they did really see in those
Places a Sun which sets not: He was then in the City Torneo in Westro Botnia,
situated about 65 and 43 of Latitude; whose Horizon, although it was in part
hindered by Mountains and Woods, so that the Truth of this Matter could
scarcely be discovered upon the plain ground; and besides, it being some Days
after the Summer Solstice, we might doubt the opportunity of seeing it was
slipped; however the undaunted Heart of the most Invincible Monarch, never
fatigued by any Labors, conquered all these Difficulties: A little Tower being
showed to us of about One hundred Foot high, on which the Bells of the Church
of the City are hung; he gets up into it by Ladders, and those very steep,
accompanied with some Eminent Persons, as Curious Witnesses of this
Observation; amongst whom by Name, were Count Gustavus Douglas, Governor of the
Northern Provinces, Charles Piper, Secretary of State, and the Secretary of
War, John Hoghusen: In the Year M DC XCIV. on the 14th. of June we viewed the
same until Eleven a - Clock and 53 M. at Night; at which time a little Cloud
covering the Sun by little and little, it disappeared; but about the 12th.
Hour, and 6th. Minute after Midnight, or of our following Day, which was June
the 15th the Sun passing again out of the small Cloud, shined out very
brightly; from whence it is certain that it did not set in the mean time, but
that Cloud was the only Cause why it was not discerned all Night long; the
Experience of the Inhabitants confirm it, who always at that time of the Year,
when the Weather is clear, use to see the Sun all the Night long: The most
Serene King himself did not disdain to put down with his own Hand into his
Table Book this Observation; which when the rest of the Company had neglected,
they were surprised the next Day at the admirable Exactness of the King, in an
Affair so foreign to Royal Concernments, and his most exact and Mathematical
Diligence; and being ashamed for the Neglect of it, and that they were outdone
by their King in so small a Share of Trouble, they humbly and submissively
beseech'd the King, that they might have a Copy of his Observation; His most
Gracious Majesty readily granted their Requests, and gave leave to all those
who desired to take a Copy of it. This way the Royal Observation came to the
joyful Hands of his Subjects; and by the Care of the most Illustrious Governor
of that Country, Count Gustavus Douglas, may be read in Golden Letters upon a
Table fast'ned to the Wall, near to the Altar of the Church in that City; and
lest any thing should be wanting in our Testimonial, for the Credit of the
Transcribers, behold a Confirmation.

IVnderwritten do testify this Description wholly to agree with the
Observation of his most Serene Majesty, written with his own Hand,

Torneo, June 15. 1694. John Hoghusen.


Certainly a Monument fit for Posterity to admire, and to propose to themselves
the Sedulity, Care, Vigilance, and incredible enduring of Toils of so great a
Prince; for who being intent, and exposed to mighty, not to say Royal Fatigues,
can endure to descend to so minute, so unusual Matters? And ye Sons of the
Mathematics whose Talent it was to fetch such things out of their secret
Places, and to demonstrate them; You, I say, ought to blush, and publicly
acknowledge that your Science has received this Improvement, not from your
selves, but from the most Potent King.

Our most Gracious King having viewed these Countries, as he designed; and
having traveled some Tracts of Land, inhabited by such People as either speak,
or understand the Sweedish Language; and at length being come amongst other
Nations, using only the Finland, or Lapland Tongue, used by few in the World,
returned with great speed according to his usual Custom. After his Return,
amongst other things, he relates to his Subjects, who enjoy a milder Air, and
more fertile Soil, the incredible Varieties of Days and Nights, which he had
seen in the most Northern Parts of his Kingdom; not only where the day at that
time is continual by the Presence of the Sun, but also where they live in
Summertime without any Night, by the perpetual Twilights; and affirmed that he
had spent a continued Day without any Night, a thing before heard, but not at
all believed by him; and when that Business, known to very few, rendered all of
them doubtful who were so attentive to his Majesty's Discourse, several
Questions were started, which exercised the Belief of some, and the Judgment of
others: Thereupon our Mathematicians are consulted, whether really under that
Elevation of the Pole, such Phaenomena's were to be expected; and which were
the true Causes, why in those Places the Body of the Sun did not set: But they
most humbly answered, they believed it might be so through diverse Natural
Reasons to be determined by the Situation of Places, Temper of Air, and other
Changes; but as yet not at all understood by them, having never lived under
that Elevation of the Pole, but only giving Credit to their Land-Maps; which
being often made and corrected, cannot always merit our undoubted Belief in all
things; but that every Astronomical Observation should be so made, as to answer
the Celestial Observations, and besides illustrate them; and they all to be
confirmed by Geometrical Demonstrations, that they may show their Readers such
Reasons, as do not persuade, but force them. By this means the Science of
Astronomy had its Rise, Progress, and no ordinary Increase, first from the
Asiaticks, then from the Europaeans for many Ages, by the indefatigable Labor
of the Observer. In the Northern World, the Inhabitants being studious of War,
and Arms, that Science did not lie altogether neglected, as appears from the
Grave-stones, and Runick Calendars, with other very Ancient Monuments; however
it was not cultivated with a Care that might equal that of the Chaldaeans, or
the Ancient Mathematicians in Greece: Nevertheless, by the Grace of God, these
Ages owe their Happiness ever since the most Blessed Times of the Reformed
Religion, to Kings of Pious and most Glorious Memory; and especially to His
most Serene Royal Majesty, which by a Paternal Affection, and truly Majestic
Love for Learning, and Men of Letters, by his incredible and inexhausted
Magnificence to them, has brought not only the Mathematics; but all sorts of
Sciences to that pitch, as neither we could hope, or Foreigners believe, they
could ever attain to; and yet a great deal of Work is still remaining, and
there will never want an occasion to any who shall be born a thousand Ages
hence to add something. For many things, according to the Conjecture of the
wise Roman, are reserved for future Ages, when the very Memory of us shall be
worn out: These things and others of the like Nature, discoursed they, not
without Pleasure, before His most Serene Majesty; who, after considering them
more deeply, carefully weighs with himself the Force and Effects of Nature; and
though he did not distrust his own Eyes in the Observations once made, yet that
he might gain the Consent and Confession of all, and lay open the true Series
of Causes, resolves to send thither some Mathematicians about the same time of
the following Year, that so they might note every thing distinctly, and duly
observe the differences of Motions, with the true Risings, and Settings of the
Sun, and what they were with Refraction or without it. In the mean time, his
loyal Subjects made a Medal to the most grateful Memory of that so fortunate
Royal Expedition, with the Picture of the King, and an agreeable Emblem.

CHAP. II. An Account of the Longitude of Places.
NOW therefore in the present Year, 1695. in the Month of April, this Charge is
committed to me by His most Serene Royal Majesty, that I should undertake the
Journey, together with the most Illustrious Person, Mr. Andrew Spole, the most
ingenious Mathematick Professor in the University of Upsal, and now almost
superannuated, my Companion and Associate in the Journey, and formerly for
eleven Years my most pleasant Colleague in this sort of Studies; and that we
should omit nothing that might conduce for the making of these Experiments, or
any other of this Nature; and above all we were injoined so to hasten our
Journey, that we might be in the City Torneo, where the King's Observation was
made, not only some days before the Summer-Solstice, but also that we should go
farther to the Northward, where we might see the Sun higher above the Horizon
in the North Meridian, by reason of the greater Latitude of the Place: Thus we
departed from Upsal with Hearts and Souls resolutely fixed, on the 21st. Day of
May, Old Style, which is used in our Country, at a Season unusual, and not yet
fixed, by reason of the Unseasonableness and Rigor of the Weather; and
therefore with great Difficulty we passed through Upland, Gestricland,
Holsingland, Medelpadia, Angirmarnland, and West Bothnia, being for the most
part in these last Countries detained by Ice and Snow; especially in passing
over Rivers, and Arms of the Sea, which are there in great Plenty, and
sometimes so wide, as to be 1000 Paces over; in which not only the Rapidity of
the Rivers, and Fierceness of the Winds, but also the Ferry-Boats are to be
minded, least they be severed asunder; for two Boats placed at a certain
distance from one another, make a Ponton, into which a Chariot is to be so put
with Horses, that the sore-wheels rest upon one Boat, and the hind-wheels on
the other; the Oars being fitted on both sides: And in the high way the ground
being sometimes slippery, and the Horses and Charriots sticking in dirty
Places, created us great Trouble, where the Cold being partly dissipated, yet
the Earth did not return to its former Solidity and Firmness; for at this
Season the Creeks nearest the Shore being hardn'd with Frost and Ice, and many
Pines being cut down, and disposed into order, did even then represent a
Winter-Journey, the Frost being melted, and thawing near the Bank-side only, so
that no body could go any further of the Journey with Safety; and therefore
almost all by Land, the way being as yet not well beaten; wherein being tossed
by diverse Fortunes, at length we happily arrived at Torneo on the 6th. of June,
having made a most hazardous Voyage in sixteen Days, in Charriots, Boats, or on
Horses, and a-foot by turns.

The City Torneo is situated by the River Torneo, rising in Lapland, a very
pleasant Place, which the River makes, by parting it self into two Arms, and
joining again where it discharges it self into the Sea, from which Island the
Citizens assert the City to have received its Name at the time of its Building:
But it was founded in this Island in the Year of our Lord M DC XX. when before
it was the Seat of Inhabitants, who dwelt some Furlongs from it to the South,
where there is still an old Stone-Church; for they have a wooden one in that
City, and that curiously built, as generally is usual in other Cities of that
Country, not long rebuilded. This City trades chiefly with the Finns and
Laplanders, whose Language the Citizens understand well: In the Winter they
likewise give them a Visit with their Ram Deer; and for the Merchandise which
they carry with them, receive others from the Laplanders of equal Value: They
have also no inconsiderable Commerce with the Moscovites, who yearly sell their
Goods to them, and part with them at a very reasonable Price; since those which
are brought out of the City Archangel, lie them in less, when the Concourse of
the Hollanders is the greatest. The same Evening that we came to Torneo, we
observed the Sun above the Horizon, noting the Time by the going of a most
exact Clock, which showed Minutes and Seconds, which I had for that use, by the
Favor of the most excellent Count, and Royal Senator, Nicolas Gyldenstolp, by
this at 11 h. 15, 45, the Sun was hidden in a little Cloud, passing over it,
and appeared that Night no more to us.

On the 7th of June we sound the Altitude of the Sun, by two Brass Astrolabes,
exactly divided into Degrees. and Min. One of which we would have to be loose, and
the other fixed with the Perpendicular, by which the Errors which arise by the
Disposition, might be the more easily detected; and by this Means we took Care
that the very least difference of them should not escape us; nor was any
Calculation made by us, except the Instruments agreed most exactly. The same
day in our first Observation, we found the greatest Altitude of the Sun to be
47. 48. On the 8th Day we found the Meridian Altitude to be 47. 49. The 9th Day
was Cloudy. On the 10th it was 47. 50. from which repeated Observations, and
another more made in the same place at our return, on the 18th of June, when
the Suns Meridian height had decreased to 47. 45. we gathered by an
Astronomical Calculation, the true Motion of the Sun being considered, and the
just Parallax added, that the Elevation of the Pole in that City is not so
much, as is laid down in some Geographical Tables, especially those of
Foreigners, being but 65. 43. but no account ought to be had of the Refraction
in these Observations, the Body of the Sun being elevated beyond that degree
where they cease; we desired truly to confirm these Diurnal Observations by the
fixed Stars; because to those who observe by the Circumpolar Stars, the
Altitude of the Pole uses to come out less; and the Winter and Summer
Declinations of the Sun being otherwise equal, the Hypothesis of the fixed
Obliquity of the Ecliptic being granted; but amongst the more Northerly, at
several Times are rendered inequal by reason of their Refractions; but at that
time the Light of the Sun, and its continual Presence saved us that trouble.

The Latitude of Torneo being found, we were solicitous to find out the true
Longitude of it; but seeing that could not be Astronomically obtained, by any
direct Journey, by reason of the Situation of Places, we were forced to be
satisfied with the Reports of the Land-Surveyers, who have so exactly described
the Measures of the Ways, and the Situation of all the Countries and Counties,
by the Command of His most Serene Royal Majesty, and because amongst the
several Ways of finding out the Longitude of Places, especially at Sea, for
which the States of the United Provinces promised so great a Reward to the
finder of it, all Eyes being intent upon this Victory, which is not as yet
obtained: I say, amongst so many ways, no Invention has yet appeared more
excellent than that which is performed by the help of a Pendulum; of which that
Noble Hollander, Christianus Con-stantine Huygens, was the Inventer and Author;
a Person, as well for his other Famous Works, as for the sake of this, most
worthy of Immortality. And here it came into our Heads to admire the great
Constancy of these Portable Clocks, made after that Example, two of which I
brought with me from home, accurately distinguished with an Horizontal
Pendulum, and divided into Minutes; but the Third, having also Seconds, was
added to them at Stockholm. Before our departure I so disposed these Two for
three Weeks together, to the Motion and Measure of a most correct, exact
Pendulum of three Foot, which was such a Rule for me, that I could scarce doubt
of their Exactness; since in the whole Journey they went so equally, that they
did not differ from one another so much as one Minute at the same time. But it
moved me more than I can express, in the first Observation at Torneo, when the
Suns greatest Altitude, and from thence the true place of the South was known
to us, all these Three Clocks wanted only 18 Minutes of this Point; to wit, the
Automaton showed the Hour of the Day of the Meridian from whence I came, and to
which I was joined when I departed at Twelve a Clock, and yet could not rightly
show us the Meridian of Torneo; or to agree with it, because that City is
judged to be some Degrees more Easterly than Stockholm. For of the Mapps which
I now have, one of them, which Aegidius Valkenier put forth in a lesser Form,
makes the Longitude of Stockholm 35 Degrees, and 30 Minutes, but of Torneo 40.
0. this difference of the Meridians, 4. 30. gives the Intervals of Time 18
Astronomically computed: The other of Fred. de Wit makes the Longitude of
Stockholm, 36. 20. but of Torneo 41. 10. This difference of the Meridians 4.
50. makes the measure of Time betwixt them 19. 20. A third of Scandinavia, by
the same De Wit makes the Longitude of Stockholm 39. 00. but that of Torneo
precisely 44. 00. which is the greatest, and produces the difference of the
Meridians of five Degrees; whence also in Time the difference of Meridians is
given 20 Minutes. But which of these two Tables is the latter and truer is not
certain; for in Maps and Clocks the Age of them is not expressed, on purpose
that so they may always seem to be New; but howsoever it was, these three Maps
did not differ so very much from one another, nor from the Scope which I
proposed to demonstrate; for if the first Map please, that agrees exactly with
my Clocks, which were so much too slow; and it is plain, that the second
differs only in one Minute, and twenty Seconds; the third differs two Minutes;
which equality of Motion and Agreement is certainly to be mightily admired in
so little and portable Machines; nor did I think that it could by any Accident
happen, that for so long a time they should mutually answer one another in the
same Laws of Motion; and it is pleasant to be employed in so delightful a
Speculation; now therefore, if any shall desire a further Scrutiny into it; let
him also know that in winding; up the Clock I daily lost five Seconds; for that
has been long observed by me; as likewise, that 72 Beats of the Pulse of the
Artery, being Fasting, answer also to one Minute, when the Body is in Health,
and neither bound up with too much Cold, nor inflamed with vehement Heat; which
Experience, and that is wonderful, never failed me for fifteen Years together.
Therefore, since these five Seconds 12 times reckoned, make one Minute, the
Clock also in twelve Days was too slow by one Minute. Now, because we got to
Torneo in sixteen Days, add for those four Days twenty Seconds, that so the
number of the lost may be 1 20 which added to 18 wanting at Torneo, makes the
Sun 19 20 which agrees excellently well with the second Maps, as is above
showed; they requiring in that time the difference of so many Minutes. But many
will be of Opinion, that the inequality of Natural Days does much oppose this
Calculation; for the Apogaeums and Perigaeums teach us, that the daily Motion
in which the Sun returns from one Meridian again into it, is sometimes slower,
and sometimes swifter; and that the Anomalies of the Plane of the Ecliptic,
lying inclined to the Equator, may beget some difference of Ascensions; but as
these are very little every Day, and that we use only the Mean, we neglect such
a small Time as a thing of lesser Consequence; but when it is necessary we also
correct them by Tables of mean Motions made for this Purpose. The Companions of
our Journey know that these things are neither precariously asserted, nor
rashly related by me; and they can honestly certify, that I have often
mentioned this Certainty, not without Admiration; and I will show in the
following Problem, why I have been so long on this Subject, for the sake of
those who do not understand it; why the difference of Time in two distant
Places ought to be equal to the difference of Longitudes betwixt them.

Let P. be the Pole of the World in this Diagram, A. C. the Aequinoctial
Circle, G. E. some Paralle, B. S. the Meridian of Stockholm, D. T. the Meridian
at Torneo; therefore because the Sun, by its Diurnal Motion daily runs through
the Aequinoctial Circle, A. C. and in it every Hour spends 15 Degrees, and by
consequence 360 in its entire Circumvolution, in the space of 24 Hours. Let
these two Places in the Question Stockholm, S. and Torneo, T. be either of them
under their Meridians; now let there be taken out of that middle Map
aforementioned, the distance of these Places, 4. 50. when the Sun was in the
Meridian, D. T. it was 12 of the Clock at Torneo, 19 and 20, after that the Sun
comes to the Meridian at Stockholm, B. S. at which time it was Twelve a Clock
there; but at the same time at Torneo it was Twelve a Clock, 19 20, since
Torneo is more Easterly by so many Minutes than Stockholm; and therefore it is
manifest that the Arch B. D. and also every one of the Parallels with it to be
4. 50. and so much to be the difference of Longitude between Stockholm and
Torneo, therefore the Horary difference is equal to the difference of
Longitude, Q. E. D.

This is the true cause why those who go Westerly have longer Days than those
who go to the Eastward; for whosoever by going from the East to the West, after
some Days passes into a different Meridian, has a longer Day than if he had
stayed in the same Meridian; but it matters not whether the Latitude be the
same or different, because in every Latitude it is Noon when the Sun is in the
Meridian; wherefore those who go from Torneo to Stockholm have the Day of 24
Hours, and almost 20 Minutes; as on the contrary those who go from Stockholm to
Torneo lose so many Minutes in a whole Day.

It is manifest from their Journals, that these Variations was the greatest
admiration to the Spaniards and Portugueze; for these Sailing to the Philippine
Islands with an Easterly Course, almost a Semicircle, gained Twelve Hours of
the Europeans; but those with a Westerly Course had so many Hours of Day later.
Wherefore if two Ships Sailing out of the same Port, go to the same Places, by
contrary Courses, the one to the Eastward, and the other to the Westward,
having Sailed a Semicircle of the Earth, at their meeting, their Accounts do
differ a whole Day from one another; but having Sailed about the whole Earth,
at their return Home will find two Days difference in their Journals. It is
clear from Pliny, that the Ancients did not want this Knowledge, who proves it
by many Experiments. But especially that those who Sail to the Westward,
although on the Shortest Day, can Sail faster than those who Sail in the Night,
as having the Sun it self for their Companion.

I thought it necessary to Treat more largely of these very well known Matters;
not that I can, by my own Clocks, prove any certain Longitudes to be found out,
but that in Land Journeys, they may be this way most easily observed. But how
much we exceed the Skill of the Ancients in this Machine, no body is so
Ignorant in Letters as not to understand; for the Ancients had no other way of
distinguishing Times, but by Shadows, and Water-Glasses; the more ancient way
was used amongst the Chaldeans and Egyptians, and at last brought down to the
Greeks; but at Rome they Learned it latelier, as we may see by the same Plinius
Secundus: For Scipio Nasica first of all divided the Hours, as well of Nights
as of Days, and set up an Hourglass in his House in the Year, U. C. 595. which
falls out 155 Years before the Birth of our Savior. So long, says he, the
Romans had divisions of Time; but at length in Octavius Augustus's Time, the
manner of making Dials was taken from Vitruvius, which afterward made so great
Improvements, that now all Europe, which before had gotten the Victory from the
other Parts of the World (whose Inhabitants much admire the Industry of the
Europeans) daily strive amongst themselves by new Inventions of this Machine.

How great the Variation of the Needle is in these Northerly Countries is not
to be rashly determined; for we by a Meridian Line found in the Town of Torneo,
find its Declination from the N. to the W. to be about seven Degrees; for the
great incertainty of the Weather hindered us to determine it precisely, which
seldom permitted us to see the Light of the Sun, either before or after Noon;
and that scarcely except amongst the Clouds; so that a shadow could scarcely be
distinguished from a Penumbra; though it is to be confessed, that the time of the
Solstices is least fit for this purpose: For if that matter of moment is to be
sought either from the greatest height of the Sun, in which the Meridian Line
may be had exactly; or from an upright Gnomon perpendicularly erected, that
Observation may nevertheless be liable to Error, unless it be frequently
repeated in the same place, because the Shadows of the Sun nearest about Noon
are sensibly neither increased or decreased: The Sun however in the mean time
making its Progress in its own Parallel.

CHAP. III. Diurnal and Nocturnal Observations of the Sun.
BUT let us return to our Sun seen by Night; in consideration of which, the
chiefest part of our Labor was undertaken; in vain for some Nights did we
watch in the Observation of it; the Sky being always filled with Rain and
Clouds; but at length in the Night between the 10th and 11th of June, an happy
Season broke forth, which beyond our Expectation dispersed the former Clouds;
and that was the first opportunity we had to enjoy a clear Night; we therefore
saw three Parts (almost four) of the Suns Body above the Horizon, one fourth
only being under it; So that the Center of the Sun did really appear above the
Horizon: We therefore Congratulated our selves in the Affair, for a long time
believed, but before not usual to our Eyes. Being excited by that occasion, I
joyfully composed the Day after the following Epigram, before we proceeded any
further upon the Memory and Confirmation of the Royal Observation; and such as
it was, sent it to Stockholm, to the most Illustrious and excellent Count
Nicholas Guldenstolp, that so before our return, it might appear what might be
expected in that business.

Rex Carolus terras, quas Circulus Arcticus ambit,
Dum peragrat, proprias atque tuetur opes:
Miratur parere suis latissima sceptris,
Sol ubi continua lampade lustrat humum.
Hactenus and nostris haec sensibus invia, Princeps
Nullus, ait, Phoebum vidit inocciduum.
Substitit in votis Alphonsi gloria Regis;
Cur se perpetuo lumine jactat Iber?
Sobrietas sed enim, Pietas, vigilantia, cura,
Sufficient Carolo munera tanta Dei.
In our Observation we used the same Turret, in which His most Serene Royal
Majesty observed the Sun; but lest any one might think that small height to be
the reason why so much of the Sun was discerned, we chose a Place some Paces
from thence, not far from a Gallows, where there was a free Prospect from the
Northern Quarter; and there we found the Appearance to be no other, than out of
the Turret, being satisfied with this clear and distinct Observation when the
Sun was so very few hours from the Solstice, which on the following Day, June
the 11th. by an Astronomical Calculation falls out 9 h. 39 before Noon. And now
we thought it our business to prosecute our Journey farther to the Northward;
and to look out for a Place, where abating the Refraction, the whole Body of
the Sun might be discerned, since it was clear that all that which appeared
here of the Body of the Sun did appear by Refraction only; since beyond our
Opinion and Calculation, according to the late found out Elevation of the Pole,
more of the Sun it self was seen than ought to have been.

Daedalus, and fama est, fugiens Minoia regna,
Praepetibus pennis ausu^^^e credere coelo,
Insuetum per iter ge^^^as enavit ad Arctos.
So we likewise being to pass to the cold Northern Parts, did not trust to
swift Wings, but to Boats very slenderly fast'ned together; for from hence as
we go farther to the Northward, there is no more Use of Chariots, or Horses;
wherefore quitting our Journey by Land, we desired the help of Pilots, whose
Language we understood no more than those who are most ignorant of it; and
entering into their Boats, were to strive against the Stream of the River,
which would suffer us neither to row nor sail, but amongst Stones and Rocks
which lay in our way, which requires only a diligent help of Boats, Poles, and
strong Arms to make use of them: Thus our Seamen passed along the Banks of this
rocky River; and in some Places with their most vigorous Endeavors, they
seemed scarcely to get a Foot forward; and for several Hours to advance but so
many Paces; and sometimes by long bendings and turnings of the River they were
forced to go ashore, and hale their Boats out of the violence of the River,
where nothing else could be otherwise expected by Humane Assistance; but it
seemed very hard, and strangely unusual to us, that on the Bank-side there was
no room between the Thorns and Brambles, and heaps of Stones where we could set
our Feet; since being wearied with the Fatigue of this Haling, we attempted
rather to make our Journey a-Foot, and by that means make the Boat somewhat
quicker and lighter. And as an addition to these our Troubles, Mountains of Ice
of twenty Cubits and more being driven together by the force of the Waters,
covered both sides of the River, and they also so sloping and craggy, that
every moment we dreaded their fall, together with our own Ruin: Neither was
there any help for us, clinging constantly with the Poles of our Boats to the
Shore, had not God by his special Favor vouchsafed to avert the Mischief; but
if it did any where happen, that the course of these Mountains was interrupted
we joyfully leaped Ashore, admiring the Nature of the Country, which not
without great Pleasure to the Spectators, amongst Snows and heaps of Ice
produced green Herbs and Flowers, among which was a great plenty of the Lilies
of the Valleys.

Amidst these Wonders of Nature we looked for Men; and at length, as indeed we
met with very few Houses of the Finns, we were carried to a certain Countrymans
Cottage, which in their Language was called Pello. It Is said to be Ten old
Miles distant from the City Torneo; and there was an Inn in which we might lie
on Rain Dear Skins, for they make use of no other Bedding. However, amongst
other Inconveniences, this was our Comfort, that in the said place, neither
Mountains or Woods hindered our prospect from the Northern Board, whereby the
Sun might all Night be the less discerned; and it was a particular Gift of God
that the same Night was free from Clouds; since in our whole Journey we had
ever a doubtful and lowering Sky; therefore 'twas here that we beheld, with
much pleasure, the whole Body of the Sun, not only entire, but elevated more
than two Diameters of its Body; and when we had tried sufficiently in this
place, with no less difficulty we performed the rest of our Journey; and on the
14th of June we Arrived at the Workhouses of Iron and Copper at Kengis. That
Night likewise favored our purpose; and we saw the Sun from our Boats on the
River, three Diameters of its Body above the Horizon.

The Situation of this place is between the Confluence of both Rivers, whose
right Branch owes its rise to the Lakes, Streams, and Moorish Places in
Lapland, and thence from Swadawara, and perhaps further by several bendings
through Monier and Kengis; but the left is excluded from the Western side, and
the Lake Torn, situate almost in the Confines of Norway, and is here
precipitated with that violence through the tops of Mountains and broken Rocks,
that the fall of the Waters near these Workhouses for Metals, is esteemed to
be 36 Feet high, and that with extraordinary Noise, and vehement Impetuosity;
but it gives an excellent advantage to the said Workhouses, which are so
placed, that where the River has a turning to the Western Bank, it is not
restrained with the Wears, though they be of considerable bigness; nor can it go
over the top of them, but runs with a free Course, without any Cataracts to the
opposite Bank. On the 15th Day, being troubled with vehement Cold Winds, and
most boisterous Weather, we took the height of the Sun, amongst the
interspersed Clouds, with an Astrolabe; and at length, at Ten of the Clock 15
looking for its Altitude with an Astrolabe, the Calculation being taken off, we
guessed the Latitude of the Place to be scarcely more than 66 and 45, although
the Sun there in the Night Time shows it self so largely above the Horizon, and
makes its Day long enough, and with an ample Circuit. And here, when we were
designing to go further into Lapland, by the right Branch of the River, which
seems to lead strait to the Northward, the Inhabitants declared, that it was
not in the Power of Man to perform such a Journey in Summer; for all Journeys
into North Lapland ought to be made in Winter; but although the left side of the
River was alike open, as before for the Boats; yet it seemed to us to incline
too much to the Western Shore; so that it was of very little use to us, from
that side, to proceed one degree further; therefore supposing what we had
already found out to be sufficient for the Lovers of Astronomy; and considering
the account of our Time, because we were stinted to narrow Limits in the
Journey, and had not as yet performed all that was to be done, we resolved to
take our Course homeward. Tum vero nautae incumbunt, and littore parvas
Deducunt sur do naves; natat uncta carina.
At our going away we had great plenty of Metals, which with great Care are
drawn out of the Metallic Veins of Lapland; and those rich enough in Copper
and Iron, and yet not carried out without great Charges, and very mighty
Risques, through the Precipices of Waters (...)
(...).
And some pieces of the Magnet were presented to us, taken out of the same Iron
Mines, which we carried home with us. The Loadstones there have very little
force; and yet in one of them, which I still keep, I perceive it daily
increases, and I hope that they will augment in time, being armed.

Magnets are found in the Iron Mines of Sweden, and elsewhere; but those of
Lapland excel in Force all that ever I had the Fortune to meet with. I pass by
other things, which we saw, or were related to us, lest I should seem to give
an History of the People, which others have before written: And now being
gotten into our Boats, we no longer, as before with our Boat Poles and Spreads,
followed the Course of the Shore, but keeping the middle of the River, where it
was most Rapid; the Rowers doubling their Strokes, we strove at least to
emulate, if not to outdo, the swiftness of the Waters; this was absolutely
necessary, lest the Impetuosity being swifter than the Boats Course, should
fill our Boat with Water, and so drown it with its Waves, especially when the
Waters a head of us, being rolled with the greatest violence amongst the
sharpest Rocks, Whirlpools, and deepest Gulfs, returning with like force,
should meet the Head of the Boat, and so detaining it as it were in a
Whirlpool, should appear altogether to overset it. In these Streights we were
sensible Quantoque ratem qui temperat anteit
Remigis officium; quanto Dux milite major.
By so much more was the safety placed in the Pilots of our Boats; for they
Steered with that Skill amongst the unseen Shoals, that we were so amazed and
astonished, that when we were delivered from Dangers, we could scarcely believe
our selves to be in Safety; but their Art appeared still more, and especially
in some certain Places. Those that are the most Experienced in this Voyage will
witness, that there are some Precipices of this River, where the Boat is tossed
up into the Air for the space of some Feet, the Pilot Steering in the same
manner, until it is again in the Water. And this whole Voyage from Kengis to
the City Torneo, which flows with one continued Channel, receives 29 Rivers,
one of which makes a whole Swedish Mile in breadth; the other being less,
recompense their smallness by the violence and rapidity of their Waves. Neither
can they be passed at any time, except by the most able Boatmen of the Place;
and in one of the Rivers, although the Passengers are expert, yet they Hire an
Inhabitant to be Pilot, but which is wonderful, for two Farthings only,
venturing his Life; certainly a great hazard, as we have sometimes beheld from
the Shore with horror; but necessity imposed that Law on them, for this is the
King's Highway, and the only one for those who pass into Lapland for sometime
in the Summer; but the Inhabitants who dwell near the River side, and those but
very few, as they live for the most part by catching of Fish, never Inhabit in
any other place, since beyond the Shore side, for a long Tract, all the Lands
are uncultivated and horrid; and they are contented with a little Ground,
wherever any place is found fit to be sowed; neither do they break it up with
a Plough, or Plough with Oxen or Horses, but by digging and Spades temper and
bring the Soil into order by the Labor of their Hands. But at our return, we
were carried by so swift a Course, that we came from Kengis to Torneo, a Voyage
of 16 Miles, in less than a day and halfs time. There we immediately observed
the Diurnal and Nocturnal Sun, trying whether the Observations again made did
agree with the former; but because it was many Days after the Solstice, this
after Care was of little advantage. Having therefore once observed the Meridan
Altitude of the Sun on the 18th of the Month, we perceived it to have decreased
to 47. 45. and yet from the declination of that time gave the same elevation of
the Pole with our former Observations.

And now, Courteous Reader, you have wherewith you may exercise your Wit, by
enquiring into the true Causes of these Apparitions. We have given you
Materials, make use of them as seems fit to your Judgments; but by your leave
we interpose ours also, most freely suffering every one to abound in his own
sense. What therefore appertains to our Nocturnal Observations, and the true
ascension of the Sun above the Horizon, because it cannot be understood by all
without the premised Doctrine of Refraction, which is the most subtle part of
the Science of Optics, we will briefly lay down some things for the use of
Students, whereby they may with greater ease take our Demonstrations.

CHAP. IV. The Doctrine of Refraction.
MAny are the Arts and Sciences which owe their beginnings to Chance and
Fortune; which would be long and difficult to reckon, since their first
Originals are unknown, and their Progress made by little and little, which
renders us doubtful both of the Order and Manner in which they began. First of
all it is very certain, that we learn by Experience, that the Rays which
proceed from any visible Body, if they fall from a more dense Body upon a more
rare, or on the contrary (which Philosophers use to term a different Medium) at
this Entry the Ray proceeds no more strait forward, but is Refracted, and in
its passage gets another way different from the former. This Assertion is
proved many ways; but leaving the more subtle, we will explain it in a vulgar
way not unknown to all People. Let some bright Piece be put into an empty
Vessel, as Gold or Silver Money; whereby the splendid Ray may more easily
represent the image to the Eye; then let him that makes the Experiment go so
far from the empty Vessel that the Money being at the bottom is so covered with
the Edges of the Vessel, that it cannot be discerned, let him stay in that
place, and order Water to be poured out of another into this Vessel; which
being done, the Money will appear through the Water to him in that Posture,
being inconspicuous before; and that so much the higher as the Water is put in
in greater plenty, by which it may be understood, that this visive Ray between
the Money and the Eye is only Refracted in the highest Superficies of the
Water, since a right Ray cannot be carried to the Eyes, remaining in the same
Posture, from the Money, by the Opake sides of the Vessel: The reason is the
same, when an Oar seems to be broken in the Water, where no other Cause can be
given of this Fallacy of the sight, than the Inclination of the Ray of the
things seen, from that side in which it enters a different Medium. Wherefore
since the Solar Rays are right Lines, it is doubted, not without cause, if the
Sun, and other Lucid Bodies in Heaven, be any where or every where discerned in
their true places; but since it is for certain observed in the Eclipses of the
Luminaries, that the places of the hidden Bodies, both true and apparent, are
different not only by reason of the Parallaxes, but also Refractions, the
strongest Argument of Astronomical Truth, and besides, some other Observations
most deserving Credit, takes away all Doubts.

Since therefore, by consent of all Men, it is evinced, that the Air is nearest
the Earth, whose Particles going out from the Earth are the Causes almost of
all the Vicissitudes which happen to it from natural Motions; and we think do
scarcely exceed, or not much transcend, the highest tops of Mountains (and that
is it which we call the Atmosphere) but next to this the Aetherial Air
succeeds, diffused through the whole Universe, in which the Sun, and fixed
Stars, and all Planets are moved; and yet there is not the same tenuity and
purity of both of them: For the Aetherial Region (the spaces of Shadows which
proceed either from the Earth, the Moon, or Planets, or Comets excepted) is
wholly in the Rays of the Sun, and Stars; and is so splendid, that at Night its
splendour may be perceived by us, dwelling in the shadow of the Earth, although
the Interval betwixt us and the fixed Stars be inestimable, by which this
Splendour, with the difference also of Color, is transmitted to us, but is
always open to the Rays of them, except when it is obscured by the Atmosphere,
but the Air swelling with smoaky and thick Exhalations, drawn from the
Terrestrial Globe by the help of the Sun, and subterraneous Fire, according to
the measure of the Matter is sometimes thicker and sometimes thinner, both in
diverse, and in one and the same place, but at diverse times, to wit, that
Matter, being rarefied or compressed, which perpetually ascends from the Sea or
Earth, and its Superficies sometimes takes up a greater, sometimes a lesser
part of Ether, which Vicissitudes we prove by several Mechanical Instruments,
Hygrometrical and Barometrical, and from thence also determine its true
Altitude; and we daily perceive by the disposition of our Bodies (the sick and
weakly especially, and who have any crude Wounds, confirm this Truth more
certainly than any Almanac) that the Ray entering into the Atmosphere is
variously determined, nor cannot go forward in strait way, according to its
thickness and condensation, no otherwise than a Leaden-Ball obliquely shot into
the Water, on its Superficies, recedes from its first direction, losing some of
its strength in passing through a different Medium; or as a Nail driven through
two Boards, not contiguous enough, acquires one determination in the
intermediate Air at the end of one, and another at the entrance of the other
Board; these things being more largely Premised than was intended, we will, by
a rude Scheme, delineate the Refraction of the Sun.



Let T. be the Center of the Earth, O. the Eye on the Plane of the Earth, A. B.
C. the Superficies of the Atmosphere, where the more gross Air is separated
from the thinner Ether. E. D. G. the Orbit of the Sun. O. B. D. the right
Horizontal Ray to the Sun appearing in D. Now it is certain that no Celestial
Body can appear to the Eye, placed in O. before it shall come to the Point D.
And further, because Experience teaches us, that it appears below O. B. D. that
cannot be done except by a Ray Refracted; for this Ray would fall sooner on the
Unequal of the Earth's Globe, than upon the Horizontal Line O. B. D. and so that
Body would remain inconspicuous, the Ray S. B. falling from the Ether into a
more dense Medium, to wit, the Atmosphere A. B. C. is Refracted, and in one
part of it represents the Line B. O. when otherwise it would have been produced
to R. if the Medium had been the same, but not to the Eye, O. Hence it is
certainly concluded, that the Sun appears on the Earth, sometimes before its
Rising, when it seems to be discerned by us in an Horizontal Line, Q. E. D.

But because it is manifest, that the nature of Refractions is diverse, and that
the Rays falling perpendicularly upon the Superficies of a different Medium are
not Refracted, as if the Ray from E. should fall upon the Atmosphere A. it
reaches to the Eye O, directly and without any Refraction; but those which fall
obliquely, are by so much the more Refracted, by how much the more they recede
from the Perpendicular; hence it is manifest, that the Celestial Bodies,
nearer to the Horizon, appear under a greater Refraction, and therefore appear
higher than the more remote, which come nearer to the Perpendicular. Hence the
Rules of Refraction are by the Mathematicians derived to a certain Degree, for
the Sun and Moon, even to the Degree of 38 Altitude; but for the fixed Stars,
but to the Degree of 20. which Rules would never fail, if the disposition of
the Atmosphere was everywhere the same; but this variety is not in the least to
be neglected, because that Refraction cannot in all Parts of the Earth be
equal, but is found to be greater in places nearer to the Pole than that which
is in the more remote, which may be confirmed by the sole Experience of the
Hollanders; and that Example is wont to be produced, as most true, by all, even
the most excellent of Mathematicians, since there are but a few Observations in
places near to the Pole, which we may use in examining the Phenomenon; for the
Dutch Wintering in Nova Zembla saw the Body of the Sun above the Horizon, at
the time when it should have been four Degrees below the Horizon, which
certainly is a Paradox; for by this reason the Horizontal Refraction increased
too much beyond the quantity commonly allowed in the Tables of Refractions.

Very many therefore not undeservedly suspected this Observation of the
Hollanders, and yet they themselves are compelled to confess that those
Observers were Learned in Astronomy, so that they could not commit so great an
Error in their Observation. Certainly the exact noting of the Time by a
corrected Clock; and that hindered by the Frost, by an Hourglass of Twelve
Hours; as also the conjunction of the Moon and Jupiter, observed by them, by
which compared with Ephemerides, they found out the Longitude of the Place.
This they related more at large, say they, lest any should doubt of the Truth
of the Observations, since they all seemed to oppose the Opinion of the
Ancients and Moderns, the Order of Nature, the roundness of the Earth and
Heaven. From which the more celebrated Mathematicians gather, that Refractions
are greater or lesser in the very same Horizon, according to the density or
rarity of Vapors, and especially about the Northern side of the World, they
increase and augment by reason of the thicker Air. I shall not uneasily give my
assent to their Opinions; for in our Nocturnal Observation somewhat happened
altogether like it, for let the found-out Elevation of the Pole at Torneo, 65.
17. that being taken from a Quadrant 90. gives the Complement of the Elevation
of the Pole, 24. 17. now because the Observation was made about the time of the
Solstice, the Sun being in the beginning of Cancer, if the Declination of the
Ecliptic, which is commonly 23. 30. be taken from it, the residue will be 47
for the place of the Sun below the Horizon.



In ^ ^ L Q. be ^he M^ridian at (...) (...) this Diagram, P L. the Axis of the
World, AE Q. the Equator, H R. the Horizon, E C. the Eccliptick, the Angle P.
O. R. the Elevation of the Pole, R O Q. its Complement, C O Q. shall be the
Declination of the Eccliptick R O Q. -- C O Q. = R O C. that is to say, the
place of the Sun shall be 47 below the Horizon, Q E D.

Now because the Diameter of the Sun, at that time of the Year is supposed by
us, about 30. to which the Horizontal Refraction may be equal in the Opinion of
those who think the Tychonick Tables of Refractions are greater than they
ought, by reason of his assuming the Suns Parallax too bigg. Let it be either
by his Table, or that of Lansberg, 34 for the difference is small in either of
them, the Sun shall be still depressed below the Horizon, although it should
appear in its Center, being Elevated above the Horizon, three fourth Parts of
its Body, to wit, 22 30. Since therefore there is so great a difference between
Diurnal and Nocturnal Observation, it follows, that here the Horizontal
Refractions are far greater than in those Places where the foresaid Tables were
made; but to form an exact Rule for them is an hard Work, and of no few Years,
as we learn from Tycho's Tables, composed by a long use from the Risings,
Sittings, and Culminations of the fixed Stars.

And further it appears from this our Observation, that they who place Torneo
beyond the 66 Degree of Latitude are mistaken. For if it be laid down to be
only 66 30. then 66 30. = 90 -- 23 30. But when this number is the Declination
it self of the Eccliptick, by this Hypothesis the Sun will also be Elevated one
half above the Horizon, without Refraction, when its Center is in the Horizon
it self; but adding the usual Refraction, the inferior Limb will be Elevated
at Torneo, above 19 which yet contradicts Observations.

In the little Cottage Pello, where we saw the Sun at Night two Diameters, or
60 Minutes above the Horizon, by Tycho's Rule of Refractions, which makes the
Refraction 34 in the Horizon, and in one Degree above the Horizon 26, it is
easily concluded, that the Sun is discerned in its whole Body without
Refraction, for the Sun being elevated two Diameters or 60 Minutes above the
Horizon, its Center will possess 45. But in that Altitude let the Refraction be
proportionable to 34 and 26 or 30= to the Diameter of the Sun, therefore its
lower Limb will appear without Refraction 15 above the Horizon; but if we
assume, as it is fit, a greater Refraction some Particles of the Solar Body
will also be elevated in this place by Refraction: But at Kengis, where it was
discerned in three Diameters of its Body, it appears by what has been
demonstrated, that the Sun was seen without any Refraction at all, to which end
we are willing to delineate in one Scheme, the Nocturnal Observations, which we
had at that Season in three Places, that the inexperienced in Mathematics may
judge more rightly of them, and understand their true and genuine Sense.

Let T. be the Globe of the Earth, B F G. the Horizontal Line, K A B C I. the
Suns Orbit, F E D H. the Quadrant of the Atmosphere, G. the Eye in an
Horizontal Plane, C D G B E G. A E G. the Refracted Rays, A G F. the Angle of
47 Minutes, the rest successively lesser; for the first of the Sun observed at
Torneo is under the greatest Refraction; the second at Pello a little less; the
last at Kengis, least of all; whence it follows, that the Sun seen by Refracted
Rays in the Points A. B. C. does not make the Lines F A. E B. D C. drawn from
the Points of Refractions Parallel, further it is clear that the Sun at Torneo
in D. was below the Horizon by Refraction at A. but being Refracted at Pello
from E. to B. some part of its Body was really still beneath the Horizon,
although it appeared two Diameters, or a whole Degree above it in E. Lastly,
being Refracted at Kengis from F. to C. it was really above the Horizontal
Line; the Experience of the Inhabitants confirms this Opinion, who there also,
for the first Days of July, confess that the Sun sets not; which Argument I do
not bring, but only as probable; for it is known from the foresaid Observation
of the Hollanders in Nova Zembla, that they in the same Altitude did not yet
see the Sun for so many Days after it ceased to rise; and therefore this
appearance might be drawn from the thickness of the Air; for (as different
Liquors make different Refractions, and a greater plenty also of them increases
the Refraction) a more rare or more dense will make a diversity of Refractions.
How much the Hollanders admired this, their Words prove in their Voyage to the
Northward, on the 24th Day of January, 1597. but, say they, as for what relates
to the Matter it self, as God is wonderful in his Works, so we refer it to his
Omnipotence, and leave it to be discussed by others, viz. That the Sun under
the foresaid Altitude of 76 Degrees disappeared to us on the fourth of
November, and on the 24th of January was again seen by us. For the rest, there
is no doubt but a right Judgment may be made Astronomically from the Altitude
of the Sun of its stay above the Horizon, even not attending to Refractions,
which alike dispatch this business; although in the determination of Climates, I
do not still deny that it is Controverted amongst the Mathematicians, whether
any notice is to be taken of Parallaxes and Refractions, some asserting, and
others denying it. But waving these things, and neglecting Refraction, the
longest Day in Kengis is found to be of about 30 of our Days, by the sole
Calculation of Climates.

In this Diagram, let the Pole be A, the Elevation of it A. B., B. C. the last
Parallel in which the Sun is carried above the Horizon; H. I. the Equator B.
N. the Horizon, B. L. H. the Angle of the Complement, E. L. of the Pole, E. F.
the Tropic of Cancer, G. K. the Tropic of Capricorn, E. G. the Eccliptick, D.
the Point where the Eccliptick cuts the Parallel B. C. which Arch being
doubled, gives the place in which whilst the Sun tarries, by ascending to the
Tropic, and again descending to the Parallel, it does not reach the Horizon,
but that whole Line will not set.

The reason is the same of any place within the Arctick Circle, according to
its different Latitude, even to the Arctick Pole, that the Sun Yearly does not
rise or set for some Days; and by so much the more as the Places are nearer to
the Pole; so that in the place of the Pole it self it does not set for an whole
half Year, and does not rise all that time in the place opposite to it, but in
the furthest places follows the Course of the Tropicks; for the Sun being in
the beginning of Cancer, as it does not set there, so in the beginning of
Capricorn it does not rise, but only sweeps the Horizon; but it will rise or
set in all other Points of the Eccliptick, all which may be easily understood
from what is before said.

CHAP. V. Of the Constitution of the Frigid Zone.
LAstly, We must not omit, that all the time we were at Torneo, and the further
places, we were Periscii; for so long as the Sun did not set to us, the Shadow
was carried about into all Parts; and the Sun being in the upper Semicircle of
the Meridian, it was extended toward the North; but being in the lower toward
the South, but in so little an Elevation of it to the North, the Light of the
Sun could not show the Hour of the Night on our Dials: Without doubt as well by
reason of the Parallelism, with the place of the Dial, because it was scarce
above its Plane; as also because of the thicker Vapors about the Horizon.
There is some difference between Observations made at Land and at Sea; so that
even they who are in a less Latitude of place, see the Sun all the Night, which
very many Inhabitants of Western Bothnia confirm to be true to their Knowledge,
in the Cities of Bithea and Buhlea, and other Maritine Places; for besides
that, the Horizon seen upon the Waters is even, being hindered by no
Inequalities, which at Land the Mountains or Trees use to make. I also think,
that Reflection comes nearest to Refraction, which being joined in a double
manner, represents the Species of the Solar Body, no otherwise than happens in
Looking-Glasses, where the first Reflection without Refraction, is made in the
polished Superficies of the Glass, but the other in the bottom of it, in its
filed bottom, but with Refraction; which Composition, except you take heed,
shows to you one thing sometimes falsely, under a double Image, or somewhat
greater than it should be; and further, many things may be Objected about the
Maritine Observations of Peasants; and we very often want the Confirmation of
Fishermens Sayings, who being accustomed to spread Probabilities for
Certainties, sometimes both egregiously deceive, and are deceived; yet we will
admire it the less, because Mathematicians, as well in their Celestial as
Terrestrial Observations have something that is Human in them.

In the Frigid Zone, and its Neighborhood, the stay of the Sun above the
Horizon, brings this Advantage to the Inhabitants, that the Corn in those
Places ripens in a short time; for as we have heard from the Husbandmen in
fertile and fruitful Years, not above six or seven Weeks are required amongst
them, from the time of Sowing their Corn until Harvest, we made no difficulty
to suffer our selves to be persuaded of it, when the first Sower, as we went,
was in the City Torneo, and the Barley sown in the beginning of June, or the
16th Day of the same Month, was grown beyond Expectation; and the Grass, which
as we passed by some places of Western Bothnia, in the beginning of June, had
scarcely come out of its Stalk, at our return, after four Weeks was Mowed. But
this Advantage is followed by another Disadvantage; for the Corn is liable to
much danger from the Cold, in this so short a space of time; for if it do but
happen about the time when it ripens, or when they hope it should ripen, that
the Dew or Frost falls upon it in the Morning, it hurts the Grain, and wholly
destroys it, which Mischief they cannot otherwise prevent, than by cutting the
Corn unripe, before it so suffer. Even then they did conjecture, that they
should experience this Year the same Damage, not without the greatest prejudice
to them; and the event showed that they were not False Prophets; for although
they saw the Cold to be near, yet the Corn was not then come to that Maturity,
as it could be exposed to any inconvenience by the violence of the Cold Weather.

But here is one thing which I would have my Courteous Reader to observe, that
the Nature of these Northern Countries is not altogether to be estimated from
the Intemperateness of this Year, for the present Year exceeds all others that
are past in the Memory of Man, for the severity of the Season; and there are
very long lived Men in those Places, who sometimes live to an Hundred and more
Years; but not one to be found amongst them who could testify that Thunder is
so much as once heard in the Year, and especially in the middle of April, which
now happened and seemed to presage something unusual: And it is very
remarkable, that when our most Serene King went to see these Places, the Year
before, the Inhabitants never saw a more pleasant Time, as if the Countenance
of Heaven was composed for Mirth, the Lord of the Country being present.

As for what concerns the Islands of the Bothnick Sea, they underwent a
different Fortune; for as we went from Torneo, to the Parish Calix, in our
Voyage on the 19th of June; at our Arrival at some little Islands, we there
perceived that the Soil was not yet freed from Cold; nor did the Birch-Trees,
which are very many, in that place, show any sing of Greenness; when yet in
other Places beyond Sea, they abounded with their ripe and full grown Leaves;
and we know, that this is not also unusual in other Countries, since in Japan,
whilst the sharpest Winter continues, and the Snows and Rains continually fall,
other Countries of Asia and Europe, situated under the same Climate, are not
sensible of the same hardness of Winter.

And Nova Albion being situated about Forty Two Degrees North Latitude, when
Drake the Englishman first Arrived there, he found the Mountains covered with
Snow; and the English were so troubled with Cold in the Month of June, that
they were forced to go from it. Other Islands also lying in the Ocean, are
reported to be liable to these Inconveniences.

At Night, between the Nineteenth and Twentieth Day we saw the Sun setting in
Calix at Eleven a Clock and Twelve Minutes, though the Horizontal Plane, by
reason of that unequal part, in which it looks to the North, scarcely permitted
us to determine its true setting. We tried the next Day to take the height of
the Sun; but this hope vanished amongst the Clouds. As much as we can judge
from our Journey, and the Sun's setting, the Latitude of that place can differ
but little from Torneo, since the Church in Calix, where the Observation was
taken, seems to be situate directly to the Westward of it.

CHAP. VI. The Latitudes of Places observed in our Return.
ON the 21st we observed in the Old Town Luhlea, the Meridian Altitude of the
Sun, and thence gathered the Latitude of the Place to be 65 Degrees, and 25
Minutes. And the Declination of the Magnet from the North to the West, to be
about Six Degrees. That City was founded in the Year M DC XX II. where there is
still an Old Church, yielding to none in that Country, for Structure and
Largeness; but for a more convenient Situation New Luhlea was Built nearer to
the Sea, in the Year M DC XL II. but by the Carelessness of the Laplanders,
kindling a Fire in the Neighboring Wood, was Five Years after, together with
the Wood, destroyed by Fire; nor was it Rebuilt more Fortunately after; for in
the Year MDCLIII. it was again ruined by an accidental Fire, and from those
Ruins, became such an one as we now see it.

On the 24th, in the Old City Bithea, we in vain hunted after the Meridian
Altitude of the Sun, the Sky being thick set with Clouds, wholly hindering our
Design; and therefore we went the next Day into the Neighborhood, to search
for it. This Old City was Built in the Year M DC XX I. but after it was
casually by Fire reduced into Ashes in the Year M DC LX VI. for some time the
Rebuilding of it was deferred, until some fresh Privileges and Immunities being
granted by His Most Serene Royal Majesty, they might undertake the Business.
But the New City then beginning to be Built, is distant half a Mile from the
Old, being situated nearer to the Sea, for a more convenient Port, and
convenience of exporting Merchandises.

The next Day, in the Parish of Schelefta, near to the Church, we observed from
the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, the Latitude of that place to be 64 37 and
the variation of the Needle to be equal to the former.

On the 26th and 27th Days we did nothing, the Air being Cloudy, nor was there
any thing which deserved the noting; except only that the Church of the Parish
Bygde, seems to be the most ancient of all the Churches of the Norlands,
provided the Inscription which appears in the Front of the Church, be genuine,
and sets down the Year of Christ, 1169. Yet the Chronicle of those Times takes
away the doubt, which clearly show, that it was Founded under the Reign of St.
Erice, at which Time Religious Worship, although Infected with Old Popery, made
extraordinary Progress; And besides, there was the Picture of a certain
Religious Person which was placed in a Wood half a Mile and more from thence;
where formerly those who were Remote from Church, are said to have met together
to Prayers, on Holy Days; but after the most happy Times of Religion being
purged from the Heresies of Papists, as that sort of Worship ceased in our
Country, so the Picture was laid up in a certain place of the Temple, in
detestation of the Memory of that Matter.

On the 28th in Uhma, near the Old Temple, we observed the Meridian Altitude of
the Sun, to be 48 38. And thence we computed the Latitude of the place to be 63
48 but the variation of the Needle not different from the former. That City is
situated in a more convenient place toward the Sea, and is the first and
chiefest of Western Bothnia; in which also is the Seat of the Governor of that
Province.

On the 29th leaving that Place, and going through the Borders of Western
Bothnia, which although it be more Northerly, yet is happy in a more convenient
Soil than the Countries next to the South, which abound in Mountains, and give
place to it in Fruitfulness; but the Mountain Scula in Angermannia, is Famous
before all others, very craggy and broken, threatening Ruin, as it were to all
who pass by it, for it is very near to the Highway. Many Stories are vulgarly
reported about it, which relish only of Gentilism. Their only chief City is
Hernosand, being furnished with a most convenient Haven, and is situated in the
Island, where the Seat of the Super-Intendant is, and the Royal-School, the
Seminary of the Youth of Norland. We stayed there three Days, hoping to find
the Elevation of the Pole; but this stay was to no purpose, as in several other
Places, by reason of the Rains, and the Sky being covered with perpetual Clouds.

On the 7th. of July in the Town Medelpadia Sundswald, we endeavored to find
the Latitude of the Place; but Heaven also opposed it. When therefore all
things seemed to thwart our Labors, which we could not stick long to in one
Place for our other Affairs; yet we still continued two days not far from this
City in an Inn near the Church Niurunda, a Place fit for Observations,
expecting but with lost labor the Light of the Sun; and this is the reason why
at no Place in Angermannia or Medelpadia we made Observations.

On the 10th. of July, coming to Helsingland, first we sought for the Sun's
height in Hudwikswald, a neat City of that Country conveniently situated near
the mouth of the Sea; but without any Success, by reason of the imminent
Tempest.

After that, on the 11th. day, we at length found the Elevation of the Pole to
be 61 12 in another City of that Country, called Soderhamn, in a famous Armoury
built there. Thence by a crooked way, going to the Copper and Iron Mines, in
our Passage we first observed the Elevation of the Pole of the City Gefle,
being in the County of Gestrefland, 11 miles from Upsal, and is famous for
being the Seat of the Governor of that Country; and having a Royal School, the
Altitude was 60 31.

On the 13th. at our coming into Dalecarle, or the mountainous Country, the
Elevation of the Pole was found at our Inn Lomsheden, to be a little greater
than before, by reason of our Journey's bending to the Northward, viz. 60 41
going thence through the Parish of Dalicarton Swerdsio, whose Church was first
beautified with a Monument of a gilded Crown, by King Gustavus of most Glorious
Memory: Some Antiquities were produced here by the Inhabitants; let those who
please believe them in a Matter so dubious, and not confirmed by any ancient
Monuments.

On the 14th. we came to the City Fahlun, very famous and eminent for being the
Seat of the Governor of that Country; and especially being the richest in
Copper Mines, of so great Antiquity, that the Original of it is very uncertain
and doubtful. From this City which we arrived at with so many Windings and
Turnings, we did not think it convenient to depart without an Observation;
therefore staying there six days before the Sky was as agreeable as we wished,
at last the grateful Light shone forth on the 20th. of July, by help of which
we found the Meridian Altitude of the Sun, and by it the Places Latitude to be
60 32; and therefore perceived this City to lie almost in the same Latitude as
Gefle.

After that designing to bring our Journey to an end. (without any Observation
because of Showers and Storms) we passed the several Cities of Westmanland and
Hedenore, so well known for its Merchandise, Agriculture, and Fairs; and then
Afwestafors famous for Copper Mines of several sorts, and coining of Moneys;
and then to Soleburg a very noble Place, and celebrated for one of the most
precious and ancient Mines of Silver.

Happily returning to Upsal on the 24th. of July, the Situation and Antiquities
of which City being described by others, are well known to all People; but the
Elevation of that Place's Pole is 59 54 for ten Years, and more at several
times observed by me, and the Variation of the Compass about eight degrees.

Because we were sensible at our return, that our most Serene King was at
Kongsor, to Review his Army, to whom we were to give an Account of our
Expedition, we thought fit to wait on His Most Serene Royal Majesty there; and
therefore setting our Affairs in Order in two Days, on the 27th we passed through
the City Enecopia in Upland, and the Cities of Arosia, Koping, and Westmanland.

On the 28th we came to Kongsor, in that most pleasant place of Sudermanland,
to the Latitude of 59 34. situated by a most pleasant River, where it empties
it self into the Lake Galtem, and Malaren.

His Most Serene Royal Majesty received us at our Coming with a singular
Clemency; and as we gave him that Account of the demanded Expedition, hearkened
to us with a Countenance full of Grace and Majesty; and the Most Serene
Hereditary Prince, and some of the King's Council, and great Ministers of State
being present, He enquired much about our Demonstrations; and would have the
Reasons of the most minute Matters laid before him; but we wondered at nothing
more, than that the Most Serene King being loaded with such a weight of Empire,
and perplexed with infinite Cares, should, of all the things which he saw or
heard the Year before, in the Northern Countries, forget nothing; so that we
but just returning from those Places, and doing no other Business, did not seem
to have a fresher Memory of Things, Events, Places, Persons, and of the Names
of Towns and Houses, which we beheld as if we were present, being just come
from our Journey, and Instructed with our Journals; but what need of our
Testimony in a Thing so well known in our Country? Those whom God has Exalted
upon Earth to so high a Place, he has thought fit to endue with Divine Gifts;
which certainly He has bestowed with a full Hand on our Most Gracious Monarch.

The next Day being dismissed most favorably by His Most Serene Royal Majesty,
we heartily Rejoiced that we had obtained the height of our Wishes, that our
slight Labors seemed not to displease our Most Gracious Master; and now having
dispatched this Business, every one went to his own Home.

Homer relates of his Ulysses; (...).


But who can believe that we traversed so many Cities in this Journey; and
Northerly waste Part of Sweden; going no more than Five Miles beyond Kongsor,
through Holmia, before we came to Upsal. We saw besides the said Cities Orebro,
Arboga, Torshella, Strangnans, Mariefred, Sodertelus, and Stockholm. So that in
all we passed through Twenty Four of them in a direct way.

CHAP. VII. The Figure of the Earth, Variation of the Needle, and difference of
Refractions under the Pole and Equator.
NOW although in this Journey, but a little may seem to be Remarked, which may
please a Curious Reader; yet there are some Things, which amongst Just and
Learned Critics, will at least Excuse, if not Commend our Labor; for as to
what concerns Chorography, that by Command of His Most Serene Royal Majesty, is
described with the greatest Care, by the Surveyors of those Countries, who for
some Time had the Charge of it. The Antiquities of the s^veral Provinces are
not slightly discussed by the mo^^ Learned Antiquaries of ^^e Kingdom,
therefore Astronomy was only our Point, in which if we have performed nothing
else, we have really shown, that all those Places in which we made
Observations, being laid down too much to the Northward, both in our Maps and
Charts, ought to be more Southerly. And this very Thing has been before
observed by those who Sail to the Northern Parts about the Promontory of the
Northern Cape; which in their Opinion is more Southerly, than is described in
the Geographical Tables.

As for the variation of the Compass, although by reason of the Imped^ments
before expressed, we could not describe it so exactly as we ought; yet we may
assert for certain, that in all those Places we had the Fortune to go to, it
was never found less than Six Degrees, which Experiment may be serviceable to
Posterity who may observe the Constancy of its Declination; for it is very
probable and agreeable to Natural Causes, that its Declination is changed with
the Time; as the Experiments and Observations of Mathematicians made in very
many places, many Years since, do abundantly teach us.

There yet remained one thing which rendered us very sollicitous, though in
vain, of which we conceived an ample Hope at our departure, viz. That in these
more Northerly Voyages, an occasion is given of enquiring into the true Figure
of the Earth, which although no Body who has a sound Head, at a Time of so great
an Improvement of Mathematics, will make to be Triangular or Cubical, since
the Superficies of the Water and Earth returning into it self has long proved
it to be Gibbous. Yet since there are sundry sorts of Gibbous which arise from
a Cone or Cylinder, if it goes from a Circular, it is doubted to which of these
it is to be chiefly referred.

We have spoke before of the Experience of Sailors, to whose Credit and
Relations we owe the asserting the Roundness of the Earth, but only to convince
the obstinate Heads of some People, who trust more to their Senses than
Understanding. For Mathematicians have demonstrated this very Thing many Years
ago, by other, and those most evident Reasons.

All know the Story that Ferdinand Magellanus Sailing out of Spain toward the
West, and having passed the Atlantic Sea, by a strait he sound out, got into
the Eastern Ocean, and by that way came to the Moluccos Islands; in which
Voyage, when he had sufficiently viewed enough that Country, he might have
returned by the same way: But not contented with that Experiment, he went
farther to the West, by a direct continued Course; at length returning as it
were out of the East, by the Indian Ocean, and Atlantic; and lest any should
think, that the Face of the Continent is different from that of the Waters, let
him consider, that the Ocean is distinguished by Lands, from the East to the
West; and on the contrary, by Seas betwixt them; and again, slowing into the
Northern Land, above and below Tartary, whence arise so many Continents as if
they were Islands, scarcely cohereing any where by the most narrow Isthmus
which every where almost have the same height. For here is no Controversy
about the Mountains or higher Places in the Earth, which no more hinder its
being round, than the small Inequalities in an Apple; since we will grant to
any, that its Superficies is not most exactly round; for Nature seldom makes
Mathematical Circles in its Motion; but if the Motion of the Sun were
altogether Sphaerical near the Equator, which we know to be inequal, although it
is supposed to be equal; for the Earth is not the Center of that Motion; yet
would it not follow, that a Sphere is formed by Motion, equally near the Poles,
as the Equator; for the Experience of Artists shows, that Cups turned, may
imitate another Figure than Spherical.

It is not to no purpose therefore, that some in this Age doubt whether the
Earth be equally Spherical near the Poles as the Equator. Some of the Reasons
which John Childrey brings in his Britannia Baconica, for the Oval Figure of
the Earth, are not to be despised; although we do not much approve of that which
is brought from the Snows being gathered together in a great heap near to the
Poles, ever since the Creation of the World.

It is certainly true, that in Lapland very old Snows, of many Years standing,
are found in the Valleys between the Mountains; as may be gathered from their
outward Coat Yearly remaining: And yet, no doubt, some of this Heap is Yearly
dissolved into Water. But those heaps of Snow make no more for taking away the
Roundness of the Earth, than the Risings of those Mountains we before
mentioned; but besides, if this was true, there ought to be the same Accession
of Snow every where about the whole Globe of the Earth, which the Industry of
those who going to Eighty Degrees Latitude, sound Mountains crusted with Ice in
that Sea: Though in time dissolvable by the violence of a Tempest, forbids us to
assert of Maritime Places.

Better Arguments might be brought from the Diurnal Motion, and the Nature of
Celestial Vortices, which peradventure would produce some variety in a
Spherical Figure; so that this Hypothesis should not seem to be altogether
neglected, especially since amongst Oval Figures, by reason of the small
difference of Diameters, almost Parallel at the Section of a Cone or Cylinder,
they do not much differ from the Figure of a Circle. Caspar Eisenschmit has
therefore confirmed this Argument with great probability, and illustrated it
with the Demonstrations that were needful. Of which at present we must say no
more, since it requires a separate Work and Demonstration assuredly. In our
Journey we long sought after some places of the Earth, situate in some Plain,
stretching from South to North, by advantage of which we might Be more certain
of the true measure of Degrees in Northern Latitudes, and by comparing them
with the more Southerly, collected by the Pains of others, we also might give
our Judgment of the Figure of the Earth; but the steep tops of Mountains, the
Moorish Grounds, and inaccessible Woods, rendered our Desires unsuccessful.

Lastly, We hope that this our little Work will not be unacceptable to
Mathematicians abroad; though it were only for that Doctrine of Refractions,
lightty attempted; from which occasion, they will not disapprove of our Opinion
to make Tables of them in the several Parts of the World. For as we do not at
all doubt that they increase according to the different Account of Elevations
in places nearer to the Poles; so in those placed in the Equator, and next to
it; if there shall be any Refractions, we believe they will be very little. And
from hence, when the Reason is asked, why the Polar Stars are not seen by those
who Sail under the Aequinoctial; and yet it is probable, that the Stars placed
in the Equator may be discerned from the Poles, if there was any Observer. We
think that, amongst other Reasons, this of Refractions is not of the least
Moment.

And if it be true which Mandeslo asserts in his Travels, in the Thirteenth
Chapter, that he saw not the Arctick Pole, except beyond the Sixth Degree, on
this side of the Equator; but the Antartick beyond the Eighth. It follows,
besides other Reasons, that the Refraction from the Northern Part of the Earth;
is greater than from the Southern, To Confirm which, we could bring many
probable Arguments, if the Matter was to our purpose.

(...).
(...).
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Edward Castle NEAR WHITE HALL.
I. THe Whole Works of that excellent Practical Physician, Dr. Thomas Sydenham.

II. An Epitomy of the whole Practical part of Physic, contained in the Works
of the Learned Dr. Willis. With a Treatise of the Plague, its Nature and Cure,
etc.

III. A Letter to the Deists.

IV. A List of all the Offices and Officers of England, both Civil and
Military, in Church and State. With a Table for finding out any Office or
Officer therein.

V. Contemplations Moral and Divine. By Sir M. Hale, Knight, Late Lord Chief
Justice of the King's Bench.

VI. A Letter to the Right Reverend Edward Lord Bishop of Worcester, concerning
some Passages relating to Mr. Locke's Essay of Humane Understanding. In a late
Discourse of His Lordship's, in Vindication of the Trinity. By John Lock, Gent.

VII. Mr. Locke's Reply to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of Worcester's
Answer to his Letter, concerning some Passages relating to Mr. Locke's Essay of
Humane Understanding. In a late Discourse of His Lordship's in Vindication of
the Trinity.

VIII. A Treatise of the Causes of Incredulity: Wherein are Examined the
General Motives and Occasions which dispose Unbelievers to Reject the Christian
Religion. With two Letters, containing a direct Proof of the Truth of
Christianity. Translated from the French of Monsieur Le Clerc.

IX. An Abridgement of Mr. Locke's Essay concerning Humane Understanding.

X. The Reasonableness of Christianity, as it is delivered in the Scriptures.
The Second Edition. To which is added, A Vindication of the same from Mr.
Edward's Exceptions.

XI. A Second Vindication of the Reasonableness of Christianity. By the Author
of the Reasonableness of Christianity.

XII. The Christians Pattern, or a Divine Treatise of the Imitation of Christ.
Written in Latin by Thomas of Kempis, above 200 Years since. 8.

XIII. Historia Nuperae rerum mutationis in Anglia, in qua Res a Jacobo Rege,
contra Leges Angliae, and Europae Libertatem, and ab Ordinibus Angliae contra
Regem patratae, duobus Libris recensentur. Authore E. Burridge, A. M.


