A Lamentation OVER ENGLAND AND Faithful Warning To the Inhabitants thereof.

By William Bingley.

Amos 8. 10. And I will turn your Feasts into Mourning, and all your Songs into
Lamentation; I will bring up Sackcloth upon all Loins, and Baldness upon every
Head, and I will make it as the Mourning of an only Son, and the end thereof as
a Bitter Day. Jer. 6. 10. To whom shall I speak and give Warning, that they may
hear? Behold, their Ear is Uncircumcised, and they cannot hearken; behold, the
Word of the Lord is unto them a Reproach, they have no delight in it, etc.
LONDON: Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at the Sign of the Crooked-Billet in
Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, 1682.

FIrst, A Lamentation over England, and the Dominions thereunto belonging, with
a faithful Warning to the Inhabitants thereof, to cease from the evil of their
Doings, and to turn unto the Lord by speedy Repentance, that so they may escape
the dreadful Judgments of Almighty God, which are threatened and ready to be
executed upon them, because of the Crying Sins that do abound in Nations.

Secondly, A Warning to the Rulers and Magistrates (in particular) to leave off
persecuting and afflicting the Innocent; and to amend their Lives and
Conversations, and set up Justice and execute true Judgment among the People,
lest God plead with them in his Anger, and consume them in his sore Displeasure.

Thirdly, An Expostulation with the Clergy of the aforesaid Dominions, whereby
they are discovered not to be in the Steps, Lives and Practices of the Prophets
of God, true Ministers of Christ, but of the false Prophets, and of Antichrist.

Fourthly, A Warning to those among them, whose Day of Mercy is not over, to
Repent of these their Wicked and Antichristian Practices, whereby they deceive
the People, or else the Lord will make them a Hissing and a Reproach to the
Nations, and their Memorial a Stink to Generations to come, etc.

A Lamentation over England, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
OH England! England! the Land of my Nativity, for whom my Soul has often
mourned, and at this time mourns before the Lord, and my Spirit is grieved
within me, to behold so much Wickedness, Ungodliness, Oppression, and
Abomination as at this day abounds in thee! A Nation to whom God Almighty has
signally appeared, and been at work in by his mighty Arm and divine Power; and
the proffers of Love and Mercy from the God of Mercies have been to thee, and
the Lord has long waited to be gracious and merciful to thee, and has
extended one Visitation after another unto thee, and has many a time sought
thy Inhabitants in tender yearning Bowels of Love.

But notwithstanding all these Mercies, and tender Dealings of the Lord with
you the Inhabitants of England, how have you continued in your Sins and
Transgressions against the Lord, that has thus sought your return to him, that
he might have mercy on you! And when Intreatings and yearning Bowels would not
draw nor prevail upon you (to restrain you from your evil courses, and to bring
you to Amendment of Life) he has threatened Judgment, and also many times
executed it upon thy Inhabitants, O England! and has showed his Displeasure
against you many a time: But neither Mercy nor Judgment, Smiles nor Threats
have taken place among many of thy Rebellious and Gainsaying Inhabitants. For
though the Lord has often entreated, and his Arm of everlasting Mercies have
been stretched out to you, as it was to Israel of Old; and as they rebelled
against the Lord, who would have gathered them, even so have you refused to
hearken to him, and to Forsake the Evil of your Ways, and to turn to the Lord
God, who would have saved you from the Wrath and fierce Vengeance that is
coming upon the Rebellious.

And though he has pleaded with you in Judgment, and has manifested his
Displeasure and Wrath in the midst of thy Inhabitants, (though always mixed
with Mercy) and showed them that he can do whatsoever he will; For who can
withstand him in his great Power? seeing the Nations are but as the drop of a
Bucket before him, and as the small Dust in the Balance; for he has
overturned on one Hand, and overturned on the other Hand, in the sight of many
of you who are yet alive; and has brought down the Mighty from their Seats
(who exalted themselves against the Lord, and against the Innocent) and has
exalted them of low degree; and when they did not answer the End, for which the
Lord God appeared on their behalf, but rebelled against the living God, who had
scattered their Enemies before them, the Hand of the Lord also turned against
them, and confounded them, and broke and scattered them, and has blown them
away with the Breath of his Mouth, as the Chaff of the Summer-threshing-Floor.

And yet all these Revolutions and Overturnings, which the Lord has brought to
pass in the sight of many of you the Inhabitants of England, and his pleadings
with you in Judgment, time after time with Sword, with Pestilence and Fire, and
many other dreadful Judgments, which have been both threatened and executed in a
dreadful manner; yet have not many of thy Inhabitants bowed themselves to the
Lord, who has thus appeared, nor feared before this dreadful God, who will be
revealed in flames of Fire, taking Vengeance on the Rebellious and Gainsayers
of the Gospel of his Son; but have grieved and provoked him by your Wickedness
and Ungodliness from day to day.

And when the Lord has sent his Servants and Messengers to you, who have
faithfully reproved Sin in the Gate, and wherever it appeared; and have cried
unto you, To break off from your Sins and Transgressions by true Repentance and
Godly Sorrow, for your Sins, and to Amend your Lives and Conversations, and to
turn to God with all your Hearts, and to put away the Evil of your doings from
before the Eyes of the Lord, and to cease to do Evil, and learn to do Well;
that so the Lord (according to his Promise) might have blotted out your Sins,
and remembered your Transgressions no more, that Rest and Peace with the
everlasting God might have been known to your immortal Souls forever and ever.

But all these Labors of Love, and yearning Bowels, with which you have been
sought both by the Lord, and also by his Servants (who have risen early, and
traveled with their Lives in their Hands, and have earnestly desired your
turning to the Lord) have been slighted, and set at naught by you: Neither have
you turned from the Evil of your ways at all, but like Jerusalem of Old, (whom
the Lord would have gathered) have rejected the Reproofs of the Spirit and
Grace of God in your selves, and are doing Despite to the Spirit of Grace, by
which you should have been both sanctified, and also sealed to the Day of
Redemption; and also rejecting the Instructions, Reproofs and Warnings, which
by the faithful Servants of the Lord have been sounded in your Ears; Instead of
hearkening thereunto, you have evilly entreated them with Whipping, Stocking,
Stoning, spoiling of their Goods, to the Ruining of many Families, Imprisoning
some to Death, and Banishing others; with many other gross and horrid Abuses,
wherewith you have entreated the Servants of the Lord, for no other Cause than
for the exercise of their Consciences toward God, and reproving you for your
Sins, and crying to you for Amendment of Life; which bespeaks you to be a
People that hate Righteousness, and love Iniquity, choosing your own Vanities,
and slighting the Tender Mercies of the Lord God, treasuring up to your selves
Wrath against the Day of Wrath; and so are bringing swift Destruction and
Misery upon your selves. Oh! My Soul mourns in the sight and sense of that
dreadful Day which is coming upon you, for your Transgressions and Rebellion
against the living God, and for your thus abusing and shamefully entreating
them, who have been sent unto you by the Lord, who sought nothing but the good
and everlasting Peace of your immortal Souls.

But none of these things have prevailed upon many of thy Inhabitants, O
England! to soften your hard Hearts, and to tender them before the Lord. For
instead of ceasing from your Sins and Abominations (which abound amongst many
of you) by true Repentance and Amendment of your Lives and Conversations, and
turning to the Lord, who has cried to you many a time, saying, Turn you, turn
you, why will you dye? (as he did to Israel of old) but you have stopped your
Ears as they did, who were compared to the deaf Adder that would not hear the
Voice of the Charmer, charming never so wisely; and so continuing still in your
Abominations (which the Lord would have gathered you from, had you obeyed his
Voice) manifold Sins and Wickedness increase amongst you, as Swearing, Cursing,
Damning, Revelling, Drunkenness, Whoredoms and Murders, with many other gross
and shameful Impieties; yea, almost all manner of Wickedness, Rebellion and
Treachery, both against God and Man, abounds amongst many of you the
Inhabitants of England, for which God will bring Judgment and Sorrow upon you,
yea, such Sorrow as shall never have an end, except you speedily Repent.

And those that can act these horrid Wickednesses and crying Sins (which indeed
make the Land Mourn) without fear or shame, as if they did not consider that
there is a God, who will punish for them, are they not most esteemed and set up
amongst many of you now a days? and so that is seen to increase amongst many of
you the Inhabitants of ENGLAND (to the grief and sorrow of the hearts of many)
which the Prophet saw, and concerning which he cried out of old, saying, The
Proud are counted Happy, yea, they that work Wickedness are even set up, and
they that tempt God are even delivered, Mal. 3. 15.

But let all such know, who are guilty of these Evils, your everlasting
Thraldom and eternal Misery is coming on, and will overtake you, (if ye
speedily Repent not) out of which you shall never be delivered.

And such as cannot run with the Multitude into those Evils and Abominations
which provoke the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to Anger, but live in the fear
of God, and a Life becoming Christianity, as knowing they must give an Account
(and so must all the Sons and Daughters of men) to God the Judge of all, both
quick and dead, and must receive a Reward at his hand, according to their
Doings, whether they be good or evil, and so cannot rush into Iniquity with
them, as the Horse rusheth into Battle, are become a Prey to the Ungodly, and
as objects of Scorn and Derision, on whom the Wicked and the Ungodly execute
their Cruelty and grievous Oppression; yea, Godliness and Piety is so little
regarded amongst many who profess Christianity, that a sober Life and a godly
Conversation is become a Derision; its Crime enough now a days among many, for
a man to have a civil Carriage and a sober Behavior (and to walk as one who
fears the Lord) to be scoffed at and vilified with reproachful Names, as he
passes through Town or City.

So that Wickedness and Debauchery, Looseness and Prophanness is encouraged and
abounds, Virtue and Sobriety are discouraged and decryed among many of you the
Inhabitants of ENGLAND. For we see many of you are living and spending your
days here in this World, in those things which are so contrary to Christianity,
Purity and Holiness (without which none shall see the Lord) as if there were no
such thing to be known or minded by you: And all those holy Admonitions in the
Scriptures of Truth, and the threatenings of Punishment and eternal Sorrow to
the Wicked and Ungodly, which the Scriptures are full of (if timely Repentance
be not known) are slighted and disregarded by you, as if they should never be
fulfilled nor executed upon you.

And these are the Practices that have been and yet are found amongst you,
encouraged and upheld by you to this day, against an innocent and harmless
People, whom God Almighty has gathered and chosen out of the World, the Ways
and Abominations thereof, to be a peculiar People to himself, zealous of good
Works, who have always sought the good and peace of the Nation, and the
abounding of Justice and Equity therein, and have often entreated the Lord, and
supplicated God on your behalf, That he would not break in upon you, the
Inhabitants of ENGLAND, by his fierce Wrath and sore Displeasure, lest he
should consume you all at once, for your Sins and Transgressions against him,
who has tendered Salvation, but you refused it.

And many have labored faithfully among you, to turn you from Darkness to the
Light of Christ (which now shines, blessed be the Lord forever) and from Satan's
Power (by which you have been, and yet are captivated and prevailed upon to
work Iniquity with greediness) to the Power of God, which would have Redeemed
out of that Slavery and Captivity, into the glorious Liberty and Freedom of the
Sons of God, had there been Obedience and Subjection yielded to it.

But this also has been slighted and set at naught by many of you: And those
who have thus labored and traveled among you for your good, you have rewarded
with Stocking, Stoning and Imprisonments, with many other gross and horrid
Abuses, as Jerusalem did of Old them that were sent to her: And instead of
turning to Christ, the true Light, that enlightens every man that comes into
the World, John 19. You have made a scorn and a derision of it, and have loved
Darkness rather than the Light, (which manifests to you the Wickedness of your
Evil Hearts, and the Abominations that have lodged there) because there Deeds
are Evil, John 3. 19, 20. And so have hated the blessed Light that does reprove
for Sin, loving your Sins, for which you have been reproved, better than the
Light who has reproved you.

And so have manifested your selves to be such as the Apostle spoke of, Lovers
of your own Pleasures, Proud, Blasphemers, disobedient to Parents, Unthankful,
Unholy, without natural Affection, Truce Breakers, false Accusers, Incontient,
Fierce, Despisers of those that are good, Treacherous, Heady, High-minded,
lovers of Pleasure more than lovers of God, etc. 2 Timothy 3. 2, 3, 4.

And in these Evils abovementioned, you are satisfying your own Hearts Lusts,
living in all manner of Voluptuousness, Pride, vain Glory, and forgetfulness of
God, and so are guilty of those Sins which Israel of Old were guilty of, who
sat down (in forgetfulness of God) to Eat and to Drink, and rose up to Play,
Exodus 32. 6.

And this is the State of too many of you the Inhabitants of England, both
Priests and People, for which the Wrath of Almighty God is kindled against you,
and his sore Displeasure is nigh to break forth upon you, in which he will
trample you under his Feet, and appoint you your portion in the Lake of
Perdition forever, if you Repent not, and that speedily.

Oh England! England! How many Warnings have thy Inhabitants had? And how long
has the Lord strove with you? both by his Servants, and also by the many
signal Tokens that have appeared of his displeasure amongst you? Yet none of
those things have prevailed upon you to turn from the Evil of your ways; but
you have hardened your Hearts, and stiffened your Necks in your Wickedness and
Rebellion against God (though he has long waited to be gracious to you) for
which God will bring everlasting Misery and Sorrow upon you, if ye continue in
these Evils which have abounded, and yet abound among you.

For although the Apostle says expressly, Know you not that the Unrighteous
shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither Fornicators, nor
Idolaters, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, etc. shall inherit the Kingdom of God,
1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. And notwithstanding these Testimonies which are certainly
true, and will be fulfilled upon all the Ungodly: How many are living in these
very Evils! as Whoredoms, Drunkenness, Revilings, with many other crying Sins,
which are expressly forbidden; yet you continue in them, as if all those
Judgments and Torments threatened in the Scriptures of Truth against the Wicked,
were but mere Fictions. And so you go on in your Wickedness and Ungodliness, as
if there were neither Punishment nor Torment to the Wicked, and as if there
were neither God nor Devil, Heaven nor Hell.

But let all such know, that the dreadful God of Heaven and Earth, that rained
Fire and Brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah of Old, that punished the Wicked in
every Age, (who has promised, and will perform it) though the Wicked join Hand
in Hand, they shall not go unpunished; but he will render the Recompense and
Reward of your own doings into your Bosoms; and if you do not turn to him while
he strives with you, ye shall feel the weight of his avenging Hand and Iron
Rod, with which he will dash the Rebellious Nations to pieces like a Potters
Vessel. And now my Soul desires that you may turn from your Evil Courses, and
no longer continue in your Exaltedness of mind and heart, and in your
Wickedness and Ungodliness, lest you be brought down and turned into Hell, with
all Nations that forget God, Psalm. 9. 17. to be tormented with the Devil and
his Angels forever and evermore.

For the Lord has often waited to be gracious unto you, and has born with
you, though you have greatly provoked him, yet his Patience has lasted long;
and he has held forth a Hand of love to many, who have taken no notice of it:
But now his Patience is almost worn out, and his long suffering well nigh come
to an End; yea, I am afraid its come to an end already to many of you, the
Inhabitants of England, and his Indignation is kindled, and burns hot against
you, who have refused to hearken to him, who has called you time after time,
and is nigh to break forth like a devouring Fire; and before him the Wicked
shall be as Hay, and as Stubble: whom God will consume, and will leave them
neither Root nor Branch.

For behold, the Cry of your Iniquities has reached unto Heaven, and your Sins
have come up before the Lord, and into remembrance with our God; and the Day
wherein he will ease him of his Adversaries, and avenge him of his Enemies
makes haste, wherein he will pour out his Wrath, Indignation and Judgment upon
you, the Inhabitants of England (that continue in your Gainsaying and
Rebellion against God) without any mixture of Mercy.

Oh! you my native Country Men and People of England (in general) for whom a
travail is upon my Spirit at present, and has been many a time, that you might
be prevailed upon (whose Day of Mercy is not yet ended and over, whom the
shadow of Death and the Night is not yet wholly spread) to consider your latter
end, before it be too late; and to turn from your Sins and Transgressions, your
Haughtiness, Pride and vain Glory, and your abusing your selves with those
things which God has extended as Mercies unto you, viz. your wasting, abusing
and spending the good Creatures of God to satisfy your Lusts, which has
highly displeased the Lord, and provoked him to Anger.

And that you may all come to learn that blessed Lesson, which the holy men of
Old learned, who were taught by the Grace and Spirit of God, (a measure whereof
is given to every man to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. 7.) which was, That denying
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts, they might live Soberly, Righteously and
Godlily in the present evil World, Tit. 2. 11, 12. Which all that ever come to
inherit Rest and Peace with God, and to have a habitation in his holy Kingdom
of everlasting Joy, must be found living in, and to cry to God in a sense of
your Miserable state and Deplorable Condition, while the Ear of his tender
Mercy is open to hear you, lest such a Day come upon and overtake you, as was
threatened to a People of Old, wherein you may Cry, and the Lord will not hear
you; (because you have not hearkened to him, when he called) you may Call, and
he will not Answer; but will laugh at your Calamity, and mock when your Fear
comes.

But that this Day may never overtake you, to whom the Visitation of God is yet
continued, is the hearty Desire and Prayer of my Soul to God for you: Therefore
turn to God with all your Hearts, while his Arms of tender Mercy are open to
receive you; and triffle not away your precious time that yet remains, lest by
so doing, you bring the sentence of an eternal Exclusion upon your selves from
God, and the joy of his Kingdom forever and ever.

And, Oh that a true Desire were begotten in all your Hearts and Minds, to come
to that blessed Fountain of God's free Love, which he has opened for all who
are willing to come to it, the Virtue whereof purges the Souls of all that
wash in it, from Sin and Uncleanness, and so sprinkles the Conscience from
death, and dead works, to serve the living God in newness and purity of a Holy
Life.

And now, Oh that you all may be willing to take that good Counsel, which was
given by the Lord to a People of Old, when he said by the Mouth of his Prophet,
Wash you, make you clean, put away from before me the Evil of your doings;
cease to do Evil, and learn to do Well; seek Judgment, relieve the Oppressed,
judge the Fatherless, plead for the Widow: Come now, let us reason together,
says the Lord; though your Sins be as Scarlet, they shall be as white as Snow;
though they be red as Crimson, they shall be as Wool: If you be willing and
obedient, you shall eat the good of the Land, etc. Isa. 1. 16, 17, 18, 19.

These are the precious Promises of God to all who are willing to forsake the
Evil of their doings, and to turn to him with all their Hearts, who desires not
the death (or destruction) of any, but rather that they may Repent, and live.

And again, the good Counsel and Advice of the holy Apostle ought to be minded
and observed by you all, which is on this wise, Cleanse your Hands ye Sinners,
purify your Hearts ye Double-minded; be Afflicted, and Mourn, and Weep; Let
your Laughter be turned into Mourning, and your Joy into Heaviness: Humble your
selves in the sight of the Lord, and he shall lift you up, James 4. 8, 9, 10.

And unless you thus humble your selves under the mighty Hand of God, and turn
to the Lord, and forsake your sinful Ways and evil Courses, and wait to know a
being washed in the Blood of Jesus Christ (which cleanses from all Sin) that
is the Fountain of God's free and great Love opened unto all Mankind, you can
never come to have a place in the Rest which God has prepared, nor in that
Kingdom of eternal Glory, which remains sure to the Righteous forever.

Now the Lord knows (who searches the Hearts, and tries the Reigns of all,
from whose all-seeing Eye nothing can be hid) that I labor for, and seek
nothing more, than your turning to the Lord with broken, tender and penitent
Hearts, that you may find Mercy with God to your immortal Souls; and that while
you have days here in this world, you may so live in his Fear, Wisdom and
Counsel, as that whenever your latter end comes, and Death looks you in the
Face, and summons you before the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth, you may
lay down your Heads, and go to your Graves in Peace with God, and in a full
assurance of a Habitation in that Eternal Joy, where no Sorrow nor Sighing
shall ever come.

These are the Desires and earnest Breathings of him, whose Soul has often
been wounded, and his Spirit grieved, in the hearing and beholding the
Wickedness and Abominations which have abounded, and yet do abound amongst many
unto this very day; and also has mourned, and been bowed before the Lord, in
the sight and sense of that dreadful Day, which will certainly overtake and
come upon all those, who continue in their Wickedness and Rebellion against
God.

W. B.

A Warning to the Rulers and Magistrates, etc.
ANd now all ye Rulers, Magistrates, and Men in Authority in ENGLAND, and the
Dominions thereunto belonging, the Lord God of Heaven and Earth (in whom Power
and Authority remains forever, To pull down, and set up whomsoever he pleases)
is highly displeased with many of you, (not exempting the Wicked and Oppressive
Rulers through the whole World) because you have not feared before his eternal
Power and Majesty, by whom the Life, Breath and Being of all Mankind, and
every living Creature is continued, who can take it away, and bring the highest
and loftiest of Mortal Men to the Dust (from whence they come) at his Pleasure.

Neither have you waited to receive Wisdom and Counsel from him, the great
Counselor, to act and to discharge your selves as you ought to have done, in
so great Affairs and weighty Concerns as you have undertaken; which if you had
done, ye would have encouraged Virtue and Righteousness in all, and punished
Vice and Wickedness, wherever it appeared, and have been a Terror to
Evildoers, and a Praise to them that were found doing Well; and so would have
eased the Oppressed, by breaking the Bonds of Oppression, and executed Justice
and Equity in the Earth, and thereby Truth and Holiness, Purity and
Righteousness would have been exalted among you; and this would have brought
Peace and lasting Satisfaction into your own Hearts, and Joy and Tranquillity
to the Nation in general.

But have not many of you done and acted to the contrary? For instead of
punishing Debauchery and Wickedness, viz. Swearing, Cursing, Drunkenness,
Whoredoms, Looseness and Prophanness in others, (which you ought to have done,
and to have been good Examples of Purity and Holiness in your Lives and
Conversations to all) are not many of you your selves living and taking delight
and pleasure in the abovementioned Evils, and gross Abominations? for which
God, the righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth (who will not be biased with
Rewards) will punish with everlasting Pain, and eternal Flames, if there be a
continuing in them.

And many of you, by your bad Lives and Conversations, (others having taken you
for Examples) have you not encouraged them in their Wickedness? Is not that the
cause which makes Ungodliness abound? as it does among many at this day, to
the grief and sorrow of many, who have truly desired to see the Current of
Iniquity stopped.

And whether have you set up Judgment and Justice as you ought to have done? Or
executed it upon the Transgressors, or eased the Oppressed, or broken the Bonds
of Oppression, and have been a Terror to the Evildoers, and Encouragers of
them that do Well?

But have not many of you punished and oppressed the Innocent, and have
executed your Cruelty upon them, and have let the Transgressors and the Wicked
go free? And So are not Such found in the Steps of those against whom the
Prophet of the Lord cried out of old, Saying; Your Hands are defiled with
Blood, your Fingers with Iniquity, your Lips have spoken Lies, your Tongues
muttred Perverseness; none calls for Justice, nor any pleads for Truth:
They trust in Vanity, and speak Lies; They conceive Mischief, and bring forth
Iniquity; Their works are works of Iniquity; The act of Violence is in their
hands; Their feet run to Evil; They make haste to shed Innocent Blood; Wasting
and Destruction are in their Paths; The way of Peace they know not, and there
is no Judgment in their goings; They have made them Crooked Paths, whosoever
goes therein, shall not know Peace; and Judgment is turned away backward, and
Justice stands a far off; for Truth is fallen in the streets, and Equity
cannot enter; yea, Truth falls, and he that departs from evil makes
himself a Prey; And the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there was no
Judgment, Isa. 59. 3, 4, and 6, 7, 8, 14, 15.

And have not many or most of these Wickednesses been acted amongst many of you
the Rulers and Magistrates of ENGLAND, and the Dominions thereunto belonging?
And have not many devised Mischief and Oppression against an Innocent People,
that have done no wrong nor harm to any of you, nor to the Nation in general;
but have sought the good and everlasting Welfare of the Sons and Daughters of
Men every where? And have not cruel Laws been made against them? And have they
not been (with many other Laws which were never made or intended against us)
executed upon us, with Cruelty and Severity (though the breach of no just Law
can be charged upon us) to the Ruin, Spoiling and exposing many Families to
Poverty, which were capable of relieving and assisting others? And are not
these Cruelties and Unrighteous Practices upheld and continued? So that at this
very day, many undergo great Hardships, Abuses and cruel Usages, for no other
Cause that can justly be laid to their Charge, than for keeping their
Consciences clear in the sight of God, for Worshipping him according to his
holy Requirings, and for reproving sin in the Gate, and crying to People, To
leave off their Wickedness, Pride, Drunkenness, Whoredoms, Cursing and
Swearing, with many other gross Abominations which abound too much among many,
both Rulers Priests and People; for which God Almighty is angry with this
Nation, and will bring his dreadful Judgments on all those that continue
therein.

And the Cry that has run through many in this day, to Rulers Priests and
People, has been, To break off from the abovementioned Evils by true
Repentance, and by Amendment of their Lives and Conversations, while the day of
Mercy lasts to them, and to fear the living God, that they might serve him in
Truth and Righteousness; And this is that which we have sought or desired (even
to see this Change wrought in all) in our Labors and Travails, for which we
have this Reward of Oppression, Cruelty, Spoiling of Goods and Imprisonments,
with many other great, Inhumane and Unchristian-like Abuses, which our innocent
Sufferings for many years, and unto this very day (which at this time is very
great) may plainly show; Though always without any Just cause given on our
parts; for none can justly charge us with Plotting and Contriving, Rebellion or
Insurrections against the KING or the GOVERNMENT or Peace of the Nation. But we
have always sought the good and everlasting Happiness of all, yea, of our
Enemies themselves, though many times Shamefully abused by them, both in Body
and Goods; and the good and welfare of the Rulers and Magistrates of England,
though many of you have imprisoned many of us (time after time) some in Nasty
Holes till Death, and others to the Ruining of their Familes (as to outward
things) because they could not wrong nor offer violence to their own
Consciences.

And when Authority has been given to Wicked, Ungodly, Profane, and
Unreasonable men, to make Spoil of their ^oods (who were sure to have one part
of the Spoil themselves) they have not only made Havoc and great Spoil
thereof, but have taken liberty (if they had not Power given them) grossly to
abuse their Bodies also, by hailing and beating them, etc.

And all these Unrighteous, Unjust Dealings and Proceedings have been patiently
born (only a cry has been in our hearts to the Lord, That he would open their
Understandings, and let them see what they were doing (that so they might
repent and ^ind mercy with God) without seeking Revenge, as knowing Vengeance
is the Lords, and he will repay; committing our Cause to God, who will plead
the Cause of the innocent. And that this has been our Practice, it is not
unknown to many of you.

So, I desire you Magistrates (who have been most concerned in persecuting of
us) may consider those Cruelties and Oppressions which have been inflicted upon
us; and how there has been no just Cause on our parts for it: For what PLOTS
have we contrived? What Disturbance have we made to the Government? Have we not
always been an innocent, suffering People? Look back at our Lives and
Conversations, ever since we were a People (in scorn) called Quakers; and at
our Carriage and Behavior toward all men: And also, take a view of your
dealings with us, and what has been inflicted upon us; and you may see whether
we have justly deserved it by any Evil that we have done: I am sure, if some
look back with an impartial Eye, they will have cause to be ashamed of their
Dealings and Proceedings against us, who have made us as objects, on whom they
have executed their Cruelty and Oppression. And also take a view of your
doings, and see whether many of you are not found too much in the steps of
those of old, whom the Prophet of the Lord cried out against, saying, Hear I
pray you, O Heads of Jacob, and ye Princes of the House of Israel; Is it not
for you to know Judgment? who hate the good and love the evil, who pluck off
their skins from off them, and their flesh from off their Bones: Who also eat
the flesh of my People and flay their skins from off them, and they broak their
Bones and chop them in pieces as flesh for the Caldron, Micah 3. 1, 2, 3.

And the Judgment threatened, which was just upon them for their Wickedness,
Cruelty and Oppression, which was inflicted on his People by them without any
bowels of mercy, was on this wise; Then shall they Cry unto the Lord, but he
will not hear them, -- he will even hide his face from them at that time, as
they behaved themselves ill in their doings, verse. 4. Again, the Prophet says,
But truly I am full of Power by the Spirit of the Lord, and of Judgment, and of
Might, to declare unto Jacob his Transgressions, and to Israel his sins. Hear
this, I pray you, ye Heads of the house of Jacob, and ye Princes of the House
of Israel, that abhor Judgment, and pervert all Equity, that build up Zion with
Blood and Jerusalem with Iniquity; The Heads thereof judge for Reward, and the
Priests teach for Hire, etc, yet will they lean upon the Lord, and say (as many
are saying now) is not the Lord amongst us? No Evil can come upon us: Therefore
shall Zion for your sakes be plowed as a Field, and Jerusalem shall become
heaps, and the mountain of the house as the high places of the Forest, verse.
8, 9, 10, 11, 12.

And as the Lord was angry with that Generation for those Evils that abounded
amongst them, even so is he angry with this Nation, because Iniquity and
Transgression abounds, and love to Righteousness, Equity and Justice (and to
them that live therein) waxes cold in many, who make a Profession of God, and
Godliness. But behold! the Lord has looked down from Heaven, and has beheld
the Iniquities of many to be of a Scarlet and Crimson dye, and has also beheld
the great Oppression of his People, and the Groanings of the Oppressed has
entered into his Ears; And the Lord God is arisen in his mighty Power to plead
the Cause of the afflicted, and will call all to an Account, who are guilty,
both for their Sins against him, and also for their Oppressing of his innocent
People, and will render a Recompense of Reward into every ones bosom, according
to their doings.

Therefore a WARNING is in my heart to you all, whose day of Mercy is not yet
ended; Forsake your evil Courses, break off from your Sins by true Repentance,
and fear before the dreadful God of Heaven and Earth, before whose Bar of
divine Justice, you must all stand, and receive a Sentence from him the true
and equal Judge. And cease from oppressing and persecuting the People of the
Lord, who seek nothing more than the Honor and Glory of his great Name.

And set up Judgment and Justice in the Earth, and encourage Truth and
Righteousness, and take the Rod of the Wicked from off the back of the
Righteous, which has lain heavy upon them long; And punish Wickedness and
Debauchery, Swearing and Cursing, Drunkenness and Whoredom; all which abound to
the grief and sorrow of many. You may hear it every day in your Ears, and
behold it with your Eyes, not only many in Authority (who should have been
better examples) but also the very Boys and Children in the Streets, their
Mouths are full of Cursing and Damning, which is dreadful to think off; its
grown so common, and so much encouraged by the bad examples of many of those
that should have been a terror to evil doers.

Therefore punish these Wickednesses, which run down like a flood, and
endeavor to stop the Current of Iniquity, which at this day increases in a
dreadful manner; And be good Examples your selves in Holiness of Life and
Conversation; Or else God will pour out Shame and everlasting Contempt upon
you, and will plead with you in his firce Wrath, and in his sore Displeasure;
and his Indignation will break forth like devouring fire, and ye shall be (who
are guilty of those Evils) like Hay and Stubble before him, who will consume
you both Root and Branch, of you Repent not, and that speedily.

And, Oh that you would fear before the living God, and dread his holy Name,
and seek the Lord while he may be found; Call upon him while he is near; Lest
that day come upon you wherein you may seek him and he will not be found of
you, because you have rejected his Reproofs, and would have none of his Counsel.

Therefore, if a day yet remain to you, mind the Honor of God, and the good of
your own Souls; and the propagating of Truth and Holiness more than your own
Interest, Friendship or Favor of men, or your Pride, Pomp and vain Glory,
which God will stain and blast by the breath of his mouth, and will blow it
away with the Whirlwind of his Wrath, like the Chaff of the Summer threshing
floor forever.

But that you may have a habitation in the Kingdom of eternal Glory, which God
has prepared as a dwelling place for the Righteous, is the desire of my Soul.

Who am a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, W. B.

An Expostulation with the CLERGY; And a WARNING to those among them whose Day
of Mercy is not over, etc.
ANd now, all you Priests, who have taken upon you to be the Leaders and
Guiders of the People, and also to take the Care and Oversight of them, and to
instruct them, and to be their Shepherds, and to feed them (as you pretend)
with Spiritual Food.

The Controversy of the great God of Heaven and Earth is with you, and the day
wherein he will plead with you in his sore Displeasure, makes haste upon you,
because you have neither fed the People with the Food you pretended, nor taken
such care of their Souls, as to have led and guided them in the way of Truth
and Righteousness, as you ought to have done: For have you not made the People
to err by your Lies, and by your Lightness? For according to what ye have taken
upon you, ye should have been good Examples to all, in Holiness, in Purity of
Life and Conversation. You have been Examples to the People, I grant; but in
what? Has it not been (with many of you) in Pride, Lightness, Profaneness,
Covetousness, Oppression and Debauchery, as Drunkenness, Cursing, Swearing and
Whoredoms, with many great and Crying Sins? Do not these Abominations abound
amongst many of you (upheld and encouraged by your bad Examples) of the Clergy
of England, and the Dominions thereunto belonging? I shall leave to all sober
People, that observe your Lives and Conversations to judge.

And so instead of leading People in the Way of the Lord, (which is a pure Way
sorever) and into Righteousness and Holiness (without which none can see the
Lord) have you not been Instrumental (in the hand of the Enemy of all
Righteousness) to lead them into the Liberty and Looseness of the World, and
into Darkness and Ignorance of the Lord, and of his holy Spirit and Grace
(which was the Teacher and Leader of the Saints of Old) by your Ungodly and
Unrighteous Lives? Do not your Practices bespeak you to be blind Guides,
leading the Blind (though its willful Blindness) and so have fallen together
into the Ditch of Uncleanness, (which the abounding of Wickedness, that at this
day increases among many of you, and your Hearers also do plainly show) and are
ready to fall into the Pit of eternal Misery and Lake of Perdition, (if you
Repent not) which will be your Portion at the Hand of the Just God, who will
render a Recompense of Reward unto all, according to their doings.

And are you not (with many of your Hearers) in the steps of those the Prophet
of the Lord cried out against? saying, A wonderful and a hurrible thing is
committed in the Land, the Prophets thereof prophecy falsely, and the Priests
bear Rule by their Means, and my People love to have it so; And what will you
do in the end thereof? Jer. 5. 30, 31.

Again, another Prophet cries out in these Words; Thus says the Lord God, Woe
unto the false Prophets that follow their own Spirit, and have seen nothing. Oh
Israel! thy Prophets are like the Foxes in the Desert, etc. They have seen
Vanity, and Lying Divination, saying, The Lord says, and the Lord has not
sent them; and they have made others to hope that they would confirm the Word:
Have you not seen a vain Vision? And have you not spoken a Lying Divination?
Whereas you say, The Lord says it; Albeit I have not spoken: Therefore thus
says the Lord God, Because you have spoken Vanity, and seen Lies; therefore
behold I am against you, says the Lord God, and my Hand shall be upon the
Prophets that see Vanity, and divine Lies; They shall not be in the Assembly of
my People, neither shall they be written in the Writing of the House of Israel,
neither shall they enter into the Land of Israel; and ye shall know that I am
the Lord God, because, even because they have seduced my People, saying, Peace,
and there was no Peace: And one built up a Wall, and lo, others daubed it with
untempered Mortar, Ezekiel. 13. 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10.

Again, the Lord cried out by his Prophet, saying, Son of man, prophecy against
the Prophets of Israel; prophecy, and say unto them, Thus says the Lord God
unto the Shepherds, Woe be to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves;
Should not the Shepherds feed the Flock? Ye eat the Eat, and ye clothe you with
the Wool; ye kill them that are fed, but ye feed not the Flock: The diseased
have ye not strengthened, neither have ye healed that which was sick, neither
have ye bound up that which was broken, neither have you brought again that
which was driven away, neitheir have ye sought that which was lost; but with
Force and with Cruelty have ye ruled them, etc. Therefore, O ye Shepherds, hear
the Word of the Lord; thus says the Lord God, Behold I am against the
Shepherds, and will require the Flock at their Hands, Ezekiel. 34. 2, 3, 4, 9, 10.

Again, the Lord cries out on this wife by another of his Prophets; For from
the least of them, even unto the greatest of them, every one is given to
Covetousness; and from the Prophet, even unto the Priest, every one deals
falsely: They have healed also the hurt of the Daughter of my People slightly,
saying, Peace, Peace, when there is no Peace. Were they ashamed when they had
committed Abomination? Nay, they were not at all ashamed, neither could they
blush; therefore they shall fall among them that fall; at the time that I shall
visit them, they shall be cast down, says the Lord, Jer. 6. 13, 14, 15.

And again, another of the Prophets of the Lord cried out on this wise; Thus
says the Lord concerning the Prophets, that make my People err, that bite with
their Teeth, and cry Peace; and he that puts not into their Mouths, they
even prepare War against him: Therefore Night shall be upon you, that you shall
not have a Vision, and it shall be dark over you, that you shall not divine;
and the Sun shall go down over the Prophets, and the Day shall be dark over
them; then shall the Seers be ashamed, and the Diviners confounded: The Heads
thereof judge for Reward, and the Priests thereof teach for Hire, and the
Prophets thereof divine for Mon^y, Mich. 3. 5, 6, 7, 11.

And are not you, the Clergy of ENGLAND, and the Dominions thereunto belonging,
highly guilty of most, if not all these great Evils and Abominations which the
false Prophets of Old were guilty of, for which the true Prophets cried out
against them? For have you not run, when the Lord never sent you? Though most
of you have not run very far, it has but been to augment your Wages, and to
get fater Benefices: So we find that filthy Lucre has been your greatest
inducement in your Runnings; for it has been for that many of you have run
from one place to another, and have taken upon you to speak in the Name of the
Lord, though he never gave you Commission so to do; and therefore you have not
profited the People at all: For notwithstanding all your Preaching to the
People, how does Iniquity abound, and Transgression increase amongst them?
Don't you hear with your Ears the horrible Cries, Oaths, and dreadful Cursings
and Damnings, which make the Land mourn? Don't you see with your Eyes the
Profaneness, Drunkenness, Looseness, and almost all manner of Wickedness and
Debauchery which increases amongst many of your Hearers? And are not many of
you your selves (who should be Examples of better things) living and taking
Pleasure therein? Yea, I am sure many who live near the Fountains, from whence
you spring, and where you learn your Arts and Sciences, have too much cause to
affirm it to your shame, who daily hear and see to their great grief and sorrow
of Heart, that almost all manner of Ungodliness, Debauchery and Uncleanness
abounds amongst many of you in these places; and not only in these places, but
also in many other places where you come; Let but People observe your Lives and
Conversations, and see whether many of you, who pretend to be Leaders and
Teachers of others, (but let all People consider whither such can lead them;
its but into the broad way, the end whereof is eternal Misery: Therefore let
all People leave off following those Leaders, who are such bad Examples to
their Followers) are not highly guilty of the beforementioned Abominations;
and so are not Examples of Righteousness and Purity, but of Wickedness and
Profaneness to your Hearers; for which the Anger of the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth is kindled, and nigh to break sorth upon you like a devouring Fire; and
if you Repent not speedily, will consume you Root and Branch.

And are you not bearing Rule by your Means, and endeavoring to make the
People love to have it so? and by Force and Cruelty, oppressing and persecuting
those, who cannot for Conscience sake own you to be the true Ministers of
Christ, nor put into your Mouths, like those the true Prophets of the Lord
cried out against? Read Isa. 56. 10, 11, 12.

And are you not seeking your Gain from your Quarters, and minding the Fleece
more than the Flock? And don't you Preach for Hire, and Divine for Money? Yea;
Are you not selling both your Sermons and your Prayers for Money? And so are
doing contrary to the command of Christ to his Ministers and Messengers, when
he sent them forth (as Lambs among Wolves) to preach the Gospel of Glad-tidings
to the People, who said, Freely you have received, freely give. Let your Doings
testify against you, that you are not in the steps of the Disciples of Christ,
but are in the steps of Simon Magus, (or worse than he) who would have bought
the Gift of God for Money: But you sell your own Divinations (under a pretense
of the Gift of God) for Money: And if his Practice was condemnable, how can
yours be justifiable? So that which was said to him by the holy Apostle Peter,
may justly be said to you; You have neither Part nor Lot in this matter; for
your Hearts are not right in the sight of God; and you are seen to be in the
Gall of Bitterness, and Bond of Iniquity. Neither do we yet find or understand,
that you have yet repented of your Wickedness (so much as he did of his) for
instead of Repenting, are you not going on and endeavoring to obtain your
Covetous Ends, and are giving Flattering Titles to many, and having men's
Persons in Admiration for your own advantage and selfends, and are crying Peace
to many, in such a State and Condition as the Lord never spoke Peace to any in?
And so are manifest to be like those that cry Peace, Peace, when sudden
Destruction and Misery is at hand. And you have fed your selves with the Fat,
and clothed your selves with the Wool, and have preyed upon the People; and by
your Oppression and Cruelty have scattered the Flock, instead of gathering
them, or turning them to God, who is become the Shepherd and Teacher of his
People himself, according to his Promise of old, That he would gather his Sheep
from the Mouths of those Shepherds that made a Prey upon them: Which Promise
many have witnessed to be fulfilled in this our day, blessed be his Name
forever.

And are you not biting with your Teeth (like the false Prophets of old) and
crying Peace to them that put into your Mouths (though never so
Unchristian-like in their Conversations) But they that cannot for
Conscience Sake put into your Mouths, to maintain your Pride, High-mindedness
and Oppression, have you not, and yet are preparing War against them? Let the
great Spoil and Havoc you have made of many sober and conscientious Peoples
Goods bear witness against you: And the many Prisons in England and elsewhere,
in which you have imprisoned some unto Death, and many others to the Ruining of
them and their Families, because they could not for Conscience sake pay you
your Unjust and Unchristian Demands, as Tithes, and many other things, which
never were demanded nor paid in the primitive Christian Times, as
Gospel-Maintenance (neither is there any ground in the Scriptures for them to
be demanded) by the Ministers of the Gospel; and seeing they were neither
demanded nor paid by the Apostles or their Successors, while they kept in the
primitive Purity; nor any Prescription given forth by the Apostles, that they
(to wit, Tithes) should ever be paid or received by the Christians in future
Ages: And also, seeing they were denied and testified against by several of the
first Reformed Protestants, as Walter Brute, etc. Therefore, for you to demand
them, and to cast men into Prison for the Non-Payment of them, manifests you to
be such as the holy Apostle cried out against; Who beguile unstable Souls; an
heart they have exercised with Covetous Practices; Cursed Children, which have
forsaken the Right Way, and are gone astay, following the Way of Balaam, the
Son of Bosor, who loved the Wages of Unrighteousness, 2 Pet. 2. 14, 15.

And these your Cruelties, Persecutions and Oppressions testify to your faces
(and to all People that are willing to see you) that you are out of the Steps,
Life and Spirit of the Messengers and Ministers of Christ Jesus; neither have
you any Example for these your Wicked Practices and Ungodly Lives, neither from
the Priests under the Law, nor from the true Ministers of Christ and Preachers
of the holy Gospel in the primitive Times, and in several Ages since the
Apostles days, but from Balaam, false Prophets, false Teachers, etc. such as
the Prophets of the Lord testified against.

And all these your Practices of Oppression, Cruelty and Persecution, and your
Unholy Lives and Conversations are sufficient Evidence and Ground for us, (had
we no more) not to believe that you are the Ministers and Messengers of Christ,
but of Antichrist; for we don't read that ever the true Ministers of Christ did
oppress or persecute others, or leave any President for any such Practice, but
the contrary; for it was many times their Lots to be persecuted, shamefully
abused, and cast into Prison by others, both in the primitive Times, and in the
Reformation, and almost in every Age until this very day: And so the words of
the Apostle have been and yet are fulfilled (to wit) Yea, and all that will
live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, 2 Timothy 3. 12. And it was
the Portion (that Christ our Lord said, that such who lived in and followed him
should meet withal, viz. That they should be hated of all Nations for his Names
sake: And that they should hale them before Rulers and their Councils; And that
they should cast them into Prison, and Kill them. He did not say, The Believers
should cast their Enemies into Prison and persecute them; but commanded, To
love their Enemies, and to pray for them that despightfully used them, and
persecuted them, that they might be the Children of their Father in Heaven, who
sends the Rain on the just and unjust, etc. But you have been so far from
obeying Christ's command, to love your Enemies, that you have, and yet are
doing despite to those that never did you any harm, but have sought, and yet
are seeking your Everlasting Peace and Well-beeing, both of Soul and Body. So
that Persecution and Cruelty is not a Mark of true Believers, that obey Christ,
neither of his Messengers and Ministers, whom he sends forth to preach the
Everlasting Gospel, but a Mark of the Whore, false Prophets and Antichrist.
Notwithstanding all their fair Pretenses for Christ, yet they have been
persecuting the Saints, and drinking the Blood of the Martyrs and Servants of
Christ, For which the Anger of the Lord is breaking forth, and he is arising in
his Mighty Power to plead the Cause of his Suffering People; and will give the
Whore Blood to drink, and the Cup of his Indignation and Fury (which she shall
not escape) from his hand shall be her Portion, and the Portion of all that
join with her, except they Repent.

And that you are in the same Steps, your own Practices, in persecuting and
oppressing an innocent People, are Evidence and Proof sufficient against you.
And therefore all you whose Day of Mercy is not yet over, and are guilty of
these things, Repent of, and cease from these your Wicked and Unchristian-like
Practices of Cruelty, Oppression and Persecution, and also from your Wicked,
Unclean Lives and Conversations, and humble your selves under the Mighty Hand
of God, submit to and lie under his Righteous Judgments, and bear his
Indignation and Wrath, which is just upon you for your Nickedness, Cruelty and
Oppression, and for your Pride and Ungodliness, which abound amongst many of
you; that thereby you may learn Righteousness, and to dread and fear before the
living God, and to serve him in Truth and Righteousness, who over all is worthy
to be served, honored and obeyed forever.

And mind the teachings of his holy Grace and Spirit (a measure whereof is
given to every man to profit withal,) which teaches to deny Ungodliness, and
worldly Lusts, and to live a Sober, a Righteous and a Godly Life in this
present evil World.

And be ye Examples of Meekness and Lowliness of Mind and Spirit, and of
Purity, Righteousness and Holiness in your Conversations, Or else the Dreadful
God of Heaven and Earth will pour out his Fury like Fire upon you; and ye shall
be as Hay and as Stubble before his Fiery Indignation, which shall burn you up,
and none shall be able to quench it; and your Portion shall be with the Beast
and false Prophets, who shall be taken alive and cast into the Lake of Fire
that burns (as with Brimstone) to be Tormented forever and for evermore.

Moreover, God Almighty, whose Righteous Soul has been grieved by your Cruelty
and Oppression against his People, and whose holy Name has been and yet is
dishonored by your Ungodly Lives, will pour out Shame and Everlasting Contempt
upon you; and ye shall be like Chaff before the Breath of the Almighty, who
will drive you away like Smoke before the Wind, never to be found any more: And
your Names shall Rot in the Earth, and your Stink shall come up. And as the
Remembrance of the Wicked and false Prophets are an evil Savor to this day, so
shall the Remembrance of you be to the Generations that are yet to come, if ye
Repent not speedily.

But that you may all escape these Judgments of the Lord, and Eternal Sorrows
(which are prepared as a Portion for the Wicked) in returning to the Lord by
true Repentance and Amendment of your Lives; and that you may find Mercy with
God to your Immortal Souls, both in this World, and in that which is to come,
is the Desire of him who is concerned to give forth this Testimony, as a
Warning to all whose day is not yet over.

Who am a Hater of Deceit and Hypocrisy, but a Lover of Truth and
Righteousness, and a Well-wisher of the Souls of all the Sons and Daughters of
Men, William Bingley.

THE END.

