August 23. 1670.
IT is Ordered by the Lords of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council,
That none shall Re-print, or Import this Book of Mr. Hugh Binning's, Entitled,
Fellowship with God, on the 1. Epistle of John, Chap. 1.2. Nor The Sinners
Sanctuary, on Romans Chap. 8. Nor Principles of Christian Religion, all by the
said Author, for the space of 19. years to come, without license of the
Printers hereof.

A. G.

FELLOWSHIP WITH GOD: OR, XXVIII. Sermons on the 1. Epistle of John, Chap. 1,
and 2.

Wherein the true ground and foundation of attaining, the spiritual way of
intertaining fellowship with the Father and the Son, and the blessed condition
of such as attain to it, are most succinctly and dilucidly explained.

By that eminent Preacher of the Gospel, Mr. Hugh Binning, late Minister at
G^van.

Joh. 17.21. That they all may be one, as thou Father, art in me and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us.

Verse. 22. And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them, that they may
be one, even as we are one.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by George Swin^^un and James Glen, and are to be sold by
them, and by David Trench and Th^mas Brown, and at most Booksellers Shops.
1671.

To the sincere seeker after fellowship with God, and seriously
Heaven-ward-tending Christian.
De^r and welbeloved friend,
AS thou a^t in thy self a rare Jewel, a most precious Stone, one of a
thousand, ^ea, of ten thousand, being compared with the many thousands of
c^mmon Stones, I mean, external Professors in the visible Church, who rest on a
bare name, and of whom that is verified in every Nation, which our Savior
says, M^t. 20 16. Many are called, but few chosen; and of many of which, that
is also too true in every generation (and oh that it were not too manifest in
this also) which Paul observed in his time, Phil: 3.18, 19. For many walk, of
whom I have told you often, and now tell you, even weeping, that they are the
enemies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose god is their
belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind ear^^ly things. And as to
Christ thy Lord most comely, as a Lilie among thorns, being ^is love among the
daughters, Cant 2.2. So also, thou in a ^pecial way art the dearly beloved and
longed for, the joy and crown, of every sincere servant of Christ in the
Gospel, Phil. 4.1. Thou art, if not the only, yet the chief object of their
labors, their work being either to confirm and strengthen thee in thy way,
that thou may so stand fast in the Lord, or remove impediments, make crooked
things straight, and so prepare the way of the Lord before thee, or to guide
thee by the light of Gods Word in the dark night of temptation^ and desertion:
Now, as we are confident these Sermons were preached at first by that blessed
serious labourer in the work of the Ministry, Mr. Hew Binning, with a special
eye to the advancement of sincere seek^rs after fellowship w^^h God* and
seriously Heavenward tending Christians am^ngst his hear^^s, So to whom shall
we dire^t this posthumous* and al^s, unperfected wor^, but to thee (O serious
C^rist^an) who makes it thy work not only to s^^k after the knowledge of ^^d in
Christ, in a mere speculative way that thou may know, and therein rest, a^ if
thy w^^k were done, but also to f^llow after the enjoyment of that known God,
and believed (...) S^^iour, and all the promised privileges of grace in ^his
l^fe, and of eternal glory in the life to come; To thee es^^cially belong these
precious soul-ravis^ing t^uths delivered in these Sermons. Two things, we kn^w,
thou have determined thy soul unto, and fixed thine eye on, as thy a^m and ma^k
in thy gene^ation* viz. the light of knowledge, and the life of practice; as to
knowledge, we are confident that with the Apostle Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2. Thou ha^^
determined to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified, and as to practice,
with the said Apostle thou prays, that thou may be sincere and without offense
till the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which
are by Jesus Christ unto the glory of God* Phil. 1.10, 11. And that ^hou may be
bl^melesse an^ h^rmlesse, the Son of God, without rebuke i^ the mi^st of a
crooked and perverse nation, shining as a light in the world, Phil. 2.15. Now
in reading these Serm^ns thou shall perceive, that to help thee in both these,
has be^n the very scope and design of this s^rio^^ Preacher; d^s^^est thou to
know Jesus Christ the Lord of life, either acc^^ding to his eternal subsistence
in the infinite understanding of the ^^ther, as Go^, or as to his appearance in
the flesh, as Man, or fitness as Medi^tor, to ^econcile the^ to God his Father
^oth in respect of wi^lingness and ability to save, then here thou shall behold
him deline at to the life: Would thou be clearly informed a^ent the only true
and sure foundation of fellowship with God, the way of intertaining it, the
honor or happiness of it, and sweet fru^^s of it, that fullness of joy that
accompanies it, here sha^^ thou find so clear a light as shall rejoice thy
soul: Would tho^ be fortified against the in^ursions and recursions of sin an^
Satan, then come to this Magazine, and be furnished ^b^^^da^tly: desire thou
to have thy so^l ^ncreased in the (...) of God, and to see manif^st
demonstratio^^ of (...) love in Christ to thee, o^ then turn in hither* (...)
g^t satisf^^^ion to thy souls desires: ^f thou des^rest with David, to hate
(...) with a perfect hatred, here, if any where, thou shall (...) thy desire:
yet let none think that we limit^ the (...) an^ usefulness of these Sermons to
ser^o^^ Christians (...), an^ so by consequence exclude all others from a^y
^ope of (...) in reading them: Nay, we declare that thoug^ (...) ^^de^yable
that ^o^n did write this Epistle with a ^pecial re^pect to the spir^^ual
advantage of serio^^ (...); and that this holy Preacher also, had this same
design, ^et ^e da^ be bold to (...) all of what degree soever, to the serio^^
pe^using of them, assuring them that in so doing, they ^^all not find their
labor in vain in the Lord; for her^ are such pregnant demonstrations of a
Deity, infinite, eternal* ^^^ipotent, incomprehensible, g^verning all things by
the wor^ of his power, as man dash the boldness of the most (...) raphys^cally
notional, or prop^an^ly practical Atheist, and wit^ conviction of spirit m^ke
him cry out, as Psalm. 73.22. So fooli^^ (...) beast before thee: Here (...)
such clear (...) ^^lenesse of sin, of its direct opposition to a holy God, and
his most holy will, of its woeful soul d^^ning effects, as may convince the
most profane and stout-h^arted carnalist, and awake him out of his soul-(...)
of security and presumption: ^ere are so glorious evidences of Gods free and
inconceivable love to the world, in Christ Jesus the Son of his love, as are
able to inlighten with the light of consolation the sadliest dejected and (...)
down soul under the apprehension of the curse and wra^h of God due to it for
sin, and raise it up to the hope of mercy in and through so clearly a revealed
Savior: In a word, here are to be found convictions for Athe^sts, piercing
reb^kes to the profane, clear instructions to the ignorant, milk to b^^es in
Christ, strong meat for the strong, strength to the weak, ^uickning and
reviving for such ^s faint in the way, re^^^ratives for such as are in a decay,
reclamations and loud o^esses after backsliders to recall them, breasts of
consolations for Zions mourners, whether under the first convictions of the
Law, and pangs of the new birth, or under the ch^llenges and compunctions of
heart for recidivation^ and relapses after conversion, even while they are
groaning under the power and burden of the body of death, Romans 7. And to add no
more, here are most excellent counsels and directions to serious seekers of
fellowship with God to guide them in their way, and help them forward to the
attainment of that fullness of joy which is to be had in fellowship with the
Father and the Son. That the Lord may bless all such to whose hands these
Sermons shall come, with blessings suit^ble to their souls condition,
es^ecially (the serious Christian.) for whose soul furtherance and advancement
these Sermons were first Penned, and now Printed, is the most affectiona^
desire of

Thy Servant in the Gospel of our dearest Lord and Savior* A. S.

SERMON I^
1 John 1.1. That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, etc.


IT is the great qualification of a Disciple, or Hearer, to be attentive, and
docile, to be capable of teaching, and to apply the mind seriously to it: it is
much to get the ear of a man; if his ear be gotten, his mind is the more easily
gained: Therefore those who professed eloquence, and studied to persuade men to
any thing, used in the entry, to fall upon some thing that might stir up the
attention of their hearers, or make them the more inclinable to receive
instruction, or catch their ^avour or good will, which is of great moment to
persuasion: for it is sometimes fit to open the passages of the heart by such
means, that there may be the more easy entry for instruction and persuasion.
Truly there is something of this Art runs here in a divine channel; as indeed
all these rules of humane wisdom attain their perfection, when they meet with
a divine spirit, that elevats them to a more transcend^nt use. Happy was that
eloquence of Paul's, and something like the sweet inspi^ation of Angel^, by
which they prevail with the ^pi^its of men: Nevertheless, being crafty (^aith
he) I caught you with guile, ^ Cor. 12 16. The^e were, piae frauds, whe^eby he
used to (...) poor souls out of the pit, and pluck them out of the fire; and he
that said, I will m^ke you fi^hers of men, taught them to use some holy deceit,
to present some things for the allurement of souls, and so to surround and
enclose them with most weighty and convincing reasons. This beloved Apostle who
leaned upon Christ's bosom, and was likely to learn the very secrets of the art
of fishing souls, you see how he goes about the business; he uses an holy art
in this Preface; being about to give a re-capitulation of the whole Gospel, and
to make a short summary of the Doctrine of it, for the more effectual
establishment, and confirmation of souls already converted, and for the more
powerful pe^swasion of others to embrace it; he uses all the skill that can be
in the entry, to dispose men's hearts to receive it; like a wise Orator, he
labors to make them attentos, dociles, and benevolos: to stir up their
attention, to conciliat their affection, and so to make them docile, and easily
teachable: He stirrs up attention, when he shows that he is not to speak about
trifling light matters, or low things, or things that do not concern them; but
concerning the greatest, most concerning, and important things to them, even
the word of life, in which all their life was wrapped up: which though it was
ancient in it self, yet withal it was a new thing to the world, and so for all
respects deserved to be taken serious notice of. Then he conciliats their
benevolence and good will, by showing his own good affection toward them, and
his great design in it, that it was only for their good and salvation, that he
had nothing else before him, but to have them partakers with himself, in that
same happiness: he had sound a jewel, and he hides it not, but proclaims it,
that all men may have fellowship with him, and that is, with God, and that
cannot but bring in full joy to the heart. Now a soul being made thus
attentive, and willing to hear, it is the best disposition, that makes them
most capable of being taught. If those two stays were come over; the careless
regard that is in men's hearts toward the Gospel, and the suspicious thoughts
and prejudices against the Ambassadors of it, then what would hinder to
believe it? The great miseries of men are, Inconsideration, and
Misapprehension: Either men are so noised with other things, continually
buzzing in their ears, and their hearts so possessed with the clamours of their
lusts, and the cries of the things of this world, that they have no leisure so
much as to hearken patiently to this blessed sound, or to apprehend seriously
what weight and moment lies in it; and so the most part of men cannot give that
^^rnest and deep attention that is nec^ss^^i^y ^equi^ed for this divine
teaching; or else there a^e many mistakes and misconception^ of the Gospel,
which sometimes arise to that hight of ^easoning against God, and prej^dices
against them that ca^^y this message; which usually a^e joined together, and
the^e stop (...) ea^s of men against the wisest and most powe^ful enchantment
of P^eaching, that it gains not much g^ound on them. O that ye would once
listen to the Gospel, Hea^ken and incline your ears unto me, i^ the Lords first
great request: and i^ once you do but se^io^sly apply your minds and hearts, to
see what is held out unto you, and to prove what good i^ in it, certainly these
sure and eve^lasting me^cies will mercifully and sweetly c^tch you with guile,
and deceive you, (if I may say so) to your eternal advantage. Wisdom, the
Fathers wisdom, begs but an equal hea^ing of you, let her have but a patient
hearing, and a silent impartial judgment of the heart, and she will ca^^y it
off all that suit you: It is lamentable that the voice of God should be
out-cryed by men's continual uninterrupted flood of business, that fills the
heart with a continual noise, and keeps men in such a constant hurry and
distemper, that they can give time and patie^^e to nothing else* and this is
only the advantage, the world and the lust^ of it have; for if they come once
under a sober and serious ex^mination, and the other party, that is, Jesus
Christ, and the Word of Life, might h^ve the liberty to be heard in the inward
retired thoughts of the heart, it would soon be found how unequal they are, and
that all their efficacy consists, in our ignorance, and their strength, in our
weakness; Certainly Christ would carry it, to the conviction of all that is in
the soul. I beseech you let us giv^ him this attention.

He that answer^ a tale before he hear it, its a solly and weakness to him: A
^olly certainly it is to give this Gospel a repulse before ye hear it: It
promises life and immortality, which nothing else does; and you intertain
other things upon lower promises and expectations, even after frequent
experiences of their deceitfulness: What a madness then is it to hear this
promise of life in Christ, so often beaten upon you, and yet never so much as
to put him to the proof of it? and to put him off continually who knocks at
your hearts, be^o^e you will consider attentively who it is that thus
importunes you. O my beloved, that you would hear him to Amen, let him speak
freely to your hearts, and commune with them in the night on your beds, in your
greatest retirement from other things, that you may not be disturbed by the
noise of your lusts and business; and I persuade my self, you who have now
least mind of this life, and joy in God, should find it, and find it in him:
But to cut off ^ll convictions and persuasions ^t first, and to set such a
gua^d at your minds, to provide that nothing o^ that ^ind come in* or else that
it be cast out as an enemy, thi^ is unequal, ignorant, and unreasonable
dea^ing, which you alone will repent of, it may be too late, when past ^emedy.

He p^opounds that which he is to speak, in the fi^t^st way for the
commendation of it to their hearts: and Oh! How vast a difference betwixt this,
and the ordinary subject of men's discou^^e^? our ears are filled continually
with reports: and it is the usual way of men to delight to hear, and to report,
even those things that are not so delightful in themselves; and truly there are
not many occur^ences in the world (^uppose you had a Di^^nal of the ^ff^irs of
all men, every week) that can give any solid refreshment to the heart, except
in the holy meditation of the vanity, vexation, and inconstancy that God has
subjected all those things unto. But its sad, that Christians, who have so
noble and divine, so pleas^nt and profitable things, to speak upon one to
another, are notwithstanding as much subject to that Atheni^n disease, to be
i^ching after new things continually, and to spend our time this way, to
repo^t, and to hear news; and alas, wh^t a^e those things that are tossed up
and down continually, but the follies, weaknesse^, impotencie^ and wickedness,
ambition and avarice of men, the iniquity and impiety of the world that lies in
wickedness; and is there any thing in this, either pleasant or profitable,
that we should delight to intertain our own thoughts, and others ears with
them? But the Subject that is here entreated of, is of another nature, nothing
in it self so excellent, nothing to us so convenient, That which was from the
beginning, of the word of life, we declare unto you. O how pleasant and sweet a
voice is that which sounds from Heaven, be those confused noises ^re that arise
from the earth? This is a Message that is come from Heaven, with him that came
down from it: and indeed that is the Airt, from whence good news has come;
Since the first curse was pronounced upon the earth, the earth has brought
forth nothing, but thorns and b^iars of contention, stri^e, sorrow, and
vexation: Only from above has this Message been sent to renew the world again,
and recreat it, as it were: There are four properties by which this infinitely
surpasses all other things can be told you. For it self it is most excellent*
for its endurance, it is most ancient; and to us, it is most profitable; and
both in its self, and to u^, it is most certain; and by these the Apostle
labors to prepare their hearts to serious attention.

For the excellency of the subject that he is to declare, its incomparable, for
it is no less, then that Jewel that is hid in the Mine of the Scriptures,
which he, as it were, digs up, and shows and o^^er^ it unto them; that Jewel (^
say) which, when a man has sound, he may sell all to buy it; that Jewel, more
precious then the most precious desires and delights of men, even Jesus Christ,
the substantial word of life, who is the substance of all the shadows of the
Old Testament, the end of that ministry, the accomplishment of the promises,
and that very life of all Religion, without which there is nothing more vain
and empty. It i^ true, the Gospel is the word of life, and holds out salvation
to poor sinners, but yet it is Christ that is the life of that wo^d, not only
as touching the efficacy and power of it, but as touching the subject of it;
for the Gospel is a word ^f li^e only, because it speaks of him, who is the
life and the light of men; it is but a report of the true life, a^ John said, I
am not that light, but am sent to bear witness of that light, Joh. 1.8. So the
Gospel, though it be called the power of God to salv^tion, Romans 1.16. and the
savor of life, and the Gospel of salvation, Ephesians. 1 13. yet it is not that true
life, but only a testimony and declaration of it, it has not life and
immortality in it self, but only the bringing of those to light, and to the
knowledge of men, 2 Timothy 1.10. it is a discovery where these treasures are
lying* for the searching and finding.

To speak of this word of life, Jesus Christ, according to his eternal
subsistence in the infinite understanding of the Father; it would ce^tainly
requi^e a di^ine ^pi^it, more elevated above the o^dinary sphere of men, and
sep^rate from that earthlinesse, and impurity, that makes us incapable of
seeing that holy and pure Majesty. Angels were but low Messengers for this; for
how can they express to us, what they cannot conc^ive themselves, and
therefore wonder at the mystery of i^? I confes^e, the best way of speaking
those things, which so infinitely surpass created capacities, were to sit down
in silence, and wonder at them; and withal to taste such a sweetness, in the
immense greatness, and infi^it myste^iou^nesse of what we believe, as might
^avish the soul more, after that which is unknown, then all the perfections of
the world known and seen to the bottom can do. This Doctrine of the holy
Trinity has been propagated from the beginning of the world, even among the
Heathens, and derived by tradition from the first Fathers, or the Hebrews to
neighbor Nation^, and therefore they speak many divine things of that Infinite,
Supreme Being, who is the fountain of the whole Creation, and that he created
all things by his most divine Word, and that his blessed Spirit is the union
and bond of both, and of all things besides. It is known what mysteries the
Pythagoreans apprehended in the number of Three, what perfection they imagined
to be in it: So much was let out, as might either make them without excuse, or
prepare the world to receive readily the (...) should be (...) ^ev^ale^: It i^
commonly he^d forth, that this eternal Word, i^ the b^^^h o^ the infinite
understanding o^ God, reflecting upon his own most ab^olu^e and pe^fect being;
which i^ ^llust^ated by some poor comparison to us Creatures, who ^o^m in our
mind* in the understanding of any thing, an inward word, or image of the
object, some rep^e^entation and similitude of that we un^e^st^nd, and this is
mo^e perfect then an external vocal expression can be; so we have a weak and
finit conception of the acting of that infinite wisdom of God, by which he knows
himself, that the^e results, as it were, upon it, the per^ect subst^ntial
im^ge, and the express character of the Divine Essence; and therefore is the
Son of God called, the Word which was with God, and the wisdom of the Father,
because he is, a^ it were, the very birth of his unde^standing, and not only
the Image of his own Essence, but the Idea, in which he conceived, and by which
he created the visible world. Then we use to conceive the H^ly ^host, as the
production of his blessed will, whereby he loves, delights, and has
complacency in his own all-sufficient, all-blessed Being, which he himself
alone pe^fectly comprehend* by his infinite understanding* and therefore called,
the Spirit, a word borrowed from ^esemblance to poor cre^t^res, who have many
impulses, and inclination^ to several things, and are carried to motion, and
action, rather from that part which is invisible in them; the subtilest parts
therefore called Spirits: So the Lo^d applies his Almighty power, and exerceth
his infinite wisdom, according to the pleasure and determination of his will,
for that seems to be the immediate p^inciple of wo^king; therefore there i^
mention made of the Spirit, in the Creation of the wo^ld, He sent ^ut his
Spirit, and they were ^reated, P^al. 104.30. These are the weak and low
attempts of men to ^each the height of that unsearchable mystery; such
conjectu^es we have of this Word of God, and his eternal gene^ation, as if
Trees could take upon them to unde^stand the nature of Beasts, or as if Beasts
would presume to give an account of the spirit that acts in men: Certainly the
distance is in^initly greater between God and us; and he must needs behold
greater vanity, folly, and darkness, in our clearest apprehensions of his
Majesty, then we could ^ind in the reasonings and conceptions of Beasts about
our nature. When our own conception in the womb, is such a mystery, as made
David to sa^, O how wonderfully am I made, and fearfully? he saw a curious art
and wisdom in it, that he could not understand, and he believed an infinite
power, he could not conceive, which surprised his soul with such unexp^cted
matter of wonder, as made him fear and tremble at the thought of it. I say,
when the generation of a poor creature, has so much depth of wisdom in it,
now can thou ^^ink to understand that eve^lasting wonder of Angel^, the birth
and conception of that eternal wisdom of God? An^ if thou can not understand
from whence the wind comes, and whither it goes, or how thine own spirits beat
in thy veins, what is the production of them, and what their motions? How can
we then conceive the procession of the Holy Ghost, which eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, nor h^th it entered into the heart of man to consider it?

SERMON II^
1 John 1.1. That which was from the beginning, etc.


THings are commended sometimes, because they are ancient, especially Doctrines
in Religion, because truth is before error, and falsehood is but an aberration
from truth; and therefore th^re is so much ple^ and contention among men, about
Antiquity, as if it were the sufficient rule of verity; but the abuse is, that
men go not far enough backward in the steps of Antiquity, that is, to the most
ancient rule, and pro^ession, and practice of truth in Scripture, to Christ and
his Apostles, but halt in their Grandfathers Tombs. But sometimes things a^e
commended, ^ec^^^e new; the nature of man being inclined to change and variety,
and ready to su^fe^t and loath accustomed things: Even as the stomach finds
appetite for new and unusual dyets, so the mind of man has a sec^et longing
after new doct^ines, and things. Now we have both these combined together in
this Subject, which makes it the more excellent and wonder^ul; Antiquity, and
Novelty: for Antiquity, it is that which was from the beginning, and which was
with the Father, and that is before all Antiquity, even from eternity; not only
from the beginning of time, but before all time, before all imaginable
beginnings. He, of whom he speaks, Christ Jesus, the Fathers Word, was with the
Father, from the beginning, with the Ancient of Days, who infinitely, and
unmeasurably, antidates all antiquity, to whose endurance, all antiquity that
is renowned among men, is but novelty, to whom, the world is but as of six
days standing, or but as of yesterday, if we consider that infinite,
beginningless, immensurable endurance of God, before this world: What a boddom
or clew is that, that can never be untwined by the imaginations of men and
Angels; To all eternity they should never unwind it, and come to the end of
that thread, of the age of the Father, and the Son; who possessed one another
before the hills were, and before the foundations of the mountains: This is it
that makes Religion the rich^st an^ most tra^^c^ndent subject in the world,
that it p^esent^ us with a two^old ete^nity, and invi^o^s the soul before and
behin^ with an eternity without beginning, only proper to God, and an ete^nity
without and, communicated to Angels and men, from God. That which was from the
beginning, and before all beginning, either real, or im^gined, How much moment
and weight is in that, to persuade a soul, and compose it, beyond all the
specious and painted appearances of the wo^ld? to consider that such ^ Savior
is holden out unto us, to come unto, and lean upon, that is the Rock of ages,
upon whose word, this huge frame is bottomed, and stands fi^m; one who
infinitely exceeds and prevents all things, visible or invisible, all their
mutations and changes, one who was possessed of the Father, as hi^ delight,
before the foundation of the world, and so most likely to reconcile him to us,
and prevail with him; yea, most certainly, they must have one will, and one
delight, who were undivided from all eternity; and they then rej^y^i^g in the
h^bitable parts of the earth, taking complacency in their own thoughts of peace
and good will they had toward us, afte^wa^ds to b^eak forth. And if both
delighted in their very projects and plots upon the business, what may we think
the accomplishment of the whole design will add, if it were possible to
supe^add to their delight? I would have you upon this, to gather two
considerations, ^o^ your edification: One, to think what an incompa^ably
excellent Savior we have, one with God, equal to him, yea, one with him from
all ete^nity, and so how strong a foundation there is for faith and confidence?
What a Rock to establish a tossed soul upon? Man's misery and curse being for
all eternity, their is one to deliver from that, who was from all eternity. And
who could purchase unto us such absolute bl^ssedness throughout all ete^nity,
who was not himself from all eternity? What mavelous congruity and beauty is
in the ways of God? How is all fitted and ^ramed by infinite wisdom? to the end
that we may have strong consolation. Do you not see the infinite evil, and
hainousness of sin, in the giving of such a p^ecious ransom for it? O how is
the black visage of sin pourtrayed in the beauty and glory of the Mediators
Person? How is it painted, even to horror in his death? Again, what divinity
and worth is put upon the immortal soul of man, that is but of yesterday, since
the beginning? When he that was the delight of God, before all beginning, is
weighted in the balance, as it were, with it, and no other thing found
sufficient for exchange and compensation, that the soul may be redeemed: And
does not this answer all the jealousies, and suspicious thoughts, and fea^ful
apprehensions, arising from the consideration of our own weakness and
infirmity? When such an one is offered, as is able to save to the utmost. Then
I would desire you may believe, that the Father is as well minded to the
salvation of sinne^s, as the Son; ^or they were sweet company together from all
eternity, and, as it we^e, contrived this plot and design between them, to save
and ^edeem mankind. Some intertain ha^sher thoughts of the Father, as if Christ
were more accessible, and exorable; but the truth is, he has given his Son
this command, and therefore he professed, that it was not so much his will, as
his Fathers, he was about: Therefore correct your apprehension^, do not stand
aback from the Father, as it were, till you have prevailed with Christ, no,
that is not the way; come in your first address to the Father, in the Son, for
so he wills you; not because he must be ove^come by his Sons persuasion, but
because he would have his love to run in that ch^nnel, through Christ to us:
And indeed our S^viour was much in holding out the love of the Father, and
labored to persuade the wo^ld of it. Withal, I wish you to consider whom ye
neglect and despise, who hear this Gospel daily, and the word of life holden
out unto you; and yet suffer not your hearts to be moved, or stirred after him.
Alas, my beloved, to forsake so great a mercy, as the eternal Word of Life, as
the infinite Wisdom of the Father, and to let the offer of this, every day run
by us, and never to find leisure and vacancy from the multitude of businesses,
and throng of the thoughts, and lusts of the world, never to start so far
backward, as to look beyond this world, to God, and his Son Jesus Christ, never
to mind seriously, either him that was before all things visible, or our own
souls, that must survive, and outlive all this visible frame. This, I say, is
the great misery and condemnation of the world, that this eternal light has
shined, and you love your own darkness better: But be persuaded, that one day
ye will think one offer of this Word of Life, better then life, better,
infinitely better then the most absolute life that the attendance and
concurrance of all the creatures could yield you. O then that ye would incline
your ears and heart^ to this that is declared unto you, to receive this Word of
Life, that was from the beginning, and ye may be persuaded, ye shall enjoy a
blessedness without end.

But there is withal a newness in this subject, which both increases
admiration, and may the more engage our affection; for the life was manifested
(says he) verse. 2. and he is such a word of life, as though he was invisible,
and untouchable from the beginning, yet he wa^ lately clothed with flesh, that
mad^ him both visible, and capable of being handled. Now truly these ^re the
two Poles, about which the mystery, glory, and wonder of Christianity turns:
the antiquity of his real existence, as God; and the latenesse or novelty of
his appearance in the flesh, a^ man; Nothing ^o old, ^or he has the infinite
fore-start of the oldest and most ancient Creatu^e^. Take those Angels, the
Sons of God, who sung together in the first morning of the Creation, yet their
generation can soon be told, and their years numbered; it is easy to calculat
all antiquity, and we should not reach six thousand years, when it is taken at
the largest measure; and what are six thousand years in his sight, but as six
days, when they are past? and if we would run backward, as far before that
point of b^ginning, and calculat other six thousand, yet we a^e never a jote
nearer the age of the Son of God. Suppose a mountain of sand, as big a^ the
earth, and an Angel to take from it one g^ain every year, your imagin^tion
would weary it self, e^e ye reckoned in what space this mountain should be
diminished, or removed: It would ce^tainly trouble the Arithmetic of the
wisest Mathematician. Now imagine as many years, or ages of years, to have run
out before the world took its beginning, a^ the years in which the Angel would
exhaust this mountain; yet we have not come a white nearer the endur^nce of our
Lord and Savior, whose being is lik^ a Circle, without beginning, or end.
Behold he is great, and we know him not, and the number of his years c^nnot be
searched out, Job 36.26. and who can declare his generation? The age of thi^
Word is such a labyrinth, with innumerable turning^, and wind^ngs in it, which
will always lea^ them round that enter in it; and so they are, after the
longest progress and sea^ch, but just where they we^e, always beginning, and
never coming nea^er the beginning of his duration, because it is the beginning
of all things that have a beginning, but has none it sel^. Now he that was
thu^ blessed from everlasting, who dwelt in ina^cessible light and glory, which
no m^n has seen, nor can ^ee, infinitely ^emoved from all humane capacities and
sense^; he, I say, begins to be mani^ested in the fullness o^ time; and to make
himself visible, he takes on o^r flesh; and all for this pu^po^e, that he who
was the substantial life in himself, and the eternal life, in an essential and
necessary way, might become l^^e to poor dead sinners, and communicate to them
eternal life; and truly it was no wonder that all ages were in expectation of
this, from the beginning of the world, since it was first promised, that the
Inhabitants of Heaven were in a longing expect^tion to see, and look into this
myste^y, for ther^ is something in it more wonderful then the creation of th^s
huge frame of Heaven and Earth: God made himself in ^ manner visible, by making
the visible world: His power, goodness, and wisdom, are every where imprint^d
in great Characters o^ the whole, and all the parts of it: the light, How
glorious a garment is it? with which he is, as it were, clothed: the Heavens,
How Majestic a Throne? the Earth, How stately a Footstool? the Thunder, How
glorious and te^rible a voice? In a word, the being, the beauty, the ha^mony,
and proportion of this huge frame, is but a visibl^ appe^rance of the invisible
God. But in taking on our flesh, the Word is more wonderfully mani^ested, and
made visible; for, in the first, the Creator made creatures to start out of
nothing, at his command; but in this, the Creator is made a Creature: He once
gave a beginning of being to things that were not; being before all beginning
himself; he now takes a beginning, and become^ flesh, that he was not. And what
i^ it in which he was manifested? Is it the spiritual nature of Angel^? But
though that far excel ours, yet it i^ no manifestation of him to us; for he
should still be as unknown as ever. Is it in the glory, pe^fection, and flower
of the visible world, as in the Sun, and lights of Heaven? But though that have
more show of glory, then the flesh of man; yet it makes not much to our
comfort; there would not be so much consolation in that manifest^tion.
Therefore, O how wisely and wonderfully is it contrived, for the good of lost
man? That the Son of God shall be made of a woman, that the Father of spirits
shall be manifested in the lowest habit of our flesh: and the lower and baser
that be, in which he appears, the higher the mystery is, and the richer the
comfort is; suppose the m^nifestation ^f glory should not be so great, yet the
manifestation of love is so much the g^eater; and this is the great design; God
so loved, etc. Ioh. 3. Nay, ^ may say, even the glory of the only begotten Son
of God, was the more ^isibly manifested, that he appeared in so low and unequal
a shape; for power, to show it self in weakness, for glory, to ^ppear in
baseness, for divinity, to kyth in humanity, and such glorious rays, to b^eak
forth from under such a dark cloud; this was greater Glory, and more Majesty,
then if he had only showed himself in the perfection of the creatures. Now it
is easy to distinguish the vail, from that it covers; to separat infirmity
from divinity: but then it had been more difficult, if his outw^rd ^ppearance
had been so glorious, to give unto God what was Gods, and to give the creatures
what was the creatures: The more near his outward shape had been to his divine
nature, the less able had we been to see the glory of his Divinity through it.

Now, my beloved, when both these are l^id together, the ^ncientnesse of our
Savior, and with^l the newness of his appearance in the flesh, by which he
has come so near us, and, as it were, brought his own Majesty within our
sphere, to be apprehended by us; and for no other end, but to make life and
immort^lity to shine forth, ^s beams from him, to the quickening of dead souls.
O how should this conjunction endear him to us: that the everlasting Father
should become a Child for us; that is one wonder. The next wonder i^, that we
who are enemies, should be made the children of God by him: when the da^k and
obscure prophesying of this, when the twilight of Jewish type^ and shadows did
creat so much joy in the hea^t^ of ^elievers, in so much that they longed for,
and ^ejoyced to see afar off that day; when such a da^k ^epresentation of this
Word of L^fe, wa^ the very life of the godly in the wo^ld, ^or ^our thousand
years; O how much i^ the cause of joy increased, by the rising of the Sun of
Rig^teousn^sse himself, and appearing in the very da^kest nig^t of Supe^stition
and Idolatry that was ever over the wo^ld? When the true Life has ^risen
himself, and b^ought to open light that life that wa^ obscu^ely couched up in
P^ophecies and Ce^emonies, a^ hid under so many Clouds. O then, let us open our
h^^rts to him, and intertain th^se new and fresh tidings, with new delights:
Though these be now mo^e then 16^0. years old, yet they ^re still recent to a
believing heart; th^re is ^n everlasting spring in them, that ^ends out every
day fresh c^nsolation on to souls, a^ refreshing, as the first day* thi^ spring
was opened. This is the new Wine that never grows old, nay, it is ^ather every
gene^ation renewed, with the accession of some new manifestation of the love of
God. Ch^ists Incarnation was the first manifestation of the Sun, the very
morning of light and life, the dayspring, vi^^^^ng the world, tha^ was bu^ied
in an hel^i^h darkness of Heathen Idolatry: and even the Church of God, in the
grave of Superstition, and corruption of Doctrine and manne^s: then did that
Sun of Righteousness first set up his head above the Ho^^zon; but it is but
one day still, he has been but coming by degrees to the Meridian, and shining
more and more to the perfec^ day; That Sun has not set since, but made ^
course, and gone a round about the World, in the Preaching of the Gospel, and
brought life, and light about, by succession, from one nation ^o another; and
on^ generation to another; and therefor we ought to intertain it this day with
acclamations, and jubilation of heart, as the people that ly under the North,
do welcome the Sun when it ^^mes once a year to them. After that the kindnes^
and love of God our Savior toward man appeared, Tit. 3.4. (...), his kindly
and affectionat love to mankind, that is it that shines so brightly; the beams
of grace and love to men, are the rays that are scattered from this Sun of
Righteousness. O the hardness of men's hearts, the impenetr^ble obstinacy of
man, that this cannot melt or pierce. How damnable and miserable a case are
they into, who can neither be persuaded with the eternity of this subject, to
adore it, nor moved with the late appearance of the love of God to the world,
in sending of his Son? whom neither Christ's Majesty, nor his Humility, can
draw. Certainly this make^ sinners under the Gospel, in a more deplorable
condition then So^om; because if he ha^ not come, they had not had such sin,
but now it i^ without excuse, etc.

SERMON III^
1 John 1.1, 2, 3. That which we have heard and seen of the word of life,
declare we unto you, etc.


THings that are excellent in themselves, will be lo^ed for themselves; but
they become the more suitable object of affection, if they have with^l some
suitableness and convenience to us: Yet neither the excellency, nor
convenience of the object, is sufficient to engage the heart, if the^e be not
something in the mind too, suitable to the obj^ct: that is, the apprehension of
that reality and good that is in it; for ^s there is a certainty in the object,
that makes it a real, not imaginary thing; so there must be a certainty in the
subject, whereby the thing is ^pprehended to be true, good, and excellent; and
then the object of af^ection is completed. Some things there are in nature,
excellent in themselves, but they rather beget admiration, then ^ffection,
because they are not suitable to our necessities: Other things of a more
ordinary purchase, have some convenience to supply our wants; and though they
be less worth in their own nature then precious stones, and such like; yet
they are more desired. But there is this lamentable disproportion betwixt our
^pprehensions, and the things themselves, which is the ground of much
disappointment; and so of vexation. The things of this world having nothing of
that solid excellency, or true worth, and convenience to our souls, nothing
suit^ble to our immortal spirits; but being empty vain shadows, and windy
husks, in stead of substantial tru^ food; yet there are high apprehensions, and
big conceits of them, which is a kind of monst^uous production, or empty
swelling of the mind; which because it has no bottom of solidity, it will fall
and evanish. Again, take a view of spiritual things, holden out in the Gospel,
and there is as incong^uous and unproportioned carriag^ of our hearts toward
them, they have a certainty, and reality, and subsistence in themselves, they
alone are excellent, and suit^ble to our spirits; notwithstanding, the mind of
man is hug^ly misshapen toward them by unbelief, and has nothing in his
apprehension suitable to the things themselves: they are represented as far
belo^ their true worth, as things temporal above their just value; and
therefore men are not enamoured with them, souls ^re not ravished after that
beauty that is in them.

Now the end of these word^ read, is to reform this irregular, disorderly
posture of your minds, to hold out to you things truly excellent, and
exceedingly convenient, things good and profit^^le, in the most superlative
degree, in the highest rank that your imagination can suppose; and then to
pe^swade you, that you are not deceived with vain words, or fair promises, but
that there is a certain truth, and an infallible reality in them, that you
being assertained in your souls, according to the ce^tainty of the things
presented, you may then ^reely, without any reserve, give your hearts to love,
embrace, and follow them. O that there might be such a meeting between your
hearts and this eternal life, that as he has come near to us, to be suitable
to us, your apprehension^ might draw near to be suitable to him: and by this
means, your souls might meet immediately with that Word of Life, and have that
constant fellowship with him, that is spoken of, verse. 3. so your joy should be
full. For joy is but the full peace of the desires; fill up all the wants of
the heart, and then it is full of joy. And so, when such a satisfying object is
pitched on, as does exactly correspond, and answer the inward ^pprehensions of
the mind; th^^ there is no more room in the heart for any other thing: as if
two Superfices were exactly plain and smooth, they could join so closly
together, that no air could come between them, and then they could hardly be
pulled asunder.

We spoke something of the excellency of tha^ Word of Life in himself, and i^
is ^ut little that is said, when all is said, in re^pect of that which He truly
is; but I fear we speak, and ye hear more of the^e things, then either o^ us
lively and affectionatly apprehends, or l^ys up in our hearts. I fear, that as
we say less then is, so more then we think; I mean, se^iously think upon. But
we shall proceed, such an eve^lasting glorious Person, though he have life in
himself, though he be never so excellent, as the Son of God, yet what is that
to us? It seems he is never a whit nearer us, or not m^re suitable to restore
us, then the very Majesty that we ^ffended. How far is he without our sight,
and without our comprehension? He is high as Heaven, Who shall ascend to b^ing
down that ^ternal life to us? But stay and co^side^, tha^ he is not only so
glorious in himself, but so gracious to us; he is not only invisible, as God,
but manifested to our senses, as Man: not only has life in himself, but is an
eve^lasting spring of life to us; not only has his Throne in Heaven with his
Father, but has c^m^ down to the world, to bring that eternal li^e near u^,
even in our mouth and hearts; to preach it, to purchase it, to seal it, and to
bestow it, and the life was manifested: The life, and that eternal life, word^
of force, that have some Emphasis in them: the life is much, that eternal life
is more; and yet these had been little to us, if not manifested to u^: Life
might have remained hid in God, eternal life might have recided in Christ the
Fountain for all eternity, and nothing diminished of their happiness, if these
had never sprung out and vented themselves; if that life that was with the
Father from the beginning, had never come down from the Father, we wo^ld have
missed it, not they; we alone had been miserable by it: Well then, there is a
manifestation of life in Christ^ low descent to death; the^e is a manifestation
of the riche^ of love and grace in the poverty and emptiness of our Savior,
and thus he is suited to us and our necessities every way fitly correspondent:
and now it is not only, as the F^ther has life in himself, so the Son h^th
life in himself, but there is a derivation of that life to man; that donation
of life to the Son, Ioh. 5.26. was not so much for any need he had of it, as by
him to bestow it on us, that it might b^, as the living Father has sent me,
and I live by the Father: So he that eats me, even he shall live by me, Joh.
6.57. As Parents that retain ^ffection to their Children, albeit they have
committed great injuries, for which they are driven out of their house, yet
they will, as it were underhand bestow upon them, and exercise that same love
in ^ covered way, by a third person, by giving to them, to impart to their
Children. Notwithstanding this halts too much, for our Father dissembles not
his love, but proclaim^ it in sending his Son: Nor does Christ hide it, but
declares, that he is instructed with sufficient fu^niture for eternal life,
that himself is the bread of life sent from Heaven, that whosoever receives it
with delight, and ponders, and meditats on it in the heart, and so digests it
in their ^ouls, they shall find a quickening, quieting, comforting, and
strengthening ve^tue in him. Nay, the^e is a strait connection between his life
and ours, because I live, ye shall live also; as i^ he could no more want us,
then his Father can want him, Ioh. 14.19. And as if he could no more be happy
without u^, then his Father without him. And whence is it come to pass, but
from his manifestation for this very end and purpose? How should such strange
Logic hold? Whence such a because? If this had not been ^ll his errand into
the world, for which his Father dispensed to want him, as it were, and he did
likewise condescend to leave his Father for a season. And now this being the
business he came about, it is strange h^ appeared in so unsuitable and
unlikely a form, in weakness, poverty, misery, ignominy, and all the
infirmities of our flesh; which seemed rather contrary to his design, and to
indispose him for giving life to others, whose life was a continued death in
the eyes of me^; and the last act of the scene seems to blow up the whole
design of quickening dead sinners; when he who was designed Captain of
Salvation, is killed himself: For if he save not himself, how should he save
others? And yet be^old the infinite wisdom, power, and grace ^f God, working
unde^-g^ound, giving life to the dead, by the dea^^ o^ life it ^elf: saving
those that are lost, by one that lost himself: overcoming the world by
weakness: conq^ering Satan by suffering: t^iump^ing over death by dying: L^ke
that ^enowned King of the Lacedaemonians, who (when he heard of an Oracle, that
if the Gene^al were sa^ed alive, the Army could not be victoriou^) changed his
h^bit, and went amongst the Camp ^f his enemies, and sought valiantly till he
was killed; whom when the Armies of the enemies understood to be the King and
General, they presently lost their hearts, and retired and fled: So our
Savior, and Captain of our Salvation, has offered himself once for all, and
by being killed, has purc^ased life to all that believe in hi^ death, and that
eternal life: Therefore, he is not only the word of life in himself, and that
eternal life in an essential manner, but he alone has the words of eternal
life, and is the alone fountain of life to us.

Now for the certainty of this manifestation of the word of life in our flesh,
both that he wa^ man, and that he was more then a man, even God: this, I say,
we have the greatest evidence of, that the world can afford, next to our own
seeing and handling. To begin with the testimony set down here, of these who
were e^r and eye-w^tnesses of all; which if they be men of credit, cannot but
make a great impression of faith upon others. Consider who the Apostles were,
men of great simp^icity, whose education was so me^n, and expectations in the
wo^ld so low, that they could not be supposed to conspire together to a
falsehood; and especially when there was no wo^ldly inducement leading them
thereto, but rather all things pe^^wading to the contra^y: their very
adve^sa^ies could never object any thing against them, but want of lea^ning,
and simplicity, which are furthest from the su^pition of deceitfulness. Now
how were it possible, think you, that so many thousands every where, should
h^ve received this new Doctrine, so unsuitable to humane ^eason, from their
mouths, if they had not pe^swaded them that themselves were eyewitnesses of
all these miracles that he did, to confi^m his Doctrine, and this testimony had
not been above all imaginable exception? Yea, so evident was it in matter of
fact, that both enemies themselves confessed, the Jews and Gentiles that
persecuted that way, were constrained through the evidence of the truth, to
acknowledge, that such mighty works showed forth themselves in him, though they
out of malice imputed it to ridiculous and blasphemous causes: And besides, the
Apostle used to provoke to the very testimony of 500. who had seen Jesus rise
from death, which is not the custom of liars, neither is it possible for so
many, as it were, of purpose, to conspire to such an untruth, as had so many
miseries and calamities following on the profession of it, 1 Cor. 15.6.

But what ^ay they? That which we have heard of, not only from the Prophets,
who have witnessed of him ^^om the beginning, and do ^ll con^pi^e together to
give a testimony that he i^ the Savior of the wo^ld: but from John, who was
his Messenger, immediately sent before his f^ce, and whom all men, even Christ's
enemies, acknowledged to be ^ Prophet; and therefore, his visi^le pointing out
the Lamb of God, his decla^ing how near he was, and preferring of him ^nfinitly
before himself, who had so much authority himself, (and so is likely to have
spoken the truth; being misled with no ambition, or affectation of honor,) his
instituting a new ordinance, plainly pointing out the Messiah at the door^, and
publishing constantly that voice, The kingdom of Heaven is at hand; these we,
and all the people have heard, and he^rd not with indignation, but with
reverence and respect. But above all, we heard himself the true Prophet, and
sweet Preacher o^ Israel, since the first day he began to open his mouth in the
Ministry of the Gospel, we have with attentive ears, and earnest hearts,
received all from his mouth, and laid up these golden sayings in our heart^: He
did not constrain them to abide with him, but there was a ^ecret power that
went from him, that chained them to him inevitably, Lord, whither shall we go
from thee, for thou have the words of eternal life? O! that was an attractive
virtue, a powerful conserving virtue, that went out of his mouth. We heard him,
say they, and we never heard any speak like him, not so much for the pomp and
Majesty of his style, for he came low, sitting on an Ass, and was as
condescending in his manner of ^peech, as in his other behavior: but because
he taught with authority: there was a divine virtue in his Preaching, some
spa^kles of a divine spirit and power in his discou^ses, broke out from under
the plainness and simplicity of it; and made our souls truly to apprehend of
him what was sacrilegiously attributed in flattery to a man, the voice of God
and not of man. We heard him so many years speak familiarly to us, and with us,
by which we were certainly persuaded he was a true man, and then we heard him
in his speeches open the hid mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, revealing the
will of the Father, which no man could know, but he that was with the Father,
and came down from him: we heard him unfolding all these shadows and coverings
of the Old Testament, expounding Moses and the Prophets, taking off the vail,
and uncovering the Ark and Oracles: And how did our hearts burn within u^,
while he talked with us, and opened to u^ the S^riptures? We heard him daily in
the Synagogues expound the Scriptures, whereof himself was the living
Commentary, when he read them, we saw the true Exposition before our eyes.

Now, my beloved, you may be admitted to hear him too, for the sum of the
living words that come ^^om the Word of Life are written; his Se^mons are
ab^idged in the Evangelists, that y^u may read them, and when you read them,
think within your se^f, that you hear his holy mouth speak them; S^t your
selves as amongst hi^ Disciple^, that s^ ^^u may believe, and believi^g may
h^ve etern^l life; for, for this end a^e they written, Ioh. 20.30, 31.

SERMON IV^
1 John 1.2. -- Which we have seen, etc.


THere is a gradation of certainty here, hearing himself speak, is more then
hea^ing by report; but an eyewitness is better then ten ear-witnesses, and
handling adds a thi^d assurance; for the sense of touching gives the last and
greatest evidence of truth. It is true, that the sense is properly
correspondent to sensible things, and of it self, can only give testimony to
his Humanity; yet I conceive these are here alleged for both, even also to
witness his glorious and Divine Nature* which though it did not (...) under
sight and handling, yet it discovered it self to be l^tent, under that visible
covering of flesh, by sensible effect^, no less, then the spirit of m^n, which
is invisible, manifests its p^e^ence in the body, by such operations sensible,
as can proceed from no other principle: And the^e^o^e, this faithful witness
adds, which we have looked upon; which relates not only to the outward
attention of the eyes, but points at the inward intention, and affection of the
heart: our senses did b^ing in such strange and marvellou^ object^ to our
minds, that we stood gazing, and beheld it over and over again, looked upon it
with ^eason, concluding what it might be; we gave intertainment to our minds,
to consider it wisely and deliberatly, and fastened our eyes, that we might
detain our hearts, in the consideration of such a glorious person. From this
then ye have two things clear; one is, that our Lord Jesus Christ was a true
man, and that his Disciples had all possible evidence of it, which the History
more abundantly shows; he conversed with them familiarly, he eat and drank with
them, yea, his conversation in the world, was very much condescending in
outward behavior, to the customs of the wo^ld, he eat with Pharisees when
they invited him; he refused not; but he was more bold with Publicans and
sinners, to conve^s with them; as being their greatest friend: He was uncivil
to none; would deterr none through a rigid austere conversation; and indeed, to
testify the truth o^ his Humane Nature, he came so low to partake of all
humane infirmities without sin, and to be subject to extraordinary afflictions
and crosses, as to the eyes of the world it did quite extinguish his Divine
Glory, and bury i^ in misbelief. This wh^^h we speak of, as a testimony and
evidence that he was m^n, was the very grand stumbling block and ^ffence of the
Jews and Gentiles; which they made use of as an evidence and certain testimony
that he was not God: the evidence of the one seems to give in evidence to the
other. But let us con^ider this, for it is a sweet and pleas^nt S^bject, if our
hearts were suitably framed to delight in it, that there was as much evidence
to the conviction of all men's senses, of his Divine Majesty, as of his Humane
Infirmity: and t^^t there a^e two concu^^ing evidences, which enlig^tens one
another; which we shall show, p^rtly ^^om his own works and miracles, and
partly from the more then miraculous success and progress of the Gospel after
him.

For the first, John testifies, that not only they saw the baseness of his
outward shape, but the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full of grace and
truth, Joh. 1.14. John the Baptist sent some of hi^ Di^ciple^, because of their
own unbelie^, to enq^ire Jesus, Art thou he, or look we for another? And what
answer gave he them? What reason to convince them? Go (says he) and tell what
ye h^ve seen and heard, that the blind s^e, the l^m^ w^lk, and the lepers are
cleansed, the deaf hear, the dead are raised, and the poor re^eive the G^spel:
And blessed is he who ever shall not for my outwa^d unseemlinesse, and
baseness, offend; But go by that, in to the glory that shines out in such
works. It is said in Luke 7.21. that the same hour he ^ured many: Before he
spoke in answer, he answered them by his deeds; he gave a visible demonstration
of that they doubted of: For they could not but see a power above created power
in these work^, which surpass Nature and Art: so many wonderful works done, so
often repeated, be^o^e so many thousands, even many of his watchful and
observant enemies; and all done so easily by a word, i^finit cures for number
and quality wrought, which passed the skill of all Physicians; Devils
dispossessed, life restored, water converted into excellent wine, without the
maturation of the Sun, or help of the Vine tree; a little bread so strangely
enlarged to the satisfaction of many thousands, and more remaining then was
laid down; the winds and seas obeying his very word, and composing themselves
to silence at his rebuke; and infinite more of this kind; Are they not in the
common apprehension of men, of a degree superior to that of nature? Who could
restore life, but he that gave it? Whom would the Devils obey, but him at whom
they tremble? Who could transubstantiat water into wine, but he that created
both these substances, and every year by a long circuit of the operations of
nature, turns it into wine? Who could feed seven thousand with that which a few
persons would exhaust, but he that can creat it of nothing, and b^ whose wo^d
all thi^ (...) wo^ld sta^ted out of nothing? Nay, let us suppose these things
to be done only by divine assistance, by some peculiar divine infl^ence, then
certainly, if we consider the very end of this miraculous assistance of a
creature, that it was to conf^^m the Doctrine delive^ed by him, and make such a
deep impression of the truth of it in the he^^t^ of all, that it cannot be
^ooted out; this being the very genuine end of the wisdom of God in such works,
it must need^ follow, that all that which Christ revealed, both of himself and
the Father, of his own being with him from the beginning, of his ^eing one with
him, and being hi^ eternal Son; all this must need^ be in^allibly true; for it
is not supposible to ag^ee with the wisdom and goodness of God, to manifest so
much of his infi^it power and glory, in so extraordinary a manner, to bear
testimony to an impostor or deceiver. Therefore though no mo^e could be at
first exto^ted from an enemy of Christ* D^ct^ine, but that such mighty works
did show forth themselves, which could not be done, but by the Divine
assistance an^ extraordinary help of God: yet, even from that con^e^^ion it may
be strongly concluded, that seeing there was no other end imagin^^le of such
ext^aordin^^y assis^ance, but the con^irmation of hi^ new Doctrine, and that of
hi^ Divine Nature, being one of the chief points of it, it must need^ in^o^ce,
that he was not only helped by God, as M^ses, but that he was God, and did
these things by his own power. By this then it appears that though after so
many Prophesies of him, and exp^ctation^ from the beginning, we see but a man
in outward appearance despisable, and without comeliness and form; yet if we
could open the eyes of our ^ouls, and six them upon him, we behold as through
some small crainies, Majesty shining in his misery, power discovering it self
in his weakness, even that power that made the world, and man too: He was born
indeed, yet of a Virgin, he was weak and infirm himself, yet he healed all
others infirmities, even by his word; he was often an hungered, yet he could
feed five thousand at one time, and seven thousand at another, upon that which
would not have served his Disciples, or but served them; He was wearied with
travels, yet he gave rest to wearied souls: At length himself died, and that an
ignominious death, notwithstanding he raised the dead by his word, and at
length he raises himself by his own power. All this is included in this, we
have seen and handled; we saw him gloriously transfigured on the Mount, where
his countenance did shine as the Sun, and his raiment was white as light, and
two, the greatest persons in the Old Testament came out of Heaven, as it were,
to yield up the administration of shadows to his substance: and we saw the
Heaven opening in the sight of many thousands, and heard a testimony given him
from Heaven, This is my beloved Son, hear him: And then when he wa^ b^^ied, and
our hope with him, we saw him ^isen again, and our hope did ^ise with him, and
then ^ome of ^s handled his si^e^, to get ^ull pe^swasion; and all of us eat
and drank and c^nve^sed with him forty days: and to make a pe^iod, at length
we saw him ascending up to Heaven, and a Cloud receiving him a^ a Ch^^iot, to
take him out of our sight. Thu^, the W^rd was made flesh, and dwelt among us,
and we ^a^e seen his glory, as ^f the only beg^tten Son of God.

But besides that which the life and death of Jesus Christ carries engraven in
it of Divinity, there is one miracle, which may be said to transcend all that
ever was done, and it is one continued wonder since his resu^rection, even the
ve^tue and power of that crucified Savior, to conquer the world, by such
unsuitable, yea, contra^y mean^ and instruments. Heathenish Religion was spread
indeed universally through the wo^ld, but that was not one Religion, but one
name; for as many Nations, as many fancied gods, and in one Nation many. And
true it is, that M^humet^nism has spread it self far; but by what mean^? only
by the power of the sword, and the terror of an Empire. But here is a Doctrine
contrary to all the received custom^, and imbred opinions of men, without any
such means p^evailing throughout the world. Cyrus, when he was about to conquer
neighboring Nations, gave out a Proclamation, If any will follow me* if he be
a footman, I will make him an horseman, if he have a Vill^ge, I will give him
a City, if a City, I will bestow on him a Country, etc. Now mark how contrary
the proceeding of our Lord is: Go and preach (says he) Repent ye, for the
Kingdom of God is at hand. Here is his Proclamation, Repent ye. And, if any man
will be my Disciple, let him take up his ^ross and follow me, and deny himself
What disp^oportioned mean^? and yet how infinitely greater success? Cyrus could
not gain the Lacedaemonians to his side for all that, but Christ, though poor,
despised and contemptible, while alive, and at length thought to be quite
vanquished by the most shameful death, when he is lift up upon the Cross, to
the view and reproach of the world, he draws all men after him: He, by a few
fishermen, not Commanders, nor Orators, persuades the world, and within a few
years that crucified Lord is adored further and wider then any Empire did ever
stretch it self. All the power, majesty, and success of Alexander could nev^r
persuade the Nations, no, not his own followers to adore him as God: But h^re
one nailed to the Cross, Crowned with Thorns, rejected of all men, and within
a little space adored, wo^shiped, suffered for throughout the Nations, yea,
Kings and Emperors casting down their Crown^ at his feet, many thousands
counting it their honor to die upon that account. And do not the Trophies of
these Apostolic victories remain to this d^y, in every co^ner of the wo^ld,
after so many hun^^ed yea^^, in so many different, and so far dist^nt N^tio^^?
that some N^me p^e^ched, and all k^ee^ bo^in^ to it. These things conside^ed,
how much done, and by mean^ wo^^e then nothing, it t^a^^cends all the mi^^cles
that ever the world wond^ed at. N^w, my beloved, these things I m^nti^n ^or
this end, that ye may be pe^sw^ded upon sure ground^, that he who is pre^c^ed
unto you, is God able to save you, and according to the evi^ence of these
grounds, ye may believe in him, and give that co^dial assent to these
eve^lasting t^uths, an^ that welcome inte^tainment to ^im in your heart that
become^. I think certainly there i^ very little even o^ this solid assent and
perswasi^n of the Go^pel in the hearts of the m^^t p^^t; because they t^k^
things or name^ ^ath^r implicitly, and never se^iously consider what th^^
believe, and (...) grounds. But (...) a more pleasant or profitable meditation
th^n this, if we would enter in a serious consid^^ation of the truth and
certainty of these things we have received. O how would such evid^nce open the
he^rt to ^n entire and full closu^e with them, and embracement of them.

SERMON V^
1 John 1.3. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that ye
als^ may have fellowship with us, etc.


THere are many things that you may desire to hear, and it may be are usually
spoken of in public, which the generality of men's hea^ts are more carried
after; but t^uly, I should w^ong my self and you both, if I should take upon me
to discourse in these things, which it may be some desire, for direction or
information conce^ning the times: for I can neither speak of them with ^o much
ce^tainty of persuasion as were needful, nor can I think it an advantage, to
shut out and exclude this which the Apostle takes to declare, as the chief
subject of his writing, which must needs be, if such things have place:
The^e^o^e I cho^^e rather with the Apostle to declare this unto you, which I
can always do with alike ce^tainty, and certainly might always ^e done to an
infinite greater advantage. Ther^ a^e these two peculiar excellencies in the
Gospel, o^ Word of life, that it is never unprofitable, nor unseasonable; but
does contain in it at all times the greatest ^dvantage to the souls of men, of
infinite more concernment and urgency, then any other thing can be supposed to
be. And then we have no doubtful disputations about it, it va^ie^ not by times
and circumstance^, it may be declared with the ^a^e full assu^ance at all
time^, which certainly cannot be attained in other things* I w^^ld gladly know
what Paul meant, when he said, he ^^t^rmin^d to know n^thing but Jesus Christ,
and him ^rucified, 1 Cor. 2 2. and that he ^^unted all dress and dung to the
su^er-excelle^t knowledge of Jesus Christ, Phil* 3 8. Sure it must amount ^o so
much at lea^t, that this should be the ordina^y subject ^f the Ministers of the
Gospel, since they are the Ambas^adours of Jesus Christ, not the O^ators of the
State. Should not all other things ^e thought impertinent and ^^ivial in
respect of thi^, the salvation ^f sinn^^s? And what has a connection with that,
but Jesus Christ, and the W^rd ^f life?

But though this be the most pleasant and profitable subject, yet I ^ear, that
^ew ^f them who pretend a calling to thi^ Embassage, a^e thus qualified and
disposed to speak and declare it, as the Apostle imports, that which we have
heard and seen, etc. It is true, there was something extraordinary in this,
because they were to be the first publishers of this Doctrine, and to wrestle
against the rebellion of men's heart^, and the idolatry and superstition of the
world: yea, to undertake such a work, as to subdue all Nations by preaching of
a crucified man to them, which seemed to reason, the most desperate and
impossible employment ever given or taken: therefore it behoved them to be the
eye and ear-witnesses of his Doctrine, Life, Miracles, and all; that being
themselves persuaded beyond all the degrees of ce^tainty that reason c^n
afford, they might be the more confident and able to convince and persuade
others. But yet there is something that hold^ by good proportion, that h^ that
de^lare^ this ete^nal life to others, should be well acquainted with it
himself; He that preaches Jesus Christ, should first be conve^sant with him,
and become his Disciple and follower, before they can with any f^uit become
Teache^s of others. Therefore the Apostles, Act. 1. Chooses out one that had
been with them from the beginning, gone in and out with them, seen and heard
all. O! How incong^uous is it for many of us to take upon us to declare this
unto others, which I fear, few can say they have heard and seen in a spiritual
manner, and handled by expe^ience? No question, it prevails usually most with
the heart, that comes from the heart: Affection is the fire that is most
suitabl^ to set ^ffection on flame. It is a great addition to a man's power and
virtue of persuading others, to have a full persuasion settled in his own heart
conce^ning these things. Now it is much to be lamented that there is so little
of this, and so few ca^^ies the evidence on their hearts and ways, that they
have been with Jesus, co^versant in his company. I cannot say, but the
Ordinances, that carry their wo^th and dignity from God, and not ^^om men,
should be notw^^^^^^nding p^ecious to your hea^ts; an^ tha^ W^rd of life
however, and by whomsoever sent, to you it be spoken, it should be suitably
^eceived with gladness of heart. B^t I confes^, the^e i^ much of the success
disappointed, by the unsuitable car^iage and disposition of i^struments, which
ought to be mou^ned under, a^ the g^eatest judgment of this Nation.

Two p^inciples has acted this Divine Apostle; the exceeding love of his
Master, for he loved much, as he was much beloved, and this ca^^ies him on all
occasions to give so hea^ty a testimony to him, as you see, I^h. 21.2^. he
characte^^zeth himself, or ci^c^ms^ribe^ hi^ own name thu^; This is the
Dis^i^le that testifies these things, and wrote these things, and we know his
testimony is tru^. Where that divine love, which is but the ^esult and ove^
flowing of the love Christ car^ies to u^, fills the heart: this makes the
sweetest vent, and most f^ag^^nt opening ^f the mouth, whether in Di^course, or
in Prayer, or Preaching that can be. O how it perfumes all the commendation of
Christ: Peter, love thou me, feed my sheep. These have a natu^al connection
together, the love of Christ in the heart, and the aff^ctionat hearty se^iou^
declaration of him to othe^^. An^ then, another principle has moved him, the
love of others salvation. These things I de^lare, that ye may h^ve fellowship
with us; finding in his own experience how happy he was, what a Pea^l he had
found, how ra^e a Jewel, eternal life, he cannot hide it, but proclaims it: His
next wish is, Now since I am thus blessed, O that all the wo^ld knew, and would
come and share with me; I see that unexhausted fountain of life, that
unemptyable sea of goodness, that infinite fullness of grace in Jesus Christ,
that I* and you, and all that will, may come and be satisfied, and nothing
diminished. There is that immense fullness in spiritual things, that
sup^^abundance, and infinite excess over our necessities, that they may be
enjoyed by many, by all, without envy or discontent, without prejudice to one
another fullness; which the ska^^nesse and meann^sse of created things cannot
admit. I believe, if Ministers or Christian^ did taste of this, and had access
into it to see it, and bl^sse themselves in it, if they might enter into this
t^easury, or converse into this company, they would henceforth carry themselves
as those who pity the world, and compa^sionat mankind. A man that we^e
acquainted with this that is in Christ, would not find his heart easily stirred
up to envy, or provoked upon others prosperity or exaltation, but rather he
would be constrained to commiserat all others, that they will not know nor
consi^er wherein their own true ^^anquility and absolute sati^faction consists.
He that is lifted up to this blessed society, to conve^se with God, were it not
for the compassion and mercy he owes to miserable mankind, he might laugh at
the ^ollie^ and vanitie^ of the world, as we do a^ children. But as the (...),
the affectionat kind love our Savior carried to humane nature, made him often
g^o^n and sigh for his adversaries, and weep over Jerusalem, ^lbeit his own joy
was full without (...): So in some measure a Christian learns of Christ to be a
lover and pitier of mankind, and then to be most moved with compassion towa^ds
others, when we have fullest joy and satisfaction our selves. O that we might
be persuaded to seek after these things which may be gotten and kept without
clamor and contention, about which there needs be no s^^ife nor envy. O, seek
that happiness in fellowship with God, which h^ving attained, you ^ack nothing
but that other^ may be a^ happy.

These things I de^lare, that ^e may have fellowship with us. O^! that
Minister^ of the Gospel might ^ay so, an^ might from their own expe^ience
invite others to p^^^ake with them, as Paul req^ests othe^s to be ^ollowe^^ of
him, a^ he was of Christ; so these w^o suc^^ed Paul in thi^ embassage of
recon^il^tion, and a^e sent to call to the feast, might upon good g^ound
inte^pose their own experience thu^, O come and eat wi^h us, O come and sh^^e
with u^, for it will suffice us all without division. When some get into the
savor of great and eminent persons, and have the honor to be their
companion^, they will be very loath to invite pro^^^c^ously others to that
dignity, this society would beget competition and emulation. But, O! of how
different a nature is this fellowship? which whosoever i^ ex^lted to, he has
no other grief, but that hi^ poor brethren and fellow creatures either know
not, or will not be so happy: therefore he will always be about the declaring
of this to others. But if Ministers cannot use such an expression to invite you
to their fellowship, yet I beseech you, beloved in the Lord, let all of us be
here invited by the Apostle to partake of that, which will not g^ieve you to
have fellows and companion^ into, but rather ^dd to your contentment.

Moreover, th^s may be represented to you, that ye are invited to the very
communion with the Apostles, the lowest and meanest amongst you has this high
dignity in your offer, to be fellow-citizens with the Saints, with the eminent
pillars of the Church, the Apostles.

It might be thought by the most part of Christians who are more obscure,
little known, and almost despised in the world, that they might not have so
near access into the Court of thi^ great King: Some would think these who
continued with him in his temptations, who waited on his own person, and were
made such glor^ous instruments of the renovation of the world, should have some
great preference to all others, and be admitted into the fellowship of the
^ather and the Son, beyond other^; even a^ many would think, that Christ's
Mother and Kinsmen in the flesh, should have had prerogatives and privileges
beyond all his followe^s. But O the wonde^ful mystery of the equal, free, and
ir^espective conveyance of this grace of the Gospel in Christ Jesus! Neither
bond nor free, neither circumcision nor uncircumcision. The^^ is ^ne common
salvation, Jude v. 3. as well as common faith, Tit. 1.4. and it is common to
Apostles, to Pastors, to People, to as many as shall believe in his Name; so
that the poo^est and meanest creature is not excluded from the highest
privileges of Apostles. We have that to glory into, in which Paul glo^ied,
that is, the Cross of Christ: we have the same access, by the same Spirit, unto
the Father, we have the same Advocat to plead for us, the same blood to cry for
us, the same hope of the same inheritance; in a word, we are baptized into one
body, and for the essentials and chief substantials of privilege and comfort,
the Head equally respects all the Member^. Yea, the Apostles, though they had
some peculiar gifts and privileges beyond others, yet they were forbidden to
rejoice in these, but rather in these which were common to them with other
Saints, Rejoice not (says Christ) that the ^pirits are subject unto you, but
rather rejoice because your names are written in heaven, Luke 10.20. The hight
and depth of this drowns ^ll other differences.

Now, my beloved, what can be more said for our comfort? Would you be as happy
as John, as blessed as Paul? Would you think your selves well, if it were
possible, to be in as near relation and communion with Christ as his Mother and
Brethren? Truly, that is not only possible, but it is holden out to you, and
you are requested to embrace the offer, and come and share with them. He that
bears my words and does them, the same is my mother, and sister, and brother:
You shall be as dear to him as his dearest relation^, if you believe in him,
and receive his sayings in your heart. Do not then intertain jealous and
suspicious thoughts, because you are not like Apostles, or such holy men as are
recorded in Scripture? If you forsake not your own mercy, you may have
fellowship with them in that which they account their chiefest happiness;
there i^ no difference of quality or condition, no distance of other things,
can hinder your communion with them; there are several sizes and growths of
Christians, both in light and grace, some have extraordinary raptures and
ecstasies of joy and sweetness; others attain not to that, but are rather kept
in attendance and waiting on God in his ways; but ^ll of them have one common
salvation, as the highest have some fellowship with the lowest in his
infirmities, so the lowes^ has fellowship with the highest in his privileges.
Such is the infinite goodness of God, that which is absolutely necessary, and
most important either to soul or body, i^ made more universal, both in nature
and grace, as the common light of the Sun to all, and the Sun of Righteousness
too, in an impartial way, shining on all them that come to him.

SERMON VI^
1 John 1.3. -- And truly our fellowship is with the Father and the Son, etc.


IT was both the great wisdom and infinite goodness of God, that he did not
only f^ame a creature capable of society with others of his own kind, but that
he fashioned him so, as to be capable of so high an elevation, to have
communion and fellowship with himself; it is less wonder of Angels, because
they a^e pure incorporeal Spirits, drawing toward a nearer likeness to his
nature, which similitude is the ground of ^ommunion; but that he would have one
of the material and visible creatures below, that for the one half is made of
the dust of the earth, ^dvanced to this unconceivable hight of privilege, to
have fellowship with him; this is a greater wonder: and for this end he
breathed into man a spirit from Heaven, that might be capable of conformity and
communion with him, who is the Father of spirits. Now take this in the plainest
apprehension of it, and you cannot but conceive that this is both the honor
and happiness of man: It is honor and dignity, I say, because the nature of
that consists in the applause and estimation of those that are worthy,
testified one way or another, and the highest degrees of it rise according to
the degree or dignity of the persons that esteem us, or give us their
fellowship and favor. Now truly, according to this rule, the honor is
incomparable, and the credit rises infinitely above all the airy and fancied
dignities of men; for the Footstool to be elevated up to the Throne, for the
poor contemptible creature to be lifted up to the society and friendship of the
most high and glorious God, the only fountain of all the Hierarchies of Heaven,
or degrees upon Earth* so much as the distance is between God and us, so much
proportionably must the dignity rise, to be advanced out of this low estate to
fellowship with God; the distance between creatures is not observable in regard
of this, and yet poor worms swell, if either they be lifted up a little above
others, or advanced to familiarity with these that are above them. But what is
it to pride our selves in these things? when we ^re altogether higher and lower
at one view, as grasshoppers in his sight; therefore man being in honor, and
understanding not, wherein his true honor and dignity consists, he associats
himself to beasts; only the soul, that is aspiring to thi^ communion with God,
is extracted out of the dregs of beastly mankind, and is elevated above
mankind, and associated to blessed Apostles, and holy Angels, and Spirits made
perfect: and that were but little, though it be a honor above Regal or
Imperial dignities, but it is infinitely hightned by this, that their
association is with God, the blessed and holy Trinity.

Now herein consists man's happiness too, for the soul being enlarged in its
capacity and appetite, far beyond all visible things, it is never fully
satiated or put to rest and quiet, till it be possessed with the chiefest and
most unive^sal good, that is, God; and then all the motions of desires cease,
then the soul rests from its labors, then there is a peace and eternal rest
proclaimed in the desires of the soul, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for the
Lord has dealt bountifully with me, Psalm. 116.7. O! what a poor short requiem
do men sing to their own hearts from other enjoyments? Oftentimes men's hearts,
whether dreaming or waking, speak in this manner, Soul take thy rest* but how
ill grounded is that peace, and how false a rest, daily experience in part
witnesses, and the last day will fully declare? But, O! how much better and
wiser were it for you, to seek the favor and light of his countenance upon
you, and to be united to him who is the fountain of life, so ye might truly,
without hazard of such a sad reprehension as that fool got, or grievous
disappointment, say, Soul take thy rest in God.

Man was advanced to this dignity and happiness, but he kept not his station,
for that great Dragon falling down from that pinnacle of honor he had in
Heaven, drew down with him the third part of the stars of Heaven, and cast them
to the earth: and thus, man who was in honor, is now associated with, and made
like to beasts, or devils, he is a stranger to God from the womb, all the
imagination^ of his heart tend to distance from God, he is exiled and banished
from Gods presence, the type whereof was his being driven out of the Garden,
and yet he is not long out, nor far away, when the infinite love of God moves an
Embassage to send after him, and to recall him; many messengers are sent
beforehand to prepare the way, and to dispose men's hearts to peace; many
prophesies were, and fore-intimations of that great Embassage of love, which at
length appeared; for God sent his Son, his own Son, to take away the
difference, and make up the distance. And this is the thing that is declared
unto us by these eye and ear-witnesses, to this end that we may know how to
return to that blessed society which we had forsaken, to our own eternal
prejudice. Is man banished out of the Paradise of God into the accursed earth?
Then the Son is sent out from his own Palace and the Paradise above, to come
into this world, and to save the world. Is there such a gulf between us and
Heaven? Christ has put his own body between, to fill it up. Do the Cherubims
watch with flaming fire to keep us from life? Then the Son has shed his own
blood in abundance, to quench that fi^e, and so to pacify and compose all in
Heaven and Earth. Is there such odds and enmity between the families of Heaven
and Earth? He sent his Son the chief heir, and married him with our nature, and
in that eternal marriage of our nature with him, he has buried in everlasting
oblivion all the difference, and opened a way for a nearer and dearer
friendship with God then was before. And whence was it, I pray you, that God
dwelt among men? First in a Tabernacle, then in a fixed Temple, even among the
rebellious sons of men; and that so many were admitted and advanced again to
communion with God; Abraham had the hono^r to be the friend of God, (O
incomparable title! comprehending more then King or Emperor) Was it not all
from this, the anticipating virtue of that uniting and peacemaking sacrifice?
It was for his sake who was to come, and in his flesh to lay a sure foundation
for eternal peace and friendship between God and man.

Now you see the ground of our restitution to that primitive fellowship with
God, my earnest desire is that ye would lay hold on this opportunity. Is such
an high thing in your of^er? yea, are you earnestly invited to it by the Father
and the Son? then sure it might at the first hearing beget some inward desire,
and kindl^ up some holy ambition after such a happiness. Before we know
further what is in it, (for the very first sound of it imports some special and
incomparable privilege) might not our hearts be inflamed, and ought we not to
enquire at our own hearts, and speak thus unto them, Have I lived so long a
stranger to God the fountain of my life? Am I so far bewitched with the
d^ceitful vanities of the world, as not to think it incomparably better, to
rise up above all created things, to communicate with the Father and the Son?
And shall I go hence without God and without Christ, when fellowship with them
is daily, freely, and plentifully holden forth? I beseech you consider where it
must begin, and what must be laid down for the foundation of this communion,
even your union with Jesus Christ the Mediator between God and man; and you
cannot be one with him, but by forsaking your selves, and believing in him; and
thence flow^ that constant abode and dwelling in him, which is the mutual
intertainment of Christ and ^ soul, after their meeting together Can two walk
together except they be agreed? We are by nature enemies to God; Now ce^tainly
reconciliation and agreement must inter^een by the blood of the Cross, before
any friendly and familiar society be kept. Let this then be your first study,
and it is first declared in the Gospel, Jesus Christ is holden out as partaking
with you in all your infirmities, he is represented as having fellowship with
us in our sins and curses, in our afflictions and crosses, he has fellowship
in our nature to bear our sins and infirmities. Now since he has partaken in
these, you are invited to come and have fellowship with him in his gifts and
graces, in the precious merits of his death and ^uffering, in his ^ising again
and returning to glory. And this is the exchange he makes and declares in the
Gospel, I have taken your sins and cu^ses, O come and take my graces, and that
which is purchased by my blood. Now this is the first beginning of ^ souls
renewed fellowship with God, and it is the foundation of all that is to come,
to embrace this offer, to accept him cordially as he is presented, and to
pacify and quiet our own hearts by says in that he has done. And this being
once laid down ^s the ground-stone, the soul will grow up into more communion
with him.

To speak aright of this communion, would require more acquaintance with it,
then readily will be found amongst us: but it is more easy to understand in
what it is exercised and entertained, then to bring up our hearts unto it.
Certainly it must neither be taken so low and wide, as if it consisted all in
these external duties, and approaches of men to God; for there is nothing
capable of communion with the Father of spirits, but a Spirit; and sure I am,
the most part of us removes them, and acts little that way. It is a lamentable
thing that men pretend to please God with such vain empty shows, and bodily
appearances, without any serious exercise of their souls, and attention of
their minds in divine worship. Neither yet must it be taken so high, and made
so narrow, a^ if it consisted only in these ravishments of the soul after God,
which are joined with extraordinary sweetness and joy, or in such rare pieces
of access and liberty; for though that be a part of it, yet is it neither
universal to all Gods children, nor yet constant in any. The^e may be some
solid serious attendance on God in his Ordinances, which may have more true
substantial life in it, and more of the marrow of Christianity in it, though a
soul should not be acquainted with these ^aptures, nor ever carried without the
Line of an equal walking with God. Therefore that which I would exhort you to,
i^ to acquaint your selves with Jesus Christ, and you shall find a new way
opened in him, by which you may boldly com^ to God, and having come to God in
him, you are called to walk with him, to intertain that acquaintance that is
made, till all the distance and estrangednesse of your heart^ be worn out. And
I know not any thing which is more apt either to beget, or preserve this
fellowship, then the communication of your spirits often with him in prayer,
and with his word in meditation, and this is not to be discharged as a custom,
but the love of God within, drawing the heart willingly toward communication
with him, and constraining to pour out your requests to him, and wait on him,
even though ye should not find that sensible sweetness that sometimes is
found. It were an happy advancement in thi^ fellowship, if converse with God,
whether in prayer and solemn retirements, or in meditation, or in our ordinary
walking, were become the delight of our hearts, at least that they might be
carried that way toward the intertaining the thoughts of his Majesty, his
Glory, and Grace, and Goodness, and Wisdom shining every where, as from a
natural instinct, even when we are not engaged with the present allurements of
that sweetness that sometimes accompanies it.

SERMON VII^
1 John 1.3. -- And truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son
Jesus Christ.

Verse. 4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.


IT was sin that did f^rst break off that fellowship that was between God and
man, and cut off that blessed society, in which the honor and happiness of
man consisted; but that fundamental bond being loosed, it has likewise untyed
all the links of society of men among themselves, and made such a general
dispersion and dissipation of mankind, that they are almost like wild beasts,
raging up and down; and in this, wilder then beasts, that they devour one
another, which beasts do not in their own kind; and they are like fishes of the
Sea, without rule and government. Though there be some remnants of a sociable
inclination in all men, that shows it self in their combinings in societies,
and erecting governments; yet generally that which is the true bond and
ligament of men, which alone can truly knit them together, is broken, that is
love, the love of God and our neighbors; And therefore notwithstanding of ^ll
the means used to reduce, and to contain mankind in order and harmony by
government; yet there are nothing but continual rents, distractions,
dissipations, divisions, and dissolutions in Commonwealths amongst themselves,
and between Nations; so that all men may be represented as Lions, Tigers,
Wolves, Serpents, and such like unsociable creatures, till the Gospel come to
tame and subdue them, as it is often holden out in the Prophets, Isai. 2.4. and
11.6, 7, 8. and 65.25.

Now indeed you have here the express end and purpose of the Gospel, to make up
these two great breaches in the creature, between God and men, and between men
and men. It is a Gospel of peace; where ever it takes hold of men's spirits, it
reduces all to a peaceable temper, joins them to God, and one to another: for
the very sum and substance of it is the love of God to mankind, and proposed
for this end, to engage the love of man again; and love is the glue, the cement
that alone will conjoyn hearts unto this fellowship. It is a strange thing, and
much to be lamented, that Christendom should be a field of blood, an Aceldama,
beyond other places of the world: that where the Gospel is pretended to be
received, that men have so far put off even humanity, as thus to bite and
devour one another. Certainly it is, because where it is preached it is not
believed: therefore sin takes occasion by it to become the more sinful;
always let us take heed to this, that it is the great purpose and grand design
of the Gospel preached to u^, to restor^ us to a blessed society and fellowship
with the Father, and withal, to a sweet fellowship amongst our selv^s; for both
you see are here.

We are called to fellowship with the Father, and what is that? but to have the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ thy Father, and thou to be his son by adoption
of grace: It is certainly the very marrow and extract of the whole Covenan^,
and all the promises thereof, I will be your Father, and ye shall be my sons
and daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. I go (says Christ) to
your Father and my Father, and to your God and my God. O what a sweet
complication and interchange of relations, Job. 20.17.

I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, he^e is the Epitome of all
^appinesse and felicity; In this word all i^ inclo^ed, and without this,
nothing is to be found that deserves the desires of an immortal spirit: For
hence it follows, that a soul is filled with the all-fulnesse of God, Ephesians.
3.19. for that is made over to thee who believes the Gospel, and thou have as
real a right and title to it, as men have to their f^thers inheritance. Then to
have fellowship with his Son Jesus Christ, is another branch of this dignity,
and this is that which introduces the other, Christ is the middle person, the
Mediator between God and man, given for this end, to recover men from their
woeful dispersion, and separation from God, and reduce them ^gain to that
blessed society: and therefore our acquaintance, as it were, first begins with
him, and by him we are led to the Father, No man can come to the Father but by
the Son: Therefore, if you have his friendship, you have done the busines^, for
he and his Father is one.

Now this fellowship, to branch it forth more particularly, is either real, or
personal: Real, I mean, (...) Bonorum, a communion of all good things, a
communion with him in his Nature, Offices, and Benefits, and thi^ must be laid
down as the foundation-stone of thi^ fello^ship, he came near us, to partake of
flesh and blood with us, that we might have a way, ^ ne^ and living way
consecrated, even the vail of his flesh, to come to God by; for certainly this
gives boldness to a soul to draw near to God, with some expectation of
success and acceptance, when it is seriously considered, that our nature is
so nearly conjoined already to God; by this step a soul climbs up to the
Majesty of God, and by means of this, we become partakers of the Divine
Nature,, as God of Humane Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. So by the same degrees we ascend
to God, that God has descended to us; he drew near us by our nature, and we by
the intervention of that same ascend to him, and receive his image and stamp on
our souls: for the Lord did stamp his own image upon Christ's Humane Nature, to
make it a pattern to us, and to represent to us, as in a visible symbol and
pledge, what impression he would put upon us: Then we have fellowship with him
in his Offices, I need not branch them out severally, you k^ow what he was
anointed for, to be a Priest* to off^r s^crifice, and reconcile u^ to God, an^
^o make intercession for u^; to be ^ King, ^o ru^^ us by his Word and Spirit,
and defend u^ ^g^inst our enemies* to be ^ Prophet, to r^veal ^he will of God
to u^, (...) instruct us in (...) same. He^e ^s ^ large field o^ fellowship, we
h^ve ^dmit^ an^ (...) by faith in Jesus Christ, to the real ^dva^tage and
benefit of ^ll these* there i^ nothing in them but it r^late^ to us, and
^edou^ds to us, the living ver^ue of that sacrifice, i^ as fresh and recent
this day, to send up ^ favor of rest ^o Heaven, and to pacify a troubled
conscience, as the first day it was offered: That perfect sacrifice is as
available to thy soul, as if thou had offered it thy self, and this day ye have
the benefit of his prayers in Heaven, we partake of the strong cries and tears
in the days of his flesh, and of intercession since, more then of our own
supplications. What shall I say? ye have one to teach you all things that is
needful for you; one to subdue your sins under you; and by virtue of fellowship
with Jesus Christ in these Offices, there is something derived from it, and
communicated to us by it, that we should be Kings and Priests to God our
Father; Kings to rule over our own s^i^it^ and lusts, in as ^ar as grace reigns
in us to eternal life, and that is truly a heroic royal spirit, that overcomes
himself and the world; and Priests, to offer unto God continually the sacrifice
of prayer and praises, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4, 5. which are sweet smelling and pleasant
in his fight; yea, we should offer up our own bodies a^ a reasonable service,
Romans 12.1. and this is a holy and living sacrifice, when we dedicat and
consecrat all our faculties, members, and abilitie^ to his will and service;
and do not spare to kill our lust^, which are his and our enemies.

Let us sum up ^ll in this, whatsoever grace or gift is in Christ Jesus,
whatsoever pre-eminence he has above Angels and men; whatsoever he purch^sed,
he purchased by his obedient life, and patience in death, there i^ nothing of
all that, but the soul may be admitted to fellowship in it, by its union with
him by ^aith; have him, and have all that he has: Faith mak^s him ^ours, and
all that he has is a consequential appendix to himself: the Word of the Gospel
offers him freely to you, with all his benefits, interests, and advantages, O
that our hearts may be induced to open to him.

N^w being thus united to Jesus Christ, that which I would pe^swade next to, is
a personal communion, that is, a suitable intertainment of him, a conjunction
of your soul to him by love, and a conspiracy of all your endeavors henceforth
to please him: It is certain, that true frien^ship is founded on a conjunction
and harmony of souls by affection, by which they cease to b^ two, and becomes
in a manner one; for love makes ^ kind of transport of the soul into another,
and then all particul^r and proper interests are drowned in oblivion, no more
mine and thine, but he makes an interchange, mine th^ne, and thine mine, my
heart thine, and thy honor mine. Now certain it is, that in this God has
given us a rare pattern, and leads the way; for he declare^ hi^ love to the
world, in the rarest effects of ^t, which give the clearest demonstrations
possible; God so loved the world, that he sent his Son: And you have the most
in^allible argument of the Sons love, greater love has no m^n th^n this, to
lay down his life for his friends, but h^ for his enemies. Now then, you see
how the heart of God and his Son Jesus Christ is fixed from everlasting on the
sons of men so unalterably, and so fully set toward them, that it has
t^ansported the Son out of his own glory, and brought him down in the state of
a servant. But it is not yet known what particular persons are thus fixed upon,
until that everlasting love break out from under ground, in the engagement of
thy souls love to him, and till he have fastened this chain, and set this seal
on thy heart, which makes thee impatient to want him: thou know not the seal
that was on his heart from ete^nity. But now the love of a believer being the
result of his love, this is it that is the source and spring of constant
communion: and it vents it self in converse with God, and daily intertainment
of him in our spirits and ways; There is a keeping of company with him in
prayer and meditation, and all the Ordinances; there is a communication and
familiar conference of the heart with him, either in thinking on him, or
pouring out our requests to him; there is a mutual and daily intercourse and
correspondence of that soul with God, in answering his word by obedience, in
praying to him, and receiving answers from him, and then returning his answer
again with a letter of thanks and praise, as it were; these are the ways to
increase that love of God, and kindle it up to a higher flame; and it being
thus increased, it gathers in all the endeavors and abilities of the soul, and
sets all on fire, as a sweet ^melling sacrifice to plea^e him: It is henceforth
the great study of the soul, to remove all things that are offensive to him;
for the intertaining of sin, his enemy, is most inconsistent with this true
fellowship and friendship: If I regard iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not
hear me, Psalm. 66.18. This will ma^r that sweet correspondence in prayer and
praises; for it is a breach of peace and Covenant, to regard and maintain his
enemies; therefore the ^oul that loves God, will study to compose it sel^ in
all things to his good pleasure, as well as his love that is strong as death,
puts him upon a careful watching, to do all things for our profit; and so this
takes in our whole carriage and walking in religious approaches, or in common
b^sines^es, to have this as our great design, Conversing with God, and walking
to all w^ll-pleasing.

Now if we were once enrolled in this blessed fellowship with the Father and
the Son, then it follows as a fruit and result of thi^, that we should have
fellowship one with another, and truly the more unity with God, the more unity
amongst our selves; for he is the uniting, cementing principle: he is the
Cen^er of all Christian^, and as Line^, the furthe^ they are from the Center,
the farrer distant they are one from another; so the distance and elongation of
souls from God, sets them at furthest distance amongst themselves: The nearer
we come every one to Jesus Christ, the nearer we join in ^ffection one to
anot^er: and this i^ imported in that of Ch^ist^ Prayer, That they may be one
in us, Joh. 17 21, 22* No unity but in that one Lord, and (...) perfect unity
but in a perfect union with him. I would exhort to study this more, to have
fellowship one with another, as member^ of the same body, by sympathy, by
mutual helping one another in spiritual and temporal things: Even amongst
Christians that live obscurely in ^ City, in a Village, there is not that
harmoniou^ agreement and consent of hearts, that contention and plea of love,
of gentleness, and forbearance, who shall exercise most of that; but there are
many jealousies, heart-burnings, g^udg^ngs, st^^fes, evil speakings, etc. to
the stumbling of others, and the weakening of your selves, which certainly argue
that ye are much ca^nal, and walk as men, and that the love of God, and
fellowship with him is waxed cold, and is languished and dead, etc.

SERMON VIII^
1 John ^.4. And these things write we unto you, that your joy may be full.


ALL motions tend to rest and quietness, we see it daily in the motions below,
and we believe it also of the circular revolutions of the Heavens above, that
the^e is a day coming in which they shall cease, as having performed all they
were appointed for; And as it is in things natural, so it is in things rational
in a more eminent way, their desire^, affections, and actions, which are the
motions, and stretches of the soul toward that it desires, and apprehends as
good, tends of their own nature, and are directed by the very intention of the
soul, to some rest and tranquillity, some joy and contentation of spirit. If
other things that have no knowledge, have their center of rest, how much more
must man, who is an understanding c^eature, have it by the ordination and
appointment of God? But there is this wide difference in the point of capacity
of happiness, between man and other creatures, that they, whatsoever excellent
virtues or properties they have, yet know them not themselves, and so can
neither enjoy what excellency themselves have, nor have use of what is in
others; for, to what purpose is it to shine forth, if there be no eye to see?
What advantage has ^he Rose in its fragrancy, if it cannot smell it self? That
which is not perceived, is as if it were not. And therefore it is an evident
testimony that all these visible things were created, not for themselves, but
for man's sake who knows them, can use them, and enjoy them: here is then the
peculiar capacity that God has given to man, to discern and know what he
seeks, what he has, and possesses, that so he may be able to enjoy it, or use
it, according to the nature of it. This is a great point of Gods Image, and
conformity with him, whose infinite blessedness and joy ^iseth from that
pe^fect comprehension, and intuitive beholding of himself, and his own
incomprehensible riches; So then, man's happiness or mise^y must depend upon
this, both wh^t the soul fixes upon, and what it apprehends to be in it;
for, if that eternal and universal good, the all-fulnesse of God, be the center
of the soul^ desires and endeavors, and there be apprehended and discovered in
God, that infinite excellency, and variety of delights, which nothing else can
afford so much as a shadow of, then, there cannot but result from such a
conjunction of the souls ^prehension, suitable to the fullness of God, and of
the excellency and goodness of God, suitable to the desires of the soul, such
a rest and tranquillity, such joy and satisfaction, as cannot choose but make
the soul infinitely happier then the enjoyment of any other thing could do.

This being the thing then, which all men's desires naturally tend unto, this
tranquillity and perfect satisfaction of the heart, being that which carries
all men's hearts after it, and that which men seek for it self, and which they
seek in all other things; the great misery of man is, that he mistakes the way
to it, and seeks it where it is not to be found. The generality of men, are so
far degenerated both from the impression of a divine Majesty, and the sense of
an immortal being within themse^ves, that they imagine to content, and ea^e
their own hearts, in these outward, uncon^tant, perishing things, and so their
life i^ spent in catching at shadows, in ^eeding on the wind, in laboring in
the fire. There is nothing so plentifully satisfies our expectation^, as can
quite the cost, and recompense the expenses o^ our labor, toil, grie^, and
travel about it; there is nothing therefore but a continual, restless
agitation of the heart, from one thing to another, and that in a round circling
about, from one thing that now displeases or disappoint^, to things that were
formerly loathed; as a sick man tu^ns him from one side to another, or changes
bed^ often, and at length retu^ns, expecting to find some ease where he lay at
first. And it may be judged, that all circular motions are eternal, and so they
can never be supposed to attain their end, that is rest and tranquillity;
therefore a soul thus carried in a round, by the vain imaginations of his
heart, is likely never to settle and find solid rest and peace. Nay, how is it
possible that they c^n give that tranquillity and contentation to the heart and
soul of man, that are so utterly in their natures disproportioned to it? both
because they are only suited to the senses, and likewise, for that they are
changeable. Now the soul is framed with a higher capacity, and can no more be
satiated with visible things, then a man that is hungry can be satisfied with
gold; and besides, it is immortal, and must have something to survive all the
changes of time, and therefore is likely to rest no where but in that which
has eternal stability. Now though these things cannot truly fill the heart,
yet they swell the belly, like the east wind, or like the prodigals husks, fill
it with wind, which causes many torments and distempers in the soul; and
though they cannot give ease, yet they may be as thorns to prick and pierce a
man through with many sorrows, as our Savior speaks: so that there is no more
wisdom or gain in this, then in gathering an armfull of thorns, and enclosing
and preassing hard unto them, the more hardly and strongly we grip them, the
more grievously they pierce us; or as if a man would fle^ into a hedge of
thorns in a tempest, the further he thrust into it, he is the wor^^ pricked;
and that which he is fallen into, is worse then that he flees from. I am sure
all your experiences giv^ ^ harmonious testimony to this, that there is no
solid, permanent, constant, and equable heart-joy and contentation in all the
f^ncied and imaginary felicities that this world adores. There is nothing of
these things, that is not lesser, and lower in actual possession, nor in the
first apprehension of them affar off. Nothing in them answers either our
desires or expectations; and therefore, in stead of peace and tranquillity,
they breed more inward torment and disquiet, because of that nec^ssary and
inevitable disappointment that ^ttends them. Therefore the Apostl^ passes all
these things in silence, when he is to wri^e of purpose, to give a fullness of
joy; for he know^ that in them there is neither that joy, nor that fullness of
joy he would wish for them; but it is other things he writes for this end.

Now indeed there has been some wiser then others, that have their
apprehension far above the rest of mankind, and have labored to frame some
rules and precepts to lead man into this true rest and tr^nquillity. And truly,
in this they have done much to discover the vanity and madness of the common
practice of men; and to draw man from sensible and outward things, to things
invisible and spiritual; yet there is a defectivenesse in all the rules that
natural reason can reach unto; there is some crookedness withal adhere^ to
them, which shows our departure from our original. There are many excellent
discourse^ of morality in Heathens W^^tings, which may be very subservient to a
Christian, and useful to the composing and settling of his mind, ^midst all the
fluctu^tions and uncertainties of this world: they may come well in as
Subsidie^ and Guards to a Christians heart, to preserve that peace and joy it
has from God, and keep out the ordinary tumultuous passions that disturb the
most part of men: But here is the lamentable failing, that while they call ^
man off things without, as ^dventitious, they lead him but in to his own spirit
within, as if he could there find that rest in the very enjoyment of his poor
miserable wretched self. but Christ Jesus calls us in to our own spirits, not
to dwell there; ^or O, what a loathsome and irksome habit^tion is a defiled
heart, and a guilty conscience? but rather that finding nothing of that joy and
refreshment within, we may then freely and fully fo^sake our selves, as well as
the world without* and transport in to God in Christ, the only habitation of
joy and delight, that being filled with anguish from the world, and from our
selves, we may more willingly divorce from both, and agree to join unto Jesus
Christ, and to embrace him in our hearts, who is the only fountain of life and
joy; who had no other errand and business from Heaven, but to rep^ir man's joy,
as grievous a breach a^ any in the Creation: ^ thing as much missed and sought
after, as any thing, ye^, sought ^ster in all things that are so^ght: Ioh.
15.11. These things I have spoken to you tha^ your joy may be full. Therefore
the Apostle propound^ this as the end of his writing on thi^ subject, the word
of life, these things I write that your joy may be full, and the way to attain
this fullness of joy, he expressed in the former verse, by fellowship with the
Father and the Son.

That which mak^s all other things disproportioned to the soul of man, to give
it this joy, is the extreme unsuitablenesse between them; that the soul has ^n
infinite c^pacity, and besides ^n immortality of endur^nce, but they are
condemned under impotency to supply that infinite void; and inconstancy by which
they must needs pe^ish, and leave the soul without all comfort, and with more
anxiety. But in these things written here, we find all things suited and
proportioned to the very great exigence of the soul. There is a ^^^tablenesse
in them, because of their spiri^^^l nature, whereby they may close immediately
with thy spirit, other things are material, and corporeal, and what union, what
fellowship can a spirit be supposed to have with them? they are extrinsick,
advenient things, that never come to a nearer union with thy soul; and though
they co^ld, they would debase thy soul, and not ex^lt it, because of a baser
inferior Nature. But these things, Jesus Christ, eternal life in him, these
precious promises of the Gospel, these spiri^^al privileges of sonship, etc.
these are of ^ more d^vin^ nature, and by med^tation and (...) come to close
with them: These are inward things, more near the soul that believes, then
himself is to himself; and so he may always carry them about in his ^eart,
which may be ^ spring of everlasting joy, this no m^n c^n take from him, Joh.
16 ^2. For the ground and fountain is inward, seated without the ^each o^ all
these vicissitude^ and change^: The^ a^ they have ^ s^itablenesse, so they have
a fullness in them, to creat fullness of joy* They are cordi^l^ to the he^rt,
things that are in their own nature refreshing to the soul, and ap^ to b^ge^
heart-joy. Other things are not suitable to thi^, to produce any suc^ inward
^oul-comp^^cency; the things that are from without, ^^ac^ not so deep as the
heart, they make their impressions rather on the outwa^d senses, to ^ickle and
please them, or the countenance, to put ^ome pleasing sh^pe upon it: but the
wise man pronoun^^^h all the^e joys that a^ise from external things* to be
^upe^ficiall, only skin-deep, in the midst of laught^r the heart is sorrowful,
and the end of that mirth is he^vinesse, Prove. 14.13. Ex^rema gaud^ luctus
occupat. There is no solid recreation to the soul, in its retired thoughts from
all the delights of the senses: it is but like the pleasure of the itch, which
no man es^eems pleasure. But besides, as the things of the Gospel affect the
heart and soul, by bringing soul-mercie^, and treasures, as fo^given^sse of
sin, hope of Heaven, etc. so there is a fullness in them, which may answerably
fill all the corners of the heart with joy; there is an unexhaustednesse in
these things, an universality in Christ, all in all, all the treasures of
wisdom are in him: and may not this cause surely an ^^gh spring tide of joy.
The heart is eased upon the lowest clear apprehension of Christ and the Gospel,
it gives a hea^t-serenity and c^lmnesse to a troubled soul, that nothing else
could do, yet to make up the fullness of joy, as well as the solidity of it; to
extend the measure of it, as well as to beget the true q^ality of it; it is
requisite that not only there be a f^lnesse in the object, that is full,
superabundant, ample matter of rejoicing; but there must be a kind of fullness
in the app^ehension, it must be rep^esented fully as it is, and the clouds of
unbelief scattered; and then indeed, upon the full aspect of the Gospel, and
Christ in it, there is a fullness of joy that flows in to the soul, as the Sea
is filled upon the full aspect of the Moon. Oh, that we could believe this,
that there is a fullness of joy here, and no where else; certainly this ^lone
being pondered and sunk into our hearts, would be a powe^f^l refo^mer in us,
and among us; How would it carry men's hearts to a disgracing and despising all
the things that are held in admiration by men? How would it turn the channel of
men's judgments, opinions, affections, an^ conversations? for certainly
whithersoever the Tide of joy flows, thither the heart is carried, and it is
that all men are seeking, though they take many contrary and diverse ways, as
their own fancy leads them. Now if once this were established in thy soul, that
here is that truth and fullness of joy, which elsewhere is ignorantly and
vainly ^ought; would it not divert thy desires, and turn the current of thy
affections and endeavour^, to ^all into this Ocean of gladness and delight?
Elsewhere there is neither true joy, nor full joy, nec verum nec plenum
gaudium; there is no verity in it, it is but an external garb and sh^dow, and
there is no plenty or fullness in it; it fills not the hand of the reaper, it
satisfies not his very hunger. But here, when a soul is possessed with Christ
by faith, and dwells in God by love, there is both reality and plenty: all
the dimensions of the heart may be filled up; Some allegorize upon the
triangular composition of man's heart, that no orbicular thing, such as this
world, can fill it exactly without vacuity, but only the blessed and holy
Trinity. Truly we may conceive, this fullness of joy, excluding all the latent
griefs of the heart, and filling up all the vacant corners, does flow from that
blessed fellowship of the Father and the Son. Now though these two be only
mentioned, yet the Holy Ghost must not be excluded, for the Apostolic Prayer
does attribute chiefly our fellowship with God to the Spirit, so that it is the
Spirit units our hearts, and associats them to God, that seems to correspond
between him and us: So then there is such a fellowship with the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, that leaves no vacuity in the heart, that fills all the
dimensions and corners of it with peace and joy.

But add unto this, in the third place, that these things have not only a
fullness, but withal a durablenesse; not only plenty, but besides, eternity and
perpetuity, to correspond to the immortality of the soul; And this certainly is
^ great congruity, and so makes up much beauty and harmony; for what more
incongruous and unsuitable, then for an immortal spirit to spend it self, and
give up it self to that which is not* which must le^ve ^t, whi^^ is mo^t^l, and
^ading in its own nature, without which, it must continue infinitely longer then
it can enjoy it? And what more comely, then for an immortal thing to ^ssociat
to eternal things, and ^o derive it^ joy from an eternal spring? For then, when
all things vi^ible a^e done away, and things mortal abolished, then its joy
none can take from it; because it t^kes its joy from that, which must survive
all these changes. Suppose any thing could for the pre^ent give a fullness of
joy, and absolute content to the heart, yet if we imagine that thing may be
separated and disjoined from the heart, and cease to be, certainly the very
expectation of such an ete^nal separation, would almost extinguish all the joy,
and make it dry up of the fullness: For, may a soul think, What shall I do for
ever when this Well dryes? Whence shall I draw water of joy? Out of what Well?
But now, that fear is removed, and the soul need^ not loss the swee^ness of
the present enjoyment of God, through anxious foresight of the future, because
he may know, that the perfect fullness that shall never ebb, is but coming, and
the Sun is but ascending yet toward the Meridian, from whence he shall never
go down, but stand fixed, to be the eternal wonder and delight of Angel^ and
men.

Now though it be true, that Christians here, have neither that plenty, nor
that perpetuity of this joy, that the object of it gives ground for; though
their hearts be often filled with g^iefs and sorrows, partly from outward,
partly from inward evils and afflictions; yet certainly this arises but from
the dark apprehension, dim belief, and slight consideration of these things
that Christ spoke, and his Apos^les wrote unto us; We might, no question, keep
ou^ hearts in more peace and tranquillity, in all the commotions of the times,
or alterations in our selves, if we did more steadfastly believe the Gospel, and
keep mo^e constant fellowship with God. But however it be, there is radically a
fullness of joy in every believers heart, that seed is sown, that shall one day
be ^ipe of fullness of joy, it is always lying at the root, and reserved for
them. O, let us lay these things to heart, which being laid to heart, and laid
up in the heart, will fill it with this sweet fragrant perfume of peace and
joy* They are written for this end, let us hear them for this end too, that our
joy may be full. It i^ true indeed, that this fullness of joy suits only the
lise to come, when the vessel is both inl^rged and strengthened to contain it:
Things that have strong spirits in them, must have strong n^w bottle^, such as
our cr^zy mortal bodies are no^; therefore the Lord has reserved the just
fullness, the overflowings of this joy, for the time that the soul shall be
purified from all sin, and the body delive^ed from all corruption: Because that
s^n lurks in many corners of the heart now, therefore this joy cannot fill up
the heart, and all the vacuities of it; for it is of so pure and heavenly a
nature, that it will not compou^d an^ inte^mingle wi^h sin, or sinful lusts;
but when nothing of that remains in the heart, then it flows-in apace, and
leaves no corner of the heart unsatisfied and unsupplied. I would have you, who
get some tastes of this joy and peace by the way, not di^quieted and troubled,
because it abides not to be ordin^^y ^ood; if you be set down again to your
ordinary spare diet of Mann^ in the Wilderness, and have not these first
f^uits and G^apes of Canaan often sent to you; think it not st^ange, ^or the
fullness which you ^eek, you are not capable of here, but you shall be c^pable
of it hereafter. You ought with patience to wait ^or that day, when your joy
shall be fall, as Christ is full, full measure, heaped up, and running over,
will he me^^ out unto you then: and this shall be without the fear of any ebb
or diminution of it for all eternity; neither shall this fullness, and cons^ant
fullness, cloy the soul, or breed any satiety in it: there is fullness of joy
without surfeit, without satiety; that which they have, they shall always
desire, and that which they desire, they shall always have: everlasting
desire, and everlasting delight, being married together in their ^ulnesse. But
yet so much is a^tainable h^re, ^s may truly be called fullness, in regard of
the world; The fullness of joy that ^ll the pleasures of this earth can afford,
is but sca^cety and want, to the inward fullness o^ joy and contentation, ^he
poorest believers may have in God, reconciled in Christ. That which the wise
man gives as the character of all earthly joy, ^uits well, I said of laughter,
it is mad, and of mirth, wh^t does it? Eccl. 2.2. Truly it cannot be supposed
to be more ^eal, then that which is the ground and spring of it. I^ must be a
perfunct^^ious, superficial, and empty joy, that is derived and distil^ed from
such vanities. Nay, there is a madness in it besides, for men's apprehensions
to swell so excessively, toward poor, narrow, and limited things; it is a
monster in reason, to put such value upon nothing, and make our selves glad
upon our own dreams and ^ancies; There is such a manifest abuse and violation
of reason in it, that it can be supposed to proceed from nothing but a
distemper in men^ hearts. But be^ides ^his, there are two other characters of
it given, Prove. 14.13. Even in l^ughter the heart is sorrowful, and the end of
that ^^rth is heaviness. There is no pure earthly joy; for it has always a
mixture of grief and sadness in the ^oward retired closet of the heart; it is
of such deadness and inefficacy, that it drives no^ out of the heart all
discontentments and anxieties; but is the most jovial man, that seem^ to be
transported with his delights, would but retire within, and examine his own
conscien^e, ^e would find those delights have but little power to affect his
heart; he would find terrible and dreadful represent^tions there, that his
joys may well for a time darken them, bu^ cannot drive them away: and then it
is the very natural law, and fatal necessity, that grief follows these joys at
the heels, yea, is pe^petually attending them, to come in their place; God has
so conjoined them together, and so disposed them, that men's j^y shall be
mingled with grief, but their g^ief is pu^e and unmixed; and that he who draws
up joy to him from the creatures, must draw g^ief and vexation in that same
chain, inseparably annex^d to it by the wise ordination of God.

But there are joys of the Holy Ghost, arising from the intimati^n and
app^ehension of the Gospel, from the consideration ^f the grace and goodness
of God manifested in it, and the experience of that in the soul, which are of
another stamp and nature. These indeed affect the heart, and give the answer of
a good con^^ience, in the blood of Christ, which is a continual feast; these
drive out the bitter and dreadful apprehensions of sin and wrath; these sweeten
and refr^sh the soul in all wo^ldly afflictions and g^iefs: The heart of man
kn^weth his own bitterness, and a stranger does not intermeddle with his joy,
P^ov. 13.10. Indeed, the to^ments and perplexities of a troubled soul, are
better felt by themselves, t^en known by others, and so are the joys of that
heart that ^pprehends Jesus Christ, and peace p^rchased in him, they a^e such,
as no man that is a stranger to such things in his experience can app^ehend. It
is a joy u^speakable; O what un^peakable content gives it to the heart. And
truly if you did not interpose the clouds of unbelief and sin between you and
his shining countenance, there needed not be so often an Eclipse in the joys of
believers; yet the day is coming that ye shall see him fully as he is, and
nothing be interposed between you and him, and then your joy shall be full, etc.

SERMON IX^
1 John 1.5. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, etc.


THe great design of the Gospel is to make up the breach of man's joy, and open
up the way to the fullness of it: and therefore it is the good news and glad
^^dings of great joy, the only best message that ever came to the world. Now it
shows unto us the channel, that this river of gladness and joy runs into; it
discovers what is the way of the conveyance of it to the soul, and what are the
banks it runs between, and that is, fellowship with the Father and the Son. In
this channel that river of delight runs, between the banks of the love of God
to us, and our love to him. Herein a soul is happy, and accounts it self happy;
and truly, in so much do we profit by the Word, and answer the design of the
Gospel, by how much we estimat our happiness from this alone, from the
communication of God to u^. Whenever the Gospel taken hold of your hearts, it
will undoub^edly frame them to this, to a measu^ing of all blessedness from
God alone: and this will carry the heart to an undervaluing of all other
things, as being too low, and unworthy for this end; and so to a forsaking of
any thing for the closser enjoyment ^f God. I fea^ many believers are little
acquainted with this joy, because they draw not their joy singly out of the
pure fountain of delight; but turn aside to other external comf^^ts, and drown
their souls in them. Now indeed, these two cannot well consist together, if we
^ake in any thing else to make up our happiness and comfort, so much we lose
of God and that which is ^ruly spiritual; and therefore our hearts would be
more purified from carnal delights, if we would have experience of this joy: we
must hang only upon his countenance and company, el^e we lose the swe^tnesse of
it.

Now the Apostle prosecutes this further, to discover what confo^mity must be
betwee^ them that should keep this fellowship; and wh^t likeness of nature and
qualities is nec^ssary for them who would be happy in Gods society. This is the
message we have heard (says he) and which we declare unto you, that God is
light, etc. T^ke this jointly, with that which went before; This we declare,
that ye may have fellowship with the Father, and the Son. And to the end this
fellowship may hold, and yield you fullness of joy, it is necessary that the
nature of God be laid down, a^ the patte^n to which ye must be conform. God is
light, and therefore you must be light too, if ye would have fellowship with
that pure light. Now this, I say is the full message of the Gospel, that which
was sent down from Heaven, with the Son of God, the M^ssenger of the Covenant,
and which the Apostles heard from him; Indeed the very manner of the proposal
of these things might stir up our hearts to attention, and make us more serious
then commonly we are, That there is one, and such an one sent from Heaven, with
such an embassage as this is, to invite us to society with God again, one whose
interest lies in this, to make us happy; and this he declares unto us, that he
has no other design, but to fulfill our joy. O how powerful might this be on
our hearts, to conquer them, to make them willingly hearken to him? Any mess^ge
that comes from Heaven, should be received with great reverence and respect of
mortal men; because it comes from the Court and Palace of the Great King. But
when this i^ the substance of it, to make us happy in himself, to advance us to
this incomparable dignity of society with himself, in which society there is a
fullness of joy; then how should we receive it with open hea^ts, and intertain
it gladly? If we could take it always thus, as a message from Heaven, and look
upon it, and hear it in that notion, I think the fruit would be incomparably
greater; for what i^ it that makes it dead and ineffectual in men's hearts, but
that the apprehension of it degene^ats and falls down from God to creatu^e^,
beca^^e it is not taken so as his wo^d, carrying the s^amp of his divine
authority: We bring it forth, not as a mes^age from him, but as from our
selves; and you receive it not as from him, but from us; an^ thus it is
adulte^ated and corrupted on both hands. My beloved, let us jointly mind this,
that whatsoever we have to declare, it is a message from God to mortal men; and
therefore let us so compose our selves in his sight, as if he were speaking to
us. The conscience of a very Heathen was awaked, when Ebu^ told him he had a
message from G^d to him: E^lon arose out of his sent, that he might hear it
reverently, Judge. 3.20. though it was a bloody message, as it proved in the
event; yet so much the common dictats of reason might teach you, that ye should
a^ise, and compose your selves to ^eve^ent and awful attention to what the Lord
God will speak. But when moreover we know that the sum of the message is, to
make us blessed, and raise us up to communion with him in his joy and
happiness; we are not only called to reverence, a^ to God, but to ardent
af^ection and desire, as to him who by all means seeks ou^ happiness. O how
happy were he that could first hear, and receive this message from him, and
then decla^e it to others. But however, though we should fail in that, this
does not c^ange either the authority, or nature of the mess^ge it self; and
therefore, i^ men should be so far des^itute o^ God, as not to bring it from
him immediately, yet do not you ^orsake your own mercy too; but receive it as
that which is come forth from God; receive it for it sel^, as carrying in its
bosom a fullness of joy to you; and receive it for his sake who moved this
embassage first after sinners, and his sake who car^ied it to sinners, that is,
for the Father, and the Son; to whose fellowship you are here invited. Let us
then hear the m^ssage:

This then is the mess^ge, that God is light, etc. The ground o^ communion o^
persons, is their union in nature, or likeness one to another. There is some
general society between all mankind, as being conjoined in one common nature;
but the contracting of that in a narrower bounds of affinity and consanguinity,
does enlarge the affection the mo^e: you see it is natural for those who are
joined by such relations of blood one to another, to love one another more then
others out of these bonds. But true friendship draws the c^rcle yet narrower,
and contracts the love that is scattered abroad to mankind in a strange
channel, to run toward one, or a few; and the foundation of this is some
peculiar and particular si^ilitude, and likeness in manners, and sympathy of
disposition, which makes the souls of men to melt one into another, after some
conve^se and acquaintance together; this is the bond that knits this near
society; some conformity necessarily presuppo^ed to communion and fellowship.
Now that which holds so in the communion of man with man, must be much mo^e
need^ul in man; communion with God: for all the societies, combinations, and
conj^nctions of the creatures, are but shadows of this higher communicati^n of
the spirit of man, with God the Father of spirits. And indeed we may find some
rude dra^ghts and resemblances of this divine s^ciety, and of the rule
according to which it must be modeled, in all the friendly or near
conjunctions of creatures; for every thing is best preserved, and agrees best
with things of its own nature: see the disposition of the parts of the world;
things contiguous, and nearest other, are also likest in nature one to another,
so it is among men, the several agreements, and symbolizing^ of men's spirits in
different qualities and tempers, makes several sorts of men, and parts them
into so many companies: Pares paribus congregantur, simile simili gaudet.

Now, my beloved, this same supernatural and divine soc^ety that we speak of,
must be constituted according to this fundamental rule, that is, It is
necessary, to the end that God and man may have fellowship together, that they
come nearer in likeness one to another: now for God, you know he cannot be
liker us, for he is unchangeably holy and good: That were most absurd, to bring
down his Majesty to parta^e of our wretched inf^^mities of sin and darkness.
Indeed in this he has come as far as his own nature and our good would permit,
to communicate in our nature, and all the sinless infi^mities of it: It i^
imp^ssible then that he should make up the distance by any change of himself,
but we must be changed, and some way raised up to partake of the pu^ity of his
nature, and be transformed into some likeness to him, and then is the
foundation of society and fellowship laid down: This is the Apostles meaning,
in declaring to us what God is, that according to that pattern, and in that
glass, we may see what to con^orm our selves to, and may have a particular
determination of the great qualification of these who pretend to fellowship
with God: God is light, and in him i^ no darkness. Now take the just
opposition, man is da^knesse, and in him is no light. Now what communion then
can light have with da^knesse? either the light must become darkness, or the
darkness become light; either the light must leave its glorious purity, and
fors^ke its nature, which cannot be admitted, or else the darkness of men's
souls must be wiped off, and abolished by the brightness of God^ light; and
then there may be a comm^nion between the primitive light, and the derivative
light, between the o^iginal light, and that which flows out from the original.
But take darkness, remaining darkness, and light, remaining light, and they
cannot compone together; for the first great separation that was m^de in the
world, was between light and darkness: And God saw that light was go^d, and
God divided between the light and the darkness, Gen 1 4. And so it is
imp^ssible f^r men that live in the d^^knesse of their minds, in ignorance, and
in the da^knesse of sinful lusts, that they can have any fellowship with God,
who is a fountain of pure light, and undefiled ^ancti^y. Wh^t have thou to do
to take my Covenant in thy mouth, etc. and this God says to the wicked. It is
an incongruous and unsuitable thing, for men to pretend nearness and interest
in this God, and yet be buried in da^knesse and hatred of the light of personal
reformation, as a Gold Ring in a Swines nose, that ^ather deforms the Jewel,
then beautifies the Beast: So are the pretensions of ignorant and wicked men,
to this divine society, etc.

SERMON X^
1 John 1.5. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, etc.


WHo is a fit messenger to declare this message? Can da^knesse comp^ehend the
light, or apprehend it? O^ can those that a^e blind, ^orm any lively noti^n o^
light, to the inst^uction and persuasion of othe^s? Truly, no more can we
conceive or speak of God, who i^ that pure light, then a blind man can
discourse on colors, or a deaf man on sounds; Who is blind as the Lords
servant? And therefore, who are more unmeet to declare this message of light?
What reverence and godly fear ought this to be declared withal, when mortal man
speaks of the eternal God unto mortal men? What composure of spirit should be
in us? What trembling and adoration? For at our best we can but declare our own
ignorance, and the furthest attainment in this knowledge, is but a further
discovery of man's darkness; we have three ways of creeping toward that
glorious light of God, first, his own works are like some visible appearances
of that invisible and incomprehensible God; and in these we know him, but not
what he is in himself. Consider how dark and dull we are in piercing into the
hidden natures of things, even below us, as Beasts and Plants: we behold some
effects flow from them, but from wh^t principle these do flow, that we know
not: How much less can we apprehend any thing suitable of the Divine Majesty,
that is i^finitly above us, from these won^e^ful and glorious works of his
power and wisdom. Man is endowed with wisdom, to do some excellent works of
A^t, as Planting, Gra^^ing, Building, Painting, Weaving, and such like. But the
Be^sts that a^e b^low (...), cannot apprehend from these works what the nature
of man is. Now is there not a more infinite distance, a greater disproportion
between us and the Divine Nature, so that we cannot rise up to an understanding
notion of it, in it self Nay, besides, one man will do many things which
another cannot understand, he beholds the Art of it, he sees the matter, but
yet he cannon pierce into the mind o^ the Workman, and loo^ upon that wisdom
and idea of his mind: Therefore all that we can conclude from these wonderful
works of God, is some silent admiration of him. If these be such, th^n what
must he be? How infinitely distant from them, and transcenden^ over them? but
what he is, these cannot declare, and we cannot apprehend. Then we use to climb
up to the knowledge of God, by attributing to him all the perfections,
excellencies, and eminencies of the creatures: whatsoever commends them, we
apprehend that originally and infinitely in him; and thus we spell out that Name
that is most simply one, in many Letters, and Characters, acco^ding to our mean
capacity, as children when they begin to learn; so we ascribe to him wisdom,
goodness, power, justice, holiness, mercy, truth, etc. All which names being
taken from the creatures, and so having significations suited to our
imperfections, they must needs come infinitely short of him, and so our
apprehensions of them: these are scattered among the creatures, therefore they
cause diverse conceptions in us; but all these are united in him. He is a most
simple, pure being, that eminently and virtually is all things; and properly is
none of all.

Another way we have of apprehending him, by way of Negation, denying all the
imperfections of the creatures, and removing them an infinite distance from him,
and truly, though this be an imperfection in knowledge, yet it is the greatest
knowledge we can attain to, to know rather what he is not, then what he is: He
is not limited to any place, nor bounded with any measures and degre^s of
perfection, as creatures are; therefore we call him Infinite: He is not
comprehended within the limits of time, but comprehends all within himself;
therefore he is Eternal: He is not subject to changes and alterations,
therefore called Immutable: He is not compounded, as a result of diverse parts,
therefore he is most purely Simple, and One: He is not like these things we see
and hear, that fall under our senses; therefore we call him a Spirit, or a
spiritual being. Now in all these weak endeavour^ of man, to detain and fix
his own spirit in the contemplation of God, if he cannot reach the
understanding of what God is, yet certainly he will attain ^his great point of
wisdom, not to be ignorant of his own ignorance. And truly, my beloved, this is
the thing that I would have us to learn to know, that the admiration of God in
silence, is the best expression of him. We would not search into these
mysteries, to satisfy our cu^iosity, but rather compose our hearts to a
continu^l silent wondering before him* ^or where our unde^standings are
confounded, and ou^ minds ove^whelmed with the infiniteness of that glory, so
that we can see nothing but our own ignorance of all; this should certainly
compose all to quiet admiration; for silence and wonder is the proper and
natural posture of a soul that is at a stand, and can neither win forward for
inaccessible light, nor will retire backward for that it apprehends already.

This then is the m^ssage, that God is light. Because we cannot conceive in our
poor narrow mind^, what God is in himself, therefore he expresses to us often
in sim^litudes to the creatures, and condescends to our capacity. As he stands
in manifold relations to us, so he takes the most familiar Names, that may hold
out to our dull senses what we may expect of him: therefore he calls himself
a Father, a King, a Husband, a Rock, a Bu^kler, and strong ^ower, a Mountain,
and wha^soeve^ else may ^epresent to our hea^ts that which may strengthen them
in b^lieving. But there is no creature ^o directly att^ibuted to God, as light:
none used to express his very nature and being, a^ a^stracted from these
relations, but this, God is light, and Christ taken it to himself, the light of
the world, and the life of men. The truth is, it has some excellency in it
above all other visible creature^, that it may fitly carry some resemblance to
him. The Scripture calls light his garment, Psalm. 104.2. and truly it is a more
glo^io^^ Rob of Majesty, then all the royal and Imperial Robs and Ga^ments of
State, that either Angels or men could contrive. The light is, as it were, a
visible appearance of the invisible God: He has cove^ed his invisible nature
with thi^ glo^iou^ Garment, to make himself in a manner visible to man. Its
true, that light is, but a^ it were, a shadow of that inaccessible light, umbra
Dei. It is the dark shadow of God, who is himself infinitely more beautiful and
glorious* But yet, as to us, it has greater Glory and Majesty in it, then any
creature besides. It is the chief of the works of God, without which the world
would be without form, and void: it is the very beauty of the Creation, that
which gives a luster and amiablenesse to all that is in it, without which the
pleasantest Paradise would become a Wilderness, and this beautiful structure,
and ado^ned P^lace of the World, ^ loathsome dun^eon. (...) the admirable
beauty of it, it has a wond^^^ull swi^^ convey^nce, throughout the whole
wo^ld, the upper, and lower, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, it i^
carried from the one end of heaven to the other in a mom^nt, and ^ho c^n say by
wh^t way the light is p^rt^l, Job, 8 24. M^^eover it car^ies along with it ^
beautiful influence, and refreshing heat and warmnes^, which i^ the very life
and sub^istence of ^ll the creatu^es below. And so, as there ^s nothing so
beautiful, so nothing so unive^sally and hig^ly p^ofitable; and to all this,
add that ^ingular ^^operty of it, that it is not capable o^ in^ection, it i^ of
such absolute pu^ity, th^^ it can c^mmu^icat it self to the dunghill, as we^l
as to the Garden, without receiving any mixtu^e from it: In all the impu^ities
it m^ets withal, it ^emains unmixed, and un^ain^ed, and p^eserves its own
nature entire. Now you may perceive that there is nothing visible that is
fitter to resemble the invisi^le God, then this glor^ou^, be^utiful, pure, and
unive^sally communi^able c^eature, Light.

Hereby you may have shadowed out unto you the nature of God, that he is an
all-knowing, intelligent being, as light is the first and p^incipal visible
thing; yea, that which gives visibility to all things: and so is in its own
nature a manifestation of all things material and bodily, so God is the first
object of the understanding: primum intelligib^le, and primum intelligens.
Nothing ^o fit ^n emblem of knowledge, as light, and truly in that respect God
is the original light, a pure intellectual light, that hat^ in himself the
perfect idea and comprehension of ^ll things; he has ^nticipated in himself
the knowledge of all, because all things were formed in his infinite
understanding, and lay, as it were, first hid in the bowels of his infinite
power. Therefore he is a Glob or Mass of light and knowledge, like the Sun,
from whom nothing is hid; He^^ and destruction are not covered to him, the^e i^
no opacity, no darkness or thickness in the creation, that can terminat or
bound this light, or hinder his understanding to pierce into it. Now all things
by the irradiation of the light become visible, so the participation of this
gloriou^ Sun of Righteousness, and the shining of his be^ms into the souls of
men, makes them to partake of that heavenly intellectual nature, and ^eflects a
wonderful be^uty upon them, which i^ not in the ^est of the world.

Besides, here is represented to us the absolut^ purity and perfection of Gods
Nature, God i^ light, and in him is no darkness; Besides the purity of the
light of knowledge, there is ^ purity of the beauty of holiness, the glorious
light of God his virtue, and power, and wisdom, is communicated to ^ll the
creatures, there is an universal extent of hi^ influence toward the good and
bad, as the Sun shine^ on both, and yet there is n^ spot or stain upon his
holiness or righteousness, from all his intermingling with the creatures, the
wo^st and b^^est c^eatures. All his works are holy and righteous, even his
works in unholy and unrighteous men; he draws no defilement from the basest of
the creatures, nor yet from the sinfulness of it: He can be intimatly present,
and conjoined in working, in virtue and power, in care and providence, with the
dirt and mi^e of the streets, with the beasts of the field, and yet that is no
stain upon his honor or credit, as men would suppose it to be; no more then it
is a dishonor to the Sun to shine on the dunghill; in a word, there is no
mixture of ignorance, darkness, impurity, or iniquity in him, not the least
shadow of ch^nge, or turning, not the le^st seed of imperfection; in regard of
him the Moon is not clean, and the Sun i^ spotted; in respect of his holiness,
Angel^ may be charged with folly.

Then add unto this, to make up the resemblance fuller, the bounty and
benignity of his influence upon the world, the flowings forth of his in^^nit
goodness, that inricheth the whole earth: look as the Sun is the greatest and
most universal benefactor, his influence and heat is the very renovation of the
world, it makes ^ll new, and green, and flourishing; it puts a youth upon the
world, and so is the very spring and fountain of life to ^ll sub^^nary things.
How much is that true of the true light, of the substantial, of whom this Sun
is but a shadow, He is the life of the world, and the light of men. Every good
gift and every perfect donation descends from him, Jam. 1.17. ^is influence is
more universal to the being, to the moving, to the living of all things. And
then Jesus Christ the Sun of Righteousness is ca^ried a^o^t in the Orb of the
Go^spel, and in his beams there is a healing virtue; t^e^e are the refreshment
o^ poor wea^ied soul^ that a^e scorched with the anger of God. There i^ an
admirable heat and wa^mnesse of love and affection, that this glorious light
carries embosomed in it, and that is it that pierces into souls, and warms
hearts, and quickens dead spirits, and puts a new face upon all again. This is
the spring of all the life that is truly spiritual; and it has as sweet and
comfo^tabl^ effects upon the souls of men, who receive the truth in love, the
light in love, that is, the light with heat, as ever-the Sun approaching ^ear
the earth, has had upon plants and living creatures.

And to complete the resemblance more, there may be something of the
infallibility, and incomprehensibili^y of the Divine Majesty here represented;
for though nothing be ^learer then the light, yet there is nothing in it^ own
nature darke^ then light: That which is so manifest to the eyes, How obs^ure is
it to the understanding* Many debates an^ inqui^ies have been about it, but yet
it is not known wh^t that is, by which we know all things. Cer^ainly, such i^
the Divine Light: It i^ inconceivable, and inexpressible, therefor he is said
to dwell in light inac^essible, and full of glory, 1 ^im. 6.16. There is a
two-^o^d da^knesse that hinder^ u^ to see God, a da^knesse of igno^ance in u^,
and a da^kne^^ of inaccessible light in him: the one is a vail upon our hearts,
which blinds and darkens the souls of men, that they do not see that which is
manifest of God, even in hi^ works. O that cloud of unbelief that is spread
over o^r soul^, which hinder^ the glorious ^ayes of that Divine Light to shine
into them. Thi^ darkness S^tan contribute^ much to, who is the Prince of
darkn^sse, 2 Cor. 4.4. this makes the most part of souls like dungeons within,
when the glorious light of the Gospel surrounds them without: this earthlinesse
and carnality of our hearts, makes them like the earth, receive only the light
in the upper and outward supe^fice, and not suffer it to be ^ransmitted into
our h^arts, to change them. But when it pleases him, who at the first, by a
word of power, commanded light to shine out of d^rknesse, he can scatter that
cloud of ignorance, and draw away ^he vail of unbelief, and can by hi^ power
and art so transform the soul, a^ to ^^mo^e its earthly quality, and make it
transpa^^^t and pure, and then the light will s^ine in to (...) heart, (...)
get free access into the soul. But ^^^ough this da^kn^s^e we^e wholly removed,
^^ere is another da^knesse, that arises not from ^he wan^ o^ light, but ^^om
the exc^ssive supe^-^bundance o^ light; Caligo (...) nimiae, that is, a divine
da^kness^, a da^knesse o^ glory, such an infini^ exc^sse and superplus ^f light
and glory, above all created capaci^ies, that it daz^es and c^nfound^ all
^^^tal or created unde^standing^. We (...) some shad^ws o^ ^his, if we look up
to the clear Sun; we are able to see nothing ^or too much light, there is such
an infinite disproportion he^e between the eye of our mind, and this di^ine
light of glory, that if we cu^iously p^y unto it, it is rather c^nfounding and
astonishing; and therefore it fills the souls of Saints with continual silent
admi^ation and adoration.

SERMON XI^
1 John 1.5. This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare
unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all.


TRue Religion consists not only in the knowledge of God, but especially in
conformity to him, and communion with him. Communion and fellowship with God is
the great end and design of the Gospel, and it is the gre^^ resul^ of all a
Chri^^ian^ pain^ and progress; it i^ not only the greatest part of Religion,
b^t the very ^eward of Religion too; ^or piety has its reward of happine^s in
the bosom o^ it, without borrowing from exte^nal things. Now that which this
sweet and fragrant f^uit which per^ume^ all the soul with delight, and ^ills it
with joy, springs out o^, is, Conformity to G^d, a^^imilation o^ nature and
dispo^ition, some likeness to God imprinted on the soul again in holy
affections and di^positions, a co-incidency o^ our will with the will of God, a
drow^ing of it in the sea of his good pleasu^e, his Law in the inwa^d pa^ts.
Now what is the root of this co^^o^mity, but the knowledge of God? this is that
which has a ve^^ue to tran^^o^m the soul into his similitude: You see then
where true Religion begins lowest, and by what means it grows up to the sweet
fruit of that eternal joy that shall be pressed out of the G^apes of fellowship
with God: ^o then whatsoever is declared of God unto u^ in hi^ Wo^d, whatsoever
is holden ^orth of him, it is not only set forth to be the subject o^ our
knowledge, but especially to be a patte^n for imitation, and to be an inflaming
motive to our affection; This is the very substance of the ver^e.

This then is the mess^ge, I declare that God is light, and this I hea^d not
from Christ only for the ^atisfaction of my curiosity, nor do I declare it to
you only that you may know it, as if you had no more to do wit^ it, but
especi^lly that ye may know what ye ought to be in conformity to that light;
the end o^ your knowing God, i^ to become liker God, if so be ye would have
communion with him.

Let us take this rule then, to measure all our sea^chings after God, and
inquirings into him; ce^^ainly there ought to be more meditation, and inquiry
of heart upon this subject, because it is the ^pring of all life to the soul;
it is that which en^icheth it most, and fills it with peace, joy, and delight,
and brings in a treasure into a man^ heart, ^uch a^ Christ speaks of; A good
man out of the good treasure of his heart, etc. Medication, much meditation on
God, a stayednes^ and fixedness of spirit upon him, lays up a treasu^e in the
heart; this is it that makes such a dif^e^ence between the heart and mouth of a
righteou^ man, and a wicked man; the heart of the wicked is little worth, for
the total want of this; and therefor their lips and tongues are void of
edification, full of corruption. But where this spring flows within, it
makes the mouth of a man like a well of life; it makes his lips li^e choice
silv^r. O, the scantnesse and neglect of this amongst Christians, makes all to
wither and decay: there is little searching after the Almighty, little
employing and intertaining our spirits about him; low, slender, and single
thoughts and app^ehensions o^ him, which c^nnot but cause a deliquium and dec^y
in all the part^ of Christianity, when the v^ry Sun is ^^^pled from us by our
ign^^ance, and inc^nsidera^ion of ^im: and that so long, it must have dreadful
eff^ct^ upon us. Therefore let us be exhorted to this study, to give our
spi^its to this employment, to think mo^e on G^d. But as I was saying, there is
need of ^ ^ule to me^sure us in it, and of some caution about it, that i^, that
we have our end ^ightly established, wha^ we ^im at in enq^iring after, or
meditating upon God. If it be only to give intertainment to the curiosity of
our mind^, as in the c^ntemplation of natural things, if it be ^nly to p^y into
secrets and mysterie^, and to labor to comprehend that which is
incomp^ehensible, then we lose our labor, and we a^e in danger to meet with ^
consuming fi^e, instead of instructing and re^reshing light. I would therefore
have this g^arded against, the insatiable desire and greedine^^e of our minds
after the knowledge of secret mysteries. We must set bound^ here, and not
over-stretch or strain our und^^standings, to compass his infinite being, as
it is in it self: let us rather take him up as he i^ revealed in the
Scripture^, and so meditate ^n him ^s manifested in hi^ Word and W^rks, hi^
G^^ce, Mercy, Power, Wi^dom, etc. and read hi^ name with delight in these la^ge
volumes spread before our eyes, etc.

Now the just measuring and regulating of all knowledge of God, is to direct it
to a further end, to have nothing before us but this, that we may reve^ence,
(...), and love him so much the more: and t^^s is the t^ing t^^t make^h acc^^s
to him most easy and sweet, when ^he design a soul h^t^, in a^l it^ ^e^^chings
about him, is for thi^ purpose, ^o the end it may love him, and wo^ship him
mo^e ^ui^^bly, and be more c^n^o^med to him, when he is looked upon as ^
p^tte^n o^ our con^o^mi^y, that is the ^ight apprehension and up-taking of him,
to know that God is light, and so to know i^, a^ in it to behold the neces^ity
of what qualification should be in us, that is indeed to know God. My beloved,
let us co^^^der that so much we know of God, as we love him, and fe^r him, and
are conformed unto him: f^r that knowledge which is not about this work and
design; it is for no other purpose, but to be a wi^ness against a man, and the
most hai^ous aggravation of his sins.

To come then to the pa^ticular in hand, God is light, and that is holden out
and declared for this end, that there may be a pattern of the qualification of
all that intend to enter into that society; if ye would have fellowship with
God, then consider what you engage into, what manner of person he is, for ^he
inti^at knowledge of one another, is presupposed to all constant friendship:
You must know then what God is, if ye would have communion with him, because
there is no communion without some conformi^y, and no conformity without
knowledge of him. Therefore as he is ligh^, so the soul must be made ^ig^t in
^im, and enlightened by him, that would have hi^ ^ociety: w^ must b^ transformed
into that nature, and made children of light, who were child^en of da^knesse.
Now as there is a light of understanding, and wisdom in God, and a light of
^olinesse and purity, so there is in our souls opposite to these* a da^knesse
of ignorance and unbelief, and a da^kne^^ of sin, and impurity of affections.
Now what communion can light have with darkness? Let every man ask this at his
own heart, i^ there be no happiness without this society, and no possibility
of this society, while I remain in da^kness* then is it not high time to come
to the light? This then is the first change that is made in a soul, the
da^knesse of ignorance and unbelief is driven out, by the approach of that
gloriou^ light of the Gospel into the heart, then is discovered unto the soul
that defo^mity of sin, that loathsomeness in it self, that it never
apprehended: then there is a manifestation of the hidden works of darkness, of
the desperate wickedness of the heart, which lay un-observed, and unsuspected
all the while, and now a man cannot in that view but abhor himself, for that
which none else can see in him. And there is withal manifested that glorious
holiness and purity in God, that inviolable righteousness, that omnipotent
power, which formerly were never seriously thought upon; now these are
represented to the life before a sinner^ and to close up all, there is a
manifestation of the grace and goodness of God in Christ, which di^covers a
way o^ salvation, and delivery from ^in and wrath; and this perfumeth and
ref^esheth all the faculties of the soul. Thu^ the soul is in a part conformed
to that original light, when a beam is sent from it, and has pie^ced into the
heart, and scattered the darkness, that did alienat the minds of men from God.
But it i^ not only an illumination of the fore-face, and outer-side of the
soul, not only a conviction of the judgment in these things, but by virtue of
that divine heat that is transmitted with the light of the Gospel, the soul is
purified and cleansed from it^ g^osser nature, and so i^ made transparent, that
the light may shine into the very inwards of the heart; and this is the special
point of c^nformity to God, to have our souls purged from the da^kness of
sinful, earthly, and muddy ^ffections, to have them purified by the light of
God, from all the works and lust^ of da^knesse, and the shining beauty of holy
^ffections and inclinations, to succeed and fill up the vacant room. If
knowledge only reside in our brains, and send not down warm beam^ to quicken
and inflame the heart, then it is bar^en and unfruitful, it is cold and
unprofitable. If it hover only alone in our heads, and keep a motion there, but
send down no refreshing showre^ to the affections, which may make us abound in
good fruits, then it is like the windy clouds, ^louds without rain, that p^sse
away without any benefit to the thi^sty ground. Let us then take thi^ alongs
with u^, let the impression of this description of the Divine Majesty abide on
our he^rts. God is light, and if we often ruminat, and ponder on this, I think
i^ will make us often to ^efl^ct upon our selves, how we are darkness^, and
this will bre^d some care^ulnesse and desire in the soul, how to have this
da^kness removed, that there may be a soul capa^le of divine illust^ation This
is it that advances the soul to the n^^^est conformity with God, the looking
often upon God, till our souls be enlightened, and our hearts purified, and this
^g^in puts the soul in the nearest cap^city for t^^t blessed co^^un^on with
God. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God* Mat. 5.8. T^uly* it
i^ not p^ofoundness of ingine, it is not ^cuten^sse and sharpness of wit, it
is not pregnancy in unde^standing, or emin^ncy in parts, that will dispose the
soul to this blessed vision of God, and f^ame it to a capacity of fellowship
with him; no, there need^ no extraordina^y part^ for this, nothing but that the
heart be purified from corruptions, those inward earthly qualities, that are
like so many vicious and gross humou^^, filling the organ of the sight, these,
pride, conceit, self-love, p^ssi^n, anger, mali^e, ^nvy, s^^ife, covetousness,
love of pleasures, ambition, these, I say, that possess the hearts of the most
excellent natural spirits, casts a mist upon ^^^ir eyes, and (...) them to see
G^d, or enjoy that delig^^ in ^^m, that ^ome poor, weak, and igno^an^
cr^ature^, who^e hearts the Lo^d has pu^g^d ^^om sin, do find in God.
The^efo^e, i^ any o^ ^ou have an aim at this, to have fellowship with God, know
both ^or your di^ection, and you^ incou^agement, that God is l ght: for your
di^ection, because that must be your pattern, and if you have no study that
way, to be like him in holin sse, you shall not see him. But* take it likewise
for an encouragement, for that style carrie^ not only the necessity of what he
must be, but it holds out likewise the foun^ain and storehouse of all our
qualifications, for God is light, the original, primitive light, all must
borrow of him, and that light is f^eely and impa^tially communicable to poor
sinners: With thee is the fountain of life, and in thy light shall we s^e
light. Let a soul that app^ehends its own da^knesse and distance from him, thus
encourage it self, my light is but a beam derived from his light, and there is
no want in him: He is a Sun of ^ighteousnesse, if I shut ^ot up my heart
through unwillingnesse and unbelief, if I desire not to keep my sin^, but would
be pu^ged from them, then that glorious light may shin^ without stop and
impediment in to my heart: He is not only light in his own nature, but he is a
light to us, and if he please to remove that which is interposed between him
and us, it shall be daylight in our hearts again. Thus a ^oul may strengthen
it self to w^it on him, and by looking thus up to him, and fixing on him, we
shall be enlightened, and our faces not be ashamed.

SERMON XII^
1 John 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, etc.


THere is nothing in which men suffers themselves to be so easily deceived, as
in thi^ highest concernment of Religion, in which the ete^nal interest of their
^ouls lies: there is no delusion either so gross, or so universal, in any
other thing, as in this thing, in regard of which, all other things are
nothing. This has overspread the world, (to speak only of that part which
pretends to Ch^istianity) a strong, pertinacious, and blind ^ancy of being in
Jesus Christ, and having interest in salvation. I call it a blind and ignorant
^ancy, for truly ignorance and d^rknesse is the strong^st foundation of such
conceits: Papists call it the mother of devotion; it is true, in this sense it
is the mother of a man's groundles^ devotion toward himself, that is, of
delusion: this, together with self-love, which always hood-wink^ the mind, and
will not suffer ^ serious impartial examination of a man's self, these I say,
are the ^ottom of this vain persuasion, that possesses the generality of men.
Now what it wants of knowledge, it has of wilfulness, it is a conceit
altogether void of reason, but it is so wilful, and pertinacious, that it is
almost utterly inconvincible, and so it puts souls in the most desperate fo^lo^n
estate that can be imagined, it makes them, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.6.
(...), children of imperswasion, it is rendered commonly children of
disobedience, and indeed they are joined together, they are children of
disobedience, carrying the manifest characte^^ of wrath upon them; yet they are
withal, children of imperswasion, incapable of any persuasion contrary to
these deluding insinuations of their own minds, though they be manifest to all
men to be sons of disobedience, living in rebellion against God, yet it is not
possible to persuade them of it; they are as far from conviction of what they
are, as reformation to what they should be. Notwithstanding if men would but
give ^n impartial and attentive ear to what the Apostle says here, I suppose
the very frame of his argument is so convincing, that it could not but leave
some impression: If any thing will convince a child of imperswasion, the terms
here propounded ^re fittest, God is light, and in him is no darkness. Hence it
follows by inavoidable consequence, as clear as the light, that no man can have
fellowship with God, that walks in darkness.

Those that delude themselves in this matter, are of two kinds, the generality
pretend to Christianity in general, and to an interest in salvation, but if we
descend into the chief parts and members of Christianity, as holiness,
fellowship with God, walking after the Spirit, and such like, these they do not
so much as pretend (...) and withal, think they have a dispensation from such
strictness, and make it a sufficient plea tha^ they are not such, because they
never professed to be such: others again, though fewer, can pretend even to
these higher points of Christianity, as communion with God, walking after the
Spirit, and indeed in this they are more consonant to their profession of
Christianity: But, as the Apostle says, there may be a practical li^ in it
too, if we consider and compare their practice with their profession.

I would speak a word by way of preparation to you who are of the first sort,
that is the very multitude of professing Christians, because you do not profess
so much as others, and do not give out your selves for the students of
holiness, you think your selves exempted from the stroke of all this
soul-piercing Doctrine, you think read^ly, it is not pertinent to apply this to
you, of walking contrary to profession, and so committing this gross lie, in
not doing the truth. If any say I have fellowship with God, etc. And who will
say that ^ say ye, Who will speak such a high word of himself as this?
Therefore since you do not presume so high, you think you have escaped the
censure that follows.

But I beseech you, consider what your professions import, and what you engage
your selves to, even by the general profession of Christianity. I know you will
all say you are Christians, and hope to be saved. Now do ye understand what is
included in that, if any man say, that he is a Christian, he really says that
he has fellowship with God; if any man say, he is a Christian, he says he
has fellowship with Christ, and is partaker of his Spirit; for as the Apostle,
Romans 8.9. decl^res unto you, If any have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of
his; that is, he is no Christian. For what is it, I pray you, to be a
Christian? Is it not to be a new creature, formed again by the Spirit of
Christ? 2 Cor. 5.17. Therefore in as far as you pretend to be Christians, and
yet are not professors of holiness, and think you have a dispensation from
such a walking in God, and after Christ, you fall under a twofold
contradiction, and commit a twofold lie: First, between your profession and
practice; then in your profession it self: your practice is directly cross to
the very general profession of Christianity. But besides that, there is a
contradiction in the bosom of your profession; you affirm you are Christians,
and yet refuse the profession of holiness; you say ye hope for Heaven, and yet
do not so much as pretend to godliness, and walking spiritually. Nay, these
you disjoyn in your profession, which a^e really one, without which the name of
Ch^istianity is an empty, vain, and ^idiculous appellation. There must be then
a great da^knesse of misapprehension in your minds, that you take on the name
of Christians, and will not know what it impo^ts, and therefore in the mean
time, you p^ofesse that which destroys and anulls your former profession. Now
certainly, this is a g^osser lie, a flatter contradiction, then it needs much
inquiry into, to find it out. It is so palpable, that I wonder that these very
common and received principles of truth, do not ^^se up within, to testify
against it: For if ye do not own the profession of holiness and communion with
God, what advantage have you then of Christianity? tell me, What will it se^ve
you for? Can it save you? Can a bare, empty, contradicted, and blasphemed title
save you? and if it do not save you, it will make your condemnation the
greater. Let this then first be settled in our hearts, and laid down as a
principle, that the most general profession of Christianity lays an inviolable
bond and obligation upon us, to all that is imported in the particular
expressions of a Christians nature, walk, and society; whether we take it so or
not, thus it is: to be a Christian infolds all that can be said; and if it do
not import these, it is not true to its own signification, nor conformed to
Ch^ists meaning. You may deprave the world as you please, and deform that holy
calling so, as it may suit to your car^i^ge, but according to this wo^d, in
this acceptance of it, you shall be judged: and if your Judge shall in that
great day lay all this great charge upon you, what will it avail you now to
absolve your selves in your imaginations, even from the very obligation it self.

Let us suppose then, that you are convicted of this, that Christianity in the
most gene^al and common acceptance, is inclusive of fellowship and communion
with God; and that you profess and pretend to both; then let us apply this
just rule of the Apostles, to examine the truth and reality of such a
profession. The rule is str^ight, and so may be a trial both of that which is
straight and crooked. Rec^um sui and obliqui index: and here the application
being made, there is a discovery of the falsehood and crookedness of most men's
hearts; this Golden Rule of Examination, is a Rule of Proportion, so to speak,
or it is founded upon the harmony that should be between profession and
practice, words and deeds, and upon that, conformity should interceed between
those that have communion one with another. Now apply these to the generality
of Christians, and behold, there is no harmony and consent between their
speaking and walking; their calling and profession, as Christians, imports
communion with God, who is the pure unmixt light, and yet they declare
otherwise, that themselves are in darkness of ignorance, and walk in the
darkness of sin, an^ so that communion must be pretended, where there is no
conformity and likeness to God intended: The result then of ^ll is this,
herein is the greatest lie, and most dangerous withal, committed, It is the
greatest li^, because it takes in all a man's conve^^ation, which all along
make^ up one great unive^sal lie, a lie composed of infinite cont^arie^ies, of
innumerable particul^r lies, for every step, every word, and action, i^ in its
own nature cont^a^y to that holy profession, but all combined together, makes
up a black constellation of lies; one powerful lie against the truth. And
besides, it is not against a particular truth, but against the whole complex of
Christianity. An e^^or is a lie against such a particular truth as it opposes;
but the tract and course of an ignorant, ungodly conversation, i^ one continued
lie, against the whole bulk and body of Christianity. It is a lie d^awn the
length of many weeks, months, and year^, against the whole frame of Christi^n
profession: for the^e is nothing in the calling of a Christian, that i^ not
ret^acted, contradicted, and repro^ched by it. Oh, that ye could unbowel your
own ways, and see what a clos^er of lies and incongruities is in them, what
reproache^ and calumnies these practical lies c^st upon the honor of your
Christian Calling, how they tend of their own nature, to the disgracing of the
truth, and the blaspheming of Gods Name. T^ese things ye would find, if ye
would rip up your own hearts and ways, and if you found how great that lie is,
you could not but fear the danger of it; for it being no less then a denying
of Jesus Christ, and a real abrenunciation of him, it puts you without the
refuge of sinners, and is most likely to keep you without the blessed City, for
there shall in no ways enter therein any thing that defiles, or makes a lie,
Rev. 21.27. What shall then become of them whose life all alongs is but one
continued lie.

SERMON XIII^
1 John 1.6. If we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness,
we lie, etc.


THat which is the sum of Religion, sincerity, and a correspondency between
profession and practice, that is confirmed by reason, and much strengthened by
nature it self, so that Religion, Reason, and Nature, conspire in one, to hold
out the beauty and comeliness of sincerity, and to put a note and character of
infamy and deformity upon all hypocrisy and deceit, especially in the matters
of Religion. There is nothing so contrary to Religion, as a false appearance, a
show of that which is not: for Religion is a most entire and equable thing,
like at (...) harmonious in all the pa^ts of it, the same wit^^in and without,
in exp^ession and action, all cor^respondent together. Now to (...) this
h^^m^^ny, and to make it up of unequal, dissimil^ pa^ts, and to make our part
give the lie to (...) other, the course of a m^ns li^e, in igno^anc^
negligence, and sin, proclaiming cont^ary to ^h^ profession of Christianity:
this is to make Reli^gion a monst^uous thing, to deny the nature o^ it, and in
our imaginations to contrive an im^possible union of inconsistent things. It is
a crea^ture made up of cont^adiction^, which can have no subsistence in the
truth, but only in the fan^cies of deluded souls: one professing Christianity,
and so by cons^quence fellowship with the original light, the Sun of
Righteousnes^^, and yet da^knesse of igno^ance possessing the mind, and the
heart ca^^ied away in the ways of the lusts of ignorance, and walking in that
darkness, this is a monster in Christianity, one so far mi^sh^pen, that the
very outward form and vi^age of it does not remain. But I told you, reason
confirms this, for what more suitable to the very natural frame and
constitution of a reasonable being, then that the outward man should be the
image and expression of the inward, and that they should answer one another, a^
f^ce answers face in the water; that the tongue should be the interpreter of
the mind, and the actions of a man's life the interpreter of his tongue. Here is
that beauti^ul proportion and that pleasing harmon^, when all these, though
different in their own nature, yet conjoyn toge^^er, and make up one sweet
conco^d. Now t^uly, if we t^ke upon us the profess^on of Christianity, and yet
our ordinary and habitual speeches are carnal and earthly, never salted with
grace, often poisoned with blasphemie^, oaths and cu^sings, and often defiled
with filthy speeches, and often inte^mingled with ^ep^oaches of othe^s, if our
conversation be con^o^med to the course of the world, according to these lusts
that hur^y away multitudes o^ mankind to perdition, and look to the heart
within, and behold, never any labor about the pu^i^ying of it from corruption,
never any mortification of evil affections, and little or no knowledge of the
truth, not so much as may let Christ in to the soul: this, I say, is as
unreasonable and ab^^^d, as it is irreligious: it wholly perve^ts that
beautiful order, makes an irreconciliable discord between all the parts in man,
that neither mind, nor mouth, nor hands answer one another, nor all of them, or
any of them answer that holy calling a man pretends to. Such a one pretends
ordinarily the goodness of his heart toward God, but now the tongue cannot
interpret the heart, it is exanctorated out of that natural office, for the
ordinary current is contrary to that pretended goodness of the heart; For a
good man, out of the good treasure of his heart, sends forth good things, but
all these are either evil, or never seasoned with that spiritual goodness.
Then the ways and actions of a man's life, which ought to interpret and expound
his professions, these are rendered altogether incapable of that, they give no
confirmation to them, but rather ^ mani^est contradiction; for what ar^ your
multiplied oaths, drunkennesses, fornication^, railings, contentions, lyings,
Sabbath-profanation^? your woeful neglect of prayer in secret, and in your
families, your continuing in these evil^ that ever you walked into, what are
they, I say, but a manifest violation of both Religion and Reason, and a clear
confirmation that ye are liars, and the truth is not in you?

There is something even in nature to decla^e the absurdity and unnaturalness
of this general discordance between men's profession and practice. Look upon all
the creatures, and do they not all with one voice proclaim sincerity? Has not
every beast, and every bird its own outward shape, outward gesture, and voice,
and external workings, which declare the inward nature of it? And is not this a
Staple-known rule in nature, that every thing is known by the effects of it? A
Lion by his roaring, ^ Lark by its singing, a Horse by his neighing* and ^n Ox
by his lowing, etc. All these speak forth nothing but sincerity, in so much,
that if these marks and signs should be confounded, and beasts use them
indifferently, all humane knowledge should suddenly fall to nothing, this would
put such a confusion, both in the wo^ld and mankind. O, how does this condemn
th^s^ who pretend to thi^ high Calling of Christianity? and yet there is no way
left to discern them by, nothing appearing in them, and ordinarily proceeding
from them, which may give a signification of the inward truth of their
fellowship with God; but rather that which gives a demonstration of the vanity
of the pretention. Ther^ ^e^e no consent in nature, if tha^ were (...)* neither
is there any harmonious agreement in Religion, where thi^ proportion and
correspondence is not kept in a m^n^ life. The very Heathens did not account
them Philosophers, but those that expressed their Doctrines in wo^k^, (...)
well as words; and truly, the liveliest image of truth is in practice: They
commended them that were spa^ing in words, and abundant in deeds: who had short
speeches, but long and large discou^ses in their life; and what i^ this, but
that which our Savior every where, from his own example, inculcat^ upon us.
These word^ are emph^tick, To do the truth, to walk in the light, to do his
word, to believe with the heart, and such like: all which declare, that in so
far we have the truth, and have fello^ship with the light, as it is impressed
in the affection, and expressed again in the convers^tion; for the infinite
truth, and the infinite life, is one, and the original light, and primitive life
and love, is on^ too, and whoever truly receive^ the truth and light, as it is,
cannot but receive him, as the living truth, and life-giving light, and so be
heated and wa^med inwa^dly by his beams, which will certainly cause some
stirring and wo^king without: For as much as in nature, heat is always
wo^king, so is the fi^e of love kindled in the heart, inces^ant that way* faith
working by love; for action is the very life of life, that which both shows it,
and preserves it.

Now what shall we say, to ca^^y these things home to your hearts? Where shall
convincing words be had which may break the hardness of your hearts? It is
strange that you are in such a deep dream of delusio^, that nothing can awake
you out of it? And how little is it that you have to please your selves into?
Some external p^iviledges, the Temple of the Lord, his Covenant, and the seals
of it, your ordinary bearing the Word, and such like: But are there not many
things in your hearts and ways, that act the most contradictory lie to these
that can be? For wherefore do we thus meet together? Do ye know an end, or
propose any? I scarce believe it of the most part. We come out of custom, and
many as by constraint, and with little or no previous consideration of the
great end of this work; and when ye go forth, what fruit appears? Your
ordinary, carnal, and civil discourses succeed; and who is it either bows his
knee to pray for the divine blessing, or intertains that holy word either in
his own meditation, or speaks of it to the edification of others? Are you not,
the most part of you, that ground of which Christ speaks, that lies in the
way-side, and every thing comes and takes the seed up? Do ye either listen and
apply your hearts to a presentnesse in hearing? Or is there any more account of
it, then a sound in the ear, or any footstep or imp^ession left in the heart,
more then of the flight of a bird in the air? And alas! how many souls are
choked and stifled? the truth suffocated in the very sp^inging, by the thorns
of the cares of this world, and the throng and importunity of businesses, and
earthly desires. How many good motions come to no m^turity by this means? How
few of you use to pray in secret, and to dedicat a time for reti^ement from the
world, and enjoyment of God? Nay, you think you are not called to it, and if
any be induced to it, and to public wo^ship in their families, yet all the day
over is but a flat contr^diction to that: What earthly-mindednesse? What
unholiness of affection? What impu^ity of conversation? What one lust is
subdued? What one sin mortified? Who increases more in knowledge of the truth,
or in love of God? Is it not midnight with most part of you? O, the darkness
of the ignorance of your mind^, by which you know not that Religion you
profess, more then Tu^ks who do pe^secute it. And what are the ways ye walk
into? Are they not such ways, as will not come to the light, and hate the
light, because it reproves them? Joh. 3.19* 20. and 11.9, 10. Are they not
such, in which men stumble, though they seem to walk easily and plainly into
them? Yet, O that everlasting stumble that is at the end of them! when you
shall fall out of one darkness of sin and delus^on, into an utter, extreme,
eternal da^knesse of destruction and damnation. O, that ^ea^^ul dungeon, and
pit of darkness, you post into ^ Therefor, i^ you love your own souls, be
warned, (...) beseech you be warned to flee from that ^^ter darkness, be
awaked out of your deceiving dreams, and deluding, sel^-flattering
imag^^^^^on^, and Christ shall give you light. The di^^^very of that gross
da^knesse you walked into, in which you did not see whither you w^nt* I say,
the clear discerning of what it is, and whither i^ leads, is the fi^^t opening
of that Light, the ^ir^t visit of that Morning Star, that brings salvation.

If ye will not be convinced o^ that ^nfinit d^nge^ you are into, yet ye ar^
not the ^urther from ^t. He that walks in darkness lie^h, etc. Hi^ strong
confidence and persuasion has ^ lie, ^ contradiction in the bosom o^ it, and
that will never bottom any true happiness. It is a lie acted by the hand, the
^oot, and ^ll the member^* a lie ^g^inst ^he holy truth and Word o^ God, and
the very reproach o^ the Name of Christ* (...) lie against your selves, and
your own pro^ess^on^, a soul-murthering lie, as well as a Christ^denyin^^ lie:
and this lie (as a holy man says) has filled Houses, Cities, Families,
Countries, it has ev^^ overspred the whole Nation, and filled all with
darkness, horror, con^usion, trouble and anguish, once being a holy Nation by
profession of a Covenant with God, and our open, m^ni^est* universal retraction
of that, by an unholy, ungodly, and wicked conversation. This h^th b^ought the
sword against a hypocritical Nation, and this will bring that far greater,
incomparably more intolerable day of wrath upon the children of disobedience.
Therefore let me exhort all of you, in the Name of the Lord, as ye desire to be
admitted to that eternally blessed society, within the holy City, and not to be
excluded among these, who commit abomination, and make a lie, that ye would
henceforth impose this necessity upon your selves, or know that it is laid upon
you by God, to labor to know the will and truth of God, that you may see that
light that shi^es in the Gospel, and not only to receive it in your minds, but
in your hearts by love, that so you may endeavor in all sincerity, the doing
of that truth, the conscionable practicing of what you know. And this, as it is
a great point of conformity to the light, so it will make you capable of more
light from God; ^or he delights to show his liberality where he has any
acceptance. Be not satisfied, O! be not sat^sfied with knowing these truths,
and discoursing upon them, but make them ^urther your own, by impressing them
deeply in your hearts, and expressing them plainly in your ways. This is pure
Religion and undefiled, J^m. 1.27. And is not this to know me, says ^he Lord,
Jer. 22.16. Practice is real knowled^e, because it is living knowledge, it i^
the very life and soul o^ Ch^istianity, when there needs no more but the
intimation of hi^ will to c^r^y the whole man: T^is is that we would all aspire
unto, and not satisfy our selves in our poor seize below this.

SERMON XIV^
1 John 1.7. But if we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us
from all sin.


ARt is the imitation of Nature, and true Religion is a divine Art, that
consists in the imitation of God himself, the Author of Nature. Therefore it is
a more high and transcendent thing, of a sublimer nature, then all the Arts and
Sciences among men; those reach but to some resemblance of the wisdom of God,
expressed in his works, but this aspires to an imitation of himself in
holiness, which is the glory of his N^me, and so to a fellowship with himself.
Therefore there is nothing has so high a pattern, or sublime an end, God
himself, who is infinitely above all, i^ the pattern, and socie^y with God, i^
(...) end o^ i^: and so it cannot choice, but where Religion makes an ^olid
impression on a soul, it (...) ex^eedingly raise and advance it to the most
he^oi^k and noble resolutions that it is capable o^, in re^pect o^ which
elevation of the ^oul afte^ God, the highest project^, the greatest aspirings,
and the most elevating de^igns of men, a^e nothing but low, base, and wretched,
having nothing of true greatness of mind in them, but running in an earthly
and ^^^did channel, infinitely below the poo^e^t soul, that is lifted up to God.

Since we have then so high a pattern as God, because he is infini^^y ^emoved
from us in his own nature, we have him exp^essed to us under the name and
notion of light, which makes all things manifest. Not only as dwelling in
inacc^ssi^le l^ght, that is, in his own incomprehens^^e, ine^^able essence*
even before this light wa^ created, for he is in the light, and was in the
light, when there was no Sun to give light, because he was in himself environed
(so to speak) ^i^h the infinite light and splendour of his own understanding, and
beauty of his own holiness, and so dwelling in an all-fulnesse, and
self-sufficiency of blessedness. Not only is he thus in the light, bu^ he is a
light to poor sinners, the most communicative being, that cease not
continually to send ^orth streamings of that light and life into dark and dead
souls: and therefore he is not only light in himself, but a Sun of
Righteousness, m^st beneficial in hi^ influences, most impartial and f^ee in
his illumination, and so he is often called, my light, and my salvation, our
light, a light to me, Psalm. 27.1. Micah 7.8. Isai. 42.6* 7. Now, it is this
emission of light from him, that first drives away that gross darkness that is
over ^oul^, for till then, in the darkness all was hid and covered, nothing
seen, neither our selves* nor God, neither the temper of our hearts, nor the
course of our w^^es, nor the end they lead to. But it is the breaking in of a
beam of that Sun of Righteousness, that makes any such d^scovery; as mo^es a^e
not seen till the Sun shine, though the house be full of them; in da^knesse
there is nothing but confusion and disorder* and light only makes that disorder
visible to the soul, to the affecting of the heart. Now when once the soul has
received that light, there is a desire kindled in the heart after more of it,
as when the eye has once perceived the sweetnes^ and pleasantness of the
light, it opens it self, and exposes it self to a ^uller reception of more:
and so the soul that is onc^ thus happily prevented by the first salutation,
and visit of that day-sp^ing from on high, while he was sitting in darkness,
and in the sh^dow of death, Luke 1.78, 79. afterward, follows after that light,
and desires nothing more, then to be imbosomed with it: That tender preventing
mercy, so draw^ the heart after it, that it can never be at perfect rest, t^ll
the night be wholly spent, and all the shadows of it removed, and the Sun
clearly up above the Horizon, and that is the day of that clear vision of Gods
face. But in the mean time, this is the great ambition and endeavor of such an
one, to walk in that light, and this is the very intertainment of that
fellowship with God; he is already in the light, that is to say, he is
translated from a state of darkness to light, and endowed with the living and
saving knowledge of God in Jesus Christ, this is his state; he is in the l^ght,
one enlightened from above, having his eye^ opened to discover the mystery of
the iniquity of his own heart, and to see far off, to that bottomless pit of
misery, which his way would lead him to; one who has by this divine
illustration discovered eternal things, and seen things not seen, and withal
gotten some knowledge of salvation, by the remission of sins. Now such an one,
being thus in the light* his duty is, and his infinite dignity besides, to wa^k
in that light, that i^, to lead all his life under that eternal light of God,
which shines in the Word, and to bring it all forth in his view; to make our
whole course a progressive motion toward Heaven; wherein that glorious light
shines most gloriously. It is almost all one with that of Paul's, to have our
conversation in Heaven; for, to walk in the light, it is a kind of elevation of
our actions, a raising them up to Heaven, to that pure light, for after that,
and toward that, is the souls design.

Now to exp^esse to you in what it co^^ists, I desire not to b^^nch it forth in
many particula^s, (...) ^athe^ dist^act the mind, then aff^ct the heart; only
you may know, it c^nsi^^^ especiall^ into the (...) re^i^ements ^f the ^oul to
G^d, an^ the ou^ward ^^i^ing of that light, in our conve^^ation to oth^^^.
These are the chief pa^ts o^ it, b^^^owin^, from hi^ light, and then (...) and
im^^^ting (...) to other^, by a holy conve^sati^n. T^u^^, we must needs
conceive that the most lively and ^^mixt par^^king of the ligbt of G^d, (...)
the sweetest ^o^iety with (...), is in the sec^et withd^^wings of the soul from
the world, and reposes upon G^d, those little intervals, and, as it we^e, (...)
hour^ of fellowship with God, that are taken from the multitude and (...) of
our busin^sse* these a^e the ^itte^^ oppo^tunities of the transforming the soul
into hi^ similitude, and of purifying it as he is pure, of fi^ling it with
divine light and love; f^r then the heart lies, as it we^e perpendicularly
under his beams, and is opened be^o^e him, to give admission and ent^y to this
saving, t^an^fo^ming light; and it i^ the shining of Gods countenance then upon
the so^l, that d^aws it most toward conformity with him, and leaves an
impression of light and love upon the soul Oh, that you were mo^e acquainted
with this, this apric^tion, so to speak, that i^, s^nning your selve^, and
warming in the Sun, the exposing and opening of your hea^t^ f^eq^ently in
s^^^et, before this Sun of Righ^eou^^^sse. N^w, this, if you were acquaint with
it, would make your light so to shine before men, as your He^venly Father may
be glor^fied, M^^ 5.16. and that is the walking in th^^ light of God. This
makes a Christian to come fo^th, as Moses from the Mount, with his ^ace
shining; he co^es out f^^m the retired acc^sses to G^d, wi^h a lust^e upon hi^
carriage, that may bea^tifie the Gospel* and (as one says w^ll) with the
Tab^e^ of the Law in both his hand^, w^itten in hi^ p^actice, the light of the
Law shining in his li^e; and truly this is the Ch^istians (...) in his low^r
^phere, w^e^ein he ca^^ies ab^ut that light that is de^ived from the hig^er
light, in all his con^erse with men, it shine^ from him to the glorifying of
him that i^ the F^ther ^f lights, walking ^igh^e^usly and sobe^ly, without
offen^e, doing goo^ to all, ^spe^ially the child^en of light, extending ^^^ces
of love and benevo^lence to every one, forbea^ing and forgiving offence^, not
partaking with other men's sin^, and fin^ly, declaring in wo^d and deed, that we
have communion with the fountain of pure light, and one day expect to be
translated out of this lower Or^, where we are so far distant from him, and
fixed in the highest of all; where we may h^ve the immediate, full,
uninterrupted, and clearest aspect of his countenance, which shall then make
the desc^iption that is here given of God, communicable to us, that, as he is
light, and in him is no darkness, so we being fully and perfectly shined upon
by him, may be light likewise, without any mixtu^e o^ d^^knesse, as here it is
not.

Now, my beloved in the Lord, this is that we are called unto, to walk thus in
the light, in the light of obedience and sanctification, and that is the great
thing ye would lea^n to aspi^e unto, rather then to enjoy the light of
consolation: Indeed I conceive, that which makes many of u^ walk in darkness,
as i^ spoken in Isa. 50.10. that is, without comfort, peace, and joy, and
without clear disce^ning our interest in God, i^, because we walk in another
da^knesse, that is, of sin and distance from God; the one da^knesse is
introductive of the other, nay, they cannot be long without other, the da^k
cloud of bold sinning, and ca^elesse unci^cumspect walking, that cannot but
eclip^e the light of consolation, and fill the soul with some ho^rour, anguish,
and confusi^n. Therefore, if ye would walk in the light of joy and comfort, O,
take heed nothing be interposed between God and your souls: you must likewise
walk in the light of his Law, which is, as a lamp to the feet, and this light,
as the ray, begets that light of comfort, as the splendour, which is the second
light of the Sun: I know i^ is a disconsolat and sad condition to walk without
the light of the knowledge of our interest in God; but I would earnestly
recommend unto you two things to support you, and help you in that; one is,
that you do not give over the chief point of this society with God, that is,
walking in the light of his Law and Commandments, but that you do the more
se^iously add^esse to the one, that you want the other. C^^tainly, it ought to
be no hinderance of your obedience, and patient continuing in obedience, that
you know not your own interest, and that his countenance shines not so upon
you; you know that sweet ^esolution, I will wait upon the Lord who hides his
face, etc. Isai. 8.17. Mic. 7.7. and his own command, Isai. 50.10. Hos. 12.6.
Ye that walk in such a darkness, neve^thelesse, stay upon God. Truly there
could be no g^eater evidence of thy interest, then thi^, to give patient
attendance upon him in the ways of obedience, till he shine forth; this would
in due time bring forth thy righteousness as the light, if we would not
substract and withdraw our selves from under the light, because it is presently
over-clouded. Then, moreover you would know, that all this while that your
interest in Christ lies dark, and under cloud, you should then be most in the
applic^tion of that blood to your souls, most in trusting and staying upon the
Name of God, and his absolute promises. Suppose thou do not as yet know that he
is thine, yet do thou not know that he is made thine by believing in him? and
therefore while it is inevident that it is already, thou ought so much the more
to labor, that what is not, may be. Now, if thou can not apply him to thy
soul, as thine own possession, yet thou may, and so much the more oug^test
to apply thy soul to him, an^ re^ign and offer thy self to him, as willing to
be his posse^sion, to be his, and no more thine own: in a word, when thine own
expe^imental feeling of the wo^k of Gods Spirit fails within thee, th^n so much
the more in^ist, and dwell upon the meditation and belies o^ the gene^al
p^omi^es, which a^e the p^oper object of faith, and not (...): as our own
inte^est is ^he proper obj^ct o^ (...), and not of says Therefore the de^ect
in the one, need^ not re^ound upon the other. To ^um up all in one word, i^
thou think that thou have not yet believed in Christ, and (...) no inte^est
in him, I will not dispute with thee, to pe^swade t^ro that thou art mistaken,
for all thi^ debate would h^ in the (...), because thou a^t in d^rkness; but
one th^^g I would s^y unto thee, labor to do that which thou would do, which
thou must do, if ^uc^ a c^^e were granted; suppose it were so, that thou had no
in^e^est in him, what would thou do then? I am sure th^^ would say, I would
labo^^ by any (...) to have him mine; why then, thou knows that cannot be
before believing, and ^eceiving him (...) hi^ promises, and not at all, but by
believing. Therefore, since that this is it you must at length tu^n unto,
suppose the case were decided, why do ye not presently ^at^er without more
wea^ying your selves, in the greatness of your way, tu^n in hither, as to a
place of refuge, without further disputing in the business, and so by
believing in Christ, and waiting upon him in his ways, you shall put that o^t
of q^e^^ion, which debating would make an end^e^^ qu^s^ion. The Lord make you
wi^e to know the t^ing^ that belongs to your peace.

SERMON XV^
1 John 1.7. -- And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin.


CAn two walk together except they be agreed? A^ darkness cannot have
fellowship with lig^^, till it be changed into some con^o^mity to the light,
even ^o t^ere can neither be any fellowship in walking, nor con^ormity in
nature, between God and u^, who are enemies to him by n^^ure, unless there be
some agreement and reconcilia^ion os the difference. Now here is that which
makes the atonement, The blood of Jesus his Son ^leanseth us from all sin.
This is it that takes away the difference between God (...) men, and makes
reconciliation for us; This blood has qu^nched ^he fl^me of indignation and
w^ath kindled in Heaven against us. And this alone can quench and extinguish
the flames and ^u^ies of a tormented soul, that is burnt up with the
app^ehension of his anger: All other things thou can ^pply, or cast upon them,
will be as oil to increase them, whether it be to cool thy self in the shadows
of the worlds delights, such a poor ^hi^t as the rich glutton would have taken
in hell; those drops of cold water that thou can dis^ill out of the c^eature,
will never give any solid ease to thy conscience; thou may abate the ^ury of
it, or put it off for a season, thou who is afraid of hell and wrath, may
procure so^e short vacancy from those terrors, by turning to the world: but
certainly they will recurr ^gain, and break out in a g^eater fire, like a fever
that is not diminished, but increased by much drinking cold water: or if thou
go about to refresh thy self, and sati^fie thy challenges by thy own
seize in Religion, and by reflection upon thy own heart and ways,
finding something in thy esteem, that may counterballance thy evils, and so
give thee some confidence of Gods avour, these, I say, are but deceitful
things, and will never either quench the displeasure of God for thy si^s, but
rather add ^ewel to it, because thou justifies thy self, which is an
abomination before him; nor yet will it totally extinguish and put to silence
the clamours of thy conscience, but that some day thou shall be spoiled of all
that sels-confidence, and sel^-defence, and find thy sel^ so much the more
displeasing to God, that thou did please thy self, and undertook to pacify
him. Therefore, my beloved, let me above all things recommend this unto you, as
the prime ^oundation of all Religion, upon which all our peace with God, and
pardon of sin, and fellowship with God must be built, that the blood of Jesus
Christ be applied unto your consciences by believing, and that first of all,
upon the discovery of your enmity with God, and infinite distance from him, you
apply your hearts unto this blood, which is the atonement, to the reconciling
sacrifice, which alone has ve^tue and power with God. Do not imagine that any
peace can be without this; would ye walk with God, which is a ^^dg^ of
ag^eement ^ would ye have ^ellowship with God, which i^ ^ ^^uit of
^econciliation? would ye have pardon o^ sins, and the pa^ticular knowledge of
it, which is the greatest ef^ect of ^avour? and all this, without and before
application of Christ who is our peace, in whom the Father only is well
pleased; will you seek these, and yet di^pu^e this point of believing, as if it
we^e possible to attain these without the sp^inkling of that blood on the
heart, which indeed clean^eth it from an evil accusing conscience* If you
desire to walk in the light, as he is in the light, why wea^y ye your selves in
by-waye^? Why take ye such a comp^sse o^ endless and ^ruitlesse agitation, and
pe^plexity of mind? and will not rather come straight way at it, by the door of
Jesus Christ, ^o^ he is the new and living way, into which you must enter, if
ye would walk in the light; and the wounds of his side, out of which this blood
gushed, these open you a way of access to him, because he was pierced for us.
That st^eam of blood, i^ ye come to it, and follow it all along, it will
certainly carry you to the Sea of light and love, where you may have fellowship
with God. And O, How much comfort is in it, that there is such a stream running
all the way of our walking with God? all the way of our fellowship, that
fountain of Christ's blood runs not d^y, but ^^ns along with the believer, for
the cleansing of his after pollution^* of ^is defilements, even in the very
light it self. This then, as it is the first foundation of peace and communion
with God, so it is the pe^petual assurance and confirmation of it, that which
first gives boldness, and that alone which still c^nt^nue^ boldness in it. It
is the first ground, and the constant warrant and secu^ity of it, without which
it would be as soon dissolved as made. If that blood did not run along all this
way, to w^sh all his steps, if the way of light and fellowship with God, were
not watered, and re^^eshed with the continual current of this blood, certainly
none could walk in it without being consumed. Therefore it is, that the mercy
of God and ric^es of grace in Christ, has provided this blo^d for u^, both to
cleanse the sin^ of i^norance, before ^elieving, and the sin^ o^ light, after
believing, that a poor sinner may constantly go on his w^^, and not be broken
off from God, by his infirmitie^ and e^capes in the way.

You ^ee then the Gospel ^uns in these two golden stream^, pardon of sin, and
purity of walking; they run undividedly, all along in one channel, yet without
confusion one with another, as it is reported of some great Rivers, that run
together between the same Banks, and yet retains distinct colour^ and natures
all the way, till they part. But these streams that glad the City of God, never
part one from another; the cleansing blood, an^ the pu^ifying light, (...) a^e
(...) entire and pe^fect ^um of the Gospel; pu^ification from sin, the guilt of
(...), and the pu^ity of ^alking in the light, flowing from that, makes up the
^ull c^m^l^xion o^ Chr^^^ianity; which are ^o nearly conjoined to^ethe^, that
i^ they be divided, they cease to be, and cannot any of them subsist, save in
men's deluded imagination. The end o^ ^^shing in the blood of Christ i^, that we
may come to this light, and have fellowship with it; for the dar^nesse of hell,
the utter da^kness of the curse of God, which overspreads the unbelieving soul,
and eclipses all the light o^ Gods countenance from him, that da^k and thick
cloud of guiltiness, that heap of unrenewed conversation, this, I say, must be
removed by the cleansing of the blood of Christ, and then the soul is admitted
to enjoy that light, and walk into it. And it is removed chiefly for this end,
that there may be no impediment in the way of this fellowship; this blood
cleanses, that you being cleansed, may hence^orth walk in purity; and there is
no pu^ity like that of the light of Gods countenance, and commands: and so you
are washed in the blood of Christ, that you may walk in the light of God, and
take heed that you defile not your garments again. But if so be, (and certainly
it will be, considering our weaknesse^) that you defile your selves again, like
soolish children, who after they have washed, run to the puddle again,
forget^ing that they were cleansed; if either you^ daily infi^mities tro^ble,
or some grosser pollution defile and waste you^ cons^ience, know that this
blood ^uns all along in the same channel of your obligation to holy walking,
and it is as sufficient now as ever, to cleanse you from all sin, from sins of
daily incursion, and sins of a grosser nature, there is no exception in that
blood, let there be none in your application to i^, and apprehension of it.
Now, this is not to give boldness to any man to sin, or continue in sin,
because of the lengthned use, and continued virtue and efficacy of the blood of
Christ; for if any man draw such a result from it, and improve it to the
advantage of his flesh, he declare^ himself to have no portion in it, never to
have been w^shed by it; for what soul can in sobriety look upon that blood shed
by the Son of God, to take away the sins of the worl^, and find an emboldning
to sin from that view? Who can wash and clea^^e here, and presently think of
defilement, but with indignation?

I spe^k these things the rather, because there is a twofold misapprehension of
the Gospel among Christians, and on both hands much darkness and stumbling is
occasioned. We have poor narrow spirits, and do not take entire truth in its
full comprehension, and so we are as unfit and unequal discerners of the
Gospel, and receivers of it, as he that would judge of a sentence by one word,
of a book by one page, of a harmony by one note, and of the world by one parcel
of it. The beauty and harmony of things consists in their entire union; and
though there should appear many discrepancies, and unpleasant discords in
several parts, yet all united together, make up a pleasant consort. Now this is
our childish foolishness, that we look upon the Gospel only by halfs, and this
being alone seen, begets misapprehensions and mistakes in our minds; for
ordinarily we supply that which we see not with some fancy of our own. When the
blood of Jesus Christ is holden out in its full virtue, in the large extent of
its efficacy, to cleanse all sin, and to make peace with God, and wipe away all
transgressions, as if they h^d never been; the generality of you never
apprehending much your own desperate condition, nor conceiving an absolute
necessity of a change, you think this is all that is in the Gospel, and begin
to flatter your selves, and bless your selves, though you live in the
imaginations of your own hearts, and never apprehends the absolute need, and
inevitable sequel of walking in purity aster pardon. And alace, there is
something of this sometimes overtakes the he^rts of true believers, in the
slight and overly consideration of the mercy of God, ^^d blood of Christ: you
do not lay the constr^int upon your hearts to ^ holy conversation. I say, it is
not because you apprehend that blood, that you take more liberty to the flesh,
but rather because you too slightly and superf^cially consider it, and that but
the one half of it, without p^e^cing into the p^oper end of that clean^ing,
which i^, that we may walk in p^^ity.

But on the other hand, some believin^ souls, having their desi^es inla^ged
afte^ more ^oline^s and confo^mity to God, and app^ehen^ing not only the
necessity of it, but the beauty and comeliness of it, yet finding withal, how
infinitely short they come, and how o^^ their pu^po^es are broken and
disappointed, and themselves plunged in the mi^e of their own filthiness, this
does discourage them, and dri^e^ them to such a despondency, and dejection of
spirit, that ^hey a^e like to give over the way of holiness as de^pe^at. Now
my beloved, for you who look upon the Gospel by a parcel, and such a parcel as
injoyns much upon you, I would ea^nestly beseech, to open and enlarge your
hea^ts to receive the full body of the truth, to look upon th^^ cleansing
blood, as well as that pure light; to consider the perpetual use of the one;
until you have fully attained the other. Know that the fo^^tai^ is kept open,
and not shut, not only to admit you to come at first, but to give ready access
in all after-defilements, and there is no wo^d more comprehensive then this
here, it cleanses from all sin. All thy exceptions, doubts, and difficulties,
are about some particular sin^, and circumstances; thy debates runs upon some
exception, but here is an universal comprehensive word, that excludes all
exception; no kind of sin, either for quality, or degree, or circumstance, is
too great for this blood; and therefore as you have reason to be humbled under
your ^a^lings, so there is no reason to be discouraged, but rather to reviv^
your spirits and vigor again, in the study of this walking in the light,
knowing that one day we shall be in the light, ^s he is in it. Nay, take this
alongs with you, as your strength, and encouragement to your duty, as the
greatest provocation to more purity, that there is so constant readiness of
pardon i^ that blood.

SERMON XVI^
1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the
truth is not in us.


THe night is far spent, the day is at hand, Romans 13.12. This ^i^e is but as
night, even to the godly: there is some light in it, some starlight, but it is
mixed with much darkness of ignorance and sin; and so it will be, till the Sun
arise, and the morning of their translation to Heaven come. But though it be
called night in one sense, in regard of that perfect, glorious* perpetual day
in Heaven: yet they are called the children of light, and of the day, and are
said to walk in the light, and are exhorted to walk honestly as in the day*
because though there be a mixture of d^^knesse in them, of weakness in their
judgment^, and impuri^y in their affections, yet they are na^ ad maj^^^, born
to greater things, and aspiring to that pe^fect day: the^e i^ so much light, as
to disce^n these night-monster^, their own cor^uption^, and Satan's temptation^,
to fight continually against them; they are about this noble wo^k, the
pu^i^ying themselves from sin and da^knesse: so that they lie in the middle,
between the light of Angels and g^^^ified Spirit^, that has no darkness in it;
an^ the midnight of the rest of the world, who a^e b^ried in da^knesse and
wickedness, and lie intom^ed in it, a^ the wo^d is, 1 Ioh. 5.19. The who^e
world (...) lies in wickedness, but we kn^w that we are of God: Therefore the
Apostle subjoyns here very seasonably a caution, or correction of that which
wa^ spoken, about the walking in the light, and fellowship with God, which
word^ sound out some perfection, and to our self flatte^ing mind^, might
possibly suggest some too high opinion of our selves. If we, even we that have
fellowship with God, even I the Apostle, and you b^lievin^ Ch^istians, if we
say, we have no sin, no darkness in us, we do but deceive our s^l^es, and deny
the truth. But who will say that I have no sin? Solomon gives a challenge to
all the world. Pro. 20*9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure
from my sin? And i^deed, the^e is no man so far a st^anger to himself, but if
he in sobriety and calmnesse retire into his own heart, the very evidence of
the impurity of ^t, will extort this confession from him. As it uses to be
said of an Atheist, he feels that Divine Majesty, within in his secret though^s
and conscience, which he denies with his mouth, and he is often forced to
tremble at the remembrance of him whom he will not confess; so if there be any
so far bewitched and enchanted into so gross and impudent a delusion, as to
assert his own perfection, and vacancy from sin, and freedom from obligation to
any divine command; (as this time is fruitful of such monsters) yet I dare be
bold to say, that in the secret and quiet reflections on themselves, they find
that which they will not confess: Inwardly they feel what outwardly they deny,
and cannot but some time or other be filled with horror and anguish in their
consciences, by that inwardly witnessing and checking principle, when God shall
give it liberty to exe^ce its power over them, The end of such will be, as of
professed Atheist^, they pretend the securest contempt, and fearlessest
misregard of God, but then, when he awakes to judgment, or declares himself in
some thing extraordinary, they are subject to the most panick fears and
terrors, because then, there is a party armed within against them, which they
had disarmed in security, and kept in chains. So, whenever such men, of such
high pretensions, and sublime professions, who love to speak nothing but
mysteries, and presume to such glo^iou^ ^i^cove^ies of new lights, of spiritual
myste^ies, when these, I say, ^ave flattered themselves (...) a season, in the
monstrous, exorbitant conceit of their own pe^fection, and immunity from
(...); and, it may be, deceived some others too, when they have lived some time
in this golden d^eam of innocence, the time will come, either when the mighty
hand of God is on them here* or when they must enter eternity, that they shall
awake, and find all their iniquities in ^attel array, mustered by the Lord of
hosts, in their con^cience against themselves; and then they shall be the
^a^est ex^mples of fear, terror, and unbelief, who p^etended to the greatest
confidence, clea^nesse, and innocence. My beloved, let us establish this as an
infallible rule, to discern the spirits by, and to know what Religion is, if it
tend to glorify G^d, and ^base man, to make him more humble, as well as holy,
if it give the true and perfect discovery of God to man, and of man to himself,
that is true Religion and undefiled. But away with these sublime speculations,
these winged and airy mysteries, those pretensions to high discoveries, and new
light^, i^ the^ do not increase that good old light of humble walking with thy
God* etc. if they tend to the loosing of the obligation of divine command^ off
thee; if they ravish man so high, that he sees not himself any more to be a
poor miserable and darkened creature. Certainly, that is no fellowship with the
pure light, which is not continually the discovery and further man^festation o^
more sin and darkness in us. For, what is a man's light in the da^k night of
this li^e? but the clearer ^ight of that darkness that is in man; and his
holiness, what is it? but the abhorring of himself for that. It is true,
something ^urther is attained then the knowing of this, but it is always so
far short of that original pattern, that the best way of exp^essing our
conformity to it, is by how much we apprehend our distance and difformity from
it.

But, my beloved, this is not all that is here meant, nor must we take it so
grossly, as if this did only check the open professors of a sinlesse, spotless
sanctity. Nay certainly, there is another way of saying this, then by the
tongue, and many other ways of self-deceiving, then that gross one, many more
universal and more dangerous, because less discernable. There is something of
this, that even true believers may fall into, and there is something of it more
common to the generality of professed Christians.

Among believers in Christ, there is much difference in self-judging; extreme
cont^arieties, both between diverse persons, and in one and the same, at
diverse times. You know that some are kept in the open view of their own sins
and infirmities, and while they aim at holiness, they are wholly disabled to
that worthy endeavor, by their discouragements, arising from the apprehension
of their own weakness, and infinite shortcoming. Now to elevat and strengthen
such ^pirits, that word was seasonably cast in, and the blood of Jesus Christ
cleanses from all sin. For i^ properly belongs to the comfort of such fainting
^oul^, and it is all one as if he had said, up, and be doing, and the blood of
Christ shall clean^e your evil doings. He goes not about to persw^de them to
have better thoughts of themselves, or lower apprehensions of their sins, but
only to have higher and more suitable thoughts of Christ, and the virtue of his
blood. And thi^ is the only cure, not to abate from that low esteem of our
selves, but to add to the esteem* and grow in the lively apprehension of
Christ. I would not counsel you to think your sel^e^ better, but to think
better of him, that all your confidence may a^ise from him.

Now there are others, and it may be, that same person at another time, (for
the ^ind of temptation winds about, and is sometimes in one corner, sometimes
in another; our adve^^ary uses many stratagems, and will seem to flee before
us, in yielding us the victory over our unbelief, that he may in his flight
retu^n, and throw some other dart upon us unawares;) when they have attained
any ^e^vency of desire^, and hight of design after holiness, and walking with
God, and thi^ i^ seconded with any lively endeavors, and this confirmed and
st^engthned with these presences of God, and accesses into the soul, that fill
it with some sweetness; then, I say, they are ready to app^ehend too highly of
themselves, as if they had a^tained, and to look below upon others with some
disdain, then the^e is not that p^esent discov^ry of themselves, that may
intermingle humble mourning with it, but a kind of unequal measuring their
seize by their desi^es, which in all true Ch^istians are exceedingly
mounted above themselves. Now indeed, this is in effect, and really to say, we
have no sin. He^ein is a delusion, a self-deceiving fancy, that begets too much
self-pleasing. Let us know where our stance is, infinitely below either our
duty, or our desire, and re-mind this often, that we may not be in haza^d to be
drunk with self-love, and self-deceit in this particular. Besides, are there
not many Ch^istian^, that ha^ing been once illuminated, and had some serious
exercises in their souls, both of sorrow for sin, and fear of wrath, and
comfort by the Gospel, and being accustomed to some discharge of religious
duties in private and public, they sit down here, and has not mind of further
progress; they think if they keep that stance they are well, and so have few
designs or endeavors after more communion with God, or puri^ication from sin.
Now this makes them degenerat to fo^mality, they wither and become ba^^en, and
are exposed by this to many temptations, which overcome them. But, my beloved,
is not this really and indeed to say, we have no sin? Do not your walking, and
the postu^e of your spirits import so much, as if you h^d no sin to wrestle
with, no more holiness to aspire unto, as if you had no further race to run to
obtain the Crown. Do not deceive your selves, by thinking it sufficient to have
so much honesty and grace, as in your opinion may put you over the black line
of irregeneration, as if ye would seek no more then i^ precisely necessary for
salvation? Truly, if ye be so minded, you give a miserable hint, that you are
not yet translated from the black side of darkness. I do not say that all such
are unconverted, but if you continue thus, without stiring up your selves to a
daily conversion and r^novation, ye do too much to blot out the evidence of
your conversion, and at length it may prove to some a self-destroying deceit,
when they shall find themselves not past over that line that passes betw^en
Heaven and hell, which they were studying to find out only, that they might
pass so far over it, as might keep their soul and hell asunder, without
earnest desires of advancement toward Heaven in conformity to God. Now for the
generality of professed Christians, though there be none has that general
confession of sin oftener and more readily in their mouths, yet, I suppose, it
is easy to demonstrat that there is much of this self-de^eit in them* which
declares that the truth is not in them. You know both God and man constructs of
men by their w^yes, not by their words; and the Lord may interpret your hearts
by their disposition, and raise a collection (...) A^heism out of all together*
^he fool has said in his heart, etc. Even so say I, many p^etended Christians
say in their heart, We have no sin. How prove ye that? I seek nothing else to
prove it, then your own ordinary clearings and excusings of your selves; ye
confess ye are sinners, and break all the Commands, yet come to particulars,
and I know not one of twenty that will cordially or seriously take with almost
any sin, yea, what you have granted in a general, you retract and deny it in
all the particulars; which declares both that even that which you seem to know,
you are altogether strangers to the real truth of it, and that you a^e
over-blinded with a fond love of your selves. I know not ^o what purposes your
general acknowledgments are, but to ^e a mask or shadow to de^eive you, to be a
blind to hide you from your selves; since the most part of you, whenever
challenged of any particular sin, or inclination to it, justify your selves;
and when ever ye ar^ put to a particular confession of your sins, you have all
wrapped up in such a bundle of confusion, that you never know one sin by another.
Certainly, ye deceive your selves, and the truth is not in you.

Let me add moreover another instance; Do you not so live, and walk in sin so
securely, so impenitently, as if you had no sin, no fear of Gods wrath? Do not
the most part contentedly and peaceably live in so much ignorance of the
Gospel, as if they had no need of Christ? and so by consequence, as if they had
no sin. For if you did believe in the heart, and indeed consider, that your
hearts are sinks of iniquity and impurity, would you not think i^ nec^ssary to
apply to the Physician? And would you not then labor to know the Physician,
and the Gospel which is the report of him? Certainly, in as much as you take no
pains for the knowledge of a Savior, you declare that you know not your sin;
^or if ye knew the one, ye could not but search to know the other. What i^ the
voice of most men's walking? Does it not proclaim this, that they think there is
no sin in them? For if there be sin in you, is there not a curse upon you, and
wrath before you? And if you did really see the one, would you not see the
other? And did you s^e it, would it not drive you to more serious thoughts?
Would it not a^right you? Would it not cause you often to retire in to your
selves, and from the world? And above all, how precious would the tidings of a
Savior be, that now are common and contemptible? Would you not every day wash
in that blood? Would the current of repentance dry? But, forasmuch as you are
not exercised this way, give no thoughts nor time for reconcilement with God,
walk without any fear of hell, and without any ea^nest and serious study of
changing your waye^, and purifying your hearts; in a word, though ye confess
sin in the gene^al, yet your whole carriage of heart and ways, declare so
much, that you think it not ^ thing much to be feared, or that a man should
busy himself about it; that a man may live in it, and be well here, and
hereafter. And is not this to deny the very nature of sin, and to deceive your
own souls?

SERMON XVII^
1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins he (...) faithful, and just to forgive us
our sins, etc.


THE current of sin dryes not up, but run^ const^ntly while we are in this
life; it i^ true, it is much diminished in a believer, and it runs not in such
an universal flood over the whole man, as it is in the unbeliever, yet there is
a living spring of sin within the godly, which is never ceasing to drop out
pollution and defilement, either upon their whole persons, or at least, to
intermingle it with their good actions. Now, there is no comfort for this, but
this one, that there is another stream of the blood of Jesus Christ, that never
dryes up, is never exh^usted, never emptied, but flows as full and as free, ^s
clear and f^esh as ever it did: and this is so great, and of so great virtue,
that it is ^ble to swallow up the stream of our pollutions, and to t^ke away
the daily filth of a believers convers^tion. Now indeed, though the blood of
Jesus Christ be of such infinite virtue and efficacy, that it were sufficient to
cleanse the sins of the whole world, it would be an over-ransome for the souls
of ^ll men, there i^ so much worth in it: that flood of guiltiness that has
drowned the world, this flood of Christ's blood that gushed out of his side, is
of sufficient virtue to cleanse it perfectly away; not withstanding of this
absolute, universal sufficiency, yet certain it is, that i^ is not actually
applied unto the cleansing of all men's sin^, but yet the mo^^ part of men are
still drowned in the deluge of their own wickedness, and lies entombed in
darkness; therefore it concerns us to know the way of the application of this
blood, to the cleansing of sinners; and this way is set down in thi^ verse, If
we confess our sins, he is just to forgive. There was something hin^ed at
obscurely in the preceding verse, for when he shows, that such as say they
have no sin, who either by the disposition of their hearts, or carriage of
their ways, do by interpretation say, they want sin, such deceive themselves,
and the truth is not in them; and so they have no benefit o^ that blood that
cleanses from all sin, and so it is imported here, that though the blood of
Christ be fully sufficient to cleanse all sin, yet it is not so prostituted and
basely spent upon sinners, as to be bestowed upon them who do not know their
sins, and never enter into any serious and impartial examination of themselves;
such, though they say they are sinners, yet never descending into themselves to
search their own hearts and waye^, and so never coming to the pa^ticular
knowledge of their sins, and feeling of them, they cannot at all make
application of that blood to their own consciences, either seriously or
pertinently: Though the river and fountain of Christ's blood run by them, in the
daily p^eaching of the Gospel, ye^ being destitute of this daily
self-inspection, and self-knowledge, being altogether ignorant of themselves,
they can no more wash here, then these who never heard of this blood, they
being strangers to themselves, sets them at as great distanc^ and estrangement
from the blood of Christ, (...) if they were wholly strangers to the very
preaching of this blood. Let us then have this first established in our hearts,
that there is no cleansing from sin, without the knowledge o^ sin, and there is
no true knowledge of sin, without a serious soul-examination of sin; these are
knit together in their own nature; for how should our sins be pardoned, when we
know nothing of them but in a confused generality, that can never affect the
heart? How should our sins not b^ opened and discovered before the holiness of
God, when they are always covered unto us, and hid from our eyes? Certainly,
the righteousness and wisdom of God requires, that such ^ monstrous thing, so
great an enemy of Gods ^olinesse, be not wholly past away in silence wit^out
o^servati^n. If we do not observe, he will; for to what purpose should pardon
be so lavished upon them who ^re not capable to know what savor (...) grace i^
in it? And ce^tainly, that none c^n know, without the feeling knowledge of the
hight and hainousnes^e of sin. Now* I p^ay you, how should ye know your sins,
when ye will not allow any time for the sea^ching of your selves? Many cannot
say that ever they did purposely and deliberatly withd^aw from the world, and
separat their spirits for this business of self-examination: and therefore you
remain perpetually strangers to your selves, and as great stranger^ to the
power and virtue of this blood.

Now in this verse. he declare^ it plainly, in what way and method sin is
pardoned by this blood* By the former verse. we have so much, that it ^s
necessary we must search and t^y our waye^, that so we may truly know our sins,
and charge them upon our selves; and here it is superadded that we must confess
them to him: And the promise ^s annexed, he is just and faithful to forgive.
Now this confession of sin is very fitly subjoyned, both to that which he
declared of that great end of the Gospel, communion with God, and that which
was immediately holden sorth of the remaining virtue of Christ's blood; for might
a poor soul say, How shall I come to partake of that blessed society? I am ^
sinner, and so an enemy to G^d, How shall this enmity be removed? And if the
^nswer be made, The blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin, and so makes
access for a ^inner to enter into this society; Yet a question remains, And
how shall the virtue of that be applied to my soul? It is sufficient I know for
^ll, but what way may I have the particular benefit of it? Here it is ^ully
satisfied, If we confess our sins, God is just and faithful to forg^ve. H^
lies under some obligation to pardon us. Now, many of you may think* if this
be the way, and these be the te^ms ^f pardon, then we hope all shall be
pardoned, for i^ there be no more but to con^esse our sin^, who will not
willingly do that, and who does not daily do it? as one said, if it be
sufficient to accuse, none will be innocent: Si accusasse sufficiat* nemo
innocens erit. So you may think, Si confiteri sufficiat, nemo re^ ^rit. If it
be sufficient to con^es^e, none will be guilty. But, my beloved, let us not
deceive our selv^s with the present first apprehensions of words that occur in
this kind; it is true, as ye take confession, there is nothing more ordinary,
but if it be taken in the true Scripture meaning, and in the realest sense, I
fear there is nothing among men so extraordinary: I desire you may but consider
how you take this word in your dealings with men, you take it certainly in a
more real sense then you use it in Religion. If any had done you some great
wrong or injury, suppose your servant, or inferior, what acknowledgment would
you take from him of his wrong? If he confessed his wrong only in general
amb^guou^ te^m^, if he did it either lightly, or without any sense or sorrow
for it, if he did withal excuse and ex^enuat hi^ fault, and never ceased
notwithstanding of all his con^ession to do the like wrong when occasion
offered, would you not think this ^ mockery? And would it not ^ather provoke
you, then pacify you? Now, when ye take words in so real and deep
significations in your own matters, what gros^e delusion is it, that you take
them in the slightest and emptiest meaning^ in these things that relate to God?
And I am sur^ the most part of men's confessions are of that nature which I have
described, general, ignorant, senseless, without any particular view, or lively
feeling of the vileness and loathsomn^sse o^ sin, and their own hearts; when
ever it come^ to particulars, there is a multitude of extenuations and
pretenses, to hide and cover the sin; and generally men never cease the more
from sinning, it puts no stop in their running, as the horse to the battle: to
day they confess it, and to morrow they act it again with as much delight as
before. Now, of this I may say, offer it to thy Governor, and see if he will
be pleased with thee, or let another offer such an acknowledgment of wrong to
thee, and see if it will please thee: and if it will not, why deceive ye your
selve^ with the outward visage of things, in these matter^ that are of greatest
soul-concernment? Should they not be taken in the most inward and substantial
signification that can be? lest you be deceived with false appearances, and
while you give but a shadow of confession, you receive but a shadow of
forgiveness, such a thing as will not car^y and bear you out before Gods
Tribunal. Therefore we must needs take it thus, that confession of sin is the
work of the whole man, and not of the mouth only. It is the heart, tongue, and
all that is in a man, joining together to the acknowledgment of sin, and Gods
righteousness: Therefore it includes in it, not only a particular knowledge of
our offenses, and the temper of our hearts, but a sensible feeling of the
loathsomeness and hainou^nesse of these: and this i^ the spring that it flows
from, from a broken and contrite heart, that is bruised under the apprehensions
of the weight of guiltiness, and is imbittered with the sense of the gall of
iniquity, that possesses the heart. Here then is the great moment of
confession and repentance, What i^ the inward fountain it flows from: If the
heart be brought to the distinct and clear view of it self, and to discern the
iniquity and plague of it, and so to fall down under the mighty hand of God,
and before his Tribunal, as guilty, as not being able or willing to open his
mouth in ^n excuse or extenuation of sin, or to plead for compassion from any
consideration in himself; a soul thus plac^d, between iniquities set in order
and battle array, on the one hand, and the holy Law and righteousness of God
on the other hand; the filthiness of the one, filling with shame and
con^usion, and the d^ead^ulnesse of the other, cau^ing fear and t^embling; in
this pos^ure, I say, for ^ ^oul to come and fall at the Judges feet, and make
supplicat^on to him in his Son Christ; thus being inwardly pressed to vent and
pour out our hearts before him, in the confession ^f ou^ sin^, and to fly unto
the City of refuge, his merry and grace that i^ declared in Jesus Christ; this,
I say, is indeed to confess our sins: For then confe^^ion is an exone^ation
and disburdening of the heart; it flows from the abundance of the inward
cont^iti^n of it: And as this must be the spring of it, so the^e is another
stream that will certainly flow from the ingenuous c^nfession of our sins, that
is, a forsaking of them: these are the two st^eams that flow from one head and
spring, the inward fountain of contrition and sorrow for sin; there is a holy
indignation kindled in the heart against sin, and an engagement upon such a
soul, as indeed flie^ to mercy, to ^enounce sin; and here is the complete
nature of true ^epentance. Solomon joins them, He that confesses and forsakes
shall have mercy, Prove. 28.13. And this is opposed to coverin^ of sins, For he
that covers his sins shall not prosper. And what is that to cover hi^ sin?
Conselling them in a general confused notion, without any distinct knowledge,
or sense of particular guiltiness, that is a cove^ing of sins, or confessing
sin, and not forsaking of it, that is a covering of sin; for, to act sin over
again, with continual ^^esh delight and vigor, is to ret^act our confessions,
and to bury and cover them with the mould of new transgressions. Now, take this
unto you, you shall not prosper, what can be said worse? For you are but in a
dream of happiness, and you shall one day be shaken out of it, and that
fancied pardon shall evanish, and then your sins that you cove^ed in this
manner, shall be discovered before the Judge of the world, and you shall not
stand in judgment.

SERMON XVIII^
1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins he is faithful, and just to forgive our
sins, etc.


THE freedom of Gods grace, and the greatness of his wisdom, shine forth most
brightly in the dispensation of the Gospel, and both of them beautify and
illustrat one another. That there is first, an expiation of sin by the blood of
Jesus Christ, that a way is laid down of reconciling the world, and that by the
blood of the Cross, that peace is purchased, and so preached unto sinners, as a
thing already procured, and now only to be applied unto the soul by faith;
herein does the inestimable riches of the grace of God expose it self to the
view of Angels and Men. That the great work of Redemption is ended, e^e it come
to us; and there remains nothing, but to publish it to the wo^ld, and invite us
to come and receive it, and have a part in it; all i^ ready, the feast
p^epared, and set on the Table, and there wants nothing but Guests to eat of
it, and these are daily called by the Gospel to come to this Table which the
wi^dom of the Father has prepared for us, without either our knowledge or
concurrence. Besides, the very terms of p^oposing the Gospel, speak forth
absolute f^eedom: What can be more free and easy then this? Chr^^t is sent to
die for sinners, and to redeem them from the ^urse, only receive him, ^ome to
him, and believe in him. He has undertaken to save, only do you consent too,
and give up your name to him: ye have nothing to do to satisfy justice, or
pu^chase salvation, only be willing that he do it for you, or rather acquiesce
to that he has done already, and rest on it. But how shall our sin^ be
pardoned, and Justice satisfied? Only confess your sins to him, and ye are
forgiven, not for your confession, but for Christ, only acknowledge thine
iniquity and wrongs, and he has taken another way to repair his Justice, then
by thy destruction and condemnation: he i^ so far from extending his Justice
against thee, that he is rather in^aged upon his faithfulness an^ justice to
fo^give thee, because of his promise.

Yet, ye would not conceive so of this manner of proposal o^ forgiveness and
salvation, as if the requiring of such a thing as repentance in thee, were any
derogation from the absoluteness of his grace; for it is not required, either
to the point of satisfaction to Gods Justice, and expiation of sin; for that is
done a^^eady upon the Cross. Christ was not offered to save sinners, he was
not sent upon the previous condition of their repentance: Nay, while we were
yet enemies, Christ died for the ungodly; so that to the bu^inesse of our
redemption, there was no concurrence upon our part, nor influence upon it by
our carriage; for he considered us as sinners, and miserable, and so saved us.
And now, to the actual application of these preventing mercies, it'^ true, it
is needful in the wise and reasonable dispensation of God, that sinners be
brought to the knowledge, and sensible acknowledgment of their sin and misery,
and so be upon rational inducements of misery within, and mercy without, of
self-indigency, and Christ's sufficiency, be drawn in to Jesus Christ, and so to
a partaking of these purchased privileges of forgiveness of sin, peace with
God, etc. I say, all this is so far from diminishing a jot of that absolute
freedom of grace, that it rather jointly proclaims the riches of grace and
wisdom both, that repentance should be given to an impenitent sinner, and
faith freely bestowed on an unbelieving sinner, and withal, that remission and
salvation, together with faith and repentance, should be brought to us by his
death, while we were yet enemies; this does declare the most unparalleled
bounty and grace, that the heart of man can imagine* and withal, that remission
of sins is joined to confession, and salvation to faith, herein the wisdom of
God triumphs; for, what way is it possible to declare that freedom of grace, to
the sensible conviction of a sinner, and so to demonstrat it to all men's
consciences, except by making them return within, to see their own absolute
unworthiness, vileness, and incorrespondency to such mercies, and so drawing
an acknowledgment of his grace, from the mouths and consciences of all? How
shall a soul know that rich superabundant grace, if he know not the abundance
of his sins? How shall he profess the one, except he withal confess the
other? Let us imagine an impenitent sinner, continuing in ^ebellion, pardoned
and forgiven: and is there any thing more contrary to c^mmon sense and reason,
to be in God^ favor, and yet not accepting that favor* to be a friend, and
yet an enemy* to have sins forgiven, and yet not known nor confessed; these, I
say, ^ound some plain dissonancy and discord to our very first apprehensions.
Certainly, this is the way to declare the glory of his grace, in the hiding and
covering of sin, even to discover sin to the sinner; else if God should hide
sin, and it be hid withal from the conscience, both thy sin and Gods grace
should be hid and covered, neither the one nor the other would appear. Take it
thus then, the confession of sin is not for this end, to have any causal
influence upon thy ^emission, or to procure any more favor and liking with
God; but it is simply this, the confession of sin is the most accommodat way of
the profession and publication of the grace of God, in the forgiving of sins;
Faith and Repentance are not set down as conditions pre-required on thy part,
that may procure salvation o^ forgiveness, but they are inseparably annexed
unto salvation and forgiveness, to the end that they may manifest to our
sensible conviction, that grace, and freedom of grace, which shines in
forgiveness and salvation.

He is just and faithful, etc. Herein is the wonder of the grace of God
increased, that when we are under an obligation to infinite punishment for sin,
and bound guilty before his Justice, that the most great and potent Lord, who
can easily rid himself of all his enemies, and do all his pleasure in Heaven
and Earth, should come under an obligation to man to forgive him his sins. A
strange exchange, man is standing bound by the cords of his own sins over to
the Justice of God, he is under that insoluble tie of guiltiness; God in the
mean time is free and loosed from the obligation of the first Covenant, that
is, his promise of giving life to man; we have loosed him from that voluntary
engagement, and are bound under a curse; and yet, behold the permutation of
grace, man is loosed from sin to which he was bound, and God is bound to
forgive sin, to which he was not bound. He enters in a new and voluntary
engagement by his promise, and give^ right to poor creatures to sue and seek
forgiveness of him, according to his faithfulness: Yet in this plea, as it
becomes us to u^e confidence, because he gives us ground by his promises, so we
should ^eason it with humility, knowing how infinitely f^ee and voluntary his
cond^^cension is, being always mindful, that he may in righteousness exact
punishment of us for sin, ^ather then we seek forgiveness from him; and yet
seek it we ought, because he has engaged his faithful promise; which
opportunity to neglect, and not to improve, either through fear or security,
were as high contempt and disobedience to him, as these sins by which we offend
him.

Ce^tainly, the very N^me of God revealed to us, or known by natures light,
those general characters of his Name, Mercy and Goodness, Power and Gre^tness,
might s^ffice to so much, as to make us in the apprehensions of our own
guiltiness and provocations of his Holiness, to look no other way, then to
his own merciful and gracious nature: suppose we had nothing of a promise from
him, by which he is bound; yet, as the very apprehension of the general
goodness, and unlimited bounty, and original happiness that is in God, ought
naturally to draw the creature toward him in all its wants, to supplicat his
fullness, that can supply all necessities, without lessening his own abundance;
even ^o, if we did only apprehend that God i^ the fountain of mercy, and that
he is infinitely above us and ou^ injuries, and that all our being and
well-being eternally, consists in his sole favor; this, I say, alone
considered, might draw us to a pouring out our hea^^s before him, in the
acknowledgment of our guiltiness, and casting our selves upon his mercy, (as
the term is used in War) when there is no quarte^ promised, and no capitulation
made; it is the last refuge of a desperate sinner, to render unto God upon
mercy, to resign himself to his free disposal; Since I cannot but perish (may a
soul say) without him, there is no way of escaping from his wrath, I will
rather venture, and go in to the King, and if I perish I perish; there is more
hope in this way to come to him, then to fly from him, perhaps he may show an
act of absolute sovereign goodness, and be as glorious in passing by an
offense, as just in punishing it. Do I not see in man, (in whom the Divine
Majesty has imprinted some characters of conscience and honesty) that it is
more generous and noble to forgive, then to revenge? And do I not see generally
among men, clemency and compassion is commended above severity, and ^igour,
though just, especially toward these who are inferior, weak, unable to
resist, and have yielded themselves to mercy. Now, shall I not much more
apprehend that of God, which I admire in a sinful man? Shall not that be most
perfect in him, which is but a maimed and broken piece of his image in lost
man? Certainly, it is the glory of God to conceal an offense, as well as to
publish it; and he can show as much Greatness and Majesty, in Mercy, as in
Justice: therefore I will wholly commit my self to him. I think a man ought to
reason so, from the very natural knowledge he has o^ God. But when ye have not
only his Name and Nature published, but his Word and Promise so often
proclaimed, himself come under some ^ye to receive and accept graciously all
sinners that fly in under the shadow of his wings of mercy; then O, with how
much persuasion and boldness should we come to him, and lay open our sins
before him, who not only may pardon them, and not only is likely to do it,
seeing he has a gracious nature, but ce^tainly will pardon them, cannot but do
it, because his faithfulness requires it. Certainly, he has superadded his
Word to his Name, his Promise to his Nature, to confirm our faith, and give us
ample ground of strong consolation.

There is another more suitable notion about the justice of God, in forgiving
sin; it has some truth in the thing it self, but whether it be imported here,
I dare not certainly a^firm. Some take his faithfulness in relation to his
word of promise, and his justice in relation to the price and ransom paid by
Christ, importing as much as thi^, what ever sinner comes to God in Christ,
confessing their own guiltiness in sincerity, and supplicating for pardon, he
cannot in justice refuse to give it out unto them, since he has taken complete
satisfaction of Christ. When a sinner seeks a discharge of all sin, by virtue
of that blood, the Lord is bound by his own justice to give it out, and to
write a free remission to them; since he is fully paid, he cannot but
discharge us, and cancel our bonds. So then a poor sinner that desires mercy,
and would forsake sin, has a two^old ground to suit this forgiveness, upon
Christ's blood, and Gods own word, Christ's purchase and payment, and the Fathers
promise, he is just and righteous, and therefore he cannot deny the one, nor
yet take two satisfactions, two payments for one debt; and he is faithful, so
he cannot but stand to the other, that is his promise; and thus is forgiveness
ascertained and assured unto the confessing sinner. If any would take this in
relation to confession, as if it reflected upon that which preceeded, and the
meaning should be, if any man confess his sin, he is just to ^equi^e
confession with remission, he cannot in righteousness deny one that deserves
it so well, he is just to return some suitable recompense, to such a humble
confession; this sense were a perverting of the whole Gospel, and would
overturn the ^oundations of grace, for, there is no connection between our
confession, and his remission, but that which the absolute good pleasure of his
will has made; besides, that repentance is ^s free grace given from the
exalted Prince, as remission of sins is.

SERMON XIX^
1 John 1.9. If we confess our sins he is faithful, and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness.

Verse. 10. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, etc.


ANd who will not confess their sin, say you? Who does not confess sins
daily, and therefore, who is not ^orgiven and pardoned? But stay, and consider
the matter again, take not this upon your first light app^ehensions, which in
Religion are commonly empty, vain, and superficial; but search the Scriptures,
and your own hearts, that ye may know wh^t confession means. It may be said of
that external custom of confessi^n that many of you have, that the Lord has
not required it, Sacrifices and burnt offerings thou would not, some
external submissions and confession^, which ye take ^or compensation ^or sins
and offenses against God, these, I say, are but abomination to the Lord; but a
broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.16, 17. And
lo, I come to do thy will, I delight in it, Psalm. 40.7, 8. When external
professions and confessions, are separated from the internal contrition of the
heart, and godly sorrow for sin; and when both internal contrition, and
external profession and confession are divided from con^ormity, o^ study of
conformity to Gods will, then they a^e in no better acceptance with God, then
these external sacrifices which God rejected, though he had required them,
because they were disjoined from the true life of them, and spiritual meaning,
that is, faith in a Mediator, and love to obedience. If confession flow not
from some contrition of heart, if there be not some inward spring of this kind,
the heart opened, and unfolding its very inside before God, breaking in
pieces, which makes both pain or sense, and likewise gives the clearer view of
the inward parts of the heart; and if it be not joined with affection to Gods
will and Law, earnest love to new obedience, it is but a vain, empty, and
counterfeit confession, that denies it self. I suppose, a man confess sin
which he feels not, or forsakes not, in so doing he declares that he knows not
the nature of sin, he may know such an action, that it is commonly called sin,
and, it may be, is shamed and censured among men, and therefore he confesses
it, but while he confesses it without sense or ^eeling, he declares that he
takes it not up as sin, has not ^ound the vileness and loathsomeness of the
nature of it, nor beheld it as it is a violation of the most high Lords Laws,
and a provocation of his glorious holiness. Did a soul view it thus, as it is
represented in Gods sight, as it dishonours that glorious Majesty, and has
manifest rebellion in it against (...), and a^ it de^iles and pollute^ our
spirits, he could not, I say, thus look upon it, but he would ^in^ some inward
soul-abhorrency and displicence at it, and himself too. How monstrous would it
make him in his own sight? It could not but affect the heart, and humble it in
secret before God; whereas your forced and strained confessions made in
public, they are merely taken on then, and p^oceed from no inward principle,
there is no sh^dow of any ^oul-humiliation in secret, but as some use to put on
sackcloath when they come to make that pro^ession, and put it (...) when they
go out; so you put on a habit of confe^sion in public, and put it off you when
you go out of the Congregation. To ly mou^ning before the Lord, in your secret
retirements, that you are strangers to. But I wonder how you should thus mock
God, that you will not be as serious and re^l in confessing, as in sinning?
Will ye sin with the whole man, and confess only with the mouth? Will ye act
sin with delight, and not con^esse it with a true sorrow that indeed affects
the heart? Now, do you honor God by confession, when the manner of it
declares, that you feel not the bitterness o^ sin, and conceive not the
holiness and righteousness of God, whom you have to do withal? Even so, when
you confess sin, which you do not fors^ke, you in so far declare that you know
not sin, what it is you confess, and so, that you h^ve mocked him who will not
be mocked; for, what a mockery is it, to con^esse these ^ault^, which we have
no solid ef^^ctual purpose to re^o^m? To vomit up our sins by con^ession, that
we may with more desire and lust lick up the vomit again, and to p^etend to
wash, ^or nothing else, but to retu^n to the puddle and defile again. My
brethren, out of the same fountain comes not bitter water and sweet, Jam. 3.11.
Since that which ordina^ily proceeds from you, is bitter, unsavory to God and
man, carnal, earthly, and sensual, your ways are a displayed banner against
Gods will, then lay your account, all your professions and acknowledgments are
of the same nature, they are but a little more sugared over, and their inward
nature is not changed, as un^cceptable to God, as your sins are.

I would give you some characters out of the Text, to discover unto you the
vanity and emptiness of your ordinary consessions. The conf^ssion of sin must
be particular, universal, perpetual or constant, Particular, I say, for there
a^e many thousands who con^esse that they a^e sinners, and yet do not at all
confess their sins. For, to conf^sse sins, is to confess their own real,
actual guiltiness, that which they indeed have committed, or are inclined to
do. So the true and sincere confession of a repenting people is expressed, 1
King. 8.38. What prayer or supplication soever be made by any man which shall
know the plague of his own heart, and spread forth his hands, then bear thou in
Heaven, and forgive every man whose h^a^t thou knowe^t. Now consider w^ether o^
not you be thus a^qu^inted with your own hea^^s and way^, as to know your
particular plague and predominant. A^e you not rather wholly strangers to your
selves, especially the plague o^ your hea^ts? There are few that keep so much
as a Record o^ Register of their actions done against Gods Law, or their
neglects of his will, and therefore when you are particularly posed about your
sin^, or the challenge of sin, you can speak nothing to that, but that you
never knew one sin by another; that is indeed, you never observed your sins,
you never knew any sin, but contented your self with the t^adition you ^eceived
that you were sinners; but if any man be used t^ ^eflect upon his own ways,
yet gene^ally, the m^st part of men are altogether strangers to their hearts;
if they know any evil of themselves, it is at most, but something done, or
undone, some commission or omission, but nothing of the inward fountain of sin
is discovered I be^eech you then, do not deceive your selves with this general
acknowledgment that you are sinners, while in the mean time your real
particular sins are hid from you, and you cannot choose but hide in a
generality from God. Certain^y, you are far from forgiveness, and that
bles^e^nesse of which David speaks, Psalm. 32. for this ^elongs to the man that
hides not his sins, in whose heart is no guile. And this is the plainness and
sincerity of the heart, rightly to discern its own plagues, and unfold them to
him. David, no doubt, would any time have confessed that he was a sinner, but
ma^k how heavy the wrath of God was on him for all that, because he came not to
a plain, ingenuous, and humble acknowledgment of his pa^ticular sins. I
confessed my s^n, and mine iniquity I hid not. While you con^esse only in
gene^al terms, you confess others sins rather then yours, but this is it, to
descend into our own hearts, and find out our just and true accusation, our
real debt, to charge our selves as narrowly as we can, that he may discharge us
fully, and forgive us freely.

Next, I say, confession must be universal, that is, of all sin, without
partiality, or respect to any sin. I doubt if a man c^n truly repent of any
sin, except he in a manner repent of all sin; or truly forsake one sin, except
there be a divorcement of the heart from, and forsaking of all sin: therefore
the Apostle says, if we confess our sins, not sin simply, but sins, taking in
all the body and collection of them; for it is opposed to that, if we say we
have no sin, etc. Then there lies a necessity upon us to confess what we have,
we have all sin, and so should confess all sins. Now, my meaning is not, that
it is absolutely necessary that a soul come to the particular knowledge, and
acknowledgment of all his sins, whether of ignorance, or infirmity, nay, that
is not possible, for who can understand his errors? (says David) cleanse thou
me from secret sins, Psalm. 19.12. There are many sins of ignorance, that we
know not to be sins, and many escapes of infi^mity, that we do not advert to,
which otherwise we might know. Now I do not impose that bu^den on a soul, to
conf^sse every individual sin of that kind, but this certainly must be, there
must be such a discovery of the nature of sin, and the loathsomeness of it in
Gods fight, and the heinous guilt of it, as may ab^se and humble the soul in
hi^ presence; there must be some distincter and clearer view of the
dispositions and lusts of the heart, then men attain generally unto; and
withal, a discovery of the holy and spiritual meaning of Gods Law, which may
unfold a multitude of transgressions, that are hid from the world, and make sin
to abound in a man^ sight and sense; (for when the L^w enters, sin abounds) and
to close up this, as the^e are many sins now discovered unto such a (...),
which lay hid before, the light having shined in upon the darkness; and above
all, the desperate wickedness of the heart is presented, so there is no sin
kno^n and discerned, but there is an equal, impartial sorrow for it, and
indign^tion against it. As a believer has respect to all Gods comm^nds, and
loves to obey them, so the penitent soul has an impa^tial hatred of all sin,
even the dearest and most beloved idol, and desires unfeignedly to be rid of
it. Hence your usual public confession^ of sin, are wipt out of the number of
true and sincere confessions, because you preten^ to repent of one sin, and in
the mean time, neither do ye know a multitude of other sins that prevail over
you, nor do you mo^^n for them, nor forsake them. Nay, you do not examine your
selves that way, to find out the temper of your hearts, or tenor and course of
your ways. You pretend to repent for drunkenness, or such like, and yet you
are ordinary c^^sers, swearers, liars, railers, neglecters of prayer,
prophane^s of the Sabbath, and such like, and these you do not withal mourn
for. In sum, he that mou^ns only for the sin that men censures, he knows and
confesses no sin sincerely; if you would indeed return unto God from some
gross evils, you must be divorced in your affections from all sin.

Then this confession should be perpetuated and continued, as long as we are in
this life, for that i^ imported by comparing this verse. with these it stand^
between. If we say we have no sin, if we say at any time, while we are in this
life, if we imagine or dream of any such perfection he^e, we ^lie. Now, what
should we do then, since sin is alwaye^ lodging in our mort^l bodies, during
this time of necessary abode beside an ill neighbor? What should be our
exercise? even this, Confess your sin^* confess, I say, as long as you have
them, draw out this, the length of that: Be continually groaning to him under
that body of death, and mou^ning under your daily infi^mities and failings;
that stream of corruptions runs continually, ^et the stream of your contrition
and confession ^un as uncessantly; and there is another stream of Christ's
blood, that runs constantly too, to cleanse you. Now herein is the discovery of
the vanity and deceitfulness of many of your conf^ssi^ns, public and private,
the cu^rent of them soon d^ies up, there is no perpetuity or constancy in them,
no daily humbling or abasing your selves, but all that is, is by fits and
st^rts, upon some transient conviction^, or outward censures and rebukes: and
thus men quickly cover and bury their sins in oblivion and secu^ity, and forget
what manner of person^ they were, they are not under a daily, impa^^i^l
examination of their ways, takes notice of nothing but some solemn and g^osse
escapes, and these are but a short time under their view.

Now, let me apply a little to the encouragement of poor souls, who being
inwardly burdened with the weight of their own guiltiness, exoner themselves by
confe^sion in his bosom; as you have two suit^, and two desires to him, one,
that your sins may be forgiven, another, that they may be subdued; so he has
two solemn engagements and ties to satisfy you; one, to forgive your sin^, and
another, to cleanse you from all unrighteousness. The soul that is truly
penitent, is not only desi^ous of pardon of sin, that is not the chief or only
design o^ such a soul in application to Christ; but it is withal to be purified
from sin, and all unrighteousness, and to have ungodly lusts cleansed away;
and herein is the great probation of such an ones reality, it will not suffice
or satisfy such an one, to be assured o^ delivery from wrath and condemnation,
but he must likewise be redeemed from sin, that it have no dominion over him;
he desires to be ^reed from death, that he may have his conscience withal
purged from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 9.14. He would have sin
blotted out o^ a^ accusing conscience, that it may be purged out of the
affections of the heart, and he would have his sins washed away for this end
especially, that he may be w^shed from his sins, Rev. 1.5. Now, as this is the
great desire and design of such a heart, in which there is no guile, to have
sin purified, and purged out of us, as well as pardoned, so there is a special
tie and obligation upon God our Father by promise, not only to pardon sin, but
to purge from sin, not only to cover it with the garment of Christ's
righteousness, and the breadth of his infinite love, but also, to cleanse it by
his Spirit, effectually applying that blood to the purifying of the heart. Now
where God has bound himself voluntarily, and out of love, do not ye loose him
by unbelief, for that will bind you into a prison: but labor to receive these
gracious promises, and to take him bound as he offer^. Believe, I say, that he
will both forgive you, and in due time will cleanse your heart from the love
and delight of sin; believe his promise, and engagement by promise to both, and
this will set to a seal to his truth and faithfulness. There is nothing in God
to affright a sinner, but his justice, holiness, and righ^eousnesse, but unto
thee, who in the humble confession of thy sins, flies in to Jesus Christ, that
very thing which did discourage thee, may now encourage thee, and ^^bolden thee
to come, for he is just and faithful to forgive sins* hi^ Justice being now
sati^fied, is engaged that way, to forgive, not to punish.

SERMON XX^
1 John 1.10. If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
word is not in us.


THere is nothing in which Religion more consists, then in the ^rue and
un^eigned knowledge of our selves. The Heathens supposed that sentence, (...),
know thy self, descended ^^om Heaven. It was indeed the Motto of the wisest and
most ^eligious amongst them* but certain it is, that the true and sincere
unde^standing of ou^ selves, descends from the Father of lights, and is a great
gift as man i^ capable of, next to the knowledge of God him^self. The^e is
nothing more necessary to man, either as man, or as a Christian, either as
endowed with ^eason, o^ pro^essing Religion, then that he should be th^oughly
acquainted with himself, his own heart, its disp^siti^ns, and inclinations, and
lusts, his ways, and actions, that while he travels abroad to other creatures
and Countries, he may not commit so shameful an absurdity, as to be a stranger
at home, where he ought to be best acquainted; Yet how sad is it, that this
which is so absolutely needful, and universally p^ofitable, should be lying
under the manyest difficulties in the attainment of it? So that there is
nothing ha^der, then to b^ing a man to a pe^fect unde^standing of himself, what
a vile, naughty, and base creatu^e he is, how defiled and desperately wicked his
nature, how abomin^ble his actions, in a word, what a compound of darkness and
wickedness he i^, a heap of defiled dust, and a mass of con^usion, a sink o^
impiety and iniquity, even the best of mankind, those of the rarest and most
^efined extraction, take them at their best estate, thus they are as sepulchers
painted without, and putrified within, outwardly ado^ned, and within ^u^^ of
rottenness and cor^uption, the imagination of his heart only evil continually.
Now, I say, here is the great business and labor of Religion, to bring a man
to the clear discerning of his own nature, to represent unto him justly his own
image, as it is painted in the Word of God, and presented in the glass of the
Law, and so by such a surprising monstrous appearance, to affect his heart to
self-abhorrency in dust and ashes, and to have this representation, however
unpleasant, yet most profitable, continually obversant to our minds, that we
may not forget what manner of persons we are. Truly, I may say, if there be a
perfection in this estate of imperfection, herein it consists; and if there be
any attainment of a Christian, I account this the greatest, to be truly
sensible of himself, and vile in his own eyes.

It was the custom of Philip King of Macedonia, after he had overcome the
^amous Republic of Greece, to have a young man to salute him first every
morning with these words, Philippe homo es, Philip thou art a man, to the end
that he might be daily minded o^ his mortality, and the unconstancy of hum^ne
aff^irs, lest he should be pust up with his victory, and this was done before
any could have access to speak with him, as if it were, to season and prepare
him for the actions of the day; but O, how much more ought a Christian to train
up his own heart, and accustom it this way, to be his continual remembrance^
of himself, to suggest continually into his mind, and whisper this first into
his ear in the morning, and mid day, and evening, peccator es, thou art a
sinner, to hold our own image continually before us, in prayer, and praises, in
res^^aints, in liberties of spirit, in religious actions, and in all our
ordinary conversation, that it might salt and season all our thoughts, words,
and deeds, and keep them from that ordinary putrefaction and corruption of
pride and self-conceit, which makes all our ointm^nt stink.

If we say we have no sin, we make him a liar. Why is this repeated again? but
to show unto us, even to you Christians, who believe in Christ, and are washen
in his blood, how hard it is to know our selves a^ight. If we speak of the
g^osser sort of persons, they scarce know any sin, nor the nature and vileness
o^ any that they know, the^e^ore they live in secu^ity and peace, and bless
themselves in their own hearts, as if they had no sin; for such I say, I shall
only say unto them, that your self deceiving is not so subtle, but it may soon
be discerned, your lie is gross, and quickly seen through. But I would turn my
self to you Christians, who are in some measure acquainted with your selves,
yet there is s^mething against you from this word; after ye have once got some
peace from the challenge of sin, and hope of pardon, you many times fall out of
acquaintance with your selves, having attained by the Lords grace, to some
restraint o^ the more visible out-breakings of sin; you have not that occasion
to know your selves by, and so you remain strangers to your hearts, and fall
into better likeing with your selves, then the first sight of your selves
permitted you. Now, my beloved in the Lord, herein you are to be blamed, that
you do not rather go in to the fountain, and the^e behold the stream^, then
only to behold the fountain in the streams; you ought rather upon the Lord
testimony of man, to believe what is in you, before you find it, and see it
breaking out, and keep this character continually in your ^ight, which will be
more powerful ^o humble you, then many out-breaking^. I think we should be ^o
well acqu^inted with our own natures, as to account nothing ^^range to them
that we see abroad, but r^ther think all the gros^nesse and wi^ke^nesse of men
suitable and correspondent to o^r spi^its, to that root of bitterness that is
in them; The goodness of God in restraining the appearance o^ that in us,
which i^ within us in ^e^lity, should rather increase the sense of our own
wickedness, then dimin^sh it in our view.

Indeed, self-love is that which blinds us, and bemists us in the sight of our
selves, we look upon our selves through this ^alse medium, and it repr^sent^
all things more beautiful then they a^e; and therefore the Apostle has reason
to s^y, we deceive our selves, and we make God a liar. O, how much practical
self-deceit is there in the application of truth? there are many errors
contrary to the truths themselves, and many deceivers, and deceived, who spread
them: but I believe there is more error committed by men, in the application
of truths to their o^n hearts, the^ in the contemplation of it; and more
self-deceiving, then de^eiving of others. It is strange to think, how sound,
and clear, and distinct, a man's judgment will be against those evils in
others, which yet he sees not in himself; How many Christians will be able to
decipher the nature of some vices, and unbowel the evils of them, and be
quick-sighted to e^py the leas^ appea^ance of them in another, and ^o condemn
it, and yet ^o pa^tial a^e they in judging themselves, ^elf-love so purblinds
them in t^is reflection, that they cannot discern that in themselves, which
others cannot but discern. How often do men declaim against pride, and
covetou^nesse, and self-seeking, and other evils of that kind? they will pour
out a flood of eloquence and zeal against them* and yet ^t is strange they do
not adv^^t, that they are accusing themselves, and impannel^ing themselves in
such discourse^, though others, it may be, will easily pe^ceive ^ p^^dominancy
of these evils in them. Who art thou, O m^^, who judges another, and ^ost the
same things? Can thou escape Gods judgment? Romans 2.1. Consider this, O
Ch^istian, that thou may le^rn to turn the edge of all thy censures and
convictions against ^hy self, that thou may prevent all men's judgments of
thee, in judging thy self all things, that men can judge thee, that is, a ^hief
of sinners, that has the root of all sin in thee; and so, thou may anticipa^
the divine judgment too, for if we judge our selves, we shall not be judged.
Labor thou to know these evils tha^ are incident to thy nature, before others
can know them, that is, in the root and ^ountain, before they come to the ^ruit
and stream; to know sins in the first conceptions of them, before they come to
such productions as are visible; and this shall keep thee humble, and preserve
thee from much sin, and thou sh^lt not deceive thy self, nor dishonor God, in
making him a liar, but rather set to thy seal to his truth, and his word shall
abide in thee.

There is a common rule that we have in judging our selves, by comparing our
selves amongst our selves, which (as Paul says) is not wisdom, 2 Cor. 10.12.
When we do not measure our ^elves by the perfect rule of Gods holy Word, but
parallel our selves with other persons, who are still defective from the rule,
far further from it, then any one is from another: this is the o^din^ry method
of the judging of self-love; we compare with the worst person^, and if we be
not so bad as they, we think our selves good; if not so ignorant as some ar^,
we presume that we know; if not so profane as many, we believe our selves
religious. Lord, I am not as this Publican, so ^aith man^ in their hearts,
there is a curser, a swearer, a drunkard, a blind ignorant soul, that neglects
prayer in private and public, and upon these ruins of others sins, they build
some better estimation of themselves. But, I pray (...) what will that avail
you to be unlike them, you be more unlike your pattern, then they are unlike
you? It may be, others will compare with these that are good, but it is with
that which is worst in them, and not that which is best; How often do men
reckon this way, here is a good man, here is an eminent person, yet he is such
and such, subject to such infirmities, and here self-love flatters it self, and
by flattering, deceives it self. My beloved, let us learn ^o establish a more
perfect rule, which may show all our imperfections: let our rule ascend, that
our hearts may descend in humility, but when our rule and pattern descends to
men of like infirmities, then our pride and self-conceit ascend^, and the
higher we be that way in our own account, the lower we are indeed, and in Gods
account; and the lower we be in our selves, we lose nothing by it, for as God
is higher in our account, so we are higher in Gods account, according to that
standing rule, Mat 23.12. Whosoever shall exalt himself shall be abased, and he
that shall humble himself shall be exalted.

SERMON XXI^
1 John 2.1. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, etc.


THE Gospel is an entire uniform piece, all the parts of it are interwoven
through other, and interchangeably knit together; so that there can be no
dividing of it, no more then of Christ's coat that was without seam. If you have
it not altogether by the divine lot, you cannot truly have any part of it, for
they are so knit together, that if ye disjoyn them, you destroy them; and if
they cease to be together, they cease al^ogether to be. I ^peak this, because
there may be pretensions to some abstracted parts of Ch^^stianity; one man
p^etends to ^aith in Jesus Christ, and persuasion of pardon of sin, and in this
there may be some secret glo^ying, a^ising from that con^^dence: another may
p^eten^ to the study of holiness and obedience, and may endeavor something
that way, to do known duties, and abstain from gross sin^. Now, I say, if the
first do not conjoyn the st^dy of the second, and, if the ^econd do not lay
down the first as the foun^^tion, both of them imb^^ce a shadow for the thing
it self; be^au^^ they separat these things that God has joined* and so can
^^ve no b^ing, but in men's fan^y, when they are not conjoined. He that would
pretend to a righteousness of Christ without him, must ^ithall study to have
the righteousness of the Law fulfilled within him; and he that endeavors to
have holiness within, must withal go out of himself, to seek a righteousness
without him, whereupon to build hi^ peace and acceptance with God, or else,
neither of them has truly any righteousness without them, to cover them, or
holiness within, to cleanse them. Now here the beloved Apostle shows us this
divine contexture of the Gospel, The great and compr^hensive end and design of
the Gospel is, peace in pardon of sin, and purity from sin: These things I
write unto you, that you sin not, etc. The Gospel is comprised in commands and
promises; both make one web, and (...) in together. The immediate end of the
command is, that we sin not; nay, but there is another thing always either
expressly added, or t^citly understood; but if any man sin (that desires not to
^in) we have an advocate with the Father: so the promise comes in as a
su^sidiary h^lp to all the pr^c^pts. It is ann^x^d to give security to a poor
soul from despair; and therefore the Apostle t^^cheth you a blessed Art of
constructing all the commands and exhortations of the Gospel, those of the
highest pitch, by supplying the full sense with this happy and seasonable
caution or caveat, but if any man sin, etc. Does that command, Be ye holy as I
am holy, perfect as your heavenly Father, which sounds ^o much unattainable
perfection, and seems to hold forth an inimitable pattern, does it, I say,
discourage thee? Then, use the Apostles Art, add this caution to the command,
subjoyn this sweet exceptive, But if any man (that desires to be holy, and
gives himself to this study) fail often, and fall, and defile himself with
unholinesse, let him not despair, but know that he has an advocate with the
Father; If that of Paul's urge thee, present your bodies a living sacrifice, and
be ye not conformed to the world, but transformed, and glorify God in your
bodies and spirits which are his, Romans 18.1, 2. and 1 Cor. 6.20. And cleanse
your selves from all fil^hiness^ of the flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. And walk
in the spirit, and walk as children of the light, etc. If these do too
rigorously exact upon thee, so as to make thee lose thy peace, and weaken thy
heart and hands; learn to make out a ^ull sentence, and fill up the full sense
and meaning of the Gospel, according as you see it done here. But if any man,
(whose inward heart-desires, and chief designs are toward these things, who
would think himself happy in holiness and conformity to God, and estimat^ his
blessedness or misery, from his union or separation from God) sin, then we
have an advocat with the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous, who has all
that we want, and will not suffer any accusation to fasten upon us, as long as
he lives to make intercession for us.

On the other han^, take a view of the promises of the Gospel, though the
immediate, and next end of them is, to give peace to troubled souls, and settle
us in the high point of our acceptance with God, yet certainly, they have a
further end, even purity from sin, as well as pardon of sin, cleansing from all
sin and filthiness, as well as covering of ^^lthinesse. These things I write
unto you, that ye sin not; What things? Consider what goes before, and what
follows after, even the publication of the Word of Life, and eternal life in
him, the declaration of our fellowship with God in Christ, the offering of the
blood of Christ, able to cleanse all sin, the promise of par^on to the
penitent, confession of sin, all these things (...) write, that ye sin not; so
that this seems to be the ultimat end, and chief design of the Gospel, unto
which all tends, unto which all work to^ether: the promises are for peace, and
peace (...) for purity; the promises are for faith, and ^aith is for purifying
of the heart, and perform^ng the precepts; so that, all at length returns ^o
this, from whence while we swerved, all this mi^ery is come upon us; In the
beginning, it was thus, man created to glorify God, by obedience to his
blessed will, sin interposeth, and ma^reth the whole frame, and from this has
a flood of misery flowed in upon us: Well, the Gospel comes offering a Savior,
and ^orgivenesse in him; thus peace is purchased, pardon granted, the soul ^s
restored unto its primitive condition, and state of subordination to Gods will,
and so redemption ends, where creation began, or rather ^n a more perfect frame
of the same kind. The second Adam builds what the first Adam broke down, and
the Son re-creats what the Father in the beginning created, yea, with some
addition; ^n this new edition of mankind, all seems new; new Heavens, and new
Earth, and that because the creature that was made old, and defiled with ^in,
is made new by grace. Now, he^^e you may ^earn the second part of this lesson,
that the Apostle teaches us; as ye ought to correct (as it were) precepts of
the Gospel, by subjoyning p^omises in this manner, so ye ought to di^ect
promises, toward the performance of his p^ecepts, as their chief end:
whenever you ^ead it w^itten, The blood of Christ cleanses from (...) sin,
if we confess, he is faithful to forgive our sins* God so loved the world,
that he gave his Son; (...) that believes has everlasting life, etc. The^
make up the entire sense and meaning, after (...) manner, These things are
written, that we sin not. I^ there a redemption from wrath published? (...)
there reconciliation with God preached? And are we beseeched to come and have
the benefit of them? Then say, and supply within thine ow^ heart, These things
are written, published, an^ preached, that we may not sin. Look to the furthest
end of these things, it is, that we sin not. The end of things, the scope of
writings, an^ the purpose of actions, is the very measure o^ them, and so that
is the best interpreter of them. The scope of Scriptures, is by all accounted
the very thread, that will lead a man ^ight in and ou^ of the labyrinths that
are in it. And so it is used as the rule of the interpretation in the parts of
it. Now, (my beloved in the Lord) take (...) the scope of the whole Scriptures,
the mark th^^ all the Gospel shoots at, These things I write unto you, that ye
sin not. You hear it is true, (...) pardon of sin, of delivery from wrath, of
not coming into condemnation, of covering offenses, o^ blotting them out as a
cloud, all these you read and hear: But what do they all aim at? If you
consider not that attentively, you shall no more unde^stand the plain Gospel,
then you can expound a parable without observing the scope of it. Do you think
these have no further aim, then to give you peace, and to secure you from fears
and terrors, that you may then walk as you li^t, and follow the guiding of
your own hearts? Nay, i^ you take it so, you totally mistake it, if you do not
re^d on, and find all these things w^itten to this end, that we sin not, you
err, not understanding, or misunderstanding the Scriptures.

These things I write unto you, little children: To enforce this the more
sweetly, he uses this affectionat compellation, little children, for, in all
things affection has a mighty stroke, almost as much as reason; it is the most
suitable way to prevail with the spirit of a man, to deal in love and
tenderness with it; it insinuats more sweetly, and so can have less
resistance, and therefore works more strongly. It is true, another way of
terrors, threatenings, and reproo^^ mingled with sharp and heavy words of
challenges, may make a great deal of more no^^e, and yet it has not such
virtue, to preva^l with ^ rational soul; the Spirit of the Lord was not in the
wind, nor in the earthquake, nor in the fire, but in the still and calm voice,
which came to Elijah, 1 King. 19.11, 12. These suit not the gentle dove-like
disposition of the Spirit, and though they be fit to rent rocks in pieces, yet
they cannot truly break heart^, and make them cont^ite: The Sun will make a m^n
sooner p^rt with his cloak, then the wind; such is the differen^e between the
warm beams of affection, and the boistrous violence of p^ssion or terror. Now,
O that there were such a spirit in them who preach the Gospel, such a fathe^ly
affection, that with much pity and compassion they might call sinners from the
ways of death. O, there is no subject, in which a man may have mo^e room for
melting affections, nothing that will admit of such bowels of compassion as
this, the multitude of souls posting to destruction, and so blind-folded, that
they cannot see it. Here the fountain of tears might be opened to run
abundantly* the Lord pe^sonats a tender-hear^ed Father or Husband often, Oh,
why will ye die? Ye have broken my heart with your whorish heart: O Jerusalem,
how often would I, but thou would not? When he, who is not subject to humane
pas^ions, expresses himself thus, how much more does it become u^, poor
creatures, to have pity on our fellow creatures? Should it not press out from
us many groan^, to see so many pe^ishing, even beside salvation. I wish you
would take it so, that the warning you to flee from the wrath to come, is the
greatest act of s^vour and love that can be done to you. It becomes us to be
solicitous about you, and declare unto you, that you will meet with destruction
in those paths you walk into* that these ways go down to the chambers of
death. O that it might be done with so much feeling compassion of your misery,
as the necessity of it requires. But, why do many of you t^ke it so hard to be
thus forwarned, and have your danger declared unto you? I guess at the reason
of it; you are in a distemper, as sick children distempered in a fever, who a^e
not capable to discern their parents tender affection, when it crosses their
own inclinations and ways.

SERMON XXII^
1 John 2.1. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not. And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, etc.


CHrist Jesus came by water and by blood, not by water only, but by blood also,
and I add, not by blood only, but by water also, Chap 5.6. In sin, there is the
guilt, binding over to punishment, and there is the filth or spot, that
defiles the soul in Gods sight: To take away guilt, nothing so fit as blood,
for there is no punishment beyond blood, therefore says the Apostle, without
the shedding of blood there is no remission of sin, Heb. 9.22. and for the
stain and spot, nothing is so suitable as water, for that is generally
appointed for cleansing; and some shadow of this the Heathens had, who had
their lust^a^ions in water, and their expiation^ by blood; but more
significantly and plainly, the Jews, who had their purifications by sp^inkling
of water* Numb. 8.7. and expiations by sac^ificing of slain b^^st^; but all
the^^ were but evanishing^ shadows: now the substance is come* Jesus Christ is
come in water and blood; in wa^e^, to clean^^ the spots of the soul, to pu^ifie
it ^^om all filth^nesse; and in blood, to satisfy for sin, and remove the
punishment. You have both in these words of the Apostle, (^o^ ^e labors to let
out unto us the true Christ, whole and inti^e) These things I write unto you
that ye sin not: He^e is the proper end of the ^ater; and if any man sin, we
have Christ a propitiation for our sins, here is the blood, the end of the
blood i^, to s^ve us, the end of the water is, that we sin no^, since we are
saved. He came in the blood of expiation, because we had sinned; he came i^ the
water of sanctification, that we might not sin. His blood speaks peace to the
soul, and the water subjoy^s, but let them not return to folly. His blood
cries, Behold thou art made whole, and the water echoes unto it, sin no more,
l^st a worse thing bef^ll thee, Joh. 5.14. These two streams o^ water and
blood, which a^e appointed for purity and pardon, run intermingled all alongs,
and so the proper effects of them are interchangeably attributed to either of
them, he has washed us in hi^ blood, Rev. 1.5. and 7.14. And the blood of
Christ cleanses u^ from all sin* Then certainly, this blood cannot be without
water, it is never separated from it, the proper effect of blood is to cover
sin, but because the water runs in that channel, and is conveyed by the blood
thither, therefore it does cleanse sin, ^s well as cover it.

These things I write unto you, that ye sin not* This then is the design of the
whole Gospel, the great and grand design, to destroy sin, and save the sinner.
There is a treaty of peace made with the sinner, and Christ is the peacemaker:
a tender of life and salvation is made to him, but there is no treaty, no
capitulation, or composition with sin, out it must go, first out of its
domin^on, then out of its habitation; it must first lose its power, and then
its being in a believer; yea, this is one of the chief articles of our peace,
not only required of us as our duty, that we should destroy that, which cannot
but destroy us; (for, if any man will needs hugg and imbr^ce his sins, and
cannot part with them, he must needs die in their imbracements, because the
Council of Heaven has irrevocably past a fatal sentence against sin, as the
only thing that in all the Creation has the most perfect opposition to his
blessed will, and contrariety to his holy nature) but also and especially, as
the great stipulation and promise upon his part, to redeem ^s from all our
iniquities, and purify us to himself, a people zealo^^ of good works; and not
only to redeem us from hell, and deliver u^ from wrath, Ti^. 2 14. He has
undertaken this gr^^t work, to compe^^e this mutiny and rebellion that was
raised up in the Creation by sin, els^ what peace could be between God and us,
as long as his enemy and ours dwelt in our bosom, and we at peace with it.

Now, take a short view of these things, (...) are wri^ten in the preceding
Chapter, and (...) shall see that the ha^monious v^ice ^f all tha^ is in the
Gospel, is this, that we sin not. Let me say further, as these things are
written that we sin not, so all things are done that we sin not. Tak^ all the
whole wo^k of Creation, of Providenc^, of Redemption, all of them speak one
language, that we sin not: D^y unto day utters speech, and night unto night
shows knowledge: There is no speech nor language where their voice i^ not
heard, P^al. 19.2, 3. And, a^ in that place, their voice proclaims the Glory,
Majesty, and Goodness of God, so they with the same sound, proclaim and
declare, that we should not sin against such a God, so great, and so good; all
that we see, suggests and in^in^ats this unto our hearts* all that we hear,
whispers this unto our ears, that we sin not: That he made us, and not we our
selves, and that we are the very work of his hands, this speaks our absolute
and essential dependence on him, and therefore proclaims with a loud voice,
that sin, which would cut off this subordination, and loose from this
dependence upon his holy will, is ^ monstrous unnatural thing. Take all his
mer^ies toward us, whether general or particular, the tr^nscendent abundance
of his infinite goodness in the earth, that river of his riches that ^un^
through it, to wa^^^ every m^n, and brings supply to his door^, that infinite
variety that is in Heaven and Earth, and all of them of equ^l birthright with
man, yet by the Law of our Maker, a yoke of subjection and service to man i^
imposed upon them, so that man is, in a manner, set in the Center of all, to
the end that all the several qualifications, and pe^fections that are in every
creature, may concenter and meet together in him, and flow tow^rds him. Look
upon all his particular ^cts of care and favor toward thee, consider his
judgments upon the world, upon the nation, or thine own person, put to thine
ear, and he^r, this is the joint harmonious melody, this is the proclamation of
all, that we sin not, that we sin not against so good a God, and so great a
God, that were wickedness, thi^ were madness. If he wound, it is that we sin
not; if he heal again, it is that we sin not. Does he kill, it i^ that we sin
not. Does he make ^live, it is for the same end. Does he shut up and restrain
our liberty, either by bond^ge, or sickness, or other afflictions, why? he
means that we sin not. Does he open ^gain, he means the same thing, that we sin
no more, lest a worse thing befall us. Does he make many to fall in battle, and
turns the ^ury of that upon us, the voice of it is, that you who are left
behind, should sin no more. Is there severity toward others, and toward you
clemency; O, the loud noise of that i^, sin not. But alas, the re^ult o^ all
is, that which is written, Psalm. 78.32. Nevertheless they sinned still. In the
midst of so many concurring testimonies, in the very throng of all the sounds
and voices that all the works of God utter, in the very hearing of these,
nevertheless to sin still, and not to return and enquire early after God, this
is the plague and judgment of the Nation.

But let us return to the words, These things, etc. That which is written of
the word of life, that which was from the beginning, and was manifested unto
us, that is written that we sin not: for, ^aith this same Apostle, Chap. 3.5.8.
And ye know that he was manifested to take away our sins, and (...) him is no
sin; yea, for this very purpose (says he) that he might destroy the works of
the devil. Now, is this the great business, that drew the Son out of the
Fathers bosom, to destroy the a^ch-enemy, and capital rebel, Sin, which, as
to man, is a work of Satan's, because it f^^st entered in man by the Devils
suggestion and counsel: all that misery and ruin, all these works of darkness
and death, that Satan had by his malice and policy wrought upon, and in poor
mankind, Jesus was m^nifest^d in the flesh without sin, to destroy and take
away sin out of our flesh, and to abolish and destroy Satan's work, which he had
builded upon the ruins of Gods work, of the image of God, and to repai^ and
renew that first blessed wo^k of God in man, Ephesians. 4.23, 24.

Now, O how cogent and pe^swading is this, one so high, come down so low, one
dwelling in inaccessible glory, manifested in the flesh, in the infi^mity and
weakness of it, to thi^ very purpose, to repair the Creation, to make up the
^^^aches of it, to destroy sin, and ^ave the sinner; what force is in this to
persuade a soul that truly believe^ it, not to sin? for, may he think within
himself, Shall I save that which Christ came to destroy? Shall I intertain and
maintain that which he came to take away, and do what in me lies to (...) the
great end of his glorious and wonde^ful descent from Heaven? Shall I join
hands, and associat with my lusts, and war for them, which w^r against my soul,
and him that would save my ^oul? Nay, (...) us conclude (my beloved) within our
own hearts, Is the Word and Prince of life manifested from Heaven, and come to
ma^^ and unmake that wo^k of Satan, that he may rescue me from ^n^er his
tyranny? ^hen God forbid that I should help Satan to build up that which my
Savior is ^^sting down, and to make a prison for my self, and cords to bind me
in it for everlasting. Nay, will a believing foul say, rather let me be a
worker together with Christ, though saintly, ye^ I resolve to wrestle with him,
to pull down all the strong holds that Satan keeps in my nature, and so to
congratulat and con^ent to him, who is the avenger and asserter of my liberty.

Then consider the greatest end, and furthest design of the Gospel, how it is
inseparably chained and linked into this, that we sin not. We are called to
fellowship with the Father and the Son, and herein is his glory, and our
happiness. Now, this proclaims with a loud voice, that we sin not; for, what
more contrary to that design of union, and communion with God, then to sin,
which disunits and discommunic^ts the soul ^^om God. The nature of sin you
know, it is the transgression of his Law, and so, it is the very just
oppo^ition of the creatures will, to the will of him that made it. Now, how do
ye imagine that this can consist with true friendship and fellowship, which
loses that conjunction of wills and affection^, which is the bond of true
friendship, and the ground of fellowship, idem velle, atque idem nolle, hae^
demum vera ami^i^ia est. The conspiracy of our desires and delights in one
point with Gods, this sweet co-incidency makes out communion, and what
communion then with God, when that which his soul abhors, is your delight, and
his delight is not your desire? What communion has light with darkness? Sin
is darkness, all sin, but especially, sin entertained and maintained, sin that
has the full consent of the heart, and carries the whole man after it, that
is Egyptian-darknesse, an universal darkness over the soul; this being
interposed between God and the soul, breaks off communion, eclipses that soul
totally. Therefore, (my beloved) if you do believe that you are called unto
this high dignity of fellowship with God, and if your souls be stirred with
some holy ambition after it, consider that these things are written, that ye
sin not; consider what baseness is in it, for one that has such a noble
design, as fellowship with the highest, to debase his soul so far, and so low,
as to serve sinful and fleshly lusts; there is a vileness and wretchedness in
the service of sin, that any soul, truly and nobly principled, cannot but look
upon it with indignation, because he can behold nothing but indignity in it.
Shall I who am a Ruler (says Nehemiah) shall such a man as I flee? and who is
there that being as I am would flee? Neh. 6.11. A Christian has more reason,
Shall such a man as I, who am born again to such a hope, and called to such a
high dignity? Shall I, who aim and aspire so high as fellowship with God,
debase and degrade my self with the vilest servitude? Shall I defile in that
puddle again, till my own clothes abhor me, who aims at so pure and so holy a
society? Shall I yoke in my self with drunkards, liars, swearers, and other
slaves of sin? Shall I rank my self thus, and conform my self to the world,
seeing there is a noble and glorious society to incorporat with, the King of
kings to converse with daily? Alas, what are these worms that sit on Thrones to
him? But f^r more, how base are these companions in iniquity, your
Pot-companions? etc. And what a vile society is it, l^k^ that of the
bottomless pit, where Devils are linked together in chains?

SERMON XXIII^
1 John 2.1. My little children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin
not* And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, etc.


IN the Gospel we have the most perfect provision against both these
extremities, that souls ^re ready to run upon, the rock of desperate distrust,
and the quicksands of presumpt^ous wantonness. It may be said to be a well
ordered Covenant in all things, that has caveated and cautioned the whole
matter of our salvation, in such a way, that there is neither place for
discouragement and down-casting, nor yet room for liberty in sin; there is no
exemption from the obligation of Gods holy Law, and yet there is pardon for the
breach of it, and exemption from the curse; there is no peace, no capitulation
with sin, and yet the^e is peace concluded with the sinner, who is, by that
agreement, bound to fall out with sin; there is no dispensation for sin, and
from the perfection of holiness, and yet there is an advocation for the
sinner, which aims and studies after it; so that in sum, the whole Gospel is
comprised in this, he speaks peace to his saints, but let them not return to
folly* thou art made whole, sin no more; All that is in the Gospel says this,
that thou should sin no more* But, because sin is necessarily incident,
therefore all that is in the Gospel, speaks this further, though ye be
su^prized in sin, yet believe; and this is the round that a believer is to walk
into* to turn from pardon to purity, and from pollution again to pardon; for
these voices and sounds a^e interchanged continually; If ye have sinned,
believe in Christ the advocate and sacrifice, and, because ye have believed,
sin not; but if ye be overtaken in sin, yet believe; and as this is daily
renewed, so the souls study and endeavor in them, should be daily renewed too.
If ye have sinned, despair not; if ye be pardoned, yet presume not: after sin
there is hope, it is true, because there is forgiveness with him; but after
forgiveness, there must be fear to offend hi^ goodness; for there is
forgiveness with him, that he may be feared, Psalm. 130.4. And this is the
situation I would desire my soul into, to be placed between hope of his mercy,
and fear of sin, the says of his favor, and the hatred of sin, which he will
not favor; and how happy were a soul to be confined within these, and kept
captive to its true liberty?

I spoke a little before, how these fundamental truth^ that a^e set down
before, do all aim at this one mark, that we sin not; Now I proceed. That
declaration what God i^, verse. 5. is expressly directed to this purpose, and
applied, verse. 6. God is light, and therefore sin not, for sin is darkness; he
is light, for purity and beauty of holiness, and perfection of knowledge, that
true light in which is no darkness, that unmixt light, all homogeneous to it
^elf, therefore sin not, for that is a work of the night, and of the darkness,
that proceeds from the blindness and estrangement of your minds, and ignorance
of your hearts, and it cannot but prepare and fit you for these everlasting
chains of darkness. Call God what you will, name all his names, styles, and
titles, spell all the characters of it, and still you may find it written at
every one of them, sin not; Is he light* then sin not. Is he life? then sin
not: for sin will separat you from his light and life, sin will darken your
souls, and kill them. Is he love? then sin not; God is love (says John) O then
sin not against love. Hatred of any good thing is deformed, but the hatred of
the beautiful image of the original love, that is monstrous: God is love, and
in his love is your life and light; then to sin against him, it is not simple
disobedience, nor is it only grosser rebellion, but it has that abominable
slain of ingratitude in it. Do you read, that it is written, he is holy, then
sin not, for this is most repugnant to his holiness, his holy eyes cannot see
it. Therefore if thou would have him look upon thee with favor, thou must not
look upon sin with savor, or intertain it with delight; Is it written that he
is great and powerful? then sin not, that were madness. Is it written, that he
is good and graciou^? then it is written, that ye sin not; for that were
wick^dnesse: it were an unspeakabl^ folly and madness, to of^end so great a
God, that can so easily avenge himself; and it were abominable perverseness and
wickedness, to sin against so good and gracious a God, who, though he may
avenge himself, yet of^ers pardon and peace, and beseeches us to accept it. Is
he just? then sin not; for he will not acquit the wicked, nor hold them
guil^lesse, them, who do acquit themselves, and yet hold by their sins. And is
he merciful? then, O then, sin not, because he has acquitted the^, because he
is ready to blot out thy guilt; will thou sin against mercy, that must save
thee? Again, is it written, that the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all
sin? that is written, that ye sin not. It is true, it is written, because ^e
have sinned already, that ye may know how it may be pardoned. But moreover it
is written, that ye sin no more, that so, more sin may be prevented, at least,
deliberat continued walking in sin; so that this blood has a twofold virtue
and use; To be the greatest encouragement to a soul troubled for sin, and the
chiefest arg^ment and inducement for ^ soul not to sin* this medicine, or this
plaster, has two notable virtues, restorative, and preservative, to restore
the bones that already are broken, through falling in sin; and to preserve our
feet from f^rther falling in sin. It h^th a healing virtue, for these brui^es
that are in the soul; and besides, it is an antidot and sovereign preservative
against the poison and infection of sin and the world. What motive is like
this, the Son of God shed his blood for our sins, they cost a dear price, O,
how precious was the ransom? More precious then Gold, and Silver, and precious
Stones, because the redemption of the soul is so precious, that it would have
cease^ for ever without it. Now, what soul can deliberatly think of this, and
receive it with any affection into the heart, but he shall find the most
vehement persuasion against sin; he cannot but behold the heinousness and
infinite evil that is in it, which required such an infinite recompense? And can
a soul on that view run to the puddle and defile again, when he sees how dearly
the fountain for cleansing was purch^sed? Can ^ believing heart have such
treacherous thoughts harbored within him, to crucify afresh the Lord of
glory, and, as it were, to trample under foot his blood? No certainly, he that
believes in this blood, cannot use it so dishonourably and basely; As it is
written, that he sin not, so he read^ it, and believes it, that he may not sin,
as well (...) because he has sinned. Many speak of this blood, and think they
^pply it to the cleansing of their sin past, but it is rather that they may sin
with more liberty; ^s if the end of vomiting up a surfeit of sin, were to
surfeit more; and the end of washing, were nothing else but to defile again.
Ce^tainly, this blood i^ not for such souls, not one wo^d of comfort in the
Word, not one drop of hope in the blood, to them who pretend to believe in
Christ's blood, and continue in sin, as fresh and lively as eve^ they did,
nothing abated of their desires, or customs. But if we confess our sins, God
will forgive (say you) and this we may do at any time, and this we do daily.
Nay, but (says John) this is written that you sin not; not to encourage you to
sin. It is not recorded for this end, that you may live after your own
imaginations and former customs, with ^ecurity and peace, upon this
presumption, that pardon is easily procurable, if ^ say, God have mercy upon
me, ere I die. Do not deceive your selves, for it is written for the just
contrary, that you sin no more, and return no more to folly. If he had said, if
we sin, though we confess, yet he ^s just to punish us, you would then be
driven to desperation, and from that, to ^ desperate conclusion, since we must
be punished however, let ^s not punish our selves here, in mortifying our
flesh; Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall die: Di^ we must, let us
deserve it; for where there is no hope, there is no help for reformation. But
now, when there is such an unexpected proposal of grace, when God who is fre^
to punish us, becomes indebted by his promise to ^orgive our debts, we humbly
submitting to him, and conf^ssing our guil^inesse, this su^p^is^l of clemency
and moderation, should, yea, certainly will overcome any heart that truly
believes it, and conquer it to his love and obedience. The more easily he
forgive sin, the more h^rdly will a believing heart be d^awn to sin. You know
any ingenuou^ spirit will more easily be conquered by kindness and
conde^cendency, then severity and violence; these cords of love, are the cord^
of a man, ^uited to the nature of man in whom the^e is any spa^kle of ingenuity
remaining; how often have men been engaged and overcome by clemency and
goodness, who could not be conquered by force of arms? Enemies have been made
frien^s by thi^ means, ^uch power is in it, to knit hearts together. Augustus,
when he was acquainted with the conspi^acy of one of his chief Minions Cinna,
whom he had made a f^iend of an enemy, by kindness and courtesy, takes the
some way, to make of a traitor a constant friend; he does not punish him, as he
had done others, but calls for him, and declare^ unto him his vile ingratitude,
that when he had given him life and liberty, he should conspire to take away
his Princes life; well, when he is confounded and astonished, and cannot open
his mouth, says Augustus, I give thee thy life ^gain, first an open enemy, and
now a traitor; yet from this day, let an inviol^ble f^iendship be bound up
between us, and so it proved: for this way of dealing did totally ove^come his
heart, and blot out all ^editious though^^. But O, how incomparably greater is
his condescendency and clemency, whose Person is ^o high and sacred, whose Laws
are so just and holy, and we so ba^e and wretched, to pardon ^uch infinite
guilt, rebellion, and treachery, against such an i^finit Majesty, and that,
when a soul does but begin to blush, and be ashamed with it self, and cannot
open its mouth; I say, this rare and unparalled goodness and me^cy being
considered, cannot but tame and daunt the wildest and most savage nature; wild
be^sts a^e not brought in subjection and tamed, but by gentle usage; it is not
fierceness and violence can cure their fierceness, but meekness, and
condescendency, to follow their humors, and soft dealing with them; as ^ rod
is not bowed by great strength, but broken, even so, these things, of the
promise of pardon for sin, of the grace and re^dinesse of God to pardon upon
the easiest terms, are written for this end, that our wild and undaunted
natures may be tamed, and may bow and submit willingly to the yoke of his
obedience, and may henceforth knit such a sacred bond of friendship and
fellowship with God, as may never be broken.

But, say ye, who is he that sins not? Who can s^y, my heart is pure, and my
way is clean? Who can say, I h^ve no sin? And therefore that cannot be expected
which you crave. Nay, but says the Apostle, These things I write unto you,
that ye sin not. Because ^in is in all, therefor you excuse your self in your
sins, and takes liberty to sin; but the very contrary, is the intent of the
declaring unto us that we have ^in* he shows that none want it, not that ye may
be the more indulgent towa^ds it, but the more watchful against it. It is not
to make you secure, but rather to give you alarm; even the best and holiest, it
is an ala^m to them, to tell them that sin is in confintis, in their very
borders, that the enemy is even in their quarters, ye^, in their bosom;
Ce^tainly, this should so much the mo^e excite us against it, and a^m us for it
every moment, lest either by fraud, or fo^ce, by sec^et undermining, or open
violence, it draw us away from God. This word, If we say we have no sin, we
lie: It is a watchword given to men, a warning to enter in consideration of
themselves, for the enemy being within, there is no flying from him, we carry
him about with us, and being within, he is less di^ce^ned; and therefore we
ought to awake, and so walk circumspectly, with eyes in our head, lest we be
su^prized at unawars, either in that time we know not of, or at that place we
least su^pect. And to others of you, who have never attained any victory over
your sin^, and scarce have a discerning of them; I would only say this, that
the unive^sality of sins inhabitation, or being in all men, even the godly,
will not excuse sins domination and reign in you. It i^ strange, that since the
holiest have need of continual watching against this bosom enemy, that ye who
have both little knowledge and strength, should think ye may live securely, and
not trouble your selves. I^ they have need to take heed, how much more have ye,
since it is but in them, but it reigns in you.

SERMON XXIV^
1 John 2.1. -- And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, etc.


THere is here a sad supposition, but too certain, that any man may sin, yea,
that all men will sin, even those who have most communion with God, and
interest in the blood of Christ, yet they are not altogether exempted from this
fatal lot of mankind, it is incident even to them to sin, and too frequently
incident; but yet we have a happy and sweet provision, for indemnity from the
hazard of sin: We have an advocate with the Father. Grant the probability, ye^,
the necessity and certainty of that supposal, If any man do sin, yet there is
as much certainty of indemnity from sin, as of necessity of falling into sin.
It is not more sure, that we shall carry about with us matter of sorrow and
mourning; but that it is a^ sure, that we have always without us, matter of
rejoyceing.

Let me then speak a word to these particulars: First, that sin is incident to
the best, even after all persuasions, convictions, resolutions, desires, and
design^ to avoid sin. Next, that it is usual for sins after me^cy, conviction,
and resolution to appear so heinous, that they may seem to overtop the mercy
o^ God, and the merit^ of Christ; a soul is most apt to be troubled with guilt
contracted after pardon, and a desire of purity. But withal, I would in the
last place represent to you, that there is no ground of despair, or
discouragement for such an one, though there be ground (...) humiliation and
mou^ning; there i^ a provision made in the Gospel against these continually
incident ^e^rs, there is a ^ecurity against the hazard of surp^izing sins, and
that this comfort belongs only to such souls, as un^eignedly desire not to sin,
and are in some measu^e persuaded by the grace of God not to sin; not to them
who willingly give up themselves to their own lusts. It is a common doctrine a^
any, that sin has some lodging in every man's heart and flesh, and is not
totally cast out, but only bound with chains within, that it do not exe^cise
its old dominion over a believer. But I fear, the most common t^uths, though
they be most substantial in themselves, yet are but circumstantial in our
apprehensions, and very r^rely and ext^aordinarily have place in the deeper and
more serious thoug^ts of our hearts: they are commonly confessed, it is true,
but as seldom considered, I am sure; for who did t^uly ponder the
inclinablenesse of our nature to sin, the strong propension of the heart to
evil, the deceitfulness of sin it self, and the many circumstantial helps, and
additions it gets to its strength, but he would stand in aw, and watch
seriously over himself. I dar say, many sin, ^ather because of a misapprehended
immunity from it, and a misse-reckoning of their own measure and strength, then
because of the strength of sin it sel^. I know no one thing makes sin so strong
(...) this, that we do not apprehend our own weakness, and so give over
watch^ulnesse, which is the greatest and best part of our armor of defense,
when it is done in faith, and this watch kept on the Tower of the Lords
Promises; The apprehension of our escaping the pollutions of the world, and of
some strength to resist them, this adds no more strength to us, but diminishes
and takes from our vigilance, and so exposes us, as it were, naked and
secure, to the cruelty of our adversary. I would wish every Christian to be
thoroughly acquainted, and often conversant in two Books of Sophistry, I may so
term them, the deceitfulness of his own heart, and the deceivablenesse of sin,
Ier. 15. and Heb. 3.13. These are the Volumns he would daily tu^n over, to
learn to discern the Sophistications, self-flatteries, blindness, darkness,
and self-love of his own heart; to take off the deceiving mask of pretenses and
appearances of good, and behold sensibly the true and real inclinations of the
heart to wickedness, to passion, pride, uncleanness, malice, envy, and all
these affections of the flesh: to find out the true beating of the pulse of the
heart; and indeed this just discerning and discovery of the thief in the soul,
is a great part of his arraignment; for if sin ly under the view of an eye that
hates it, and loves God, much of its power and virtue, which lay in darkness,
is taken away. I press this the more, because I verily apprehend it to be the
plague of many Christians, who have some general insight into the matter of
good and evil, and espy some more gross corruption in themselves, and have some
affection to good, yet this estrangednesse to our own hearts, and the vein or
strain of them, the not unbowelling of our hidden affection^, and not
discerning of the poison of pride, self-love, love of the world, and such like
lusts, which are intermingled in all that we do, and spread, as it were,
universally through the whole man; this, I say, makes most of us be subject to
so many surprisals by sin; we are often routed before we draw up, and often
conquered ere we consider: this makes us such unproficients in mortif^^ation,
so that scarce any sin is killed, while the roots of all sin lies hid under the
ground from u^. Then withal, I desire you to study how deceivable a thing sin
is, how many deceitful fair pretenses it is covered with, it has the voi^e of
Jacob, but the hands of Esau; look what it is that is pleasant or ^uitable to
our natural spi^its, it insinuat^ it self always under the shadow of that, and
if there be not much heedfulness and attention, and much expe^ience o^ the
wiles of that subtle one, it is a great hazard to be catched with it
un^dvisedly, while we clasp about another thing, which is presented as a bait
and allurement. Now, is it any wonder that a poor soul be drawn to sin often,
when our enemy does not ^or the most part pro^esse hostility, but friendship,
and under that color pleads admission, within our Ports; and besides, we have
^ treacherous friend in our bosom, that betrays us into his hands, that is,
our own deceitful hearts: These things I mention, to put you i^ remembrance of
what condition you are in, in this world, and what posture you should be into;
watch, (I say) and when ye have done all, stand with your loins girt; and
though you cannot possibly escape all sin, yet certainly it is not in vain thus
to set against it, and keep a watch over it, for by this means you shall escape
more sin, and sin less; as he that aims at the mark, though he do not hit it,
yet he shall ordinarily come nearer it, then he that shoot^ only at random;
and as the Army that is most vigil^nt and watchful, though they cannot prevent
all l^sses and hazards, yet commonly they are not found at such a loss, as
those who are proud, ^onfident, and secure.

Now, as it is suppo^ed, that sin is ordinarily incident to the child o^ God,
so it is especially to be caveated, that he despair not in his sins, for it is
imported in this provision, that the believer is in great haza^d upon new
lapses into sin, either of daily incursion, or of a grosser nature, to be
discouraged; As there is so much corruption in any man's heart, as will turn the
grace of God into w^ntonnesse, and incline him upon the propo^al of free grace,
to presume to take liberty to the flesh, so, that same corruption upon another
occasion, works another way, upon the supposal of new sins, aggravated with
preceding mercy and grace in God, and convictions and resolution^ in him, to
drive him into despondency, and dejection of spirit, as if there were no pardon
for such sins. And indeed, it is no wonder if the soul be thus set upon, if we
set ^side the consideration of the infinite grace of God, that far surpasses
the ill deserts of men. To speak of the very nature of the thing it self, there
is no sin in its own nature more unpardonable, then sin after pardon; nothing
so heinous, aggravated with so many high circumstances, which mingleth it with
the wo^st ingredients, as this sin, after so much grace revealed in the Gospel,
to the end that we may not sin. Sins washed so freely, in so precious a
sountain, and yet to defile again; sins forgiven so readily, and easily, the
debt whereof, in Justice the whole creation wa^ not ^ble to pay, and yet, to
offend so gracious a Father; a soul being thoroughly convinced of the vanity,
folly, and madness of sin, of the deceitfulness and baseness of its
pleasures, and set in a posture against it, as the most deadly enemy, and yet
after all this, to be foiled, deceived, and ensnared; Here, I say, are very
piercing considerations, which cannot but set the challenge very deep into the
heart of a Christian, and wound him sore; how will he be filled with shame and
con^usion of face, if he look upon God? every look or beam of whose
countenance, represents into the soul the vilest and most abominable visage of
sin; or if he look into himself* there is nothing but self-condemning there, he
finds his own conscience staring him, as a thousand witnesses; thus the soul of
a believer being environed, he is ready to app^ehend, that though God should
have pardoned the sins of his ignorance, yet that there is more difficulty in
this, to pardon his returnings to solly, and therefore are some put to harder
exercise, and greater terrors after conversion, then in the time of it; the
sins of ignorance being, as it were, removed as a cloud, and scored out in a
heap, but the sins of knowledge after mercy, lying more distinctly and clearly
in the view of the soul; it is more difficult to blot them out of the
conscience, and sprinkle the heart from an evil conscience: These things I
spe^k to you for this reason, that you may be afraid to sin. I suppose that
there is no h^z^rd of eternal damnation by sin, grant that you know
beforehand, that if you sin, there i^ yet forgiveness with him, and there is
no hazard of pe^ishing by it, yet, su^e I am, it is the most foolish adventure
in the world, to t^ke liberty on that account, for though there be in^empnity
that way, as to thy eternal estate, yet I am persuaded, that there is more
damnage another way, in thy spiritual estate in this wo^ld, then all the gains
o^ sin can countervail: There is a necessary loss of peace, and joy, and
communion of the Holy Ghost; it is inevitable in the very o^dinary and natural
course and connection of things, but that sin, that way indulged, will eclipse
thy soul, and bring some darkness of sorrow, and horror over it; to speak
after the manne^ of man, and in the way of reason it self, the inte^tainment of
that which God hates, will dep^ive thee of mo^e solid joy and sweetness in
him, then all the pleasures of sin could affo^d. Therefore I dare not sa^ to
you (as one too unadvisedly expresses it) Fear not, th^ugh you do sin, of any
hurt that can come by these sins, for if y^u sin, it shall do you no hurt at
all: I say, this were indeed but to make you too bold with sin. I had rather
represent unto you, that though ye be secured in your eternal estate, and there
can come no condemnation that way, yet there is much hurt comes by sin, even in
this world, and sure, I think it a very rational and Christian inducement, to
prevail with a Christian not to sin, to tell him that he shall make a foolish
bargain by it, for he shall love much more then he can gain. Is there no hurt
or loss incident to men, but eternal perdit^on? Nay, my beloved, there is a
loss Christians may sustain by sinning freely, which all the combined
advantages of sin cannot compense; Is not one hours communion with God, is not
the peace of your own consciences, and the joy of the Spirit, such inestimable
Jewels, that it were more suitable for a man to sell the world, and buy them,
then to sell them, and buy ^ poor momentany trifling contentment, which has a
sting in the tail of It, and leaves nothing but vexation after it? O these
bruises in David's bones, these breaches in his spirit, that loss of the joy of
his salvation! Let these teach you who are escaped the great hurt of sin, to
fear at least to be hurt by it this way, more then ever you can expect to be
helped by it.

But then, I desire to add this in the third place, that there is provision
made against the discouragement of these souls that desire not to sin, and yet
sin against their desire. If the challenge I spoke of, be written in thy
conscience, as it were with the point of a Diamo^d, deeply ingr^ven; yet my
beloved, consider, that if any man sin, we have an advocate, etc. There is an
express caution against thy discouragement* certainly our Savior has
provided for it, since the case is so incident, and the supposition so
ordinary, it is not conceivable that he has not caveated and ^ecured thy
salvation in such cases: for he knew certainly before he pardoned thee, and
visited thee at first, that thou was to be subject unto this necess^ry burden
o^ sin, and that it would often times molest and trouble you, and sometimes
prevail over you; all this he knew, that when ye should order your forces, and
draw out against sin, with the greatest desire and resolution, that yet you
might be soiled unexpectedly; and this was not unknown to him, when he showed
mercy at first; there^or^, since his love is unchangeable, and his wisdom
(being infinite,) ^aith it should be so, he would never have cast his love on
^uch persons, if these things which were then before him, could make him
change. Now, I grant there is more wonder in the pardon of following sins, then
in the first pardon; and therefore you should still love more, and praise more;
but what is this wonder, to the wonder of hi^ grace? it is swallowed up in that
higher wonder, For his thoughts and ways are not like ours, hi^ voice is,
Return thou back-sl^ding sinner to thy first Husband, though thou have played
the harlot. Therefore, I desire that whatsoever be presented in that kind, to
aggravat your sins, let it humble you more indeed, and make you hate sin, but
let it not hinder you to think as highly of his mercy and grace, and to set
that in the Heaven^ above it.

SERMON XXV^
1 John 2.1. -- And if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, etc.


IT is the natural office of the conscience to accuse a man in evil doing, as
every man by sin is liable to the judgment of the supreme Court of Heaven, so
he is likewise subject to the in^eriour Court of his own Conscience; for the
most high God has a Deputy within every man's breast, that not only is a
Witness, but a Judge, to fasten an accusation, and pronounce a sentence upon
him according to the L^w of God. And while it is so, that a man is accused in
both Courts, at the supreme Tribunal, and the lower House o^ a man's own
Conscience, when man's accuser is within him, and God his righteous Judge above
him, Who can come in to plead such a man^ cause? A person self-condemned, who
shall plead for his absolution? If he cannot but accuse himself, and stop his
mouth, being guilty before God of the transgressions of all his Law, then what
place for an advocate to excuse him, or defend his cause? And who is it that
can enter in the lifts with God, who, because the supreme and highest Judge,
must be both Judge and Party? Where shall a dayes-man be found to lay hi^ hands
on both, and advocate the desperate* like cause of sinners? Truly here we had
been at an eternal stand, and here had the business stuck for ever, for any
thing that the Creation could imagine, had not the infinite grace and wisdom of
Go^ opened themselves to mankind, in opening* a door of hope to broken and
outlaw sinners; and behold, here is the provision is made for the sec^^ity and
salvation of lost souls, there is One able and mighty to save, a person found
out fit for this advocation, who takes the broken cause of sinners in hand,
and pleads it out, and makes out Justice to be for them, and not against them,
If any man sin, we have an advocate, etc.

There is one thing impo^ted, that sin makes a man li^ble to a charge and
accusation, and brings him under the hazard of judgment. Indeed, its hard
enough to endure an accusing c^nscience, and a spirit wounded with the
apprehen^ion of wrath; When our Savior would express great ^^^liction, he
does it thu^, A man^ enemies shall be those of his own house. If a domestic
enemy be ^o ill, what shall a bosome-enemy be, when a man^ accuser is not only
beside* him, but within him, not only in the house with him, but in the field
too, carried about with him whithe^soever he goes, so that he can have no
retiring or withdrawing^place from it* Indeed, some poor soul^ make a mad
escape from under the challenge of their consciences, they get away from their
keepers to more excess in sin; or make some vain diversion to comp^ny* and
other things o^ the world, but the end thereof shall be more ^itternesse, for
that will not still sleep within them, but shall awake upon them with more
terrou^, and one day put them in such a posture, that all the comforts of the
world shall be but as a drop of water to a man in a burning fever, or as oil to
a flame. But, as I told you, that is not the greatest matter, to be
self-accused, and self-condemned, if there were not a higher T^ibunal, which
this process originally flows from, one greater then the conscience, who
speaks to us in his Word, and has written his charge and sentence against us,
and this is it which ^ets the soul most on edge, and it is but the very
apprehension of that higher judgment, which is the gall and wormwood, the
po^^on of these challenges in the conscience. I would desire you to look upon
this, and consider that there is a sentence past in the Word of God upon all
your actions, that the wrath of God is revealed in the Scriptures as due to
you, however you may flatter your selves in your sins, and fancy an immunity
from wrath, though you live in sin: I wish ye were once persuaded of this, that
all sinners must once appear before Gods Tribunal, and hear the righteous
sentence of the duenesse of punishment pronounced; I say, all must once appear,
either to hear and believe it, or to see it executed; the wisdom of God
requires, that all men's guilt, which is a transgression of the Law* should once
come to a judicial trial, and decision by the Law; and either this must be done
in your own consciences here, that ye may sist your selves before him, and take
with your sins, and humble your selves in his sight, and then the matter is put
over upon a Mediator, or else you must give him leave, nay, he will take leave
to cite you to appear, to see the sentence executed, which was pronounced,
since ye would not apply it to your own heart^. O, happy is that soul that
anticipat^ that great day of final judgment, by a previous self-judgment, and
self-t^yal. Well then* has the Scripture^ included all under sin, that all men
might be guilty, and every mouth stopped before God, Romans 3.19. What shall we do
then? Since righteousness and justice is against us, who can plead for us? It
would seem, that there could be no relaxing, no repealing, no dispensing with
this Law, at least, that, i^ there be any thing of that kind, that
righteousness and judgment can have no hand in it* Yet, behold what follows,
We have an advocate, etc. And an Advocate his office is, to sue out the Cliants
right, from principles of Justice, elsewhere Christ has the office of a Judge,
here is an Advocate for the party, and both of these may have a comfortable
con^ideration: Ioh. 5.22. The Father judges none, but has committed all
judgment to the Son. And yet, here we have an Advocate with the Father, and
that is, with the Father as Judge: these do not cross one another, but to make
out our abundant consolation, that one entire office of our Savior is
represented under all these various (...) suited to our capacity; A Judge he
is, yea, his Tribunal is the highest and ^upream, from which there is no
appeal, the ultimat decision lies here of all capital, or soul ca^es or causes.
It is true, the Father does not wholly divest himself of Judgment and
Authority, in the matters of life and death, for the Gospel is his contrivance,
as it was the Sons, but Christ is, as it were, substituted his Vicegerent, in
the administration of the second Covenant. You read of a preparatory Tribunal
erected in the Word by God the Creator, that is, of the Law, which condems us.
Now, such is the mercy and grace, and free love of God, that he has relaxed
that sentence, as to the persons, he has not taken that advantage which in
Justice he had against us, but upon some valuable considerations has committed
to the Son a royal power of prescribing new Laws of life and death, and new
terms of salvation, and Christ, having at his Fathers will, satisfied the Law,
in what it did threaten us, he is, as it were, in compensation of such a great
service, made Lord and King both of the dea^ and living, Romans 14.9. And all
things in Heaven and earth are given to him, Mat. 18.29. Joh. 13* 3. And
therefore, what ever soul is agrieved under the accusation and charge of the
Law, has liberty, yea, and is called to it, of duty, to appeal unto this new
erected Tribunal where Christ sits to dispense life, according to the terms of
grace; and he may be sure, the Father, will not judge him ^^co^ding to the Law,
if the Son absolve him in the Gospel.

Now, with this it consists, that he who has all final judgment in hi^ hand,
yet he is ou^ advocate in another conside^ation; as we consider God the ^^ther
sitting upon the Tribunal o^ Justice, and p^oceeding acco^ding to the te^ms and
^enor o^ hi^ fi^s^ Law, o^ Covenant of life an^ death; then Christ come^ in,
with hi^ advocation for poor sinners, and sustain^ their persons, and maintains
their cause, even from the p^inciples of Justice* he presents his satis^acto^y
^^c^ifice, and pleads that we are not to be charged with that punishment that
he has suffe^ed, because he has indeed fulfi^led our legal righteousness, and
by this means, the Laws mo^th i^ sto^t, which h^d stopped our mouth, and the
^inner i^ (...), who was ^ound guilty. Thu^, you see the salvation and
absolution of believers, is wonde^fully ^^cu^ed* ^or the^e is a sentence ^or
it, in the Co^^t of the Gospel, pronounced by the S^^, but l^st* you think he
should usu^p such an absolute power, then hear, that he i^ an advo^ate to plead
out the equity and justice of it, be^o^e the very Tribunal of the Law, that the
Law it self being the ^ule, the Father himself who made the Law being the
Judge, the poor soul that flies unto him as a ^e^uge, may be saved, since what
is craved of us, it gets in him, and is as fully satisfied that way, as it
could have be^n by us: therefore, that same righteousness which bids condemn
the sinner, commands to save the believer in Christ, though a sinner. What
shall a ^oul then ^ea^, who shall condemn? it is Christ that justifies, ^or he
is Judge of li^e and death, and that is much; but it is the Father that
justifies, and that is more; whatsoever Tribunal you be cited unto, you may be
sure; Is it the Gospel? then the Son is Judge. Is it the ^aw? then the Son is
advocate. He will not only give li^e him^el^, but see that his Father do it,
and wa^^and you from all back-haza^ds. Nay, before the matter shall misgive, as
he comes down from off the Throne, to stand at the Bar and plead for sinners,
who devolve themselves upon him, so he will not spare, if need require, to
degrade him^el^ fu^ther (if I may so say) and of an advocate become a
supplicant. And truly he ceased not in the days of his flesh to pray for us,
with strong cries and tears, Heb. 7. And now he lives still to make
intercession for us. He can turn from the plea of justice, to the intercession
and supplication of mercy, and if st^ict justice will not help him, yet grace
and savor, he is sure will not disappoint him.

There is a divine contexture of justice and mercy, in the business of man's
redemption, and there is nothing so much declare^ in^init wisdom, as the
m^thod, order, and frame of it. Mercy might have been showed to sinners, in
gracious and ^^ee pardon of their sins, and dispensing with the punishment due
to their persons, yet the Lords justice and ^a^th^ulnesse in that first
commination, might be wronged and disappointed by it, if no satisfaction should
be made for such infinite offenses, i^ the Law were wholly made void, both to
the punishment, as also to the person: Therefor, in the infinite deeps of Gods
wisdom there was a way ^ound out to declare both mercy and justi^e, to make
both to shine glo^iously in this wo^k, and indeed, that is the great wonder of
men and Angels, such a conjunction, or constellation of divine attributes in
one work. And in^eed, it is only the most happy and ^avourable aspect, that we
can behold the divine Majesty into; The P^almist, Psalm. 85. expects much good
from this conjunction o^ the Celestial Att^ibutes, and prognostics salvation
to be near hand, and all good things, as the immediate effect of it. There is a
meeting there, as it were, of some hon^urable personages, verse. 10, 11. as are
in Heaven; the meeting is strange, if you consider the parties, mercy and
truth, righteousness and peace, i^ mercy and peace had met thus ^^i^ndly, it
had been less wonder, but it would seem, that righteousness and truth should
stand off, or meet only to reason and dispute the business with me^cy: But
here is the wonder, mercy and truth meets in a ^^iendly manner, and kisseth one
another, there is a perfect agreement and harmony amongst them, about this matter
of our sa^vation; The^e was a kind of pa^ting at man's fall, but they met again
at Christ's birth; here is the uniting principle, truth springing out of the
earth, because he who is the truth and the life, was to ^pring out of the
earth, therefore righteousness will look down from Heaven, and countenance the
business, and this will make all of them meet with a loving salutation.

Now, as this was the contexture of divine attributes in the business of
redemption, so our Lord and Savior takes upon him diverse names, offices, and
exercises, different functions for us, because he knows that his Father may
justly exact of man personal satisfaction, and has him at this disadvantage,
and that he might have re^used to have accepted any other satisfaction from
another person, therefor, he puts on the habit and ^orm of a supplicant, and
intercessour for us, and so, while he was in the flesh, he ceased not to offer
up prayers and supplications with strong cries and tears, and h^ is said still
to make intercession for us ^^as he learned obedience, though a Son, so he
learned to be a humble supplicant, though equal with God; because our claim
depends wholly on grace, he came off the bench, and stood at the bar, not only
pleading, but praying for us, entreating savor and mercy to us; and then, he
personats an Advocate in another consideration, and pleads upon terms of
justice, that we be pardoned, because his Father once having accepted him in
our stead he gave a satisfaction in value equal to our debt, and pe^formed all
that we were personally bond to, so then, you may unde^stand, how it is, pa^tly
an act of j^stice, partly an act of me^cy, in God to ^o^give ^in to believers,
though indeed mercy and grace is the predominant ingredient, because love and
grace was the very fi^^t rise, and spring of sending a Savior and Redeemer,
and so the original of that very pu^chase and prize, He freely sent his Son,
and freely accepted him in our stead; but once standing in our ^oo^, justice
craves that no more be exacted of u^, since he has done the business himself.

A sinner stands accused in his own Conscience, and before God* therefore, to
the end that we get no wrong, there is a twofold Advocate given us, one in the
E^rth, in our Consciences, another in the Heavens with God* Christ is gone up
to the highest T^ibunal, where the cause receives a definitive sentence, and
there he manageth it above, so that though Satan should obtrude upon a poor
soul, a w^ong sentence in its own con^cience, an^ bring down a false and
counte^feit Act, as it were, extracted out of the Register of H^^ven, whereby
to deceive the poor soul, and con^emn it in it self; yet there is no hazard
above, he dare not appear there, before the highest Court, for he has already
succumb'd on (...), when Christ was here, the Prince of the worl^ was judged
and cast out, and so he will never once put in an accusation into Heaven,
because he knows our ^aith^ul Advocate (...) n^thing can pass without hi^
know^edge and consent. And this is a great com^o^t, that all infe^iour
sentences in thy perplexed con^ci^n^e, which Satan through violence has
imposed upon thee* are r^^^inded above in the highe^^ Court, and shall no^
stand to thy prejudi^^, whoever th^^ ^e that desires to ^orsake sin, and come
to Jesus Christ.

But how does Christ plead? can he plead us not guilty? can he excuse, or
de^end our sins? no, that is not the way, that accusation of the Word and Law
against us is con^essed, is proven, all is ^ndenyably clear; but he pleads
satisfied, though guilty; he presents his satisfactory sacrifice, and the
favor of that, perfumes Heaven, and pacifieth all: he shows Gods bond, and
discharge of the recept of the sum of our d^bt, and thus, is he cleared, and we
absolved. Therefore, I desire you, whoever you are that are challenged for sin,
and the transgression of the Law, if ye would have a solid way of satisfaction,
and peace to your consciences, take with your guiltiness, plead no^, not
guilty, do no^ excuse, or extenuat, but aggravat your guilt; nay, in this you
may help Satan, accuse your selves, and say, that you know more evil in your
selves, then he does, and open that up before God, but in the mean time*
consider how it is managed above, plead thou also, sati^fied in Christ, though
guilty; and so, thou may say to thy accuser, if thou have any thing to object
against me, w^y I may not be saved, thoug^ a sinner, thou must go up to the
highest Tribunal to propone it, thou must come before my Judge and Advocate
above, but for as much, as thou do not ^ppear there, it is but a lie, and a
murdering lie.

Now, this is the way, that the Spirit advocats for us in our Consciences, John
14 and 15.26. (...) it is rendered here Advocate, the^e Comforter; both suit
well, and may be conjoined in one, and given to both, for both a^e comfortable
Advocats, Christ with the Father, and the Spirit with us; Christ is gone above
for it, and he sent the Spirit in his stead, as God has ^ deputy-judge in man,
that is, m^n^ Conscience, so the Son our Advocate with God, has ^
deputy-advocate to plead the cause in our Conscience, and this he does, partly
by opening up the Scripture^ to us, and making us understand the way of
Salvation in them, partly manifesting his own works* and Gods gifts in us, by a
super-added light of testimony, and partly by comforting us against all outward
and inward sorrows. Sometimes he pleads with the soul against Satan, not
guilty, for Satan is a slanderous and false accuser, and cares not calumniari
fortiter ut aliquid hareat, to calumniat stoutly, and he knows something will
stick. He will not only object known sins and transgressions of the Law, but
his manne^ is, to cast ^ mist upon the eye of the soul, and darken all its
graces, and then ^e brings ^o^th his process, that they have no grace, no
^aith in Christ, no love to God, no sor^ow for sin; in such a ca^e, its the
Spirits office, to plead it out to our conscience^, that we a^e not totally
guilty as we are charged, and this is not so much a clearing of our selves, as
a vindication of the free gifts of God, which ly under his aspe^sion and
reproach. Indeed, if there be a great stresse here, and for wise reasons the
Spirit forbear to plead out this point, but leave a poor soul to puddle it out
alone, and scrape its evidences together in the da^k, I say, if thou find this
too hand for thee to plead, not guilty, then my advice is, that ye wave and
suspend that question, yield it not wholly, but rather leave it entire, and do
as if it were not: suppose that article and point were gained against thee,
what would thou do next? Certainly, thou must say, I would then seek grace and
faith from Him who gives liberally, I would then labor to receive Christ in
the promises, I say, do that now, and thou takes a short and compendious way,
to win thy cause, and overcome Satan; let that be thy study, and he has done
with it.

But in any challenge about the trangression of the Law, or desert of eternal
wrath, the Spirit must not plead, not guilty, for thou must confess that, but
in as far as he drives at a further conclusion, to drive thee away from hope
and confidence, to despondency of spirit, in so far the Spirit clear^ up unto
the conscience that this does no ways ^ollow, from that confession of
guiltiness, since there is a Savior that has satisfied for it, and invites
all to come and accept him for their Lord and Savior.

SERMON XXVI^
1 John 2.1. -- We have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous.


THere i^ no settlement to the spirit of a sinner, that is once touched with
the (...) of his sin^, and apprehen^ion of the j^stice and w^ath of God, but in
some clea^, and dist^^^ct understanding the grounds of consolation in the
Gospel, and the method of sal^ation ^e^ealed in it. There i^ no solid
peace-giving answer to the challenge^ of the Law, and thy own conscience, but
in the advocation of Jesus Christ, the Savior of sinners, and therefore, the
Apostle propone^ it here, ^or the comfort of believers, who ^re incident to be
su^prized, through the suddenness of sin, and often deceived by the subtilty
of ^atan, whose souls desires, and sincere ende^vours are, to be kept from
iniquity, and therefore, they are made to groan within themselves, and
sometimes sadly to conclude against themselves, upon the prevailing of sin,
here i^ the cordial (I say) he presents to them, Jesus Christ standing before
the Bar o^ Heaven, and pleading his ^atisfaction, in the name of such souls,
and so suiting forth an exemption and discharge for them from their sins; so he
presents us with the most comfo^table a^pect, Christ standing between us and
Justice, the Mediator interposed between us and the Father, so that there can
come no harm to such poor sinners, except it come through his sides first, and
no sentence can pass against them, unless he succumb in his righteous cause
in Heaven.

The strength of Christ's Advocation for believers, consists partly, in his
qualification ^or the office, partly in the ground and ^oundation of his cause.
His qualification we have in this verse. the ground and ^oundation of his
pleading in the next verse. in that he is a propitiation for our sins, and upon
this very ground, his Advocation is both just and effectual.

Every word holds out some fitness, and therefore every word drops out
consolation to a troubled soul. [With the Father, speaks out the relation he
and we stand in to the Judge, he has not to do with an austere and rigid
Judge, that is implacable, and unsatisfiable, who will needs adhere
peremptorily to the letter of the Law, for then we should be all undone, if
there were not some pate^nal affection, and fatherly clemency and moderation in
the Judge, if he were not so disposed, as to make some candid interpretation
upon it, and in some manner to relax the sentence, as to our personal
suffering, we could never stand before him, nor needed any Advocate appear for
us: But here is the great comfort, he is Christ's Father, and our Father, so
himself told us, Ioh. 20.17. I go to my Father and your Father, and my God and
your God. And therefore we may be persuaded that he will not take advantage,
even that he has in justic^ of us, and though we be apprehensive of his anger,
in our failings and offenses, and this makes us often to be both afraid and
^shamed to come to him, measuring him after the manner of men, who are soon
angry, and often implacably angry, we imagine that he cannot but repel and put
back our petition^, and therefore we have not the boldness to offer them; yet
he cease not to be our Father, and Christ's Father, and if ye would have the
character of a father, look Ier. 31.18. how he stands affected toward ashamed
and confounded Ephraim, how his bowels move, and his compassions yearn toward
him, as his pleasant child: The truth is, in such a case in which we ^re
captives against our will, and stumbles against our purpose, be pities us, as a
Father does hi^ children, knowing that we are but dust and grass, Psalm.
103.13, 14, 15, 16, 17. See the excellent and sweet application of this
relation, by the Psalmist, if it stir him, it stirs up rather the affection of
pity, then the passion of anger, he pities his poor child when he cries out, of
violence and opp^ession. And therefore, there is great hopes that our Advocate
Jesus Christ, shall prevail in his suits for us, because he with whom he deals,
the Father, he loves him, and loves us, and will not stand upon strict terms of
justice, but rather attemper all with mercy and love. He will certainly hear
his welbeloved Son, for in him he is well pleased, his soul rests and takes
complacency in him, and for his sake he ^dopts us to be his children; and
therefore he will both hear him in our behalf, and our prayers too, for his
Names sake.

But this is superadded to qualify our Advocate, he is the Christ of God,
anointed for thi^ very pu^pose, and so has a fair and lawful calling to this
office, he takes not this honor to himself, but was called thereto of his
Father, Heb. 5.4. As he did not make himself a Priest, so he did not int^ude
upon the Advocat^ship, but he that said, Thou art my Son, called him to it. If
a man had never so great ability to plead in the Law, yet except he be
licenciat and graduat, he may not take upon him to plead a cause. But our Lord
Jesus has both skill and authority, he has both the ability and the office,
was not ^ self-intruder, or usurper, but the Council of Heaven did licenciat
him, and graduat him for the whole office of Mediatorship: In which there i^
the greatest stay and support for a sinking soul, to know that all this frame
and fabric of the Gospel was contrived by God the Father, and that he is
master builder in it, since it is so, there can nothing control it, or shake
it, since it is the very will of God, with whom we have to do, that a Mediator
should st^nd between him and u^: and he has such a mind to clear poor souls,
that he freely chooses and gives them ^n able Advocate, it is a great token
that he has a mind to s^ve as many as come and submit to him, and that he is
ready to pardon, when he prepares so fit an Advocate for us, and has not left
us alone to plead our own cause.

But the anointing of Christ for it, implies both (...) and (...), potentium,
and potestatem, the gifts for it, as well as the authority, and the ability, as
well ^s the office; for God h^th singularly qualified him for it, given him the
Spirit above measure, Isai. 61.1. He received gifts not only to distribute to
men, but to exercise for men, and their advantage, Psalm. 68.18. And therefore
the Father seems to interess himself in the cause, as it were his own, he
furnishes our Advocate, as if it were to ple^d the c^use of his own justice
against us, he upholds and strengthens Christ in our cause, a^ really a^ if it
were his own, Isai. 42.1.6. which expresses to us the admirable harmony and
consent of Heaven to the salvation of as many as make Christ their refuge, and
desire not to live in sin, though they be often soiled, yet there is no hazard
of the f^iling of their c^use above, because our Advocate has both exc^ll^nt
^kill, and undoubit^ble ^uthority.

Yea, he i^ so fully q^alified for this, that ^e is called Jesus, the Savior,
he is such an Advocate, that he saves all ^e pleads for. The best Advocate may
loss the cause, either through the weakness of its self, or the iniquity of
the Judge, but he is the Advocate and the Savior, th^^ never s^ccumb'd in his
undertaking for any soul, be their sins never so h^inous, their accusation
never so just and true, their accuser never so powerful, yet they who put their
cause in his hand, who flee in hither for refuge, being we^ried of the bond^ge
of sin and Sat^n, he ha^h such ^ prevalency with the Father, that their c^use
cannot miscarry, even when Justice it self seems to be the opposite party, yet
he h^th such m^rvellous success in his office, that justice shall ^ather meet
amicably with mercy and peace, and salute them kindly, Psalm. 85.10, 11. a^
being s^tisfied by him* then he come short in his undert^king.

But there is another personal qualification needful, or all should be in vain,
Jesus the righteous. If he were not righteous in himself, he had need of an
Advocate for himself, and might not ple^d for sinners, but he is righteous and
holy, no guile found in his mouth, without sin, an unblameable and u^spotted
high Priest, else he could not mediate for others, and such an Advocate too,
else he could not plead for others, Heb. 7.26. As this perfected his s^crifice,
that he offered not for his own sins, neither needed, so thi^ compleats his
Advocatship, and gives it a mighty i^fluence ^or his poor Clients, that he
needs not ple^d for himself. If then the Law cannot attatch our Lord and
Savior, can lay no claim ^o him, or change against him, then ce^tainly, ^ll
that he did, behoved to be for others, and so he stands in a good capacity to
plead for us before the Father, and to sue out a pardon to us, though guilty;
for if the just was delivered for the unjust, and the righteous suffered for
the unrighteous, much more is it consistent with the justice of the Father, to
deliver and save the unrighteous and unjust sinner, for the ^ighteous Advocats
sake. If ye seek me, then let these go free, says he, Ioh. 18.8. So he in
effect pleads with God his Father, O Father, if thou deal with me the righteous
One, as with an unrighteous man, then, in all reason and justice, thou must
deal with my poor Clients, though unrighteous, as with righteous men; If
justice thought she did me no wrong to punish me the righteous, then let it not
be thought a wrong to justice to pardon, absolve, and justify the unrighteous.

Now, if he be so righteous a person, it follows necessarily, that he has a
righteous cause, for an honest man will not Advocate for an unjust cause. But,
how can the cause of believers be said to be righteous, when justice it self,
and the Law, indites the accusation against them? Can they plead, Not guilty?
Or he for them? There is a twofold righ^eousnesse, in relation to a twofold
rule, a righteousness of strict justice, in relation to the first Covenant,
and this cannot be pleaded, that our cause is exactly conformable to the
Covenant of Works, we cannot, nor Christ in our name, plead any thing from
that, which holds ^orth nothing but per^onal obedience, or else personal
satisfaction. But yet, our cause may be ^ound to be righteous, in relation to
the second Covenant, and the rule and terms of it, in as f^r as God h^th
revealed his acceptance of ^ surety in our stead, and has dispensed with the
rigor of the Law, according to that new Law of grace and righteousness
contempered together; The cause of a desperate lost sinner may sustain before
the righteous Judge, and it is upon this new account, that he pleads for us,
because he has satisfied in our stead; and now it is as righteous and
equitable with Go^* to show mercy and forgiveness to believing sinners, as it
is to reveal wrath and anger against impenitent sinners.

I know there will be some secret whisperings in your hearts upon the hearing
of this, Oh, its true, it is a most comfortable thing for them whose Advocate
he is, there is no fear of the miscarrying of their cause above, but as for me,
I know not if he be an Advocate for me, whether I may come into that sentence,
We have an Advocate, etc. I confess it is true, he is not an Advocate for
every one, for while he was here, be prayed not for the world, but them that
were given him out of the world, Joh. 17. much more will he not plead for the
world, when he is above; He is ^ather witnessing against the unbelieving world.
But yet, I believe his Advocation is not restrained only to them that actually
believe, (...) neither his supplication was, Ioh. 17. But (...) he prayed for
them who should ^e^eafter believe, so he still pleads for all the elect, not
only to procure remission to the penitent, but repentance to the impenitent.
There is one not^ble ef^ect of the Advocation and intercession of Christ, which
indeed is common ^o the world, but particularly intended for the elect, that
is, the present suspension of the execution of the curse of the ^aw, by virtue
whereof there is liberty to offer the Gospel, and c^ll sinners to repentance:
No question, the spa^ing of the world, the forbe^^^nce and long-suff^^ing of
God tow^rd sinner^, is the result and f^uit of our Lords intercession and
advocation in He^ven, and so even the e^^ct have the benefit of it before they
believe, but it i^ so provided, that they shall never sensibly know this, nor
have any special comfort ^^om it, till they believe, and ^o Christ does not
plead for pardon to their sins till they repent* He pl^ad^ even before we
repent, but we cannot know it, yet, he pleads not that pardon he bestowed
before they ^epent, and so the saving effi^acy of hi^ Advoc^tion is peculiar
and proper in the applic^tion to believing ^ouls.

Now, consider (I say) whether or not thou be one that find^ the power of that
persuasion, my little children, I write to you that you sin not, etc. Can thou
unfeignedly s^y, that its the desire and endeavor of thy soul, not to sin, and
that thou art persuaded to this, not only from the fear and terror of God, but
especially from his mercy and goodness in the Gospel, this is one part of the
character of such as Christ^ advocation is actually extended to. Moreover,
being surprised with sin, and overcome beside thy purpose, and against thy
desire, do thou apprehend sin as thy greatest misery, and ^rr^ign thy self
before the T^ibunal of God, or art thou attached in thy own conscience, and the
L^w pleaded against thee, before the bar of thy own conscience, then, I say,
according to this Scripture, thou art the soul unto whom this comfort belongs,
thou art called of God, to decide the controversy in thy own conscience, by
flying up, and apealing to that higher Tribunal, where Christ is advocate, thou
may safely give over, and trust thy cause to him.

But on the other hand, O, how deplorable and irremedilesse is the condition of
these souls, who have no cause of this kind stated within there our conscience,
who are not pursued by Satan and sin, but rather at peace with them, amic^bly
agreeing with them, acting their lusts and will; you who have no bonds upon
you, to restrain you from sin, neither the terror of the Lord persuades you,
nor the love of Christ constrains you; you can be kept from no beloved sin, nor
pressed to any serious and spiritual labor in Gods service, and then, when you
sin, you have no accuser within, or such an one as you suppres^, and suffers
not to plead it out against you, o^ cite you before Gods Tribunal. I say unto
you, and al^s, many of you are such, you do not, you can not know, that you
have an interest in this Advocate. You can have no benefit, nor saving
advantage from Christ^ pleading, while you remain thu^ in your sin^. Alas, poor
soul^, what will ye do? Can you m^nn^ge your own cause alone ^^ though you
defraud and deceive your own consciences now, though ye offer violence to them,
do you think so to carry it above? nay, persuade your selves, you must one day
appear, and none to speak for you; God you^ Judge, your conscience your
accuser, and S^tan your tormentor standing by; and then, ^o to him that is
alone, when the advoc^te becomes judge* in that day blessed are all those that
have trusted in him, and used him formerly as an Advocate against sin and
Satan. But woe to them for ever, who would never suffer this cause to be
pleaded, while there was an Advocate.

SERMON XXVII^
1 John 2.2. And he is the propitiation, etc.


HEre is the strength of Christ's plea, and ground of his advocation, that he is
the proti^tion. The Advocate is the Priest, and the Priest is the Sacrifice,
and such efficacy this sacrifice has, that the propitiatorie-sacrifice may be
called the very propitiation, and pacification for sin. Here is the marrow of
the Gospel, and these are the breasts of consolation, which any poor sinner
might draw by faith, and bring out soul-refreshment. But truly, it comes not
out, but by drawing, and there is nothing fit for that but the heart, that
alone can suck out of these breasts the milk of consolation. The well of
salvation in the word is deep, and many of you have nothing to draw with, you
want the bucket that should be let down, that is, the affection^t meditation
and consideration of the heart; and therefore, you go away empty. You come full
of other cares, and desires, and delights, no empty room in your hearts for
this, no soul-longings, and thi^stings aft^r the righteousness of God: and
therefore, you return as you came, empty of all solid and true refreshment. Oh,
that we could draw it sorth to you, and then drop it into your hearts, and make
it descend into your consciences.

In these words, you may consider more distinctly, who this is, and then, for
whom he is made a sacrifice, and withal, the efficacy of this sacrifice, and
the sufficiency. Who this is, is pointed out as with the finger, (He is) that
is, Jesus Christ the righteous. The Apostle demonstrats him as a remarkable
person, as in his Evangel, the Baptist, does. Behold the Lamb of God which
takes away the sins of the World. And the Church, Isa. 63.1. takes a special
notice of this person. Who is this that comes from Edom? and that which makes
him so remarkable, is his strange habit after the treading the Wine Press of
wrath alone, that he was made a bloody sacrifice to pacify God, and to show
you, how notable a person he is, he is signally, and eminently pointed ^ut by
the Father, Is^. 42.1. Behold my servant, etc. As if he would have the eyes of
all men fixed upon him, with wonder and admiration; and for this end, he
singled him out from the multitude, by a voice from heaven, which testified
unto him particularly, this is my welbel^ved Son, hear him. Therefore the
Apostle had reason to say, 2 Cor. 5.14 That he is One for all, so notable an
one, that he may serve for all; He stands in more value, in the count of God,
the^ all mankind; all creatures are Ciphers, which being never so much
multiplied, come to nothing, amount not beyond nothing, but set him before
them, put Christ on the head of them, and he signifies more then they all do,
and gives them all some estimation in the count. And so they stand in Paul's
calculation, Phil. 3. which he makes with very great assurance and confidence,
yea doubtless I count all dung, but the superexcellent knowledge of Christ.
Christ is only the figure, that has signification, and gives signification to
other things.

But in this business, the consideration of the persons interessed, ( he, and
us,) makes us behold a great Emphasi^ in the Gospel: he, a propitiation, and
that for our sins, is ^ str^ng^ combination of wonders. If it had been some
other person, less distant from us, that w^r^ thus given for us, and standing
in our room, then we would have better understood the exchange. Things of like
wor^h, to be thus shuf^ed together, and stand in one ^nothers place, is not so
strange. But between the persons mentioned, him, and us, there is such an
infinite distance, that it is wonderful, how the one descend^ to the room of the
other, to become ^ sac^ific^ for us. O, that we could express this to our own
hearts, with all the Emphasis that it has; He, the Lord, and we, the servant^;
he, the King* and we* the poor beggars; He, the brightn^sse of his Fathers
glory, and we, the shame and ignominy of the whole creation; he, counting it no
robbery to be equal with God, and being in the form of God, and we, not equal
to the worst of creatu^es, because of sin, and being in the form of devils. Had
it been ^ holy, and righteous man for sinners, it had been a strange enough
exchange; but He is not only holy and harmless, but higher then the heavens.
O, what a vast descent was this, from heaven to earth, from a Lord to a
servant, from an ete^nal Spirit, to mortal flesh, from God to creatu^es, and to
descend thus far, for such persons, not only unworthy in themselves, such as
could not conciliat any liking, but such as might procure lo^thing, as is
described, Ezekiel. 16. and Romans 5.6. and 1 Pet. 3.18. While we were enemies, and
might have expected ^ commissioner from heaven, with vengeance against us.
Behold, how the mysterious design of love breaks up, and opens it self to the
world, in sending his own Son for us; and this is exceedly aggravated, from the
absolute freedom of it, that there was nothing to pre-ingage him to it, but
infinite impediments in the way to dissuade him; many impediments of his
affection, and many difficulties to his power, and then, no gain nor advantage
to be expected from such creature^, notwitstanding of such an undertaking for
them.

Now, herein is the strongest support of says, and the greatest incentive to
love, and the mightiest persuasive to obedience, that can be. I say, the
strongest support of ^aith; for, a soul apprehending the greatness and
heinousness of sins, and the inviolablenesse of Gods righteousness, with the
purity of his holiness, can hardly be (...)* that any thing can compe^^^^
(...) infinite w^ong that is done to his Majesty, though ordina^ily the small
and superficial app^ehen^ion of sin, makes a kind of facility in this, or an
empty c^edulity of the Gospel. The reason why most men do not question and
doubt of the Gospel, and of their acceptance before God, is not because they
are stablished in the faith, but rather because they do not so seriously and
deeply believe, and ponder their own sins, and Gods holiness; which if many
did, they would find it ^ gre^ter difficulty to attain to a solid and quieting
persuasion of the grounds of the Gospel: they would find much ado^ to settle
that point, of the ^eadinesse of God to pardon and accept sinners. But now, I
say, all this difficulty, and these clouds of doubts, will evanish at the
bright appea^ance of this Sun of Righteousness, that i^, at the solid
conside^ation of the glorious excellency of him that was given ^ ransom for
us, herein the soul may be satisfied, that God is satisfied, when he considers
what a person has undertaken it, even Jesus the righteous, the only Son of
God, in whom his soul delights, whose glorious divine Majesty puts the stamp
of infinite worth upon all his sufferings, and raises up the dignity of the
sacrifice, beyond the sufferings of all creatures: For there are two things
needful, for the full satisfaction of a troubled soul, that apprehends the
heinousness of sin, and hight of wrath* nothing can calm and settle this
storm, but the appearance of two things; First, of Gods willingness and
readiness to pardon sin, and save sinners; Next, of the an^werablenesse of a
ransom to his Ju^^ice, that so, there may be no impediment in hi^ way to
forgive. Now, let this once be estab^ished in thy heart, that such an one, so
beloved of God, and so equal to God, is the propitiation for our sin^, that God
has sent his only begotten Son, for this very business, unrequired, and
unknown of us; then, there is the ^learest demonstration of these two things,
that c^n be, of the love of God, and of the worth of the ransom. What
difficulty c^n be supposed in it, actually to pardon thy heinous sins, when his
love has ove^come infinite greater difficulties, to send one, hi^ own Son, to
procure pardon, John 3. Certainly, it cannot but be the very delight of his
heart to forgive sins, since he spared not his Son, to purch^se it; since he
has had such an everl^sting design of love, which broke out in Christ's coming,
and then, such a person he is, that the merit of his sufferings, cannot but be
an valu^ble and sufficient compensation to justice, for our personal ex^mption,
because he is one above all, of infinite highnes^^; and therefore, his lowness
has an infinite worth in it, of infinite fullness, and therefore his
emptin^sse is of infinite price; of infinite glory, and so, his shame i^
equivalent to the shame and malediction of all mankind. So then, wh^^so^ver
thou apprehend of thy own sins, or Gods holiness, that seems to render thy
pardon difficult, l^y but in the balance with that, first, the free and rich
^^pression of the infinite love of God, in sending such an one for a ransom,
and sure, that speaks as much to his readiness and willingness, as if a voice
spoke it just now from heaven; and then, to take away all scruple, lay the
infinite worth of his person, who is the propitiation, with thy sins, and it
will certainly outweigh them; so that, thou may be fully quieted, and
sati^fied in that point, that it is as easy for him to pardon, as for thee to
con^esse sin, and ^sk pardon: nay, that he is more ready to give it thee, then
thou to ask it.

But in the next place, I desire you to look upon this, as the greatest
incentive of affection: O, how should it inflame your hearts to consider, that
such an one became ^ s^crifice for our sins; to think that Angels has not such
a word, to comfort themselves withal; these innumerable companies of Angels,
who left their station, and were once in dignity above us, has not such glad
tidings to report one to another in their societies, as we have; they cannot
say, he is the propitiation for our sins. This is the wonderful mystery, that
blessed Angels desire to look into, they gaze upon it, and fix the eyes of
their admiration upon God manifested in the flesh, wondering at the choice of
mort^l man, before immortal spirits, that he is a ransom for them, and not for
their own brethren, who left their station; how should this endear him to our
souls, and his will to our hearts, who h^th so loved us, and given himself for
us; Has he given himself for us, and should we deny our selves to him,
especially when we consider what an infinite disparity is between the wo^th, and
difference in the advantage of (...) he gave his blessed self, a sacrifice, he
offered himself to death for us, not to purchase any thing to himself, but life
to us, and what is it he requires? but your base and unworthy self, to offer up
your lusts and sins in a sacrifice, by mortification, and your hearts and
affections, in a thanksgiving-offering, whe^ein your own greatest gain lies
too: for this is t^uly to find and save your selves, thus to quite your selves
to him.

The efficacy of this is holden out in the word, propitiation for our sins, the
virtue of Christ's sacrifice is to pacify Justice, and make God propitious,
that is, favorable and merciful to sin^ers. In which there are three
considerable things imported, one is, that sin is the cause of enmity between
God and man, and sets us at an infinite distance, that sin is a heinous
provocation of his wrath; another is expressed, that Christ is the
propitiation, in opposition to that provocation, he pacifies wrath, and then
conciliat^ ^avour, by the sacrifice of himself; all the expressions of the
Gospel, import the damnable and deplorable estate that sin puts man into:
Reconciliation imports the standing enmity and ^eid between God and men,
Propitiation imports the provocation of the holy and just indignation of God
against man, the ^ewel whereof is our sins: Iustificati^^ implies the lost and
condemned estate of a si^^ner, under the sentence and curse of the Law^ all
that is in the Gospel minds us of our orig^^nal, of the forlo^n estate he found
us into, no^ pitying us, nor able to help us. I would de^i^^ that this might
first take impression on yo^^ hearts, that sin sets God and men at infinite
distanc^ and not only distance, but dissaffection and enm^^ty, it has sown
the seeds of that woeful discord and kindled that contention, which if it be no
quenched by the blood of Christ, will burn to ever^lasting, so that none can
dwell with it, and ye^ sinners must dwell in it, there is a provoking quality
in it, fit ^o alienat the holy heart of God, and to incense his indignation,
which when once it is kindled, who can stand before it? Do but consider what
you conceive of wrongs done to you, how they stir your passions, and provoke
your patience, so that there is much ado to get you pacified, and what
heinousness must then be in your offenses against God, both in regard of
number and kind? Oh, that you could but impartially weigh this matter, you
would find, that in the view of God, all wrongs and injuries between men
evanish. Against thee alone have I sinned; that relation and respect of sin to
God, exhaust^ all other respects of injuries toward men. It is true, that his
Majesty is free from passion, and is not commoved and troubled as your spirit^
are, yet such is the provoking nature of sin, that it cries ^or vengeance, and
brings a sinner under the dreadful sentence of divine wrath, which he both
pronounces, and can execute, without any inward commot^on or disturbance of
spirit. But, because we conceive of him after our manner, therefore he speaks
in such te^ms to us. But that which he would ^^gn^fie by it, is that the sinner
is in as dreadful and damn^ble a condition by sin, as if the Lord were
mightily inflamed with anger and rage; the just punishment is as due and
certain, as if he were subject to such passions as we are, and so much the more
certain, that he is not. Now, I desire you to consider, how mightily the
heinousness of sin is aggravated, partly, by the quality o^ the person^, and
partly, by the con^ideration of his benefit^ to us. A great man resents a light
wrong heavily, because his person makes the wrong heavier. O, what do you think
the most High should do, considering his i^finit distance from us, his glorious
Majesty, and greatness, hi^ pu^e holiness, his absolute power and supremacy,
what vile and abominable characters of presumptions and rebellion do all these
imprint upon disobedience? Shall he suffer himself to be despised and neglected
of men, when there is no petty creature above another, but he will be jealous
of his credit, and vindicat himself from con^empt? and then, when ingratitude
is mingled, in with rebellion, it makes sin exceeding si^ful; and sinful sin
exceeding provoking, to proclaim open war against the holy and righteous will
of him* whom we owe our selves to, and all that w^ are, or have; To do evil,
because he is good, and be unthankful, because he is kind, to take all his own
members, faculties, creatures, and employ them as instruments of dishonor
against himself, there is here ^ewel ^or feeding everlasting indignation; there
is no indignity, no vileness, no wickedness to this; all the provocations of
men, how just soever, are in the sight of this, groundless and vain, like a
child's indignation; all are but imaginary injuries, consisting but in opinion,
in regard of that which sin has in the bosom of it against God.

But, how shall any satisfaction be made for the injury of sin? What shall
pacify his justly deserved anger? Here is the question indeed, that would have
driven the whole world to a nonplus, if once the Majesty and holiness of God
had been seen. But the ignorance of Gods greatness, and men's sinfulness, made
the world to fancy some expiations of sin, and satisfactions to God, partly, by
sacrifices of b^asts, partly, by prayer, and repentance for sins.

SERMON XXVIII^
1 John 2.3. And hereby we do know that w^ know him, if we keep his
commandments.


THis age pretends to much knowledge, beyond former ages, knowledge, I say, not
only in other natural Arts and Sciences, but especially in Religion; whether
there be any great advancement in other knowledge, and improvement of that
which was, ^o a further extent and clearness* I cannot j^dge; but, I believe,
there is not much o^ it in this Nation, nor do we so much pretend to it. But,
we talk of the inlargements of divine knowledge, and the breaking up of a
clearer light, in the point o^ Religion, in respect of which, we look on former
times, a^ the times of ignorance and darkness, which God winked at. If it were
so indeed, I should think the time happy, and bless the days we live into, for
as many sour and sad accidents as they are mixed withal: Indeed, if the
variety of Books, and multiplicity of discourses upon Religion, if the
multitude of disputes about points of truth, and frequency of Sermons, might be
held for a sufficient proof of this pretension, ^e should not want store enough
of knowledge and light. But, I fear that this is not the touchstone of the
Holy Ghost, according to which we may try the truth o^ this assertion; that
this is not the rule, by which to measure either the truth, or degrees of our
knowledge; but for all that, we may be lying buried in Egyptian-darkness, and
while such a light seems to shine about us, our hearts may be a dungeon of
darkness, of ignorance of God, and un^elief, and our ways and walk full of
stumbling^ in the darkness. I am led to intertain these sad thoughts o^ the
present time^, from the words of the Apostles, which gives us the designation
of ^ true Christian, to be the knowledge of God; and the character o^ his
knowledge, to be obedience to his commands; if according to this level, we
take the estimat of the proportion of our knowledge and light, I am aff^aid
lest there be found as much ignorance of God, and da^kness, as we do foolish
fancy that we have of light. However, to find (...) will be some breaking up of
light in our hearts, an^ to discover how little we know indeed upon a (...)
account, will be the first morning Star o^ that Sun (...) R^ghteousnesse, which
will shine more and more to the perfect day. Therefor we shall labor to bring
ou^ light, to the l^mp of this word, and our knowledge to this testimony of
unquestionable authority, tha^ ^aving recourse to the Law and the Testimony, w^
may find if there be light in us, or so much light as men think they see; if we
could but open ou^ eyes to the shining light of this Scripture, I doubt not,
but we should be able to see that which ^ew do see, that is, that much of the
pretended light of this age, is darkness and ignorance. I do not speak of
errors only, that come ^orth in the garments o^ new light, but especially, of
the vulgar knowledge of the truth of Religion, which is ^ar adulterated from
the true metal and stamp of divine knowledge, by the intermixture of the
gross darkness of our affections and conversation, as that other is from the
naked truth; and therefore both of them are found light in the balance of the
Sanctuary, and counter^eit by this touchstone of obedience.

To make out this examination the better, I shall endeavor to open these three
things unto you, which comprehend the words; 1. That the knowledge of God in
Jesus Christ, is the most proper designation of a Christian; hereby we know
that we know him, which is as much as to say, that we are true Christians. 2.
That the proper character of true knowledge, is obedience, or conscionable
pr^ctising of what we know; And then lastly, that the only estimat or trial of
our estate before God, is made according to the appearance of his work in u^,
and not by immediate thrusting our selves into the secrets of Gods hidden
decrees; Hereby we know, etc. Here then in a nar^ow circl^ we have ^ll the work
and business of a Ch^istian, his direct and principal duty is, to know God, and
keep his commands, which are not two distinct duties, as they come in a
religious consideration, but make up one complete wo^k of Christianity, which
consists in conformity to God. Then the reflex, and secondary duty of a
Christian, which makes much for hi^ comfort, is, to know that he knows God: To
know God, and keep his commands, i^ a thing of indispensible necessity to the
being o^ a Christi^n, to know that we know him, is of great conce^nment, to
the comfort and well-being o^ a Christian; without the first, a man is as
miserabl^ ^s he can be, without the sense and feeling of mise^y, because h^
wants the spring and fountain of all happiness; without the second, a Christian
is unh^ppy indeed for the present, though he may not be called miserable,
because he is more happy then he knows of, and only unhappy, because he knows
not his happiness.

For the first then, knowledge is a thing so natur^l to the spirit of a man,
that the desire of it is restless, and unsatiable; there is some appetite of
it in all men, though in the generality of people (because of immersednesse in
earthly things, and the predominancy of corrupt lusts and affections, which
hinder most men's souls to wait upon the more noble inquiry alter knowledge, in
which on^ a man really differs from a beast) there be little (...) no stirring
that way; yet some finer spirits the^ ^^e, that are unquiet this way, and with
Solomon give themselves, and apply their hearts to sea^c^ out wisdom. But, this
is the cu^se of man's curio^^^ty at first, in seeking after unnecessary
knowledge when he was happy enough already, and knew a much of God and his
works, as might have been (...) most satis^ying intertainment of his spirit; I
say for that wretched aim, we are to this day depriv^ed of that knowledge which
man once had, which was the ornament of his nature, and the ^epast o^ his soul;
as all other things are subdued under ^ curse for sin, so especially this which
man had, i^ lost, in seeking that which he needed not, and the tract of it is
so obscured and perplexed, the footsteps of it are so undiscernable, and the
way of it is like a Bird in the Air, or a Ship in the Sea, leaving us few helps
to find it out, that most part of men lose themselves in seeking to find it:
And therefore, in all the inquiries and searchings of men after the knowledge
even of natural things, that come under our view, there is at length nothing
found out remarkable, but the increase of sorrow, and the discovery of
ignorance, as Solomon says, E^cles. 1.18. This is all the Jewel that is
brought up from the bottom of this Sea, when men div^ deepest into it, for the
wisest of men could reach no more, though his bucket was as long as any mans^
Chap. 7.23. I said, I will he wise, b^t it was far from me; that which is far
off, and exceeding deep, who can find it out? Knowledge has taken a far
journey from man's nature, and has not lest any prints behind it to find it out
again, but, as it we^e, has flown away in an instant, and therefore, we may
ask with Job, 28. ver. 1.12 Surely there is a vein for the silver, etc. But
where shall wisdom be found? and where is the place of understanding? What
Vtopian Isles has she t^an^ported unto? that mortal men, the more they seek
her, they find more ignorance, the further they pu^sue, they see themselves at
the further distance; thus it is in these things that are most obvious to our
sense^, but how much more, in spiritual and invisible things is our darkness
increased, because of the dullness and earthiness of our spirits, that are
clogged with a ^ump of flesh; for God himself that should be the ^rimum
intelligibile of the soul, the first and principal object, whose glorious light
should first strike unto our hearts, Job testifies how little a portion is
^nown of him, when we cannot so much as under^tand the thunder of his power,
that makes such a ^ensible impression on our ears, and makes all the ^orld to
stand and hearken to it, then how much ^esse shall we conceive the invisible
Majesty of God? ^n natural things we have one vail of da^knesse in ^ur minds to
hinder us; but in the apprehension ^f God, we have a two^old darkness to break
through, ^he darkness of ignorance in us, and the darkness ^f too much light
in him. Caliginem nimiae luci^, which makes him as inaccessible to us, as the
other; ^he over-proportion of that glorious Majesty of God, to our low spirits,
being as the Sun in i^ brightness, to a night-Owl, which is da^k midnigt^ to
it. Hence is it, that these holy men who know mo^^ of God, think they know
least, because they see more to be known, but infinitely surpassing knowledge
pride is the daughter of ignorance only, and h^ that thinks he knows any
thing, knows nothin^ as he ought to know, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.2^ For
he that knows not his own ignorance, if h^ know never so much, is the
greatest ignorant, an^ it is a manifest evidence that a man has but a
supe^ficial touch of things, and has never broken the shell, or drawn by the
vail of his own weakness and ignorance, that does not apprehend deeply, the
unsearchableness of God, and his mysteries; but thinks he ^ath in some
measure compassed them, because he makes a systeme of divinity, or sets
down so many conclusions of faith, and can debat^ them against adversaries, or
because he has a form and model of divinity, as of other sciences, in hi^
mind. Nay, my bel^ved, holy Job attained to the deepest and fullest speculation
of God, when he concluded this, because I see thee, I abhor my self; and as
Paul speaks, If any man love God, he is known of God, and so knows God, 1 Cor.
8.3. From which two testimonies I conclude, that the true knowledge of God,
consists not so much in a comprehension of all points of divin^ty, as in such a
seriou^ apprehension and conception of the Divine Majesty, as inkindles and
inflames these two affections, love and hatred toward their proper objects;
such ^ knowledge as carries the torch before the affection; such a light as
shines into the heart, as Paul's phrase i^, 2 Cor. 4.6. and so transmitts heat
and warmness into it, till it make the heart burn in the love of God, and
loathing of himself; as long as a man does but hear of God in sermons, or read
of him in books, though he could determine all the questions and problems in
divinity, he keeps a good conceit of himself, and that knowledge pu^seth up,
and swell^ a man into a vain tumor, the venom of poison blows him up full of
wind, and self-confidence, and commonly they who doubt least, are not the
^reest of error, and misapprehension; and truly, whoever seriously ^eflects
upon the difficulty of knowledge, and da^knesse of men's minds, and the general
curse of vanity, and vexation that all things are under, so that what is
wanting cannot be numbered, nor that which is crooked made straight, he cannot
but look upon too great confidence, and peremprorienesse in all points, as upon
a race at ^ull speed, in the dark night, in a way full of pit^ and snares;
o^tentimes our confidence ^lowes not ^^om evidenc^ of truth, but the ignorance
of our ^indes, and is not so much built upon the strength (...) reason, as the
strength of our passions, and weak^esse of our judgments.

But when once ^ man comes to see God, and know ^im in a lively manner, then he
sees his own weak^esse, and vileness in that light, and cries out ^ith Isaiah,
Woe is me, I am a man of polluted lips, and he discerns in that light, the
amiablenesse and ^^velinesse of God, that ravisheth his heart after it, (...)
then (...) Jeremiah says, He will not glory in riches, or strength, or beauty,
or wisdom, but onl^ (...) this, that he has at length gotten some disco^^^^ of
the only ^ountain of happiness, then he will (...) think so much of tongues
and languages, of pro^^^^cying^, of all knowledge of controversies, neit^^^
gifts of body nor of mind, nor external append^^ces of providence, will much
affect him, he could content to trample on all these, to go over them to a
fuller discovery, and enjoyment of God him^^^^

If we search the Scriptures, we shall find fl^^^ they do not entertain us with
many and subtle (...) courses of Gods nature, and decrees; and proper^l^^ nor
do they insist upon the many perplexed ques^^^on^, that are mad^ concerning
Christ and his offi^^^ about which so many volumnes are spun ou^, to (...)
infinite distraction of the Christian world; they (...) not pretend to satisfy
your curiosity, but to (...) your souls; and therefore they hold out God (...)
Christ, as clothed with all his relations to ma^^k^nd, in all these plain and
easy properties, thi^ concerns us everlastingly, his justice, mercy, grace^
patience, love, holiness, and such like. Now, hen^^ I gather, that the true
knowledge of God, consi^^ not in the comprehension of all the conclusions tha^
are deduced, and controversies that ar^ discuss^^ ^^ent these things, but
rather, in the serious an^ solid apprehension of God, as he has relation (...)
us, and consequently in order and reference to the moving of our hearts, to
love, and ^dore, and reveren^e him, for he is holden ou^ only, in the^^
garments that are fit to move, and affect our hearts. A man may know all these
things, and yet not know God himself, for to know him, cannot be abstracted
from loving o^ him, they that know thy Name will trust in thee, and s^ love
thee, and so fear thee, for its impossible but that this will be the natural
result, if he he but known indeed; because there i^ no object more amiable,
more dread^ul withal, and more eligible, and worthy o^ choice, and therefore,
seeing infinite beauty and goodness, and infinite power and greatness, and
infinite sufficiency and fullness, are combined together with infinite truth, the
soul that apprehends him indeed, cannot but ^pprehend him as the most ravishing
object, and the most reverend too; and if he do not find his h^^rt suitably
a^^ected, it is an evident demonstration, that he does not indeed apprehend
him, but (...) idol. The infinite light, and the infini^ life, are simply one,
and he that truly without a dream, sees the one, c^nnot but be warmed and moved
by the other.

So then by this account of the knowledge of God, we have a clear discovery
that many are destitu^^ of it, who pretend to it. I shall only apply it to ^wo
sorts of person^, one is, of them who have ^t only in their memories, another,
of them who ^ave it only in their minds or heads. Religion ^as once the
legittimat daughter o^ judgment and ^ffection, but now, ^or the most part, it
is only ^dopted by men's memories, or ^ancies; the great^st part of the people,
cannot go beyond the repe^ition of the Catechism or Creed, not that I would
^ave you to know more. But you do not under^^^nd that, only ye repeat words,
without the sensible knowledge of the meaning of it, so that if the same matter
be disguised with any other form (...) words, you cannot know it, which
shows, tha^ you have no ^amiliarity with the thing it ^elf, bu^ only with the
letters and syllables that are the gar^ments of it. And for others that are of
great^^ capacity, yet alace, it comes not down to the hear^, to the affecting
and moulding and forming of it* a little light shines into the mind, but your
heart^ are shut up still, and no window in them: Corrup^ affections keep that
Garrison against the power of the Gospel; That light has no heat o^ love, o^
warmness of affection with it, which shows* that it is not a ray or beam of
the Sun of right^ousnesse which is both beautiful for light, and ben^ficial ^or
influence, on the cold and dead froze^ hearts of mankind, and by its
approaching, mak^^ a springtime in the heart.

But all men pretend to know God, such is the self-love of men's hearts, that it
makes them blind in judging themselves; therefore, the Holy Ghost* as he
designs a Christian by the knowledge of G^d, so he characterizeth knowledge by
keeping ^h^ Commandments; hereby we know, etc. So that Religion is not defined
by ^ number of opinions* or by such a certain collection of such articles o^
^aith, but rather by practice and obedience to th^^ known will of God. For as I
told you, knowled^^ is a relative duty, that is instrumental to some thing
else, and by any thing I can see in Scripture, is not principally intended for
it self, but rather for obedience; There ^re some science^ (...) speculative,
that rest and are complete in the mere knowledge o^ such objects, as some
natural sciences are. But others are practical, that make a ^urther re^erence
of all things they cognosce upon, to some practice, and operation. Now, perhaps
some may think, that the Scripture or divinity, is much of it mee^ly
contemplative, in regard of many mysteries in^olded in it, that seem nothing to
concern our practice. I confess much of that, that is raised out of the
Scriptures, is such, and therefore it seems a deviation and departure from the
great scope, and plain intent of the simplicity and easiness of the
Scriptures, to draw ^orth with much industry, and subtilty many things o^ mere
speculation and notion, dry and ^aplesse to the affection, and unedifying to
our practice, and ^o obtrude these upon other men^ consciences, as points of
Religion. I rather think, that all that (...) in the S^riptures, either
directly has the practice of Gods will for the object of it, or is finally
i^tended for that end; either it is a thing that pre^^ribeth our obedience, or
else it tends principally to ing^ge our affections, and secure our obedience;
and so these ^^rains of elevate discourses of God, h^^ nature, and properties,
of his works, and all the mysteries infolded in it, are directed toward this
end, f^^t^er then mere knowing o^ them, to ^^^age the heart of a believer to
more love, and ^^^e^ence, and adoration of God, that so he may be brought more
easily* and steadily to a sweet co^plyance, and harmonious agreement to the will
o^ God, i^ ^ll his ways. Nay, to say a little more, there are sundry Physical,
or Natural contemplations of the works of God in Scripture, but all these are
divinely considered, in reference to the ravishment of the heart o^ man, with
the wisdom, and power, and goodness of God, and this shows u^ the notable art
of Religion, to extract affection and obedience to God, out of all natural
contemplations; and thus true divinity engraven on the soul, is a kind of
mistresse-science, arthitectonica scientia, that serves it self of all other
disciplines, of all other points of knowledge, be they never so remote from
practice, in their proper sphere, and never so dry and bar^en, yet a religious
and holy heart, can apply them to these divine uses of engaging it self further
to God, and his obedience: as the Lord himself teaches us; Who would not fear
thee, O King of Nations, Jer. 10. And fear ye not me who have placed the sand,
etc. Jer. 5.22. So praise is extracted, Psalm. 105. And admiration, verse. 1.33.
So submission and patience under Gods hand often pressed in Job, therefore if
we only seek to know these things, that we may know them, that we may discourse
on them, we disappoint the great end, and scope of the whole Scriptures, and we
debase and degrade spiritual things, as far as Religion exalts natural things,
in the spiritual use: we transform it into a carnal, empty, and dead letter, as
Religion, where it is truly, spiritualizeth earthly and carnal things, into a
holy use, etc.

FINIS^

