THE TRUMPET Of the LORD Sounded forth unto these THREE NATIONS, As a WARNING
from the Spirit of Truth; especially unto Thee, Oh ENGLAND, who art looked upon
as the Seat of Justice, from whence righteous Laws should proceed. Likewise,
unto Thee, thou great and famous City of London, does the Lord God of Vengeance
sound one WARNING more into thine Ear, that (if possible) happily thou may
hearken unto him, and amend thy life before it be too late. With a Word of
wholesome Counsel and Advice unto thy King, Rulers, Judges, Bishops and Priests,
that they may prize the Day of their Visitation, before it pass away: As also,
a Word of Prophecy of the sore Destruction that is coming upon them if they
Repent not. Together with a few Words unto the Royal Seed, which is chosen of
God, and separated from the World, to do his Will for ever.

By one Who is a Sufferer for the Testimony of Jesus, in Newgate, ESTHER BIDDLE.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1662.

One Warning more from the Lord God of Vengeance, sounded forth unto Thee, Oh
City of London.
OH London, London! The dreadful Lord God of Everlasting strength, which
fails not, his notable, terrible, and dreadful Day is coming upon thee as at
noon day, and from it thou can not escape, neither can thou quench God's
Fire which burns as an Oven, which is overtaking thee: Oh the burden of the
Lord concerning this Treacherous and Backsliding City! Oh! Calamity, upon
Calamity, Misery upon Misery, Plagues upon Plagues, Sickness upon Sickness, and
one Disease upon another will the Lord God of Power bring upon thee, and the
Lord will destroy thee from being inhabited, unless thou do repent from the
bottom of thine heart, and lead a new Life, and abhor thy self in dust and
ashes; The Everlasting Counselor and Prince of Peace is come, and coming to
take Peace from thee, and to hide comfort from thine Eyes.

Oh! woe is me for thee, my heart is even broken within me, and mine Eyes as a
Fountain Flows forth before the Lord in thy behalf, that the bitter Cup which
thou and thy joining Sister has to drink, may be taken away, if it be his
will. Oh! that thou wouldt return unto the Lord as Nineveh did, who received
the Message of Cod; And the King came from his Stately Throne, and humbled
himself before the Lord, and his Soul was obedient unto the higher Power, which
is God, and all that had a being in that City, both Man and Beast, was covered
with Sackcloth and ashes; Three days and three nights they humbled themselves
before the higher Power, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who is
Governor amongst the Gods, even he repented himself of the Evil which he
thought to bring upon them, and accepted of their Humiliation.

Oh London! it would be well for thee to consider thy ways, and Worship, and
Religion, and search with the Light, and let the Light show thee whether thy
ways and Worship, and Law is pure, which is given forth in thee; if it be not
so, I pray thee as in Christ stead, let his Light lead thee into his way and
Judgments, and Worship, and Religion, which are holy, that thy Soul may be
saved in the Terrible Day of the Lord; for there are hundreds in thee, that do
not know their right hand from their left, neither can they discern the Power
of the Lamb from the Power of the Beast. Therefore has the Lord stayed his
fury from breaking forth upon thee; yet a little while and the Mighty hand, and
outstretched Arm of the Lord, which is stretched forth from Sea to Sea, will
come upon thee suddenly.

Oh thou City! says the Lord, who formed thee in the womb, and gave thee Life
and Breath, and has been as a tender Father and loving Nurse even from thy
Cradle; have not I made the Earth to bring forth her Corn, and Oil, and Wine
for thee? have I not clothed the Earth with Grass, and the dew to descend
upon it, and the softly Showers of Rain? have not I caused to distill upon thy
Flowers and Vines that they might give a Fragrant Smell unto thee? how have thy
Streets and houses been dressed with the glory of them? and have not thine eyes
beheld the Glorious Colors of the Flowers and Workmanship of my hands, the
which many of you shall see no more because of my destroying Angel.

Oh London! have not I who am the God of the whole World, placed a glorious
burning Fire in thee, which all the water in the Sea cannot quench, which gives
light in thee, and unto thee, and all Nations; which is my witness in every
man, which stands up for me against all manner of Sin? has not the Lord broken
up the Seals of the great deep, and opened the Fountain of Everlasting Life in
the midst of thee, to wash thee from thy Leprosy, and to heal thy putrefying
sores: Oh! thou art full of running sores, from the crown of thine head, to the
sole of thy foot, there is not a free place; have not I opened a well of pure
water to bathe and make thee white? I the Lord of Host has caused my Sons, and
Daughters, and Handmaids to leave both Father, and Mother, House and Land, Wife
and Children; and indeed all outward things, to come unto thee, rising up early
in sore Travels and labors, to warn thee, and call thee to Repentance, that
thou might be saved before my dreadful stroke be struck at thee, which will
not fail: have not they showed thee many things which has come to pass? I
have shown and am showing Signs in Heaven and Earth, in thee, which shall make
the keepers of the house to tremble; have not the dead been raised, the blind
made to see, the Lame to walk, the dumb to speak, the Leopards been cleansed in
thee? have not I made the Elements to melt with fervent heat, the Powers of
Heaven have been shook by me, the Sun have I turned into darkness, and the Moon
has lost her Light: The old Heaven, and the old Earth has the Lord made to
pass away at the Brightness of his coming; and as I have worked and suffered
in you, so I will do until I have made up my Jewels, which I am perfecting
through sufferings in thee; And until I have gathered my Seed from the four
winds in thee, into my Bosom, from whence it came, until then will I work, and
bear the burden of iniquity, even until the Seed suffering measure is come to
an end; and then shall not my eye pity, nor hands spare thee, but I will bathe
my sword in thy blood, and I will give thee blood to drink, even as thou have
done by my Innocent Lambs, even so will I do by thee; and as they have seen
their blood lie in thy Streets, so shall thou see thine, and the day will be
hot and terrible that is coming upon thee, unless thou do repent; I the
Everlasting God have looked down out of my Holy Habitation, and have beheld the
Sufferings of my People, notwithstanding the noble and worthy Acts that have
been done by my People in thee, how have thou Bruised, Beaten, and Knocked
down, Killed and Spilt the blood of my innocent Lambs, and haled them into thy
nasty Prisons until they die; Oh! the blood of the innocent is found in thee,
which cries aloud for Vengeance unto my Throne, Drunkenness, Whoredom, and
Gluttony, and all manner of Ungodliness, Tyranny and Oppression, is found in
thee; Thy Priests Preach for hire, and thy People love to have it so; Rioting
and ungodly meetings, Stage Plays, Ballad Singing, Cards, and Dice, and all
manner of Folly (not in corners only, but in the high places of thy streets)
wicked works and actions are not punished by thee, and hundreds may meet
together to commit folly, and take the name of the pure God in vain, and cause
his soul to mourn, and abuse themselves with his Creatures, until they can
neither go, nor hardly speak; Taverns and Alehouses are frequented day and
night, and are seldom disturbed by the Magistrates, or sent to Prison, or
Bruised, or Knocked down; but they that are Innocent and cannot lift up a hand,
or bear Arms for or against any man, and have no evil or hard thought in their
Hearts against any one, neither do they speak evil of things they know not, or
contemn Magistracy, but reprove Sin in the Gate, and ungodliness in the
Streets, and so have made themselves a Prey; these are they that are Punished
by thee, and whose Sufferings are deeper than any People upon the Earth besides.

Oh London! the sins of the old world is found in thee; art thou guilty or not
guilty? for thy time draws near, wherein thou must give an account unto me,
who am a dreadful and most terrible Judge, unto that Spirit which leads thee
into Persecution: Oh! thou art grown numerous, and very great, thy beam
reaches unto Heaven, and thy Glory unto the end of the Earth, and thou have
Crowned thy self with Dignity, and have built thy Nest among the Stars, and
sits as a Queen, thou have made thy self strong, and have said in thy Heart,
Thou shall not see Sorrow; thou see no Scarcity within thy Gates, but Fullness
within thy Palaces: But know this as from the Lord, thou bloody City, thou
shall know his terrible stroke, who is God Almighty; He will plead with thee as
in the Valley of Jehosaphat, even with the Fire of his Wrath, and the
glittering Sword of his Spirit.

Oh! thou famous and beautiful Harlot, who art beautified with the Glory of
Egypt, thou have played the Whore with many Lovers; Oh! thy Bed is defiled, and
thou have forgotten thy Creator, which makes my Soul to mourn; thy strength
shall become weakness, and thy Glory shall perish, thy beauty shall be turned
into ashes, and thy honor shall become contemptable, because thou art covered
with a dark Cloud of Sin and Transgression, and so cannot behold the Lord; Envy
has misled thy mind, which has caused thee to Imprison his Messengers, not
only them of thy own City, but Strangers, who has forsaken all to visit thee
in Bowels of Everlasting Love; and thus have thou rewarded them, which is
contrary to Christ's Command, which is to love Strangers.

In the Days of Old, they received Strangers and washed their Feet, and gave
them to eat and to drink; but thou briusest and knockest them down, and keep
them in Prison from their Families; and have said, The Parish will look after
them: Oh thou merciless City! do thou think to obtain Mercy from the Lord?
How many Families have thou separated, the Wife from the Husband, and the
Husband from the Wife, and the Mother from her Children, and the Servant from
the Master, not suffering them to see each other for a time; The Lord has
said, Cursed is He that separateth a man from his Wife; and dust not thou bring
that Curse and many more upon thy head? we have been found in no Plots nor
Risings, but have seeked the good of all Souls, and the Prosperity of all
Nations; in Olivers Days, and ever since we have been gathered out of the
Worships and Vanities of this City, and could not Bow unto Hammon, we have been
a suffering People, and nothing could be found against us but concerning the
Worship of our God, which must disanul all unjust Laws made by Man: The Medes
and Persians had nothing against Daniel, but concerning his Faith; and I know
Daniels Spirit lives amongst us.

Therefore consider what thou art doing, for in vain do thou set up Briers
and Thorns in Battle against the terrible God, for by the brightness of his
Coming shall they be burnt up; for assuredly the Lord will arise mightily for
his Seeds sake, for as a Lion roused up, is he come, who is the munition of
Rocks, and as a she Bear bereaved of her young Ones, will he roar and disquiet
all thy Inhabitants.

Oh London! God has a remnant in thee, which he has marked for his own, which
shall escape the Wrath that is to come; Glory, Glory, Songs of Everlasting
Praises be rendered unto the living God, who has not left himself without a
witness in thee; Oh London! If thou would return says the Lord Almighty, I
will heal thy Backslidings, and forgive thee all thy Sins; I will withdraw my
bitter Cup which I have filled full of my Indignation, and I will cover thee
with my Garment of Everlasting Love, and I will be married unto thee, even as a
young Man marries a Virgin, never to be separated; I looked down from the
Throne of my Glory, and I saw thy distressed Condition, thou art as a Sheep
without a Shepherd, as upon the Mountains of Prey, and art scattered hither and
thither, amongst the Clouds of Religions; thou know not which way to turn,
thou art like the Dove, thou can find no rest nor footing for the soal of thy
foot; thou art liable to be torn by the Woolfs, and devoured by the Lions; thy
TeachErs are removed into corners, And thou art disposessed of thy wonted
Houses and Service: Therefore says the Lord, do I pity thy ConDition, and if
thou will hearken unto me, who am near thee in thy Heart, and in thy mouth; at
thy down lying I am with thee, and in the night season I visit thee, and at thy
uprising I call thee to repentance: how many years have I born with thee, as I
did with the old World? but my Patience came to an end, and my Wrath waxed hot,
and so it will against thee, if thou will not hear my beloved Son, which I have
sent a Light into the World; and if thou will learn of the Light which shines
in thy Heart, then thou will be on heaps no more, neither will thy Teachers,
and Worships, and Church, be any more removed into Corners, but thou will be
built upon Christ, the Pillar and Ground of Truth, who is the Church of the
Firstborn; then will thou have Fellowship with the Lord, and thy-Glory, and
Crown, and Beauty shall never have an end, but thou shall be the Glory of the
whole Earth, and the Beauty of all Nations, and Kings, shall come to thy
rising, and Princes to the brightness of thy Glory; there is no City upon the
Earth can say as thou can in this latter day, for the Power of the Lord has
been shed abroad in thee, and thou have been visited more than any; therefore
prize the Son of the Lord, least thou art cast into utter Darkness; for it is I
the Lord that chaineth Leviathan, which no man can tame, who am God, and there
is none besides me; by my Wisdom the World was made, and the Heavens framed; I
created the Sea, and caused the Rivers to run into it, and have set the Sands,
as swaddling bands that it cannot over-pass; and this is my decree which I will
have sealed unto my people, I am the Quakers God, and will be with them unto
the end of this World, and in the end they shall be with me in my Glorious
Kingdom, where they shall be kept from their Persecutors, and lie down in joy,
peace and tranquillity, with the rest of my holy Martyrs, and Prophets, and
Apostles, in years past: and I am utterly against all that do oppose them, who
am a terrible God, and will bring the wickedness of the wicked to an end, but
the righteousness of the righteous does live with me.

This is my Decree, and it shall live for ever, and remain World without end;
and if thou can cause the rain from raining, or the Stars from shining, or
the Sun from going her Course, or giving light to the Nations, then may thou
alter my Decree with my People, whose seed shall be for number as the sand upon
the Sea shore, and for Multitude as the Stars of Heaven, and they shall shine
in Glory more brighter than the Sun at noon day, in the Firmament of my Power,
when the generation of the wicked, shall be cast into the Lake, which is
prepared of God, for the King of darkness and his Subjects.

The Trumpet of the Lord sounded forth unto England, Scotland* and Ireland,
with a Word of wholesome Advice and Counsel to the King, Rulers, and Judges
thereof.
OH King! this is my Counsel unto thee, and thy Rulers and Judges; Oh! hearken
unto the Light of Christ in your Consciences, that it may bear rule in your
hearts, that you may Judge for the Lord, and oppression may be expelled in your
Dominions. Oh! that you would do Justice, and love Mercy, and walk humbly with
the God of heaven, then would the Lord give you length Of days, and a long
life, Peace and Plenty shall be in your Dominions, every one shall sit under
his own Vine and Fig Tree, and none shall make them afraid, joy and
tranquillity shall be in your Palaces; this shall you see and know to be
accomplished, if you will leave off oppressing the Righteous, and set the
Captive free.

Oh ye Rulers, Judges, and Justices, and all People high and low! be it known
unto you from the mighty Judge of Powerful Majesty, that he is risen, who will
scatter Rulers in his anger, and will pluck down Kings in his wroth. Oh! the
anger of the Lord waxes hot against all workers of iniquity, and he will set
his oppressed seed free, which cries unto him for deliverance; and know this,
what cruelty soever be in your hearts against us, the Lord will confound it and
bring it to nothing; for the Lord is on our sides, and we fear not
Imprisonment, Banishment, Fine or Tortures, or whatever the wrath of man can
inflict upon us; for our hearts are firmly fixed upon the Lord, and we are
freely given up in Body, Soul, and Spirit to suffer for God's Cause: Oh you
Rulers! if the Lord suffers you to Banish us, I know that the Lord will go
along with us, as he did with Abraham in a strange Land, but know this, we
shall leave a seed behind us, which shall be your tormentor, and shall witness
for us when we are gone.

Oh Lord! I commit our case unto thee, who art faithful, and keeps Covenant
for ever, and I know thou will fight our Battle, and plead our cause with the
mighty on earth, who would destroy us from being a People if thy Power did not
preserve us; Glory and Honor be given unto thee, who has compassed us about
with songs of everlasting praises; and we may bless the hour and time that
thou raised up a People in the North, even a dreadful and terrible Army, who
Marched swiftly in thy Power through the Nations, and by them we were
convinced, and turned toward the Lord, and they shall be the dread of all
Nations, and God has crowned them with an everlasting Crown, which neither Men
nor Devils shall be able to take from them.

Oh you Rulers and Judges of these Nations! do you think to overcome us or make
us yield by keeping them in Prison, which you think are our Teachers, and
Ringleaders? nay, Christ is our Teacher, and he cannot be removed into a
corner, who is the Ancient of Days, and will cause us to increase daily, and
to grow as Calves in the stall; we are not like the World, who must have a
Priest to Interpret the Scriptures to them, and when he is removed, they are
scattered and knows not what to do; but my friends, we witness the Scriptures
fulfilled, who has said in the latter days, He would pour out his Spirit upon
Sons and Daughters, and they should Prophecy; and they shall all be taught of
me, and great shall be their peace, and in righteousness shall they be
established: So the Lord does not speak unto us in an unknown Tongue, but in
our own Language do we hear him perfectly, whose voice is better than life; and
for this cause does the unlearned hate us, and the uncircumcised revile us,
because we cannot own the Teaching that is of this World, but that which comes
immediately from God, and that is pure and refreshes the Soul, and holds up
the head in the day of Battle, and it causes us to meet together, to worship
the Lord as we ought to do; and Oh you Rulers, and People! it is in vain for
you to strive against us, for the God of heaven is with us.

Oh England, Scotland and Ireland! but more especially thou O England, that art
the most fruitful and famous Land, in which the Lord has been pleased to make
manifest his Life and Power, Beauty and Glory, more than in any Nation under
the Heavens; in so much, that he has raised his sons and daughters from death
to life, and has made them bold and valiant Soldiers for his Testimony, which
he has given them to bear forth unto all Nations; and by the Glorious and
Powerful Word of Life, which has proceeded out of their mouths, has thy
Judges and Rulers been convinced of the evil of their way, and have been made
to confess to the Truth, both Priests and People, both High and Low, Rich and
Poor, has the Lord visited in this day of great Salvation, and everlasting
love; so that none could plead inorance, but many like Demas has denied the
Truth, and Embraced this present evil World: And now Oh England! will the Lord
try and prove all thy Inhabitants, from the King that sits upon his Throne,
unto the Beggar that sits upon the dunghill, even all sorts of professors
and profane; Oh! the Fire is kindled, and the Furnace is even hot, in the
which your works and worships, Faith and Religion must be tried, and that which
will not remain in the Furnace, must be consumed by the Fire of the Lord; for
the most high and Glorious King is a trying and purifying his Children in the
Furnace, as Jerusalem, that they may come forth as pollished Silver, and well
refined Gold; and he has brought many through the Furnace, and has set them
as Pillars in his house, to bear forth a Valiant and Noble Testimony of what
they have seen, tasted and handled of the Word of Life, unto thy inhabitants,
and unto the whole World, that they may fear that dreadful God, who made Heaven
and Earth, in whose sight the whole World is but as the drop of a Bucket, and
at whose presence the heavens shall wax old as a garment that moths have eat,
and the Element shall pass away with a great noise, the Earth shall be
dissolved, and all things therein shall mourn, and the souls shall fail before
him which he has made.

Oh! let your King and Queen, Dukes and Earls, Lords and Ladies, Judges and
Rulers, and all Bishops, Deacons, Priests and People in these three Nations,
and all the World, consider their ways, worships, and religions, and fear and
tremble before the mighty God, who has the hearts of Kings and Rulers in his
hand; times, and seasons are with him, the Dominions of the World are at his
disposing, who is the high and lofty One, and does Inhabit Eternity; what is
the Pope or the Kings of the Earth, will he not bring them to judgment, and
turn them to dust again from whence they came?

Oh you high and lofty ones! who spends God's Creation upon your lusts, and
does not feed the hungry, nor cloth the naked, but they are ready to perish in
the streets; both old and young, lame and blind lies in your streets, and at
your Massehouse doors, crying for bread, which even melts my heart; and
makes the soul of the righteous to mourn: did not the Lord make all men and
women upon the earth of one mould, why then should there be so much honor and
respect unto some men and women, and not unto others, but they are almost naked
for want of Clothing, and almost starved for want of Bread? and are you not
all brethren, and all under the Government of one King? Oh repent! least the
Lord consume you, and be ashamed, and cloth the naked, and feed the hungry,
and set the oppressed free.

Oh King! thou art as head under God over these three Nations, and the Lord
has set thee as overseer, to see Justice and true Judgment Executed in thy
Dominions; Oh! let all unjust Laws and unrighteous Decrees made in thy days,
and before thy days, be all disanul'd and made of none effect, and henceforth
let there be good and wholesome Laws Established, that all the honest-hearted in
thy Dominions may worship the God of their Life, without any molestation; and
if thou decreest any thing, let it not grieve the Lord, for the Lord God of
Israel looks for better fruit at thy hands than he did of all that are gone
before thee; for in the time of Ignorance God winked, but now is the glorious
Light of the Morning risen, and God calls all men every where to Repentance.

Oh you Rulers, Priests, and People of these three Lands! I most humbly entreat
you to learn Wisdom before it be too late, and prudence before it be hid from
your eyes. Oh! leave off your old ways and Worships, and observing Days,
Times and Seasons, and learn the new and living way, which is the way in the
Wilderness, though a wafering man or a fool shall not err therein; this calls
for Holiness and Purity, without which you cannot see the Lord; therefore
consider you are but Men, and made of the dust of the Earth, and you know not
how soon you may return to your long homes, and shall be seen no more; have you
the length of your life, or the number of your days in your own hands? have
you the command of Death, or can you stay its stroke? nay, you are but as
potsheards broken by the hand of the Potter, you are here to day and gone to
morrow, your Beauty is as the grass, and your glory as the Flower thereof, cut
down by the hand of the Mower; your Crown is mortal, and will fade away; Ah,
poor dust and ashes, why do you persecute us even to Death, for no other cause
but for worshipping the God of Heaven? Oh! do you think that the Lord is such a
one as your selves? or are you so vain to believe, that he winks or joins with
you in Persecuting, Knocking down, and spilling our blood in your Streets; and
Murdering of us in your Prisons? nay, nay although he has suffered such things
to be done, for the Trial of our Faith, and the filling up of the measute of
your Iniquity, which is near full; Now will I arise, says the dreadful and
terrible God, who am clothed with Vengeance as with a Robe, and with Zeal as
with a Garment, and I will tear and devour, and for Sions sake I will not be
quiet, and for my beloved Jerusalem I will not be silent, but I will roar and
thunder forth my voice out of my Holy Mountain, and the Beasts shall tremble,
the Earth shall be as a smoke, the tall Cedars shall fall, and the stirdy Oaks
shall be plucked up by the Roots, and all things of this World shall be afraid;
the Bats shall go into their Holes, and the Lions into their Dens, when the
Lord appears in his Beauty, to make Inquisition for blood, then shall your
hearts fail you for fear of those things that are coming upon you; in that
Terrible Day, all your lovers will do you no good, and your familiars will
stand afar off; then must you be left to the Judge of Judges, where you shall
see the Book of Conscience opened, where your Indictments will be read at
large, and he will Judge you according as your deeds shall be. Oh then! if you
have not done Justice, nor loved mercy, or did the thing that was Just in the
sight of the Lord, then shall you be Banished from the presence of the King of
Heanen for evermore, into utter darkness, where is weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of Teeth, and you shall be a stink to Ages to come.

Oh! blessed and happy will it be for those Judges, and Rnlers, and Poople, who
has clean hands, and pure hearts, and have not joined with the wicked in
persecuting the Innocent; surely there reward will be great in Heaven.

My Friends, I was once of this Religion which is now in Power, I was signed
with the sign of the Cross, and baptized into the Faith; my Godfathers and
Godmothers Promised and Vowed, that I should forsake the Devil and all his
works, the Pomps and Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful lusts of
the Flesh, and that I should keep Gods Holy Will and Commandments all the days
of my life; and when I was young, my Father had me Bishop'd, thinking thereby
to gain a blessing for me: I spent many years in Oxford, where the carriages of
the Scholars, did trouble me in that day, they were so wild; after the best
sort of Religion and custom of the Nation, was I brought up; then the Lord drew
me to this City, where I applied my heart both Evening and Morning, and at noon
day, unto reading and hearing the Common Prayer; when there was but one place
of Worship left in this City, I went to it, and when there Books were burned, I
stood for them, for my heart was wholly joined unto them; and when the King's
head was taken off, my heart and Soul was burdened, that I was even weary of my
Life, and the Enemy waited to devour me; then did the Lord take away my hearing
that I was deaf as to all Teachings of Men for a year; then that Faith which I
was baptized in, did no good, for all that the Man and Women had promised, and
vowed, I should do, I could not forsake the Pomps and Vanities, and sinful
lusts of the Flesh I run into; and they stood always before my eyes, my cry
was continually unto the Lord, that I might put off that body of death, which
hindered me from his presence; then did the Lord carry me to a Meeting of the
People called Quakers, where I was filled with the dread and Power of the Lord,
and it raised my Soul to bear Testimony to the Truth, and after a little season
the Lord set my sins in order before me, and every idle word which I had spoken
was brought to my remembrance, where I received a just reward from the Lord,
and so came to have Peace of Conscience with my Savior, which I never could
obtain whilst I walked with those People.

Oh my Friends! I can truly say, ever since I was a Child, the witness of God
pursued me, and what ever I did, I had no Peace in this worship, or Service,
which is now in being; it tired and vexed my tender Soul, to see what a sad
estate I was in; but now Glory be to the Lord, I am set at Liberty from this
vain Religion, which never profited me at all; and would you have me to conform
to this Religion, which keeps the Soul in the grave? hay I shall never
conform unto this worship whilst I have breath, but shall bear my Testimony
against it, for I know the powerful Cod is risen to throw it down, and woe be to
all that uphold it.

Oh your Rulers! be it known unto you, if you will not do Justice and ease the
oppressed, and set the Captives free, the Lord will overturn you, and destroy
you from being a People, as he has done in years past; for his sword is in his
hand, and it will cut you down, unless you do repent, ye shall likewise perish.

One Warning more to the Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Friars, and Jesuits.
OH! Woe be unto you Bishops, Priests, Deacons, Friars, and Jesuits, and all
other Officers under you, for the Lord is risen in Power, yea, he is risen in
dreadful and terrible Wrath; Oh! I have seen, I have seen this Night, the
dreadful Flames which the Lord God will cast you into; Oh! your
Communion-Tables which you sacrifice upon unto Devils, and not unto the living
God, your Altars which you bow down unto, and make an Image of, will the
dreadful Lord of Vengeance overthrow in his fiery Indignation; your Surplices
and Tippets, and all your loathsome Robes, which you dress your selves withal,
which are like unto a menstrous Cloth before the Eye of the pure Jehovah, he
will rent them all off, who is the Bishop of our Souls: Oh you Bishops,
Priests, Deacons, Friars and Jesuits! once more will the Judge of Heaven and
Earth plead with you, because you are a blood-thirsty Generation, you are a
building of Zion with blood, and Jerusalem with Iniquity, as your Forefathers
did in the days of old: Therefore will the Lord of the Harvest cast you heaps
upon heaps, as stones in the street, and as mire in the highway; the Lord of
Heaven and Earth loathes your Worships; your Singing, and the Noise of your
Organs does the Lord abhor; and instead of your instrument of music,will the
lord make you howl and lament bitterly, in so much that the Earth shall be
astonished, and your Downfall shall be so great, that Nations shall fear and
tremble before our God; your Communion and Union is with Devils and unclean
Spirits* and not with the powerful God, which creats a new Heaven, and a new
Earth; and this shall you see fulfilled in its time and season; for the Lord
has determined your utter Destruction, both Pope and Bishops, both root and
branch, from off the face of the Earth: Oh it hastens, it hastens, and Wrath
will not stay.

In this glorious day, in which Zion is rayed in beauty bright,
To stand in her strength against this dark Night;
Whose Clouds are so many, and Sky so dim,
That Zions Beauty can hardly be seen;
But the Lord is risen in this his glorious Day,
To sweep Bishops, PrElates, and Clouds away.
Babylons Destruction is very near, let all the World fear for evermore.

A few Words unto the Royal Seed, which is chosen of God, and separated from
the World, to do his Will for ever.
OH Friends! blessed are you of the immortal God, who are centred in the City
of refuge, which is made without hands, which indeed is the lot and inheritance
of the unspotted Lambs, whose Hearts are after nothing but the Glory of God,
which is the Crown and Cause of rejoicing of his Sons and Daughters, who do
inhabit in and about this City, who are come to the Church of the Firstborn,
and to the innumerable company of Angels, and to the SpIrits of just men made
perfect; Oh! my beloved Ones, your Life is above this City, and denies the
Vanity of it, and it loathes the Worship that abounds in it; Oh! it is well with
you, for the Lord has made you up as his Jewels and Pillars in his House for
ever: Oh! my Friends, who do inhabit in and about this City, who are convinced
of the Abominations and Uncleanness that is committed in her; I am moved of the
dreadful and terrible God to warn you, that you do not join with her Spirit,
neither in word nor thought, for assuredly the day of her pain and sorrow is at
hand, in the which she shall weep bitterly, and shall make all astonished, who
are from the Power and Life of God; Oh my Friends! keep to the Power and to the
Judgments of the just Judge, that that eye and thought that would look out at
her Glory, and that would think to sit at ease in her Borders, let that be
judged and accursed for ever, that would have any Life below the Son of God: Oh
my Friends! call to mind the years past, how precious and fresh was the Love of
the Lord in your hearts, when he first visited you in this City? Oh! did you
think any thing to dear for him? could you not have laid down your Lives for
his Truth? were you not glad when you were robbed of your Glory, and bereaved
of your choicest Jewels even for the Lords sake? Oh my Friends! I can bear you
record in the sight of God, who was a fellow feeler of your Integrity and
Faithfulness unto the Lamb.

Oh! you tender Ones, with whom my Soul has Union, keep to that pure and
undefiled Love, even to the measure of God's Grace, that it may teach you
continually to deny all things that is of this World, and unclean in this City,
that you may stand every one in your measures, as Lights in this dark City; for
the Lord of the Heavens and the Earth, has placed you in and about this City,
as he has done the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and there you in the Firmament are to
stand fixed in him, who is the glorious morning Star, you must not wander least
you cease to give Light in the place, where you are set; for remember they that
wandered were reserved in Chains of Darkness until the Judgment of the great
Day, which is near at hand, to give unto every one a just reward.

Oh! you beloved Friends of God, this I have to say unto you from the mighty
God, although you are set as marks for the mighty men to shoot at, and as a
byword in the mouth of the Beggars, and are reckoned the worst of all People,
not worthy to live upon the Earth; yet know this, that the Covenant of the Lord
is made with you, and his Power and Life shall not depart from you, nor from
your Seed for evermore; Glory, Praises, and Power eternally be rendered unto
the Lord, who reigns in the Heavens, who never alters, but lives a God for
ever. Oh my Friends! this is the earnest desire of my Soul, that we may keep
close unto our Maker, even to bear a pure, holy and faithful Testimony in our
Generation, against all that do oppose the Lamb in this City, as the Prophets,
and Apostles, and holy Martyrs, have done in their day, against all false Gods,
Worships, and Worshippers; we have the same Spirit to fight against in this
City, as they had in the World before: Therefore my Companions, and fellow
Sufferers, have we not need to stand up for God's Cause, for the which we have,
and are called to bear forth our Testimony, in so deep Sufferings as we have
come through? and if we are to drink of a deeper Cup, yet let us be thankful
unto the Lord of the Harvest, for it is for the gathering of the Exiles into
Abraham's bosom, and the poor thirsty Souls unto the place of broad Rivers:
Oh! rejoice, and give Praises unto God on high, who has begun his Work, and
will finish it in his time: Oh my Friends! let us keep clear of this City, let
us not taste nor handle any of her Works, for her works are Vanity and falsehood,
the Poison of Aspes is under her tongue, and Deceit is in her hands; therefore
it is good that we bear a faithful Testimony for the most high against this
Generation, and if our lot be to die, and we appointed to be Slain for the
same, it will be well with us, our Souls shall be received into the bosom of
the Father, where we shall glorify God day and night, and shall be free from
Oppression: Oh dear Hearts! be not afraid of the threatenings, or proud looks of
vain Man, which is but like a bubble, he can but kill the Body, but cannot kill
the Soul; Oh! be continually prepared to die, that none may be afraid of Death
when it comes, for it may come suddenly, when ye are asleep, or in the
twinkling of an Eye; Oh! that then the rest which God has prepared for his
People, may be entered into, or else Misery and Pain will be found, which is the
Reward of the Slothful and Disobedient; the Way of the Righteous is Life
Eternal, and the Path of the Just is a burning and a shining Light, which our
Eyes have seen, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life, by which we
have been preserved unto this day; and I am certain if thousands of thousands
should rise up against us, they shall not prevail, for the Lord the mighty
Jehovah is with us, and will fight our Battle, and plead our Cause with the
mighty Ones of the Earth; we need do nothing but stand still in Gods Salvation,
which is the saving health of all Nations, and will plead with all Tongues and
Kindreds of the Earth, who do oppose Him; And his Lambs and Babes, who walks
in his holy Path, which is Life to the upright in heart. Oh! the Wisdom, Power
and Glory of the unlimitted God, what tongue is able to declare it, or what
heart can conceal the infiniteness of the Riches of the Judge of Heaven and
Earth? it even fills the Heart with Love and Life, and over-shadows the Soul
and Mind with the Glory and Beauty of the unspotted Lamb, which takes away the
Sins of the World; Oh! the weight of his Glory, I am even swallowed up with the
incomprehensibleness of it; Oh! the height and the depth of it is past finding
out, by the Wisdom of this World; Oh my Friends! is not that God amongst us,
who created Adam in Innocence, and Eve of the Dust of the Earth? did not he
cause Abraham to leave the Land of his Nativity, and go into a strange Land?
and did he not compass him about with Strength and Power, and gave him Favor
in the sight of the People? and is he not the same God still? Yes, although the
Earth may wax old, and Heavens vanish away as smoke, and the Elements with
fervent heat, yet he remains unchangeable, who is our head; Oh! What is all the
World before him, who is Judge of Judges, and King of Kings? it is but as the
drop of a bucket in his sight; and a thousaud Years is but as one day with our
God: Therefore it is expedient for all Friends to watch and wait, and Pray
least they enter into Temptation: And this have I seen my beloved Friends this
night as from the Lord, that there must be a watching and waiting for the
Invisible Power of the Lamb to arise, to move, to pray, to speak, and then it
will be a pure and a holy Sacrifice which the Lord will accept: Oh my Friends!
let us whilst we have breath sacrifice our Sighs, Tears and Groans, Prayers,
and Fastings, upon God's holy Altar, that a sweet Savor may ascend into the
Nostrels of the Most High God, that so we may receive a Blessing from Heaven
for evermore: And this the Lord has put into my Heart, and I cannot forbear
but Write, that if any prays or speaks unless in the holy Power of the
dreadful God amongst us, it is as water spilt upon the ground, and it will
bring a Curse rather than a Blessing; the Lord looks for a holy and clean
Sacrifice from us, above all the People in the World, because he has raised up
his own Life in us, and chosen us to be his People, and the Lot of his
Inheritance, and the Place where his Honor dwells, is with us; and I know
Sacrifices have been offered by us, and is to this day, which the Lord's Soul
loves, and He does delight to make us his choice; He is our God, and we have
none in Heaven nor in Earth to plead our Cause but He, that Suffered, and laid
down his Life on Earth, but now sits in Majesty and Glory in the highest
Heavens, who is our chief leader and guide, and does lead us into his Power to
meet together, and to stand in awe and Sin not; and if (Friends) we should not
meet together, we should Sin against God, and should miss of his Presence, who
has said, Where two or three are met together in my Name, there will I be
(says the Lord) and this is my Testimony as a Witness to this thing, I never
went to any Meeting since I knew the Truth, even from the first Meeting to this
day, but I was filled with the Living Power of the Lord; Oh! the sweet showers
that does descend from the presence of the Lord, and the pleasant rains that
falls from his Throne like silver drops, it does distill upon our Hearts,
whilst we are in our Meetings in the Name and Power of Jesus, who is amongst
us, and has raised us, and is raising us from the Dead; and has, and is
quickening our mortal Bodies, that they may be like unto his glorious Body; he
has and does turn us from Darkness to Light, from Satan's Power to his own: Oh!
can we forget or refuse such glorious Benefits, which we have received from the
God of our Life, in our Meetings together? I know my Friends, you are not
unsensible of this great gain, by losing the Love of the World, to meet
together with the King of Heaven and Earth, whose presence is better than Life:
Oh! how has he opened the Sluice of Everlasting Mercies and Love, that it has
poured down from the crown of our head, to the soal of our foot, so that we
have been washed throughout by the endless Goodness of the Lord in our
Meetings: And this is my mind, and I hope you are and will be of the same with
me, and I do believe the Lord will carry me on to the end; I had rather die the
cruellest Death that ever was, or can be devised by man, than to neglect or
abstain from Meeting together in his Name; for I know who ever does it,
neglects their own Salvation, and the day of their Visitation. Oh my beloved
Friends! if we Suffer Imprisonment, or loss of Life upon the account of meeting
together, let us rejoice, for it is for Christ sake that we are Persecuted, for
great is our reward in Heaven; Oh! Christ is our meat and drink, he is become
our Table in the midst of our Persecutors, our Cup does overflow, when we are
in close Prisons, Christ is with us, who cannot be exposed from us by the Wrath
of Wicked men; when we are brought out of Prison, and had before the Rulers,
then Christ goes along with us, and teaches us what to say; He is a Mouth,
and Wisdom, and Utterance, we take no care what to do; when we are sent back
again to Prison from the Rulers, if it be into a nasty Hole or Dungeon, our
Savior goes with us, and he teaches us Patience, and Meekness, and pours
upon our Head and Hearts his holy Oil, which makes us sing for joy of heart,
that he has counted us worthy to Suffer for his name: So my Friends, if they
fight against us, they fight against God, for God is with us, and it is his
Cause we stand for, and Suffer in Goods, Body and Spirit: And therefore seeing
it is so weighty a thing that we lie at stake for, we value not what Men, or
Devils, Spirits, or Angels can do unto us, for our Hearts and Spirits are
firmly fixed upon the Lord and his Cause; and for Meeting together as long as
we are moved of the Lord, the which will be I hope as long as we have breath;
Oh all you my Friends! who are young and tender, and all you who are looking
abroad to see what will become of us, and cannot join with us, because of
Persecution, have a care, I warn you in the Presence of the dreadful God, stand
not in that slippery place, least the day of Mercy pass over whilst you stand
gazing, and Repentance be hid from your Eyes, then would you give the whole
World if you had it, for one hour to repent it, but then it will be too late:
Therefore I beseech you not to look at us, but to mind your own Salvation, and
what the Lord says unto you by his witness in you; for every one in the day of
God's account shall answer for himself, and receive a reward according to their
Works; the Lord is no respecter of Persons, the King as well as the Beggar
shall know the stroke of God's hand, when the Book of Conscience is opened,
wherein their Sins are written as with the point of a Diamond; and I know that
there is nothing can blot them out but the blood of the Lamb; and therefore do
we utterly deny and abhor any Pardons from the Bishops, for I know they cannot
pardon themselves, nor keep their own Soul alive; our confidence is in God, who
has tried our Reins and searched our Hearts by his living Power; Glory
everlastingly be given unto the higher Power, to whom our Souls are subject,
and in whom we live, and shall do world without end.

Oh Zions King! thy Beauty bright,
Has filled our Hearts with great delight;
Thy City pure our Eye does see,
In which alone dwells Purity:
Oh! rejoice ye Saints of Zion all,
For God has saved you from the Fall:
It Is no matter if our Bodies dye,
Our Souls shall live Eternally,
With God who rules in the Heavens High:
A City pure God has prepared for us,
When our Enemies has laid us in the Dust:
Thy Day and Beauty does declare,
An open war with Sin and Sinner;
Who does thy Name, defame.
O Lord unto thy Glorious name all knees shall bow
Of things in Heaven, and things below;
Thy Seed Royal, that Glorious plant,
Which thou into the World has sent,
A Light, is content with Punishment.
From Sinners Hands, who like Iron Bands
Against thy own Seed stands,
Their Hearts is bent, with full consent, thy seed to rent.
O Lord thy Seed to Heaven does cry for Delivery,
In this Day of Perplexity;
Thou righteous Judge, thy suffering Lambs in Prisons lie,
Until they die for thy Testimony,
Which shall remain when all is slain,
Which does increase, our Joy and Peace.
Oh! blessed be the day our Sins were washed away,
And we set free, to follow thee,
From the Gulf of Misery, who art a God of Purity:
O Lord we will serve thee, whilst we have breath,
For thou art Judge of Heaven and Earth;
Honor and Glory is thine alone,
And be it rendered to thee for evermore.
FINIS.

