AN USEFUL Case of CONSCIENCE, Learnedly and Accuratly Discussed and Resolved.

Concerning Associations and Confederacies with Idolaters, Infidels, Heretics,
Malignants, or any other knoun Enemies of Truth and Godliness.

BY Mr. HUGH BINNING, Sometime Professor of Philosophy in the Universitie of
Glasgow, andthereafter Minister of Gods Word at Goven.

Useful for these times: And therefore published for the benefit of all those,
who desire to know or retain the sworn to Principles of the sometimes famous
Church of Christ in SCOTLAND.

Printed in the Year M.DCXCIII.

That the Present Public RESOLUTIONS And Proceedings, do Import a Conjunction
with the MALIGNANT PARTY In the Kingdom, and of the Sin, Danger and Scandal of
that way.
Sect. 1. That there is a Malignant Party still in the Kingdom.
IN the Entry to this business, the Importunity of not a few makes it needful
to speak somewhat to a Question which unto this time has been unquestioned, as
beyond all exception, That is. Whether there be yet in Scotland a Malignant
Party? Or, Whether there be at this time any Party who may and ought in
Reason and Christian prudence be reputed and looked upon as Malignants and
disaffected to the Covenanted Cause of God? It seems the more needful to speak
somewhat of this. First, Because some Ministers are become slack and silent in
this point, as if now there were no need of Watchfullness and Warning against
any such party. 2. Because the expressions of many of the people of the Land
run that way, that there are now no Malignants in Scotland, and that it is but
a few Factious Ministers that will still keep up these names, that they may
more easily with, others of their oun stamp weaken and divide the Kingdom for
carrying on of their oun ends. 3. Because the Inclinations and Resolutions of
the Public Judicatories in reference to most of the Party who carried that
name, does clearly import that they do think they are no more to be looked upon
as Malignants, as appears from several of their papers; especially the Letter
written for satisfaction to the Presbytery of Sterling. And therefore this must
be laid down as the Foundation of what follows. That there is still in the
Land, not only a few persons; but a Party considerable for Number, Power and
Policy, who are Malignant and dissaffected to the Covenant and Cause of God. We
would join heartily in the desire of many, that these and other such like
Odious names of different parties and factions were taken away; But we cannot
join in the Reasons of this desire which are ordinarily given. We wish the name
Malignant were Obsolete and antiquate, if so be the thing it self, which is
such a root of bitterness, were extirpated out of the Church; yea though the
thing it self remained, if men would hate it for it self, and account it more
odious and hateful than the name imports, we would be glad it were no more
heard of: Because we find this prejudice by all such Appropriated Names, that
People generally Looks upon that which goes under that name as the only sin:
and as if there were not that root of bitterness in all which it grows out of
in any; and so conceive themselves good Christians if they fall not under that
hateful Appellation of Malignants. But seeing this bitter fruit of Enmity
against Godliness and the Godly, comes to more ripeness and maturity in many of
this Generation than in others, who yet are unconverted: And seeing it has been
the Custom of the Church of God in all Generations, to discriminate many more
Ungodly and knoun haters of Godliness and his people from the common sort of
natural people, and to comprehend them under these names, of Wicked, of
Malignant, of Enemies, as may appear in the old Testament, especially in the
Psalms. And more especially in our days, that name has been appropriated to
such who have declared themselves in their words or Actions to be haters of
Godliness and the power thereof, and his People. Or have arisen to the height
of Actual Opposition against these; we cannot be blamed for using such a name
still, for distinctions sake. We proceed to some Reasons.

(1.) The constant and Continued Proceedings of the General Assembly and their
Commissioners for many years past unto this day.

There is not almost any of their Warnings, Declarations or Remonstrances,
which does not Assert this, and warn against it, and that not only before the
Kings home coming and taking of the Covenant; but also since that time, as is
evident by the Declaration emitted by the Commission in July Last, the
Declaration of the Assembly it self a little after, by the Declaration emitted
at Sterling since the defeat at Dumbar, the Causes of the Fast upon that
defeat, the Remonstrance to the King at Perth after his escape, together with
the Remonstrance given in by them to the Parliament: All which do clearly hold
forth this Truth.

(2.) Take Christ's Rule, By their fruits ye shall know them. There is a great
Party in the Land that adhere to Malignant Principles, bring forth Malignant
fruits, and tread Malignant Paths. As may appear in these instances. (1.) A
great many of these who have been formerly engadged in such Courses, and under
Church Censures, did lately Conjoyne together and rise in Arms, and drew away
the King from the Public Counsels of the Kingdom, and refused to Lay down Arms
till they got Conditions agreeable to their mind, which Course of theirs was
justly declared by the Commission to carry upon it the stamp of Malignancie in
an Eminent way. (2.) The seeking to promove and Establish an Arbitrarie Power
in the Person of the King, as it has been still the Endeavor of the Malignant
Party, so it has been always taken by the Kirk of Scotland as one of their
Characters, and that there is a Party now in Scotland, who still hold that
Principle and drive this Design of Arbitrary Power is evident. First, Because
these same men who were Lately in Arms, did not only take up Arms upon the
Kings simple Warrant, and without the Knowledge and contrare to the mind of the
Committee of Estates; But also received the Act of Indemnity, and laid down
Arms, in obedience to the Kings Majesty, without so much as mentioning or
Acknowledging the Committee of Estates, as it is to be seen in a Paper
Subscrived by them, and in the Remonstrance of the Commission of the General
Assembly dated at Perth Novr. 29. 1650. The words whereof are these. Your
Lordships would Likewise Consider, Whether it does not Encroach upon the
present Constitution of Government of this Kingdom, and will not Involve your
Lordships in the Guilt of these men's Sin, if You shall accept upon their Laying
down of Arms, Merely upon the Profession of Obedience to the Kings Command,
without any expression of their respect and obedience to the Committee of
Estates, or any Acknowledgment of their sin and Offense: which we hope you will
look upon as a most Unnatural and unseasonable rending of the Kingdom, in the
time of this heavy Oppression by a common Enemy, and exposing the Kingdom to
all misery and ruin. 2. It may be remembered that in the first Model of the
Aggreement which was made at Bredah, that clause which does concern the
determining of Civil matters in the Intervall of Parliament, by such as are
Authorized by Parliament for that effect, and the Kings Majesty hearkening to
their Advice, was wholly left out. And any who are aquainted with expressions
and Inclinations of sundry Great Ones in the Land, are not ignorant of their
dislyke of a Committee of Estates, and their desire to have the Administration
of Matters in the Intervall of Parliament wholly devolved upon the Kings
Council. And the same spirit that would draw business from the Committee to a
Cabinet Council, would at last draw them from the Parliament it self: Because
that is also, if not more crossing to private Interests and designs than a
Committee of Estates. 3 Instance. There is a Party in the Land who as in their
hearts they do envy, and in their tongues do Traduce men that have been
steadfast and faithful in the Covenant and Cause of God; so do they Endeavor
to the utmost of their power, to bring them into Disgrace and Contempt, and to
get them removed from Power and Trust; And upon the other side study with no
less diligence to get places of Power and Trust in the Army and elsewhere
filled with such as either have been open enemies or secret underminers. 4
Instance. Be there not many who oppose the Kingdom of Jesus Christ and Work of
Reformation? not only by holding up that old Calumny of Malignants, concerning
the seditious and factious humor of Ministers, and their stretching of
themselves beyond their line, and by mocking all faithful and free preaching
of the Word, and by bearing down the power of Godliness, deriding and hating
all the lovers and followers thereof, by being impatient of the discipline and
Censures of the Church; But also looking upon the Government of the Church with
ane evil eye: And strongly enclyning, some of them, that Church Government be
put in the hands of a few Prelates; most of them that it may be wholly devolved
upon the Civil Government. 5. Instance. There is still a party in the Land that
endeavor to have the state of the Question altered, and to have Religion left
out of the same; That it being stated upon Civil Interest, they may take to
themselves a greater Latitude in their way of carrying on business. This was
holden forth to be the design of the Malignant Party in the year 1648. as
appears in the Declaration of the Commission that year in March: and there was
a Necessary and Seasonable Warning given against it by the Commission in their
Declaration of the date July 1650.

(3.) Reason. Besides these who are Excommunicated, there be yet in the Land a
Considerable number of persons of Chief note, who do still ly under Censures of
the Church, some because of their Accession to the late Unlaufull Engadgment,
others because of their Accession to the late Course of Rebellion about the
time of the Kings escape from Perth; beside many others of less Note.

(4.) We suppose that it is most certain and unquestionable, that there was
lately a Malignant Party and faction in the Land very numerous and powerful.
How many men of blood, Murderers of their brethren, as unnatural and barbarous
as the Irishes they once joined with against their Country? How many have
watched all opportunities for troubling the peace of the Kingdom, and rejoiced
in the day of its Calamity? How many were the Oppressors of these who Called on
the Lords Name in the time of the Engadgment? What multitudes of profane and
Ungodly mockers of all Godliness and Haters and Persecuters of the Godly,
suarming every where? If this be of truth, as it is indeed; We may say, who
has heard such a thing? Who has seen such a thing? Shall a Nation be born at
once? And have they so soon Learned to do well, who have been so accustomed to
do evil? When did this Catholic Conversion fall out? and by what means? Has
the act of Indemnity and Pardon such Influence, to Justify these men from all
their Butcheries and Barbarous Cruelties? The adding of three Thousand to the
Church in one day, was miraculous in the days of miracles. But Behold a greater
miracle than that, in the days when miracles are ceased! many Thousands added
to the Church of the friends of the Cause of God in one day, and that not by
preaching, which is the power of God unto Savation; Not by spiritual weapons
which are mighty through God: But by the Carnal weapon of ane Act of
Indemnity, and the example of one Man, the Kings Conjunction in the Cause,
which at the best has not such evidence of reality as to convince any, and
change their mind. Sad experience, and the Constant Testimony of the Church of
Scotland proves, that Malignancy is a weed that has deeper and stronger roots
than to be plucked up so easily; and that though there be some, yet they be but
few in the Land who have been once engadged in that way, that have really and
indeed abandoned and come off the same.

The point shall more appear by taking off objections that are made to the
Contrary. It is objected. 1. That these who were formerly esteemed Malignants,
did oppose the work of God because they could not be persuaded in Conscience,
That the Covenant and Cause were Contrived and Carried on in a Warrantable way,
those who were most isntrumental in it, seeming to them not only to act
without Authority, but against Authority. But so it is, that the King has now
joined in the Covenant and added his Authority to it, and therefore it needs not
be feared that these men will any more oppose it; Nay it may be expected, they
will no less Zealously promove the ends thereof than they did formerly oppose
the same.

Answer. This Argument supposes some things that are false, some things at
best doubtful, and some things dangerous. It supposes Tuo falsities. 1. That
it was a ground and principle of Conscience and respect to the Kings Authority
that made these men to oppose the Covenant and (...) of Reformation. If it was
the Conscience and Conviction of the Unwarrantablness of it for the want of
Authority, that stirred them up to oppose the Covenant and Cause; Then why did
they subscrive it and join in the defense of the same against the King? 2. It
supposes that the only ground, why they did oppose and undermine the same,
was, because the King was of a Contrary mind and refused to join in the
Covenant, and Ratify the same by his Authority, which also is false; for there
were several other Grounds and Causes of so doing besides this. We shall name
a few, leaving the rest to a further scrutinie. 1. The Natural enmity that is
in the hearts of all men against the Lord and his Anointed, his work and his
people, and the power of Godliness, which does effectually work in the
Children of disobedience. 2. An Enmity against the Power of Parliament and
Laws. 3. An Enmity against the Union of the Kingdoms. 4. An Enmity against the
Power of Presbyteries and the Discipline of the Church. To which are opposed, A
sinful desire of breaking the bonds, and casting away the Cords of the Lord
and his Anoynte; A desire to establish an Arbitrary Power and unlimited
Monarchy; A desire to Establish a Lordly Prelaticall power in the Persons of a
few, or to have the Government of the Church wholly dependent on the Civil
Power; A desire to dissolve the Union of the Kingdoms, that they may be thereby
weakened and less able to resist Malignant Designs against Religion and
Liberties; A desire to live loosly without bands in regard of personal
Reformation.

2. It supposes something that is at best doubtful, to wit, That the King has
really joined unto the Cause of God, there being small Evidences of it, and
many presumptions to the Contrary. Especially. 1. His bringing home with him
into the Kingdom a number of eminent, wicked and known Malignants. His
countenancing of, and familiar conversing with such in this Nation since his
coming, and Correspondence with others of them abroad. His deserting of the
Public Counsels of the Kingdom, to join to a Party of bloody and wicked men
raised in Arms with his Knowledge and by his warrant. 2. His not being
convinced of any guilt in his Father, because of his opposition to the Cause
and Covenant, notwithstanding of all the blood of the Lords people shed by him
in that opposition. For verifying whereof, we appeal to the Knowledge of some
Noblemen and Ministers who have occasion to know his mind, and to be serious
with him in this thing.

3. It supposes something that is of very dangerous Consequence 1. That these
men's Zeal to the Cause or against it, does ebb and flow according to the Kings
being against it or for it. Since they follow the Cause, not for it self but
for the King, will they not desert it when the King forsakes it? Can they be
accounted real friends of the Cause who are knoun to favor it only ad nutum
Principis? As the Comaedian ait, aio, negat, nego. Is it not all one to follow
the Cause for the King and for a man's oun Interest and advantage? both are
alike Extrinsick and Adventitious to the Cause, both are alike Changable.
Eccebulus under Constantius was a precise Christian, under Julian a persecuting
Apostate, and then again under the next Christian Emperor became a Christian:
And it is like if he had outlived that Emperor till a Heathen succeeded, he
should have Paganized the second time. 2. That very principle that is pretended
to unite them to the Cause is in the self most dangerous, both to the
Privileges of Parliament and Liberties of people, and to our Religion beside.
Their principle of opposition was, They conceived the way followed could not be
warrantable without the Kings Consent and warrant. That people might not
vindicate their oun just Rights and Liberties, and their Religion, without the
Kings Concurrence, or against Him. Now then, the principle of their conjunction
to the cause must be this, Because it is now clothed with Authority which it
had not before, and which now makes it warrantable. This principle therefore
includes in the bosom of it, the establishing of Illimited and Absolute Power
in Kings, the Unlawfulness of defensive wars against Tyranny and Oppression,
the Kings Negative voice, and the dependent Power of Parliaments upon his
Pleasure: All which are principles destructive of the Cause and our Liberties,
and the very characters of our Enemies from the beginning. Thus they have
changed their way but not their principles, and are now the more dangerous that
they may not be looked upon as Enemies, but as friends. Seeing it is manifest,
that it is not the love of the cause that constrains them, and they know, it
was not that principle that persuaded the King, but mere Necessity, contrare to
his oun inclination. May we not certainly expect, that according to their
principles they will labor to set at freedom the King whom they conceive
Imprisoned and captivated by the power of necessity within the limits and
bounds of a regulated Monarchy, and to loose from him all these chains of
Involuntary Treaties and Agreements, and rigid Laws and Parliaments, that he
may then act in freedom and Honor according to his oun inclination and theirs
both. And then farewell Religion and Liberties.

Objection 2. The most part of these who were formerlie Malignant, have now
repented of that sin, and make profession of their resolution to adhere to the
Covenant and Cause of God, and to bestow their lives and Estates in defense
thereof: Therefore they are not now to be esteemed Malignants.

Answer. We would wish from our hearts that we had no answer to this Argument,
then should we yield the point in hand, and yield it cheerfully, that there is
no Malignant party now in Scotland. But, alas! that we have so much evidence
convincing our consciences and persuading them to deny what is objected. We
acknowledge some have indeed repented, and such we desire to embrace and
receive with all tenderness and love, as Godly Christians, worthy to be
entrusted: But yet the most part of them do still bring forth the same
Malignant fruits. Their ungodly and wicked practices testify to their face that
they have nothing to do to take his Covenant in their mouth, seeing they hate to
be Reformed. The late rising in Arms, contrare to their solemn and particular
engadgments; Their bearing down and reproaching the Godly, and such as are of
known Integrity; Their studying to fill places of Trust with men formerly
Enemies or Underminers; Their continuing in their profane and loose walking.
All these are more convincing evidences of their retaining their Old
principles, than any extorted confessions or professions, for sinister respects
and ends, can be probable signs of their repentance and change.

We desire these things to be remembered. That the Engadgment was Carried on,
not by Open and professed Enemies; but such as had made public profession of
their repentance, and were thereupon admitted to trust. 2. That upon
consideration of the hypocrisy and instability of these men appearing in that
and other particulars, the Kirk and Kingdom of Scotland did take upon
themselves strait Bonds and Engadgments to exclude such from Trust, until such
time as they had given real evidences of the reality of their Repentance, and
of abandoning their former Principles and ways; of which this Kirk was to
judge Impartialie as in Gods sight. 3. That it has been confessed and preached
by many Godly Ministers, and was given in by sundry in the time of the search
of the Lords Controversy against the Land, in Novr. last at Perth, and has
been bemoaned and regrated by many of the people who feared God; That there is
a great deal of sin and Guilt Lying on the Kirk of Scotland, for the sudden
receiving of Scandalous persons, especially Malignants, to the public
profession of Repentance before there was in them any real evidence of their
forsaking their former Principles and ways.

Objection 3. None are now to be esteemed Malignants, in reference to
Employment and Trust, but such as stand Judiciallie Debarred by Kirk and State
to be so: for certainly, men are not to ly under the burden of so great a
reproach, upon the private whisperings and Common reports of others; otherways,
honest men may be wronged, and there shall be no end of confusion, or
terminating this Controversy, there being no certain Rule to walk by in it.

Answer. We Acknowledge that surmisings, whisperings and reports of others are
not sufficient, but that a Rule is needful. All the Question will be, what is
that Rule? And though the Judicial debarring of Judicatories be not all, but
it must be Ruled by another Rule, yet are we willing to take it for so much:
for even that will prove there is yet a Malignant Party in Scotland: Because
many are standing under Church Censures. These involved in the Late Rebellion,
are standing under a sentance of the Commission, declaring them to be following
their old Malignant designs, few of them are yet admitted to profession of
Repentance. We desire it may be Considered, that the Rule holden forth by the
Kirk of Scotland, 1648. for admitting of Persons to Trust, is of larger extent
than Judicial sentence or Censure. To wit, that they be such against whom
there is no just cause of exception nor jealousy. 2. Albeit a Judicial trial
or Censure be indeed necessary, for inflicting punishment or Censure upon men:
Yet it is not necessary for avoiding Association with them, or debarring them
from Trust. 3. If none were to be accounted Malignants, but they who are
Judicially* declared to be such, what needed the Kirk of Scotland have
frequently taken so much pains, to give Characters to know them by; there being
so clear and Compendious a way beside? Has there not been always in the Land
secret underminers as well as open Enemies? And has not faithful men avoided
the one as well as the other? 4. The General Assembly 1648. Declared the
taking in of these who followed Iame Grahame to be Association with Malignants,
though most part of them were then Released from Church Censures.

Section 2. That the Present Public Resolutions, expressed in The Commissions
Answer to the Parliaments Quaere, and the Act of the Levy, do not exclude
that Party.
IN the next Place, Upon supposall and proof, that there is a Malignant Party
and faction still in the Land; It is needful to examine, whether the
exceptions contained in the Answer of the Commission to the Parliaments Quaere,
and insert into the Act of Levy, be so Comprehensive as to include all that
Party. The exceptions be four. First, Such as are excommunicated. 2. Such as
are Forfaulted. 3. Such as are Notoriously profane or flagitious. And 4. Such
as have been from the beginning, and continues still, Or at this time are,
obstinate Enemies and opposers of the Covenant and Cause of God. That these are
not Comprehensive of the whole Malignant Party in the Land, appears.

First, The Rules of the General Assembly framed for the exclusion of all
such, as ought not to be employed in our Armies, are far more Comprehensive.
The Rule is for employing of such only as are of a Christian and blameless
Conversation, which is turned over by their Commissioners into a Negative, All
that are not notoriously profane or flagitious. Another is, For entrusting only
these who have been of knoun Integrity and Constant Friends to the Cause of
God, from the beginning. Which is also turned over into a Negative; All that
have not been Constant Enemies. All such, by the answer, are Capable of some
Trust and Employment. The Rules agreed upon by the Assembly, and Ratifyed by
Act of Parliament Anno 1649. And renewed upon occasion of this Invasion, was,
That no Officer nor Soldier that followed James Graham, should be permitted in
the Army; Nor any Officer that was on the Engadgment, except such as upon Real
evidence of Repentance, were Particularly Recommended by the Church, Nor any
Common soldier, but upon sufficient Testimony of his Repentance. Now since it
is proved, that the most part of all such, continues still Malignants, and
retains their old Principles* And that the bulk and body of the people are
Called forth by the Public Resolution, without such exceptions as were
conceived before necessary, for the exclusion of that Party; It follows
clearly, that the Malignant Party is not excepted in the present Resolutions.

2. Few of these who were in the Late Rebellion, and declared, not many days
since, to be following a most Malignant design and Course, are Contained under
these exceptions; Because very few of them are Excommunicated or Forfaulted:
and though more of them be indeed flagitious and Profane; Yet very few of them
will fall under the Compass of the Exception, Notoriously flagitious. Many
wicked things will be said to concur to make up a Profane man; some acts will
not serve; a habit must be demonstrated: and though that were showed; Yet there
must be also Notoriety of it, which imports a man to be famous for Loosnes and
Profanity; and there be none almost, if any, in the Land, who have been
professed Enemies from the beginning, and Continue so to this day. James Graham
was not such. It is the matter of our sad Complaint, that whilst many are
Enemies, they make Profession and Semblance of friendship. 3. These exceptions
do not Comprehend any who are under Censure for Malignancy or Profanity,
except such as are under the sentance of Excommunication; And that even such
may not be excluded, Lest the Rule be transgressed, by admitting and employing
Excommunicated Persons. It Is withal resolved, that these Persons shall be
relaxed from that sentence, that so they may be immediately in the same
Capacity of Employment with others, whatever formerly has been their
Opposition or Defection. Some exceptions must be made, for Honesty and Credits
sake: But the nearest and readiest way is taken to make them Ineffectuall. 4.
These exceptions do not only not reach these who were upon the Unlawful
Engadgment, and have not as yet given sufficient proof of their Abandoning
their Malignant Principles and Courses; But come not the Length of
Comprehending these men of blood who followed James Graham, and in the most
barbarous and Cruel way, shed the blood of their oun Brethren and Gods people;
because the most part of these are not Ex communicated nor Forfaulted. Nor
Notoriously flagitious and Profane, Nor such as have from the beginning been,
and are still Enemies. If any will say, that such are Comprehended under these
exceptions. Why did the Commission express the exceptions in such terms, as to
men's common Apprehension do not include many? especially seeing there are known
Rules, particular and distinct, without Ambiguity; and seeing there is such a
Propension in Rulers to employ all without Difference, which would undoubtedly
take Advantage of any thing that seemed to look that way.

It is likewise manifest, that the second part of the Answer, relating to the
Capacity of Acting, is loadned with the same Inconvenience. 1. There is no
positive determination of the Qualifications of Persons to be entrusted, as in
former times it was agreed on by the Assembly and their Commissioners: but that
is now referred to the discretion of the Parliament; Together with such
Diminutive terms, as gives them great Latitude to go upon. Before, No trust
was given to such persons; Now, it is allowed they shall have some trust: and
how much is not determined, nor what degree of it is prejudicial to the Cause;
Which it appears, the Parliaments proceedings in Nomination of Officers,
unquestioned by the Commission, is a good Commentary to expone that they may
have any trust, except to be General Officers* 2. Our former Estalished Rule
was, that no persons should be Entrusted, but such as are of known Integrity,
and have been constant friends of the Cause. But how far is this diminished?
They who are such, only recommended to be espcially taken notice of. Less could
not be said by any, more ought to have been said by the Commission. And though
no such notice be taken of such by the Parliament; But on the Contrare, those
who have been most faithful, and suffered in the late defeat at Hamiltoun.
They are used as Enemies, worse than Malignants in former times; yet there is
no Testimony given against such things. Quantum mutatus ab illo Coetu qui
quondam fuit!

Before we enter upon the Chief Question, We offer these manifest and known
Truths to Consideration.

1. The Occasion of Contriving and subscribing first the National Covenant,
and then the Solemn League and Covenant, was, The designs and Practices of
the Popish, Prelaticall and Malignant Party, against Religion and the Work of
Reformation in these Kingdoms. 2. Since the Contriving and subscriving of the
same, it has been the continual endeavor of that Party, sometimes by
Undermining, and sometimes by open Opposition, to undo the same, and to bear
down all those that clave honestly thereto, and faithfully prosecute all the
ends thereof. 3. That there has been these many years past, and still is, such
a Party, in all the three Kingdoms, Considerable for Number, Power and Policy.
4. That that party, has always prosecuted their design, under a Color of
gzeal and respect to the Kings Authority and Interest. 5. That that party has
always been the Authors and Abettors of much bloodshed, many Miseries and sad
Calamities to these Nations. 6. That the People of God in these Kingdoms, have
taken upon themselves a most Solemn and Sacred bond of ane Oath and Covenant
to Discover them, and bring them to Condign punishment. 7. That it has been
one of the predominant sins of Scotland under the bond of the Covenant, to
Comply with them. 8. That Indignation and wrath from the Lord, has been
following that Party and their Designs these years past. 9. That Complyances
with them has always been Cursed to us of God. 10. That few of that Party,
do really Abandon and forsake their corrupt Principles and way, and join
Cordially in the Cause and Covenant. 11. That many of them do, after the
Profession of their Repentance for their opposition to the Cause and Covenant
of God, relapse frequently into the same sin. 12. That sudden receiving of many
of them to Fellowship and Trust, and too great Credulity in beleiving their
professions, has often cost this Land very dear 13. That upon Consideration of
the deep Treachery and Hypocrisy of these men, and the sad Consequents
following upon sudden receiving of them, without Evidence of a Change, after
long and renewed Experience, this Land renewed their obligations more strictly
in the Solemn Engadgment. 14. That there has been a Design driven these two
years past, to get that Party again in Power and Trust. 15. That this design
has been testified against, by the Public Resolutions of the Judicatories
unto this time. 16. That as it has been driven at very cunningly and Actively,
by many Instruments and Arguments of several sorts; so has it gained ground
piece and piece, until at Length many of them are brought into the Court, and
to the Army and Judicatories in the Country: And now, by the Public
Resolutions, they are generally to be employed and Entrusted. Thus the Design
is Accomplished. But 17. These men do not satisfy themselves with some Degree
of Power; But endeavor to Ingross the whole power of the Kingdom into their
oun hands, and study to bring into Contempt, and Cull out these, who have been
and do continue Constant in the Cause of God. 18. That having power into their
hands, They must act according to their oun Principles, and for estalishing
their oun Ends. And Lastly, That these Principles and Ends, are destructive to
the Covenant and Work of Reformation.

That the Employing of, and Associating with the Malignant Party, according as
is contained in the Public Resolutions, is Sinful and Unlawful.
IF there be in the Land a Malignant Party of Power and Policy, and the
Exceptions Contained in the Act of Leviae does Comprehend but few of that
Party; Then there needs be no more difficulty to prove, that the Present
Public Resolutions and Proceedings, do import ane Association and Conjunction
with a Malignant Party, than to gather a Conclusion from clear Premises. But
that such a Conjunction is in it self sinful and unlawful, and besides, A
violation of our solemn Oaths and Engadgments; A backslyding from our
Principles and Professions, And a walking Contrare to the whole tenure and
current of our former Resolutions and practices, is now to be made manifest.

First, We reason from that Constant, standing and perpetual Rule, which the
Lord gives concerning the modelling and Carriage of the Armies of his people in
all their Wars. Deuteronomy. 23. 9. When the Host goes forth against their enemies,
then Keep thee from every wicked thing. And after. If there be among you, any
man that is unclean, by reason of uncleanness that Chances him in the night,
then shall he go abroad out of the Camp, he shall not come within the Camp. (If
for Ceremonial uncleanness he was to be excluded, much more for Moral, as our
Divines Reason from the Old Testament in the point of Excommunication; and if
for uncleanness not Voluntary, much more for Voluntary wickedness.) The Reason
of all is given verse 14. for the Lord thy God walks in the midst of the Camp,
to deliver thee, and to give up thine Enemies before thee: Therefore shall thy
Camp be holy, that he see no unclean thing in thee and turn away from thee.
Even as they would expect a blessing of the Lord, so ought they to keep their
Camp holy, as he is holy; He gives not such a strict Rule for the Competency of
Number, as for the Qualifications of the Persons, as being the Principal
thing. Therefore the present Conjunction with so many ungodly and wicked men,
that have formerly declared themselves Enemies to God and his people, and to
this day give no evidence to the contrary, is sinful and unlawful.

2. The Lord has frequently in scripture declared his dislike and hatred of
such Associations and Conjunctions. The Scriptures cited in the General
Assemblies Declaration in the year 1648. against the Engadgment, are sufficient
proof of this. We shall take the Argument as it is formed by the Commissioners
of that Assembly, In their Answer to the Observations of the Committee of
Estates upon the Assemblies Declaration. Page 7. Every Engadgment in War, that
is pretended to be for Religion, and has in it a Confederacy and Association
with wicked men, enemies of True Religion is sinful and unlawful. But the
present Engadgment in War, as it is held forth in the Public Resolutions, is
pretended to be for Religion; and yet has in it a Confederacy and Conjunction
with wicked men, and Enemies of True Religion. Ergo. The second Proposition is
evident from the two first Sections.

The first Proposition is proved from these Scriptures forementioned, God
forbade Conjunctions and Confederacies with the Enemies of his Cause and
people. Not only the Canaanites. Exodus 34. 12. 15. Deuteronomy. 7. 2. and other
Heathens, Such was Asa his Covenant with Benhadad 2. Chron. 16. to verse 10.
Ahaz his Confederacy with the King of Assyria 2 Kings 16. 7, 10. 2 Chronicles. 18.
16. But also with wicked men of the seed of Abraham, as Iehoshaphats with Ahab
2 Chronicles 18. 3. And Ahab King of Israel said unto Iehoshaphat King of Judah,
with thou go with me to Ramoth-Gilead? And he Answered him, I am as thou art,
and my people as thy people, and we will be with thee in the war. Compared with
Chap. 19. 2. And Iehu the son of Hanani the Seer, went out to meet him, and
said to King Iehoshaphat, Should thou help the ungodly, and Love them that
hate the Lord? therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord. And with
Ahaziah 2 Chronicles. 20. 35. And after this did Iehosbaphat King of Judah join
himself with Abaziah King of Israel, who did very wickedly. Which being
reproved for, he would not again join with Ahaziah 1 Kings 22. 49. Then said
Ahaziah the Son of Ahab unto Iehoshaphat, Let my servants go with thy servants
in the ships: But Iehoshaphat would not. And then Amaziah's Association with
100000 of Israel 2 Chronicles. 25. 7, 8, 9, 10. But there came a man of God to him,
saying, O King Let not the Army of Israel go with thee; for the Lord is not
with Israel, to wit, with all the Children of Ephraim. ver 8. But if thou will
go, do it, be strong for the battle: God shall make thee fall before the Enemy:
for God has power to help and to Cast down. ver 9. And Amaziah said to the man
of God. But what shall we do for the hundred talents which I have given to the
Army of Israel? And the man of God answered. The Lord is able to give thee much
more than this. ver 10. Then Amaziah separated them, to wit, the Army that was
come to him out of Ephraim, to go home again: Wherefore their anger was greatly
Kindled against Judah, and they returned home in great anger. The sin and
danger of such Associations may further appear from Isay 8. 12, 13. Say ye not,
A Confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A Confederacy;
neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid. ver 13. Sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let Him be your fear, and let him be your dread. Jer. 2. 18. And
now what have thou to do in the way of Assyria to drink the Waters of the
River? Psalm. 106. 35. But were mingled among the Heathen and learned their
works. Hosea 5. 13. When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound,
then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Iareb: Yet could be not
heal you, nor cure you of your wound. and Chap. 7. 8, 11. Ephraim, he has
mixed himself among the people, Ephraim is a cake not turned. ver. 11. Ephraim
also is like a silly dove without heart, they call to Egypt, they go to
Assyria. 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15. Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers:
for what fellowship has righteouness with unrighteousness? and what Communion
has Light with darkness? ver 15. And what Concord has Christ with Belial? or
what part has he that believes with an Infidel? And if we should esteem Gods
enemies our enemies, and hate them with perfect hatred, how can we then join
with them as friends? Psalm. 139. 21.

The Committee of Estates at that time endeavored to elude the strength of
these Scriptures, and vindicate their Engadgment from the falling within the
Compass of them. But the Commission of the Assembly that year took the mask
off their evasions. Would to God we had no other Party to deal with now. It was
the evil and Complaint of that time, that Church and State was divided. But
what ane evil time are we now fallen into, that the union of these in this
point, is the complaint of many of the Godly? The Commission, in their Letter
to Sterling Presbytery, sets up the Committees answer in a new dress, and
holds it out for satisfaction to our Consciences. All that is answered may be
reduced to three or four heads.

1. There is made a great difference between ane Invasive and Defensive War, as
if in the one, Choice of Instruments ought to be sought: but in the case of
Just and necessary defense, all subjects may be Employed.

To which we answer. 1. That the Scriptures cited conclude most expressly
against Conjunctions of that Kind in defensive Wars. Such was Asa's Covenant,
such was Ahaz his Confedracie. Was not the reproofs of the Prophets directed
particularly against the peoples seeking of help from Egypt and Assyria in the
Case of their oun Just and necessary defense? Ier. 2. 18. Hosea 5. 13. and 7.
8. 11. Isay, 8. 12, 13. 2 Chronicles. 16. to ver 10. 2. The Law and Rule given Deuteronomy.
23. is General, regulating all their Wars whether Defensive or Offensive; and
it is strange that any should imagine such a difference where the Law makes
none; nay, when the ground of the Law is Moral and General, equally
respecting all Wars. Is there any Ground of Conscience, why wicked persons may
not be kept in the camp when we invade others, and yet these may be employed
and entrusted when we defend our selves? If there be any Reason to prefer the
one to the other in this point, we conceive Defensive War should have the
preference: Because when the Lord brings upon us injust invasion, he is
ordinarily pursuing a Controversy against us: and therefore we ought to be most
tender and circumspect, that there be no unclean thing in the Camp, and put
away every wicked thing from us, even the appearance of evil; Lest we add oil
to the flame of his Indignation, and he seeing such ane unclean thing in us,
turn yet further from us. Except we say, that we need not take a care to have
God in the camp with us, when we are upon Just and necessary defense, seeing our
Cause is so good. 3. There is more hazard and danger to our Religion and
Liberties, to have a wicked Malignant Army at home among us, than abroad in
another Nation. While they are here, they have the power of the Sword, and can
command all: But there might be some hope and endeavor, for vindicating our
oun Liberties and Religion while they are abroad, as it fell out in the time of
the Engadgment.

2. It is answered, that there is a difference between this Case and the
Engadgment: Because there was then no necessity of choosing such Instruments, a
competency of power might be had: But now it is not so: And therefore the
Scriptures mentioned do not militate against the present case. Answer 1. The
Scriptures cited will obviate this. What made Israel and Judah, run to Egypt
and Assyria for help, but their weakness and necessity? Their wound was
incurable, and their bruise grievous, as Jeremiah often Laments, and
particularly Cap. 8. 20, 21, 22. and 10. 19. etc. and yet this did not excuse
them for going to Egypt or Assyria to heal their wound Hos. 5. 13. and 7. 8,
11. The Scripture holds out Infidelity and Distrust in God, as the ground of
such Associations. 2. Chron. 16. 7, 8, 9. Isay. 8. 12, 13. Which proceeds from
the incompetency of Means as the occasion of it. 2. Suppose there were a
necessity for the calling forth the body of the Common people, yet certainly,
there is no necessity of Employing any such persons of whom the Question is,
and putting them in places of Trust: There is none can deny, but there are,
besides all secluded persons, many, that might fill the places of Trust and
Power: Therefore the plea of necessity is but a Pretense to cover some Design,
that under its specious and Plausible Covering, the power of the Land may be
Engrossed into the hands of Malignants: And so by this means all Power and
Trust may return as the rivers to the sea or fountain (as they Judge) the King;
that so in his Person there may be established ane Unlimited and Arbitrary
Power. 3. Necessity is a very plausible Argument and strong plea to Carnal
reason for any thing; But it cannot be a good ground, in point of Conscience,
for that which is sinful in it self. Now that this is sinful in it self
appears from the Word of God, simply condemning such Associations upon moral,
and so General and perpetual grounds. Now in such a case of necessity, we are
called either to trust in God, in the use of competent means, seeing in such
Cases we have so many promises; or, if all help be gone, which God allows us to
make use of, we must wait on him till He bring Salvation with his oun Arm.

But because the plea of necessity is the strongest that is made use of for the
Present Public Resolutions, we must consider it a little more. It is aleadged,
that the best part of the Land is under the feet of the Enemy, and so no help
can be had from it; and for other parts of the Land which are yet free, there
is not much Choice of Persons; and the testimony of faithful men in the State,
Declares, that when all that are called forth of these places, are gathered, it
cannot amount to a power Competent enough: And therefore in such a Question of
the Existence of second means, the knowledge whereof immediately depends on
sense and experience, these who are not aquainted, should give Credit to the
testimony of faithful Witnesses. And that a Competency of power must be had,
according to the ordinary way of Providence, in relation to which we must act,
except we would tempt God by requiring of him wonders.

Answer. Suppose the Enemies Army to Consist of 20000 or above, Are there not
more sensible persons in the Shyres on the North side of Forth? Believe it who
please, we cannot stop our oun Consciences, and put out our oun eyes. Let the
rolls of several shyres be Looked to, and it shall confute that Testimony.
Nay, are there not more persons not formerly secluded in all these Shyres? What
meant the Levy appointed immediately after Dumbar? was not 10000 Foot and 1400
Horse put upon these Shyres which are not under the power of the Enemy? and yet
the Rules of exclusion was not abandoned. Now all these, or most part of these,
are yet in the Country not Levied. Money was taken in stead of men, the Levies
obstructed; So that there was little Addition to the strength of the Forces that
remained; the Forces diverted by the insurrection of the Malignants in the
North, at the Kings command or warrant. All which has such pregnant
presumptions of a design carried on to Necessitate the Kingdom to Employ that
Party, by the cunning Politicians of the time, by obstructing the Levies,
raising the Malignants, and then pacifying them by an act of Indemnity: and at
last openly and avowedly Associating with them. Thus the design is
accomplished which was long since on foot.

2. If satisfying Courses had been studied by the public Judicatories to carry
on all the Godly in the Land with their Resolutions, there had accrued strength
from the parts of the Land be-south Forth, which would have compensed all that
competency of Power that the Conjunction of the Malignants makes up: and it may
be would have been more blessed of God. 3. If there be no help required nor
expected from these parts of the Kingdom be-south Forth, wherefore did the
Commission write to the Presbyteries in these bounds that they might Concur
actively in their stations for the furtherance of the Levies, and choose
Ministers to go out with them?

3. It is Answered That the Confederacies reproved were Unlawful, because they
were either with Heathens, or with Idolaters, strangers and Forraigners. This
is answered to the Case of Amaziah etc. and so it seems not to make against the
present Case, the employing all Subjects in the just and necessary defense of
the Kingdom.

Answer. 1. This answer at one blow cuts off all the strength of the General
Assemblies reason against the Association with Malignants in that year. There
might be some few persons Idolaters, but there was no party and faction such;
and yet they can deny Association with the English Malignants from these
Scriptures; Yea not only with them, but with our oun Countrymen that was in
Rebellion with James Grahame, who were neither Idolaters nor Forraigners. We
need no other answer than the Commission at that time gave to the Committee of
Estates using that same evasion. page 10. 11. 2. The ground and reason
whereupon such Associations are condemned, is more general and comprehensive.
Iehoshaphat was reproved for joining with Ahab, because he was ungodly and
hated the Lord, which is properly in our terms, because he was a Malignant and
profane man. It were a strange mocking of Scripture to Restrict Ungodliness, in
that place to the sin of Idolatry. Confederacy with the Canaanites and other
Nations was forbidden on this ground, that the people be not ensnared, and
learn not their works. Now is not the Company of, and Communion with ungodly
men of the same general profession, but mockers and haters of the power
thereof, as infectious and ensnaring? Nay its more apt to ensnare because of
the profession. Paul would have as much distance kept with a brother walking
Unorderly, as a Pagan: for such a one as walks contrary to their profession of
the true Religion, do evidence more ungodliness and wickedness, than a
ignorant and superstitious Papist that walks precisely according to his
profession. There is some Principle of Conscience stirring in the one: but its
seared in the other with an hot iron. God ranks such, who are Uncircumcised in
heart, with the uncircumcised in flesh. Ought not his people to do so to? 3.
The Rule of modelling Armies and purging the Camp is most Comprehensive Deuteronomy.
23. Not only of Idolaters and Forraigners, but every wicked thing and Unclean
thing was to be removed out of the Camp. Now seeing these Examples are
transgressions of this Law, what reason is there to make the only ground of
reproving and condemning of them to be, because Idolaters were Associated with,
as if any other might be joined with that is not an Idolater. 4. That Reason
against Amaziah's Conjunction with Israel is wrested by some, expounding it
thus. God is not with them, is not understood in regard of a state of grace, as
appears, nor in regard of Gods prospering providence: because he was often with
them in that Regard: but it must be understood in regard of an Idolatrous
profession. But we reply, that it is true it is not understood in regard of a
state of grace; nor simply in regard of his prospering Providence: But Ut
plurimum, the Lord for the most part crossing them till they were cut off from
being a Nation. But especially it is to be meant in regard of a Course opposite
to God, according as the Lord speaks, 2 Chronicles. 15: 2. The Lord is with you
while ye be with him; but if ye forsake him he will forsake you. If any will
restrict this to Idolatry, he has no ground from Scripture for such a
Limitation; but being engadged in the business, he wrests the Scriptures to his
oun destruction. Sure we are, there are many palpable forsakings of God, and
Gods forsaking of men, beside Idolatry and false worship. 5. That which is
said, That God did not Command Amaziah to dismiss any of his oun Subjects.
Either it makes nor much to the present business, or else it strikes against the
Law of God it self, that Commanded such strict purging of the Camp. From whom I
pray you? Certainly from wicked Israelites, from wicked Country men: Therefore
if there was any such among the men of Judah, he ought to have put them out of
the Army as well as the Israelites. Nay the Command of dismissing the
Israelites, was, really and upon the Matter, a Command to Purge his Camp of all
that was of the stamp of the Israelites. It is strange that the Civil
difference of strangers and Citizens should make such Difference in the point
of Conscience. Ought we not to hate the Lords enemies with a perfect hatred,
not as Englishmen, not as strangers, but as Enemies. Levi knew not his
brother, this was his honor; but many now for respect to their brethren, know
not God. It is the Moral Quality that the Law of God respects, without respect
of Persons and Countries. To be a Citizen, if not qualified, does no more plead
for employment in foro Conscientiae and before God, than to be a stranger and
qualified does impede trust and employment in foro Conscientiae and before God.

5. It may be Answered (and it is by some) That these Scriptures plead, that
there should be no Conjunction with wicked men in a Quarrel of Religion: but
seeing our present business is the Defense of the Kingdom, all subjects, as
subjects, stand in Capacity of employment for that end, though in reference to
the defense of Religion there must be a choice.

Answer. 1. The Commission have vindicated themselves in a letter to Sterling
Presbytery from that Imputation, that it is said, they state the Quarrel and
Cause merely upon Civil things in the Answer to the Parliaments Querie. But
Certainly there is just ground given to these that are watching for any such
thing, to state the Cause so: because they do contrare to all former Custom and
Practice, mention the Defense of the Kingdom only, as it had been of purpose,
to make the employing of all members of the body or subjects of the Kingdom for
its defense more Plausible. But we answer to the point, The Associations and
Conjunctions that are Condemned in the cited Scriptures, are some of them for
Civil Quarrels, so far as we know; some of them in the point of just and
necessary Defense of the Kingdom, and yet that does not Justify them. 2. The
Rule given them Deuteronomy. 23. was regulating all their wars, and clearly holds
forth, that all subjects as subjects, and members of the Politic body, though
as such there is an obligation lying on them to Defend the whole; yet they are
not in actual and nearest Capacity to the performance of the Duty, if they be
wicked and unclean. And the reason is, because the Lord would have the Wars of
his People his oun wars, and all that they do, to his Glory; Number. 21* 14. 2.
Chron. 20: 15. Col. 3: 17. More especially such solemn undertakings, there
ought to be a difference between his people, acting for Self-defence, and other
Nations. 3. Although the Defense of the Kingdom and Defense of the Cause, be
Different in themselves, yet are they Unseparable. Whoever is entrusted with
the Defense of the Kingdom really and de facto; he is to ipso entrusted with
the defense of the Cause: Therefore the People of God, who ought alwise to have
Religion first in their eye, ought, especially in raising Forces for
self-preservation, level at Religion, and direct the Choice of Instruments in
Relation to that Mark, that they destroy not Christians while they save
Subjects, and preserve our bodies to destroy our souls.

3. Reason. That which is dissonant from and contrare unto all our former
Resolutions and Proceedings, Oaths and Engadgments, Confessions and
Humiliations, must needs be most Unlawful, or they themselves, as to that
point, were Unlawful. But the present Resolutions and proceedings are
dissonant from, and contrare to all these. Ergo. Either our Present or our
former Resolutions and Practices were Unlawful; either we were wrong before,
or we are not right now. The second Proposition may be made manifest from 1.
The present Resolutions are contrare to the Solemn League and Covenant in the
fourth Article and the sixth. To the fourth, Because we put power in the hands
of a Malignant Party, power of the sword, which is inconsistent in the oun
nature of it with either actual punishing of them, or endeavoring to bring
them to punishment. Unless it be intended to bring them all forth, and expose
them to the slaughter for a Sacrifice for the Land, which may be the Lords mind
indeed, howbeit they know not his thoughts. And to the sixth Article, Because
its a declyning to the contrary Party, even that party against whom the
Covenant was at the making expressly contrived. And as the Declaration of the
General Assembly 1648. has it, Its a joining with one enemy to beat another,
with a black Devil to beat a white.

It is most Ingenuously answered, that the present Resolutions are not contrare
to the Covenant. Because such as are descrived in the Covenant are not allowed
to be employed, meaning, that these men are not now Malignants. What needs men
make such a Compass to Justify the Public Resolutions, seeing there is so
easy and ready a way straight at hand? This one answer might take off all the
Arguments made against them, that there is no Malignant party now: which is the
foundation that being removed, all the building must fall to the ground. But we
have in the First article evinced that, which had been scandalous to have
proved, if it had not been Questioned. If it were indeed true, that no
Malignants are allowed to be employed, what needed the Commission in their
Letter to Sterling Presbytery take so much pains from Scripture and Reason to
justify the present Resolutions, when the clearing of that one point had
cleared all? As for the Declaration of the Assembly Anno 1648. It is answered,
that none are to be employed, that continue natourly in the Courses of
Malignancy, which was done that year. Whereas the Malignant Party that was then
Associated with, would have engadged to be faithful to all the ends of the
Covenant, many of them were such as had been in Covenant, and made show of
their repentance for their defection from it: and so there is no difference in
this particular.

2. The solemn Acknowledgment of Public sins is so clear and peremptory in
this, that it makes us tremble to think on it Page 6 Should we again break his
Commandments and Covenant, by joining any more in Affinity with the people of
these Abominations, and take in our bosom these serpents, which have formerly
stung us almost to death? this, as it would argue much folly and madness, So no
doubt, it would provoke the Lord to consume us till there be no remnant of
escaping. Let the 6th. Article also be considered. Join to this the Declaration
of the Commission, upon report of this enemies invading Page 6. where it is
Declared, that Malignants shall not be Associated with, nay not countenanced
and permitted to be in our Armies. The General Assembly after this, upon the
enemies entry into Scotland, gives serious warning to the Rulers, to take heed
of snares from that Party: and that the rather, because men ordinarily are so
taken with the sense of Danger, as not to Look back to that which is behind
them etc. How often have we sentenced our selves unto Wrath* and Consumption if
we shall fall into this sin again? All these and the like, are endeavored to
be taken off, by saying that our Engadgments in this point, was conceived in a
way of Prosecution of the Cause; But to be no impediment of just and necessary
defense which we are bound to by Natures Law which no humane Law can Infringe.

But we reply. 1. It is strange, our prosecution of the Cause these years past,
should be Contradistinguished from the defense of it and the Kingdom. It was
conceived that our War in England was Defensive not Invasive, that it was
necessitated for the defense even of our Kingdom, but it seems it is now
questioned; But passing what was acted abroad, Certainly all our Wars at home
were merely Defensive, both against unjust Invasion and seditious
Insurrections. Now our solemn Engadgments were conceived, in relation* to our
actings at Home especially, and modelling our Armies for the defense of our
Liberties and Religion. We knew well enough that a just invasive war is a rare
accident in the world, and that the flock of Jesus Christ are, for the most
part, obnoxious to the violence of others, as sheep among wolves: but are not
often called to prey upon others. 2. To call our Solemn Engadgments and
Declarations, grounded upon our oaths and upon the Word of God, Humane Laws and
Constitutions, that must cede to Natures Law, it is indeed ingenuous dealing:
because to Justify the present proceedings, there can be no more expedite way,
than to condemn by past Resolutions for the peremptoriness of them, and to
make them grounded on Politic Considerations, which are alterable: But it
imports a great change of Principles. We conceive that all Humane Laws that are
not for the Matter grounded on the Word of God, that oblidge not Conscience but
in the Case of Scandal, and in regard of the general end, are alterable, and
changeable, whenever they come in opposition to the Law of Nature,
Self-defence, Law of God written in the Word. And therefore that Act of
Parliament mentioned by the Commission, Discharging all subjects to rise
without the Kings Command, which was made use of against our first taking Arms,
was no ways binding on the subjects not to rise in the Defense of their
Religion and Liberties when in hazard. And we wonder that that Law should be
compared to our Solemn Engadgments, which are grounded upon oaths and Gods
Word, as touching the very matter and substance of them, as if our Engadgments
did no more bind us now, in case of defense, than that Law did bind us then.
Royalists might be excused for preferring the Kings will to Gods; but we cannot
be pardoned for equalizing them. And especially while we consider that that
forementioned Act undoubdely has been intended, for the establishing of ane
Arbitrary and Absolute Power in the Kings hand; that the Subjects may not have
Liberty to save themselves, except the King will. Where God has given us
Liberty by the Law of Nature, or his Word; No King can justly ty us, and when
God binds us and oblidges us by any of these, No King or Parliament can loose
us or unty us. 3. The Declaration of the Commission and Assembly upon this
invasion, Renues the same bond of our former Engadgments; Yea and speaks
expressly, in the Case of fewness and scarceness of Instruments, against the
Unbelief of people that are ready in danger to choose any help. Therefore that
which is said in answer, that at that time there was a Choice of Instruments
which now is not, it may indeed condemn and falsify the Declarations at that
time, in the supposing of the Paucitie of Instruments, and in the application
of that Doctrine and divine truth to that time; but it does not speak any thing
against the application of that truth therein contained to our time; it being
more manifest, that we have greater necessity and less Choice of Instruments:
and so in greater hazard of unbelief, and overlooking what is behind us.

3. It is of all Considerations the most Confounding, to reflect upon our
former Humiliations and Fasts. How often has it been Confessed to God, as the
predominant Public sin of Scotland, Countenancing and Employing the Malignant
Party? But when we call particalarlie to mind the first Solemn Fast after the
defeat at Dumbar, Astonishment takes hold on us, to think, that it is now
defended as a Duty, which, but some months ago, was Solemnly confessed as a
sin, the not purging of the Army, the obstructing of that work, and great
inclinations to keep in and fetch in such Persons, and the repining at, and
crying out against all that was done in the contrary, was then reckoned as the
great Cause of Gods Wrath, and his sad stroke upon us. What distraction may
this breed in the hearts of the people of the Land, to hear that same thing
Complained of as great sin to day, and Commended as a necessary Duty to morrow?
Is not all the Land presently called to mourn for the Kings sins, of which this
is one, the designing a Conjunction with the Malignant Party, and giving them
warrant to rise in Arms for the defense of the Kingdom? Now, how shall they be
able to reconcile these in their oun minds, at the same time to mourn for that
as a sin in the King, which they hear commended as the Duty of the Parliament?
To fast a day for that as the Kings sin, which they must go about to morrow as
their oun Duty? Tell it not in Gath, Publish it not in Ashkelon: lest the
Daughters of the Philistines rejoice. Heathens may rise in Judgment against
this Generation. Semperidem ^elle atque idem nolle haec demum sapientiae est.
If any wise man be ubique and semper sibi pay and idem, what ought a Godly man
to be?

3. Reason. That which is an Uncertain mean of preservation of the Kingdom, and
a more Certain mean of destruction of Religion, is utterly unlawful. But the
employing and entrusting of all men promiscuously, according as is holden out
in the public Resolutions; is, at best an, uncertain mean of the preservation
of the Kingdom, and is a more certain mean of the destruction of Religion.
Ergo, It is utterly unlawful. The First Proposition cannot be denied. When any
less good comes in opposition with a greater good, the Pesser good in that
respect becomes evil. We may not endanger certainly a greater good, for the
probable and uncertain attainment of the lesser. The Second Proposition I know
will be Denied, as it was denied in the time of the Engadgment by the Committee
of Estates. They said, the Danger of Religion was not infallibile, that it
might eventually fall out so: but not by any Causality. And thus it is pleaded
now. That the danger of Religion is not inevitable; That the danger of the
Kingdom is certain: and so these being laid in the balance together, we ought,
to eschew a certain danger of the Kingdoms Destruction, rather hazard on a
probable danger of Religion.

But we shall clear this and confirm the reason. 1. The danger of the Kingdom
is indeed great; but it is not so certain and inevitable in case of not
employing the Malignant party: because there may be some competency of Power
beside. Now the Delivery and preservation of the Kingdom from this danger, by
conjunction with that party, is either improbable; because we have sentenced
our selves to Destruction, if ever we should do such a thing again. We are
standing under a curse, whereto we have bound over ourselves; And beside, God
is in a special manner parsuing that generation, and has raised up this Enemy
for their destruction; so that we may with greater probability expect, to
partake of their plagues, and to fall under our oun Curse, than to be
Delivered, or be instruments of Deliverance to the Kingdom. Or, at the best, it
is uncertain: for what is more uncertain than the event of War? The battle in
this sense may be said peculiarly to belong to the Lord. Now on the other hand,
the danger of Religion is Certain and inevitable, though not simply in it self,
and absolutely: because the Lord does in Heaven and earth what he pleases; yet
with a Moral Certainty and infallibility, which is often as great as Physical
certainty. Suppose these men; having the power of the Sword, prevail; will they
not employ it according to their principles, and for attaining their oun ends,
which both are destructive to Religion? What is more certain than that men act
and speak from the Abundance of the heart, when there is no outward restraint?
It should be a great wonder if they who are so accustomed to do evil, should
cease to do evil, when they have power and Convenience to do it. Power and
greatness has Corrupted many good men, shall it Convert them? Can men expect
other fruits from a tree than the nature of it yields? Will one seek figs on
thorns, or grapes on thistles? 2. We do not see what Defense it can be, for the
present, to the Kingdom, at least the godly and well affected in the Kingdom,
who will be as much troubled in their persons and Estates by that Party, as by
the Common Enemy. It is known what threatenings the Country is filled with,
which vents that inveterate Malice and hatred of all the well affected in the
Kingdom, which they have kept within their breast of a long time: and now they
find opportunity of outing it. It is as clear as day light, that the most part
of all the secluded persons looks upon these that opposed them in the
Engadgment, and shut them out of places of Trust, and Capacity of Employment,
as enemies, and as great Enemies as the Sectaries. And that we may know what to
expect when they have full power in their hand; they have already so lift up
their head, that no Godly man can promise himself security in many places, And
especially the faithful Gentlmen and people of the West, who have given more
proof of their Faithfulness to the Cause and Kingdom against the Common
Enemy, than any others in the Land; Yet are daily suffering violence from
these preservators of the Kingdom, while they are sufferers under the feet of
the Enemy: When they have no common Enemy, whom I beseech you, will they prey
upon; seeing they do it already while they have an Enemy.

But it is replied. That none of the least Suspicion, are allowed to be in such
trust and power, as may be prejudicial to Religion: And that ane oath is to be
taken of all, which is to be conceived as particular, binding and strict as is
possible.

Answer. 1. What a manifest receding is it from former principles, that it is
now conceived, that all places of trust, excepting some few of eminent note,
may be filled with secluded and debarred persons, without the prejudice of
Religion? It is certain that most part of Officers, nominated by the Parliament
and Shyres, are not only such, of whom there is just ground of suspicion; but
such as have been Enemies by actual opposition to the Cause of God, or known
underminers thereof. Can it be said in good earnest, that none, of whom is any
suspicion, shall have such trust as may be prejudicial? Sure we are, there are
many just grounds of suspicion and jealousy of General Persons, who have
Chief trust in our Armies: and this the public Judicatories are not Ignorant
of. 2. Oaths and Covenants are but like green Cords about Samson to bind these
men. Would we have them yet once again perjured; Then may we tender ane oath to
them. Put power in their hand, and then make them swear to employ it well. Its
as ridiculous as to give a mad man a sword, and then persuade him to hurt none
with it. There is no more capitulation with such persons, retaining their old
principles, than with the floods or winds. These whom that SACRED BOND OF
COVENANT has not tied, what oath can bind? Except you can change their nature,
do not swear them to good behavior. Can a Leopard change his Spots?

5. Reason. That which gives great offense and scandal, and lays a stumbling
block in the way, both of the people of the Land and our Enemies, especially in
the way of the Godly: that is Unlawful. But the present Association and
Conjunction, with all persons in the Kingdom (excepting a few if any) is
scandalous and offensive to the whole Land, to the Godly especially, and also
to the Enemy. Therefore it is unlawful. The Major is beyond all exception, if
we consider how peremptory CHRIST and his Apostles are in the point of offense,
which yet few Christians do consider. We ought not only to beware of the
offense of the Godly, but even of wicked men, even of our blaspheming Enemies.
Give no offense neither to the Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God.
CHRIST would not offend and scandalize his malicious Enemies. The Minor is
proved. 1. There is great offense given to the Godly in the Kingdom by the
public Resolutions, concerning that Conjunction with the Malignant Party,
under the Name and Notion of Subjects. 1. Because its known that the most part
of them are tender in that point, what fellowship they act with: And this has
been Remonstrate unto the Commission and Committee of Estates, from several
Synods. Now the present Resolution lays that stumbling block in their way,
that they cannot act in the defense of the Kingdom: Because there is no way
left them, for the performing of that duty, but that which they in their
Consciences are not satisfied with. Its a sad necessity and snare that is put
upon them, that they cannot perform their bound duty, which they are most
desirous of, without sin: Because of the way that is taken. 2. Is it not a
matter of Offense and stumbling to them, to be necessitated by Law to that
which was their affliction? The mixture that was in our Armies was their Grief:
And their comfort was that the Judicatories were minting at their duty to purge
them: But now there is no hope of attaining that: all Doors is shut up by the
public Resolutions. 3. It undoubtedly will weaken their hands, and make their
hearts faint; So that they cannot pray with Affection and in Faith, for a
blessing upon such an Army, the predominant and leading part whereof have been
esteemed, and is really Enemies to God and his people. 4. Is it not a great
Offense that any thing should proceed from the public Judicatories, that shall
lay a necessity upon many Godly in the Land, to suffer, because they cannot in
Conscience go along with it. Next it scandalizeth the whole Land. What may they
think within themselves, to see such dissonancy and disagreement between
present and former Resolutions and Practices? What may they judge of the
inconstancy and levity of the Commission? And be induced to give no respect and
reverence to them in their Resolutions. Is it not, at least, a very great
appearance of evil to join with that Party, that we did Declare and repute, but
some few weeks since, to be wicked Enemies of Religion and the Kingdom? and
look hencforth on them as friends without so much as any ackowledgment of their
sin had from them? Shall not they be induced, to put no difference between the
precious and the vile? not to discern between him that fears God and him that
fears him not, when the public Resolutions puts no difference? Then, how will
it Confirm all the Malignant party in their wickedness? May they not think our
Solemn vows and Engadgments, our rigid Resolutions and proceedings were but
all contrived and acted out of Policy; and that Interest and Advantage, and not
Conscience Principled them? Have they not ane occasion given them to persecute
all the Godly, and vent their long harbored malice against these who have been
most zealous for Reformation and purging of the Land? Nay, they are put in the
Capacity that they have desired, for acting all their Resolutions, and
accomplishing their Designs. And last of all, the present proceedings will not
only encourage, and animate the Common Enemy: but confirm them in all the
Imputations and Calumnies they have loadned our Church with. May they not have
ground fothink, that we are but driving on a politic design and does not
singly aim at Gods Glory? That it is not Grounds of Conscience acts us, but
some wordly Interest, when they look upon the inconstancy and Changeableness of
our way and Course, which is so accommodated to occasions and times? Can they
think us men of Conscience, that will join with all these men of blood, before
we will so much as speak with them? It is Replied, that the Scandal is taken,
and not given; which must not be stood upon, in the Case of a necessary duty.
But 1. we cleared, that there is no necessity of that Conjunction: therefore
the scandal is given; seeing its known before hand, that it will be taken. 2.
There are many grounds of offense given by the present Resolutions, as appears
by what is said. If it were no more, its a great appearance of evil; Its very
inductive of many evils; A most fit occasion of all that's spoken; And besides,
its in it self sinful, contrare to Gods Word and to our oaths.

6. Reason. That which makes glad all the wicked and Enemies of God in the
Land, and sad many, if not most part, of the Godly; has much appearance and
evidence, if not Certainty, of evil, is unlawful. But the public Resolutions
and proceedings are such. Ergo. Or thus. That which makes glad all the wicked,
and heightens the hopes and expectations of the Malignant Party, and makes sad
none almost but the Godly, and discourages their spirits; That, proceeding from
the public Judicatories, cannot be right and Lawful: But so it is, that that
which proceeds from the public Judicatories, makes glad all the hearts of
thewicked, and makes sad none, almost, but the Godly, heightens the hopes of
the Malignants, and makes them say their Day is coming, Lo we have seen it: And
discourages the Godly, and makes them almost say, Our hope is cut off, our
Glory is departed. Ergo, it cannot be right, at least it has a great and
convincing Appearance of evil*,

This Argument may be thought more Popular, than either Philosophical or
Scripturall: But such an argument the General Assembly 1648. made use of
against the Engadgment. It is no ways imaginable, how the wicked and ungodly
in the Land, would so insult and rejoice in this day; if they saw not some
Legible Characters upon it, which were agreeable to their oun Principles and
Ends. The Children of God, are, for the most part, Led by the Spirit of God,
and taught the way they should choose. John. 16: 13. Psalm. 25: 12. So that
readily they do not skunner at Courses approven of God: But the Children of the
world, being, at best, led by their oun carnal minds and senses, and, for the
most part, acted by a Spirit of disobedience and enmity against God, they use
not to rejoice at things that do not suit with their Carnal hearts, and are
not engraven with the Character of that which is imprinted in their Spirits. We
see now that the wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.
And when the wicked rise, the Righteous is hidden, and when they bear rule, the
people mourns: but when Righteous men are in Authority, the people do
rejoice: and when the Righteous rejoices, there is great Glory. Ps. 12. ult*
Prove. 28: 12. and 29: 2.

7. Reason. That which is the accomplishment and perfecting of the Malignant
design, that has been driven on these years past, especially since the
unlawful Engadgment; it cannot be a Course approven of God: But the present
Course is the Accomplishment of that design. Ergo. That there has been a
design, for a long time, driven and endeavored, both at home and abroad, with
much Policy and Industry, by many turnings and wyndings, and by Arguments of
several kinds, as the exigence of the times did furnish: and that the design
was, to have all such Persons in Trust and Power again, who had been secluded,
that so they might compass their oun Ends, has not been denied hitherto: and
we are persuaded, no man that fears God, and observes the times, is ignorant of
it. Let the public Papers of the treaty at Bredah, and the public papers of
this Kingdom and Church at home, be Consulted; they bear witness for us. Was
not the foundation of it laid in Holland? Many of them in both Nations, brought
home with the King contrare to public Resolutions, and by the prevailing
influence of some in the State, kept in the Kingdom, Contrare to Public
Resolutions? Was not the work of purging Judicatories and Armies obstructed?
The Godly discountenanced and discouraged? great endeavors used to raise the
Malignants in the South and in England, and since the Defeat to raise all
without exception in the North? But when that could not be obtained, by the
withstanding of honest men in the State. The Levies appointed, which would have
been a Considerable force for the defense of the Kingdom, was rendered wholly
ineffectuall; Partly by taking moneys for men; partly by raising the Malignant
Party; and then pretending to go against them, they were pacified by an act of
Indemnity: the fruit and Result of all which, is this present Conjunction with
them: and putting the power of judicatories and Armies in their hand. Thus the
Design is Completed.

8. Reason. That which will increase the Lords Indignation and controversy
against the Land, yet seven times more; that is very unlawful and
unseasonable; But so it is, that Confederacy and Association with the people of
these Abominations, will increase the Lords indignation and Controversy seven
times more. Ergo. The Assumption was as manifest and uncontroverted as the
Proposition, a few months ago, but it is begun now to be questioned by some,
qui quod sciunt nesciumn, quia sapiunt. But we shall evince it. 1. We are
standing under such a sentence, which we deliberately and sincerely past upon
our selves, in the days of our vows to God, that if we did ever any more join
with the people of these Abominations, the Lord would consume us till there
were no remnant. And this was not done in rashness but in sobriety, and with a
Scripture president Ezra. 9: 12, 13. 2. Our experience has made this clear to
us. We never did mingle our selves among them, but the Lord did pursue us with
Indignation, and stamped that sin, as in vive Characters, upon our Judgment.
God has set upon that Rock, that we have so often split upon, a remarkable
Beacon. Therefore we do not only in our solemn Engadgments, bind our selves
over to a Curse, in case of Relapsing, but passes the sentence of great
madness and folly on our selves. Piscator ictu sapit. Experience makes fools
wise, but it cannot cure madness. Did not that mixture provoke God at Dumbar?
And is this the way to appease him, to revolt more and more. 3. Conjunction and
Confederacy with that party, does necessarly infer a Communion in blessings
and plagues, we must cast in our lot with them, and have all one purse. Now it
has been Confessed and Declared by this Church, that God has a notable
Controversy with that Party, that this enemy is in ane eminent way to bear
them down and Crush them. Therefore if we join with them, we must Resolve to
partake of their plagues and have that Controversy pleaded against us also.

It is answered, that Indignation needs not be feared simply on this account:
because the means are Lawful and necessary; else, if this have any force, it
will conclude, that we should ly down and do nothing: because Gods Indignation
is upon the whole Land.

But we reply. 1. Though it be true, that this Enemy is the rod of Gods
Indignation against the whole Land; Yet it is Certain to us, and has been
formerly unquestioned, that they are raised up, in a special way, to execute
Gods wrath on Malignants, and God does arm them with Power in a signal manner
for that end. Besides, the Lords anger and indignation against his enemies is
such, as will burn and none can quench it: its of another nature than his wrath
against his oun people, which is a hyding of his face for a moment. He corrects
us in measure and judgment, but leaves us not altogether unpunished: But he
makes ane end of other Nations, Especially these that rise up to actual
enmity and hatred of his people, and sheding of their blood. And therefore, if
any man would not meet with Wrath and sore Displeasure, he would stand at a
distance with such, as God has appointed for destruction; we mean, as long as
they carry in their foreheads the mark of the beast. When God has such a
remarkable Controversy against a people then be that helps and he that is
helped, shall both fall together. Isay. 31: 3, All that is in league with them,
shall fall with them by the sword. Ezech. 30. 5. and 32: 21. 2. Since it is
known, that the Malignant party have not changed their Principles, and so they
cannot but in prosecuting this War establish their old Quarrel and follow it,
to wit, the Kings Arbitrary power, the Interest of man, above Gods or the
Kingdoms Interest. We leave it to be judged impartially, whether or not, these
that Associate with them, do espouse that Quarrel and Interest, at least
expose themselves to all that Wrath and Indignation, which has hitherto
followed that Quarrel, seeing they must have Common blessings and Curses? Will
not that Quarrel holden up by most part of the Army, be a wicked thing, an
Achan in the Camp, that will make God turn away from it and put Israel to shame?

Having thus established the truth. In the next place, we come to take off what
objections are made to the Contrary.

First, it is argued from Humane Authority. The uncontroverted and Universal
practice of all Nations in all Generations, is, to employ all subjects in the
Case of necessary Just defense. It was the practice of our Reformers, who took
into the Congregation and received all, that upon acknowledgement of their
error, was willing to join, though they had been on the Contrary faction. Such
an universal practice of Christian Nations, though it be not the Ground of our
Faith; Yet it is apparent, that it cannot want Reason for it.

Answer. I. This will plead as much against the exceptions added in the answer
to the Query and act of Levy; for seeing other Nations except none, in the Case
of necessary Defense, why should we except any? And if once we except any, upon
good and Convincing Grounds; upon the same ground we ought to except far more.
2. Mr. Gillespy in his Treatise of Miscellany Questions makes mention that the
City of Strasburg 1626. made a Defensive League with Zurick, Berne, and Basil:
because they were not only Neighbors, but men of the same Religion. And the
Elector of Saxony refused to take into Confederacy, these who differed from
him in the Point of the Lords supper; lest such sad things should befall him,
as befell these in Scripture who used any means of their oun Defense. This Rule
was good in Thesi though in that case misapplyed. Now then, if they made
Conscience of Choosing means of their oun defense, A Confederacy with
forraigners. May not the same Ground lead us to a Distance with our oun
Countrymen as unqualified, who have nothing to commend them but that they are
of the same nation, which is nothing in point of Conscience. 3. The Practice of
other Nations, that are not tender in many greater points, cannot be very
Convincing. Especially when we Consider, that the Lord has made light to Arise
in this Particular, more bright than in former times. God has taken occasion
of Illustrating and commending many truths unto us in this Generaration, from
the darkness of error, and of making straight many Rules, from the Crookedness
of men's Practice and Walking. Is not the Lord now performing the promise of
purging out the Rebels from among us and them that transgress, God has winked
at former times of Ignorance; but now the Lord having Cleared his mind so to
us, how great madness were it to forsake our oun mercy, and despise the Counsel
of God against our oun souls. As for that Instance of our Reformers* There
could not have been any thing brought more prejudicial to that Cause, and more
advantageous for us. After they were twice beaten by the French in Leith, and
their Forces scattered, and the leaders and Chief men of the Congregation
forced to retire to Sterling. JOHN KNOX preaching upon the eightieth Psalm, and
searching the Causes of Gods wrath against them, he condescends upon this as
the Chief Cause, that they had received into their Counsels and forces, such
men as had formerly opposed the Congregation: and says, God never blessed them
since the DUKE had come among them. See Knox Chron. 2. It cannot be showed,
that ever they took in a party and faction of such men, but only some few
persons; which, though it was not altogether Justifiable, yet more excusable.
But now, the public Resolutions hold forth a Conjunction with all the bloody
murderers in the Kingdom (excepting very few) and these without profession of
Repentance in many, and without evidence of the reality of it almost in any. 3.
These persons were not such, as had once joined with the Congregation and
relapsed, and became Enemies to it; but they turned to the Protestant Religion
from Popery: But ours is a different Case.

2. Its Argued from Scripturec Three Scripture Instances are brought to Justify
the present proceedings. First Instance is from the practice of Gods people in
the book of Judges, who, when for Defection from Religion they were brought
under oppression, yet when any Governor was raised by God for their Defense,
they gathered and come all out promiscuously, notwithstanding a great part of
them had been in the defection; and yet it is not found, that their Governors
are reproved for this; but rather sad Curses on them that came not out to the
work. Judge. 5. 15, 16, 17, 23. The second instance is from the story of the
Kings, very like the first; when after Defection, gracious Reforming Kings
arose, and had to do against foreign Invasion, we find them not debarring any
subjects, but calling them out promiscuously. Neither is this laid to their
Charge that they called out such and such Subjects, though we may perceive by
the story of the Prophets, that the greater part of the body of the people were
wicked etc.

We answer to these two Instances jointly. 1. We may by the like reason prove,
that which is as yet uncontroverted (we know not how long.) That we ought at no
time to make Choice of Instruments, neither in case of Prosecution of the Cause
and the Invasion of others, Nor yet in the time when choice is to be had; and
so, that all our former Engadgments, Resolutions and proceedings, in the point
of purging Judicatories and Armies, was superfluous and supererogatory: Because
we read not, that the reforming Kings or Judges, when ever they had an Invasive
war, and in the times that they had greatest plenty and multitudes of people,
did ever debarr any of their Subjects from that service, but called them out
promiscuosly. Neither is this laid to their Charge; though we may perceive,
that the greater part of the people were wicked under the best Kings: Therefore
we may lawfully employ any Subjects of the Kingdom in any of our wars. And we
may look upon all indifferently, without any discerning of Persons that fear
God and them that fear him not, as in good Capacity to be entrusted, Even when
otherwise we have Choice of good Instruments. Certainly it follows by parity of
Reason: for if you conclude, that from the calling forth all promiscuously, and
no reproof given for it in the Case of necessary defense; then we may conclude
from the calling forth of all promiscuously, and in the Case of an Invasive
War, and no reproof Recorded, that neither, in such a Case, is it sinful to
make no difference, and that with stronger Reason: Because, it being more easy
in such a Case to Choose instruments and no necessity pleading for it: if it
had been sinful, the Prophets would have rather reproved it, than rebuked them
for using such means in a Case of necessity. 2. We may argue after that manner,
that in the Case of necessary Just Defense, there should be no exceptions made
at all of any persons: because we read not that the Judges or Kings Debarred
any Subjects, neither that they were rebuked for so doing. Therefore the
Instances militate as much against the exceptions added in the Answer to the
Query, as against us; unless it be said, that there was no such persons among
that people, which were as groundless rashness as to say that they gave all
evidence of Repentance. 3. Seeing the Judges and the Reforming Kings of Judah,
were so accurrate and exact in cleaving to the Law of God, and walking
according to it in all other things; it were more Charitable and Christian
Judgment to say, that since they are not reproved for any fault in this
particular, that they were also exact to walk according to the Rule Deuteronomy. 23.
in so great a point as this. 4. Men's Practice is often lame and Crooked: and
therefore must be examined according to the Rule; but it were not fair dealing
to accommodate the Rule to men's practice. Seeing then, we have so clear and
perfect a Rule Deuteronomy. 23. which must Judge both their practice and ours: We see
not how their Practice can be obtruded as a rule upon us, which it self must be
examined according to a Common and General Rule. If it be not according to
that Law, we hold it to be sinful in it self, and so no president for us,
albeit the PROPHETS did not reprove it in express and particular terms (as they
did not reprove MAN-STEALING etc.) Yet they rebuked it by Consequence, in as
far as they rebuked the Kings for Association with wicked Israelites, which is
condemned upon grounds Common to this very Case in hand. 5. We see not any
ground for such promiscuous calling forth of the people by the Judges. Baraks
business, as that of Iepthah and Gideon, were done by no great multitudes of
People, but a few Choice men. 6. As the oppression was heavy and Continued
long; so the repentance of the people was Solemn, and their deliverance a
fruit of this. 7. Their Case and ours is very different; None of Israel or
Judah, did fight against the Profession of the true Religion, and shed the
blood of their fellow subjects who were for the Defense of the same. Israel in
the days of the Judges, and Judah in the time of the Reforming Kings, was not
Divided the one half against the other, upon opposition and Defense of the true
Religion: And the better part, after many experiences of the treachery and
enmity of the most of the worst part, Solemnly engadged to God, not to admit
them to Employment and trust, but upon real evidence of Repentance, of which
they should Judge as in the sight of God. And last of all did ever Israel or
Judah in the days of their Judges and Reforming Kings, admit into their
Armies, a party and faction of such, as had given no real evidence of their
Abandoning their former Course; and such a party, as had been long studying to
get the Power of Armies and Judicatories in their oun hands for attaining their
oun ends? But all these are in our Case.

The 3d Instance from scripture is from 1 Samuel 11. Which is aleadged to be a
clear practice and stamped with divine approbation: In the Case of
Iabesh-Gilead besieged by a foreign Enemy, Saul Commands all to come forth
for defense of their brethren, under pain of a severe Civil Censure. Now, what
Saul did in this business, the spirit of God is said to act him to it, and what
the people did, was from the fear of God, making them obey the King: And then
Samuel in this acting concurrs jointly, and makes no opposition; and last of
all, the people came forth as one man, and yet Cap. 10. 27. many men of Belial
were among them, who Malignantly opposed Saul's Government contrare to Gods
revealed will.

To which we answer. 1. The stamp of divine approbation is not apparent to us,
success does not prove it; neither the spirit coming on Saul, not the fear of
God falling on the people, will import a divine approbation of all was done in
the manadging that War. That motion of the spirit is no sanctifying motion; But
a Common, though extraordinary, impulse of Saul's spirit to the present work,
which, doubtless was in the King of Babylon, whom God raised up, fitted and
sent for the destruction of many nations. Albeit that work in his hand was
iniquity. That fear of God that fell upon the people, was but a fear of the
King Imprinted by God, and it is more peculiarly attributed to God, because the
people did despise him and contemn him, which makes their reverence and fear to
be a more extraordinary thing upon a sudden. Then, Samuel not opposing the
Course in hand, does no more import his approbation of all was done in it, than
his not reproving the men of Bolial does prove, that he approved of their
opposition. 2. It does not appear, that the men of Belial were a great faction
and party, there is something in the 12. ver. speaks against it, It is not like,
the people would put a faction and party to death. 3. Neither does it appear,
that they were in the Army; for that which is said, that all the people came
out as one man, does only import, that the body and generality of them came
forth; and that it was a wonder so many came forth so suddenly, at the Command
of the King who was but mean and abject in their eyes. It is certain that all
sensible Persons were not present, because the whole Army being numbered ver 8.
was but 330000. And who will say there was no more men in Israel, when they had
600000 such, and above, before their coming into the Land? seeing then, many
have stayed at home; it is most probable that these men of Belial would not
come, seeing they despised Saul's mean and Low condition in their heart, and
thought him unfitt to Lead their Armies, till he should prove what was in him.
That which is said ver 12. does not prove they were in the Camp; it might be
conveniently spoken of absent persons. 4. It is not certain, that these men
were wicked and scandalous in their Conversation, haters of Godliness and of
their brethren; but that they stood at distance only with Saul in the point of
his Election; which indeed was blameworthy, seeing God had revealed his mind in
it: and therefore they are called men of Belial, as Peter was called Satan, for
opposing Christ's suffering.

Some other Scriptures are alleged by some, as David's employing of such men
etc. all which are cleared in Mr. Gillespies treatise of Miscellanie Questions
Quest 14.

3. It is argued from reason. And. 1. That which any is oblidged to do for
another preservation by the Law of God and Nature, And which he cannot ommit
without the Guilt of the others destruction; that may the other Lawfully
require of him to do when he needs it, and when it may be done without the
undoing of a greater good; But so it is, that every subject is oblidged by the
Law of Nature, Oath and Covenants, and the Law of God, to endeavor to their
Power, the preservation of the Kingdom against unjust violence: And the safety
of the Kingdom stands in need of many subjects Assistance who were secluded:
And it may be done without undoing a greater good than is the preservation of
Religion. Ergo.

This Argument has an answer to it in the bosom of it. 1. We shortly deny the
Assumption, in Relation to the two last branches, both that the Kingdoms
preservation stands in necessity of these men's help. And that their help tends
not to the undoing of a greater good; seeing there is no reason given to confirm
these two points, wherein the nerve of the business lies, we referr to a Reason
of our denial of them given page, 22. Secondly, It is true that the obligation
to such a duty lies upon all; But that obligation is to be brought in act and
exercise in an orderly and Qualifyed way, else what needed any exceptions be in
the Act of Levy? Excommunicated persons are under the same obligation; Yet the
Magistrate is not actually oblidged to call such, but rather to seclude them.
Are not all bound to come to the Sacrament who are Church members? Yet many are
not in a Capacity to come, and so ought neither to presume to come, nor be
admitted: are not all subjects oblidged to defend the Cause of God, and to
prosecute it? and yet many, because of their Enmity to the Cause of God, are
actually incapable of employment in the defense or prosecution thereof. 3. The
Law of Nature is above all humane Laws and Constitutions, they must Cede when
ever they come in opposition to it, Salus populi is suprema Lex in relation to
these: But in Relation to the Law of God it is not so; sometimes the Law of
Nature must yield to Positive Commands of God. Abraham must Sacrifice his son
at Gods Command. The Law of Nature obliges us to the preservation of our
selves; But it does not oblidge to every mean that may be found expedient to
that end, unless it be supposed Lawful and approven of God. Therefore the Lord
in his written word does determine, what means we may use for that end, and
what not. But 4. we conceive that the Law forbidding Association and
Confederacy with known wicked and Ungodly persons, is included in the Law of
Nature, as well as the Law that obliges us to self-preservation; that is
grounded on perpetual reason, as well as this. Nature bids me preserve my
self, and Nature binds me to have one friend and foe with God. The Heathens had
a Notion of it; they observed, that Amphiaraus, a wise virtuous man was
therefore swallowed up in the Earth with seven men and seven Horses, because he
had joined himself and associated with Tydeus, Capaneus and other wicked
Commanders marching to the seige of Thebe, Mr. Gill, Miscell. Qyest. Chap. 14.
page 171.

2. The Second Reason is framed thus in Hypothes^. Such as are excluded are a
great part, if not the greater part, of the Remnant of the Land, if rules of
exclusion be extended impartially. Now, they having their Lives and Liberties
allowed them, must either in these things be ensured by the interposing of a
competent Power for their Defense, or else they must have Liberty to act for
themselves. But so it is, that we cannot interpose a Competent power for their
protection. Ergo they must have liberty to act for themselves. Nam qui dat
vitam, dat necessaria ad vitam.

We answer. 1. It is not certain that such as are excluded are the greater part
of the Land; However, it is certain, that though the Rule had been kept and
endeavors had been used to walk according to it, yet many whom it excludes
would have been taken in. There is a great Difference between endeavor of
Duty, and attaining its perfection. If the Rule had not been quite destroyed,
so great offense could not have been taken, though it had not been strictly
urged in all particulars. 2. We still affirm, upon evident grounds to us, that
there is a power Competent in the Land, beside the Malignant party, which may
protect the Land and ensure their lives and Liberties. 3. We are persuaded,
many of that party who have been so deeply involved in blood-guiltinesse and
barbarous cruelties, should neither have lives nor liberties secured to them:
because they ought not to be permitted to live. But the not taking away so much
Innocent blood from the Land by acts of Justice, is the Cause that so much
Innocent and precious blood is now shed. Our Rulers have pardoned that blood
which God would not pardon: And therefore would not pardon it to the Land,
because they pardoned it to the Murderers.

Sect. 4. That it is not Lawful for the well affected Subjects to concur in
such an Engadgment in war, and Associate with the Malignant Party.
SOme convinced of the unlawfulness of the public Resolutions and proceedings,
in reference to the employing of the Malignant Party; Yet do not find such
clearness and satisfaction in their oun Consciences as to forbid the Subjects
to concur in this War, and Associate with the Army so Constituted. Therefore
it is needful to speak something to this point. That it is unlawful for the
Subjects to Associate and join in arms with that Party, as it is for the
Parliament to employ them. For these Reasons.

1. The Scriptures before Cited against Associations and Confederacies with
wicked and ungodly men do prove this. The Command prohibiting Conjunction with
them and Conversing etc. is common both to Magistrates and people: for the
ground of it is common to both. The peoples ensnaring, Helping of the ungodly
etc. It were strange Doctrine to say, that it is not Lawful for the Parliament
to Associate in War with the Malignants, lest the people be ensnared: And yet
it is Lawful for the people to Associate with them upon the Command of the
Parliament, seeing the ensnaring of the People, has a more immediate connection
with the peoples Conjunction with them, nor with the Parliaments Resolution
about it. Had it not been a transgression in all the people to have joined with
these men before the Parliaments Resolution about it? How then can their
Resolution interveening, loose the people from their obligation to Gods
Command? Shall it be no sin to me, because they sin before me? Can their going
before me in the transgression, exempt me from the transgression of that same
Law which obliges both them and me? 2. The People were reproved for such
Associations as well as Rulers, though they were originated from the Rulers.
The Prophets speak to the whole body. What have thou to do in the way of Egypt
etc.? Ier. 2: 18. And Isay. 31. Woe to them that go down to Egypt. Psalm. 106.
They mingled themselves etc. The Lord instructed Isaiah, and in him all his oun
people, all the Children whom God had given him, saying, Say not ye, A
Confederacy, to all them to whom this people shall say, A Confederacy; Isay.
8: 12. When all the people was going on in such a mean of Self-defence, the
Lord instructed him and the Disciples among whom the testimony was sealed, that
they should not walk in the way of this people. When Iehoshaphat was reproved
for helping the ungodly, was not all his people reproved that went with him?
They were the helpers of the ungodly as well as he. If Amaziah had refused to
dismiss the Army of Israel whom God was not with, Doubtless it had been the
Subjects duty to testify against it, and refuse to concur and act in such a
fellowship.

3. If the Association and Conjunction with Malignants, be only the sin of the
Parliament, and not the sin of the people, who do upon their Command Associate
with them: Then we cannot see how people can be guilty of Association with
Malignants at any time and in any Case. To Join with them in an ill Cause is
not Lawful indeed: But neither may we join with good men in an evil Cause.
Suppose then the Cause be good and necessary (as no war is Just if it be not
necessary) in what case or Circumstances shall Association with them be
unlawful for the people? If it be said, in Case the Magistrate Command it not;
we think that strange Divinity, that the solo Command of the Magistrate should
make that our duty, which in absence of his Command is our sin; And that not
because of the absence of his Command but from other perpetual grounds.
Certainly, whenever Association with them is a sin, it is not that which makes
it a sin because the Mastistrate Commands it not, but because God forbids it.
And it is as strange, that the unlawful and sinful Resolution of Parliament
should make that lawful to me which otherwise had been lawful. It is known
that Humane Laws oblidge not, but as they have Connection with Gods Word. Now if
that Law, enjoining a Confluence of all Subjects for the defense of the
Kingdom, be contrare to the Word, in as far as it holds out a Conjunction with
Malignant and bloody men, how can it be lawful to me, in obedience to that
ordinance, to Associate with these men? If it be said to be lawful in the Case
of necessity, that same necessity is as strong a plea for the Magistrates
employing them, as for the peoples joining with them: and if it do not
justify that, it cannot excuse this. If the Lawfullness of the MEAN must be
measured by the justice and necessity of the END: then certainly any mean shall
be lawful in the Case of just and necessary defense; then we may employ Irish
Cutthroats; then we may go to the Devil for help, if expediency to compass
such a necessar and just End be the Rule of the Lawfullness of the Mean.

4. The whole Land is bound by the Covenant and Solemn Engadgment not to
Associate with the Malignant party: Ergo it is sinful for the people to join
with them as for the Magistrate to employ them. Are we not all bound by
Covenant, to endeavor to bring Malignants to Condign punishment, and to look
on them as enemies? And is not Conjunction and Confederacy with them on the
peoples part, as inconsistent in its oun Nature with that Duty, as the
Magistrates employing them is inconsistent with his Convenanted duty? When all
the people did Solemnly engadge themselves not to join any more with the People
of these Abominations, was the meaning of it, we shall not join until our
Rulers join first; Or, we shall not join with them in an ill Cause? No indeed,
but we shall not employ them in a good Cause, or join with any party of them in
it. If that Engadgment be upon every one in their station, let us consider what
every man's station in the work is. The Rulers station and Calling is to choose
Instruments, and levy Forces for the Defense thereof. The Subjects station and
Calling is, to concur in that work, by rising in Defense of the Cause and
Kingdom. Now what did the Subject then engadge unto? Certainly, unless we
mock God, we must say, that as the Magistrate engadged not to employ that
ungodly Generation in a good Cause, so the Subject engadged not to join with
any such party even in a good Cause. If this be not the meaning of our
ENGADGMENTS and VOWS, We see not how the Subjects is in Capacity to break them,
as to that precise point of Association.

In Sum, All the Reasons that are brought to prove the unlawfullness of the
public Resolutions, may with a little Variation be proportionably applied to
this present Question. Therefore we add no more but a Word to ane objection or
two.

Object. 1. A necessary Duty, such as Self-Preservation is, cannot be my sin.
But it is the Subjects necessary Duty to rise in Defense of the Kingdom. Ergo.
Answer. A necessary Duty cannot be a sin in it self, but it may be a sin in
regard of some Circumstances, in which it ceases to be a necessary Duty. It is
a necessar duty to defend the Kingdom: But it is neither a Duty nor necessary
to do it in such a Conjunction and fellowship, but rather a sin. If I cannot
preserve my self, but by ane unlawful mean, then Self-preservation in such
Circumstances, is not my Duty.

Object. 2d. JONATHAN did assist Saul in a war against the Philistines invading
the Land, and no doubt many Godly joined and died in battle. Now this is
commended in Scripture, as may be seen in David's funeral upon them; although it
was known that Saul was ane hater of Gods people and a perfecuter, and that God
had a Controversy with him, and that these 3000 that assisted him against
David were also ungodly and wicked men. Answer. 1. These Scriptures speak
nothing to commend that Particular act of Ionathans Conjunction in war with his
Father. David in his Epitaph speaks much to the Commendation of both Saul, and
Jonathan, as of excellent Warriors; and of Jonathan as a kind and Constant
friend to him: but there is nothing touched of that point. If that place be
pressed, it will follow with much more evidence, that Saul was as good a man as
Jonathan, and that the People of God had great loss inhis death. But none of
these must be pressed rigorously from a speech wherein he vents his affection
and grief. 2. Suppose the natural bond of Jonathan to Saul his Father, and the
Civil bonds of the people to Saul their King, did oblidge them to join with him
against the Common Enemy; Yet we think they ought not to have Associated with
these persecuting Servants and the 3000. that pursued David; But they ought to
have pleaded for a purging of the Army. 3. It is not Probable that there was
many Godly persons employed in that Army. David complains of that time Psalm.
12. That the Godly man ceased, and the faithful from among the Children of
men: and that the wicked walked round about when the Vilest men were Exalted.
4. Many of the Laws of God have not been much taken notice of, even by Godly
men, until the Lord has taken occasion to reprove them particularly and so to
mind them of their Duty. It is like the Rule Deuteronomy. 23. has not been Considered
till the time of Iehoshaphat and Amaziah etc.

Scriptures showing the sin and Danger of Joining with wicked and ungodly men.
ISaiah 13: 25. When the Lord is punishing such a people against whom he has a
Controversy and a notable Controversy, every one that is found shall be
thrust through: and every one joined with them shall fall. They partake in
their Judgment, not only because in a Common Calamity all shares, as in Ezech*
21: 3. But Chiefly because joined with and partakers with these whom God is
pursuing. Even as the strangers that join to the house of Jacob partake of her
blessings, Chap. 14: 1. To this purpose is Isay. 31: 2, 3. And Ezekiel. 30: 5, 6,
8. The mingled people and these that are in League with Egypt partakes in her
plagues, and these that uphold that Throne that God so visibly Controverts
with, their power shall come down and all its helpers shall be destroyed as it
is Ier. 21: 12, 20, 24. And this is the great reason of these many warnings to
go out of Babylon. Ier. 50: 8. And 51: 6. Remember that passage 2 Kings 1: 9,
10, 11, 12. The Captain and Messenger of the King speaks but a word in
obedience to his wicked Masters Command, and the fifty are but with him and
speak not: But their Masters judgment comescon them all.

Consider how many Testimonies the wise King in his Proverbs gives against it.
Chap. I. from verse 10. to 19. My Son if sinners entice thee, consent thou not.
11. If they say, Come with us, let us lay wait for blood, let us lurk privily
for the Innocent without Cause. 12. Let us swallow them up alive as the Grave,
and whole as those that go down into the pit. 13. We shall find all precious
substance, we shall fill our Houses with Spoil. 14. Cast in thy lot among us,
let us all have one Purse. 15. My Son, walk not thou in the way with them;
refrain thy foot from their path. 16. For their feet run to evil, and make bast
to shed blood etc. Here are the Practices and designs of wicked men expressed
in their oun nature: but certainly they would color them over with fair
pretenses; their purpose is to undo men, especially Godly men that Classed and
purged them. Yea it is the profession of many, and they scarce ly privily, or
have so much wisdom as to conceal their designs till their fit opportunity:
but before the power be confirmed in their hand, they breath out Cruelty
against all the Innocent in the Land, and promise themselves great gain by it,
and are already dividing their Estates among them, saying, we shall find all
precious substance. ver 13. But my Son, if thou fear God, though they entice
thee with specious arguments of Nature and Necessity and Country Privileges,
yet Consent not. Venture not thy stock in one Vessel with them, Cast not in thy
Lot among them. Walk not in the way with them, Refrain thy foot from their
path: for they are not come to the height of iniquity, they are running on to
it: And if thou Join, thou wilt cast thy self in a miserable snare: for either
thou must go on with them to their Designed and professed evils, or be exposed
to their Cruelty.

Chap. 2. from verse 10. to the end. When Wisdom enters into thine heart, and
Knowledge is pleasant to thy soul. 11. Discretion shall preserve thee,
Understanding shall keep thee. 12. To deliver thee from the way of the evil
man, from the man that speaks froward things. 13. Who leave the Paths of
uprightness to walk in the ways of darkness. etc. If thou take the WORD of
GOD for a lamp to thy feet, and it enter into thy Soul, and be received in love
and affection: it will certainly keep thee from the Evil man's way, who have
already left the Righteous paths to walk in the ways of darkness, who rejoice
in nothing so much as in the sorrows and miseries of the Godly, and delight in
one another wickedness. And it will keep thee Chaste to thy husband CHRIST
JESUS, and preserve thee from Committing fornications with Egypt as Aholah and
Aholibah, and joining so nearly with the degenerated seed of Abraham, who are
but as strangers: for come near their house and Paths, and they will lead thee
to Destruction with them, or make thee a more miserable life. But these that go
to them return not again quickly; they are like fallen stars, shall they ever
be set in the Firmament again? Its safest to walk with good and righteous men:
for Gods blessing and promise is on them. His Curse and threatening is on the
wicked: therefore thou may fear wrath on that account, if thou join with them.

Chap. 4. ver 14. to 20. Enter not into the Path of the Wicked, and go not in
the way of evil men. 15. Avoid it, pass not by it, turn from it, and pass away.
16. For they sleep not except they have done mischief: and their sleep is taken
away except they cause some to fall. 17. For they eat the bread of wickedness,
and drink the wine of violence. 18. But the path of the just is as the shining
light, that shines more and more unto the perfact day. 19. The way of the
wicked is as darkness: and they know not at what they stumble. It was said
Chap. 3: 23. that the man who keeps wisdom and the fear of God in his heart,
should walk in the way and not stumble. That safty has ease in it here, their
steps are not strained, as when a man walks in steep and hazardous places,
which cannot Choose but it will be, if a man enter into the path of wicked men,
he must either go along in their way with them, and then its broad indeed; or,
if he think to keep a good Conscience in it, he will be pinched and straightened:
therefore its freest for the mind and Conscience for to avoid and pass by that
way: for they sleep not etc. they will never be satisfied till they have done a
mischief, they will live upon the ruins of the poor Country, And how will
thou join in that? Or how can thou eschew it if thou walk with them? If it were
no more, its a suspected by-path, that thou never traveled into. O pass by it;
or, if thou be entered, turn out of it. If thou wilt enter upon the
Apprehension of some light and duty in it, know that its but evening, Sun is
setting, and thou wilt be benighted ere it be long: and thou shall stumble then
and not know whereupon, even on that thou sees now and thinks to eschew and
pass by. Then from ver 25. to the end. Keep thy heart with all diligence: for
out of it are the issues of life etc. Except thou keep thy heart and whole man,
thou cannot escape falling in some temptation: O keep thy heart deligentlie on
the knowledge and love of the Truth. Take heed to thy words. Look not a-squint
but directly to that which is good. Give not a-squint look to any unlawful
Course, for the necessity or utility it may be seems to attend it. But look
straight on, and ponder well thy way thou walks in, that thou run to no
extremity either to one party or other. That thou walk in the middle way
between Profanity and Error, thou held these ways hitherto for extremes, Ponder
I beseech thee then, before thou walk in any of them; see whether they be
really come to thee, or thou to them. Mark who is changed.

Chap. 5: 8. to the 15. Remove thy way far from her: and come not near the door
of her house. 9. Lest thou give thine honor unto others, and thy years unto
the Cruel. 10. Lest strangers be filled with thy wealth, and thy Labors be in
the house of a stranger. 11. And thou mourn at last, when thy flesh and thy
body are Consumed. 12. And say how have I hated instruction, and my heart
despised reproof? 13. And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers nor inclined
mine ear to them that instructed me? etc. If thou would be safe from snares,
Remove from the way and house of the strange Woman. Thou must fall in Aholah
and Aholibahs whordoms, Ezekiel. 23. except thou come not near them. If thou keep
not from that Assembly and Congregation, thou shall be almost in all evil. If
thou join with them, thou cannot but partake of their sins and plagues; and so
thou shall say after, when thou cannot well mend it, It was near gone, my steps
almost gone, and all the Assembly of his people shall witness to it.

Chap. 6: 16, 17, 18, 24, 25. These six things does the Lord hate, yea seven
are ane Abomination unto him. 17. A proud look, A lying tongue, and hands that
shed innocent blood: 18. An heart that devises wicked imaginations, feet that
be swift in running to mischief. 24* To keep thee from the strange Woman, from
the flattery of the tongue of a strange Woman. 25. Lust not after her beauty in
thine heart; neither let her take thee with her eyelids. Descrives both our
Enemies, the Malignant Party and the Sectarian. Pride, Violence, Cruelty,
Lying, is the very Character of the one. Flattery, beauty of pretended
Religion, and false witnessing and Charging of the Lords people, and seeking to
sow discord among these that were one in heart and work, is the Character of
the other, Now keep thee from both these Abominations: and do not think, its in
thy power not to be infected with the Contagion of their fellowship. Can a man
take fire in his bosom and his Clothes not be burnt? Can one go on hot Coals
and not burn his feet? So whoever Associates and goes in friendly to either of
them shall not be Innocent, ver 27, 28, 29.

Chap. 7: 14. etc. I have peace offerings with me, this day have I paid my
Vows, They pretend Religion on both sides. And our Church says, The Malignants
have satisfied them, and repented, Even like the peace offerings and Vows of
the whore. She began with her devotion, that she might with more liberty sin
more, and have that pretense to cover it; and by means of her offerings, she
got a feast of the flesh. Even as they by profession of Repentance are Admitted
to Trust; and by offering for the like sin, a new sin is Covered, and Vows
undertaken never to be kept. Therefore take heed of these snares: For she has
cast down many strong ver 26. Many tall Cedar has fallen by that Fellowship.
Its the way to hell. verse 27. See Chap. 8. 13.

Chap. 10. Shows us the very different estate of the Godly and wicked, both in
regard of light and knowledge concerning Duty, and of blessings promised. verse
6. Blessings are upon the head of the just: but violence Covers the mouth of
the wicked. 9. He that walks uprightly, walks surely: but he that
perverteth his ways, shall be known. verse II. The mouth of a Righteous man is a
well of life: but violence covers the mouth of the wicked. ver 20. The tongue
of of the Just is as Choice silver: the heart of the wicked is little worth. ver
23. It is as a sport to a fool to do mischief: but a man of understanding has
wisdom etc. ver 24, 25, 28, 31, 32. Which show us, That if the Lords mind be
revealed to any concerning the present Courses, it must be to his poor people
that wait on him, and not to all the wicked and ungodly in the Land, who almost
only are satisfied and clear in the Course, who yet before were never
satisfied. And beside, though the Lord be Chastising his people, yet one may
Ioyn with them without fear of wrath and Indignation on that account, and with
hope of Partaking of their blessings, when he cannot and dare not join with a
wicked party pursued with wrath and Indignation in the same dispentation. Which
may be more clear from Cap. 11. ver 3, 5, 8. The Integrity of the Upright shall
guide them: but the perverseness of Transgressors shall destroy them. ver 5. The
Righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way: but the wicked shall fall by
his own wickedness. 8. The Righteous is delivered out of trouble and the
wicked comes in his stead. And ver 10, and 11. Shows the different Condition
of People under wicked Rulers and Godly. All the wicked now rejoice, None
shouts but they, they think their day is come, the Godly generally hang their
head and are discountenanced. Even as Psalm. 12. The 21. and 31 ver. shows that
when Godly men are Chastifed and punished in the Earth for their sins, much
more wicked, especially when the Godly were Chastised for partaking with them,
according to 1 Pet. 4: 17, 18. Isay. 10: 12. and 49: 12.

Chap. 12: ver 13. They are snared by the transgression of their lips, their
ordinar Common speeches they drop out with, declare them and make their Cause
more hateful than other pretenses its covered with would permit. Yea they
speak like the piercings of a sword against the Godly ver 11. If our State and
Church had a LIP OF TRUTH, they would speak alwise the same thing, they would
not carry in their talk and writings, as now every common understanding
perceives. We may find their writings made up of Contradictions: For a lying
tongue is but for a moment ver 19. Its but for a moment indeed before the
Judicatory, and then out of doors it contradicts it self, as in the mock
Repentances. But sorrow and anguish will come to these, who before they would
speak of terms of peace with one Enemy, would Associate in war with another.
But to the Counselors of peace is joy. ver 20. The present Course Contradicts
this 26. ver. The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor: but the way
of the wicked seduceth them. They think these Malignants better than the
West-Coutrey forces; they would condescend to any terms to get their help,
though it were to ranverse the Act of Classes, to give them Indemnity; yea not
so much as to Condemn their way: but they will not so much as clear the State
of the Quarrel, or choose a better General for all their help. Their way seems
good in their ouneyes ver 15. But it were wisdom to hearken to the Counsel of
the Godly.

Chap. 13. 10. Only by pride comes Contention: But with the well advised is
wisdom. There is nothing keeps up our Contention and Wars but Pride; No party
will condescend to another. We will not say, we have done wrong in bringing in
the King, they will not say they have done wrong in invading: But it were
wisdom to fall lower and quite these Interests. ver 16. Every Prudent man
deals with knowledge: but a fool lays open his folly. A wise man would
count before the War, if he can accomplish it: and if he cannot, then he would
send Messengers of peace, and Cede in all things he may without sin. If it be
but more honor and wealth to our King, Should we destroy the Kingdom to
purchase that? Our rash and abrupt proceedings shows our folly. ver 20. He that
walks with wise men shall be wise: But a Companion of fools shall be
destroyed. A man will be, must be assimilated to his company, and then partake
of their Judgment or blessings.

Chap. 14. He that is accustomed to speak truth in private, will in his common
speech be a faithful witness in public: But a man accustomed to Lying,
Dissembling, Swearing in private, will not stick to forswear himself, to make
professions and vows contrare to his mind in public, ver 5. (which is also
Chap 12. 17. and 6. 19.) Such men seek wisdom and make a show of Religion, but
find it not; whereas its easy to Godly men to find it, to find Repentance and
salvation, ver. 6. Go away from foolish men and break off society with ungodly
men, be not privy to their Counsels; Use them not as special friends, when
thou perceives that all means are used in vain to reclaim them from their
Damnable way and principles, ver 7. The knowledge a Godly man has, it serves
to direct his way, and is given of God for it: But all the wit and skill of
such wicked men is Deceit, they themselves are beguiled by it in opinion and
practice and hope. And they also beguile others, ver 8. Sin makes fools aggree:
But among the Righteous, that which is good makes aggreement (in the old
translation) ver 9. Its only evil will unite all the wicked in the Land as one
man: for its a sport to them to do mischief (Chap 10. 23.) Albeit our way seem
right in our eyes; Yet because its a backslyding way, and departing from
unquestionably right Rules, the end will be death, and we will be filled with
our oun devices. O it shall be bitter in the belly of all Godly men when they
have eaten it ver 12. 14. and Chap 1. 31. The simple believes every word
gives credit to every vain word that is spoken. But a prudent man looks well
to men's goings, Ponders and examines whether their professions and practices
agree; What weight is in their words, by the Inspection of their deeds, and of
their ordinar speaking; and does not account a Coined word before a Judicatory
sufficient to testify Repentance: and as he gives not present credit to their
professions, who have so often proven treacherous; so he himself skarrs at
every appearance of evil, and keeps himself from it; Whereas foolish souls rage
and are confident, think any thing Lawful if they can have any pretense for
it, or use of it ver 15. 16. Then, what a great difference is between wicked
men and Godly men, both in their Lot, when God is Correcting both? And in their
disposition, wisdom that rests in the ones heart, is Manifested; Wickedness in
the others heart appears also. In the midst of such men there is no other thing
ver 32. 33.

Chap 15. 8. The Sacrifice of the wicked is an Abomination to the Lord: but the
Prayer of the upright is his delight, Expresses how provocking a thing the
outward professions and sacrifices of wicked men, continuing in their
wickedness, what ane Abomination that Commonly called PUBLIC REPENTANCE, or
ECCLESIASTICAL HOLINESS is, when men are visibly unholy and ungodly in their
Conversation: And therefore he pleaded always with that people, that his soul
abhorred their external Ceremonies, because of the Uncleanness of their hands.
He pleaded that he never Commanded them, though indeed he did command them; Yet
those were aberrations and departings from the express Rule and Command, to
accept or be pleased with these sacrifices and Ceremonies, when there was no
evidence of Real Repentance. To this purpose are Chap 21. 4. 27. Isay 1. 11.
and 66. 3. Ier. 6. 20. and 7. 22. Amos 5. 22. All which show that its but a
mocking of the Lord, and perverting of his Law, and profaning of his
Ordinances, to accept the profession of Repentance in those who walk contrary
thereto, and to count them Ecclesiastically Holy enough, who say, they repent;
though a thousand actions witness the Contrary. Of such the Lord says, what
have thou to do to take my Covenant in thy mouth; seeing thou hates to be
reformed? Psalm. 50. 16, 17. They have no right to it, they should not be
admitted to it: for its a taking the Lords Name in vain. The 16 verse tells us
That it had been better to possess our oun Land in quietness, than to venture
what we have for the uncertain Conquest of England, and Restitution of the
King, Parallel with Eccl 4. 8.

Chap. 16: 7. When a man's ways please the Lord, he makes even his enemies to
be at peace with him. Can our STATES way then please the Lord, seeing they
cannot find the way of Peace? They will not walk in it; and seeing they make
the Godly in the Land to fall out with them, and none to be at peace but the
wicked, who may thereby get opportunity to crush the Godly. ver 17. The
Highway of the upright is to depart from evil. This is the high way only to
depart from evil, not Carnal policies, nor advantages. He thinks the stepping
aside to any of these is not the high way. Can then, men change their way, and
go cross to it, and keep the right way in both? No, the Godly have this high
way and keeps it. Chap. 17. ver 11. An evil man seeks only Rebellion:
therefore a Cruel messenger shall be sent against him. Evil men seek only
Rebellion, and delights in no other thing: But the KING of KINGS shall send a
Cruel messenger, he arms men with wrath and power against them. ver 13.
Speaks sadly to the English and to our State, that rewarded the West Country
evil for good, ver 14. and 19. Tells us how we should advice before we begin a
war, and leave no mean of composing Difference and strife unassayed; we did
more in it than the English: but not all we might have done. ver 15. with Chap.
18: 5. Its a dreadful sentence against the public Judicatories, that in all
their Resolutions, Papers and Practices, Justify the wicked and ungodly as
honest faithful men, and condemn all approven Faithful men, that cannot go
along in such Courses, or were earnest to have them Repent, as both Malignants
and Sectaries. Do they not pronounce all Malignants friends, and absolve them
from the sentences and Classes they stand under? And do they not put the Godly
in their place? They relax the punishment of the one, and imputes transgression
to the other; and so brings them under a Law. See Exodus 23: 7. Prove. 24: 24.
Isay. 5: 23. and the 26. verse of this Chapter. Its not good to punish Godly
men, who have given constant proof of their Integrity, for abstaining from such
a Course, at least having so much appearance of evil, that many distinctions
will never make the multitude to believe, that we are walking according to
former principles: because their sense observes the quite contrary practices,
etc.

Chap. 18: ver 2. ( A fool has no delight in understanding, but that his heart
may Discover it self.) Shows, that if the present Cause and Course were of God,
and tended so much to his Glory, fools or wicked men would have no such delight
in it: for they delight in nothing but what; is agreeable to their humor, to
discover themselves etc. Verse 3, gives the true reason, why our public
judicarories and Armies are so base and contemptible; why contempt and shame is
powered on them; because, when the wicked comes, then also comes contempt, and
with the vile man, Reproach. verse 13. He that answers a Cause before he hear
it, it is folly and shame unto him. Many pass peremptory sentence upon the
honest party in the West, before they hear all parties, and be thoroughly
informed, and this is a folly and shame to them. They hear the State and Church
and what they can say for their way; and indeed they seem just, because they
are first in with their Cause with them, and they will not hear another; but he
that comes after will make Inquiry, and discover these fallacies. Verse 24.
There is a friend that sticks eloser than a brother. A godly neighbor, not
so near in natural bonds to us, that is a surer friend than many brethren in
the flesh. These bonds of Country and Kindred, should all Cede to Gods
Interest. See Chap. 17: 17.

Chap. 19: 22. A man's desire is his Kindness: and a poor man is better than a
liar. The Godly, that cannot Concurt in the public Cause being disabled
through an invincible impediment of sin lying in the way and means made use of,
are better friends, and have more real good will to the stablishment and peace
of the Land, than any ungodly man, let him be never so forward in the present
Course. Verse 10, Pleasure and its attendants, are not comely for a wicked man.
i. e. Foolish man; much less for a servant. i. e. men enthralled in their
Lusts, to Rule over Princes i. e. Godly men, highly privileged by God. All
things that are good do ill become them; but worst of all to have Power and
Superiority over Good men. Verse 25, joined with Chap. 21: 11. Ringleaders of
wickedness, Refractory and Incorrigible persons should have been made examples
to others, and this would have prevented much mischief. The Scripture gives
ground for putting difference between the scorner and simple, seducers and
seduced.

Chap. 20: 6. and Chap. 21: 2. and Chap. 16: 2. Most men will proclaim every
one his oun goodness: but a faithful man who can find? Its no great wonder
that Malignants say they Repent; and the State and Church say they keep the
same principles: for who will say any evil of himself? verse 8. Magistrates
should scatter away evil men with their Countenance, by denying it to them,
looking down on them, How then do our Rulers gather them. Verse 3. Shows, that
war and strife should not be kept up but in extreme necessity, fools will be
meddling. Verse 11, Shows that the best way of Judging of men is by their Doings
and fruits, not strained words and confessions. But these who upon a bare
profession, pronounce a Notour Malignant a friend; having no proof of their
integrity; and will not have any judged such, but such as judicially are
debarred; yet they, contrary to all the testimony of works and fruits, Judge
and condemn honest men as Traitors, though not Judicially convicted. Certainly
Diverse measures are an Abomination to the Lord As in verse 10. Then verse 25,
Sacrilege is described, and Covered perjury, which is a snare to the soul that
commits it, to Devour that which is holy. i. e. Employeth to Common use these
things God has set apart, and commanded to be kept holy, as our profaning of
REPENTANCE and ABSOLUTION by casting such pearls to Swine, and for our own
Advantage making a cloak of them to bring in wicked men, contrare to the very
nature and Institution of the ordinance. Also our prostituting of our Covenant
and Cause, most holy things, to mentain Unholy or Common Interests. Our
committing his Holy things to them that will Devour them. And after vows to
make enquiry, To dispute now, that we did not bind our selves in the Case of
necessity, not to employ wicked men; when as the ground is perpetual and holds
in all cases. It shows either temerity in swearing, or impiety in enquiring
afterward and changing, See Deuteronomy. 23: 21. Then verse 26. A wise King scatters
the wicked, and brings the wheel over them. O that our Magistrates were so
wise! Is the Act of levy a scattering of the wicked? Is the act of Indemnity a
bringing the wheel over them Psalm. 101. 8. 1 will early destroy etc.

In Chap. 21: 10. ( The soul of the wicked desires evil, his neighbor finds
no favor in his eyes.) The wickeds principles can carry no where but to evil;
and to do evil to Good men. verse 8. His way and life is full of horrible and
tragical chances: But a good man's work is easy and pleasant, directs to a
good and peaceable end Isay. 26: 7. In verse 12. A Righteous man should have his
wit about him, to consider ungodly houses and families, and persons. that God
has visible controversies with, that he may not communicate with them in their
Judgments. verse 16. It is a sad wandering out of the way, when a man leaves the
Congregation of the Living to abide among the dead. Dead in sins and appointed
to Death. Its a great Judgment as well as sin. Verse 27. with the 4. and places
before cited, show how Abominable the external professions and pretenses of
wicked men are, when contradicted by their practice; especially if they do it
but out of a wicked mind, when they Intend to effect some mischief, under the
Color of Repentance and being Reconciled to the Church. As Absaloms Vow at
Hebron; as Balaam and Balak and the Pharisees, who under pretense of long
prayers devoured widows houses; as Iezebels fast; and as the people Isay. 58:
4. Who fasted for strife and debate, and to strike with the fist of
wickedness. All men knows that the Church is the Ladder to step up upon to go
to preferment, and Repentance the door to enter to places of Trust. Chap. 22:
3. ( A prudent man forseeth the evil and hides himself: but the simple pass on
and are punished.) He is a wise man that knows the Judgment of the Lord, and as
the stork and swallow the time of his coming, that in the Consideration of sins
and threatenings, and comparing things spiritual with spiritual, apprehends
Judgment coming on such a Course and such a party, and hydes himself, goes
aside, retires to a Covert, by avoiding these evils, and the least fellowship
with them that bring it on, and eschewing such a Society as has the Cloud
hanging directly above their head: but simple Idiots and blind worldings go on
headlong, and dread nothing and are punished verse 5. Most Grievous plagues and
Punishments, and all manner of unhappiness encumbreth their wicked life:
Therefore he that would keep himself pure and clean, 1 John. 5: 18. and save
his oun soul, shall be far from them; shall keep himself far from such people.
He prays with JOB. Let their Counsel be far from me Job 21: 16, 17. Because
their good is not in their hand; their Candle is often put out etc. And resolves
with JACOB, My soul shall not enter into their secret, to have such Intimacy
with them, as join Counsels with them Genesis 49: 6. And verse 10, 11. Cast out of
thy Company, Family, Jurisdiction, the Scorner that contemns ^odly men, and
mocks Instruction: for such men are Infectious, and able to Corrupt all they
Converse with: But Cast him out, and Contention shall go out with him. Its such
only that marrs the union of the Godly, that stirs up strife, and foments
divisions. Thou shall have more peace, and be more free from sin and shame. But
sound hearted upright men, who deal faithfully, not to please but to profit;
you should choose these to entrust and rely upon; those should be the friends
of Kings. Verse 14, As a Harlots allurements are like pits to catch men, so the
Allurements of wicked ungodly men their Power, Policy etc. and their fair
speeches and flatteries, is a deep ditch to catch men into this spiritual
whoredom and fornication spoken of Ezekiel. 23. And he whom God is provoked with,
by former wickedness, falls into it Eccl. 7: 26. verse 24, 25. (Make not
friendship with an angry man: and with a furious man thou shall not go etc.)
And is not Association in Arms with such, as friends against one Enemy, a
making friendship with them we are sworn to hold as Enemies? If we may not
converse with a furious passionate man, how then with men of blood, enraged,
whose inveterate malice has now occasion to vent against all the Godly? For
thou wilt learn his ways, as we have always seen it by experience; and thou
wilt get a snare to thy soul: If thou go not in his ways you cannot aggree, you
will fall out and quarrel; and that is a snare to thee. Verse 28, Remove not
the ancient landmark which thy Fathers have set. If it be so dreadful and
accursed to remove our Neighbors marks and bounds. O how much more to change
and alter Gods land mark, his Privileges, Oaths and Covenants etc. and Chap.
23: 10. 11. Deuteronomy. 19: 14: and 27: 17,

Chap. 23: 1, 7. (When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, Consider diligently
what it before thee. verse 7. For as he thinks in his heart so is he etc.)
Consider diligently what men ARE, not what they PRETEND and seem to be. for as
they think so are they, not as they pretend with their tongue and Countenance,
but as they think in their heart, which is better evidenced by their Common
'and habitual speaking and walking, than any deliberate and resolved
profession contrived of purpose. But if thou consider not this, the morsel thou
have eaten thou shall vomit up, thou shall Dearly pay for thy Credulity and
loss all thy sweet words. Verse 23: Buy the truth and sell it not. etc. Do not
we sell the truth and Cause and all into the hands of the Enemies of all?
Whereas we ought to Ransom the Kingdoms liberty and Religions Interest, with
the loss of all extrinsick Interest that does but concern the accession of ones
honor; yet we sell, endanger and venture all for that.

Chap. 24: 1. (Be not thou envyous against evil men neither desire thou to be
with them. Godly men's hearts are often tickled to be acquainted with, in league
and friendship with wicked men, when they have power: that they may not be hurt
by them; but seeing there is no Society between light and darkness, let not the
Godly desire to be with them, as in Chap. 23: 17. But rather to be in Gods fear
always, that is good Company. The Reason is Verse 2. Their heart studies the
destruction of the Godly, why then should thou walk with thine Enemy? And you
shall hear nothing but mischief in their Lips. verse 12. Its not according to
men's words but works they should be judged, and why do not we follow that Rule
in our Judging? Do we mock God as one mocks another? Job 34: 11. Psalm. 62: 12,
Ier, 32: 19. Romans 2: 6. Verse 21. etc. Men given to Change, false deceitful
men, meddle not with such if thou either fear God or respect man; for such will
be sure to no Interest but their oun. Their calamity shall come suddenly:
therefore have nothing to do with them: for who knows the Ruin of them both,
of them and all other wicked men, or of both them and the King if wicked. Also
to the wise and Godly this belongs, Its not good to have Respect of Persons in
Judgment, whither he be King or Noblman. A Righteous State respects not the
Person of the Prince and mighty says Job. But he that says to the Righteous,
you are wicked Sectaries, and also Malignants, because ye will not approve all
their Resolutions; and to the wicked, thou art Righteous, to the Malignants,
you are the honest men; the blessed of the Lord, who did ever to this day fall
under Meroz Curse, Should the people approve him? No Certainly, him shall they
Curse, and the Nations abhor him or them: But a blessing on them that would
reprove our sins and search them out. Verse 29. The Malignant party are even
speaking so, As the Classers and purgers did to us, even so will we do to
them. But God will render them according to their work.

Chap. 25. 2. (It is the honor of Kings to search out a matter.) Its a Kings
glory and Judges glory to search our a matter, to try dissemblers before they
trust them; Gods glory is to Pardon, Man's glory is to Administer Justice
Impartially. ver 4, 5. shows, what need there is of purging places of trust,
especially about the King. Dross cannot be melted, take what pains you will, it
will not convert into a vessel and become useful. This mixed in, obstructs all
Equity, Justice and Piety where it is. The Ruler should be the Refiner to purge
away this dross, and the Army or Judicatory or Kingdom is a vessel. You
shall never get a fined vessel for use and service, till you purge away the
dross Psalm. 101. 4. Then Verse 8. we should follow peace with all men as much
as is possible, never to begin strife or draw the Sluse of contention: But if
we be wronged, we should not for all that go out hastily to strife, till 1.
the Justice and Equity of the Cause appear. 2. that the matter wherabout we
contend be of great moment, a ground to found a War upon. 3. that we first use
all means of peace and aggreement possible. 4. that we overmatch not our selves
with these who are too strong for us, See Chap. 17. 14. Lest thou be brought to
that extremity that thou know not what to do. Thus Christ advises Luke 14.
31. I am persuaded this would plead much in Reason to yield security to
England, so be it our wrong were repaired and no more done, Verse 19 shows,
what the employment of unfaithful men, who mean nothing less than they
pretend, is, they fail when most is expected, and hurts beside, as Jobs friends
Chap. 6. 15. And Verse 26, A Righteous and upright man, consenting with a
wicked man in sin; or, through fear of him, not daring to do his duty, turning
to him and his way, or dallying and flattering him in his Iniquity, is like a
troubled fountain, is not good and profitable for Edification nor Correction,
having troubled the purity of his soul through the mudd of Carnal respects and
Interests: Corruption within is the mire, the wickeds seducements are like the
beasts trampling it with his foot; And he is like a corrupt, infected and
poisoned fountain, more ready to infect and draw others by his example. Verse
27, A man should not seek Honor and preferrment, that's base and shameful.
None of the trees longed for soveraigntie but the Bramble.

Chap 26. 1. (As snow in summer and as rain in harvest; so honor is not seemly
for a fool.) Its as unseemly, prodigious and destructive a thing, to give
Honors, Promotions and Trust to wicked men, as snow and much rain in Harvest;
a Reproach and punishment more becomes him, than honor the reward of Goodness
(as ver 3) a whip, rod and bridle for him, to restrain him from wrong and
provoke him to goodness ver 6. He that commits an errand or business and
entrusts a wicked man with it, is as unwise in so doing as if he did cut off
the Messengers feet he sent; he deprives himself of the means to compass it; He
sends a lame man to run ane errand; He is punished by himself as if he had cut
off his oun feet, and procures sorrow and discontent to himself, as if he were
compelled to drink nothing but what is contrare to his stomach. ver 7. All good
speeches halt and limp in evil men's mouths; For there is no constancy in their
mouths: Within they are very rottenness. Out of the same mouth comes blessing
and Cursing. I am 3. 10. their very words aggree not; The public and
extraordinary Crosses the private and ordinary, and their actions have less
harmony with their words. Professing they know God, in works they deny him etc.
Ver 8, To give a mad man a weapon, what else is it but to murder? To bring shot
to an ordinance which may do much mischief to himself and others, is to be
accessory to that mischief; So to give honor to a fool, he has given power to
them, and put them in a Capacity to do evil, and set them on work again to
perfect their designs against good men. Verse 9, As a drunken man, put a thorn
in his hand, he can make no use of it, but to hurt himself and others; so
wicked men's good speeches and fair professions, commonly tend to some mischief,
these but cover their evil designs: and yet the Covering is shorter than that
it can hide them. Verse 10, wicked Rulers (look the margent) grieve and molest
the subjects; and the means to effect this is, to employ the fool and
transgressor, to give Offices and Countenance to evil men, which may be
Instruments of their Lust, so Abimelech Judge 9. 4. so Iezebel, 1 Kings 21. 10.
so in Neh. 8. 15. Verse 11, The dog feeling his stomach surcharged, goes to the
Grass, as our Malignants to profess Repentance, and casts up that which
troubles him by a fained Confession: But because there is noe change in his
Nature, He is inwardly stirred by his old principles to lick up that vomit, to
Committ and practice what he professed Repentance for, yea and to profess the
same he pretended sorrow for: When Power is confirmed in their hand they will
return to their folly. Verse 17, What else is our Interposing our selves in the
Kings Quarrel concerning England, though we have Interest in it to endeavor
it in a peacable way, if he were fit for it; Yet in comparison of our Kingdom
and Religions fafety, which may be ruined by War, Its no such matter as
belongs to us: And so it falls out, we are like a man taking a Dog by the
ears to hold him; We have raised up many Enemies, and provoked them to byte
us: We cannot hold them long from destroying him: And we provoke them more by
holding them, in espousing his Quarrel, As Iehoshaphat joining with Ahab, We
had done well to interpose our selves between the King and them to make peace,
but to side to one party was not well done. Ver 18, 19. furious and bloody men
take all opportunities to hurt others, especially good men: and so deceives
these employed: But they do it under a pretense, as a scorner reproacheth under
a pretense of sport; so they, under other pretenses, of wrongs done, of the
Countries defense etc. Ver 20, 24, Shows the way to prevent trouble and keep
peace. As a contentious turbulent person, would inflame a whole Country and
put them by the ears; so a person, though not contentious in his oun Nature,
yet having many contentious Interests following him, which he will not quite or
committ to Gods providence, as our King was, O it is the destruction of a
Nation to have such a person among them: He has broken the peace of two
Kingdoms. Verse. 23, 24, 25, 26. Burning Lips, Hot and great words of Love and
friendship, and a wicked heart, Revenging its enmity, and minding nothing less
than what is spoken, is Like a potsneard, a drossie piece covered over with the
fairding of Hypocrisy; Or like a sepulcher garnished and painted, he dissembles
and speaks vanity and flatters Psalm. 12. 3. But he laves up his wicked purposes
close within him till a time of venting them: Therefore when he speaks so fair
and Courteously, be not confident of him, trust him not too far till thou have
proof of his Reality. Put not thy self and thy dearest Interests into his
mercy. This is wisdom and not want of charity Ier. 12. 6. Micah. 7. 5. Cain,
Ioab, Judas, are proof of this. It may be covered a time, but not long. Naturam
expellas furca licet usque recurrat. All the World shall be witness of it.
Psalm. 125. So then verse 21. The Calumniator and false accuser who openly
professes his hatred and malice, and the flatterer that seems to be moved with
love, both of them produce one effect, viz Ruin and Calamity.

Chap 27. 3, 4. (A stone is heavy and the sand weighty: But a fools wrath is
heavyer than them both etc. We see what we may expect of the enraged,
exasperated Malignant Party, their wrath against all the Godly, for their
faithful secluding and purging them out of places of trust, is weighty and
unsupportable like the sand of the sea; It will crush them under it if God
support not. Its like a swelling River or a High spring-tyde, it goes over all
banks, since the State and Church have drawn the sluice and letten it out. But
when it is joined with Envy and Malice against Godliness and Piety it self, who
can stand before that? No means can quench that heat. Verse 6, faithful men's
Reproofs, Remonstrances and Warnings, applied in Love and Compassion, are
better than an Enemies Kisses and flatteries, than his oils and ointments is:
Therefore we would Pray against the one, and for the other; that God would
smite us with the mouth of the Righteous, but keep Us from the dainties of the
wicked Ioabs, Iudases, and Achitophels. Verse 8. Speaks sadly against Ministers
that withdraw from their Charges so unnecessarly, as a bird that wandreth too
long from her nest, the young sterve for Cold or famine, or are made a prey; so
these, who having no necessary Call to be els-where, especially not being
members of the Commission, yet stay not with their flocks, are guilty of their
souls Ruin. verse 10, O how does this speak against the present Course of
Judicatories, they have forsaken their old faithful friends, when they proved
ever Constant, and have gone in to their wicked Countrey-mens house in the day
of their Calamity. But a neighbor in affection and piety, is nearer than a
brother in flesh and near in habitation.

Chap 28. 1. (The wicked slay when no man pursues: But the Righteous is bold
as a Lion) wicked men are now chosen for Stoutness and Courage, but they have
no sure foundation for it. Its buts like the Rage: and temerity of a mad man or
drunkard: But Godly men, once satisfied in grounds of Conscience about their
duty, would have been bold as Lions. A good Conscience would have made them
bold Psalm. 112. 7, 8. Levit. 26. 36. Now verse 2, Behold the punishment of our
sins, our Governors are changed, There is almost a total alteration, and we
are Faces about; which cannot but bring Ruin to the Land, especially when men
of understanding and piety are shut out. verse 4. with Chap 29. 27. Its a great
point and Argument of declyning and forsaking the Law of God when men Praise
the wicked, Change their Names though they themselves be not Changed, and Leave
off contending with them or declaring against them, and do rather plead for
them. But Godly men that keep the Law Contend with, discountenance them, and
oppose them; As DAVID, I hate them that hate thee, and earnestly contend with
them: Thus they are kept from partaking with other men's sins. Ver 5, Its not
very likely, that all the ungodly should now understand the duty of the times
and discern the right way, and that so many that fear God, understand it not,
seeing the Lords secret is revealed to them Psalm. 25. 14. Verse 6, 7. A poor
man, and weak means if they be of upright men, are better and stronger than
many rich and strong perverters. A companion of evil men and a keeper of the
Law aggree not in one person, the one is a honor, the other a shame to all
that have interest in them. Verse 9. Their prayers and professions are
Abomination, no acceptance of those who turno away their ears from obedience
to the Law, who walks contrare to it. Verse 10. These Cunning and crafty men
that have enticed some Godly men, and led them on in the present Course, shall
themselves smart for it, when the Godly seduced shall see good things after all
this. Verse 12, When wicked men have Power and Trust, Good men hide and Retire
themselves from such a Congregation or Assembly of the wicked. See Chap. 10:
10, 11. Should we thus choose our oun Plague, Tyranny, Oppression, Calamity and
Misery: and cast away our oun glory? Then verse 13. Repentance requires true
and Ingenuous Confession, and real forsaking; If both these join not, its but a
Covering and hyding of sin. If a man confess and yet walk and Continue in them,
he is but using his Confession as a Covering to retain his sins: and such shall
not find mercy of God, or prosper before men, Verse 14, Its not so despisable a
thing to fear always, and to be very jealous of sin as it is now made, Its
counted a reproach to have any scruples at the prelent Course: But happy is he
that abstaineth from all appearance of evil: But he that emboldneth himself,
and will not Question any thing makes for advantage, falls into mischief. Verse
15, 17, Shows the Lamentable Condition of a people under wicked Rulers, they
are beasts and not men toward the people, especially toward the best. Dam. 7:
4, 5. Zep. 3: 3. verse 17. How does that aggree with our sparing of bloody men,
of our soliciting for their Impunity, of our pardoning them? Are they not, by
the appointment of Gods Law, ordained for destruction and have to it? Should
any then stay them? should they not then far less employ them? And (verse 24.)
If it be so heinous to take our Fathers goods upon this pretense, because they
are our oun; how much more sacrilege is it to rob God of his Interests? and
give over his money to bankrupts, and say its no transgression to rob the Land
of its Defense, and make them naked, as Ahaz his confederacy did: Certainly it
is murder. verse 28. and Chap. 29: 2. and 11: 12. and 28: 28 are to one
purpose: We have forsaken our oun mercy and wronged our oun souls: and
destroyed our selves in choosing our oun Judgment, and making our oun Red to
beat us withal. Chap. 29: 1. We being so often reproved by his word and
providence for the sin of Association with the wicked, and being so lately
punished for it; and having so lately reproved our selves for it in our
Declarations and Fasts, yet to harden our necks. What can we expect but utter
destruction and that without Remedy, as we sentenced our selves? Ezra 9: 13.
and 14: 13. Isay. 30: 13, 14. Shall not this Iniquity be to us abreach ready to
fall, even this Iniquity of going down to Egypt for help etc. Then verse 6.
There is a snare to entrap thy feet in the sins of the wicked; if thou be
joined with them thou cannot well escape. Verse 8. Wicked Profane contemners of
God and his people bring ruin on a City or Commonalitie, they set it on fire
and blows it up: But Godly men pacify wrath, turn away Judgments, and purge all
from provocations, which is the only means to turn it away. Verse 16 Shows, when
wicked men gather together and grow in State and power, they grow worse, and
sin with greater boldness: And transgression then overflows the Land tanquam
ruptis repagulis. There is no obstacle, see Psalm. 12. And verse 24 shows, He
that is partner and fellow-receiver* with a thief, or conceals such offenders,
endangers his oun destruction: and he that stays with and Associates with
wicked men, must hear cursing aed cannot bewray it; he will see many
Abominations, that though he would he cannot remedy. Verse 25. Fear of man and
of the Lands danger, has brought many into a snare, to run from the Lord to an
Arm of flesh: but he that trusts in the Lord shall be safe. Verse 27. Here is
the deadly enmity between the two feeds, they cannot reconcile well, see verse
10. and Chap. 21: 3. Its no wonder the Godly Abominate such men who are Gods
enemies and the Lands plague.

Chap. 30: 11, 14. Descrives the Malignant party, who make nothing of the Godly
Magistrates or their mother Church and Land, but Curse, Malign, Oppose as much
as they could, and are Oppressors, monstrous Tyrants, Mankind-beasts, or
beastly men; the Subject of their Cruelty is the Godly afflicted man, they eat
up all and will not leave the bones: As the Propher complains, I ly among men
whose teeth are as spears and arrows, and their tongue as a sharp sword. And
then verse 12, 13, 20. Descrives our Enemies, the Invaders, They think
themselves Godly and Righteous, yet are not purged from their filthiness. They
are given up to strong delusions to believe lies; and there is no lie greater
than this, that they are a Godly Party in a Godly Cause and way. They wipe
their mouth after all their bloodshed, and says, I have done no evil: They
wash their hands as Pilate, as if they were free of the blood of these Just
men, whose fouls cry under the Altar. Verse 21, 22, 23. It is a burden to the
world and a plague to mankind, when servants, unworthy men, and persons unfit
for high places are set in Authority, and when wicked men have their desire of
plenty and honor (Chap. 19: 10.) And when an odious woman, or men of hateful
Vicious dispositions comes to preferment and are espoused by a State. Naught
they were while alone, but worse now when they have crept into the bed and
bosom of the State. Her Roots was naught before: but now she is planted in
rank mould, and will shoot forth her unsavory branches and blossoms. And when
Handmaids, kept in a servile estate because of their disposition and quality,
get their Masters ushered out, and they become Heirs, at least possessors of
the Inheritance or Trust. Verse 33 Shows, how necessarly war and Contention
follow upon unnecessary provocations by word or deed, such as we have given
many to England, though indeed they have given more. And lastly, Chap. 31: 20,
26, 31. Shows how word and work should go together: and men should be esteemed
and praised according to their works and fruit of their hands.

FINIS.

