Biddle Dispossessed, OR His Scripture perverting Catechism reformed by
Scripture. Wherein Those points of the Christian Religion blasphemed by Biddle,
by wresting the Scripture, to answer his heresies Question-wise propounded, are
vindicated in several Anti-questions, resolving themselves by pertinent
answers, taken word for word out of the Scripture, without either consequents
or comments; And (which Biddle could not say) no more is concluded in the
Question, then what is really and plainly contained in the Answer. Collected
for their sakes who desire to be true Christians, and not of this sect of
Biddle, inasmuch as that Sect (not more or less but) has altogether departed
from the simplicity and truth of the Scripture.

Quid dignum tanto tulit hic promissor? 2 Pet. 3.17. Beware lest ye being led
away with the Error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness. London,
Printed for Francis Tyton, at the three Daggers in Fleet street, near the
Temple-Gate, 1654.

BIDDLES Mock-Preface.
I Have wondered that there was no Catechism yet extant (that ever I could see
or hear of) in which one might find the whole system of heresy, as the same is
exactly contrary to the holy Scripture, as in this of Biddles, which is
generally so stuffed, which abuses, wrestings, and forcing the Scripture to
answer his heretical, spurious, and lying Questions, that the least part
thereof is at all consonant to, or derived from the Word of God; For thus it
is, the Councels, Convocations, and Assemblies of Divines, having been
attending to lesser things, not sufficiently watching, this envious one, now
whilst they sleep, endeavors to justle the sacred Scriptures out of their
place in the Church; framing Articles, and Intruding them on our faith,
according to his own fancy and Interest, which is to gain Disciples after him;
as who is there that has not heard of Biddles Disciples? And the Civil
Magistrate, notwithstanding his Authority, conniving at the same, we have at
last a Catechism fitted to those Articles, that Interest and design, wherein
the Scriptures are some of purpose omitted, others wrested or brought in only
for a show, not one quotation amongst all the things controverted, being a whit
to the purpose, as will soon appear to any man of Judgment, who taking into
his hands the said Catechism, shall examine the text, alleged with other
Scriptures, and the ends they are alleged for; for if he do this diligently
and impartially, he will find the Scripture and this Catechism to be at so wide
a distance one from another, that he will begin to question whither, and
proceed to believe that Biddle did not himself believe what himself wrote; or
if he did so, will positively conclude, that spiritual and Scriptural
understanding he has none (notwithstanding all his pretense to rational) and
that he did believe (proudly supposing all men blind as himself) that his
Readers had no more: In how miserable a condition then (as to spiritual things)
must the Disciples of Biddle needs be; when thus trained up, not (as the
Apostle advises) in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, but in the blind
and crooked paths of ungodly men, deceived, or deceving, or both: and in the
doctrine of Devils, not having only no assurance of the reality, but the
clearest Scripture-conviction of the non entity of their faith! Into which sad
condition, many notwithstanding are fallen into, being so unhappy as not to
know, or having known, to forsake the way of Truth, and quite abandon all piety
and honesty, having departed from the Truth, the only firm ground whereon to
build the same; to prevent which mischief, for time to come, by reducing such
to their prisline faith (I mean such of them as own the Divine authority of the
Scripture) and withal to satisfy the just and pious desire of some, and of my
self, who delight to see the Scripture vindicate its self, and maintain the
Truth of our religion, to the end that they and all good men (especially such
to whose hands this blasphemous piece has come) may consume themselves, their
children and families, in that truth wherein they are already built up, and are
yet building up one another; I have therefore (not by the understanding I have
gotten, but that God has given me) not compiled but collected certain
Scrip^ures, which may serve touching several wronged Truths of God, for a
Scripture Catechism, wherein I have not, nor cannot, but the Spirit of God may
bring the Reader to a sure and certain knowledge of the truth of our
profession, and the Error of Biddles, touching great things, both touching
belief and practice, whilst I myself assert nothing; much less force the
Scripture to answer my lies (as Biddle has done before me) but only introduce
the Scripture, uttering its own assertions, which all Christains confess to be
of undoubted Truth. Take heed therefore, whosoever thou art, of Biddles Sect or
not, that lightest on this book, and there read things quite contrary to the
lies propagated by Biddle, and currantly received amongst his deluded, and
(without grace lost followers; for I maintain, not only the things here
displayed but the many Scriptures alleged both in the Letter, and sense of
them, not only to have such a tendency, but a direct and flat opposition to
those his abominations; I say take heed whoever thou art, that thou art not
once or again entangled or ensnared with these his Hellish diabolical
insinuations; for if thou art fair with him, thou can not be so, without
falling foul upon the whole bulk of holy Scripture it self: inasmuch as all the
Questions and answers thorough Biddles Catechism, are forced either to speak
another Dialect then themselves know, or at least then the current of other
Scriptures know; whereas the Scripture wars not against its self, but is in
sense reconcilable one place to anoother, though in words perhaps may have
another tendency: for how can a Kindom divided against its self stand? And for
the Answers in this Anti-Catechism now before thee, they are faithfully
transcribed out of the holy book, rightly applied to Question, and made father
no more in the Question then is really contained in the proof, if thou shall
make a dilligent inspection into the several texts with all their
Circumstances: which (besides his pretentions) Biddle could not say. To evince
it that he could not say so, Take only one Instance for many in his Catechism:
In his 5. Chap. his first question is, How many holy spirits of Christians are
there? He answers it by Ephesians. 4 4. One spirit. Put the Question and answer
together, they make one entire proposition (whither true or false judge
Reader.) There is but one holy Spirit of Christians: This he does to take off
the power of the word, which calls the holy Ghost the Spirit God; But neither
here nor elsewhere the Spirit of Christians: which yet as an answer to this
Question this Scripture is made to say ex ungue Leonem: by this may you judge
of many such; and yet Mr. Biddle gives you express Scripture without consequent
or comments (to save his credit we say so too, without true ones.) And let not
Biddle say, or any for him, we need a mystical or figurative interpretation
(though many texts of Scripture are of that nature) to make the doctrines of
Truth in our hand, and the texts of Scripture alleged to maintain their sense;
for we do not as Biddle in this Instance, draw the Scripture falsely to our
doctrine, but our doctrine truly from the Scripture: nor do we once take this
liberty to impose our mystical and figurative interpretations on the Scripture,
without express warrant of the Scripture it self; and with that, they are no
more our interpretations, but the Scriptures: neither have we the less settled
belief, nor are we the more liable to be turned aside by any one can Invent a
new mystical meaning of the Scripture, there being as sure a rule to judge of
such meanings as there is of the litteral ones, to wit, the spirit of
Revelation in the knowledge of him; I say Revelation conversant in, not without
and besides the Scriptures, and that form of wholesome words, once to the
Saints: nor is there any error how absurd or impious soever, can on such terms
be accorded with the Scripture, nor the abominable Idolatries of the Papists,
nor the superstitious fopperies of the Turks, nor the licentious opinions and
practice of the Ranters, nor all these abominable and damnable heresies, the
smoke belched out by Satan in several ages, from the bottomless pit, and now
all Epitomized in the Person and Catechism of Biddle, may upon such terms be
palliated, much less defended by the Word of God. Certainly we do not of our
own heads figuratively interpret the Scripture, when the Letter seems
repugnant to our spiritual sense, to the scope of the respective Text, and to
many plain Texts to the contrary; (for in such cases) Biddle himself confesses
we must of necessity admit figures in the sacred volume, as well as we do in
profane ones, that the Scripture clash not with it self, or with our spiritual
sense, which indeed as it has the word for its foundation, (and only so is of
infallible certainty I say, if then we do admit a figure or spiritual meaning,
in the plain word of God; neither do we make, as some blaspemously, and Biddle
wickedly would make the Scripture a nose of wax: for Instance, its delivered in
the Scripture that the heaven of heavens cant contain God, that there is no
flying from his presence, that he is present in heaven, and in hell, and in the
uttermost parts of the Sea: that the Heaven is his Throne, and the Earth his
Foot stool, and alt these things has his hand made, that he is a God at hand,
and a God afar off, that no man can hide himself in secret places from God, and
that he fills the heaven and the Earth: neither is any thing said in the
Scripture to the contrary, (but that several places say, he is in heaven, none
saying he is not elsewhere) I say now in this or such other cases, why should I
thus stick to the Letter of the Word, and boldly affirm, with Biddle (having
his understanding darkened with vain Philosophy, of which we are bidden to
beware that God is in a certain place? would not this be to use the Scripture
as a nose of wax, and when of it self it looks one way, to turn it another at
our pleasure? the like may be said of the similitude or shape of God: his
Passions and affections, the Redemption of all men, and the falling from the
faith, and such like, whatever is controverted in the ensuing Catechism: And
does not God so speak to our capacity in his Word, (which is a sure refuge in
many matters, concerning God in Scripture (as that he does not render us
incapable of finding out his meaning, when he speaks one thing, and explains
himself by another? yea is not that way of his a direct course, not to make us
substitute an Idol in his place, but to prohibit our so doing when he tells in
one place, our God is in the heavens, and explains himself in another, yea
sundry other, that he is also in the Earth, in Hell, and in the furthestmost
parts of the Sea: for thus does he in plain terms express himself, that we may
not conceive amiss of him: Thus we see, that when sleep which plainly argues
weakness and imperfection, is ascribed to God, Psa. 44.23. the contrary is said
of him; Psa 121. Thus does God in these forementioned things; he tells us he is
in heaven, but that he is in the Earth and the Sea also: which is the manner of
God in Scripture to explain himself in one place, what he means by another,
which has so much weight in it that it cannot be avoided; and he that shall
deny it to any heretical end, does but take up one erroneous tenet, to maintain
another; But its no wonder indeed this fellow does so, who entertains himself,
and would have us to entertain such conceits of God and Christ, as are
repugnant to the current of the Scripture, and far below the Divine Majesty, as
he has pleased to discover himself in the plain but certain Letter of sacred
writ, which he does in design to beguil the rude apprehensions of the vulgar,
and instead of making them mere Christians to make them worse then Heathens;
the root whereof is pride desiring to be accounted a learned man, and able to
speak more truly of God, and the things of God, then himself has spoken in his
word. This indeed has brought that more then Babylonish confusion into the
Church, whilst men, such men, (who being of their Father the Devil, his works
they will do) have framed those horrid doctrines under color of Religion and
Truth, but in Truth to put a baffle on the simplicity of the Scripture, and
usher in heresies, that so they may with the more advantage, carry on their
designs, whither of applause or profit, by their seduced followers, which could
not be effected but by the ignorance of such people, and by wrapping up such
dangerous conclusions in the gilded coverts of wrested and misapplied
Scriptures, such things probably as our Author (for so he would, but shall not
be called) does not, and the first Inventors thereof; for he has taken them
all from the inventions of others indivers ages before him, who did not
themselves believe, even then when they did (whither in design or in malice or
both, I say not) first of all broach them; wherefore there is no possibility to
keep the Christian Religion in its primitive purity, (a thing worthily boasted
of in reformed Churches, as having been sincerely endeavored, and in some good
measure effected, by the good hand of God upon the labor (among others) his
Servants Luther and Calvin) but by detecting and cashiering those many false
notions, and devised forms of lying, fathered on religion, and wholly keeping
our selves to the plainness and Truth of the Scripture: for I have observed and
find my observation to be true and certain, that when men to express matters of
religion, wrest the words and phrases in Scripture contrary to the sense
thereof, as explained by the holy Ghost, (the Author of the whole Divine writ)
in other Scriptures they slyly under them couch false doctrines, and obtrude
them on us: for without question the doctrines of the Scripture can be so aptly
explained by no Spirit, (no Scripture being of private interpretation as by the
spirit of the Scripture it self; so that its not always safe to stick to the
Letter of every Scripture, but only as explained by other Scriptures; nor is
it always unsafe to express matters of religion in words and phrases unfound
in Scripture, as to the Letter of them, provided they be sufficiently warranted
and allowed as to the sense of them. This Liberty therefore has the Church
unblameably taken to speak of the things God in the exact sense of Scripture in
their own words: And he that blasphemes any such sentence, which in sense is
the very language of Scripture, though the very words are not found in
Scripture blasphemes the Scripture its self, and so does he who (not ignorantly
but maliciously) opposes the expressions of Gods being infinite, and
incomprehensible, of his being a simple act subsisting in 3 persons, a Divine
Circumcession, an eternal generation, eternal procession, incarnation,
hypostatical union, communication of properties, original sin, Christ's taking
our nature upon him, of Christ making satisfaction to God for our sins, both
past, and present, and to come, of Christ's fulfilling the Law for us, being
punished by God for us, Christ's merits, or his meritorious obedience, both
active and passive, of Christ's purchasing the Kingdom of heaven for us, of
Christ's enduring the wrath of God, of Christ's rising from the dead by his own
power, of apprehending and applying Christ's righteousness to our selves by
faith; of Christ's being our surety, paying our debts, of our sins imputed to
Christ, of his righteousness imputed to us, of Christ's dying to appease the
wrath of God, and reconcile him to us, of infused grace, of free grace, of the
world, of the elect, of Irresistible workings of the Spirit in bringing men to
believe, of carnal reason, of spiritual desertion, of spiritual incomes, the
outgoings of God, of submitting to, or taking up the ordinances, etc. some of
which are in the same terms expressed in Scripture, all of them so owned by the
Scripture, as that the things are expressly and fully contained in them, which
all men know that are any thing acquainted in that sacred book; but for the
terms, the mother of God, Transubstantiation, Consubstantation, and the
ubiquity of Christ's body, we will add them to Biddles holy spirit of
Christians, and confess them neither to be owned by Scripture, name, nor thing:
Therefore excellent was Paul's advice to Timothy, to hold fast the form of sound
words; which if we once let go, we shall be in danger of corruption, by new
coined words of some, and the new coined doctrines of others, which is many
men's sad case, as woeful experience teaches us: for wicked and ungodly men, in
succeeding ages, from the Apostles, have coined not only words, but doctrines
to: Hence it is, that Arrius began wickedly to blaspheme and oppose the
Divinity of the second person, who is coessential with the father, for he is
God blessed for ever, Amen: this opened a gap for other heretics after him,
(as at present Biddle) like so many undershrubs taking life from the droppings
of his heresy, under pretense of returning to Truth, to propagate that
accursed heresy: The like of others, which though it could not vitiate the
chastity and simplicity of our faith delivered in the Scriptures, every point
thereof yet remaining sound and entire, yet did there, or yet does remain not
any one point thereof uncontradicted and opposed; And those heresies of
whatsoever kind, thus propagated from hand to hand, are so far from being like
Theseus his old ship new mended, as that it was hard to say, whither it was the old
ship or new; as that they are rather like the bird which was alterius ornata
coloribus, so that though they may perchance vary their words, and new dress
their arguments, yet are they the same, and but the same, which were at first
propounded, by this or that Master Heretic, and as often answered, so that
this Master Builder himself does here Jurare in verba Magistri, only with this
difference: this o that Heretic, at this or that time, has tacked this or
that error to our Religion: but this would subvert the whole Religion, which
Christ and his Apostles taught, and put this body of heresy in the room
thereof; in this outstripping them, that what they do scatteringly, against
this or that part of Religion, he Rallies and applies to the ruin of Religion
it self; but thanks be to God through our Lord Jesus Christ, who amidst the
present Inundation of heresies, has preserved his written word entire: (for
had men corrupted it, they would have made it speak more favorably in behalf of
their lies and heresies then it does) wh ch word if we with prayer and humility
pry into, resolving sincerely to embrace the doctrine therein plainly
delivered, though all the world should set themselves against the Truth (our
minds being enlightened) we shall easily discern it, and be kept therein through
the power of God unto salvation.

And thus much we shall see by experience, that a weak instrument of none, much
less of no great abilities, has sufficiently detected his wicked errors in the
Body of heresy, by natural and pertinent Questions and answers, exactly
transcribed out of the Word of God; it having been already of much vantage to
me and may (I question not) through the spirit be so to all whosoever shall
search the Scripture alleged, and make inquiry into the Oracles of God: These
Oracles, which all men that have (by the Spirit of Truth, which can only lead
into all Truth) studied the same, be enamored with, as breathing out the wisdom
and Truth of God, and as being the exactest rule of a holy life, (which the
true Religion acknowledges the way unto happiness) whose Divinity
notwithstanding has been, is, and will be Questioned by many, to the worlds
end, who are unwilling to deny their wordly lusts, and obey the pure and
perfect precepts thereof; which truly Biddle himself would not stick to do
(might it advantage him in his design against Truth) as well as the Divinity of
that Spirit which made them Divine: But he judges it the most Politic way, to
stand on the foundation, to batter down the house, which is a stratagem so
perfectly devilish, as that in this life, and in that to come, twill (without
repentance) make him equal to the Prince of evil Angels.

CHAP. I.
QVest. The Word of God is quick and powerful, and more sharp then a two-edged
sword: but is to so of it self, or with the spirits operation?

Asw. 2 Cor. 3.6. Who also has made us able Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but the Spirit
gives life.

CHAP. II.
QV. There is indeed but one God: but has not that God declared himself to be
as one in Essence, so three in subsistence, the Father, the Word and the Spirit?

Answ. Isa. 61.1. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, therefore has the
Lord anointed me. Genesis 1.26. And God said let us make man in our Image, chap.
3.22. And the Lord God said, behold the man is become as one of us. chap.
11.6.7. and the Lord God said, let us go down. 1 Ioh. 1.1.7. for there are
three which bear record in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and
these three are one. Mat. 28.16. Go therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Ioh.
15.26. but when the Comforter shall come whom I will send unto you from the
Father, even the Spirit of Truth, which proceeds of the father, he shall
testify of me.

Ioh. 14.26. But the Comforter which is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will
send in my name, he shall teach you all things.

2 Cor. 13.13. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God, and the
communion of the holy Ghost be with you all, Amen.

Titus 3.5, 6. But when the bountifulness and love of God our Savior toward
man appeared, he saved us by the washing of the new birth and the renewing of
the holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus Christ our
Savior.

Gal. 4.6. And because ye are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of his Son
into your hearts.

Quest. The Father indeed is God, and also the Son is God, and the Spirit is
God: of which in its proper place; only here repeat one Scripture already named.

Answ. 1 John 5.7. For there are three which bear record in heaven, the father,
the Word, and the Spirit, and those three are one.

Quest. When God is said to be in a certain place in Scripture, as Psalm. 115.3.
Our God is in the heavens, and such like places: is he so there as to be
circumscribed, comprehended, as included? or so there as are the Creatures,
there, and not elsewhere then there; how then is God infinite? or is he
infinite? what says the Scripture?

Answ. 1 Kingt 8.27. 'But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold the
heaven, and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house
that I have builded.

Psalm. 139.7. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or Whither shall I flee from
thy presence? If I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there: If I make my bed in
hell, behold thou art there: If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in
the uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. Isa. 66.1. Thus says the Lord, The heaven is my
Throne, and the earth is my footstool; where is the house that ye builded unto
me, or where is the place of my rest? for all those things has my hand made.

Isa. 40.12. Who has measured the waters in the hollow of his hand? and meted
out heaven with a span? and comprehended the dust of the earth in a measure?
and weighed the mountains in Scales? or the hills in a balance? Who has
directed the Spirit of the Lord?

Jer. 23, 24. Am I a God at hand says the Lord, and not a God afar off? can
any hide himself in secret places, that I shall not see him, says the Lord? do
not I fill heaven and earth, sa th the Lord?

Quest. When we read of the Image of God, as Genesis 1 26, 27. Let us make man in
our Image, after our likeness, etc. the similitude of God; or the person of God
in Scripture, does it prove that God is corporeal and visible as man is? what
is meant by the Image of God? what say other Scriptures?

Answ. Col. 3.10. Renewed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him:
Ephesians. 4.24. And put on the new man which after God is renewed in righteousness
and true holiness.

Joh. 6.46. Not that any man has seen the Father.

Joh. 1.18. No Man has seen God at any time.

1 John 4.12. No man has seen God at any time.

Exodus 33.20. Moreover he said, Thou can not see my face.

1 Timothy 6.16 Who only has immortality, and dwells in the light that no man
can attain unto, whom never man saw, nor can see, to whom be honor and power
everlasting, Amen.

Quest. When we read in Scripture of affections and passions, as love, hatred,
repentance, anger, etc. attributed to God in Scripture, as the anger of the
Lord was kindled, it repented the Lord, etc. may we think thereby that God is
subject to change as is man, or else speaks the Scripture in order to our
capacity and apprehensions? what says the Scripture?

Answ. 1 John 1.5. God is light, and in him there is no darkness, Genesis 28.19
God is not as man that he should lie, neither as the Son of man that he should
repent; has he said, and shall he not do it? has he spoken, and shall he not
accomplish it? James 1.17. Every good giving and every perfect gift is from
above, from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, nor shadow of
turning: Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord shall stand for ever, and the
thoughts of his heart throughout all ages.

Isaiah 46.10. My counsel shall stand, and I will do whatsoever I will; as I
have spoken so will I bring it to pass; I have purposed, I will do it.

Quest. Touching expressions we meet with in Scripture, of Gods tempting of
Abraham, and having tried him, now he knew that he feared God, Genesis 22.1 to the
10. that God proves his people to see whither they will walk in his way or no;
or repenting him of good and evil, upon his peoples sins, or return of trying
them, to know what was in their heart, and such like places; do they prove any
such free actions of ours, or that God knows not till they come to pass: or
rather speaks the Scripture after the manner of men? would not such doctrine
destroy the Omnisciency of God? what says the Scripture to this thing?

Answ. Heb. 4.13. Neither is there any creature which in not manifest in his
sight; but all thing are naked and open unto his eyes, with whom we have to
do, Psalm. 139.2, 6, 7, 11, 13, 16. Oh Lord, thou understandest my thoughts afar
off; thy knowledge is too wonderful for me; It is so high that I cannot attain
unto it; If I say the darkness shall hide me even the night shall be light
round about me; yea the darkness hides not from thee; but the night shines as
the day, the darkness and light are both alike; My bones are not hid from thee,
though I was not made in a secret place; thine eyes did see me, when I was
without form: for in thy book were all things written which in continuance were
fashioned, when there was none of them before.

Joh. 21.27. Peter said unto him, Lord, thou know all things; and Jesus
said, when thou wast young, thou girdedst thy self, and walkedst wither thou
pleasedst; but when thou shall be old, another shall girde thee, and lead thee
whither thou would not; and this he spoke, signifying by what death he should
glorify God.

Psalm. 147. Great is our Lord, his wisdom is infinite.

Isa. 40.28. there is no searching of his understanding.

Acts. 2.3. The determined counsel and fore knowledge of God.

1 Pet. 1.2. Elect according to the fore knowledge of God the Father.

Psalm. 94.9, 10, 11. He that planted the ear, shall not he hear? and the eye,
shall he not see? he that teaches men knowledge, shall not he know? the Lord
knows the thoughts of a man.

Jer. 17.9, 10. The heart is deceitful and wicked above all things: who can
know it? I the Lord search the heart, and try the reins.

Ephesians. 1. He has chosen us in him, ere the foundationn of the world, that we
should be holy: that in the dispensation of the fullness of time, he might
gather together in one, all things according to his purpose; who rules all
things after the counsel of his own will.

2. Tim. 2.19. The foundation of God stands sure, having this seal: the Lord
knows who are his.

James 1.17. With God is no variableness or shadow of change:

Prove 19.21. Many devices are in man's heart, but the Lords counsel shall stand.

CHAP. III.
QVest. Whereas we read in Genesis 3. the curse denounced by God upon our Parents
first sin, to be sorrow in conception, a curse on the ground, and man's labor
in this life, is that the full extent of the curse, or in the question of Gods
enemies? did not their sin bring on them and us the guilt of hel-f re? deface
the Image of God in us, darken our understandings, enslave our wills, deprive
us of power to do good, and cause mortality? did it, or did it not? what says
the Scriptures?

Answ. Genesis 2.17. in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall dying dye: Romans
5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death went
over all men: verse. 14. but death reigned from Adam to Moses.

Verse 15. Through the offense of one, many be dead.

16. The fault came of one man to condemnation.

17. By the offense of one, death reigned.

18. By the offense of one, the fault came on all men to condemnation.

21. Sin reigned unto death.

Gal. 3.10. Cursed is every one that continues not in all things, which are
written in the book of the Law to do them.

Romans 3.9. We have proved both Jews and Gentiles to be all under sin; verse. 12.
They are altogether become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not
one. John 8.34. Whosoever commits sin, is the servant of sin.

Romans 6.17.20. Servants to sin.

Romans 7.14. Sold under sin:

15. What I would, that I do not; but what I hate, that I do.

18. In me (that is in my flesh) there dwells no good thing:

19. For the good that I would, I do not: but the evil which I would not, that
I do.

23. But I see another Law in my members, bringing me into captivity of the Law
of sin, which is in my members.

24. O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death?

2 Pet. 2.19 While they promise liberty, themselves are the servants of
corruption; for of whom a man is overcome, of the same is he brought in bondage.

Ephesians. 2.1. Dead in trespasses and sins.

John 8.41. You do the deeds of your Father; ye are of your Father the Devil,
and his deeds will ye do.

James 1.14. Every man is tempted of his own lust, and enticed.

Romans 8.7. They that are in the flesh, cannot please God.

Gal. 3.22. The Scripture has concluded all under sin; unless ye be born from
above, you cannot enter into the kingdom of God.

Titus 3.5. He saved us by the washing of regeneration, and the renewing of the
holy Ghost.

Psalm. 54.5. Behold I was born in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived
me.

Genesis 6.5. The Lord faw all that all the imaginations of man's heart are evil
continually.

Quest. What says the Scripture concerning the understanding?

1 Cor. 2.4. For the natural man receives not the things of the Spirit of God;
for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned.

Ephesians. 4.17, 18. This I say therefore and testify in the Lord, that ye
henceforth walk not as other Gentiles walk, in the vanity of their mind, having
their understanding darkened, being alienated from the life of God through the
ignorance that is in them; because of the blindnesss of their hearts.

Romans 8 5 They that are after the flesh, do mind the things of the flesh:

7. The carnal mind is enmity with God.

Luke 24.45. Then opened he their understandings, that they might understand
the Scripture.

Isaiah 44.18. They have not known nor understood. God has shut their eyes
that they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot understand.

19. None considers in his heart, neither is there knowledge nor
understanding.

10. A seduced heart has deceived him.

Quest. What of the Will?

Answ. Phil. 2.18. Its said, God works in us to will and to do.

Romans 7.23. But I see another Law in my members, bringing me into captivity
into the Law of sin.

Romans 6.20. Being servants to sin, we are free from Righteousness.

Romans 8.7, 8. The carnal mind is enmity with God; for it is not subject to the
Law of God, neither indeed can be; so then they that are in the flesh cannot
please God. Ephesians. 4.19. Have given themselves over to lasciviousness.

CHAP. IV.
QVest. Whereas we find in the Catechism, of Gods enemies and ours, an
endeavor to prove Christ the Lord by way of distinction from the one God, as
he blasphemes to that end several Scriptures quoted, and many Questions stated;
as that Jesus is the Lord born of his Mother Mary; that he dyed to be Lord over
quick and dead; that God raised him up from the dead; that he was approved of
God by miracles which God did by him; that the Son can do nothing of himself,
but what he sees the Father do; that he abode in his Fathers house, because he
abode in his Fathers commandments; that he is the Son of God; that the Father
is greater then he; that he shall deliver up his kingdom to his father; that at
the same time Thomas calls him, and the Scriptures call him God, himself and the
Scripture confess him to have a god; by these does that wretched Creature prove
what he intends; to wit, that the Lord Jesus Christ is so our Lord, as not our
God, very God with the Father? or does he prove that which we shall never deny
him, the humanity of our Mediator, according to the Scriptures; for such an
high Priest it became us to have; let us hear what testimony the Scripture
gives to the Godhead of Christ; and that he may see the wisdom of that God whom
he has blasphemed, as a token of vengeance to him, bring out one dart for the
heart of him and his blasphemy out of his own quiver: The two first Scriptures
he quotes, in this God defying Chapter, what say they and other Scriptures?

Answ. He begins with Ephesians. 4.5. and 1 Cor. 8.6. One Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom are all things.

Col. 2.9. In him (in Christ) dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily.

Isaiah 9.6. For unto us a child is born, and unto us a Son is given, the
Government is upon his shoulders, he shall call his name wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace.

Jer. 23.5. Behold the days come, says the Lord, I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, and this is the name whereby they shall call him, the Lord
our righteousness.

Mat. 16.16. Then Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
living God.

John 1.1. In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and that
word was God.

John 20.28. Then Thomas answered and said, Thou art my Lord and my God.

Acts 15.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves and to all the flock whereof
the holy Ghost has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God which he has
purchased with his own blood.

Romans 9.5. Of whom concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all,
blessed for ever, Amen

1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy great is the Mystery of godliness, God
manifested in the flesh.

1 John 5.20. But we know the Son of God is come; Christ; and we are in him
that is true; Christ, that is, his son Jesus Christ, this same is very God; and
eternal life.

Ioh. 3.13. No man ascends up to heaven, but he that descended from heaven,
the Son of man which is in heaven; before Abraham was I am:

Phil. 2 6 Who being in the form of God thought it no robbery to be equal with
God took on him the form of a servant.

Mat. 24.44. The Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool.

Joh. 5.17, 18 My Father works hitherto and I work therefore the Jews sought
the more to kill him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, but said also
that God was his Father, and made himself equal with God.

Joh. 19.7. The Jews answered, we have a Law by which he ought to dye; because
he made himself the Son of God.

Romans 8.3, 15 God sending his own son, not sparing his own Son.

Isa. 7.14 Behold the Virgin shall conceive and bear a son and she shall call
his name Emanuel, God with us.

John 3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.

Ioh. 1.14. And the word was made flesh and we saw the glory thereof as the
only begotten son of the father.

Col. 1.13. Giving thanks unto the Father who has translated us into the
kingdom of his dear Son, who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born
of every creature; for by him were all things created, which are in heaven and
which are in earth things visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or
Dominions, or Principalities, or powers all things are created for him, and by
him: and he is before all things, and in him all things consist.

Heb. 1.6. Let all the Angels of God worship him: verse. 8. Unto the Son he
says, O God, thy throne is for ever and ever: verse. 10. And thou Lord in the
beginning have established the earth, and the heavens are the works of thy
hands.

Heb. 3.3. Christ is worthy of more honor then Moses, inasmuch as he that
built the house, has more honor then the house; and he that built all things
is God.

Heb. 13.8. Jesus the same yesterday, to day, and for ever.

Isa. 45.21, 22, 23. Who has declared this from the beginning, who has told
it of old? have not I the Lord? there is none other God beside me, a just God,
and a Savior; look unto me, and ye shall be saved all the ends of the earth;
for I am a God, and there is none other; I have sworn by my self, every knee
shall bow unto me and every tongue shall swear by me; compared to Romans 14.10,
11, 12. We shall appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; for it is written,
I live says the Lord, and every knee shall bow to me, and all tongues shall
confess unto God: so then every one shall give account of himself to God.

Isa. 44.4.44.6. Rev. 1.18. compared; who has wrought and done it? he that
calls the generation from the beginning: I the Lord am the first, and with
the last, I am the same; thus says the Lord the King of Israel, and his
Redeemer the Lord of hosts, I am the first and the last, and without me there
is no God; And I saw seven Candlesticks, and in the midest one like the Son of
man, and he said, I am the first and the last.

Pro. 8.22. The Lord has possessed me, the beginning of his ways, I was
before his works of old.

Mar 3.1. Behold I will send my Messenger, and he shall prepare my way before
me; and the Lord whom ye seek shall speedily come to his Temple, even the
Messenger of the Covenant, whom ye desire.

Psalm. 45.6. Unto the Son he says, O God thy Throne is for ever and ever.

Esa. 40.3 A voice cries in the wilderness, prepare ye the way of the Lord,
make straight in the desert a path for our God.

CHAP. V.
QVest. We find the Blasphemer pretending to the Letter of the Scripture,
without Consequent or Comment; how then does Ephesians. 4.4. one Spirit resolve his
Question, how many holy Spirit's of Christians are there?

Ans. No ways.

Quest Whereas then he would ungod God the holy Ghost, he makes a phrase and
gives the holy Ghost a new name, The holy spirit of Christians whereas we find
no such thing in Scripture, but the holy Spirit of God; what shall we then say
to such a Blasphemer, who would under pretense of express Scripture, put on us,
that for Scripture which we never find there, and that to so damned an end?

Answ. The Lord rebuke thee Satan, to the Law and to the Testimony.

Quest. The Scriptures indeed are the rule of faith; and no God ought we to
worship but the God in the Scriptures: What Scripture have we then that
expressly proves the Deity of God the holy Ghost?

Answ. The first Scripture being unhappily quoted by our Adversary, being 1 Chronicles. 10.11. I shall therefore first give you, The Spirit searches all
things, Esaias 6.9. compared to Act. 28.25. and I heard the voice of (Jehovah)
the Lord; saying, whom shall I send? And I said, here am I, send me: Then he
said, go and fay unto this people, they shall hear and not understand, etc. In
Acts its quoted, well said the holy Ghost by Esaias the Prophet, go unto this
people and say, by hearing ye shall hear and not understand.

Heb. 9.14. The etternal Spirit.

1 Cor. 3.16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple of God? and that the spirit of
God dwells in you?

1 Cor. 6.19. Know you not that your body is the Temple of the holy Ghost,
which dwells in you, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your Spirit,
for they are Gods.

2 Cor. 6.16. And what Agreement has the Temple of God with Idols? for ye are
the Temple of the living God.

Acts 5.3, 4. Then said Peter, Ananias, why has Satan filled thy heart that
thou should lie unto the holy Ghost? Thou have not lied unto man but unto
God. Esaias 40.9. Say unto the Cities of Judah, behold your God, ver. 10. behold
the Lord God will come with power, ver. 13. who has instructed the Spirit of
the Lord, or was his Counselor? ver. 15. Behold the Nations are as a drop of
a bucket, and are counted as the dust of the balance; Behold he takes away the
sles as a little dust, verse. 17. All Nations before him are as nothing, less
then nothing, and vanity, ver. 18. To whom then will ye liken God?

Luke 1.3. And the Angel said, the holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the most high shall overshadow thee: the Spirit of God has made me.

1 John 1.5, 7. Three bear Record in heaven, and these three are one.

Mat. 28.19. Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Genesis 1.2. And the Spirit of God moved upon the waters.

1 Cor. 12.1. Now concerning gifts, verse. 4. There are diversities of gifts,
but the same Spirit, verse. 6. And there are diversities of operations, but God
is the same, which works all in all: ver. 8, 9. To one is given by the Spirit
the word of wisdom: to another the word of knowledge by the same Spirit: to
another faith by the same Spirit: to another the gift of healing by the same
Spirit: verse. 11. All these things works the self-same Spirit, distributing
to every one severally, as he will.

Mat 12.28, 31.32. I cast out Devils by the Spirit of God: therefore I say unto
you, every sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven unto men but the blasphemy of
the holy Ghost shall not be forgiven unto men; and whosoever speaks against
the holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, either in this world, or the world
to come.

Quest. Are there not some workings of the Spirit in the hearts of men already
regenerate, that are extraordinary and miraculous? such as in the Acts, which
is called receiving the holy Ghost; the holy Ghost falling upon them, etc. in
use for confirmation of the primitive Church, some that are proper to such a
state, as the Spirit of Adoption: Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth the
Spirit of his Son; of Consolation, so the Spirit is called the Comforter, which
Christ prays shall be sent; of assurance and evidence; after ye believed, ye
were fealed with the holy Spirit of promise; if there be, and that this is the
meaning of such Scriptures, do they then prove that Regeneration, Conversion,
and the first beginnings of grace are in us, without the working of the Spirit,
until after, as our Catechist would insinuate? or else do they prove only the
further and gradual workings of the Spirit? what say the Scriptures?

Answ. 2 Cor. 3.8. The Gospel by which we are converted, is called the
Ministration of the Spirit.

Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the kingdom of God. Mat. 3.12. I baptize you with water, unto amendment of
life: but he that comes after me, will baptize you with the holy Ghost, and
with fire.

Joel 2.28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh.

2 Cor. 6.11, 18. But ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are purified
in the name of our Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

1 Ioh. 3.24. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.

Romans 8.2. The Law of the Spirit of life which is in Christ Jesus, has freed
me from the Law of sin and death.

CHAP. VI.
QVest. That Scripture, Romans 5.10. We shall be saved by his life; is it so to
be understood, as Saints ought not to expect salvation by the death of Christ,
as Biddle insinuates? What say other Scriptures to this thing?

Answ. Romans 8.3. God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
condemned sin in the flesh, Heb. 2.9, 14, 15. that he by the grace of God
should taste death for all men, that through death he might destroy him that
had the power of death, that is, the Devil, and deliver them who through fear
of death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage, 2 Cor. 5.14. If one dyed
for all, then were all dead; and that he died for all, that they that live,
should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which dyed for them,
and rose again. 1 Timothy 2.6 who gave himself a ransom for all men.

Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and
give his life a ransom for many.

Mat. 26.28. For this is my blood of the New Testament, which is shed for many,
for the remission of sins, Heb. 9.28. Christ wat once offered to bear the sins
of many. Esaias 53.11. By knowledge shall my righteous servant Justify many, for
he shall bear their iniquities.

Ephesians. 5.25 Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it; without blood
there is no remission; he dyed for us, and gave himself for us.

Ephesians. 1.7. We have redemption through his blood.

Heb. 9.12. But by his own blood entered he once into the holy place, and
obtained redemption for us.

Heb. 13.13. Therefore even Jesus that he might sanctify his own people by his
own blood, suffered without the gate.

1 Pet. 1.18, 19 Knowing ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold; but with the precious blood of Christ.

1 John 1.7. And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sin.

Rev. 1.5. Who has washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Romans 4.25.

Isa. 53.5. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our
iniquities.

1 Cor. 15.3. Christ dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures: he laid on
him the iniquities of us all.

Quest, But how is the other Question, of Christ his being given, raised and
exalted by another to be a Savior, according to those Scriptures, a name
given, exalted to be a Savior, raised unto Israel a Savior, to be understood?

Answ. As are those Scriptures in the fourth Chapter of the humanity of Christ:
else the Scripture tells us, 1 Timothy 2, 6. He gave himself a ransom: he gave
himself for us.

CHAP. VIII.
QVest. Whereas he would impudently apply that Scripture, Joh. 3.13. No man
has ascended into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, the Son of man
which is in heaven: and what other Scriptures speak him coming down from
heaven, coming forth from God, and such like; to this erroneous doctrine, that
Christ as man, first ascended into heaven, was there, and came down thence, ere
he showed himself to the world; is that according to truth? or does he this
merely to avoid the force these Scriptures have in them to prove the Deity of
the Son? what Scriptures have you, that will sufficiently prove he did not so
ascend as man, ere he was discovered to the world?

Answ. Mat. 1.8. The birth of Jesus was on this wise; when as his Mother Mary
was espoused to Joseph, before they came together, she was found with child of
the holy Ghost: behold a Virgin shall be with child.

Luke 1 30,31. And the Angel said unto her, Mary; Behold thou shall conceive in
thy womb, and bring forth a Son.

Mat. 2.8. Search diligently for the young child: ver. 9. stood over where the
young child was: verse. 11. They saw the young child with Mary his Mother:
verse. 13. Arise, take the child and his Mother: for Herod seeks the child to
destroy him: verse. 14, 15. He arose and took the babe and his Mother, and
departed into Egypt, and was there until the death of Herod; that it might be
fulfilled which was spoken of the Lord by the Prophet, saying, Out of Egypt
have I called my son: verse. 19, 20, 21. And when Herod was dead, behold an
Angel of the Lord appeared in a dream to Joseph in Egypt, saying, Arise, and
take the babe and his Mother, and go into the Land of Israel: Then he rose up,
and took the babe and his Mother, and came into the Land of Israel. Verse. 23.
And went and dwelt in a City called Nazareth.

Luke 2.40. And the child grew, and waxed strong in the Spirit, 42. Now when he
was twelve years old. 43. The child Jesus remained in Jerusalem. 51.52. And he
went down with them, and came to Nazareth and was subject to them, and Jesus
increased in wisdom and stature.

Joh. 20.17. Jesus said unto her, Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended unto
my Father: but I ascend unto my father and your father.

Quest. These Scriptures prove indeed sufficiently, that Jesus was conceived
among us; for she was with child; born among us: seen among us: removing from
place to place among us: growing in years and stature, and gifts among us: and
after all this his own testimony, after his resurrection, do sufficiently
prove, he ascended not as man, before he descended; what use then shall those
Scriptures turn to, which he abuses to that end?

Ioh. 3.13. No man has ascended, but he that has descended, the Son of man
which is in heaven.

John. 8.42. I came from God. Verse. 29. I am from above.

John 13.1.3. Jesus knowing that he came from God.

Ioh. 16.28, 30. I came forth from the Father: by this we believe that thou
came from God.

Answ. Add them all to that Testimony afforded us by the Scripture, Romans 9.5.
Who is God over all, blessed for evermore, Amen.

Quest. Whereas our Catechist quotes several Scriptures, importing that he that
believes shall be saved; if we hold fast our confidence to the end; if a man
purge himself, if through the spirit we mortify the deeds of the flesh, we
shall live; if we repent, our sins shall be blotted out; if we do these things,
happy are we; if we suffer with him, we shall also reign: and whereby he
deducts -- that the promises of the Gospel are propounded conditionally to
faith, perseverance, obedience, doing and uttering, which indeed is true, but
mean time conceals that Truth, which ought to be considered herewith, namely,
that we may perform these conditions, we must have recourse to an absolute
promise: are there not therefore Scriptures that make all these first to be
Gods gift, ere they are our Act? repeat some among many.

Answ. Gal. 5.22. The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, etc.

Ephesians. 6.23. Peace be to the Brethren, and love, with faith, from God the
Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.

Heb. 12.2. Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith.

Ephesians. 2.8. By grace are ye saved through faith in Jesus; and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.

Acts 26.22. I obtained help of God, and continue unto this day.

2 Timothy 2.14. And the Lord will deliver me from every evil work, and will
preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdom.

Heb. 13.20, 21. The God of peace that brought again from the dead, our Lord
Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, thorough the blood of the
everlasting Covenant, make you perfect in all good works, to do his will,
working in you what is pleasing in his sight thorough Jesus Christ, to whom be
praise for ever and ever, Amen.

Eze. 11.19. And I will give them one heart, and I will put a new spirit in
their bowels, and will take their stony heart out of their bodies, and I will
give them a heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and keep my
Judgments, and execute them. Hosea 14.9. The ways of the Lord are just, and
the r ghteous shall walk in them.

Phil. 2.13. For it is God that works in you, both to will and to do, of his
good pleasure.

Acts 5.31. Him has God raised up, with his right hand, to be a Prince and
Savior to Israel, to give repentance and forgiveness of sins.

Acts. 11.17, 18. Forasmuch then as God gave them a like gift as he did unto
us, who believed in the Lord Jesus Christ, who was I that I could let God? when
they heard these things, they held their peace, and glorified God, saying, then
has God also granted unto the Gentiles repentance unto life!

Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his bounty, and patience, and
long-suffering, not knowing that the bountifulness of God leads thee to
repentance. 2 Timothy 2.24, 25. But the Servant of the Lord must not strive, but
be gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently,
instructing them with meekness that are contrary-minded, proving if God at any
time will give them repentance, that they may acknowledge the Truth, and come
to amendment out of the snare of the Devil, of whom they are taken prisoners to
do his will.

Phil. 1.19. Unto you it is given for Christ, that not only you should believe
in him, but also suffer for his sake.

CHAP. IX.
QVest. Though the many Scriptures cited do prove the Divinity of the Son, and
we do in the main refer all other by strokes thereat (one whereof we have in
this Chapter) to that distinct head, yet whereas here is quoted Mat. 9.2, 3, 4,
importing that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins; and that the
multitude glorified God, which had given so much power unto men

Acts 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and Savior to give repentance
and remission of sins to Israel; which Scripture he accommodates by his
Question, to his Lie; namely, that Christ forgiving sins on earth and heaven,
does it as a man empowered and exalted by God, and not as God: That so he may
remove the irresistible force of this argument, He that forgives sins, is God;
but the man Jesus Christ forgives sins: Ergo. Have you therefore no Scripture
that directly proves this thing; that what the Lord Jesus did in the work of
Redemption and forgiveness of sins, he did it as God? and so what ere act he
did as Mediator, he did by virtue of his Divine nature.

Acts 20.28. The Church of God which he has purchased with his own blood.

CHAP. X.
QVest. What shall we say to this Blasphemer, who yet in despite of Jesus
Christ, God blessed for ever, abuses that place, John 22.23. The father
judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, that all men
should honor the Son, even as they honor the Father; to th s cursed end. The
Son is not to be honored as the Father, because he has not the same esteem
with the Father, but the same judiciary power; that so he may divert the dint
of two unanswerable Arguments in this glorious Text. 1. He that is Judge of all
the world, is God: but the Son is Judge of all the world. Ergo Genesis 18.22, 25.
And Abraham stood before the Lord, and said, Shall not the Judge of all the
world do right? And the Lord answered. If I shall find 50. persons in Sodom
righteous. I will spare the place for their sakes. 2. The second is, He that is
to be Honored even as the Father, is equal to the Father; but the Son is to be
Honored even as the Father, Ergo. So that though there be enough in the naming
this Scripture, to confute this child of Satan, yet have ye no Scripture over
and above those Scriptures already brought to vindicate the Divinity of the Son
that expressly proves the Son is honored as he is, and because he is God?

Answ. 1 Pet. 3.15. Sanctify the Lord God in your hearts, that they may be
ashamed which blame your good conversation in Christ.

Luke 17.15, 16, 17. Then one of them when he saw that he was healed, turned
back, and with a loud voice praised God, and fell down on his face at his feet,
and gave him thanks; and he was a Samaritan. But Jesus answered and said, Are
there not ten cleansed, but where are the nine? There were none found to give
God thanks save this stranger.

Quest. Since in this Chapter he belches out yet more blasphemy, what shall be
said in answer to his perverting of this Scripture? John 5 27. he has
authority to execute Judgment, because he is the Son of man; Christ therefore,
says he, had it not as he is God; and that Rev. 1.5, 6, 11, 12. Unto him which
washed us from our own sins in his own blood, be glory and dominion; worthy is
the Lamb that was slain; when says he, Saints and Angels praise him, not
because he is very God, of very God, but because he died for us.

Answ. These are sufficiently spoken to in the Scriptures to the other Answer;
yet more to follow him, in regard in this Question he blasphemes the term very
God of very God, see Phil. 2.5, 6.7 8.9, Let the same mind be in you, which was
in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it no robbery to be
equal with God; but he made himself of no reputation, and took on him the form
of a Servant, and was made like unto man, and was found in shape as a man; he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross wherefore God also highly exalted him, and gave him a name above every
name.

1 John 5.20. But we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us a mind
to know him that is true and we are in him that is true; that is, in his Son
Jesus Christ; this same is very God, and eternal life.

John 1.14. And the word was made flesh, and pitched his tents among us: and we
saw the glory thereof as the glory of the only begotton Son of the Father,
full of grace and truth.

CHAP. XI.
QVest. There being two parts of the Priesthood, of Christ's satisfaction, and
intercession, according to the Scriptures; its the design of this Chapter to
make void the first of them, namely the satisfaction of Christ by making the
Priesthood of Christ merely to consist with latter namely his intercession;
contrary to that rule, What God has joined, let no man put asunder: And
whereas he does this, First, by Heb 8.4. If he were on earth, he should not be
a Priest. Heb. 7.15, 16. There arises another Priest, made not after the Law
of a Carnal Commandment, but after the power of an endless life; hereby
concluding, that Christ was not a Priest until after his death and
resurrection; and if so, no Priest upon the Cross; since then this is so
weighty a business, what says the Scripture in other places?

Answ. The Scriptures to this thing are already cited in the sixth Chapter. All
centring in that, 1 Cor. 15.3. Christ died for us according to the Scriptures.

Quest. But whereas that Scripture, Heb. 7.25. he is able to save, seeing he
ever lives to make intercession for us, is alleged: does he save only by his
intercession, or by his intercession without his satisfaction? What other
Scriptures therefore have you to prove Christ to be a Priest, and a Priest able
to save, because he offered up himself?

Answ. Many, but some of the principal our adversary names, I cannot tell why,
unless that we should not.

Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered up to bear the sins of many.

Heb. 10.11, 12. This man after he had offered one sacrifie for sins for ever,
sat down at the right hand of God; for by one offering he has perfected for
ever them that are sanctified.

Heb. 7.26.27. For such a High Priest it became us to have, which is holy,
harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher then the Heavens;
which needed not daily, as these Highpriests, to offer up a sacrifie, first
for his own sins, and then for the peoples for that he did once when he offered
up himself.

Quest. Does our Catechist pretend to expres place of Scripture, and yet tells
us so impudent and known a lie, as that Christ entered into the holy place to
offer himself, as in his nineth Question, in this Chapter, intimating he
offered himself not here; what will you then say to so bold a Blasphemer?

Answ. Acts 13.10. Oh full of all subtilty, and all mischief, the child of the
Devil. and enemy of all righteousness! wilt not thou leave to pervert the
straight ways of the Lord?

Quest. What means that place in Heb. 9.12. By his own blood entered he into the
holy place; means it that Christ was not a Priest? etc. as this lying wretch
insinuates from this place, that Christ offered not himself till he went into
the holy place; or rather means it that Christ by his offering himself, and
suffering upon the Cross, then being a Priest, went up to God? rehearse some
passages in this Chapter.

Answ. Verse 12.13, 14, 15. But Christ being come an High Priest of good things
to come, by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle, not made with hands, neither
by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own blood entered he once into the
holy place, and obtained Redemption for us; for if the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and the ashes of an Hiefer, sprinkling them that are unclean,
sanctifies as to the purifying of the flesh; how much more shall the blood of
Christ, which through the eternal spirit offered up himself without spot unto
God? ver. 24, 25, 26. for Christ is not entted into holy places that are made
with hands, which are similitudes of the true Sanctuary, but is entered into the
very heaven, to appear now in the sight of God for us; not that he should offer
himself often, as the High Priest entered into the holy place every year with
other blood; (for then must he have often suffered, since the foundation of the
world) but now in the end of the world has he appeared once to put away sins
by the sacrifice of himself.

Quest. shough indeed that oblation once offered for the sins of many, which
Christ offered up himself, was the great act of his Priestly office, yet was
not Christ as Priest before his suffering? or came he to his Priestly office by
suffering? That is to say, did he first suffer, and then was a Priest? Is that
meant in that place, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest?

Answ. Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; so speaks the
Psalmist before Christ, Psalm. 110.4.

Quest. Seeing we have such an High Priest, let us come boldly unto the Throne
of grace, Heb. 4.14.16. is the proper use indeed we ought to make of the
Priesthood of Christ, but principally respecting his intercession? what other
Scripture therefore does the Scripture direct us to, to be made of his
satisfaction?

Answ. Luke 1.68. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, because he visited and
Redeemed his people; and has raised up the horn of salvation unto us, in the
house of his Servant David, ver. 74, 75. that we being delivered out of the
hands of our enemies, should serve him without fear, all the days of our life
in holiness and righteousness before him. Luke 2.8. to the 14. Romans 5.8, 9, 11.
While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us: much more then being justified
by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him; and not only so, but we
rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the
atonement.

1 Pet. 21.24. Christ suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should
follow his steps, who his own self bare our sins in his body on the tree, that
we being delivered from sin should live in righteousness; 2 Cor. 5,21. For he
has made him to be sin for us, that we should be made the righteousness of God
through him.

CHAP. XII.
QVest. Its demanded whither it were the will and purpose of God, that Christ
should, suffer the death of the Cross? what say you in answer?

Answ. We say, answer and confess that he was delivered by the determinate
council and foreknowledge of God; and that what was done, was whatever Gods
hand and council derermined before to be done; only we would herewith take in
that 9. to the Heb. 13. which says expressly that Christ through the eternal
spirit, offered himself to God.

Quest. Reconciliation being properly betwixt two persons at variance; the
Mediator of Reconciliation, has in both these, respecting God and us, made an
atonement and reconciliation: And because God was the party offended, the
Scripture therefore speaks that man was reconciled; hence are we said to be
reconciled to God; God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself; Christ
suffered for sins, that he might bring us to God.

But the adversary of all truth takes occasion hence to insinuate that God was
not at ods with us; and if so, needed no satisfaction: Therefore says he,
Christ died not to reconcile God to us, but us to God: That so he may null that
glorious work of Christ's satisfaction: To which in its proper place the
Scriptures have already spoken; yet that this false conclusion may fall, do not
the Scriptures say, we lay under the displeasure of God, which was done away by
that work of his satisfaction?

Answ. We were the Children of wrath as well as others: Ephesians. 2.3. Christ has
redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, when he was made a Curse for us.

Gal. 2.13. Jesus which delivers from the wrath to come.

1 These. 1.10. -- Romans 5.9. Saved them from wrath to come through him.

Quest. If we lay under the curse of the Law, and were children of wrath, and
this curse and wrath are we by this Mediator redeemed from; then indeed has he
reconciled God unto us by his satisfaction, that glorious part of his
Mediation: but have you no Scripture that does expressly hold out our
reconciliation to God, by the blood of Christ, to be in order to our acceptance
with God?

Answ. Col. 1.19, 20, 21. For it pleased the Father that in him should all
fullness dwell, and by him to reconcile all things to himself: and to set at
peace, through the blood of his cross, both the things in heaven, and the
things on earth: and you which were in times past strangers and enemies,
because your minds were set on evil works, has he now also reconciled in the
body of his flesh, through death, to make you holy and unblameable, and without
fault in his sight.

Romans 5.9.10. When we were enemies we were reconciled to God through his son;
and not only so, but we all rejoice in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by
whom we have now received the atonement.

Quest. When the Scripture says Christ dyed for our sins, our sins indeed
procured his death Accidentally: for we might have sinned, and Christ not have
dyed, which is causa causata but whereto does the Scripture assign the first
principal and moving cause which is causa causans?

Answ. John 3.16. Grd so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son.
Gal. 2.20. Who loved me, and gave himself for me.

Rev. 1.5. Unto him that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.

Quest. Christ indeed learned obedience by the things he suffered, left us an
example, brought us to God, destroyed him that had the power of death,
sanctify us with his own blood, makes us live together, with him, not live to
our selves; which are glorious ends; the Scripture tells us of the death of
Christ: but are these the only ends of Christ's death the Scripture mentions? if
not, what other principal end is here omitted?

Answ. Ephesians. 1.7. We have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins.

Col. 1.14. Same words, Ephesians. 1.14. Redemption of the possession purchased.

Gal. 4.5. When the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his son, made of
woman, and made under the Law, that he might redeem them which were under the
Law.

Titus 2.13, 14. Our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he
might redeem us from all iniquities.

CHAP. XIII.
QVest. Were there neither Scripture nor Argument against the doctrine of
universal love and general Redemption, this were enough to a sober mind to
Question it, in that its bound up in the volume of our Authors Truth; and so
vigorously contended for by such a Master of heresy; And may cause our late
assertors thereof to blush to see their opinion touching so important an head
in Divinity, inserted in so black and Atheistical a Calender: But to the thing;
the Scriptures speaking Christ dyed for all gave himself a ransom for all,
tasted death for every man, gives life to the world, will have all men be
saved, all should come to repentance, for the sins of the whole world, etc. and
other such of a general tendency; how must they be understood? of a general
confused and universal love to men, so that God willed, and Christ effected the
Salvation of all men? or else according to restraint given us in other
Scriptures? to the Election of the Father: the prayer of Christ: the faith, and
obedience of men: the sheep of Christ: his Church: such whom his Father has
given him: his people; his peculiar people: and this general term all,
expounded by other Scriptures, to be many? which will if so, effectually prove,
that though Christ is indeed in common tendered, and propounded to all men, but
intended and effectually applied only according to these restraints. Rehearse
the Scriptures therefore on each of these.

Answ. Romans 9.11, 12.13. For ere the Children were born, and when they had done
neither good nor evil, that the purpose of God might remain according to
Election, not by works, but by him that calls, it was said, the elder shall
serve the younger, as it is written, I have loved Jacob, and hated Esau.

Romans 11.5. Even so then at this present is there a remnant according to the
election of grace; ver. 7. The Election have obtained it; the rest have been
hardened. v. 28. As touching the election, they are beloved for the Fathers sake.

John 17.9. I pray for them; I pray not for the world, but for them which thou
have given me, for they are thine.

Ioh. 3.16. God so loved the world, that whosoever believes on him, should not
perish, but have everlasting life.

John 12.46. I come a light into the world, that whosoever believes in me,
should not abide in the darkness.

Acts 10.43. To him also give the Prophets witness that through his name, all
that believe in him shall receive remission of sins.

Romans 3.22. The righteousness of God by the Faith of Jesus Christ, unto all,
and upon all that believe.

Heb. 5.9. Being consecrate, was made the Author of eternal Salvation to all
them that obey him.

Mat. 25.33. And he shall set his sheep on his right hand, and the Goats on his
left.

John 10.26, 27. My sheep hear my voice; and I give unto them eternal life.

John 10.15. I lay down my life for my Sheep.

Mat. 15.24. And he answered, and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep
of the house of Israel.

Acts 20.28. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to all the flock whereof
the holy Ghost had made you overseers, to feed the Church of God, which he has
purchased with his own blood.

Ephesians. 5.25. Husbands, love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and
gave himself for it.

John 6.29. And this is the Fathers will who has sent me, that of all which he
has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last
day.

Mat. 1.21. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his name
Jesus, for he shall save his people from their sins.

Titus 2.13, 14. Looking for the blessed hope, and appearing of the glory of
the mighty God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that
he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto
himself, zealous of good works.

Mat. 20.28. The Son of man came not to be served, but to serve, and to give
his life a ransom for many.

Mat. 26.28. This is the blood of the new Testament which is shed for many, for
the remission of sins: Heb. 9.28. Christ was once offered to take away the sins
of many.

Isa. 53.11. But his knowledge shall my righteous servant justify many; for he
shall bear their iniquities.

Quest. These Scriptures are undeniable as to this great point; but is there
not a general, providential, temporal good, mercy and salvation in God, common
to all men? yea to irrational creatures as well as men?

Answ. Psalm. 145.8, 9. The Lord does good to all, and his tender mercies are
over all his works.

Psalm. 36. O Lord, thou savest man and beast.

Quest. In this Chapter we have another blow at the Godhead of the Son; The
Scriptures abused to this end are such as tell us, Christ was raised by God, by
the power of God, by the glory of the Father, and such like: whence it is
concluded, Christ rose not by his own power, but by the power of another: Is
that therefore the language of these Scriptures; which tells us, he was not
raised by himself? Touching that, we must address to other Scriptures; what
therefore says the Lord himself touching this thing?

Answ. John 2.19, 20, 21. Jesus answered, and said unto them, Destroy this
Temple, and in three days I will raise it up again: then said the Jews, Forty
and six years was this Temple a building, and will thou rear it in three days?
but he spoke of the Temple of his body.

John 10.17. Therefore does my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that
I may take it again: no man takes it from me: But I lay it down of my self; I
have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again.

Quest. This discourse of the resurrection was improvidently meddled with to
that end intended; for if the Lord Jesus Christ did by his own power raise
himself from the dead, as those Scriptures prove, then only was he God; yet
have you not other Scriptures do prove, that when God the Father raised up the
Son from the dead, the Son then raised up himself, inasmuch as the Father and
the Son work together in one and the same work?

Answ. John 5.21. For likewise as the Father raises up the dead, and quickneth
them, so the Son quickens whom he will.

John 5.19. Whatsoever things the Father does, the same things does the Son
also; the father works hitherto, and I work.

CHAP. XV.
QVest. To usher in the doctrine of works, way is made for it by confounding
the terms, Justification and Righteousness; as if they were but one and the
same thing, when indeed there is nothing less; for the Scripture indeed tells us
of a righteousness which is of the Law, but nowhere a Justification which is of
the Law. That we may therefore understand them both, let us hear the Scripture
speaking touching them both; and first for Justification; does not the
Scripture expressly say, it cannot be righteousness in us?

Answ. Psalm. 143.3. For in thy sight shall no man that lives be justified,
Romans 4.5. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is accounted for Righteousness.

Quest. Justification then cannot be righteousness in us, but accounted to us;
what is Justification then but remission of sins? and does not the Scripture
make our Justification to consist herein, that iniquities are forgiven, and sin
not imputed?

Answ. Psalm. 32.1. Blessed is he whose iniquity is forgiven, and whose sin is
covered: blessed is the man to whom God imputes not sin.

Quest. But how prove you this is meant to be Justification? does not the
Apostle Paul, treating on this very thing Justification, quote this very place,
summing up Justification in two parts; Imputation of righteousness without
works, non-Imputation of sin?

Answ. Romans 4.2, 5, 6, 7, 8. For if Abraham were Justified by works, he had
wherewith to boast, but not before God; But to him that works not, but
believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is accounted for
Righteousness; even as David declares the blessedness of the man to whom the
Lord Imputes righteousness without works: saying, Blessed are they whose
iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are covered: blessed is the man to whom
the Lord imputes not sin.

Quest. What then is our Righteousness? does not the Scripture tell us, its the
satisfaction and obedience of Christ, in life and death performed for us, and
of God freely imputed to us that believe? report the language of the Scripture
touching this glorious import, first of his satisfaction?

Answ. 1 Cor. 2.2. For I determined to know nothing among you save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified. Esaias 53.5, 6. By his stripes we are healed, the Lord
has laid upon him the iniquities of us all.

Luke 22.20. This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you.

Romans 3.24. Justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption which is in
Christ Jesus; whom God has sent forth to be a reconciliation through faith in
his blood, to declare his righteousness to the forgiveness of sins.

Rom 5.8, 9. While we were yet sinners, Christ dyed for us; much more then,
being justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him.

Gal. 5.13. Christ has redeemed us from the Curse of the Law, when he was made
a Curse for us.

Ephesians. 1.7. By whom we have Redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness
of sins.

1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God, cleanses us from all
sin, Christ the Son of God cleanses from all sins.

Col. 2.10. Ye are complete in him.

Rom 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: so by the
obedience of one, shall many also be made righteous.

Quest. Its clear indeed, tha its the suffering of Christ, the obedience and
righteousness of Christ that makes us righteous, and justified; but then how
does the Scripture say, his faith was counted righteousness? Abrabam believed
in God, and he counted it for righteousness: Is it (contrary to the sense of
all the forementioned Scriptures) the act of faith, or the blood of Christ the
Object of faith, that justifies? in short, is Justification for our faith, or
by it? how say the Scriptures?

Answ. Ephesians. 2 10. By Grace are ye saved, through faith, and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God.

Romans 5.9. Being now justified by his blood.

Quest. But the Scriptures say, we are justified freely by grace, the
forgiveness of sins according to the riches of his grace; eternal life is the
gift of God, etc. Is it so, as if the gift of God, and the merit of Christ are
inconsistent? nay, rather do they ever act apart? may not, nay is not that
which is a free gift of God, respecting us, the price of blood respecting
Christ?

Answ. We need no farther then the Scriptures wrested on this very account.

Rom 3.24. We are justified freely by his grace, through the Redemption that is
in Christ Jesus.

Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have Redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of
sins, according to the riches of his grace.

Romans 6 23. The gift of God is eternal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Quest. Does not the Scripture say therefore positively, that we are bought
with a price? and that price is the precious blood of Jesus Christ?

Answ. 1 Cor. 6.20. For ye are bought with a price.

1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price; be not the Servants of men.

1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Knowing that ye were not redeemed with corruptible things, as
silver and gold, from your vain conversation, received by the traditions of the
fathers, but with the precious blood of Jesus Christ, as a Lamb undefiled, and
without spot.

Quest Nay, more, does not the Scripture expressly say, that without this price
of blood there is no remission?

Answ. Heb. 9.22. And almost all things are by the Law purged with blood, and
without shedding of blood there is no remission.

CHAP. XVI.
Quest. Our Savior tells us his Commandments are not grievous, his yoke is
easiy, and his burden light; this indeed is a slight proof of our Master of
Arts to conclude our possibility of keeping the Commandments of God: let us hear
the sense of the Apostle Paul to this very thing, affectionately expressing the
desire of his regenerate part to keep the Law of God, and his hearty closing
therewith making good that of our Savior: That his Commandments are not
grievous, his yoke is easy, and his burden light: yet withal plainly telling
us, that he was not able to keep them, by reason of his unregenerate part; and
in plain terms giving our Master of Arts the lie.

Answ. Romans 7.14. -- For we know the Law is spiritual, but I am carnal, sold
under sin; for that which I do I allow not; for that I would, that do I not;
but what I hate, that I do: now then its no more I that do it, but sin that
dwells in me; for I know in me, (that is in my flesh) dwells no good thing;
for to will is present with me; but how to perform that which is good I know
not; for the good that I would, I do not; but the evil which I would not, that
do I; I find then a Law, that when I would do good, evil is present with me;
for I delight in the Law of God after the inward man: but I see another Law in
my members, warring against the Law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity
to the Law of sin, which is in my members: Oh wretched man that I am! who shall
deliver me from this body of death?

Quest. In Truth this is an eminent experience, in this eminent Apostle, writ
for our instruction: but what more express Scriptures have you?

Answ. Eccl. 7.20. For there is not a just man upon the earth, that does good,
and sins not.

1 John 8.10. If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is
not in us; If we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and the truth is
not in us.

2 Cor. 3.5. We are not sufficient to think any thing as of our selves. Psalm.
14.3.2. Enter not into Judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no
man living be justified.

Esaias 64.6. We have all been as an unclean thing, and all our righteousness is
as filthy rags.

Quest. Indeed this makes little for the possibility of keeping the Law of God:
but yet more, are not these laws broken by us, ere we come unto act? and if so,
there is yet further impossibility.

Answ. Mat. 5.28. I say unto you, whosoever looks after a woman, to lust
after her, has committed Adultery with her already in his heart.

Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin?

Quest. Here is sin proved effectually to be in all, even the best men,
omitting good, committing evil; yea, and against their endeavors and desires,
and sin in thought; but what is this sin which the best men do, and cannot but
do? is it not the breaking, transgressing, or not keeping the Commandments of
God?

Answ. 1 John 3. Whosoever commits sin, transgresses also the Law; for sin
is the transgression of the Law.

Quest. But suppose a man exactly observe and do all the Law: some few points,
nay, ore breach in his time only excepted; does not that entitle him to the
guilt of all? so that he that keeps not all and every one, keeps none of the
Commandments?

Answ. James 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in
one point, is guilty of all.

Quest. If this be our possibility to keep the Commandments, the Lord be
merciful to me a sinner; but yet the Scriptures speak of keeping the
Commandments of God, doing the will of God, hearing and doing, to which
blessedness is annexed: is there not therefore a new obedience required of, and
practiced by the Saints, according to the tenor of such Scripture, which
though it be not perfection, yet is accounted to them as perfection, and has
blessedness intailed to it; That obebience centring on these two Bases
Sincerity and Faith.

Answ. Walk before me, and be perfect, etc. upright, seat Psalm. 1.1, 2. Blessed
is the man that walks not in the Counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in the
way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful; but his delight is in
Law of the Lord.

Gal. 3.21, 22. If there had been a Law given which could have given life,
surely righteousness should have been by the Law; but the Scripture has
concluded all under sin; that the promise, by the faith of Jesus Christ should
be given to them which believe.

Quest. But David said of himself he had keep the ways of the Lord; did he mean
perfectly? How could that be, since he is recorded (a fit example alleged by
Biddle) both an Adulterer and a Murderer? what can be then meant by his
keeping, but his sincerity? is not that his righteousness, cleaness of hands,
and his keeping the ways of God? namely, his not wickedly departing from God,
and his being upright before him? quote the very words already by Biddle, (for
which light we thank God, not Biddle) to the contrary end.

Psalm. 18.20. to 24. The Lord rewarded me according to my righteousness:
according to the cleanness of my hands has he recompensed me; for I have kept
the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from my God; for all his
judgments were before me, and I did not put away his Statutes from me; I was
also upright before him, and I kept my self from mine iniquity; therefore has
the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the
cleanness of my hands in his eysight.

Quest. What says Paul, whom before we find could not keep the commandments,
yet in Gods sight was accounted perfect; but how?

Answ. Phil. 3.7. That I might be found in him, not having mine own
righteousness which is of the Law, but that which is of the faith of Christ.

Quest. That the Lord Jesus himself did respect, and the Saints may, the
recompense of reward, is not denied by us: -- which is warranted by those
Scriptures that tell us, by well-doing we should seek for Honor, Glory and
Immortality: we should look for the blessed hope: But how is this to be looked
on as due unto us? ex debito, vel ex congruo? for our doing, or for our
suffering? or rather to the grace of God which pleases so to reward us? in
short, is the reward of merit or of grace?

Answ. Luke 17.7. to the 10. but which of you having a servant plowing, or
feeding Cattle, will say unto him by and by, when he is come from the field, go
and sit down to meat, and will not rather say unto him, Make ready wherewith I
may sup, and gird thy self, and serve me till I have eaten and drunken, and
afterward thou shall eat and drink does he thank that servant, because he did
those things that were commanded him? I trow not; so likewise you when you have
done all those things commanded you, say we are unprofitable servants, we have
done that which was our duty to do.

Ephesians. 2 8.9. By grace are ye saved through faith, and that not of your
selves, its the gift of God: not of works least any man should boast.

Quest. The Scripture tells us, we are chosen to be holy and unblameable: That
Christ gave himself for the Church, to present to himself a glorious Church not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and
without blemish. 2. That the gifts of Christ were for the protecting of the
Saints: we are exhorted to be perfect; prayed for, that we may stand perfect
and complete in all the will of God; and that our whole spirit, soul and body
be preserved blameless unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: and we have it
recorded, that Noah was a just man, and perfect in his generation; That
Zacharias and his wife Elizabeth were both righteous before God, walking in all
the commandments of the Lord blameless: if these and such like be intended of
perfection complete, is it not in respect to the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness and perfection to us; not of our own righteousness or perfection
in us?

Answ. I desire to be found in him, not having my own Righteousness. Phil. 3.9.

Quest. But rather is not the scope of those Scriptures, truly to press us to
aim at perfection and have it as a rule in our eye? nay does not the Apostle
Paul press such as he calls already perfect, at the same time to press on to
perfection, as not having yet attained perfection, though called perfect? let
us hear himself speak of himself and others.

Answ. Phil. 3.11, 12, 13, 14, 15. If by any means I might attain unto the
resurrection of the dead; not as though I had already attained, or were already
perfect; But I follow after, If I may apprehend that for which I am apprehended
of Christ Jesus; Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; But this
one thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth to
those things which are before, I press toward the mark, for the price of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus; let us therefore, as many as be perfect,
be thus minded.

Quest. When Paul was at his highest pitch, through the abundance of
Revelations, yet was he not then far from such an estate as perfection in
degree? what says he himself?

Answ. 2 Cor. 12. Lest I should be exalted above measure, through the abundance
of Revelations, there was given unto me a prick in the flesh.

Quest. But though the degree of perfection were not attained or attainable,
yet there is sincerity, which is perfection; there is an universal, general
obedience to every part of the Law of God, which is perfection too in Gods
account; so much these Scriptures compared with others declare; but can they
prove the complete pitch and degree of perfection? besides what is already
named, what say other Scriptures?

Answ. 1 Cor. 13.9, 10. For we know in part, and we prophecy in part.

Psalm. 19.12, 13. Who can understand his Errors? cleanse thou me from my secret
sins; keep back thy servant also from presumptuous sins.

Mat. 6. 12. Forgive us our Trespasses.

Mark 9.24. Lord, I believe, help thou my unbelief.

Col. 3.5. Mortify therefore your members which are upon the earth.

Psalm. 51.4. My sin is ever before me.

Quest. Touching good works enough has been said in the former chapter, to
evince that they have nothing to do in the business of Justification, so as
that God should justify us for, or because of our works: yet inasmuch as here
its again insisted on as the cause of Justification; repeat therefore the same
Scriptures here urged, which prove our Justification to be not of works but of
grace.

Answ. Ephesians. 8, 9. 10. By grace are ye saved through faith: and that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, not of works:

Romans 11.5. And if by grace, its no more of works, otherwise grace is no more
grace.

Quest. But good works are so to salvation, as is the Antecedent to the
Consequent: to say though we may not expect to be saved for them, yet we cannot
expect to be saved without them; what therefore the Scripture makes the proper
end of good works, are they not especially these, and such like as these?
obedience to God, the honor of our profession; the glory of God, the proof,
evidence and justification of our faith, a trial to the sincerity of our
profession, a sign of our state in grace, acceptance with God, and from the
whole, to put to silence evil men, and be a comfortable ground of peace in our
own s^uls. What says the Scriptures to each of these?

Answ. 1 These. 4.3. This is the will of God, even your Sanctification.

Titus 3.8. This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, That they which have believed in God may be careful to maintain
good works: These things are good and profitable unto men.

Ephesians. 4.1. I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, that you walk
worthy of the vocation whereunto ye are called.

Mat. 5.16. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good
works, and glorify your father which is in heaven.

James 2.14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 24, 25. What does it profit my
brethren though a man say he has faith, and have not works? will faith save
him? if a brother be naked and destitute of daily food, and one of you say unto
them, Depart in peace, be you warmed and filled; notwithstanding you give them
not those things that are needful to the body: what does it profit? even so
faith if it has not works, is dead. Was not Abraham our father justified by
works? Thou believe that there is one God: thou do well; the Devils also
believe and tremble; but will thou know O vain man that faith without works is
dead? was not Abraham our father justified by works, when he had offered his
son Isaac upon the altar? see thou how faith wrought with his works? and by
works was faith made perfect.

1 John 3.7, 10. Little children, let no man deceive you; he that does
righteousness, is righteous, even as he is righteous, in this the children of
God are manifest, and the Children of the devil: whosoever does not
righteousness, is not of God.

1 John 2.29. If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one which
does righteousness is born of him.

Acts 10.35. He that fears him, and works righteousness, is accepted of him.

Heb. 13.18. Pray for us; for we trust we have a good conscience in all things
willing to live honestly.

1 Pet. 3.16. Having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as
ev l doers, they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good conversation in
Christ.

1 Pet. 2.15. For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put to
silence the ignorance of foolish men.

Acts 23.1. And Paul earnestly beholding the Council, said, Men and brethren, I
have lived in all good conscience toward God, until this day.

Quest. We are now come to that grand Question, touching the perseverance of
the Saints wherein we have many ^criptures brought, telling us that the
righteous may turn away from his righteousness, and sin unto death, and that
for his iniquity which he has committed he shall dye.

Eze. 18.24.33.13. Is there any denies a temporal death according to these
Scriptures? have ye not other examples agreeing with them that sickness and
death are inflicted on good men, under the Gospel for their miscarriages?

Answ. 1 Cor. 13. -- For this cause some of you are sick, and some are fallen
asleep.

Quest. But do these or other Scriptures following prove that doctrine to be
false, Once in Christ and ever in Christ? as we have taken for granted in the
question of Biddle: The Scriptures are such as tell some shall depart from the
faith; some have made Shipwreck of faith, cast off their faith erred from the
faith; overthrown the faith of some; several exhortations in Scripture, that we
take heed we depart not from the living God; left we be hardened thorough the
deceitfulness of sin; lest any man fall after the example of unbelief; lest
being led away by the error of the wicked, fall from their own stedfastness;
least any man fail of the grace of God; lest by any means the Tempter tempts
us, and the Apostles labor be in vain; lest we destroy our weak brother by our
knowledge; and the Apostle, lest when he preach unto others, himself should be
cast away: several other positive Scriptures speaking, such Saints as were
enlightened, have tasted the heavenly gift, made partakers of the holy Ghost,
tasted the good word of God, and the powers of the world to come; if they fall
away; that some are cursed children, having forsaken the right way, and have
gone astray: That some after they have escaped the pollutions of the world, are
again entangled therein, and overcome, who after they have known the way of
righteousness, turn from the holy Commandment delivered to them; and to
conclude, if a man abide not in Christ, he is cast forth and withers; every
branch in him that bears not fruit he takes away. Do not some of them prove
that hypocrites may go far in the business of Religion, and have much light,
much experience, yea faith, (though temporary) and yet fall away? do not others
of them, as the last, prove, that such men may have the profession of Christ
and be members of the visible Church of Christ, and so said to be in him; yet
being strange from the work of regeneration, and implantation, in the end be
cast out? But notwithstanding all this; do any of these Scriptures, or all of
them prove, that a real member of Christ's mystical body, or a true Believer,
may fall from that state, lofe his faith, and finally perish? is not this
contrary to the whole tenure of the Gospel? what do the Scri tures speak? do
they not tell us that such as thus fall, were never true Believers? and that
many did thus believe, whom our Lord himself did not account to be true
Believers? 2. Has not God in his word plentifully promised that true believers
should persevere and be preservd from total and final apostasy? and if so, does
not the Scripture tell us, God cannot lie?

3. Does not the Scripture tell us, that God does keep true believers, that
they cannot thus finally fall?

(4.) Does not the Scripture tell us, that such as are true believers are
elected of God, and cannot thus fall, but have already attained the inheritance?

(5.) Does not the Scripture tell us, that Christ prays the Father for the
perseverance of the Saints? and does not Christ himself say, the Father has
always heard him?

6. Do not the Saints and true Believers daily pray for their perseverance? and
does not the Scripture tell them what ever necessary thing they ask in the name
of Christ, shall be obtained?

7. Are not true believers thus kept by Jesus Christ in the faith, so as they
can never totally and finally lose their faith?

8. Are not such sealed by the holy Spirit in their hearts, that they shall
never fall?

(9.) Are not Believers compared to a Tree that withers not: a house that is
builded on a Rock and falls not: seed sown in good ground, which brings forth
its perfect crop?

10. Are not such Believers so dead to sin, that it cannot again have dominion
over them? and are they not so born of God, as the seed of God abides in them:
that they cannot so sin again as do other men? yea, are not such believers so
endued, as that they shall overcome all their enemies, and cannot be overcome?
In short, if these particulars are the Tenor of Scripture, and the truth as it
is in Jesus, shall not this truth of the Saints everlasting perseverance, be
worthy of all acceptance to the worlds ends? sure it will, let us therefore
hear what the Scriptures speaks to each of these, and first of the first.

Answ. 1. -- John 8.31. Then said Jesus to those Jews that believed on him, If
ye continue in my word, then are ye my Disciples indeed.

1 John 2.19. They went out from us, because they were not of us: for if they
had been of us, they would have no doubt continued with us, but they went out
that they might be made manifest they were not all of us.

Heb. 3.6.14. Whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end.

Luke 8.18. Whosoever has not, from him shall be taken what he seems to have.

2 John 23, 24. Now when he was at Jerusalem, at the Passover, in the feast
day, many believed in his name, when they saw the miracles that he did; But
Jesus did not commiit himself unto them, because he knew all men, and needed
not that any should testify of man, for he knew what was in man.

Gods promise.
2. -- Jer. 32,38, 40. They shall be my people, and I will be their God; and I
will make an everlasting Covenant with them, that I will never turn a may from
them to do them good, but I will put my fear into their hearts that they shall
not depart from me.

Esa. 54.10. For the Mountains shall remove, and the Hills shall fall down, but
my mercy shall not depart from thee; neither shall the covenant of my peace
fall away says the Lord, that has compassion on thee.

Isa. 59.10. And I will make this my Covenant with them says the Lord, My
spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not
depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth
of the seed of thy seed, says the Lord, from henceforth even for ever.

Hosea. 2.19. In that day, I will marry thee unto me for ever.

al. 125.1. They that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be
removed, but abides for ever. John. 4.14. Whosoever drinks of this water
that I shall give him, shall never be more athirst: but the water thar I shall
give him, shall be in him a well of water, that springs up to everlasting life.

John 6 39. And this is the Fathers will, which has sent me, that of all which
he has given me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the
last day.

John 10.27, 28, 29, My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow
me, and I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any pluck them out of my hand? My Father that gave them me is greater
then all, and none is able to take them out of my Fathers hand.

Mat. 16.18. Upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates hell shall not
overcome it.

Ioh. 14.16. I will ask the father, and he shall give you another comforter,
that he may abide with you for ever.

Titus 1.1,2. This hope of eternal life, God that cannot lie has promised
before the world began.

God keeps them.
3. -- 1 Cor. 1.7, 8. Waiting for the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, who
shall also confirm you unto the end, that ye may be blameless in the day of our
Lord Jesus Christ; God is faithful.

1 Cor. 10 13. God is faitful, and will not suffer you to be tempted above what
ye are able; but will give with the temptation, that ye may be able to bear it.

1 These. 5.23, 24. Now the very God of peace sanctify you throughout; and I
pray God, that your whole spirit, soul and body may be kept blameless unto the
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ: faithful is he that calls you, who will also
do it.

2 These. 3.3. The Lord is faithful which will stablish you, and keep you from
evil.

Phil. 1.6. And I am perswaof this thing that he that haeh begun this good work
in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ.

The Elect cannot fall.
4. -- Mat. 24.24. For there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders; so that (if it were possible) they should
deceive the very Elect.

Romans 8.29,30. For those whom he knew before, those also he predestined;
moreover whom he predestined, them also he called: and whom he called, them
also he justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified.

Romans 11.1. God has not cast away his people, whom he knew before verse. 7.
what then? Israel has not obtained that he sought, but the election have
obtained it, and the rest have been hardened.

Christ prays, and is always heard.
5. -- Luke 21.31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, behold Satan has
desired to winnow thee as wheat: but I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail
not.

John 17.15, 20. I pray not that thou should take them out of the world, but
that thou keep them from evil. I pray not for these alone, but for them which
shall believe in me through their word.

Romans 8.34. Who shall condemn? it is Christ which is dead, yea rather which is
risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request for us;
who shall separate us from the love of Christ?

John 11.41, 42. And Jesus lift up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee
because thou have heard me, I know that thou hear me always.

The Saints pray and shall obtaen.
6. -- Mat. 6. 13. Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.

1 John 5.14. And this is that assurance that we have in him, that if we ask
any thing according to his will, he hears us.

6 Saints are preserved in the faith.
7. -- John 6.37.38. All that the Father gives me shall come to me, and him
that comes to me; I cast not away.

This is the Fathers will which has sent me, that of all which he has given
me, I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.

Chap. 10.27, 28. My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me,
and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall not perish, neither shall any
pluck them out of my hand.

John 17.12. Those that thou gave me, have I kept, and nore of them is lost:
chap. 13.1. Forasmuch as he loved his own which were in the world, unto the end
he loved them.

8. -- 2 Cor. 1.21. And it is God which establishes us with you in Christ, and
has anointed us: who has also sealed us, and given the earnest of the Spirit
in our hearts.

Ephesians. 1.13, 14. In whom also ye have trusted, after that ye heard the word of
truth, even the Gospel of your Salvation, wherein also after that ye believed,
ye were sealed with the holy spirit of promise, which is the earnest of our
inheritance. Chap. 4.30. Grieve not the holy spirit of God, by whom ye are
sealed unto the day of Redemption.

Psalm. 9. Comparison of Believers in Scripture.
1.3. For he shall be like a Tree planted by the Rivers of waters, that will
bring forth her fruit in her due season, whose leaf shall not fade.

Mat. 7, 24.25. I will liken him to a wise man, which has builded his house on
a rock.

Luke 8.15 But that which fell on good ground, are they which with an honest
and good heart, hear the word, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with patience.

10. -- Romans 6.2 8, 10 Saints dead to sin.
9, 11. How shall we that are dead to sin, live yet therein? wherefore if we be
dead with Christ, we believe that we shall live also with him; knowing that
Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more dominon
over him: likewise think ye also that ye are dead to sin, but are alive to to
God in Christ Jesus our Lord.

1 John 3 9. Whosoever is born of God, sins not; for his seed remains in
him, neither can he sin, because he is born of God.

Chap. 5,4. For all that is born of God, overcomes this world.

Romans 8.35.37. to the end. Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? in
all these things we are more then Conquerours through him that loved us; for I
am persuaded, that neither death nor life, nor Angels nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus our Lord.

Quest. Our Savior tells his Disciples, hitherto they had asked nothing in his
name; was it because they prayed God without a Mediator? without the name of
Christ? nay sure; but they had asked nothing, that is nothing comparatively to
what they might have asked, and God would give; was there at any time even
before Christ's Incarnation, any acceptance with the Father without him? was not
Christ the Center of all those types? Surely yes, the Scripture is full.

Let it suffice us here to hear one Scripture proving that Christ was to them
before his coming in the flesh as to us since, though more darkly; one
Scripture proving that they did then pray the Father through his name, even
before his incarnation; One Scripture that there is but one Mediator for all
men, whether them before, or us since his manifestation in the flesh; let us
hear them faithfully recorded.

Answ. 1 Cor. 10.4.3. Moreover Brethren, I would not have you, ignorant how
that all our Fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through the sea; and
did all eat the same spiritual meat; and did all drink the same spiritual drink
(for they drank of that spiritual rock that followed them, and that rock was
Christ)

Dan. 9.17. Now therefore oh our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplications; and cause thy face to shine upon thy sanctuary that lies waste,
for the Lords sake.

1 Timothy 2.5. For there is one God; and one Mediator between God and men, the
man Christ Jesus.

CHAP. XX, XXI.
QVest. Its of great comfor to the Church indeed, that Christ her head, has
the Keys of hell and death; But has not the Lord Jesus committed to the Church
the power of these keys, that the public, regular, and due use thereof may
according to the institution of Christ, and Apostolical direction be had to the
proper ends thereof, in each particular Church and congregation of Christ under
the Gospel?

Answ. John 16.19. And I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven: and
whatsoever thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

John 20.23. Then Jesus said unto them, Peace be unto you; as my Father sent
me, even so send I you: and when he said this, he breathed on them, and says
to them, Receive ye the holy ghost. Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are
remitted unto them, and whosesoever sins ye retain, they are retained.

Mat. 18.15, 16, 17, 18. If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him
his fault betwixt him and thee alone; if he hear thee, thou have won thy
brother; but if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be confirmed; and if he will not
vouchsafe to hear them, tell it to the Church; and if he refuse to hear the
Church also, let him be unto thee as an Heathen-man and a Publican. verily I
say unto you, whatsoever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven; and
whatsoever ye loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

1 Cor. 1.4, 5. I verily as absent in body, but present in spirit, have
determined already as though I were present, that he that has done this thing,
when ye are gathered together, and my spirit in the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that such one I say, by the power of our Lord Jesus Christ be delivered
unto Satan for the destruction of the flesh, that the Spirit may be saved in
the day of our Lord Jesus. ver. 13. With such a one, eat not; put away
therefore from your selves that wicked person.

Quest. Touching Baptism, this is the end of this Chapter, to destroy and
overthrow the Ordinance and Institution of Water Baptism, agreeing in this with
such as of late have appeared to that and other such good ends; for its a body
of heresy we have to do with; no wonder therefore, if he takes every brother
by the hand; But how is this done? first, by bringing before us such Scriptures
as tell us, That John indeed baptized with water, but he that came after him
with the holy Ghost; do those prove that water baptism ceased with John? or
that Christ did that which John could not do, namely, wash us with his blood
and Spirit? does not the Scripture therefore call Baptism the washing of the
new birth and the forgiveness of sins?

Answ. Tit. 3.5. According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of the new
birth, and renewing of the holy Ghost.

Acts 2.2.16 Arise and be baptized and wash away thy sins.

Quest. No wonder indeed then, that John could not baptize as did Jesus, whose
shoe latchet he was not worthy to unloose: since it is not the outward baptism
of water, but the blood of Christ that cleanses us from all sin: since it is
true also we are baptized into Christ's death; and it is not the putting away of
the filth of the flesh but the answer of a good conscience toward God that
saves us: these all proving baptism indeed to be a Sacrament and no more
effectual then the Spirit makes it effectual, which it has made instrumental:
we confess it is not otherwise the thing signified, but must affirm it to be
the sign: what testimony therefore have you for the use of that sign, namely,
the use of water, in Scripture?

Answ. Mat. 18.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

Mark 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved.

Acts 2.38.4.1. Then Peter said, Amend your lives, and be baptized every one of
you, in the name of Jesus Christ; then they that gladly received his word were
baptized; the same day were added to the Church 3000. souls.

Mat. 3.11. I baptize you with water to amendment of life.

Ioh. 1.31, 33. Therefore am I come baptizing with water: he that sent me to
baptize with water.

Quest. This indeed is our sufficient warrant from the significancy of the word
baptizing, and also from the express addition of water, wherewith John was sent
expressly to baptize: only the efficacy of that ordinance was then, and is now
acknowledged to be the work of Christ by his Spirit; but if they should thus
say, This was indeed the baptism of John, but the Apostles did not baptize, or
if they did not so, what testimony therefore have you, that the Apostles did
baptize, and with the element of water, according to the first institution of
baptism? and first, give the example of Paul, who though he make it a great
work, to which as an Apostle he was chiefly called to preach the Gospel: and
that he might clear himself of vain glory, he rejoices he baptizeth not many;
yet he acknowledges that he baptized some.

1 Cor. 13. to the 17. Were ye baptized into the name of Paul? I thank God I
baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius, lest any should say, I had baptized
into mine own name; I baptized also the house of Stephanus; furthermore, I know
not wither I baptized any other; for Christ sent me not to baptize, but to
preach the Gospel.

Mat 8.36. to the end. And as they went on the way, they came unto a certain
water, and the Eunuch said See here is water, what does let me to be baptized?
and they went down into the water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized
him; and as soon as they were come up out of the water, the Spirit of the Lord
caught away Philip.

Quest. There needs indeed no more au hority: yet to put it out of all
controversy, have ye no president of some baptized with the element of water,
even after they had been baptized with the holy Ghost?

Answ. Acts 10.44. to the end. While Peter yet spoke these words, the holy
Ghost fell on all them which heard the word; so they of the Circumcision, which
believed were astonished, as many as came with Peter because that on the
Gentiles, also was poured out the gift of the holy Ghost: for they heard them
speak with tongues, and magnify God; then answered Peter, Can any man forbid
water, that these should not be baptized which have received the holy Ghost, as
well as we? so he commanded them to be baptized in the name of the Lord.

Quest. One word more and then we shall leave it to whomsoever reads to judge,
whither we or our Master of Arts will more need to fly from plain Scripture to
consequence or comment: have ye therefore no example that the Lord Jesus Christ
himself who did himself baptize with the holy Ghost yet for the honor of his
own Institution, and to confirm us in the truth, that he might fulfill all
obedience, submitted to this Ordinance of Baptism administered in the Element of
water?

Answ. Mark 1.9.10. And it came to pass in those days that Jesus came from
Nazareth, a City of Galilee, and was baptized of John in Jordan: and as soon as
he was come out of the water, John saw the heavens cleaving in twain, and the
holy Ghost descending on him like a Dove.

Mrt. 3.13. to the end. Then came Jesus from Galilee to Jordan unto John to be
baptized of him; but John earnestly put him back, saying, I have need to be
baptized of thee, and come thou to me? Then answering Jesus said, Let it be
now; for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness: so he suffered him:
and Jesus when he was baptized, came straight out of the water: and lo the
heavens were opened unto him, and John saw the the Spirit of God descending
like a Dove, and lighting on him, and lo a voice came from heaven, saying, This
is my welbeloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.

CHAP. XXIV.
QVest. Well were it for the Heresy of former ages, and of this, if the last
thing in the Catechism were true: fitly brought (if believed) to lull asleep
the present torments of a checking Conscience, which will work in the heart of
such as maliciously sin against the truth: but alas they cannot but know the
greater is their present sentence, and receipt of Judgment, and fiery
indignation which shall devour such adversaries.

Heb. 10.26, 27. They have a lie in their right hand. It is most fitly added
therefore as a close hereto: The thing is this then in one word dreadful
enough, whereas we read of (a liar ought to have a good memory, see the last
Question of the third Chapter) death opposed to everlasting life, the second
death, destruction, perdition, Hellfire, etc. Is it (as I know Biddle could
wish) such a death as immediately makes the Creature cease to be, and dye as
does a beast: and so that the height of their misery were that they should not
be happy? to say, they should dye, and that's all; or else more truly according
to Scripture, does this death, second death, destruction, damnation hell fire
etc. consist in eternity of torments, and everlasting death, so that damnation
is a life though miserable, in opposition to which, salvation is only called
eternal life: -- Two or three Scriptures and so end.

Answ. Isa. ult. ult. And they shall go forth, and look on the carcasses of the
men that have transgressed against me; for their worm shall not dye, neither
shall their fire be quenched, and they shall be an abhorring unto all flesh.

Mark 9.42. to the 48. And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that
believe in me, it were better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about his
neck, and that he were cast into the sea; Wherefore if thy hand cause thee to
offend, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into life maimed, then
having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched,
where the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out; likewise if thy foot
cause thee to offend, cut it off; it is better for thee to go halt into life,
then having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire that never shall be
quenched, where the worm dies not, and the fire goes not out; and if thy eye
cause thee to offend, pluck it out; it is better for thee to go into the
kingdom of God with one eye, then having two eyes to be cast into hell fire,
where the worm dies not, and the fire never goes out.

Mat. 25.41 and 46 verses. Then shall he say to them on the left hand, depart
from me ye cursed into everlasting fire which is prepared for the Devil and his
Angels; and these shall go into everlasting pain; and the righteous into life
eternal.

FINIS.

