A Funeral Sermon Preached on the Decease of GRACE Lady GETHIN, WIFE of Sir
RICHARD GETHIN, Baronet, On the 28 day of March, 1700. at Westminster-Abby: And
for perpetuating Her Memory a Sermon is to be Preached in Westminster-Abby,
yearly, on Ash Wednesday for Ever.

By Dr. Birch, Prebend of Westminster.

LONDON: Printed by D. Edwards in Nevils-Ally in Fetter-Lane. 1700.

To the Honored the Lady Norton.
THis Sermon lately recommended to Your Ladyships Ear from the Pulpit, is now
presented to Your Eye from the Press; and it comes to Your Hand as now it
should do, dressed up, like Second Mourning, in Black and White. It Is hoped
that this Discourse, being now not transient, but fixed; if often read and duly
weighed, will by degrees, if not quite remove, yet at least, much abate the
Excess of Sorrow, which the subject of it has occasioned.

It Is true you have lost a Child; and for such losses Nature requires and Grace
allows some Tears, but Reason and Religion too, forbid too many. In this Case
our Eye should be like an Alembick; which softly distills some gentle Drops; but
not like an open Flood*gate, which pours out a Deluge. A perfect Indolence and
Insensibility for the Death of our near Relations, would argue us to be no
better than sottish Stoics; but an Excessive Sorrow would be an evidence that
we are not such Christians as indeed we must be. For, to Mourn without Measure,
is no less than to show our selves dissatisfied with the Providence of God to
which a meek submission is due, because they are always most Wise, Just, and
Holy.

It Is granted, that You have lost such a Daughter as was more Ingenious than
the most of Women, and more Religious than the most of Ladies; One that helped
to Support the World by Her Prayers, and Reform it by Her Example; but what
then? Methinks Your Reflections upon Her Eminent Virtues, and the Glorious
Consequences of them, should rather Sweeten than Imbitter Your Thoughts of Her
Mortality.

And will Your Ladyship Reply to all this, that the Curcumstance of Time does
add such an aggravation to Your loss, that You know not how to bear it? Indeed
Your Excellent Daughter, like an Early Rose, was cropped, though not in Her First
Bud, yet in the Prime Flower of Her Age; but did you love her, and yet think
that she could be happy too soon? Her Passage through this World to a Better
being very Safe, can you grieve that it proved so quick? Is it Your trouble
that a Child of Yours should become a Glorious Saint too Early? Will you still
take on and Mourn, because Your young Daughter has got the start, outrun her
Mother, and has first arrived at Heaven?

But perhaps your sharpest sting which Wounds you deepest, does yet stick
behind; I mean, that this young Lady, whom you have lost or rather parted with
for a little while; was Your only Daughter, nay, Your only Child, the Center of
Your Love, the very Quintessence of Your Delight and Pleasure; and if so, how
can you bear her departure from you?

Pray tell me, how patiently did Job bear the death of all his Children at
once, who did not die according to the course of Nature, as your Daughter did,
but on a sudden, without any warning of it, without any actual Preparation for
it? With what Alacrity of Mind did Abraham stretch forth his Hand to cut the
Throat of his only Son, when God required his Blood for a Sacrafice? Nay, did
not even God Himself for Your sake freely give his only Son, and will not you
Resign up to him Your only Daughter; and the rather, because he called for her
to her great Advantage?

For the Text, Chosen to be the Subject of this Discourse, does plainly tell
you, Blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord. But who are they? Certainly
they who live in the Lord, i. e. by the Power of his Grace, according to those
Rules, which he has given us, and that Example, which he has left us; and was
not Your Daughter one of that Blessed Number? Are you not convinced that she
was free from Vice, and full of Virtue, Pious toward her God, just toward all
Mankind, and as to the Poor, Charitable, I had almost said, even to a Fault;
now, since She thus lived in the Lord, She must needs die in the Lord too; and
consequently you may pronounce Her Blessed.

It Is observable that the Text does not say, They that die in the Lord, shall
be blessed hereafter. But they are blessed actually, and at present Real Saints
yet alive, have a Title to Eternal Glory only in Reversion, but departed Saints
have it in Possession; and since that is Your Daughters Case, shed no more
Tears, unless they be Tears of Joy, Superlative Joy indeed, that you have a
Child, who is now more happy in Abraham's Bosom, than She ever was, or ever
could have been in Your own; a Child, who now dwells with God, and Converses
with those Glorious Angels, who are the Peers of God's Kingdom, and the Nobles
of the Court of Heaven; a Child Enrolled in the List of Glorified Saints, and
is become one of that Celestial Choir, who Sing Hallelujah to Him, that Sits
upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for Ever.

In short, the Text says of all departed Saints, they rest from their Labors;
from all the painful Services, Toils, Drudgeries, and Troubles of this
miserable World; and if so, methinks the Meditation of Your Daughters Eternal
Rest, should not Interrupt, but rather Sublimate and Advance Your own, even
till that Blessed day shall come, wherein you and your Daughter, and all
Righteous Souls shall meet again in that Place of Bliss, and part no more for
ever.

And as the present Enjoyment of her Happiness, so the very manner of her first
Entrance into it, should be a great Satisfaction to you, Her Life being so
Divine, Her latter End was not only Safe, not only Comfortable, but
Illustrious; She did not pass like common Mortals through the Shadow, but through
the Sunshine of Death. For, during Her Sickness, especially upon Her Devout
Reception of the Holy Sacrament, She was so Transported with Joy, so Ravished
with the fore-tast of Heaven, and the near Prospect of Her then approaching
Glory; as if with Good old Simeon She had already embraced Her dear Savior in
Her Bosom; as if with St. Paul She had been rapt up into Paradise; as if with
St. Stephen She had seen Heaven opened, and the Son of Man standing ready to
entertain Her.

Thus She lived and thus She died without the least reluctance; Her Lamp
expired without a Blast, Her Glass most freely run out without a Shake; to Her,
under such blessed Circumstances, to die was nothing else but to lie down in
Her Bed and fall fast a Sleep.

Now since Your dear Daughter has so happily Closed Her own Eyes, be pleased
Good Madam, as to Tears, to Shut up Yours; be pleased to bespeak Your self and
all Your Mourners, as a Spartane Lady once did in the same Case. Flete alios,
etc. Go Weep for others, My Daughter does need no Tears. So Prays at the Throne
of Grace, for Your Ladyships Health and Happiness, both in this World and the
next,

Honored Madam Your Ladyships most Humble Servant, F. G.

INSCRIPTION on the Lady Gethins Monument; On the South Side of
Westminster-Abby.
TO the Pious Memory of Dame Grace Gethin, Wife of Sir Richard Gethin, of
Gethin-Grott in Ireland, Barnt Daughter of Sir George Norton, Knight and Barnt
and Granddaughter of Sir George Norton, Knight, and Great Granddaughter of
Sir William Owen of Salop, Sir Thomas Freak of Dorset, and Sir Thomas Culpeper
of Kent, Knights. Who being Adorned with all Graces and Perfections of Mind and
Body, Crowned them all with Exemplary Patience and Humility; and having the day
before her Death most devoutly received the Holy Communion, which she said, she
would not have omitted for ten thousand Worlds; she plainly evidenced Her sure
and certain hope of future Bliss; And thus continuing sensible to the last. She
resigned her Pious Soul to God in fervent Transports of Spiritual Joy and
Comfort, for her near Approach to the Heavenly Glory.

Obiit October the 11th in the Year of her Age 21 of our Lord, 1697.

Her Disconsolate and Afflicted Parents, for a lasting Memorial of this Her
Godly and Blessed End, Erected this Monument; She being the last of their Issue.

REV. 14. 13. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Write, Blessed
are the dead that die in the Lord from henceforth; Yea says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their Labors, and their Works do follow them.
THIS is a Triumphant Hymn over Death, the King of Terrors, and the last Enemy
of our Nature; and so have all regular Churches understood it; for they have
long used it in their public Offices, as an expression of the firmness of
their Faith, and the Alacrity of their Hope; that this Mortal should put on
Immortality, and that which is now sown in Corruption shall be raised up in
Glory. And of this we are assured by St. John, beyond the possibility of
mistake; I, says he, heard a Voice from Heaven, saying unto me, Blessed are the
dead: And this wonderful Sentences which only Heaven could Reveal, was
immediately ratified, yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their
Labors.

A Consolation so strong amongst those who first received it, that of old they
seemed Ambitious of a preference in Death, and so to rejoice in the Tribulation
as to tempt their Fate, and run too fast to the Crown. They knew not the modern
Arts to cover Infidelity, or thought it became them to dissemble in the
presence of their greatest Foes, but gave up their lives unto Death, and
rejoiced they were counted worthy to lose them. Hence came those Holy Customs
of attending the Dead with Thanksgiveings, of yearly Celebrating the
remembrance of Martyrs Agonies, of burying the remains of their Bodies under
their Altars, of making the days of their Death Festivals, and the places of
their Burial Churches.

This was the Practice of an undefiled Christianity, and it often awakened the
observation of unbelievers to enquire into the reasons, why the faithful
esteemed them Blessed whose end seemed to be without Honor; nay, we often read
that this lead them on to Conviction, and so the Blood of Martyrs became the
Seed of the Church. As for those who wish these Honors had not been paid to
the Saints departed, and who refuse to continue them, they do alone by
consequence, as wish their Religion had not prevailed; and as for those dumb
Funerals they would introduce in their stead, these express neither Faith nor
Hope; nor is it imaginable what such a stupid Custom can express, but only the
Pleasure of Contradiction at parting.

As to the Sense and Connection of the Words, they are part of a Prophecy, so
hard to be understood, that it may well excuse all pretense to a strict
Interpretation. But in general they seem intended for a present Comfort to the
Christians of that early Age, who were appointed to bear the weight of the
succeeding Persecutions, and had need of all the Faith and Patience of Saints
to support them. The Title at least (c. 1.) only speaks of things that must
shortly come to pass, and so the most ancient Writers that best knew the
Language of the times, Interpret it. In their Sense the fall of Babylon was
that of Heathen Rome, with the Idolatry it supported, and the Planting of the
Faith of Christ in its place, was making all things New; and this is a Sense
which it is possible to understand still; but to kill the Witnesses of the
Church Universal in the corner of an Island, or to make Scotland or Genva sit
Scenes for all the mighty and surprising Events that are here recorded, this is
a Modern and still undigested thought; one that seems intended to make Court to
Friends, but has certainly made sport for Enemies.

Whatever is the Design, we are sure of the Event, Blessed are the dead which
die in the Lord and not in their Sins; and in that Latitude it is a noble
Testimony to the certainty of our future Reward. For;

1. The distinction is here made that will divide all Mankind for Ever; none
are pronounced Blessed except those who die in the Lord, and are Members of his
Body; which is exclusive of all others whatsoever. It is not a promiscuous
blessing that shall fall indifferently upon the Good and the Bad, like that of
the Sun or the Rain; but the Foundation of God stands sure, he knows who
are his, and it is happy for us he does so, because by this the Righteous are
assured that they shall not always be vexed with the filthy Conversation of the
Wicked.

2. The Sentence is again ratified by the same Divine Authority, and that
solemn Repetition is not in vain, for it is the true and proper Foundation of
Faith. The Voice commands St. John to Write tha strange Proposition, Blessed
are the dead for a lasting Memorial, and the Answer of the Spirit confirms it,
as a Matter so important, that it could not be too often inculcated. And,

3. The substance of this Answer, namely, our resting from Labor, and having
our Works to follow us, suggests the best Method of conceiving what the
happiness of another World is; for so far as our short Conception reaches, a
Man can Enjoy no more even in desire, than to rest from the Evil that attends
our imperfect State, and to have all his Good to follow him. And,

1. We are never to forget unto whom alone the Blessing is confined; for it is
at the Peril of our Souls, and of all the dreadful Consequences which attend
the loss of them, that we remember the distinction. The Caution perhaps may not
seem pertinent to him that considers only how plain it is in Speculation, but
there is a continual use of it when reduced unto Practice, or the uses of Life.
There every Profession of Religion agrees in flattering themselves; they
Magnify their Privileges to the prejudice of their Duty, and generally are
much fonder of being thought in the right way than of walking in it; hence we
find so severe Guards planted against Heresy, by those who never regard the
worst of all, for doubtless no Heresy is so dangerous as to hate to be
reformed; and hence so many are fond of all Remedies, but that alone which can
do them good.

Give me leave then to bring to your remembrance what the nature of every
Promise from God is. It is properly a Covenant, and supposes something due on
the part of Man to Entitle us to it; it is ever made by way of Restipulation,
to quicken and not to abate our Industry, and consequently there is no
inconsistence between the Promise and the Condition.

Of this there can be no possible doubt where the Condition is expressed, and
to show it must constantly be understood where it is not, we have the Authority
of all the Wise and Good who have gone before us; for they always understood
them conditionally though never so absolutely spoken. Jacob for example, was
promised directly Genesis 32.
enough to be made a great Nation of, and bid to return into his Country for
that End, but this hindered not his appeasing the wrath of Esau with a
chargeable Present: Joshua had his Enemies put into his hands, therefore, says
his Story, he came upon them alone suddenly, and went up from Gilgal all Night,
or marched to surprise them; David was Anointed King by Samuel, and was
acknowledged Successor by Saul himself, and yet he made him Friends of the
Elders of Israel, and raised an Army to defend his Person: And to heap up no
more Instances, it was revealed to Act. 27.
St. Paul, that God had given him the Lives of all those that sailed in the
Ship with him, but he yet took care to keep the Mariners Aboard, and truly
affirms, except these abide in the Ship he cannot be saved. None of all these
distrusted the Promise, but they rightly understood it, and he who does not
understand it as they did, his Faith is Rashness, and his Trust is Folly; for
he depends upon what was never promised him.

The Case is too plain for any to doubt but the wilfully blind, and such as
have a mind to deceive themselves; all others may see if they please, that
there must ever be a reason for our hope, and that the Conditions must be first
honestly performed before our claim to the Promise commences. But if this great
Circumstance be once provided for, then our Faith soon overcomes the World, and
all its difficvlties; What if no operation in Nature be known to us able to
produce such an effect as is a resurrection of dissipated parts? It is not
therefore impossible, as Pliny for that reason concludes it, l. 2.
for we are to esteem things possible or impossible by the Power of God. What
if a thoughtless, unprincipled Pretender to Philosophy says he cannot see the
consequence in St. Paul's Argument, that as in Adam all die, so in Christ shall
be made alive? Yet I hope wiser Men may, for all Men are virtually in their
Representatives, and it is altogether as much an Equity to absolve when the
price of our Redemption is paid, as to hold us in Bondage for want of it. The
very discharge of our Surety demonstrates a full satisfaction to be made for
the Sins of the World; for had he been holden of Death, like the rest of Men,
we could never have been certain that the Sins for which he suffered were not
his own.

If then we are numbered with his Saints we need not suspect our reward; For

2. A Voice from Heaven records the Sentence, and the Spirit immediately
confirms it; Blessed are the Dead.

And happy is it for us that this is the Voice of Heaven, and not the vain
boast of one of the Sons of Earth. For us weak Men to call any Blessed, is but
to declare our opinion that they are so; but with the Word of God is Power,
with him it is the same thing to speak and to create. He that holds the Keys of
Hell and of Death, can with the very same ease say to the Dead, be Blessed, and
it shall be so, as he did in the Beginning, Let there be Light, and it was so.

And therefore this alone is the true Foundation of a Christian's Faith. Till
Life and Immortality were brought to light through the Gospel, Mankind saw
nothing in the Grave but Corruption. Tertullian affirms of the Heathen World,
that they denied the Restitution of the Flesh with a general Consent, and when
St. Paul Preached Jesus and the Resurrection Act. 17.
at Athens it self, some mocked, and others took them for a couple of new Gods.
And as for those well-meaning triflers in Divinity among our selves, who have
the Will and determination of God to support their Faith, and yet will be
foolishly hewing out to themselves Cisterns that will hold no Water, let us but
consider to what all their other Arguments for a Resurrection do amount.

The World, say they, subsists by a constant succession of Resurrections; day
dies into night and rises again into morning, winter is a general Sepulcher,
and the Spring opens the Grave to every Plant, the corruption of one Animal is
the generation of another; and many ignobler Creatures, many of the Beasts of
the Field, some of the Fowls of the Air, and diverse plants of the Earth,
outlive the Sons of Men. It is not therefore probable that this present life is
proportionable to our Composition; for the Souls of Men are immortal, and being
once Created, receive a subsistence for Eternity; and consequently since the
Soul of Man is so soon forced from the Body, and cannot continue with it half
the years that other Creatures live, the reason of it must be, because this is
not the only Life belonging to us. But yet all this is no more than probable,
and what is probable may still admit a doubt; it may perhaps entertain, but
except we could bring more into the conclusion than was in the premises, it can
never force Assent.

It is also certain, that in this Life there is no just retribution either to
the virtues or the vices of Men; the most Righteous are often full of troubles,
and one Man sometimes commits such Sins as all the Punishments of this Life
cannot equalize. Witness the Authors of Assassinations, and Tyrants that have
destroyed whole Nations, and extirpated the Servants of God. If then they are
not here recompensed as they deserve, it is probable they will be hereafter;
and if these things were done in the Body, it is fit that be joined also in the
Punishment. But all this ascends no higher than to a probability that a full
Amends shall be made in another State; for it gives us no infallible assurance
that it shall be so.

Nay the very Power of God to raise the Dead only proves it possible, but not
certain; from his Power alone we can only conclude that we may rise, but it is
from his Will that we are sure to do so; and that intention is only delivered
in his Word.

It remains therefore that all the true ground of hope is, that so has God
appointed, and so declared in his Word, and has given assurance of it unto all
Men by raising up Jesus Christ. For no Argument is so convincing as a miracle
in kind, to see a Man like our selves rise again by a visible experiment;
because that which has been, may be again, and no objection is good against
Experience.

In so weighty a case then as this is, we ought not to build upon any
Foundation that will not bear the Superstructure, upon thin airy Speculations
which only please the weak, but never satisfy the wise; our wisdom is to pass
on from likelyhoods to full assurances, that we may dare to look Death in the
Face, and be steadfast and unmovable when we do so.

3. It remains in the last place that we also consider the words as they are a
full and adaequate description of our future happiness, or at least suggest to
us the best method of conceiving it; for to rest from our Labors, and to have
our works follow us, seems a division that exhausts the Subject, because, let a
Man call what he will his good or his evil, he can wish no more than to enjoy
the one, and get rid of the other.

A rest indeed from Labor is seldom apprehended, except by those who have
tasted a bitter Cup; and the possession of good with the security of Enjpyment,
is but rarely thought of by them that want an Habit of taking care of
themselves. We need not then to wonder if the fools of Fortune are not commonly
wise toward God: but he that can either relish a deliverance or a Blessing,
will not be troubled with a doubtful Choice, he will reach forth unto the
things which are before, and forget the things that are behind.

It is true, what those things are which are before, we cannot comprehend, and
if we could they would not be so great. It Is in vain to attempt the describing
of a Life that is hid, or that World of Spirits which is Invisible. All we
Mortals know of the Regions above, and the Joys that are there, is, that they
are not like our own; and he that pretends to more, must go thither and fetch
down the knowledge.

And yet that knowledge which is too wonderful for us, is no doubt familiar to
that enlightened Soul which looks down and pities our blindness; I mean that
Excellent Person who is gone before unto Glory, and has left us wretched
Mortals to do Honor to her Memory.

Her Condition is now out of the reach of enquiry, above the Praises and much
more above the Flatteries of Men. Such adulterate Arts are below the Dignity of
the Subject, and the place we are in; may the Darkness cover them, and their
sound be no more heard in any Congregation of the Saints. But I hope it will
not fall under the Censure, barely to name what it would be on this occasion a
Crime to Conceal.

Give me leave then to Observe, that the Deceased has a just Title to all that
the Civilized part of the World requires, as due to Families of note and
extraordinary Merit; being of a well known race, not only for its Wealth and
Antiquity, but for its Loyalty too. If this honorable Character may still be
allowed its barren Praise, inspight of that insolent Faction, who call it a
juster thing to have judged their King, than preserved him.

To which if we add the Piety of her immediate Parents, in forming her tender
Years to Virtue, and generously providing to have the Memory of it Annually
propagated; we need not scruple to call her Good and Pious by descent.

But she had little need of turning the Achievements of Ancestors into a
property: if a Stranger might be allowed to be particular in those Graces in
which her self only had a Share. Let it suffice barely to name a natural
probity of Temper, a Meek and Candid Behavior, a remarkable Justice and
Charity of Action, and above all a sober unaffected Piety; which are but a part
of her happy Character, and might every one be enlarged opon from an undoubted
Testimony, would it not perhaps appear a betraying of Truth into the hands of
Flattery.

All which therefore lessens the wonder that her end was Peace, and a Peace
that so filled the Mind, as made the beholders judge it a fore-taste of her
approaching Felicity. What those joys were, becomes not us to define, for
secret things belong to God; but we are to lose no opportunity to think of the
things which are commanded us with Reverence.

Every solemnity of this kind allows us to see how frail and uncertain our own
Condition is at another Expense, and he that is Wise will ponder these things.
The most think of another World under a general representment, and as of a
thing wherein they have no personal Concern, but it is for want of numbering
their days in this; would they wisely retire out of the noise and tumult of the
World, to compute how short their days probably are, by how many unforeseen
Accidents they may be still shorter, and that yet upon these uncertain moments
of our probation Eternity depends, this would allow us to hope for the great
end of the Precept, I mean the applying our Hearts unto Wisdom, to an early
Provision for that unknown State, which will soon begin but never have an end.
For all great considerations and important Resolutions require time to ripen
them; a certain degree of retirement to fix the Heart and take Root in it,
which our Savior intends by entering into our Closets; and on the contrary, a
sad experience will not let us be Ignorant, that what is lightly undertaken
will be lightly pursued.

In particular, we are to turn this bright Example into an Advantage to our
selves; for though the virtues it enforces are of the number of those which make
least noise in the World, yet they are of most real use. Men indeed talk most
loudly of their Conquerors, and Churches are ever most disturbed by the heads
of Parties and the Authors of Heresies, but they get least by these glorious
Troublers of the Worlds repose of all Mankind besides; the true supporters of
Society, that make life a Blessing, are the humble and contented, who do their
own business, and have a just sense of Humane Condition, being full of Mercy
and good Fruits. If then the Fame of these more retired virtues is not so
great, yet still it is better; for they leave no marks of their Oppression
behind them, nor are they pursued to their Graves by the Tears, if not the
Curses of the Miserable. A greater Fame is indeed scattered into more Mouths,
but it is a Trumpet that calls together Enemies as well as Friends; a good one
is more approved of God and accepted of Men; and it ought not to be forgot,
though the Lesson be taught us by one of the lowest instances of God's
Providence, that his Holy Law takes more care for Oxen that tread out the Corn
in Peace, than for the Horse which tramples it down in War.

To conclude, we are not to let all remarkable Events pass over our heads
without Observation, but are to gain by experience, or else we make no use of
our Reason. If then we think this our Interest, I hope that only fashionable
Argument will make it appear our Duty too. Awake therefore, says St. Paul, thou
that Sleep, Ephesians. 5.
and arise from the Dead. Shake off thy Sloth, and behold the Crown which is
reached out unto thee; do not abandon the care of thine own Preservation, and
shut thine Eyes against the light. In vain do thou continue among the Graves
of Sin, and yet hope to find life among the dead; the works of Darkness will
never lead thee to the Light inaccessible; but if thou sowest to the Flesh,
thou shall of the Flesh reap Corruption. Be wise therefore for thy self, O
foolish dreamer, and make have to the Prize; for all the treasures aabov lie
open to the hearts that are there, thou have but to desire and to enjoy, and
shall happily find that a Resurrection of the Soul will not fail to make a
joyful one of the Body. And Blessed and Holy is he that has his part in the
first Resurrection, on such the second Death has no Power, but they shall be
Priests of God and of Christ.

Now to God the Father, etc.

INSCRIPTION on the Lady Gethins Monument.
TO the Pious Memory of Dame Grace Gethin, Wife of Sir Richard Gethin, of
Gethin-Grott in Ireland, Knight and Barnt Daughter of Sir George Norton, and
Granddaughter of Sir George Norton, Knights, and Great Granddaughter of Sir
William Owen of Salop, Sir Thomas Freak of Dorset, and Sir Thomas Culpeper of
Kent, Knights. Who being Adorned with all Graces and Perfections of Mind and
Body, Crowned them all with Exemplary Patience and Humility; and having the day
before her Death most devoutly received the Holy Communion, which she said, she
would not have omitted for ten thousand Worlds; she plainly evidenced her sure
and certain hope of future Bliss; And thus continuing sensible to the last. She
resigned her Pious Soul to God in fervent Transports of Spiritual Joy and
Comfort, for her near Approach to the Heavenly Glory.

Obiit October, in the Year of her Age 21 of our Lord, 1697.


