Words in the Word; TO BE Read by Friends in the SIMPLICITY, Felt in the
POWER, and Received in the LOVE.
DEar Friends in the Lord, upon and above all the Earth, Let an open, living,
large, noble Heart, yea, a bountiful, sympathizing, generous Soul possess, be
in, and among you all, toward all in the Lord. In the wrong ground, call
nothing your own, [uphold Deceit in none] let the Prudent in God, strengthen
the feeble knees, and boldly in the Name of the Lord God, who redeemed Israel,
say unto the present, and yet (for a season) future Prisoners and Sufferers for
Christ, it shall not be always thus.

In the Life, in the pure Love, which is Infinite, as an entire beautiful flock
of Innocents, meet often together, in the Eternal Fear, wholly free from the
Fear of Man. At your Meeting, or Parting with each other [ as ye are moved] in
the Life, salute each other, with, or without the hand, with, or without words,
or any manner of visible sign: in every thing, feel the internal motion: and
let not him, that is, or is not saluted, in the least be troubled: but in the
pure, good part, receive all that is purely good; And if it be so, that
thousands of you meet together, and there be no Eternal Motion, [neither
occasion outwardly for the uttering of words] Oh! let not the noise of an
artificial, forced, or formal tool, be so much as once seen, or heard, in the
Temple of our God, which Temple we are. Oh! my most dear and entirely Beloved,
male and female Brethren, let all manner of Likenesses, Inventions, Imitations
and Formalities in the very Root, Branches, (yea) and Buds thereof, be wholly
razed down, cast out, cut off, and utterly consumed from among ye: for, from
the Lord God I feel a dreadful consumption is come, and coming upon all men's
Words and Forms; yea, every man's Words, already are his own, as well as others
burden. Wherefore let all, yea, every individual friend to Truth, sink down,
dig deep, and return in, to within the Gate, the Way, the Cross, the Stop, the
tender Pale, over which any are leap't, In the Name of the living God, let none
presume or dare to speak words (pretending to minister in the Assembly of God's
Heritage) except eternally moved: for words, though never so true, uttered out
of the Life, from the in-gathered stock in the brain, are loathsome to the Seed
immortal. Cease speaking when the Power cease; for that which adds, as well
as that which diminishes, is accursed.

Let no man say this or that whatsoever it be, is true, or Truth, immediately to
be done, undone, or not done at all; because any man has said, or says it: [
Let many beware of that Idolatrous Leaven.] Resist not the pure good Spirit in
any; but with the Anointing in your selves, Taste, try, feel and handle all
things; that so the Noble Plant, the Seed of Life, may not be veiled,
captivated, or burdened in any, by any: but in the Light ye may be seen, and
see each other in the Head to be one entire Piece, Within the Fold, By the
precious Fountain, In the Pasture which is green; even in that Eternal Spirit
which discerns all men, things and voices, there to feed, grow, dye, and live
for ever; whose meat and drink in the Cross, must be to do the Will of the
Father; feel through, and let the Ax, which is quick and powerful, be laid to
the very Root of all false begettings: for no Bastard, though never so goodly,
shall inherit the Kingdom, prepared for the clean begotten in the Father of the
Faithful; in whom alone (out of the likeness of any thing, though in it self
heavenly) Rest, Hope and Deliverance is; to whom, of good will, and not by
constraint, be subjection yielded, by, and in all, that profess and know Him to
be God over All: who is come, and coming, to burn up the Dross, to thresh the
Wheat, to purge out the Tin, and even to try the pure Grain; but utterly to
blow away that Chaff, which calls it self Wheat, and is not.

Let all be dreadful to build that again, which already is, or ought to be
destroyed. Beware, beware of formal Inventions, Coverings or Imitations. Be
afraid of Excess. Let Moderation be seen in you all, in all things.

Dear Friends of the Lord, Tradesmen of all sorts, buy your Commodities good,
in the pure Understanding; make, and sell them in the Fear of the Almighty: for
the Lord greatly beholds your doings. Let nothing be bought or sold, that is
superfluous, or destructive to God's Creation: I say, see that none lick up any
part of the old vomit. Ah, dear Lambs! verily, ye are as Beacons in the Mount,
and very great is, ought, or may be, your Ministry, in your several Callings:
Wherefore let your Light shine bright, without spot or blemish; to the reaching
of the just measure of God in all; Oh! let not the Nobility in any of ye, be
clouded through dishonest gain.

Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, truly know and keep your places in
the Lord. Masters, gently inform, sweetly admonish. Servants and Children, be
swift to hear, slow to speak, at least to provoke. Away with Eye-service, Be
faithful, be faithful, repine not. Let not the poorest of ye in the outward,
grudgingly say within your selves, Why am I made thus, or formed so or so, as
to my outward condition? but continually feed upon, and feel that, which is
Lord over all, That did the Will of the Father, who was numbered with the worst,
and lived as the meanest; yea, He had not of this World whereon to lay his head.

Let all who pertain to Truth, abstain from [ fleshly Marriages] trouble not
the Congregation of the Righteous therewith: I say, not I, but the Lord, Let
all beware of that Leaven, or rather great Iniquity; But Marriage in the Lord,
and the Bed Undefiled is honorable.

Finally, Let all who are or have been truly convinced, swiftly repair in the
Life, into the form of sound words: (not by imitation) Beware of, and in the
Power for ever resist that Serpent, which says it is thy Liberty to say You, o^
Sir, etc. to one person, and Thee or Thou, or Friend, to another: for, the
double-tongue, our God surely hates: and every Tree, which in the Father is not
firm, and truly planted: Behold, the storm comes, and he shall be plucked up
with dishonorable shame. Many are called, but all are not willing to be chosen
into the Cross, the Power, the Sword of God.

All feel your Root, and see if the present ground wherein ye stand, be purely
holy: for lo, the deluge swiftly comes, which surely will wash away all sandy
foundations.

Let the pure Loins of the mind in all, be girt up, that so the outward body
may stand upright in the Cross, in the Faithfulness, without Bowing, Fawning or
Twisting under, to, or for any Creature, slavish fear or gain.

Let the Males feel the Mystery of the Hat, and do not therewith dishonor your
Head, wear all your Garments, and stand upright, as becomes true men.

For ever and ever, blessed are the True-hearted Israelites: but Contempt, far
beyond utterance, shall be poured forth upon the Double-minded: And every Ass
shall surely bear his own burden, and every Fool be fed and clad with the fruit
of his own doings.

From the Gatehouse-Prison in Westminster, the 9th day of the 3d Month, 1661.
Edward Byllyng.

POSTSCRIPT.
ROyal Seed of God, upon the face of the whole Universe, over all the World, in
the pure, invisible, undaunted Armor, in Light keep; Trample under, and upon
the earthly earth, and all the dark powers thereof, and therein. Fear not,
neither believe the Mighty; but in the Almighty walk boldly upon the Seas,
slight the Waves, regard not the raging Floods of Idolatry, although they have
sworn a Confederacy against ye, yet let not the foming forth of their Profane
swelling mire and dirt, one jot affright the least Babe in Truth. Feed upon
your own Bread, drink your own Cup, (it will be sweet in the end) Ah! keep
within, entirely within, in your own proper Rock, the only virge-Royal of
Safety for all God*s Heritage, in this perilous day, come and coming; dwelling
therein, and only therein, ye are and may be safe, yea securely hid from the
Vulterous eye; but and if ye hunt, or stragle forth from under the Eternal
Pavilion, ye perish: Wherefore keep within, even in the contemptible manger,
where-in ye are at present (for trial) placed. The truly wise man whose eye is
in his head, will see, and seel your star, and swiftly repair into your
precious (though contemptible) Inn, as for the implacable fool, who hates to
be reformed, and says in his heart, there is no God, it matters not. O seek
not acquaintance with any strange flesh! Ah! be subject, be alone subject, to
that which first sought ye, [to wit the higher Power] Let none of ye exchange
Eternal Manna for stinking Garlic, or the food of Angels for an Egyptian
Kindness; the thing is soon done. Then the subtle Hunter may weep, but his
tears shall not prevail; What want ye? What seek ye? Or, What would ye have,
that ye have not, shall, or may have of me, says the Lord God of the
distressed? Are your Trials great? your Reward shall far transcend. Do ye sow
in Tears? ye shall reap in Joy; the living God has spoken it.

Ye Royal Priesthood! Ye Sons and Daughters of the most High! Ye blessed little
Kingdom! in this your day of try-all be not tempted, to touch, or in the least
to mix with the unclean thing upon any offered terms whatsoever; Make not, oh!
make not any bargain or promise with Death, for it and that shall vanish, and
come to naught: O! stand still, dwell in the hidden, and ye shall surely see
Salvation to the uttermost; But he who with a lavish Tongue or Pen, gives his
Pearl to the Swine, his own, or the Childrens Bread to Dogs, shall surely be
rent and bitten; yea, whosoever by Personal Act, Declaration, Word or Promise
goes about in the least to satisfy, answer, or feed the unsatisfiable lustful
demands of the Wicked, famisheth his own Soul, and betrays the Truth for which
they shall greatly suffer. Who ever yet touched Pitch, and was not defiled?

Oh! let all re-descend deep into that still Fountain, which first suckled
their barren lips, and opened the mouth to praise; in that was, and is done the
valiant things; that is that which must again plow up the clongie Earth, and
remove the false Heavens.

The Waters themselves they shall divide, and the roaring Seas shall run on
heaps, and dry-shod over ye the Faithful (after your refining trial) shall
surely pass; the fury of the Hills shall melt down each other, and in the most
pleasant Valleys (in the end) ye shall safely dwell: Wherefore it is not much,
if in the Patience free from grudging, even dumb before the shearers, ye watch
one hour with the Lord in this his Day of great, yea, very great Provocation.

Gate House, 11th day 3d Month, 1661. E. B.


