AN EPISTLE OF Tender Love, To Friends In IRELAND.

By your Faithful Friend, and Brother in the Truth, William Bingley.

In all their affliction he was afflicted, and ^he Angel of his presence saved
them: in his love and in his pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and
carried them all the days of old,

Isa. 63. 9. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit you like Men, be Strong,

1 Cor. 16. 13. Cast not away therefore your Confidence, which has great
recompense of reward; For ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the
Will of God, ye might receive the Promise,

Heb. 10. 35, 26. Printed, and sold by T. S. at the Crooked-Billet in
Holywell-Lane in Shoreditch, 1692.

An Epistle of Tender Love to Friends in Ireland.
Dear Friends and Brethren;
THe Tender Salutation of my unfeigned Love, in the Lord Jesus Christ flows
forth unto you, yea, in that Love and Life, which our God has shed abroad in
our Hearts, in which we have been Comforted in the Lord, and one in another,
does my Life reach unto you at this Time; and my hearty Desires and Prayers are
often put up unto the Lord on your behalf; That you may be preserved steadfast
in your holy Profession, and sincere to God through all Opposition and
Affliction to the end. For I can Truly say, the sense and Consideration of your
great Exercises Sufferings and Hardships, comes often weightily upon my Mind
and Spirit, and I cannot but Sympathize with you therein, it being a day of
Calamity and Distress, upon that poor Nation; and how soon it may fall upon us,
we know not, but this is our Cry, the Lord prepare us for it that we may have a
Foundation Sufficient to stand upon in that Day. And although it is yout Lot
outwardly to partake thereof with many others of such Cruelties, as makes my
Spirit Mourn, to think, that ever Men should be given up to do such Inhumane
Acts, as Strippings, Burnings and Murders, etc. Yet this is my Comfort and
S^tisfaction (under all the bowings of my Spirit for you,) That God has in his
infinite Love and Mercy, brought you to the Knowledge of himself, and of his
Son Jesus Christ, whom to know is Life Eternal; and has made you Partakers of
his living Power and Arm, which is sufficient to bear up your Minds, and
Comfort your Souls and Spirits and to preserve you from Fainting or Sinking
under the greatest of Trials, and to make every Bitter thing Sweet, and hard
things Easy to you; for although he may try you with great Afflictions, he
will not leave you, nor forsake you; for he is God and changes not; but is the
same yesterday, to day and forever, and his promise was to his People, Israel
of old, on this wise, though you go through the Fire the Flames shall not
kindle upon you; or through the Water, the Floods shall not overwhelm you; and
no doubt but the same Arm will uphold his Israel, in this our Day, and he will
be as a Sun and a Shield unto all those, who are preserved faithful unto him,
and truly cast your Care upon him, for he cares for you; whose Expectations
are to God alone for help and preservation, and are kept under the conduct of
his Holy Spirit and Power; he will be your Strength and your Stay, and will be
a safe hideing Place for you in this Day of Trouble and Storm; therefore let
your dwelling be in the Name of the Lord, which ever was and is a strong Tower,
for the Righteous to fly unto, wherein they ever found Peace and Safety; for
therein our Souls are out of the reach of the Devil, and his rage, although he
may be permitted to touch our Bodies, and outward substances, and although these
Afflictions are your Portion and Lot for a season, yet when the Everlasting
God, (who knows all things, and what is good for us better then we know our
selves) sees that it will be for his Glory, and your Good* can say to these
proud Waves, (which at present seem as if they would quite overflow,) be still;
and they must obey his Voice, for its the Lord alone that gives bounds thereto,
and says, Thus far shall you go and no further.

Therefore my dear Friends, keep your Eyes and Minds, to the Lords Power, and
let your Trust and Confidence be in him alone, for he never fails them that
put their Trust in him; but he always has been a present Helper in a time of
need to those, who have no dependency upon any other, but upon his Eternal Arm
and Power, nor no Helper in the Earth, but the Lord alone; and be faithful to
God, and dwell in his Holy Spirit of Meekness, and of Love toward all men,
even to the greatest of your Enemies, for that is a true mark and token of
being Disciples of Christ our Lord, whose Precepts and Counsel was to his
Followers, Love your Enemies, Pray for them that despitefully use you, and
Persecute you; and do not let up a murmuring Spirit, nor a Spirit of Revenge,
but dwell in the Meek Lambs Life, and in the Word of Gods Patience; for God
has promised to keep such in the hour of Tribulation and Temptation, that will
come upon the Earth, to try them that dwell therein; and let your Habitation be
in the Heavenly Power of God, for that is above and over all the powers of
Darkness, and will out last all the Cruelty, and Barbarity of the Children of
Darkness, and will bring to the mark of the price of the high calling of God in
Christ Jesus, and to reap the rewards of Well Done, and to Inherit the Crown of
Eternal Glory, if you faint not, but hold out to the end, therefore your safety
is to be singly resigned up to the Will and Disposing of our God, who can and
will put a stop to their wicked and cruel proceedings when he in his Wisdom and
Goodness sees meet.

And in the mean time keep your Minds and Spirits truly stayed upon him, for he
will keep those in perfect Peace, whose minds are stayed upon him, according to
the Testimony of the Prophet of old.

And dear Friends, as God in his infinite Mercy has been pleased to give every
one of us, a measure of his Holy Spirit, and Grace to profit with. Oh! that
every ones mind may be truly exercised therein and truly subjected to the
Teachings and Government thereof, for therein is Peace and true Joy known, and
increased to the Immortal Soul.

And as you in Diligence are found waiting upon the Living God, you will find
your strength to be renewed in him, and you thereby bourn up, as on the Wings
of an Eagle, above all those things, that would make you to faint in your
Minds, and to sit down short of that Inheritance of Eternal Life, and Crown of
Glory, which God has laid up in store for them, that hold out to the end: Oh!
be watchful over your own Hearts, and Spirits, and over your Words and Actions,
that you keep in Innocence, and in the Simplicity of the Truth, and therein
walk Inoffensively before all with whom you have to do, or amongst whom your
lot may be cast; and then whatsoever Sufferings come upon you they will be
without occasion given on your parts, and therein you will have true Peace and
Satisfaction, whatever your hardships or exercises may be.

And dear Friends, see that you keep your Hearts and Minds in an Holy
Submission and Resignation to the Will of God in all things, being truly
contented with, and Patient under your Troubles, following the Example of Job
that good Man of Old, who said when Surrounded and Surprised with sudden (...)
Evil Tidings, The Lord gives and the Lord takes away, Blessed be the Name of
the Lord. And as thus you are kept by the Mighty Power of God, through Faith,
Rooted and Grounded in Christ our Lord, not looking out at your Afflictions,
but fixed and settled in him, who is the Munition of Rocks, where your Bread is
sure, and your Water fails not, nothing will be too hard for you, because the
Lord your strength, is with you and is become your Rook, and Salvation, and
your exceeding great reward.

Then if you should loose all your outward Enjoyments, you know him that is
able to make it up again, yea and if you should suffer Death it self, as to
your outward Man, you know him that is your Life, and this is a Life that Death
and Hell cannot touch, nor all the Cruelties of the Wicked deprive you of, and
herein you are the Lords, whether in Life or in Death, and will have the
Evidence of Gods Spirit, bearing witness with your Spirits, that you are his
^hildren, and that you have faithfully served ^od, in your Day. Thus having the
blessed Evidence of Well Done, and peace from God in your selves, it will make
up all your Sufferings and Losses, and will be a Portion and an Inheritance,
beyond all the Treasures and Pleasures of this Transitory and fadeing World.

And dear Friends as God has been pleased to open the fountain of Divine Love
to you; So wait to feel more and more, the same Love shed abroad in your
Hearts, to keep your Minds and Spirits in a right frame, in this trying Day,
that you may be kept open to God, and truly open in his Love one to another,
and thereby you may be a strength, and a comfort one to another, helping to
build up one another, in the most Holy Faith; that notwithstanding all the
stormy Winds that may blow, and Floods that may beat against you to Scatter and
wash you, away, you being founded upon Christ the Living Rock may endure and
stand immovable as Gods building, to his Glory, and your everlasting Joy.

And now dear Friends, Let your Lives and Conversations amongst all men be in
Meekness, Patience, Temperance and Holiness that therein you may be Exemplary
to all and instrumental in the Hand of God, to turn the Children of men from
the darkness (and all their dark and evil Works and Ways, which always
procure Wrath and Judgment from God.) To the Light of Christ in themselves,
which will show them the evil of their Ways; and as it is believed in and
closed with, will bring to true Repentance, and Remission of Sins; and to an
Inheritance incorruptable that fades not away: And be careful and tender of
Gods Honor, and the Reputation of the Blessed Truth, and Breath to God and
Supplicate him for one another good and preservation every way in this day of
Great Affliction; which though the Lord may suffer you outwardly to partake of,
yet he will behold his afflicted ones, (who have no helper in the Earth) with
an Eye of Love and Compassion, and will as it was prophetically said of old,
lay the Foundations with Stones of fair Colors, and will Beautify with his
own Beauty and make to shine forth in that Comeliness, which he does and will
put upon his own Heritage and Offspring.

Oh! Friends, since these late Calamities have attended you in that poor
Nation, you have been often in my Mind, and the many times of Refreshments,
which we in the Presence of God have enjoyed together, to our mutual Joy, and
been as a well watered Garden, with the pleasent Showers which have dropped from
above, upon us, and yet fall upon the truly begotten of God, and made us to
rejoice together, in the Lord, and in the Power of his Might, and fresh in my
Remembrance at this time, and therein are the reaches, of my Life and Spirit to
you: My Friends and Brethren, This is it that Unites and Bundles up together in
one, and makes Members of that Living Body, of which Christ our Lord is Head,
as we are preserved in this Membership, we cannot but mourn and suffer with
you, being in a Spiritual sense as Flesh of our Flesh and Bone of our Bone.

And now my dear Friends, the earnest Cry and Breathing of my Soul are to the
Lord, that you and I, and all Gods Heritage, may be preserved in a living
Sense, of the Goodness and Presence of God, to the End, and that he may more
and more break the Bread of Life unto you, and the Waters of a full Cup may be
daily administered unto you, to strengthen your Souls, that so you may have
cause to say, and that with Joy, that though your Tribulations in this World do
abound, yet your Consolation and Peace in our Lord Jesus Christ, does much more
abound; and thus being preserved in a Divine sense, will sweeten your
Exercises: and also sweeten your Spirits under them, and Sanctify every state
to you, and all things will work together for your Good, and to the Glory of
God, who has been your Strength and preserver through all your Afflictions,
and will be, as your Eyes are kept to him.

So into the Hands of our God* as in to the Hands of a Faithful Creator do I
recommend you, and leave you with all his Flock and Heritage every where; who
am, Your Loving Friend* and Brother in the Truth, Bowed in Spirit to the Lord
for your Preservation to the End.

Written in London, the 2d of the first Month, 1690/1. William Bingley.

THE END.

