THE Bill of Indictment Exhibited against JOHN GILES, On Wednesday the 14th
instant, For his Barbarous ATTEMPT upon the Body Of Justice ARNOLD; For which
he was then Tried, and found Guilty.
Together with The Sentence he received on Saturday last, being the 17th
instant.
As also what happened concerning Mr. HERBERT, in reference to the said Justice
ARNOLD.

MR. John Giles being suspected for having been one of those that made the late
Barbarous and Inhumane Attempt upon the person of John Arnold Esquire one of His
Majesty's Justices of the Peace for the County of Monmouth last April, in
Jackanapes-lane near Temple^bar; after the indefatigable care of Edmund Warcup
Esquire to little effect here in Town, by the farther diligence of the Justices of
the Peace in the Country, (the Justice of Heaven still pursuing the Malefactor)
was upon several Informations, and strong presumptions, at length apprehended
in Monmouthshire: upon his Apprehension Mr. Arnold, very ill and weak of the
Wounds and Bruises he had received, took a Journey from his House to see and
speak with the said John Giles, whom he had no sooner seen and heard speak, but
he positively upon Oath charged him to be guilty of the Crime, of which he was
before only suspected.

Thereupon he the said John Giles was brought up to London to be Tried for the
Fact; in order to which, he was brought to the Bar at the Sessions House in the
Old-Bailey, upon Wednesday the 14th of this instant July, 1680, where the Jury
being Sworn by the Names of

Christopher Plucknet, William Dod, Anthony Nurse, John Burton, Nathan Goodwin,
George Wood, James Partridge, Lawrence Wood, John Bradshaw, William Withers,
Edward Probie, Richard Bromfield.
The Indictment.
THe Jurors for our Lord the King, upon their Oaths do present, That John Giles
late of the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West, in the County of Middlesex
Gent. not having God before his eyes, but being moved and seduced by the
instigation of the Devil, contriving, and maliciously by a most wicked
Conspiracy, with diverse other Malefactors to the Jurors unknown, forethought
and had, intending one John Arnold Esquire a faithful Subject to the King, and one
of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Monmouth, inhumanely to Maime,
Wound, Kill, and Murder, the 15th of April, in the Thirty second year of the
Reign of our Sovereign Lord Charles the Second, by the grace of God King of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. with the
said Malefactors unknown, at the Parish of St. Dunstans in the West aforesaid,
in the County of Middlesex aforesaid, in and upon him the said John Arnold,
then and there being in the peace of God and the King, voluntarily, and of his
malice forethought, with force and Arms, that is to say, with Swords, Staves,
and Knives, of design, and by lying in wait, did make an Assault, and him the
said John Arnold did then and there Beat, Wound, Maim, and evilly entreat, and
the Throat and Face of him the said John Arnold did grievously cut with a
certain Knife, also diverse almost Mortal Wounds then and there to the said John
Arnold, that is to say, one Wound of the depth of seven Inches in his Body,
between his Belly and his left Pap, two Wounds upon his Breast, and two Wounds
in his Left Arm, with certain Swords then and there did give and impose, so
that 'twas despaired of the said John Arnolds Life; and other enormities then
and there unto him did bring, to the great damage of the said John Arnold, and
against the Peace of our said Lord the King, his Crown and Dignity.

After a full hearing of the Evidence on both sides, the Jury withdrew, and
having debated together about half an hour, returned, and brought the Prisoner
in Guilty. Which done, the Court Adjourned till the Saturday following, the
17th of July; at which time the Court being sat, John Giles was brought to the
Bar, to whom the Right Worshipful Sir George Jefferies, the Worthy Recorder of
the City of London, delivered himself to this effect.

The RECORDERS Speech to John Giles.
YOu the Prisoner at the Bar, you have been Indicted for a very vile Offense,
an Offense in its nature that deserves a greater Punishment than the Law does
inflict upon any such Offenses; There is a Jury has convicted you of this
Crime, against whom, had you any Objection, you might have made your Challenge.
And now you stand Convicted here: It is only the Duty of the Court to pronounce
that Judgment against you, which they think may be reasonable to inflict upon
such an Offender. And I must needs say, it was one of the basest and barbarous
Actions, that Mankind could possibly be guilty of; and it was an action of so
much filth and baseness, that the Law could not foresee any man would be guilty
of; and therefore has not made provision for a Punishment proportionable to
it. But inasmuch as we understand [by Mr. Arnold's motion to the Right
Honorable the Lord Major] you have a charge of Children, therefore the Court
takes some consideration: not that they think to extend any Mercy to you for
your own sake, But Clemency they they think they are bound to have for those
that have not offended; but with regard too (as they ought to have a care) that
things of this nature be not only intended as a Punishment to the Offender, but
as a means to terrify all other people from being guilty of such extraordinary
Villainies. And because they will have a regard to your posterity, therefore
they do not think fit to put so great a Fine upon you as this Fault does
deserve: But on the other side, they have thought fit you should be made an
Example, and that your own Corpse should have as great a Punishment as the Law
will allow. And therefore in the name of the Court I do pronounce this to be
your Sentence.

The Court does think fit that you be put upon the Pillory, toward
Lincolns-Inne fields, as near to the place where this barbarous Fact was
committed as may be; and there you are to stand from the Hour of Twelve till
One, one day, at Noonday: And at another day, from the hour of Twelve till
One, over against Grays Inn in Holborne: And another day, between the same
Hours, just by the May Pole in the Strand. These three several days you are to
stand upon the Pillory, and to have a Paper put upon your Hat, wherein shall be
signified to all People that come by, the Offense of which you stand Convicted.
And next, to deter all others from committing the like, the Court does think
fit likewise to award, That you should pay to the King the Sum of Five Hundred
Pound; and that you be Committed, till such time as you pay that Money. And
because it is to be both a Punishment to you, and a Determent to all others
from committing such Villainies as these are, you are to find good Sureties for
your good Behavior during Life.

Sentence being pronounced, and the Prisoner removed from the Bar, Rich.
Cavenagh was brought to the Bar, and prayed to be Discharged; but was by Mr.
Arnold charged with threatening of one Philip Staneright, one of the Kings
Witnesses: for which reason, and for that also a new Evidence was come in
against the said Cavenagh, with some farther charge relating to Mr. Arnold's
business, the Court thought fit for want of Bail to continue him a Prisoner.

Then Mr. Herbert appeared, and prayed to be Discharged from his Recognizance
to appear at the Old Bailey; but being accused by a Woman, for calling her
Whore, Jade, and very ill Names, and holding up his Staff at her, and
threatening to beat her, for being a Witness against his Friend Gyles; as also
for taking away her Horses, as she was going to the Mill; and the reason was
because she was to be a Witness at London against Gyles: But she being a
married Woman, and none appearing that would be bound to prosecute him for it,
he was not bound over to answer it, till another Complaint came in against him.
Which was immediately made by Mr. Ballard and another Gentleman; who charged
Mr. Herbert, that in Whitsun-week last, upon a discourse about choosing Knights
of the Shire for Monmouth, and the saying of one in the company, that 'twas
thought Mr. Arnold would stand for it, Mr. Herbert should make answer, I will
circumcize the other side of his Cheek first; or, He must have the other side
of his Cheek circumcized first. Upon which the Court ordered he should not be
Discharged, but remain bound upon the former Recognizance, to appear there next
Sessions; and the Court gave him several sharp Reprehensions for his malicious
and unmanly words and proceedings. This being the second of the King's
Witnesses, and a Woman that he had barbarously treated, still passionately
giving the reason, that they were Witnesses against his Friend John Giles, as
it was proved on Oath before the Court by several Witnesses.

Then Sir Thomas Allen acquainted the Court, that a Gentleman had informed him
the day before, that Mr. Herbert told him, that Mr. Arnold wounded himself, and
cut his own Throat; which the Court looked upon as an high Effect of a malicious
Ingratitude: Mr. Arnold having besought his Majesty, when Mr. Herbert was in
Newgate, to have his Release. Mr. Arnold replied, that Mr. Herbert had been
more ungrateful to his Majesty, who had graciously pardoned him greater
Offenses; and lately, for he had spoken worse of his Majesty's Person and
Government than he had done of him, as it had been proved before his Majesty,
and of which he believed his Majesty was well satisfied. The Court told Mr.
Herbert, he was a shame to all English men, and bound him by Recognizance to
appear and answer this Offense at the Kingsbench-Bar, the first Day of the next
Term.

FINIS.

