A FAITHFUL TESTIMONY FOR God and my Country: OR, A Retro-spective Glass FOR
THE LEGISLATORS, And the rest of the SONS OF THE Church of England, (So called)
Who are found Persecuting the INNOCENT.

London, Printed for the Author, in the Year, 1664.

A faithful Testimony for God and my Country, etc.
FRiends, had you by the greatness of your Valor invaded, and Vi and Armis
conquered the Nation, or were they your subdued Vassals through the puissance
of your Courage, whom you now pretend to sell for slaves, You had then had the
Rigidity of Infidels for your Parallel: But for you who were amicably admitted
into Trust and Government, to so much as offer to banish, or sell for slaves
the freeborn Denizens of England, because they are Spiritually-minded, and for
Conscience Sake cannot conform to the Carnal Ordinances of man, contrary to the
Royal Law of God written in their hearts; I say, if this be not utterly below
the Heroic Spirit of all Generosity as well as Christianity, let the holy
Witness of God in all Consciences judge.

But alas, poor mortals! what have you undertaken? Ye are as capable to divert
the course of the Sun, or impede the flux and reflux of the Seas, as ye are to
stop the spreading, conquering and flourishing growth of the Truth and Gospel
of our Lord Jesus; for infinitely greater is HE that is in Us, than the God of
the men of your World: wherefore in vain do you think through your unnatural
coercion, to cause us to forsake GOD the Living Fountain (who has never failed
us) to drink of your lifeless puddles, or so much as deign to taste of those
Husks, which you call Bread; I tell you, Nay, for we know better things; and
our Rock is as invincible, our Armor in the Light as impenetrable, and our
Fountain as precious and inexhaustible as when first we believed; and the holy
Religion that we through the Light of Jesus in the Conscience do already
conform to, and live in, is not of yesterday, as the ignorant most vainly
imagine, nor the Principle leading thereto subject to change, or liable to
expulsion; neither may we in the exercise thereof run shirking into holes, or
skulk into corners by threes or fours, as the now Pestiferous Locusts did a few
years since, when the Powers of the Earth bid them be silent or took away their
fleece: For through the Grace and Mercy which is infinite, we know and have
believed in the Living God, and Jesus THE Christ, whom he has sent to redeem
and save his People from, not in their sins: And we have eaten (eternal thanks
be to his holy Name) of that Flesh, and drank of that Blood which admits not of
hunger or thirst after the Inventions or Traditions of man any more; and such
knowing the immortal Truth through the Revelation of the Everlasting Gospel
(for which they have an infallible Testimony to bear) cannot fly, although your
Furnace were or should be made seven times hotter than it already is. Nay, nay;
for our descent is legitimated by the Generator of the Just, and the Birth of
our day is more Noble, our Principle and Spirit more public and true than so;
and our mouths were not opened by, neither can they be shut in the will of man;
insomuch, that what we receive in secret, that declare we openly and freely
among you, for it admits of no limitation, neither fear we the gainsaying Jews
of this Age; and if our Gospel and glorious Testimony be hid from any [in this
the Lord's Day] it is only from such who perish through their own opposition or
opposing the Light in themselves and others; for the Candle-Royal, the
Everlasting Light of the Living-God, which is lighted, brought forth and set
up, in and among the Land of the Living, cannot, is not whelmed under a bushel,
nor can the prevalent in-flaming power thereof be extinguished by any humane
Law.

And your selves cannot rationally think by this your unnatural Act (the effect
whereof is, let a million be concerned, and an hundred thousand perish, rather
than the inordinate wills of a very few be crossed) to so much as influence or
endear any sober man in the Nations: and for Converts you need not expect one;
some few ye may divert through hypocrisy into further deceit, who with their
Bodies for slavish fear or dishonest gain, may conform, and ye may also
therewith gratify the Profane, and cause the Seed of Evildoers for a season
to rejoice: But O! the Cries and Prayers of the Oppressed, with the Tears and
Groans of the Captives, the Widows and Fatherless will further prevail than
many Armies of that uncircumcised Leaven.

But there are some so impudent to allege that this your Act is not against
Conscience, (but it is like they are such who have made shipwreck of their own
that thus babble) however the indelible characters written with the effused
blood of the Innocent and truly Conscientious (which will never cease to cry)
have by woeful experience manifested all such Allegations to be fictitious and a
lie; wherefore in vain does the Serpent go about to Hide himself there. Indeed
the Tail of the Dragon is not the Head of the Serpent, neither are his Teeth
and Tail his Cloven-feet: for have you not a Law that would compel us to your
Worship? and another that excommunicates us because we do not come? Is there
not a third of the same species, that robs and imprisons us for
Antichristian-Tythes? and a fourth that would likewise compel us, against a
positive Command of Christ, to swear; and is there not a fifth and sixth, in
case of refusal, that praemunires and requires us upon pain of death to abjure
the Land? Interweave with the sweep of this Drag, that of your own making,
prohibiting our Meetings, and requiring us also to swear upon pain of being
sold for Bondslaves For who can be so injurious to his own reason, to pay for
his being transported against his own consent; and then the words of your Act
(so far as I remember) are, The Sheriff may distrain, and for want of distress
he has power to contract with any Merchant, etc. that is, he has power to
sell me for seven years.
; and if It, with the rest, make not up a complete Labyrinth of Thraldomes
against Conscience, then judge thou O Righteous Judge of Heaven and Earth!

Is this the Indulgence so often promised to tender Consciences? and did not
the King say in his late Declaration, That he was an Enemy in his nature to
Sanguinary and Capital Punishments? If to Banish an Innocent man from his Wife,
or a tender mother from her innocent babes and husband, be not capital or
sanguinary punishment; Nay, if it be not the most exquisite of Cruelties, judge
thou O Lord my God, for thy Judgments are, and will be just, and thy Decrees
are righteous altogether, and in thy season shall most surely be fulfilled,
although at the present thy Enemies rage, and the Rulers in the Earth decree
the Banishment of thine Anointed forth of their Land.

When first I heard that such a Bill was preparing to be offered in Parliament,
I said in my heart, Can, Dare, or will any, called Englishmen, give their
consent to the passing thereof? How! the Peoples Representatives in Parliament
give their consents to punish the most innocent Natives with no less than
Banishment, and upon their return with Death, for the exercise of their pure
Consciences to God!

To Death such immane Crueltyes, I shall decry,
And with my Blood I Will freely seal,
Your Act's against the Commonweal.
Also know all the Actors, by your Act unminded,
That it is no Law till Magna Charta be rescinded,
Though with it you do and may the Innocent vex,
Not minding SALUS POPULI SUPREMA LEX.
Well, if it were possible for you to obtain your wills, and that you could rid
out of the Nation all such who for Conscience sake, in obedience to Christ's
Command, cannot swear, nor, as moved by his holy Spirit, forbear to meet often
together, to wait upon and serve the Lord; neither Conform to your
Church-Worship (And what man that strictly fears God in any measure, does not
some of your Laws against Conscience reach?) Who should then Plow the Earth,
and maintain the Industry now used therein? It Is not Profaneness, Drunkenness,
Oaths, Lies, Lust and Persecution, and such who nourish their hearts in the
Sensuality of all manner of Uncleanness, (though Sons of your Church) that
will be long able to give to Caesar, or put into the Hirelings mouths; and then
to be sure, if they are not very much degenerated from their old nature, they will
prepare War and contrive Insurrections, the prevention whereof, is the alleged
pretention why this your Act of Prevention was passed against the Innocent [but
it is more then palpable, it is the exercise of our holy Conscience to God that
is struck at: For if really and alone to prevent Insurrections, was the Cause
why the Act was passed, what is the reason that Women, and Men past sixty, or
otherwise impotent were not excepted?] But to cut short all such pretention; I
tell you plainly, it is time enough for an Englishman to be impeached when
really guilty, and to suffer when matter of Fact is fully and legally proven. I
am sure that is the hereditary undoubted Right, absolutely due to the meanest
person born within the English Nation. And that good Cilician, Paul, being
ensnared for the exercise of his pure Conscience, as at this day we are,
Pleaded the Privilege of the Nation and City whereof he was; and those
generous Heathens, Claudius Licius, Felix, Festus and Agrippa did not deny him
his Birthright, but like men of noble minds, permitted him to speak for himself
to the full; ingenuously admitting his Appeal unto Caesar, who though a
professed Heathen, suffered Paul, a Christian, not only to live, but also to
preach Christianity in Rome, no man molesting him; so that, that great Emperor
did not employ his Soldiers (like Brutes) to pull Paul and his Friends out of
his House, and break up their Meetings, though it is most probable he had
oft-times with him an hundred times four, besides them of his Family; and yet
it was not ignorantly called, A Seditious Conventicle, etc. But the accurssed
High Priest of the Jews who read the Law, as your Priests do the Prayers that
you call Common, and talked of the Messia to come, as yours do of Christ now he
is come, insinuating with the Rulers of the Earth then, as at this day, being
assisted with the baser sort then, as now, suffered Paul to be smitten and
abused contrary to the Law, as at this day we are: And was it not the Hirarchy
then, who sent their Armed Mercenaries, Satan's Vassals, with their suborned
Judas, to seize upon, and hale the Innocent Lamb of God before their Judgment
Seat, or pretended Spiritual Court; where, by a Law incontinently, they
condemned the Savior of the World, prevailing (through their subtilty) with
Pilate [even against the Witness of God in his conscience] to give up Jesus the
Just One, to the Crucifiction, (in whom he found no fault) and deliver to them
and their accomplices Barrabas a Murderer; and Pilate having once drankin the
Priests Sorceries, fell below the state of a man, permitting his Soldiers to
Spit in his Saviors face, Crown him with Thorns, Strike, Mock and Revile him
on the Cross, give him Gall and Vinegar to drink, cast Lots for his Garments,
receive the Priests Bribery to lie; all which was as far beneath the Nobility
of the Romans, before the Priests spirit had entered them, as our Usage at this
day is beneath the spirit of True Englishmen, and contrary to the Fundamental
Laws of the Land whereof we are Freeborn.

For in the first place, We are not only illegally seized upon, Dragged through
your Streets and Canels, knocked down, Hair and Garments rent off, Blood drawn,
bruised and beaten to excess, even several to death, and many other most sordid
immanities (against Law) done unto us (which a large Volumn will not contain)
but as illegally sent to Prison; and when Prisoners, and brought before
Judicatories (so called) denied to be heard; our mouths stopped at the Judges
command, by the hand of the Common Hangman and other assistant miscrants, with
Gags, and by thrusting nasty handkirchifs, rouled up, into the months of the
Innocent ready to sufficate them; also striking of them many dreadful Blows
with great Canes or Cudgels (at least a hundred) upon their bare heads and
other parts of their bodies, and this by command, and at the Bar of Justice (so
called) and for no other Cause but legally pleading for their Liberties and
Estates, having been a considerable time falsely imprisoned, and ought by the
Law of the Land, at least to have been freed, naught being found or proven
against them. But instead of receiving any manner of Justice, most rediculously
and impertinantly was the Oath of Allegiance, imposed as a Snare upon them; for
refusal whereof they were forthwith premunired, and their Estates and Liberties
in this horrid manner raped from them.

As likewise since, at the same place, to wit, the Sessions House in the
Old-Bailey London, about forty Friends were brought from Newgate thither, and
set to the Bar; a false Indictment read against some few of them, and for
fashion-sake a Jury impannell'd; some Witness, such as it was, but not being
sufficient to prove the Indictment, the purport whereof was, For being at an
Unlawful Assembly, Seditious Meeting, Conventicle, or Worship, contrary to the
Lyturgy of the Church of England, or such stuff so far as I remember. After
twice going out, the Jury brought in their Verdict, That the Prisoners were not
guilty of any Seditious Conventicle, Unlawful Assembly, or the like. Whereupon
they were exceedingly menaced, furiously interrogated, their Verdict by the
Judge (so called) refused, and by him six of them bound-over to answer it at
the King's Bench Bar; and all this, because they could not without sufficient
Witness, contrary to their Conscience, find the Innocent Guilty. Are not the
Jury Judges of matter of Fact (at least) and to give their Verdict according to
their Conscience and Judgment? and is not the Judge obliged to receive the
Juries Verdict, and acquit the Prisoner, or give Judgment accordingly See one
of your own Presidents in that case, the substance whereof is this, so far as I
remember; (viz.) An Innocent man was indicted for Felony; the Witnesses
swearing against him, the Jury brought him in Guilty; and notwithstanding the
Judge himself knew the man indicted was innocent, and likewise, knew the person
that did the Felony, yet he was forced to pass Sentence upon the Innocent,
because the Jury had brought him in guilty; and all the Judge could do was, to
reprieve him until he had got his Pardon from the King.
: But these Innocents were remanded to Prison (though cleared by the Jury) and
there to remain. This is not all, (although so abominable, that I do believe
the like has not been done in England in any Judicatory this many hundred
years) but two days after, twenty Friends (or there-abouts) Men and Women,
were at the place aforesaid, upon the authority of sic volo sic jubeo,
sentensed to Banishment without any Jury at all, or being legally heard,
notwithstanding they never refused, according to their understandings and a
good conscience, to plead the general Issue, the which with one voice they then
affirmed to the Judge in the face of the Court; (so called) though it be most
evident (by the London Juries usage) that pleading or not pleading, Jury or no
Jury, is much at one. As was also somewhat manifested at Hicks's Hall the same
week, where the Grand Jury, at their first and second going forth, could not
find the Bill; but being checked and threatened to be fined, at their third
going forth (the Clerk of the Peace going up to help them) it was said the Bill
was found; I say, it was alleged it was found, but it was not clear to many
(if any) of the bystanders. How ever, with such Witness and Petty-Jury as they
were, there were likewise sentenced to Banishment Twelve Innocents, to any of
the Kings Plantations, Virginia and Barbados excepted: but one of the Justices
(so called) informed the Judge that Virginia was one of the places excepted in
the Act; then he mentioned Hispaniola, (a place that never yet belonged to
England) and one that stood by and heard him, said, Oliver did not get that for
you; so that at that time he did not condescend upon any particular place.
Indeed the man was greatly confounded, insomuch that his lips trembled
exceedingly when he pronounced his confused Sentence, which to me was an
infalible sign that God's hand was against him.

As for the illegal, absurd and cruel proceedings last Assizes and
Quarter-Session holden at Hertford, where by Banishing twenty nine innocent
true Men from their dear Wives and tender innocent Children (sixteen of them
being married, and several of them already shipped) has on your part, and by
virtue of the Authority derived from you, in effect made sixteen Widows, and at
least forty or fifty Fatherless Children; the which being already malafama
through and through the Nation, I shall but only mention it, and as dung,
amongst the rest of the precited inhumane Violences, spread it before you; that
so you may plainly see, if prejudice utterly blind not, how we are really
enslaved, and contrary to Magna Charta and the most wholesome Laws of the Land,
destroyed in our Lives, Liberties and Estates, even by the power that is
derived from your late Act. Since the unnatural birth whereof (where the
Magistrates through God's Mercy to them and us have not been restrained) have
not our Persons been imprisoned, and our innocent Blood drank as freely as
other cups of Vice and Pleasure? Not less than the bodies of twenty seven
precious Souls destroyed, in and through Cruel Imprisonment in Newgate, since
your Act became in force; being taken, and Imprisoned to death, only for
worshipping the Lord their Maker in the Spirit and in the Truth. Is not this
turning of Justice backward, and Equity into Cruelty? makes not such doings
your Thrones of Justice (so called) to become Stages of Infamy, and your most
legal Theaters most artificial Aceldama's? and think ye that the Living God of
Heaven and of Earth will not visit for these things, and make a dreadful
inquisition for the Blood and Sufferings of his Innocent Seed? YEA, YEA, YEA,
as sure as he is God; and its more requisite for you, to expect the revelation
of his Indignation, than daily Bread. What can I say? You will as surely feel
his Justice, as ever you saw his Mercy; and your whole Arm of Flesh shall be no
more able to deliver you from his Vengeance, than one single Reed; wherefore,
in vain do you fight against God in his Seed, or go about to limit his Holy
Ones in the exercise of their holy Consciences, to your way, or number. Had not
Christ twelve Apostles, and did the ignoble Jews go about to restrict him to
the number of five? and were not oft-times several hundreds, and sometimes
thousands conveen'd to hear him and them preach? though indeed they were, as we
now are, by the same Antichristian and Hierarchical-spirit cast out as
Evildoers, thought not worthy to live; commanded to speak no more in that
Name; called Sowers of Sedition, Pestilent Fellows, Ringleaders of Sects,
Perverters of the Laws, Turners of the World upside down, etc. However, these
our Primitive Predecessors fearing and obeying God, rather than man, met often
together, sometimes in the Field, sometimes by the Seaside, sometimes at one
Friends house, and sometimes at another, or the like. And did not the Apostle
incite the True Christians, to meet often together, and rebuke such who forsook
the Assemblies of the Saints? wherefore some grew weak, and others fell asleep.
And whether do you think its juster before God, for us to obey the Spirit of
Christ in Us, and follow the blessed Example of him and his holy Apostles, or
your Edict? And was Daniel a Rebel, when he brake the Decree of Darius, King of
the Medes and Persians, whose Statutes are said to be unalterable? Yet holy
Daniel valued not the anti-conscience Law of the King his Master (whose
immediate Servant he was) but boldly opened his windows, and prayed to his God
as at other times. And for my part, I tell you plainly, I purpose in my heart,
all the days of my life to wait upon, and pray to my God, as at other times,
as holy Daniel did, notwithstanding your Decree to the contrary; infallibly
knowing, my God can deliver me if he please: but as to mine own part, whether
my days shall be many, or few, my death public or private, O Lord, thou
know I am not at all anxious or careful in that matter. And as I would not
be profuse of my Blood, even so I abhor the very thought of being nigardly of
my life, for the further Testimony of the Gospel and immortal Truth, as it is
holden forth and dispensed, by those depicable, yet precious Ones, (who tremble
at his Word) in scorn called Quakers.

Wherefore thy Will, not mine be done, O God most Wise.
Christ's Cross I love; the Pain, the Shame, I utterly despise.
Your Banishment, your Goal and Gibbet I defy;
When you are ready so am I, for God and's Truth to die.
However, it had been but reasonable among men, before you had passed a Decree
to Imprison, Fine, Banish, sell for Slaves, and upon their Return, to put to
Death so considerable a part of the Nation, as we (and others concerned in your
late Act) are, to have conveen'd a sufficient number of your Priests (for whom
you thus drudg) and Us together, and your selves have heard if they could have
convinced us, that we held or declared any thing for Doctrine or Religion
derogatory to God, or Christ Jesus the Light of the World; or that we had
preached for Hire, or divined for Money, handfuls of Corn or pieces of Bread,
(as the false Prophets did and do) or if they could have plainly evinced to
you, we had like Belly-gods, idle Drones, greedy Dumb-dogs who can never have
enough, robbed the Nation of the Tenth, or seventh part of their Estates and
yearly industry, then it had been time to have cried Away with them: for such
men, as such, are indeed pernicious to the Publick-weal, a burden and a plague
to our Nation.

Or rather, in the first place, immediately after God had permitted you into
outward Power and Government, It had been fitter for you to have put on
sackcloth and ashes, and in humility of soul have turned inward, and waited
there in brokenness of heart, at Wisdoms gate, that so ye might have come to
have felt and known what the Lord had meant (considering what bad men you had
been) to devoul such undeserved Trust and Power upon you. But alas, alas,
instead of doing thus, have ye not turned the Grace of God into Wantonness,
Pride, Oaths, Persecution, and many other unutterable Abominations Him that is
free I neither interrogate, nor accuse, although I expect he that is most guilty
should be ready to throw the first stone at me.
? And can you expect ought but a suitable reward, and that God should make a
dreadful decision betwixt the Just and the Unjust, betwixt them who serve him,
and them who will not serve him themselves, nor suffer others? Indeed, were I
so vicious as very very many of the sons of your Church are, I should rather
expect the eternal Vengeance of the dreadful God forthwith to sweep me from the
face of the Earth, than his intolerably provoked Mercy should permit me to live
one day longer to blaspheam. And truly, friends, the Whoremonger, Swearer,
Liar, Drunkard, Adulterer and Idolatrous, Persecutor be you assured God will
severely judge; and the Thirsters after the Blood of the Innocent shall not
live out half their days, and the Memorial of the Wicked shall Rot.

E. B.

THE END.

