TWO TREATISES: The One, Of Eternal Judgment;

OR, The Great Day of GOD.

^he Other, The MAN of Sin;

OR, The Son of Perdition;

OR, That Wicked Revealed.

By George Bishope.

London, Printed for R. Wilson, 1663.

ETERNAL JUDGMENT; OR, The Great Day of God: WHEREIN He will render to every
One according to his Deeds.

As it is written from the Spirit of the Lord, in His Servant, Geo. Bishope.
Therefore leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, let us go on unto
Perfection; Not laying again the foundation of Repentance from Dead Works, and
of Faith toward God; of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of Laying on of Hands,
and of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of ETERNAL JUDGMENT. And this we will
do if God permit, Heb. 6. 1, 2, 3. And as he reasoned of Righteousness,
Temperance, and JUDGMENT to come, Felix trembled, etc. Acts 24. 25. London,
Printed for R. Wilson, 1663.

Eternal Judgment, etc.
THat which I am speaking to, viz. Eternal Judgment, is of great weight,
whether it be considered as to this World, or to that which is to come.
Judgment -- than which, what can be greater? -- Eternal -- it endures for ever
and ever.

And unto this must [all] come -- and this [all] must abide for ever and ever;
whether they be high, or whether they be low; whether they be rich, or whether
they are poor; [all] must come to abide Eternal Judgment.

Quest. What then is Eternal Judgment?

Answ. Eternal Judgment is no other in the sense thereof, or signification --
than the final conclusion of a Man, to this state, or that, for ever and ever.
--

Now this (as I have said) is a thing of great weight, whether it be considered
as to this World, or that which is to come.

If it be considered as to this World; What is there that is more weighty than
for a Man here to be concluded to an Eternal state? for here the Judgment
begins that shall have no end.

If as to that which is to come, What more to be minded than that which abides
for ever?

Eternal Judgment, then, is of two sorts; or, it may be considered under a
double head, viz.

Either as to Life, or Death.

As to Life -- And so it is the Eternal Conclusion of a Man, in a state of
happiness, or with God for ever.

As to Death -- And so it is an Eternal Separation of a Man from God; or, the
Punishment of a Man with Everlasting Destruction from the Presence of God, or
from God for ever.

To instance, and be particular.

Man in his first estate was made after the Image of God. So God created Man in
his own Image, (says Moses) in the Image of God created he him; male and
female created he them, Genesis 1. 27. And the Lord God formed Man of the dust of
the ground, and breathed into his nostrils the Breath of life, and Man became a
living Soul, Genesis 2. 7. And this Image of God in which Man was created, was
Righteousness and true Holiness. -- Which after God (says the Apostle) is
created in Righteousness and true Holiness, viz. the New Man, the Man which was
at first, before the fall, into which Man must be renewed again ere he can
enter into Life, into the state in which he was before he fell; which Death
came over, and is over, till into this state there be a renewing again, which
Death is over; and therefore it is called New, because of the Old, which came
over in and by the Transgression, which must be put off, the Old man with his
deeds; and that which was before the Old, which by reason of the Old has lain
in Death, must rise again; Man must be renewed again into the Image of God, in
which he was created, which was (as I have said) in Righteousness and true
Holiness. This I say therefore (says he) and testify, that ye henceforth walk
not as other Gentiles, walking in the vanity of their minds, having their
understanding darkened, being alienated from the Life of God, through the
ignorance that is in them, because of the blindness of their heart; who being
past feeling, have given themselves over unto Lasciviousness, to work all
Uncleanness with greediness: but ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that
ye have heard him, and have been taught of him, as the truth is in Jesus; That
ye put off concerning the former conversation, the old man, which is corrupt,
according to the deceitful lusts; and be [renewed] in the spirit of your mind;
And that ye [put on] the [New Man] which after God is created in Righteousness
and true Holiness, Ephesians. 4. 17, to the 25th. And, If ye be then risen with
Christ, seek those things that are above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God. Set your Affections on things above, not on things on the Earth:
for ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ who is
our Life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in Glory. Mortify
therefore your Members which are upon the Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness,
Inordinate Affection, and Concupiscence, and Covetousness which is Idolatry;
for which things sake the Wrath of God comes on the children of disobedience.
In the which ye also walked sometime when ye lived in them: But now ye also
[put off] all these, Anger, Wrath, Malice, Blasphemy, filthy Communication out
of your mouth. Lie not one to another, seeing that ye have [put off] the [Old
man] with his deeds, and have put on the [New man] which is [renewed] in
knowledge, after the Image of Him that created him; where there is neither
Greek nor Jew, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scithian, bond nor
free, but Christ is all, and in all. Put on therefore, as the Elect of God,
holy and beloved, Bowels of Mercies, Kindness, Humbleness of Mind, Meekness,
Long-suffering, etc. Col. 3. 1, to the 12th. I say, Man in his first estate was
made after the Image of God, which was in Righteousness and true Holiness; and
here he proceeded from God, he was born of God, he was the Son of God: God
breathed into Man the Breath of Life, and Man became a living Soul, as
aforesaid.

Now as the life, being, and happiness of every thing is in the Principle from
whence it proceeds, and of which it is; So Man, or the Soul of Man proceeding
from God, its happiness, and being, and life, is God, from whom it is; and as
he is with God, and may be with Him, of whom he is; So is his Joy, his Peace,
his Rest, and no otherwise; and this being for ever, the Soul is in its
Principle, as a Line in its center, in Peace and Rest; and here it is well, as
a Child in the bosom of its Father; and as a Living Plant in the Root of which
it is. And here were all Men, as they stood in the state of him who was the
first man, Adam, who was made a living Soul, unfallen, and not in the state of
Degeneration from God.

But Man not abiding in this state with God, in which he was made, but turning
from it, into that which is in the Separation from God, from hence came his Woe
and Misery: For being in the state of Separation from God, he is from his Life,
his Rest, his Peace, his Principle, and so Death is over, and Death reigns,
which is in enmity to God, and to his Life, and all that is of him who is his
Life, which seeks to destroy and root out that which is of God, and to keep it
under.

Now in this stare every Man is by nature (the nature which is in the
Transgression) without Christ, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel; a
stranger from the Covenants of Promise, having no hope, and without God in the
World; that is, he is from God, who is the life of his Soul; Death is got
between, and has the dominion, and so his Soul languisheth and dies (as to
the Life of God) and lies in Death; being deprived of, and kept from that which
is its Life, by Death, that is over; and so has no Peace nor Rest (none that is
truly so) for it is from or without him who is the root of his being, and the
Center of his Rest.

And in this state the Son of God when he comes, finds all men; All under
Death; All in the state of Wrath; and so it may be said, as he said, When the
Son of Man comes, shall he find Faith on Earth? And again, -- he looked, and
there was none to help, and he wondered that there was none to uphold; Therefore
his own Arm brought Salvation unto him, and his Fury it upheld him; and this he
did, that he might Redeem unto God, and by overcoming Death, which was got
over, bring Immortality to light by the Gospel: And so the first man, Adam, was
made a living Soul; the last Adam was made a quickening Spirit; to beget, to
bring to life again that which was dead. And so, As in Adam all die, even so
[in] Christ all are made alive; that is, all that are [in] Christ.

And this is the state of Regeneration, or the begetting again unto God such as
were degenerated from him, and born of the Devil, in the flate of Death;
Children of wrath as well as others. And this said Paul of the Ephesians, who
were begotten again to a lively hope through the Resurrection of the Dead. --
And you has he quickened (says he) who were dead in Trespasses and Sins,
wherein in times past ye walked according to the course of this World,
according to the Prince of the power of the Air, the spirit that now works in
the children of Disobedience. Among whom also we [all] had our conversation in
times past, in the lusts of our flesh, fulfilling the desires of the flesh, and
of the mind; and were by nature the Children of Wrath [even as others] but God
who is rich in Mercy, for his great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we
were dead in sins, has quickened us together with Christ: By Grace ye are
saved, Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. -- And, such were some of you (says he to the
Corinthians, viz. Fornicators, Idolaters, Adulterers, Effeminate, Abusers of
themselves with Mankind; Thieves, Covetous, Drunkards, Revilers, Extortioners)
but ye are wa^hed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of
the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. And here the
Soul is brought to God again, into union with God again; unto its Life, its
Principle, its Root, its Center, and comes to feel refreshing again, and
quickening again, and to enter into its Rest, from which Death kept it, and made
a Separation. And so there remains a Rest for the People of God (as the
Apostle said to the Saints) and he that believes, does enter into that Rest;
and he that is entered into his Rest, he also has ceased from his own works, as
God did from his, Heb. 4. 3, 9, 10. He is come to that from which he was; which
whilst he was from, he was from his Rest. He is come to God again, from whence
he was gone; He has found his Resting Place, which the other was not. -- Arise
ye, and depart; for this is not your Rest, Micah 2. 10.

So Man coming to be joined to God again, to his Rest, is in Peace; and now it
is well with him; now he lies down, and takes his Rest, for the Lord sustains
him, as David said, -- I will both lay me down in peace, and sleep; for thou,
Lord, only make me dwell in safety, Psalm. 4. last. He is in his Root; and his
Root is in him, and he is born by the Root. He is at the Breast, the Breast of
his Mother, and his Mother gives him suck; Jerusalem which is from above, which
is free, the Mother of us all, says the Apostle, Gal. 4. 26. and he is dandled
upon her knees, and born on her sides, and so it is well with him. Rejoice ye
with Jerusalem, and be glad with her all ye that love her. Rejoice with Joy,
all ye that mourn for her, that ye may suck and be satisfied with the Breasts
of her Consolations, that ye may milk out, and be delighted with the Abundance
of her Glory, Isa. 66. 10, 11.

And here it comes to be well with Man for ever, as he abides with God, his
Rest, his Peace, his Center, his Principle, He of whom he is, and from whom he
came; there is no night with him here; no sorrow, nor tears, nor sighing; for
sorrow and sighing flee away, as he abides here, as he abides in the presence
of the Bridegroom, and hears his voice, whom his soul loves. Can the Children
of the Bride-chamber mourn (says Christ) as long as the Bridegroom is with
them? but the days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and
then shall they fast, Mat. 9. 15. From whom had not Man gone away, he had never
known what fasting was, or sorrow, or sighing, or tears, or trouble; but here
came his misery, here hence it sprang, his sorrow, and his trouble, the cause
of his sighing and fasting and tears, and here it continues; and this is the
Reason of it, and the ground of all; He went from Him whom his Soul loved, who
was the Rest of his Soul, and the center of his being, and went to Death; and
so Death came over him, to which he went, the which he chose; so his Soul came
to be laid in the grave, and he to be separated from God. And this is the state
of Man in the Fall, and of his Recovery again to the state in which he was
before the Fall, and of his being joined to the Lord again, as he was before
the Fall; and of his happiness in it; and the reason or ground of the one and
the other, which is necessary for Man to understand, that the eyes of his
Understanding may be enlightened, to see how it was with him before he fell; and
how it is with him in the Fall; and how he comes to be restored again; and what
that Restoration is: for till this be, he labors in vain, and lies down in
sorrow, and can never come to God, or be joined to Him who is the rest of his
Soul, and the length of his days, and his Portion for ever. And for want of
this right Understanding it is, that Men are deceived, and led along by the
Enemy to do his will, till the hour of their Visitation be over, which is in
this World, and they come to drop into the Pit, out of which they cannot come:
For whilst they think they may go on in Wickedness, which separates from God
(Behold the Lord's hand is not shortened that it cannot save, neither his ear
heavy that it cannot hear; but your Iniquities have separated between you and
your God, and your Sins have hid his Face from you, that he will not hear, Isa.
59. 1, 2.) and continue in Wickedness, which makes the separation, and die in
wickedness, which concludes it; they may yet be saved by Christ: And this is
the Doctrine they have generally been taught, viz. That they shall never be
delivered from Sin while they live: Then say I, Thou shall never be saved; and
my word is truth; For, whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom
he called, them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also
glorified, Romans 8. 31. And this is not the Unrighteous; For, know ye not that
the Unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Abusers of themselves with
Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners shall inherit the Kingdom of God: and such were some of you; but
ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. as aforesaid;
and he that justifies the Ungodly, is he that sanctifies. Let us draw near with
a true Heart, in full assurance of Faith; having our Hearts sprinkled from an
Evil Conscience, and our Bodies washed with pure Water: Let us hold fast the
Profession of our Faith without wavering, for he is faithful who has promised,
Heb. 10. 22, 23. I say, whilst men think thus, and go on thus, and are
persuaded thus, and so are deceived; how is it possible that they can ever come
to Life? Therefore am I moved of the Lord to write thus, to remove this
mistake, and to uncover this deceit of the Enemy, and his wile; that Men may
come to see their state, and be converted and healed: For till Man, who is
fallen from God, be turned to God, and joined to God again, it can never be
well with him.

Now he that is joined to the Lord, is One Spirit, 1 Cor. 6. 17. And, -- If any
man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 8. 9. And, If any
man be in Christ, he is a new Creature. Old things [are] past away; Behold
[all] things are become new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. And, -- If ye be dead with Christ
from the Rudiments of the World, Why, as though living in the World, are ye
subject to Ordinances? Touch not, taste not, handle not; (which [all] are to
perish with the using) after the Commandments and Doctrines of men; which
things have indeed a show of wisdom, in Will Worship, and Humility, and
neglecting of the Body; not in any Honor to the satisfying of the flesh, Col.
2. 20, to the end. And, -- If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits on the right hand of God, Col. 3. 1. For,
he that is in Christ, is as he is; -- Because [as] he is, so [are] we in this
World, 1 John 4. 17. And -- He that does Righteousness [is] Righteous, [as] he
is Righteous, 1 John 3. 7. And, -- Every man that has this Hope in him,
purifies himself, [as] he is pure, 1 John 3. 3. Christ [in] you the Hope of
Glory. The Mystery hid from Ages, and from Generations, Col. 1. 27. And, What
fellowship has Righteousness with Unrighteousness? and what communion has
Light with Darkness? and what concord has Christ with Belial? and what part
has he that believes with an Infidel? and what Agreement has the Temple of
God with Idols? For ye [are] the Temple of the living God, as God has said; I
will dwell in them, and walk in them; and I will be their God, and they shall
be my People. Wherefore come out from among them, and be ye separate, says the
Lord, and touch not the Unclean thing, and I will receive you, and will be a
Father unto you, and you shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord
Almighty, 2 Cor. 6. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. And, -- God is Light, and in him is no
Darkness at all. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in Darkness
(and all sin is darkness) we lie, and do not the Truth: but if we walk in the
Light [as] he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another; and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from [all] sin, 1 John 1. 5, 6, 7.
And, Thou art of purer eyes than to behold evil, and can not look on
Iniquity, Hab. 1. 13. And -- Thou art not a God that have pleasure in
Wickedness, neither shall Evil dwell with thee, Psalm. 5. 4.

Therefore it is that Christ Jesus purifies, and makes clean all that come to
God by him; whom he is able to save to the uttermost, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them, Heb. 7. 25. And, Husbands love your Wives, even as
Christ also loved the Church, and gave himself for it; that he might sanctify
it, and cleanse it, with the washing of water, by the Word; that he might
present it to himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or [any]
such thing; but that it should be holy, and [without] blemish, Ephesians. 5. 25,
26, 27. And so, -- Let us draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of
Faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an [evil] conscience, and our bodies
washed with pure water, as aforesaid, Heb. 10. 22. And, -- Who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us, from [all] iniquity, and [purifie] unto himself a
peculiar people, zealous of good works, Tit. 2. 14. And, -- Unto you first God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to [bless] you in [turning] away every
one of you from [his] iniquity, Act. 3. last. And, -- She shall bring forth a
Son, and thou shall call his name Jesus; for he shall save his people from
[their] sins, Mat. 1. 21. And, -- Unto him that loved us, and [washed] us from
[our] sins in [his] blood, and has mad^ [us] Kings, and [Priests] unto God and
[his] Father, Rev. 1. 5, 6. And, -- Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
[redeemed] with corruptible things, as silver and gold, from your [vain]
conversation, received by [tradition] from your Fathers; but with the precious
Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot, 1 Pet. 1. 18,
19. And, -- He was manifested to [take] away [our] sins, and [in] him is [no]
sin, 1 John 3. 5. And, -- Little children these things I write unto you, that
ye sin [not] 1 John 2. 1. And, -- Whosoever abides [in] him, sins [not]
whosoever sins has [not] seen him, nor known him: He that [committeth] sin
is of the devil, for the devil [sinneth] from the beginning: For this purpose
the Son of God was manifested, that he might [destroy] the works of the devil:
Whosoever is born of God he does [not] commit sin, for his seed remains in
him, and he [cannot] sin, because he is born of God. In [this] the [children]
of [God] are manifest, and the [children] of the [devil] 1 John 3. 6, 8, 9, 10.

And the reason or ground of it is this; Because the wrath of God is revealed
from heaven against [all] ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1. 18. And, -- The Lord Jesus shall be revealed
from heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them
that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who
shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord,
and the glory of his Power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints,
and to be admired in all them that believe, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. -- For, our
God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. last. And, -- without are dogs, and
sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes a lie, Rev. 22. 15. And, -- There shall in no wise enter into
it, (into the holy City where God is) [any] thing that defiles, neither
whatsoever works abomination, or makes a lie; but they that are written in
the Lambs Book of Life, Rev. 21. 27. But the fearful, and unbelieving, and the
abominable, and murderers, and whormongers, and sorcerers, and idolaters, and
all liars, shall have their part in the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death, verse. 8. And, -- Know ye not that the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God? Be not deceived, neither
fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with mankind; nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
And, -- Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, Heb. 13. 4.

Now it being so, that God is of purer eyes than to behold evil, and cannot
look on iniquity, neither shall evil dwell with him: And seeing his nature is
so pure that no unclean thing can be joined to it, or come at it, but he
consumes it; for our God is a consuming fire; and seeing his wrath is revealed
from Heaven against all ungodliness, and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness; for that of God which is to be known [is] made
manifest [in] them, (the measure of God, that which shows evil) And seeing,
Depart ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels,
will the King say to the goats on his left hand; and these shall go into
everlasting punishment, Mat. 25. 31, 41, 46. And, -- I never knew ye; Depart
from ye that work iniquity, Mat. 7. 23. And, -- I know ye not whence ye are,
depart from me [all] ye workers of iniquity, Luke 13. 27. And so men will be
concluded for ever and ever. There is a necessity, that men come to know that
which purifies, and does purge, (who are in the defilement, in the
transgression) and that they be purified and purged, ere they can come to Life;
ere they can come to God. For there is no medium, or thing between, or state,
but they must be either so, or undone for ever. And so there is a necessity
that they come unto, and know, and believe, in that which purifies, and does
purge, that so they be not undone for ever. And he that purifies and does purge
to bring to God, and is appointed and given for that purpose, (the measure of
him in every man) is Christ Jesus.

Therefore has God sent him into the world; that the world through him might
believe, and therefore is he come into the world, a light into the world, a
light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel; that
whosoever believes in him, might not abide in darkness, but have the Light of
Life; and the Light it is that comes from him, and leads to him, who is Light.
Whatsoever makes manifest is Light; that which reproves, that which makes
manifest is Light: All things that are reproved are made manifest by the Light;
for [whatsoever] does make manifest is Light: Wherefore he says, -- Awake thou
that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light,
Ephesians. 5. 13, 14.

To this men are to take heed; in this they are to believe; on this they are to
wait; and this they are to obey, which shows them that their deeds are evil;
that so they may know the Power of God, and his Arm, to cleanse, to purify, to
save, to redeem, to deliver them; Christ Jesus the wisdom of God, and the power
of God: The Gospel of Christ, (the Word, nigh in the mouth, and in the heart,
which judges evil, and shows a man what he shall do, the righteousness which is
of Faith, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.) which is the power of God unto salvation, (For I
am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, (says Paul) for it is the power of God
unto Salvation to every one that believes; to the Jew first and also to the
Greek, Romans 1. 16.) the Gospel of Salvation, (in whom ye also trusted after
that ye heard the word of truth, (the word aforesaid [that] is the word of
faith (says he) which we preach, Romans 10. 8.) the Gospel of your salvation: In
whom also, after that ye believed, ye were sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise, which is the earnest of our inheritance, until the redemption of the
purchased possession, unto the praise of his glory, Ephesians. 1. 13, 14.) the Arm
of God to deliver, whom the Lord has given for a Covenant to the People, a
Light to the Gentiles, a Light to them who sit in darkness, and in the shadow
of death, and to guide our feet into the way of Peace. The Light of the World,
(I am the Light of the world, he that follows me, shall not abide in
darkness, but shall have the Light of Life, Joh. 8. 12.) The Light of the
world, which lights every man that comes into the world; the [true] Light,
(which was the [true] Light, which lights every man that comes into the
world, Joh. 1. 9.) in whom was Life, and the [Life] was the [Light] of men;
which shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not; who was in the
world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not; who came unto
his own, but his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them
gave he power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his Name;
who were born not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God, verse. 4, 5, 10, 11, 12, 13.

And this (as I have said) is necessary for all to come unto, to believe in, to
heed and obey, because now is the hour of every man's Visitation, and here it is
whilst they are in the Body, that they will be determined either to everlasting
woe and misery, or life eternal. For in the world it was that transgression
entered, and in the world it is that it must be done away (that which is of the
world, and was received in the world) and in the world has he appeared to do
it away, (the evil of the world) to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself,
(as the Apostle says, -- But now once in the end of the world, has he
appeared, etc. as aforesaid, Heb. 9. 26.) And, for this purpose (says John) 1
Epist. 3d. Chap. Verse. 8. the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy
the works of the Devil, which are in the world; for there the Devil did his
work after man was created, and was in the world, and there he works; and there
where he works, must what he works be destroyed, viz. in the world where his
works are; and therefore the Son of God came into the world to destroy his
works, and his works must be destroyed in the world, in all that are saved, by
the Son of God. And this unto ye all is the Word of the Lord. So in the World,
whilst they are in the world, men must heed, believe, come unto, and obey that
which is come into the world, and in the world is made manifest to take away
the sins of the world. (Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of
the world, says John of Christ, Joh. 1. 29.) that of him which makes manifest
sin, which comes from him, who is come to take away sin, if so be they will be
delivered from the evil of the world; or, that of which they have been guilty,
in the world, they must be delivered ere they go out of the world; or, their
souls will not be saved when they are out of the world: It is the Word of the
Lord to all, as aforesaid.

For, (as I have See a little Treatise of Things Indifferent, in relation unto
Worship, etc.
elsewhere showed) in the grave there is no repentance. The grave cannot praise
thee, death cannot celebrate thee, they that go down into the pit cannot [hope]
for thy truth. The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day;
the Father to the Children shall make known thy Truth, said king Hezekiah, Isa.
38. 18, 19. All that is to be done must be done on this side. Dives when he was
in torment, though he could see Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, yet he could not
come to him. Son, said Abraham to him, when in hell he lift up his eyes being
in torment, and saw Abraham afar off, and Lazarus in his bosom; and cried, and
said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me, and send Lazarus that he may dip the
tip of his finger in water, and cool my tongue, for I am tormented in this
flame. Son (said he) remember that thou in thy [life] time receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is comforted, and thou art
tormented. And besides all this, between us and you there is a great gulf
fixed, so that they which would pass from hence to you [cannot;] neither [can]
they pass to us that would come from thence. Then he said, I pray thee
therefore Father, that thou would send him to my Fathers house, for I have
five brethren, that he may testify to them, lest they also come into this
place of torment. Abraham says unto him, they have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them. And he said, Nay Father Abraham, but if one went to them from
the dead, they will repent. And he said unto him, if they hear not Moses and
the Prophets; neither [will] they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead,
Luke 16. 23, to the end.

Therefore in this world is the time for every one to be delivered from the
evil of the world, because an eternal state attends it, when they pass out of
it; and an eternal state is that which is for ever and ever, which never shall
have end. And therefore it is necessary, yea absolutely necessary for every one
to come to that, and to heed that, and to obey that which redeems out of the
world, and leads to God again, from whom, or his state in whom, man by
transgression fell, that so he may have peace with God again, and enter into
Rest; And this is so much the more of concernment, and of necessity to be
heeded, because God having sent his only begotten Son into the world to Redeem
man out of the world (without the Light of whom, man could never see his state,
nor his enemy; and without whose power he cannot be delivered) man is to attend
that which the Lord has sent to deliver him. For the Lord is not bound to his
Creature, but having made man upright, and he having sought out many
inventions, he might have left him in that state, and never have strove with
him, nor have sent his Son to deliver him; or the Light of him, to have shown
him where he is; and so he might have been undone for ever. But herein the love
of God is commended to us, or, herein God commended his love to us; that while
we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. For, when we were yet without strength
in due time Christ died for the ungodly, says the Apostle, Romans 5. 6, 8. Yea,
For the rebellious also, that the Lord God may dwell among them, Psalm. 68. 18.

Now the Lord having sent his Son, and appointed him for Salvation unto the
ends of the Earth, and placed a measure of him in every man, which shows him
evil, and the state he is in, and his enemy (the same is it that delivers; for
that which shows a man how he is in captivity, is greater than that which holds
him in captivity; and if the enemy could help it, man should never come to see
where he is, and the captivity in which he is held: So the Light is power, and
greater than the Powers of darkness, and will deliver from all that it shows,
if it be obeyed) I say, the Lord having done all this for man, when man thought
not of it, much less desired it; (for man cannot desire that which he does not
think, and man cannot think where he does not know and he cannot know where he
does not see) Man is so much the more to mind it now, (that which shows, that
which makes manifest) because he knows not how long the Lord may strive with
him, or wait upon him, or continue the Light with him, (that which shows him,
that which makes manifest.) For, as it was in the Lord's Freewill and Love (Of
his own Will begat he us with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind of
first fruits of his Creatures, Jam. 1. 18.) to put something of himself into
man, to show him where he is (in the Fall) and how it is with him; and what his
Enemy is, and his working; and how he may be delivered: So it is much more to
continue it, especially after man has so long slighted and rebelled against
it; against that in him which makes manifest. Yet a little while, and the Light
is with you; Walk whilst ye have the Light, lest darkness come upon you; for he
that walks in darkness, knows not whither he goes. While ye have the
Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of the Light, says
Christ, John 12. 35, 36.

For how long he will continue the Light with you, (that which makes manifest,
that which shows) you know not; Or, whether after this striving of his Spirit
with you; after this shining of his Light in you, to show you your Way, and
your Enemy, He will strive once more, he will shine any more; and if he should
strive no more; if he should not shine into you any more, ye are undone for
ever. For, if the Long-suffering of God be once at an end (and when his Spirit
ceases to strive, his Long-suffering is at an end; and his Spirit will not
always strive with Man; My Spirit shall not always strive with Man, for that
he also is flesh, Genesis 6. 3.) there is no prevailing. When once the Master of
the house is risen up, and shut to the Door, and ye begin to stand without, and
to knock at the Door, saying, Lord, Lord, open unto us; and he shall answer and
say unto you, I know ye not whence ye are. Then shall ye begin to say, We have
eaten and drunk in thy Presence, and Thou have taught in our Streets. But he
shall say, I tell you I know you not, whence ye are; Depart from me all ye
Workers of Iniquity. Then shall be weeping, and gnashing of teeth; when ye
shall see Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and all the Prophets in the Kingdom of God,
and you your selves thrust out. And they shall come from the East, and from the
West, and from the North, and from the South, and shall sit down in the Kingdom
of God; and behold, there are last which shall be first, and there be first
that shall be last, says Christ, Luke 13. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. If your Day
be once over, if it be spent; if it be done, there is no fetching it back
again, though you seek it carefully and with tears. Esau found it so, who sold
his Birthright for a mess of Pottage; and therefore is called a profane
person: Lest there be any Fornicator, or Profane Person, as Esau (says the
Apostle) who for one morsel of meat sold his Birthright: for ye know how that
afterward when he would have inherited the Blessing, he was rejected; for he
found no place of Repentance, though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb.
12. 16, 17.

For, the movings of the Lord are out of the power of Man, he cannot draw one;
they are in His pleasure; They are as the Wind, and the Wind blows where it
lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but can not tell from whence it
comes, and whither it goes. So is Every One that is born of the Spirit, says
Christ, John 3. 8. So are the Movings of the Spirit; they are out of the reach
of Man, he cannot fetch one of them, he cannot compel them; he knows not from
whence they come, nor whither they go; only this he knows, they are with him
when they show him evil, and move against it; and they go away when Man ceases
following them; and when they may come again he cannot tell. They are no more
in his power than the Rain, or the Light, o^ the Day, or the Seasons, or the
Breath he draws, or to give life to any thing. How desperate a thing is it then
for Man to resist the motions of this Spirit, or deny them or stifle, or
murder, or quench them; seeing he cannot bring them to life again; that is to
say, he cannot cause them once more to move; for, It is the Power of God only
to do this, and if He will not (and how can He be expected to do it, when He
has been so often resisted?) What then will become of him? I say, how can he
expect, that when he has resisted One, and followed the Enemy who tempted him
to evil, (the Temptation, and the very appearance whereof the Lord showed, and
his Spirit resisted and withstood, and strove against) h^ should move again, or
his Spirit strive again, or show him it any more? seeing (as I have showed) the
Lord was not bound unto his creature, when he fell, to show him once where he
was, or his Enemy much less can he expect when that the Lord has showed him,
and after the Lord's waiting many years upon him, and being still rejected, he
should once more visit him with the Light from Him, that shows him his Enemy,
or with the strivings of his Spirit which resists him?

And if the Lord should conclude man here, (as I have said) Whither would he
go? or, what would become of him? with what could he appear before the Lord, or
plead with God, or offer unto Him as to his righteous Judgments? or stand
before Him, or reason with Him, as to all this? Would he not, yea must he not
be silent before his Judge, and lay his hand on his mouth, and confess to God
that His Judgments are just? For that which has waited on man, and sought him,
and followed after him, (which man has refused; and willingly followed after
the Commandment, after the enticements of Sin, the Law of Sin; the Allurements
of the Devil, and his Devices; the Power of the Prince of the Air which works
mightily in the children of disobedience; as it was said of Israel of old; and
that therefore he was oppressed, and broken in Judgment; Ephraim is oppressed,
and broken in Judgment, because he willingly walked after the Commandment, Hos.
5. 11.) will witness for God how he has sought him, how he has followed after
him, how it has strove with him, and yet man would not; but has turned
against it, and willingly followed that which led into Sin, into Evil, and from
the Lord. Wherefore will ye plead with me? (said the Lord to the Jews in the
case) Ye all have transgressed against me, says the Lord: In vain have I
smitten your Children; they received [no] correction. Your [own] sword has
devoured your Prophets (that which showed them their Iniquity) like a
destroying Lion (they tore it to pieces, as it were, that which showed them.) O
Generation, see ye the Word of the Lord; Have I been a Wilderness unto Israel?
(See how the Lord pleads, and how he will plead with man that neglects the hour
of his Visitation, and turns from and against that which shows him) a Land of
darkness? (Nay, the Lord was light unto them, a fruitful field, in whose paths
are peace and pleasure for evermore) Wherefore say [my] People, we are [Lords]
We will come [no] more unto Thee? Jer. 2. 29, 30, 31. And, Why should ye be
smitten any more? Ye will revolt more and more. The [whole] head is sick, and
the [whole] heart is faint; from the soals of the feet even to the head, there
is no soundness in it; but [wounds] and [bruises] and [putrified] sores (The
Lord had smitten them, but they refused Chastisement; his Witness had reproved
them, had wounded, had judged them; yet they would not come to that which smote
them; they would not return to be guided by that, that so there might be a
healing of their Error) they have not been closed, neither bound up; (Come and
let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and he will heal us; he has
smitten, and he will bind us up, Hos. 6. 1.) There Is the healing, there is the
binding up, to return to that which tears, that which smites; and where this is
not, there is wounds, bruises, putrified sores, no closing, (it lies open to
Judgment and Wrath) No binding up, it is not gathered to God, to him that
smites, to him that tears; who smites that he may heal, who tears that he may
bind up; they have not been closed in their bound up (they have not turned unto
him) neither mollified with Ointments; This were a sad case to see a man so
beaten, and torn, and bruised in the outward, to turn him from that, or to mind
him to turn from that which would destroy him; and yet he will not turn,
(though so torn, and beaten, and bruised) to that which it minds him to turn
to, which would deliver him. What can a man say in such a case, for such a man?
but to leave him to destruction, and to say, Who shall pity him? Every one
would leave such a man justly to perish in his own gainsaying: And yet this is
the case (if the Eye were open within to see, as a man may see such a thing
without) of millions at this day; nothing but full of smitings, of wounds, of
bruises, of putrified sores, (wounded over and over again; reproved, and yet
doing the same thing from one seven years to another) unclosed, unbound up;
smitten, reproved, judged from the time they could remember, and yet never
turned to the Lord to be guided by that of him that tears, that he may heal,
that smites, that he may bind up. What shall be done to such a People? or, What
can be said of them, or for them? who are thus from the soals of their feet
unto the head, smitten, wounded, putrified; no place free, all in
transgression, all in smitings for transgression, yet not turned from
transgression; No place free, no soundness in it, from the soals of the feet to
the head; the [whole] head sick, the [whole] heart faint? Why, read the Issue,
they are fit for nothing but the fire, for judgment, to be swept away with the
beesom of destruction; And this day is near to many, therefore it concerns them
to take heed, whose case is as has been said; and the Witness of God answers
to it, which they will do well to heed, and to let it speak, and to follow it
yet, ere it be too late; for this I say and testify in the Name of the Lord,
the Day is closing up upon this Generation, and their Night is at hand which
never shall have end; for what more can there be than has been, to turn them
unto God? beaten all over, bruised all over; full of sores, full of reproofs;
No returning, No healing, No binding up; as bad as before, as wicked as before,
yea worse, adding drunkenness to thirst, drawing iniquity with Cart-ropes of
vanity; Why should ye be smitten any more? ye will revolt more and more. And
the Revolters are profound to make slaughter (killing that which witnesses)
though I have been a rebuker of them all, said the Lord, Hos. 6. 2. I know
Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: O Ephraim thou committest whoredom, and
Israel is defiled; They will [not] frame their doings to turn unto their God;
for the spirit of whoredom is in the midst of them, and they have not known the
Lord; and the pride of Israel does testify to his face: therefore shall Israel
and Ephraim fall in their iniquity (the sorest word that can be said; yet see
the consequence of continuing in such a state as this) Judah also shall fall
with them. They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the
Lord, but they shall not find him, (mind ye all who are in such a state as
aforesaid, and turn to him that smites ye, ere it be too late, for time is
short) He has withdrawn himself from them, (and what more hard?) they have
dealt treacherously against the Lord; for they have begotten strange children,
(children of the degenerate plant, that which turns from the Lord) now shall a
Month devour them. (The destruction of such will come suddenly.) Blow ye the
Cornet in Gibeah, and the Trumpet in Ramah, cry aloud at Bethaven, after thee,
O Benjamin! Ephraim shall be desolate in the day of rebuke (when the Lord comes
to Judgment; when that which judges in them (the day of their visitation)
has an end) and the Judgment comes which shall never have end; then shall they
be desolate, such as are here, in the day of rebuke, when the Lord shall
reprove them, and set their sins in order before them. Remember this all ye
that forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver you.)
Among the Tribes of Israel have I made known what shall surely be, (so the Lord
left them not without warning, without a Prophet, as he has not these at this
day) and what he has said shall surely come to pass; his word shall be
fulfilled, this Generation shall see it, Israel shall know i^; this is the word
of the Lord. The Princes of Judah were like to them that remove the bound (put
by that which witnessed, that which limited their wild courses, that which
reproved them) therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like water (see
what follows the continual putting by that which bounds, that which reproves;
and seeking to remove it, that there may be no reprover, that all things may be
at ease, commit iniquity without control; for these things this signified, and
it is so) Ephraim is oppressed and broken in judgment, (this is the issue)
because he [willingly] walked after the commandment, as aforesaid (here is the
Ground) therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a Moth, and to the house of Judah
as rottenness; (here is the Judgment) When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah
saw his wound, then went Ephraim to the Assyrian (still from the Lord, though
he made him to see his condition; something opened his eyes, and he could not
withstand it, yet he went from that to another for help, to the Assyrian, to
that which was the cause of his wound) and sent to King Jareb, yet could he not
help you, nor cure you of your wound; (to another than to that which witnessed
in them, which could not help them; Here Is a lively Character of men in this
state: And what is the reason that that unto which they went could not cure,
could not help them? because it was another than that which smote them; and
that which smote them, that they might turn unto it, kept it open, that they
might turn unto him) For I will be unto Ephraim as a Lion, (how can he be cured
then? and the Lord's mercy it ^s that it is so, that the wound is kept open;
that there is that still that tears, that pulls to pieces, that judges, that
smites, that reproves, how tart soever) even as a young Lion to the house of
Judah. (It were better to hear, than that the Lord should be put to this; I
will melt them and try them; for how shall I do, (says the Lord, Jer. 9. 7.)
for the Daughter of my People) I, even I, will tear, and go away; (this will be
heavy when these things are, and the Lord shall hide his face) I will take
away, and none shall rescue him; I will go and return unto my place, till they
acknowledge their offense; (see the end, and blessed are all they who heed it,
that which witnesses in them, that which smites, that which wounds, that which
tears, that from whose judgment none can rescue; that which reproves) and seek
my face. This is the end of the Lord in all, to do man good, and to turn him to
him. For he does not afflict willingly, nor grive the children of men; but
though he cause grief, yet he will return again, according to the multitude of
his compassions; to them which turn unto him, to that which smites them; which
is his end in smiting them, that they may turn; and if they would turn with
less, less should serve; but because they do not turn with less, they have
more, that they may turn; and this is mercy, and the end is still to turn them.
For, as I live, says the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but rather
that he may turn and live: (He smites that they may turn, he goes away that
they may seek him.) In their affliction they will seek me early, (here is the
end of all) Hos. 5. 2, to the end. And; Hear ye this, O Priests, and hearken ye
house of Israel, and give ye ear, O house of the King, for Judgment is toward
you; because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor, Verse.
1. -Your Country is desolate, your Citis are burnt with fire, your Land
strangers devour it in your presence; (see what it is to suffer the enemy to
devour, to carry away into Captivity, to do his deeds, whilst your eyes are
open, and you see it is the enemy: That which shines in you, which is of the
Lord, has showed it to you; yet whilst ye see it, you suffer it; strangers,
enemies to your soul, the lusts of the wicked one, to devour your Land, that in
you which is not of this world, in your presence, whilst ye know it is so, and
the Lord shows ye it, viz. that of him, that shines in you, to show you.) As
overthrown, (says he) by strangers, and the daughter of Sion; (that which is
not of this world, that which shows you these things) is left as a Cottage in a
Vineyard, (desolate and forsaken, and none dwelling therein) as a Lodge in a
Garden of Cucumbers, as a besieged City; (set about on every hand with that
which moves against it) Except the Lord of Hosts (says he again) had left unto
us a very small remnant, we should have been as Sodom, and we should have been
as Gomorrah, (Isa. 1. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.) were it not for the Seeds sake. Except
the Lord of Sabbaths (says the Apostle of what the Prophet had said, Romans 9.
29.) had left us a seed, we had been as Sodom, and been made like unto Gomorrah.

So it is for the Seeds sake, the born of God, which sins not, that is in
the world, by which the world was made, which upholds the world, unto which the
Lord has regard, that men are not as Sodom, and like to Gomorrah; that a
sudden destruction sweep them not away, and they cease to be on the face of the
Earth; for the indignation of the Lord would sweep them away into destruction,
but this is that which makes the atonement, which bears the iniquity, which
stops the wrath, which calls on man to heed, to mind, to hear, to obey ere time
be no more, and the Lords anger cease in their destruction. And this Seed is
Christ, he that stops the wrath, he that bears the iniquity, he that makes
peace, is he (the Light of him in every one) that shows the evil, which causes
the wrath, and is near to deliver. If man will not heed this, he is left
without excuse. For, what more can be said? what more can be done? than that a
measure of him is in every man, that thus calls upon every man, that seeks
every man, that thus strives with every man, that thus waits to be gracious; he
that will not hear this, what will he hear? he that turns not at the smitings
of this, at the reproofs of this; the reproofs of wisdom, which is the way of
Life (I am the Way, the Truth, and the Life, says Christ) what will he turn
at? He that is not touched at this, what will move him? He that is not
converted by this, what will save him? A greater than this cannot be; a greater
than Solomon is here; A greater than John Baptist, who of all them that are
born of women, was the greatest: There has not risen a greater than John
Baptist, among them that are born of women, says Christ of John, Mat. 11. 11.
I indeed baptize you with water, unto repentance; but he that comes after me
is [mightier] than I, whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to bear; he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire; whose fan is in his hand, and
he will thoroughly purge his floor, and gather his wheat into his Garner, and
burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire, says John of Christ, Mat. 3. 11,
12. He that has born the wrath, that knows the wrath, that will execute the
wrath, calls; If a man will not come at this Voice, whose Voice will he come
at? So mind your state ev^^y one, and see where ye are, and what ye do (heed in
that which shows you) ere it be too late. For this word will stand, the word of
him that speaks from heaven, It will judge ye for ever, and execute eternal
judgment upon you, who in your day, whilst it calls upon you, whilst it
strives with you, heed not its judgment. It is the word of the Lord to you,
whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear.

So mind your state every one, and consider, for this is that which will make
your bruise incurable, and your wound grievous, and leave you without excuse,
viz. that ye knew ye should not do so and so, and yet ye did so and so, and so
have rejected the counsel of God against your selves, as the Pharisees and
Lawyers did, who were not Baptized of John, as said Christ; And yet the
Pharisees and Lawyers little thought that they did so, when they were not
baptized of him: But it was so, and the People that heard him, and the
Publicans who were baptized of him, justified God, who sent John to baptize,
and yet there was no Scripture for John to baptize. Therefore the Priests and
Levites which came from Jerusalem, whom the Jews sent to ask him, said, Who are
thou? And he confessed and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ. And
they asked him, What then? Art thou Elias? and he says, I am not. Art thou
that Prophet? and he answered, No. Then said they unto him, Who art thou, that
we may give an answer to them to them that sent us? What say thou of thy
self? He said, I am the Voice of one crying in the wilderness, Make strait the
way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Esaias. And they which were sent, were of
the Pharisees. And they asked and said unto him, Why baptizest thou then, if
thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither that Prophet? John answered them
saying, I baptize with water, but there stands one among you, whom ye know
not; He it is, who coming after me, is preferred before me; whose shoe-latchet
I am not worthy to unloose. And, -- That he should be made manifest to Israel,
therefore am I come baptizing with water. And John bare record saying, I saw
the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him, and I
knew him not; but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me;
Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him; the same
is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost; and I saw and bare record, that this
is the Son of God. And, Looking on Jesus, as he walked, he said, Behold the
Lamb of God, Joh. 1. 19, -- 28, 31, 32, 33, 36.

Now if the Pharisees and Lawyers are said to reject the Counsel of God against
themselves, because they were not baptized of John; who came to prepare the way
before him, as you have heard that it is so; and yet the Pharisees could get no
other satisfaction of John, than that he was the Voice of one crying in the
wilderness, Make straight the way of the Lord, as said the Prophet Isaias; and
that he might be made manifest to Israel, therefore came I baptizing with
water, and he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me; Upon
whom thou shall see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he
which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost; which were things as without, according to
the state of them in that day; where the things were without, to lead to that
which was within, Christ Jesus, the true Prophet; which Moses said the Lord
would raise up to them of their Brethren, like unto him, whom they should hear
in all things; the Seed which was come, till the coming of which, the Law
within, (the fear in the inward parts, the Second Covenant) the Law without,
was added (or put, which was not in the beginning, for the fear was then
within) because of transgression; which had come over or blotted it out,
therefore that without, or to the outward man, in something like it, or that
was visible, was added, to lead to that within) were not fully finished. I say,
if the Pharisees and Lawyers because of this, were said to reject the counsel
of God against themselves; which was ordered of the Lord, or foreappointed to
lead unto him; which they not heeding, though they sent to ask, are said by him
to reject who was come; and yet they were but things without (as has been
said) to lead or point to that within, (for the Law was our Schoolmaster
(says Paul) to bring us unto Christ; that we might be justified by faith, Gal.
3. 24.) How much more may they be said to reject the counsel of God against
themselves, who hear not him who speaks from heaven; the Word nigh, in the
mouth, and in the heart, that which witnesses to God, as the Scripture
speaks, and has been Instanced? If the Word spoken by Angels was steadfast,
and every transgression, and disobedience received a just recompense of reward;
how shall we escape (says the Apopostle) if we neglect so great Salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by our Lord; and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him? Heb. 2. 2, 3. And John was of the Earth. He that comes
from above (says he) is above all; He that is of the Earth is earthly, and
speaks of the Earth; he that comes from Heaven is above all; and what he
has seen and heard, that he testifies, and [no] man receives his Testimony;
he that has received his Testimony (and his Testimony is within, that which
witnesses) has set to his seal, that God is true. For him whom God sent, (who
speaks within, the Word nigh in the mouth, and in the heart; the
righteousness which is of Faith, which shows evil, which is come to redeem;
who saves his People from their sins; who shows them sin and judges it,
reproves and makes manifest all that is evil, and delivers from it; the same is
it which shows that which is good, and leads unto it, unto God; who is come to
deliver, who is able to save to the uttermost all that come to God by him; who
is the Son of God, the Savior of the World; the Ordinance of God to Salvation,
the Power of God to Salvation, the Gospel of God, the Power of God, and the
Wisdom of God; the Amen, the Firstbegotten from the dead, the true and faithful
Witness, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the
Last, who was, and who is, and who is to come, the Lord God Almighty) speaks
the words of God; for God gives not the Spirit by measure unto him. The Father
loves the Son (says he) and has given [all] things into his hand; he that
believes on the Son has everlasting life; and he that believes not the Son,
shall [not] see life, but the [wrath] of God [abideth] on him, Joh. 3. 31, to
the end.

So see your state all people, who refuse him who speaks from heaven, that
which witnesses in you, which shows you, which reproves you, which judges you;
you shall [not] see Life (if you continue here, if in this state your day be
closed upon you, if you never come to, nor believe in that which witnesses; if
you believe not on the Son) you have not everlasting Life, but the wrath of God
abides on you. It is a true word (what ever you may think) and abides for
ever. For Except ye believe (said he to the Pharisees) that I am he, ye shall
die in your sins, Joh. 8. 24. And, this is he that came by Water and Blood,
even Jesus Christ; not by Water only, but by Water and Blood; and it is the
Spirit that bears witness, because the Spirit is Truth. For, there are Three
that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the [Word] and the Holy Ghost, and
these Three are One; and there are Three that bear witness in Earth; the
Spirit, the Water, and the Blood; and these Three agree in One. If we receive
the witness of man, the Witness of God is greater; for this is the witness of
God, which he has testified of his Son; He that believes on the Son of God,
has the witness in himself, (the Son is in him, in whom he believes; who is
the witness whom he feels, and knows living in him; and so he is sure, and so
he is certain. Now we believe not because of thy saying; for we have heard him
our selves, and know that this is indeed [the] Christ, the Savior of the
World; which was not as to without; for so they knew him not, nor did she (the
woman of Samaria) but, come, see a man (says she) which told me all things
that ever I did; Is not this the Christ? Joh. 4. 29, 42. He that showed her,
and them, all that she and they ever did; coming to this, believing in this,
the Christ, living [in] them, was that which made them, and her to confess;
this was the Witness, and this Witness was [in] her and them; Christ [in] you,
the hope of glory; the mystery hid from ages and generations, but now made
manifest to his Saints; to whom God would make known, what is the riches of the
glory of this mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ [in] you the hope of
glory, whom we preach says the Apostle, Col. 1. 26, 27, 28.) he that believes
not God, has made him a liar; because he believes not the record that God
gave of his Son. (And he that believes not in this that witnesses, that it is
Christ, that in it is eternal Life, and so comes not to it, cannot be said to
have the Witness in himself; for he believes it not, and so cannot be said to
have that, or to enjoy it, or that it is his, which he does not believe, that
he does not receive) And this is the Record that God has given us, eternal
Life; and this Life is [in] his Son. He that has the Son (has that which
witnesses, that is, believes in it, receives it, obeyes it, likes to retain
it; which they did not of whom Paul speaks, Romans 1. 28. and so were given
over to a reprobate mind, to do those things which are not convenient; and even
(says he) as they liked not to retain God in their knowledge; God gave them
over to a reprobate mind, etc. as aforesaid) has Life; (it is in him, he has
received it, believed in it; it is his witness; Life is his witness, the Son is
his witness; This is the record God has given us, eternal Life, and this Life
is in his Son; Life's the Witness, the Son is the Witness, that God has given
us eternal Life, and this Life is in his Son; he that feels the Son feels Life,
and he that feels Life feels the Son; and this is the Record that God has
given to us eternal Life; Christ the Life, is the Record, the Book of Life. And
another Book was opened, which is the Book of Life, Rev. 20. 12. And in thy
Book all my members were written, Psalm. 139. 16. This witnesses to them that
have it, that believe it, that receive it; for such only may be said to have
it, and no others; not they that refuse it, not they that reject it, not they
that believe not in it, not they that disobey it, not they who do not retain
it, though it shines in all, though it witnesses in all; the Light shines in
darkness; but the darkness comprehended it not; And he came unto his own, but
his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he power to
be called the Sons of God, even to as many as believe in his Name; which were
born not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of
God; as aforesaid) and he that has not the Son of God has not Life, Joh. 1.
6, to the 15. And this is the Word of Truth.

So (as I have said) people all see your state, who are here, who refuse him,
who speaks from heaven, the Son of God, him whom God has sent, who speaks
the words of God, unto whom God has not given the Spirit by measure; that
which witnesses the measure of him in every one, the fullness of him which
fills all [in] all, that which shows ye evil, which ye know is in you, and
that it has been in you ever since you could remember, and that you should
have heeded it, and that it would have been good for you so to have done; and
that you should so have done, and that it is of God; for you refuse the Son of
God, and reject the Counsel of God against your selves, much more than did the
Lawyers and Pharisees in not being baptized of John, (as has been said) for
that was outward, and he was of the Earth; but this is inward in you, which the
outward signified, and is fulfilled in the inward; this is from Heaven; The
second man, the Lord from Heaven. The first man is of the Earth earthy, the
second man is the Lord from Heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 47. And this will be hard for
you in the Day of Account.

For that which witnesses in you, will judge you. It Is your Judge that
Witnesses, and the Judge is at the door; near indeed, when it is he that
witnesses. So stand in fear and dread all, and take heed what you do, and how
ye refuse him, and how ye disobey him; seeing he that witnesses in you is he
that will judge you; There is [One] Lawgiver, (he that gives the Law judges)
who is able to save and to destroy, Jam. 4. 12. And, -- Ye are come to God, the
Judge of all, Heb. 12. 23. Who were come to that which witnessed; And, -- The
Father has committed [all] Judgment unto the Son, that all men should honor
the Son, as they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son, honors
not the Father that has sent him, Joh. 5. 22, 23. And, -- He has appointed a
day, in the which he will Judge the World in Righteousness, by [that] Man which
he has ordained, whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has
raised him from the dead, Act. 17. 31. And, -- I charge thee therefore before
God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall Judge the quick and the dead at his
appearing, and his Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 1. And, -- Who shall give account to him
that is [ready] to judge the quick and the dead, 1 Pet. 4. 5. And, -- Their
conscience also bearing witness, and their thoughts the mean while accusing or
excusing one another, in the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by
Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, Romans 2. 15, 16.

So it concerns ye to look to it, for he that shows you the secrets of your
hearts, knows the secrets of your hearts; and he that knows the secrets of your
hearts is he by whom the Lord will Judge the secrets of your hearts; and this
is near you. Trifle not away then your precious time any longer, refuse not him
that speaks from heaven; be not as the deaf Adder, that refuses to hear the
voice of the Charmer, charm he never so wisely. Hear that which witnesses,
believe in it, obey it, it is the way to Life; Why will ye dye? why will ye
perish? why will ye miscarry, when that is so near you (as is that which
witnesses) that can save you, that would save you; that seeks to gather you,
in which is Salvation; and no other, Christ Jesus? Who woos ye, who entreats
you, who waits upon you, who bears you, and with you, who watches over you, so
that no evil can approach so near as to hurt you, but he is nearer to show it
you, to deliver you from the evil he shows; who shows the very appearance of
evil. The Grace of God (by which we are saved; by grace ye are saved) which
brings Salvation, has appeared unto all men; who is more watchful to
preserve you, than the enemy is to destroy you; the Watchman of Israel, who
neither slumbreth nor sleeps. So that ye can never be surprised; ye can never
be Undone; ye can never be hurt as ye watch to, as ye abide with him. Salvation
is in you, is near you, as near you as your mouth, as your heart. It Is [in]
your mouth, [in] your heart; that is the word of Faith which we preach, (says
Paul, as aforesaid) Christ Jesus, the Word. There are Three that bear witness
in heaven, the Father, the [Word] and the Holy Ghost; and these Three are One.
The Word of God, Rev. 19. 13. which endures for ever, 1 Pet. 1. 25. and this
(says he) is the Word which by the Gospel is preached unto you, verse. the
same; which is [quick] and [powerful] and [sharper] than any two-edged sword;
[piercing] even to the [dividing] asunder of [soul] and [spirit] and of the
[joynts] and [marrow] and is a [discerner] of the [thoughts] and the [intents]
of the heart. Neither is there [any] creature that is [not] manifest in [his]
sight; but [all] things are [naked] and [opened] unto the [eyes] of [him] with
[whom] we have to do. This is the Word of God, which the Apostle preached, Heb.
4. 12, 13. and which they all spoke of, and directed unto, as the end of the
Law (that which was given without) for Righteousness; that all men might come
to the Righteousness which is of Faith, which speaks on this wise; (says
Paul) Say not in thine heart, Who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is, to bring
Christ down from above) Or, who shall descend into the Deep? (that is, to bring
up Christ again from the dead) but what says it? The [Word] is nigh thee, even
[in thy] mouth; and [in thy] heart; that is, the Word of Faith which we preach,
Romans 10. 6, 7, 8.

So people all, Salvation is near you, as near you (as I have said) as your
heart, and your mouth; it is in your mouth, it is in your heart, the word of
Faith, which witnesses in you, and speaks in you for God, and against all
evil. This is the Son of God, Christ Jesus, the Savior of the World; you need
not go far to look him; Or, to say in your hearts, where shall we find him? Who
shall go up into Heaven, for us, to bring him down from above? Or, who shall
descend into the Deep, to bring him up again from the dead? He is near you, he
is in you, he calls upon you, and he has called, as often, and as long as there
is and has been a reproving you for evil, a showing you of evil, and what ye
should do. This is the voice of the Son of God; and he must be near when his
voice is heard; and his Voice you hear (that which reproves, which is Judge of
all, which is above all, that is greater than all, that which reproves gives Law
to all; Christ Jesus, Shiloh, the One Lawgiver) and his Light you see, (that
which makes manifest; for, whatsoever makes manifest is Light) and you know it
is so; (as I have said) and that you should hear it, and obey it, and when you
speak of it in any sense, or feeling, you will say (I have heard many say) We
should do so; that is to say, according unto it; and God forgive us, (upon
sense of Judgment, when ye have done the Contrary) and this arises from that
which judges you for the evil when it is done, which showed the evil; and it
showed ye the evil that ye might be delivered from it.

And now people, what would ye have more? what can ye have more? Or, what more
plain can be spoken to you? Or, what is more plain? Its as near you as your
heart, as your breath, as your life; in him we live, move, and have our being,
Acts, 17. 18. And we are also his Offspring, who is the head of every man, the
head of the Church, which is his Body, the fullness of him that fills all in
all; the head of Principalities, and Powers; the Firstborn of every Creature,
the First-begotten from the dead; the Heir of all things; by whom he also made
the Worlds, and without whom, was not any thing made that was made; upholding
all things by the Word of his Power; who is the brightness of the Fathers
Glory, and the express Image of his Person; who when he had by himself purged
our sins, sat down on the right hand of the Majesty on high, Heb. 1. 2, 3.

This is our High Priest, this is our Savior Jesus, who saves us from wrath
to come, who stands at the door and knocks; who so stands (and has stood
long) at yours. Behold I stand at the door and knock, (says he) If any man
hear my Voice, and open the door, I will come in to him, and will sup with him,
and he with me, Rev. 3. 20. As often as ye have heard that in you, which shows
you, which reproves you, which strives with you; so often has he stood at your
door and knocked; as often as you have heard that which reproves you, and tells
you what ye should do, so often have ye heard his knock; As often as you have
been sensible of that in you, which has shown you evil, the appearance of it,
and what you should do, the thoughts and intents of your hearts; so often have
you seen him, who stands at the Door and knocks, though ye have not known him,
though you have not let him in; though you have let him stand without, and his
head to be filled with dew, and his locks with the drops of the night; whilst
ye have been taking your fill of pleasure, with other Lovers. It is your
Beloved (that which should be your beloved, that which is the beloved of your
soul that lies in death, though death being over, you have other lovers, which
are in death, which the whorish woman goes after; that in you which is
adulterated from God; whose house is the way to hell, going down to the
chambers of death, Prove. 7. 27.) that knocks, why do ye not open unto him?
why do ye not let him in? who is come to save you, who is come to redeem you
from the strange woman, from the stranger which flattereth with her words,
Prove. 7. 5. How can ye withstand him any longer? How can ye keep him out; who
stood so many years at your door (in your remembrance, and before) and thus
knocked for you to open and let him in, that he may deliver you? Me thinks it
would break ones heart to think on it, that he should be kept out thus long;
that he should stand at the door any longer and knock, and be kept out; who
seeks to save, who seeks to deliver, who is come to save, who is come to
deliver, who waits to save, who waits to deliver, and none other can deliver;
I am sure it has broken mine and many more, and this is the way we came to
God; and they which went before, the holy men of God, came to God, and which
all must come, who come to God, viz. by opening to him that stands at the door
and knocks; by coming to, and heeding that which witnesses, which is the Power
of God; to feel the Power of God; to let it in that it may work, and destroy
its enemies. Let God arise, (men keep it out, men stand it out, men will not
open, men keep that under which reproves, which checks them, which would
deliver them; they take pleasure in unrighteousness; they will not suffer that
to arise, which would discomfit their enemies it is but letting him in, it is but
letting him arise, and he will do it; Let God arise) let his enemies be
scattered, let them also that hate him flee before him, Psalm. 68. 1. The
hardship is in your selves, the difficulty is in your selves, the narrowness,
the straitness; you are not willing to let that go which would destroy you; the
whorish woman, which says, Come, let us take our fill of love unto the
morning; let us solace our selves with loves, for the good man (that which
reproves) is not at home, he is gone a long journey; he has taken a bag of
money with him, and will come at the day appointed, Prove. 7. 18, 19, 20. I say,
you are not willing to let that go with which you have pleasure, which will
destroy you, (there is an adulterous nature begotten in you, by reason of Sin,
which joins with, and takes pleasure in unrighteousness, and so you are
bewitched) and carried away to do his will, the will of the Prince of the Air,
that works mightily in the Children of Disobedience) nor will ye let that in
which would deliver you: O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee! how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chicken under her
wings, and ye [would] not, Mat. 23. 27. as aforesaid. And, O thou that art
named the house of Jacob; Is the Spirit of the Lord straightened? are these his
doings? Do not my words do good to him that walks uprightly? Mic. 2. 7. And,
-- Ye are not straightened in us, but ye are straightened in your own Bowels, 2
Cor. 6. 12. The straightness is in your selves; you are not willing to open; I
am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt; [open] thy
mouth [wide] and [I] will [fill] it. But [my] people would [not] hearken to
[my] voice; and Israel would have [none] of me. So I gave them up unto their
own hearts lust, and they walked in their own counsels. O that my People had
hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways; I should soon have
subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries; The haters
of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him, but their time should
have endured for ever. He should have fed them also with the finest of the
Wheat, and with honey out of the Rock should I have satisfied thee, Psalm. 81.
10. to the end.

And here is the reason of man's miscarriage; not that the Door is not open, or
that there is not that which calls; Or that Power is not near to deliver; but
man will not come in, he will not hear when he is called; he will not join to
the Power; that which calls, that which opens, which is the Power of God; he
will not open to God, he will not let God arise; the motions of him, the power
of him, the measure of him, he keeps it under, he quenches the Spirit: I speak
this after the manner of men, and as to men, and as the thing is in man; and
the experience of every one will prove it; Not that God can be kept under, or
bowed by the creature; that is to say, that he, or the enemy, is stronger than
God; or can (otherwise) be kept under by him; but God having given man an
Understanding to know Him who is true; and placed something of himself in man,
to lead him unto Him who is true: If this move, and man heed it not, and join
to the contrary; or, will not suffer it to rule and guide, or obey it; just it
is with the Lord to withdraw, to suffer that to withdraw, to be put by, and be
as if it were not; as a thing slain, as a thing quenched, and as kept under,
(and so indeed it is, for Iniquity is on top, and rules, and ye will not come
to me that ye may have life. So it returns to its place; In their affliction
they will seek me early) but it is above All, and over all, and judges all,
when it shows iniquity; but is put under as to man, who prefers iniquity before
it; and (as in him) sets it over, that is to say, as his Guide, as his Leader;
and here is the state of all men, who obey not the motion of God, who rebel
against the Light; as Job said of them in his day, who caused the naked to
lodge without clothing, that they have no covering in the cold; that are wet
with the showers of the mountain, and embrace the rock for want of a shelter;
that pluck the fatherless from the breast, and take a pledge of the poor; that
cause him to go naked without clothing, and they take away the sheaf from the
hungry; which make oil within their walls and tread their wine-presses, and
suffer thirst; So that men groan out of the City, and the soul of the wounded
cries out. They are (says he) of those that [rebel] against the [Light] they
know not the ways thereof, nor abide in the paths thereof. The murderer rising
with the Light, kills the poor and needy, and in the night is a thief: The
eye also of the adulterer waits for the twy-light, saying, No eye shall see
me; and disguiseth his face. In the dark they dig through houses, which they
had marked for themselves in the daytime: They know not the Light, for the
Morning is to them as the shadow of Death. If one know them, they are in the
terrors of the shadow of death. He is swift as the Waters; their portion is
cursed in the earth; he beholds not the way of the Vineyards. Drought and
heat consume the snow-water; so does the grave thoss that have sinned. The Womb
shall forget him, the Worm shall feed sweetly on him; he shall be no more
remembered; and Wickedness shall be broken ^s a tree: He evil entreats the
Barren that bears not; and does not good to the Widow. He draws also the
Mighty with his Power; He rises up, and no man is sure of life: Though it be
given him to be in safety whereon he rests, yet his eyes are upon their
ways: They are exalted for a little while, but are gone and brought low: they
are taken out of the way as all other, and cut off as the tops of the ears of
corn. And if it be not so now, who will make me a liar, and make my speech
nothing worth? Job 24. 7. to the end.

So it concerns man to take heed, and mind in his day whilst these things
call upon him, which he knows are so; lest his day pass over, and there be an
end; for this will make his pain intolerable, and his wound not to be cured;
that he knew these things are so, and that he should not have done so and so,
and yet he has done so and so; and has rebelled against the Light, that which
showed him; the Great Salvation, which at first began to be spoken by the Lord,
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him, says the Apostle, Heb. 2. 3.
For even from the time that people can remember (as I have often said) have
they known something that showed them evil, and judged them for it; and this
that showed them, they knew was good, and that they should have followed it;
and were judged that they followed it not (as I have hinted) so they cannot
pretend ignorance. If ye were blind (said Christ to the Pharisees) ye should
have no sin; but now you say, We see, (and all men must say so; the Witness of
God will make every man to say so, in the day of account, which knows that it
is so, and is witness) therefore your sin remains, Joh. 9. 31. These things
have thou done, and I kept silence (I made thee not to feel the power of my
Wrath) who when thou [sawest] a Thief, thou [consentedst] with him; and have
been partaker with Adulterers; (thou saw something showed thee, so thou
knew) and then consentedst; this (as I said) will make it intolerable. Thou
[givest] thy mouth to Evil, and thy tongue [frameth] Deceit (here is all upon
knowledge, giving, framing) contriving all in the understanding; when a man
gives up himself to a thing, he does it willingly, as he knows what he does;
and when a man frames and contrives Deceit, he knows it is so; and his framing
is to disguise his face, as Job said (as aforesaid) that his deceit may not be
seen, his false dealing as he sees it; For, he says, No eye shall see me; The
voice of the Adulterer, which goes to another, and knows he should not go; who
waits for the twylight; that which is neither day nor night, that his deeds
may not be discovered) Thou sit and speak against thy neighbor (set
deliberation) thou slanderest thine own mothers son (thou speak evil
contrary to thy knowledge of that of which thou speak evil, (for so is the
signification of the word slandering) against that which reproved thee) against
that which made these things manifest, which showed thee these things, the son
of thy mother, thine own mothers son) Thou thoughtest I was altogether such a
one as thy self (See the wrong use people make of the long-suffering of God,
which is Salvation; and of his forbearance, who is not willing that any should
perish (as has been said) but that all should have everlasting life. They
think the Lord is altogether such an one as themselves, (as loving and liking
their proceedings) but I will reprove thee, and set them in order before thine
eyes (after another manner and order than man thinks of; who supposes his
iniquity is forgotten, because he has set it out of his sight; he has turned
his back upon that which witnesses, which brings to remembrance, which he knows
sees it: Nay, nay, it will prove to be no such matter; it will be all gathered
together (It is all gathered, and kept together; -- Is not this laid up in
store with me, and sealed up among my Treasures? Deuteronomy. 32. 34. And, think
thou this, O man, that judge them which do such things, and do the same,
that thou shall escape the Judgment of God? Or, despisest thou the riches of
his Goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the Goodness
of God leads thee to Repentance? but after thy hardness, and impenitent
heart, [treasurest up] unto [thy] self Wrath against the day of Wrath, and
revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God, who will render to every man
according to his deeds, Romans 2. 4, 5, 6.) I say, It shall be all gathered
together again; it shall be all brought up before his eyes, and set in order,
though he has shut his eyes at it; at that which reproves, at that which makes
manifest, the Lord will bring it up again, not to save him (who is in this
state) as the first was to convince him of sin, and to show him it, that he
might not do it, but be delivered; but to confound him for ever. These things
have thou done, and I kept silence; but I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine eyes. Now consider this ye that forget God, lest I tear you
in pieces (this will be a Woe day) and there be none to deliver, Psalm. 50. 18,
19, 20, 21, 22. This will be the reproving; this will be the setting of them in
order before Peoples eyes, the day of whose Visitation is over, viz. a tearing
in pieces; the Lord's tearing in pieces (Our God is a consuming fire) and none
to deliver. Lest I tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver. Consider
this, ye that forget God, and that which witnesses in you.

For people now cannot pretend ignorance: If they did not see; if there were
not something in them that showed them; if this did not shine in them, (as has
been said) so as to open their eyes, and to give them to see that which was
evil, and that they should not do it: If there were not such an [Irresistable]
Power manifested in them, as brought them to see that their deeds were evil,
and judged them: If they knew not that this was the Power of God, and that they
ought to obey it; that that was the Truth, which showed them Error; and that
they should heed it, and ought to do so; it were something to plead as an
excuse (though yet, as I have said, the Lord is not bound unto his creature,
but he having turned from Him that made him, to his enemy, he might have left
him there, and never have showed him where he was, till he should be tumbled
into the pit, out of which he cannot come; which if he had done, man had not
wherewithal to complain against the Lord, and that justly, but his mouth must
have been stopped, and he must have been silent before his Judge; and though it
is said, The times of this ignorance God winked at, yet, it is not said, that
that was sufficient to excuse that they were ignorant, of that which witnessed,
but God winked at; he let it pass, who is Judge of all, and can do as he
pleases. For before man transgressed, before he had lost that which made
manifest, whilst he stood in that in which he was made, which gave him to know
the will of God, and that he should do it; when there was nothing in him of a
contrary nature, in and by which the enemy might work, and so blind, and
deceive him, he received the command, and he knew it, and could tell the
Serpent so. God has said, (said the Woman to the Serpent, concerning the Tree
of the knowledge of Good and Evil) Ye shall not eat of it, neither shall ye
touch it, lest ye die, Genesis 3. 3. and so he was without excuse, and all his
offspring, who was the Father and Head of all the Generations of Men on the
face of the Earth, that are, have been, or shall be; and so all are included)
but they seeing, and knowing (the [Grace] of God which has appeared unto [all]
men, having showed them) that they should not do such things, and that the
Judgment of God for such things is just, and that they which commit such
things are worthy of death; (and this all men will acknowledge, and it is that
which will judge them, that makes them so to acknowledge, which shows it to
them) not only do the same, but have pleasure in them that do them, as says
the Apostle, Romans 1. last, as aforesaid. And so they become inexcusable
[utterly] and must be silent before God for ever. For, what more can there be,
than for man to have such an irresistible power made manifest in him, as to
show him his state, and his enemy, and evil, and the appearance of evil;
notwithstanding, what the strength of darkness can make, and his joining with
it, to keep him blind, senseless as to God, and ignorant; whereunto if he
joined, he might be delivered; and yet he will not join unto it, that he may be
delivered? I say, what can be more to leave man without excuse?

And this (as I have said) will make it intolerable in the day of the Lord;
when he shall come to Juge, and his witness shall arise and bring to mind all
the strivings of the Lord, and of his Spirit; all the shinings of the Light,
and convincements of Evil (for there is a record kept of it all, which is
Eternal) All the waitings of the Lord and his long-sufferings, all the
gentleness of God, and his tender mercies; all his followings after, though he
has been refused; all his wooings, entreatings, and beseechings, the
stretching forth of his arms, and his lamentings, O Jerusalem! Jerusalem! Thou
that killest the Prophets, etc. Oh! do not this abominable thing that I hate.
Oh that my people had hearkened unto me! etc. Jer. 44. 4. All his being
rejected, and cast out; and the Long day of Repentance, and the large
visitation of Love, and the enemies being joined to, shall be reckoned up, and
Laid in Order before your eyes. Then shall ye seek death, but ye shall not find
it; and ye could wish ye might be dissolved into nothing; or, be as an Atome,
or that ye had never been: but it cannot be, there is something in you that is
eternal, that can never be dissolved, or brought to nothing; do ye, and the
Powers of darkness, what ye can. Then shall ye curse the day that ye were born,
and wish that ye had never seen the Sun, that ye had died from the womb, and
given up the Ghost, when ye came out of the belly; that ye had been as the
hidden untimely Birth, and as Infants which never see Light; but all to no
purpose. For, as sure as ever was any thing in you, that witnessed to God, that
strove in you, and with you, and showed, and reproved, and judged you; So sure
shall the Worm arise in you (and this shall be it) which shall never die, and
the fire which shall never go out. It is the Word of the Lord God to you all
who are here.

Therefore it concerns you, who shall still neglect the hour of your visitation,
to mind (I speak once more to you in the bowels of compassions, as knowing that
these things will assuredly be, and that the time is near) whilst ye have time,
and before the door be shut, and that which calls upon you ceases, and the good
man of the house be risen up; Seek the Lord whilst he may be found; call upon
him whilst he is near; for he has called upon you long, ever since the time
you can remember (as I have said) you know it, ever since there was any thing
in you that showed you evil; and he has waited thus long upon you; who needs
none of you, bu^ you need his mercy; who (as I have said) is not willing that
any of you should perish but that all should have eternal Life; an^ he waits,
and has waited upon you for this purpose; and ye have all this while (who have
not heard) been trifling away your precious time, and presuming upon the Lord,
and trying of it, to see whether his Mercy will endure for ever. Go ye on as ye
will in your Rebellion against the Lord, who will have a time when his
long-suffering shall have an end; if you heed not, and you know not how soon it
may have an end, and whether he will strive yet once more with you. And
therefore it behooves you to mind and consider, lest your day be done, and your
night come, which never shall have end. For the day is far spent, and the night
is at hand to all who have neglected the day of their Visitation, that have not
known in this their day the things that concern their Peace; as the night is
far spent and the day is at hand, to all them that have known it, that have
heeded the day of their Visitation.

An Eternal concluding hour is at hand, and very near on this Generation, who
have had a long day of Visitation, which will determine every one to the right
hand, or to the left; and the Judge is at the door, (as I have often said,
(that which reproved you, that which has made manifest) to conclude you, and
he will conclude ye, with the god whom ye serve, whether it be the Lord or his
Enemy. And this unto you all is the Word of the Lord, whether ye will hear, or
whether ye will forbear, through His Servant,

George Bishope.

THE END.
THE MAN of SIN, Or the SON of PERDITION, Or, That WICKED Revealed; Even Him,
whose Coming is after the working of Satan, with [all] Power, and Signs, and
lying Wonders, and with [all] deceivablness of Unrighteousness in them that
perish; whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy
with the brightness of his Coming.

IN A WORD of WARNING, in the Movings of the Lord, to Friends of Truth, in
reference to the Hour of Trial which now is come in, and amongst them, from the
presence of the Lord.

By GEO. BISHOPE.

Woe to the World because of Offenses, for it must needs be that Offenses come;
but woe to that man by whom the Offense comes. London, Printed for R. Wilson,
1663.

The MAN of SIN, etc. Revealed, etc. in a word of Warning to Friends of Truth,
etc.
Friends all,
TO you am I moved of the Lord to write concerning the times of trial which now
are come from the presence of the Lord in, and amongst you, to try every man's
work of what sort it is; that so that which is stable, and built upon the Rock
of Ages may be made manifest; and that that which stands on man may appear what
it is. And this I am moved of the Lord to say unto you, that this hour is come,
and for the ends aforesaid; and to warn you, that you look to your selves, that
your garments be kept, lest ye walk naked, and they see your shame. For, this I
have to say again to ye from the Lord, That the hour is come, whereof John
spoke, which he saw in the Revelations, viz. -- Behold I come as a thief;
blessed is he that watches, and keeps his garments, lest h^ walk naked, and
they see his shame.

And the Reason of this is, Because, tha^ in this hour such will be the
workings of Satan, the spirits of Devils, which go out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet, to gather the Kings o^ the Earth, and of the whole World to the Battle
of the great day of God Almighty and such the deceit of Satan, the Old
Deceiver, that (if it were possible) they would deceive the very Elect.
Therefore says Christ, (as I have sometime written to you, See Epist. of Love,
page 12.
that so it would be) Many false Christ's, and false Prophet^ shall arise, and
deceive many, yea, (if it were possible) the very Elect: Behol^ I have told ye
before, says he. And, says Paul of the Son of Perdition, the Man of Sin, that
wicked, who opposes, and exalts himself above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped; so that as he, as God, sits in the Temple of God,
showing himself that he is God, whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of
his Mouth, and destroy with the Brightness of his Coming: His Coming (says he
to the Thessalonians) is [after] the working of Satan (after Satan has had his
time, and wrought and done his work, in begetting something that is of his own)
with [all] Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and with [all] Deceivableness
of Unrighteousness in them that perish; because they received not the Love of
the Truth, that they might be saved; And for this cause God shall send them
strong Delusions, that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be damned
that believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness.

Now, Friends, as I have said unto you, The hour is come, yea it is already
entered, and it will make great work and havoc in the world, and too much among
you; and the Bowels of the Lord move to you-wards, that ye may be preserved;
and therefore has he moved me to write unto you, and to warn you, and to open
this thing unto you; even this great Mystery of Iniquity; the last in the
World; this [all] Deceivableness of Unrighteousness; this [all] Power, and
Signs, and lying Wonders, whose Coming is so, viz. with all Power, and Signs,
and lying Wonders; and with [all] Deceivableness of Unrighteousness in them
that perish: This Son of Perdition, this Man of Sin; this Wicked, whose Coming
is after the working of Satan with [all] this; who opposes and exalts
himself above all that is called God, or is worshipped; So that he [as] God,
sits in the Temple of God [shewing] that he [is] God; whom the Lord shall
consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy with the Brightness of his
Coming; and likewise to show you what these false Christ's, and false Prophets
are, that shall arise and deceive many; yea, (if it were possible) the very
Elect; and what these spirits of Devils are, working Miracles, unclean spirits,
like Froggs, which come out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of
the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false Prophet; and which go forth unto
the Kings of the Earth, and of the whole World, to gather them unto the Battle
of the great Day of God Almighty; in which it is said, Blessed is he that
watches, and keeps his Garments, lest he walk naked, and they see his shame:
and which, John saw gathered into a place, called in the Hebrew tongue
Armageddon.

This then is the day, and the hour, and the place, and the battle, and the
spirit, and the Man of Sin, that Wicked, the Son of Perdition, the false
Christ, the false Prophet, viz. That in every one of you (I speak as to such in
whom it is so) wherein the Enemy has place; wherein he works, which he has
begotten; which works for him; which comes after his working: which is in
the similitude and likeness of Truth; which is as an Angel of Light; which
transforms himself into an Angel of Light; which opposes and exalts himself
above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he sits in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God (as aforesaid) but is the Man of
Sin, the Son of Perdition [that] Wicked, whom the Lord shall consume with the
Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy with the brightness of his coming; That which
discovers him, destroys him; and that which witnesses against him, consumes
him; and the false Christ, and the false Prophet, that shall so deceive, is the
same which shall arise and deceive many, yea, the Elect, the [very] Elect, if
it were possible; puts the [very] Elect to it, yea to the uttermost; to the
Impossibility (as I may so say) if it were possible. And the day and hour is
now; and the place is within you; and there hence goes forth the spirits of
Devils (from this Son of Perdition, this begotten of the Devil, this Man of Sin
[that] Wicked) working Miracles, (and it is a Miracle they should so deceive)
Unclean spirits, like Frogs, which go forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of
the whole World (all that is out of God) to gather them unto the Battle of the
great Day of God Almighty; this great Day of God Almighty, wherein he is come
to raise his Seed over all to reign for ever and ever; which this would keep
under; which made it to suffer; which it would destroy; which the Lord is come
to raise up; to destroy this; to make this to suffer; to keep this under; to
cast out this for ever and ever: Therefore this rises against it, and works
in [all] ways imaginable, and with [all] deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish; and with [all] Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders; and
gathers as it can against it; against this Day, the Battle of this great Day of
God Almighty; the Son of Perdition against the Son of God; and this Day is come.

And therefore Friends, it concerns ye to mind where ye are, and how it is with
you, and what the season is, that ye may not be deceived; That your Garments
may be kept, that ye walk not naked, and they see your shame.

If you ask me, how shall we do this? and what is this Hour, and the Son of
Perdition?

I shall show you, as I have received it from the Lord.

The Son of Perdition, is that Antichrist in man; Or something in man which the
Devil has begotten; which bears his image; which is of his nature; which is in
the similitude of Truth; which wears the Garments of Truth; which being in
man, and within his Treasury, the Understanding and Experience he has gotten
whilst in Truth, puts it on, and makes use of it against the Truth, the
Power of Truth, the Life of Truth; to the deceiving of, entering into, and the
begetting in others, under the similitude of Truth, the like image and
similitude, working in its nature against the very Life of Truth; and opposing
and exalting it self above all that is called Truth, or God, or that is
worshipped; and so sits in the Temple of God, (whose Temples ye are, said
Paul to the Corinthians) and shows himself that he is God, or Truth; and
here is the Mystery.

You may say, This is strange; and how comes this to pass? And wherefore is it
that this is now spoken of, and not before; and just as in this hour; and that
it already works?

I answer; It is strange indeed, if it be considered what a large hour, and
tender visitation of Love the Lord has given to People, and how great a
Deliverance; so that by this, if the Answer had been on their part according to
the working on his, they had been able to say (most of them, if not all) as he
did in his day, The Prince of this World comes, and has nothing in me; who
was the Son of God. But if it be considered, how great a neglect there has
been in many since the time they knew that which would have delivered them; and
how that from which they should have waited, and wrought in the Power of God;
in that which makes manifest, to have been delivered, has prevailed over them,
and caused the Seed again in them to suffer; so giving advantage to the Enemy
more than ever over the Seed; and making it to cry by reason of its Oppression
(whose Cry the Lord has heard, and is come to deliver it) It is no wonder, nor
a thing strange, that thus it should be; because the Enemy having wrought, and
gotten a place in them; Out of this place he comes to make War with the Seed,
under the similitude of Truth; so deceiving those in whom he works, and has
gotten this place, and comes out of it, and exercises the Seed, when it comes
to arise, and to reign over all for ever and ever; which in others, that is to
say, those [in] whom he has no such place, he can work against the arising of
the Seed, but from [without] and so from without, or out of it, put the Seed to
its exercise, and make war upon it.

And here, when I say -- from without -- I mean not that only which comes from
the World (wherein also he will work Persecution as from among men; as he
stirred up the chief Priests and the Pharisees to put Him to Death; whom he
exercised otherwise also, when he sweated in the Garden drops of Water and
Blood, and cried out on the Cross, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me?
yet he had nothing in him) but from [without] that is, not from [within] them;
not from out of their own bowels, or the son of their own bowels rising up
against them; that is to say, As having no place, no such place in them, out of
which to come and make War upon them; he has no strong-hold in their house; in
his he may enter, and out of that which has begotten he may war in a disguise,
and so steal and destroy; but into those [in] whom he has nothing, he cannot:
but the exercise that the Seed has from the Enemy, as to such, or in such, is
as he can beset them round, and hem them in on every side, and compass them
about; and so assault them, and distress them, if so be by that means, or by
the force of his Armies of Darkness, he can so overcome as to break in upon
them, and keep it under; which otherwise he cannot enter: and its sufferings
here is after this sort.

The sorrows of Death compassed me; the Floods of ungodly men made me afraid
(here it has exercise indeed, but not so dangerous as the other, because it
sees its Enemy, and its Enemy is not [within] it, therefore he lays siege
against it, and seeks to force it, if so be he may so enter and make it to
yield) the sorrows of Hell compassed me about; (Who so has known this, has
indeed known sorrow and trouble) The snares of Death prevented me, I found
sorrow and trouble.

Many Bulls have compassed me; strong Bulls of Basan have beset me round; they
gaped upon me with their mouths as a ravening and roaring Lion. For Dogs have
compassed me, the Assembly of the Wicked have enclosed me, they pierced my
hands, and my side. Keep me as the Apple of thy Eye; hide me under the shadow
of thy wings, from the Wicked that oppress me, from my deadly Enemies who
compass me about: They are enclosed in their own fat; with their mouth they
speak proudly; they have now compassed us in our steps; they have set their
eyes bowed down to the Earth; Like as a Lion that is greedy of his prey, and as
a young Lion lurking in his secret places. Here it is hard indeed.

Deliver my Soul from the Sword, My Darling from the power of the Dog; Save me
from the Lions mouth, for thou have heard me from the horns of the Vnicorness.
Lord! how long will thou look on? rescue my Soul from their Destruction, my
Darling from the Lions: My Soul is among Lions, and I lie even among them that
are set on fire, Even the sons of Men whose Teeth are Spears and Arrows, and
their Tongue a sharp Sword; They have prepared a Net for my steps; my Soul is
bowed down: They have dug a Pit before me, in the midst whereof they are
fallen themselves. This is the Case of such in this state.

Rebuke the Company of Spear-men, the multitude of the Bulls with the Calves of
the People; Scatter thou them that delight in War. Plead my Cause, O Lord, with
them that strive with me. Fight against them tha^ fight against me. Take hold
of Shield an^ Buckler, and stand up for my help. Draw out also the Spear, and
stop the Way against them that persecute me: Say unto my Soul, I am thy
Salvation. Let them be confounded, and put to shame, that seek after my Soul:
Let them be turned back, and brought to confusion, that devise my hurt; Let
them be as Chaff before the wind; and let the Angel of God chase them: Let
their Way be dark and slippery, and let the Angel of God persecute them; for
without cause have they hid their Net for me in a Pit, which without cause they
have dug for my Soul. Let Destruction come upon him at unawares, and let his
Net which he has hid, catch himself; into that very destruction let him fall:
And my Soul shall be joyful in the Lord, it shall rejoice in his Salvation. All
my bones shall say, Lord, who is like unto thee, which deliverest the Poor from
him that is too strong for him; yea, the Poor and the Needy from him that
spoileth him? This fares hard.

Break their teeth, O God, in their mouths; break out the great teeth of the
young Lions, O Lord; let them melt away as waters which run continually: When
he bends his Bow, to shoot his Arrows; Let them be cut in pieces. As a snail
that melts, let every one of them pass away. Lake the untimely birth of a
woman, that they may not see the Sun. Before your pots can feel the thorns, he
shall take them away as with a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath. The
righteous shall rejoice when he sees the Vengeance, he shall wash his feet in
the blood of the wicked; so that a man shall say, Verily, there is a reward for
the Righteous; Verily, there is a God that judges in the Earth. And this is
the Case oft-times of the Righteous.

My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? why art thou so far from helping
me, and from the words of my roaring? O my God, I cry in the day time, but thou
hear not; and in the night season, and am not silent. But thou art holy, O
thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. Our Fathers trusted in thee, they
trusted, and thou did deliver them; they cried unto thee, and were delivered;
they trusted in thee, and were not confounded. But I am a worm, and no man; a
reproach of men, and despised of the People; all they that see me, laugh me to
scorn; they shoot out the lip, they shake the head, saying, He trusted in the
Lord, that he would deliver him; let him deliver him, seeing that he delights
in him. I am poured out like water, and all my Bones are out of joint; my heart
is like Wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels; my strength is dried up,
like a potsherd, and my tongue cleaves to my jaws, and thou have brought me
to the dust of death. This was said of the Son of God. I cried, by reason of
mine affliction, to the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of Hell cried
I, and thou heardest my Voice: for thou have cast me into the deep, into the
midst of the Seas, and the Floods compassed me about; all thy Billows, and thy
Waves passed over me. Then I said, I am cast out of thy sight; yet I will look
again toward thy holy Temple. The Waters compassed me about, even to the Soul;
the Depth closed me round about; the Weeds were wrapped about my Head: I went
down to the bottoms of the Mountains; the Earth with her bars were about me
for ever. Yet have thou brought up my Life from corruption, O Lord my God; when
my Soul fainted within me, I remembered the Lord, and my prayer came in unto
thee, into thine holy Temple. They that observe lying vanities, forsake their
own mercies; but I will sacrifice to thee, with the voice of thanksgiving; I
will pay that that I have vowed; Salvation is of the Lord. And this was the
state of Jonah.

O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath, neither chasten me in thy sore
displeasure. For, thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore;
there is no soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger; neither is there any
rest in my bones, by reason of my sin; for, mine iniquities are gone over my
head, as a heavy burden, they are too heavy for me. My wounds stink, and are
corrupt, by reason of my foolishness; I am troubled, I am bowed down greatly; I
go mourning all the day long; for, my loins are filled with a loathsome
disease, and there is no soundness in my flesh; I am feeble and sore broken; I
have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart. Lord! all my desire is
before thee, any my groaning is not hid from thee. My heart pants, my
strength fails me; as for the light of mine eyes, it also is gone from me; my
lovers, and my friends stand aloof from my sore, and my kinsmen stand afar off;
they also that seek after my Life, lay snares for me; and they that seek my
hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceit all the day long. But I, as a
deaf man, heard not, and I was as a dumb man that opened not his mouth. Thus I
was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs. For in thee,
O Lord, do I hope; Thou will hear, O Lord, my God: For, I said, hear me, lest
otherwise they should rejoice over me; when my foot slippeth they magnify
themselves against me; for I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually
before me; for, I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin; but
mine enemies are lively, and they are strong, and they that hate me wrongfully,
are multiplied; they also that render evil for good, are mine adversaries,
because I follow the thing that good is. Forsake me not, O Lord, O my God be
not far from me; make have to help me, O Lord, my Salvation. This said David.

I said, I will take heed to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue; I will
keep my mouth with a Bridle, while the wicked is before me. I was dumb with
silence, I held my peace even from good, and my sorrow was stirred, my heart
waxt hot within me; whilst I was musing the fire kindled, then spoke I with my
tongue, Lord make me to know mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is;
that I may know how frail I am. Behold, thou have made my days as an
hand-breadth; and mine age is nothing before thee: Verily, ^very man at his
best estate is altogether va^ity. Surely every man walks in a vain show;
surely they are disquieted in vain. He ^eapeth up riches, and knows not who
shall ^ather them. And now Lord, what hope I ^or? My hope is in thee, deliver
me from ^ll my transgressions; make me not the re^roach of the foolish. I was
dumb, I open^d not my mouth, because thou did it. Remove thy stroke away from
me. I am ^ven consumed by the blow ^f thy hand. When thou with rebukes do
correct man ^or iniquity, thou make his beauty to con^ume away like a mouth:
Surely every man is ^anity. Hear my prayer, O Lord, and give ^ar unto my cry.
Hold not thy peace at my ^ears, for I am a stranger with thee, and a ^ojourner,
as all my Fathers were. O spare ^ne that I may recover strength, before I ^o
hence, and be no more. Said David also.

Deliver me out of the mire, and let me ^ot sink; Let me be delivered from them
that hate me, and out of the deep waters. Let not the water-flood overflow me,
neither let the deep swallow me up; and let ^ot the pit shut her mouth upon me.
Hear ^e, O Lord, for thy loving kindness is good; turn unto me according to the
multitud^ of thy tender mercies, and hide not the face from thy servant; for I
am in trouble Hear me speedily; draw nigh unto my sou^ and redeem it; deliver
it because of min^ enemies: reproach has broken my heart and I am full of
heaviness; and I looke^ for some to take pity, and there were none* and for
comforters, and I found none: the^ gave me also gall for my meat, and in m^
thirst they gave me vinegar to drink. Le^ their table become a snare before
them, an^ that which should have been for their we^fare, let it become a trap;
let their eye^ be darkened, that they see not, and mak^ their loins
continually to shake; pou^ out thine indignation upon them, and le^ thy
wrathful anger take hold of them. Le^ their Tabernacle be desolate, and let
non^ dwell in their Tents; for, they persecut^ him whom thou have smitten, and
they ta^^ to the grief of those whom thou have woun^ed: Add iniquity unto their
iniquity, an^ let them not come into thy Righteousness Let them be blotted out
of the Book of the Living, and not be written with the Righteous: was it said
of and by the Son of God.

In thee O Lord, do I put my trust, let m^ never be put to confusion; deliver
me i^ thy righteousness, and cause me to escape; Incline thine ear unto me, and
save me; be thou my strong habitation whereunto I may continually resort: Thou
have given commandment to save me, for thou art my rock and my fortress;
deliver me, O my God, out of the hand of the wicked, out of the hand of the
unrighteous and cruel man; For, thou art my hope, O Lord God, thou art my trust
from my youth; by thee have I been holden up from the womb; thou art he that
took me out of my mothers bowels; my praise shall be continually of thee. I am
as a wonder unto many, but thou art my strong refuge; let my mouth be filled
with thy praise, and with thine honor all the day. Cast me not off in the time
of old age; forsake me not when my strength fails: for mine enemies spoke
against me, and they that lay wait for my soul take counsel together, saying,
God has forsaken him, persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver
him. O God, be not far from me, O my God, haste for my help. Let them be
confounded, and consumed that are adversaries to my soul; let them be covered
with reproach and dishonor that seek my hurt. But I will hope continually, and
yet praise thee more and more; my mouth shall show forth thy righteousness, and
thy salvation all the day; for I know not the number thereof: I will go in the
strength of the Lord God, I will make mention of thy righteousness, even of
thine only. O God thou have taught me from my youth, and hitherto have I
declared thy wondrous works: Now also when I am old and gray headed, O God,
forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength unto this Generation, and thy
power to every one that is to come; thy righteousness also, O God, is very
high, who have done great things; O God, who is like unto thee? Thou have
showed me great and sore troubles, thou shall quicken me again, and bring me up
from the depths of the Earth; thou shall increase my greatness, and comfort me
on every side; I will also praise thee with the Psaltery, even thy Truth, O my
God; unto thee will I sing with the Harp, O thou Holy One of Israel; my lips
shall greatly rejoice, when I sing unto thee, and my Soul which thou have
redeemed. My tongue also shall talk of thy righteousness all the day long; for
they are confounded, for they are brought unto shame that seek my hurt. Said
David, also.

O God why have thou cast us off for ever? why does thine anger smoke against
the sheep of thy pasture? Remember thy Congregation which thou have purchased
of old, the Rod of thine Inheritance which thou have redeemed: this Mount Sion
in which thou have well lift up thy feet unto the perpetual desolations; even
all that the Enemy has done wickedly in the Sanctuary. Thine Enemies roar in
the midst of the Congregations, they set up their Ensigns for Signs: A man was
famous according as he had lift up Axes on thick Trees; But now, they break
down the carved work thereof at once, with Axes and Hammers; They have cast
fire into thy Sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dewlling place
of thy Name to the ground. They said in their hearts, Let us destroy them
together; they have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land; We see not
our Signs, there is no more any Prophet, Neither is there among us any that
knows how long: O God, how long shall the Adversary reproach? shall the Enemy
blaspheme thy Name for ever? Why withdrawest thou thine hand, thy Right Hand?
Pluck it out of thy Bosom; for God is my King of old, working Salvation in the
midst of the Earth; Thou did divide the Sea by thy strength, Thou breakest
the heads of the Dragons in the Waters; Thou breakest the heads of the
Leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat to the People inhabiting the
Wilderness; Thou did cleave the Fountain and the Flood, Thou dryest up mighty
Rivers; The Day is thine, the Night also is thine; Thou have prepared the
Light, and the Sun; Thou have set all the Borders of the Earth; Thou have made
Summer and Winter. Remember this, that the Enemy has reproached, O Lord; and
that the foolish people have blasphemed thy Name. Oh deliver not the Soul of
thy Turtle Dove unto the multitude of the Wicked; Forget not the Congregation
of the Poor for ever: Have respect unto thy Covenant; for the dark places of
the Earth are full of the Habitations of Cruelty; O let not the Oppressed
return ashamed; Let the Poor and Needy praise thy Name. Arise, O God, plead
thine own Cause; Remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily; forget
not the Voice of thine Enemies: The Tumult of those that rise up against thee
increases continually: Said the Church.

I cried unto God with my Voice; even to God with my Voice, and he gave ear
unto me; In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord; My Sore ran in the night,
and ceased not; My Soul refused to be comforted: I remembered God, and was
troubled; I complained, and my spirit was overwhelmed; Thou hold mine eyes
waking, I am so troubled that I cannot speak: I have considered the days of
old, the years of ancient times; I call to remembrance my Song in the night, I
commune with mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search: Will the Lord
cast off for ever, and will he be favorable no more? Is his Mercy clean gone
for ever? Does his Promise fail for evermore? Has God forgotten to be
gracious? has he in Anger shut up his tender Mercies? And I said, this is mine
infirmity, but I will remember the years of the Right Hand of the Most High; I
will remember the Works of the Lord, surely I will remember thy Wonders of old;
I will meditate also of all thy Work, and talk of thy Doings. Thy Way, O God,
is in the Sanctuary; who is so great a God as our God? Thou art the God that
do Wonders; Thou have declared thy strength amongst the people; Thou have
with thine Arm redeemed thy People, the Sons of Jacob and Joseph: The Waters
saw thee, O God, the Waters saw thee; they were afraid; the Deeps also were
troubled; The Clouds poured out Water, the Skies sent out a sound; Thine Arrows
also went abroad, the Voice of thy Thunder was in the Heaven; The Lightnings
lightened the World, the Earth trembled and shook. Thy Way is in the Sea, and
thy Path in the great Waters; and thy Footsteps are not known: Thou leadest thy
People like a Flock, by the hand of Moses and Aaron: Said the Seed.

I will praise thee, O Lord, my God, with all mine heart, and I will glorify
thy Name for evermore; for great is thy Mercy toward me, and thou have
delivered my Soul from the lowest Hell. O God, the Proud are risen against me,
and the Assemblies of violent men have sought after my Soul, and have not set
thee before them. But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion, and gracious;
long-suffering, and plenteous in Mercy and Truth: O Turn unto me, and have
mercy on me; Give thy strength unto thy Servant, and save the Son of thine
Handmaid: Show me a token for Good, that they which hate me may see it, and be
ashamed; because thou, Lord, have helped me, and comforted me: Prayed David.

O Lord God of my Salvation, I have cried day and night before thee; Let my
Prayer come before thee, Incline thine ear unto my Cry: for my Soul is full of
Troubles, and my Life draws nigh unto the Grave; I am counted with them that
go down unto the Pit; I am as a man that has no strength; Free among the Dead,
like the slain that lie in the Grave, whom thou remembrest no more, and they
are cut off from thy hand: Thou have laid me in the lowest pit, in darkness, in
the deep; Thy Wrath lies hard upon me, and thou have afflicted me with all thy
Ways; Thou have put away mine Acquaintance far from me; thou have made me an
Abomination unto them: I am shut up, and I cannot come forth; mine eye mourns
by reason of affliction. Lord, I have called daily upon thee, I have stretched
out my hands unto Thee; Will thou show Wonders to the Dead? shall the Dead
arise and praise thee? Shall thy Loving Kindness be declared in the Grave, or
thy Faithfulness in Destruction? Shall thy Wonders be known in the dark, and
thy Righteousness in the Land of forgetfulness? But unto thee have I cried, O
Lord, and in the morning shall my Prayer prevent thee: Lord, why have thou cast
off my Soul? why hidest thou thy face from me? I am afflicted, and ready to
die, from my youth up; while I suffer thy Terrors I am distracted: Thy fierce
Wrath goes over me; Thy Terrors have cut me off; They came round about me
daily like Water, they compassed me about together: Lover and Friend have thou
put far from me, and mine Acquaintance into darkness. My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? said the Son of God.

Now, this is hard; but never has any man here failed, never has here any man
miscarried; because here the Enemy is without; He is not in them, he has not
deceived them, they know who he is, and what he comes for, and what is his end,
and they look to the Lord, and their cry is to him, and he is near and does
deliver them. They are not mistaken; They take not him for their Friend, who is
their Enemy; he has not wrought his work of Deceivableness in them, by which
he may deceive them, in seeming to be that which he is not. Their eye is open,
they see him, they know him; They flee to the Lord for Refuge; For, they know
that in themselves there is no strength, and therefore they go to him, and look
to him, as aforesaid, who is able to save; who in the days of his flesh when
he had offered up prayers and supplications, with strong crying, and tears,
unto Him who is able to save him from Death; and was heard in that he feared;
For the Lord is with his Seed in the trial, and delivers it, and brings it
forth, and sets its feet at liberty, that it may run the ways of his
Commandments: and then makes its feet to walk in a large place, and to feed,
and lie down; yea, he feeds it with the Heritage of Jacob, and delivers it;
Though he suffer it to be tried, yet he is near to deliver it. This is the
state of them in whom the Enemy has no place, that is to say, In whom his
deceivableness has not wrought a place for his deceivableness to enter; Or in
whom there is not a place of Deceivableness for him to enter, wrought before
for the Son of Perdition, when he comes to enter: which though it be sore,
because of its assaults; for the Seed in every particular must be assaulted,
and tried, and overcome the whole strength of Darkness, ere it have its Crown;
and then every one will witness what I have said; yet it is sure, that is to
say, It is not deceived, it is not mistaken; Deceivableness has not overcome
it; It takes not the one for the other; It is not overrun ere it be aware;
It Is not covered with its eye, and guided with its feet, and led into
destruction ere it know it: he has not his will, his pleasure, his swinge
here, to run all into his will, into his pleasure, to do as he would, and so
insensibly to carry them into the Pit, out of which they cannot come. But it
sees him; it knows him; it understands its hour; it keeps him at a distance, it
bids him defiance; it cannot yield to him, it will die first; it flies to the
Lord, of whom it is; it lies at his feet; it keeps to him; it will not go from
him whatever comes of it; If it must perish, (but perish it cannot, for the
Lord is with that which is with him) it will perish with him; It sufficiently
understands its state, and knows its Crown; and it will not lose it, and will
let none take it from him; It can suffer, because it must reign; it presses to
the battle, because its deliverance is near.

But when the Enemy has a place in man, such a place as I have said; something
that he has begotten in him, which is bone of his bone, and flesh of his
flesh; the degenerate plant, of a strange Vine, in which he works with all
deceivableness, of which he is the juice and the sap, the eye and the foot, the
savor and the relish, (as every thing savours according to the root of which
it is) then it is hard indeed: For here a man comes to be overspread ere he is
aware, and to be deceived, and the deceivableness so works in him, as that he
sees it not, but thinks the contrary, viz. That it is the Plant of the Lord,
the Holy Right Seed, which he has set; And so that which opposes and exalts
it self above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God,
sits in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God: This Man thinks
is God; but it is the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, [that] Wicked; whom the
Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and destroy with the
brightness of his coming. And here is the danger, and here many will miscarry.

And the Reason is this, and the greatest hazard of the matter, Or that wherein
the great hazard lies; This degenerate Plant of a strange Vine; this seed of
evil doers; this generation of corrupters, growing up, and increasing, the
Enemy has a place wherein to lodge [within] them; A Door by which to enter,
and not be perceived; A Seed which he cherishes; A Plant of which he is the
Root, which receives him as its natural Father, and which partakes of his
corruption, as the Branch from the Root of which it is; and this sees nothing;
nor savours, nor feels, but what is of him of whom it is. As in the Natural,
the Juice of an Apple Tree will not fill a Vine; nor the Blood of a Vine fill
an Apple; Nor will the branch of either grow on each other; nor does it know
it; but every thing knows, or grows, or lives by the proper Juice of that
Root of which Nature it is, and no other.

So, Friends, here is the difference; That which comes to be tried, in which
the Prince of this World has no place, though it suffer hard, and be sore put
to it (as is expressed, and the sensible in the Lord, who have known in any
measure such a Day can bear Witness) Yet it is in a true sensible understanding
of its state, and how it is, and where it is, and what incompasseth, assaults,
and afflicts it, and for what end; and it sees the end; which is, that it may
be delivered, that it may be crowned, that it may overcome, that it may sorrow
no more, nor sigh, nor weep, but be freed from the bondage of corruption, and
reign for ever: and therefore it looks to the Lord, and cries to him, and he
hears its Cry, and is near to deliver it; and delivers it for his Name sake,
and his Promise sake, and his Covenants sake, and his Oath's sake; who has
said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee, but those to whom the Prince
of this Word comes and finds in them a place, something of his own, which he
has wrought in all deceivableness in the night, whilst men have slept, whilst
they have been careless and negligent, and suffered that to grow up in them,
which they should have plucked up; (Did not thou sow good Seed in thy field,
from whence then has it Tares? He said unto them, an enemy has done this.) To
such he comes, as his own, in them, and his own receives him, and
acknowledges, and confesses him, and none other; who is not the Father of the
Seed of God, but of the Son of Perdition. And here a man comes to be lost, ere
he is aware, and to be sunk into the Pit ere he think on it; and it is
impossible it should be otherwise, whilst this stands; because the illegitimate
Birth (as I may so say) the bastard Brood, the degenerate Plant, overshadows
him; in which the Prince of this World lodges, who is the Father and Root
thereof.

So mind your state Friends, and consider in time; For, when it once comes to
this, and your hour comes, wherein the Prince of this world comes to keep his
place which he has wrought, and make good his station that he may not be cast
out, against him, who is come to cast him out (and the hour is come, I declare
it to you again from the Lord) if he can at this door enter, when he is come
forth in any of the same deceivableness which works in you, (I speak still to
such in whom the enemy has so wrought) he will re-enforce his strong holds,
and hold ye to it as he can, against him who lives for ever, who is come to
deliver you; and unless that which Satan the Old Deceiver, has so wrought in
you; which he has begotten, which works for him, in which he works; which he
has [warily] wrought from the beginning against such a day as this, though you
have slept, and whilst ye have slept, come to be consumed, come to be destroyed
(not Cocker'd, not dandled, not smoothed, not Gentled, not spoke to in a
corner) you are undone for ever.

Quest.

And now, if ye would know Wherefore this is now spoken of, and not before, and
just as in this hour; and that it already works, even this mystery of
Iniquity?

Answ.

I Answer, It is now thus spoken of, and not before (though he forewarned of
him before; as has been wrote See Epist. of Love, page 10, 11. etc.
unto you) because before now this hour was not entered, of which ye were so
forewarned; and things come to be spoken of more plain in the movings of the
Lord, as they enter, of which he warned before they entered; and this is the
Love of the Lord, and his great lovingkindness, that as the enemy enters, so he
manifests him, of whom he forewarned; that friends may know that he is come,
as he warned of his coming. And this he does, that the simple may not be
beguiled with his wiles; and that others may be left without excuse. For as the
Son of Perdition comes to work, even him whose Coming is [after] the working
of Satan (as aforesaid) with [all] power, and signs, and lying wonders, and
with [all] deceivableness of unrighteousness in them that perish; so he who is
come, who is the Son of God, who shall reign for ever, who shall consume him
with the spirit of his mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of his
coming, reveals him, makes him manifest; even this mystery of iniquity that
already works, this man of sin, [that] wicked, that already opposes, and
exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is worshipped; and this
for the Elect sake, that they may not be deceived: So that the Prince of Peace
is before the Prince of darkness, in the warning, in the prophecy, and is even
with him in his working, who shall consume him; the Son of God, the son of
perdition.

And if ye would know, Whether he already works? I say, yea; and ye may know
him by this Character; He works subtly, and in the dark, in the similitude
and likeness of Truth; but is not Truth.

And if ye ask me, How shall ye find it to be so?

I answer, You must stand off him, or keep him off; and what he presents in the
Seed Immortal, which cannot be deceived, in which alone he can be discerned.
For if ye are off from this, from your watch, from your eye, from your savor,
from your feeling, from the Elect, from the Immortal, which cannot be deceived;
and let him in, and suffer his deceivableness to arise and work above the Seed,
or to come over it; your eye will be darkened; your savor will be lost (the
true eye by which you should see, the true savor by which you should taste)
and he (with the deceivableness which is come to deceive you) will come to be
the eye by which you see, and the savor by which you taste; and then ye are
gone, if the Lord show ye not mercy, by destroying him, and that of him which
is in you.

For, that which was the state of the fall at first, is yours in this, and is
become so again, and in a greater danger you are, and in a far more deceivable;
For, your coming to be visited, and to feel something quickened that was dead (I
speak to such as have been sensible) and to see the enemy by whom you were held
in Death; the Enemy coming to get over you again, and to deceive you again; It
is a greater mystery, not as an enemy to Truth (as before) or in opposition to
Truth, as may seem, or appear to the outward; but as a friend of Truth, and as
holding forth the Word of Truth; not as against the Light, but as an Angel of
Light; not as defiling the Temple of God, or as rising against God, or as in
opposition to God, but as sitting in the Temple of God, (whose Temple ye are,
said Paul to the Corinthians) and there, as God, opposing, and exalting himself
over all that is called God, or, that is worshipped, showing himself that he is
God. Only here is the difference; He is not God, nor Truth, nor the Light, nor
a friend of either; but the utter enemy of God, Truth, and Light; yet as Light,
as Truth, as God, seeks to destroy the Truth, and the Light, and that of God
made manifest in the Conscience. Not as one that tempts to sin, that leads
into evil, as he did Eve, but as one that is redeemed, and redeems from sin,
and delivers from evil (that is in the words, or the show thereof) not as one
that is not able to bear and suffer all things, but as one that bear^^h and
suffers all things, yet cannot bear the power of Truth; not as one that
drives from the measure of God, but as leading to it; yet it is to lead out of
it, from the Life, to the Word; from the Spirit that quickens, to the spirit
that destroys; not as one that would destroy the Creation, but as tender to it,
and yet his Name is Abaddon and Apollion, and by him it is that the Creation
suffers; and it groans to be delivered from the vanity unto which it is made
subject by him; not willingly, but by constraint; and for the manifestation of
the Sons of God; that it may be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into
the glorious liberty of the Children of God; which he is come to destroy: not
as one doing things out of the Wisdom of God, but as doing all things in his
Wisdom, and the height of Understanding; yet it is the wisdom that must perish,
and the understanding that must be brought to naught: Not as causing Truth to
suffer, but as suffering for the Truth; yet, he it is by whom Truth suffers.
And here is the deceivableness, the mystery, the mystery of iniquity, which
already works; the Man of Sin, (one that is grown up) the Son of Perdition, (one
that can do his Fathers work, who must be destroyed, that is his name, the Son
of Perdition, or of Destruction; for that is the signification of Perdition) it
came from destruction, and it must go to Destruction, it must be Destroyed; it
was its Birth, it must be its End; it had its being in Destruction, and it must
go into it; its being, and its end must be the same; its nature, and its issue,
its root and prop, its Father and Mother, its Brethren and Sisters; no mercy to
it from God, he will not spare it, who is come to consume it; he will not deal
gently with it, who is come to destroy it; whom perdition would destroy, whom
destruction would consume; who shall destroy destruction, and consume
perdition, and is come to do it. O Death, I will be thy death! O Grave, I will
be thy destruction! Repentance shall be hid from mine eyes; and the last enemy
that shall be destroyed is death; And death and hell were cast into the lake of
fire which is the second death. And the great Dragon was cast out, that [old]
serpent called the Devil and Satan, which deceives the whole world; he was
cast out into the earth, and his angels were cast out with him.) That wicked,
the false Christ, the false Prophet, the Antichrist, that seems to be for
Christ and to be Christ, and yet is against Christ; To speak for and of God,
and yet opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; and in the Temple of God sits as God, and shows himself that
he is God; The Abomination of Desolation standing in the Holy place, where it
ought not, (for the Temple of God is holy, whose Temple ye are) which when ye
see (says Christ) viz. The abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet, (whosoever reads let him understand) standing where it ought not; then
let them that be in Judea, (in the Land where these things are) flee into the
Mountains, the place of refuge, let him which is on the house top, (that sees
these things, and that the time is come) not come down (from the state in which
he is) to take any thing out of the house, (out of the state in which he is)
neither let him which is in the field (in the world, and now I am no more in
the world, but these are in the world, the field is the World) return back to
take his clothes (that which covered him, or, that wherewithal he was covered,
which he had left every one to the elect; to that which gives to see, to that
which preserves, the City of Refuge, the place of habitations; the thing in
them, not to that from which he is gone, which he has left, which he has
parted with, because of offenses, no returning again to the old coverings to
hide from the storm; which would not endure the eye which first manifested, and
which the eye which first did manifest, did cause to be cast off; no safety
here, for these things must be dissolved, they must be destroyed; no shelter
but in the Rock of Ages, the holy Mountain) the Hour is come.

You may say, How is this, or how can this come to pass? or, how comes it that
any should be so deceived, who have known the way of God, or the path of Life;
or, that have walked therein?

I Answer, By the very same way as Transgression at first entered, and sin into
the World.

How is that? It may be said.

Answ. By letting in the Serpent; For, had Eve stood in that in which she was
made, she had never been deceived; and it was impossible that she should so
have been, had she in that stood; but she letting in the Serpent, the Serpent
had her in possession, and was the eye by which she saw, and the spirit by
which she savoured, and the hand by which she wrought, and the foot by which
she went. He entering into her, possessed her, and so she was no longer guided
by that in which she was made, which was after the Image of God, in
righteousness and true holiness; but by him, or, the spirit of him, which she
had let in to her, which had brought that in which she was made under it, or,
which she had brought under, or put out, that the Serpent might enter; for
whilst that stood, he could not enter. For the Spirit it is that is the ground
of Union, and the cause of Sense; and therefore it is, that according to the
spirit that is in every one, or that which rules, so is the Sense, so is the
Union. In the Body natural it is so; the feeling, the suffering, the union, the
joy, is according as any thing answers unto, or is against the Spirit that is
in it, by which it lives, and has its being. And so it is as to the Spiritual;
the seeing, feeling, savouring, suffering, joying, etc. is according to the
Spirit that rules in Man.

Now if it be the Lord, the Spirit of the Lord, according to that which is
Living of God; So is its eye, ear, savor, hand, foot, love, joy; And that
which proceeds from ^he Spirit of God in any, answers to its love, ^oy, hand,
foot, ear, eye, and his savor is according unto it. If it be the spirit of
de^eivableness, then according to that spirit of deceivableness, (for
deceivableness there ^s of sundry kinds, and each deceivableness ^nswers to the
spirit of which it is) it sees, ^eels, hears, understands, savours according ^o
that spirit, and to that spirit as it moves ^n any (for now the spirit is got
in, and it works for it self, and sets the creature, ha^ing the eye, etc. for
and against any thing that is for or against it) and as it moves ^n any, so it
moves to that spirit; and so on ^he contrary, as to that which opposes, or
^ppresses that Spirit, or strikes, or wounds it, ^r testifies against it; It is
in the same sense as that is which is so opposed, oppressed, struck, ^ounded,
or testified against, and makes the Creature to think, that it is the right
Seed that is so opposed, oppressed, struck, and ^ounded; and makes it cry out
so, -- Thou Oppressest the Seed -- when it is the Seed of evil doers, the false
Seed, the degenerat^ Plant, the generation of corrupters, the begotten of the
Devil, the Son of Perdition, that is so Stricken, Oppressed, and Wounded, which
must be destroyed, or it will destroy the Creature; and here is a deceit
indeed, and a thing most consideratel^ to be minded; when the enemy comes to
make the Creature cry out of that which comes to deliver the Creature, and to
make his sense of the hand that is against him to dostroy him, that the
Creature may be saved to be the sense of the Creature, and to raise the
Creature against the hand, that by the destruction of him, and what he has
begotten, seeks to deliver the Creature: A man that is here can hardly be in a
state more dangerous.

Now the Devil having wrought his work in man, and by his Artifices, and
deceivableness beguiled man into a consent to his workings, to a working
together with him, man comes to suffer, as that which is so begotten is made to
suffer, and suffer it must, or man will be destroyed.

O Daughter of Babylon, who art to be destroyed; Happy shall he be that
rewards thee as thou have served us; Happy shall he be that takes thy little
ones, and dasheth them against the stones.

Now the spirit of deceivableness having a ^lace in any; that is to say,
something an^werable to the same deceivableness, or that ^s of its nature,
being begotten in the crea^ure, there the spirit of deceivableness which ^s
answerable unto that deceivableness which ^s wrought in the Creature, coming
and entering ^^ and come and enter it will as it can, when ^^ is at its last and
sees it must be cast out.) ^t fills, it possesses, that Creature is filled, and
possessed therewith, so that it savors nothing, nor is affected with any thing
but what is according unto it, and it feels the ^ontrary.

And this is the Reason, why there is some^hing that seems to be living,
something that seems to be savoury, to he refreshing in that, which in it self
is dead as to the life ^f God, and in enmity unto it. The spirit of
deceivableness is (as it were) the soul of that Creature, or that which causes
the ^efreshing, or gives the feeling, and the seem^ngness of Life; as the Soul,
or the Spirit does to the Body natural; or, the Spirit of Life to the things
that are of God: Therefore said Paul, For, we are unto God a sweet ^avour of
Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish; to the one we are a
savor of Death unto Death, and to the other the savor of Life unto Life. And
says the Lord, -- The soul that sins it shall die. The spirit of the thing,
is that which gives the savor unto that thing, and it savours only that which
is of the same Spirit, so as to be one with it: That which is agreeable to the
Life of a man, or that has in it something of that nature of which man's life
is, and by which it is preserved, answers to the spirit that is in man, which
is in a man's Life; another thing does not that is the contrary. So as to a
Beast or any other Creature, this in the natural, and this gives the savor. So
a seed of deceivableness being begotten, the spirit of deceivableness is the
soul of it; or that by which it feels or savours; and this answers to its own
in all. And such a thing being begotten in man, man's savor is according unto
it.

Therefore it nearly concerns every friend to look to his state, and to see how
it is with him; before the day of the Lord come upon him as a Thief in the
night; and lest, ere he be aware, the enemy come, and enter by one spirit or
another into that in him, in which he has place (I speak still to such in whom
he yet has a place) for this assuredly I have received from the Lord, that
before this hour be over (which is the last and greatest of all, and which is
already entered) there is not a place left in any friend in which the enemy
has place, but a spirit of deceivableness will come forth answerable unto it,
be it in what kind soever, which will seek thereby to enter, and to destroy the
Creature.

And the reason of it is this; The enemy has been long working, and very
subtly too, (as I have said) he has not been asleep, or negligent (you have
not such an enemy to deal with, and you will find it so) as too many have been;
but ever since this day of the Lord came, he has been seeking to keep or
reserve some place in Friends in which he was before, or to get some new; and
having so reserved, or gotten, he strengthens it as he can; and works night and
day for this purpose that it may be a hold for himself against the day of the
appearance of him, who shall arise to cast him out. For this he knows, that he
must be cast out by him who is come, as sure as the day of his appearance is
come who must cast him out; and the nearer the time comes to be finished, or to
draw toward an end, the more he seeks to visit, and fill up the holds that he
has gotten; that so at least, in this or that particular (as I have elsewhere
See Epist. of Love, page 8. etc.
spoken more at large) he may keep him from rising, who is Lord and King, (yet
rise he will in all to their eternal Salvation or destruction) and make such
useful against him who lives for ever.

And this is the reason also why the spirit of deceivableness, the Son of
Perdition, the Man of Sin, that Wicked, now begins to appear, whose coming is
after the working of Satan, because the hour is come wherein he must be cast
out; and he is come who must cast him out; the Son of God, the Heir of all
things, the Brightness of the Fathers Glory, and the express Image of his
Person; and therefore he makes use of all that he has wrought, as his reserve
against this day of his appearing, who is come to cast him out, and he has
wrought for this purpose; and this is the reason why he now reveals him, who is
come to cast him out, even this Mystery of Iniquity; because he but now so
works against him that is come to cast him out. And here is the great Mystery.

So dear Friends, you have the reason of these things, and the unfolding of
this Mystery; because the hour is come, and he that is come, who is Lord and
King, unfolds and reveals them, and by the brightness of this his coming,
destroys, and by the spirit of his mouth consumes this Son of Perdition; even
him whose coming is after the working of Satan, that Old Deceiver, with all
Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of
Unrighteousness in them that Perish.

Now, if ye ask me, How comes this to pass, that the enemy should work so in
Friends, and how it is wrought?

I answer, It comes to pass through their not waiting in, and watching to the
Power of God, that which manifests, to have the enemy cast out, (that which was
before their eyes came to be enlightened, before they were convinced of Truth)
and when he was cast out to keep him out, that he might not enter in again; and
by their receiving of mixed spirits, and not trying the spirits; that which is
not holy right Seed: For, every thing begets its own Image: Adam begat a Son in
his own Image, after he had transgressed, who before was the Son of God; and
the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, that which is like him; who is the
quickening Spirit.

Life begets Life, and Death Death; and every thing that of which nature it is;
so that if it be holy, that which is begotten is like it; if it be unholy,
unsound, rotten, so is that which proceeds from it, and the issue manifests
it.

Therefore, Friends had need to look to it, what spirits they receive, and how
they receive them* and to try, and examine them well, and not be uncertain, and
easy, and running after every spirit that bears the similitude of Truth. For,
the time is now, that Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light; and
he knows it is too late for him to think to enter into the flock, and devour
it, by that which is in opposition to Truth, or that is not in sound words;
nay, he has tried this already, and it will not do; he must now work in a
Mystery, and a Mystery must do it, if ever it be done; and this he knows, and
therefore he works in a Mystery; the Mystery of Iniquity, for so is its bottom,
and so is its end, and so is its nature, and so is its work; and he is suffered
so to do, to try the Elect, and to sweep away those who have pleasure in
unrighteousness, on whom the Lord has long waited, and in whom his Seed has
suffered, and they have made merry whilst it has been under, and have been
wanton, and proud, and careless, and earthly, and busiebodies, and many
masters, and haughty, and envious, and haters, and whisperers, and backbiters,
and sowers of evil Seed, (the Devils husbandmen) and evil surmisers, and
railers, and false accusers, and all them who are not obedient to the Truth in
the day of God. For, as the Elect is come, and the Lord has brought it forth,
so it must be made manifest; therefore it must be tried, and that is high above
all; yea, the highest that can be, the Elect. So the Mystery of Iniquity that
comes to try it, that must be the highest that ever was, and in the nearest
similitude; that it may appear, that there is yet that which is higher than it,
that cannot be deceived. There must be Heresies, that those that are approved
may be made manifest; and all unstable spirits, that are short of the Elect,
yet keep not to the Elect, that are from it, that have been negligent and
careless in the day of their visitation; and have suffered the weeds to grow
again over them, and have been drinking in every water, and all puddle that
comes, and have been led away with every deceivableness, may also be made
manifest. Those who have not kept to their watch, have not hearkened to the
warnings of the Lord, but have risen against it, and joined with the thief, and
the murderer, in the day of the Lords witness, to grieve the soul of the
righteous, and stop down the Testimony of God (if it were possible) which yet
'twas not possible for them to do, for it was of God. I say, the Lord has
suffered, and will suffer, and does suffer these things to be for this end and
purpose, that the stability may be made manifest; who are fixed on him who is
the stability of times, and also the others; and now how are they made
manifest; and how do they toss, and reel, and fret, and rise, and evil surmise,
and evil speak, and backbite, and hate, and how are the Garments of many
unkept; and how does their nakedness appear, and how is their shame seen!

For Friends, it is but a narrow path to walk in, a little turning aside, a
little off the watch, a little looking out, a little mudled, and a man is gone;
the enemy claps in upon him, who watches his advantage with his
deceivableness; and then what becomes of him? beguiling unstable souls; his
shame is manifest.

Therefore, he who knew these things, and what the hour would be, and how
deceivable, spoke often; and he spoke not in vain; that is to say, that there
was not ground for what he said, Watch; What I say to one, I say to all, watch.
Take heed, lest at any time your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness, and the cares of this Life, and that day come upon you unawares;
for as a snare it it shall come on the Inhabitants of the earth. And, Watch,
lest coming suddenly he find ye sleeping; with much more of that nature, of
which I have See Epist. of Love Page 20, 21, etc.
other-where spoken more at large, in the the Movings of the Lord.

I say, these things comes to pass through not watching, through not waiting,
through carelessness, through pride, through receiving mixed spirits, through not
trying of spirits, through not abiding in that which tries the spirits. For
alas, how can that man but be deceived in such an hour, wherein the Mystery of
Iniquity works; the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, that Wicked, with all
Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and with all deceivableness of
unrighteousness, in them that perish, (and is suffered so to do, for the trial,
and making manifest of that which cannot be deceived) who is not with that
which cannot be deceived; Many false Christ's (says he) shall arise, and false
Prophets, and shall deceive many, yea, if it were possible, the very Elect;
then that which is not in the very Elect, how can it but be deceived;
especially where the enemy has wrought before in his deceivableness, and
prepared a place for his Mystery, his false Christ, and false Prophet, his Son
of Perdition, his Man of Sin, that Wicked, to work, and to receive him.

Therefore Friends, as I have said, it concerns you nearly to mind these
things; and not to be foolish, and brittle, and staggering, and unseeing the
things that belong unto your peace, and rising against them that do; for here
will be the misery of it, (though to such you cause suffering for the Seeds
sake in you, which by such things suffers; and for their love to you, yet) the
worst on it you will have in the end; and if the mercy of the Lord yet prevent you,
that ye descend not into the pit, with him with whom ye have joined, and who
has wrought in you his deceivableness, which I tell you will be a hard matter
to pull you from, you who drink deep of this, and are obstinate, yet you will
come to loss, and great loss too, and of your Garments; and your shame will be
made manifest, and you must bear your shame. Therefore in the Bowels of Love
for the Seeds sake in you all, I beseech you mind, and consider, for these are
no jesting things, nor is the hour little. Eternity depends upon it, should ye
be cut off, and ye will lose your glory, and your renown will dye away, and all
that ye have done and suffered for the Truth will be lost, and you will be cast
out to the loathing of your persons; yea, though ye were as the signet on God's
right hand, yet he will pull you thence, and none of the righteousness that ye
have done shall be remembered; but in the sin that ye have sinned, and in the
iniquity that ye have committed, ye shall die. And others will step over you,
and upon your graves wear your Crown, and bear the Name of the Lord for ever
and ever, in which he will be glorified.

Hezekiah after he had recovered from his sickness, and through a miracle, as a
sign, was restored, and fifteen years added to his Life: The Sun going bacward
so many degrees, in King Ahaz his Dial; yet letting in the Ambassadors of the
King of Babylon, and showing them his Treasury, he did foolishly; and the Lord
by the Prophet told him, that the King of Babylon should come, and carry it all
away; which. was fulfilled.

Friends, it is a dangerous thing to let your enemy into your Treasury, though
he come to visit you, or send his Ambassadors to visit you, as in kindness,
after the recovery of your sickness, as was the Case of Hezekiah, which was a
figure: For, then the Enemy will get your Treasury, and wear your Treasure, and
make use of it to deceive others as well as you; and to discern that with which
you were, whilst you gained it.

Every good man, whilst he is so, (working the work of God, doing, suffering,
exercised in the Truth) comes to knowledge, to experience, has a Treasury of
all that he has done and known within him. A good man out of the good Treasury
of his heart, brings forth good things. And, Let your Treasure be in Heaven;
for, where your Treasure is, there will your hearts be also. There is something
that he lays up, that is a Remembrance for him in the time to come. Now when
the enemy, by any deceivableness shall get into you, and make use of you for
his ends, he will come forth not in his own hue, and ugly shape (then he knows
he shall be seen) but clothed with you; with what once you had in a true
feeling of God, which whilst you were so, you had a place with his Chosen; and
with this, and under this will he seek to enter into such again, and so to
deceive, who is the murderer; and if such who had once a sense of you in the
living, or, who look to outward things, to the clothing, the good words, and
are not on their watch, be not very vigilant; in he will get by that again, and
so deceive you; and when he is in, 'twill be hard having him out for the
Reasons aforesaid.

And if any man has been more eminent than another in Truth, or suffering for
the Truth; with such will he be dealing most, if so be into such he can enter,
and by any means deceive; and if he can so enter, and can so deceive any one
who has been so eminent for the Truth; look by how much that man has been
eminent in the Truth, and thereby, or by sufferings, has a place in friends,
by so much the more is the danger; and by so much the more is the zeal of the
Lord against him in that man, in whom he is so entered; so that it will not
spare him, no not for a moment, nor can it have any truce with him; but as now
the Devil is mounted in his Mystery in his Son of Perdition, so he that is come
to destroy the works of the Devil, the Son of Perdition, will be at him, and
uncover him, and unmask him, and pluck off his Hood, his Vizor, and show him
what he is, the fowl face under the goodly paint; the ravening wolf under the
sheeps clothing, the Son of Perdition under the similitude of the Son of God;
and it will destroy him, not cocker him; it will consume him, not smooth him
up: For, now its come to it, Life and Life, Victory and Victory, Death and
Death; the last encounter, which is eternal; and here indeed is the sharp
engagement, and the quick work, which admits of no reconciliation; one cannot
live but in the death of the other. And a moment does it (as it were) the
twinkling of an eye, it is on a sudden, in a moment, ere a man can think; so
comes deceivableness, so comes that which uncovers, which destroys, which
reveals, which consumes it; it cannot be born, it must not be born, because of
the danger; it is the precious Life that is hunted after, he is in a hood to
murder, and it is the last hour. He that is greater than all, who is over all,
who is more vigilant to save than the Enemy is to destroy; who though he suffer
the hour, yet will be above the hour for his Seeds sake; who holds the
Balance, who orders the Battle; the Lord of hosts musters the hosts of the
Battle. The King of glory who is come, immortal, eternal, the Son of God, who
must reign for ever and ever; who is come to reign for ever and ever, and to
take to himself the Kingdom, and will have it so; who is more able to save,
than the Son of Perdition to destroy. It Is the great Battle of the Lord God
Almighty.

Therefore Friends, be ye all still and quiet where ye see such things are, and
be not hasty in judging, or in rising up against that, which comes forth to
judge such spirits nor limit the Lord to your Methods, nor tie him to your
times, or your wills, or the will or method of any man; for the Lord will not
be limited by you, nor tied by you, and the Son of Perdition, shall not come
where the Son of God is come, but he will make him manifest, yea, in the midst
of the Assembly, and will sheath his sword in his blood, who would sheath his
sword in the blood of the Truth. Remember, Joab and Amasa; Art thou in health
my brother, said Joab, and Joab took Amasa by the beard, with the right hand,
to kiss him, but Amasa took not heed to the sword that was in Joabs hand, so
he smote him therewith in the fifth rib, and shed out his bowels to the ground,
and struck him not again, and he died. Remember Joab and Abner; And when Abner
was returned to Hebron (for David had dismissed him who came to bring the Kingdom
to David, and he was gone in peace; and Joab sent after him, but David knew it
not) Joab took him aside in the Gate, to speak with him [quietly] and smote him
there under the fifth rib, that he died.

And, said David, Died Abner as a fool dies? Thy hands were not bound, nor thy
feet put into fetters; as a man falls before wicked men, so fellest thou.
Faithful are the wounds of a friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.
Open rebuke is better than secret love. Shall the Enemy come in among you
disguised to destroy, and shall he that sees it suffer him to destroy? It Is too
late when he has done his work; stay a while, take him aside, let him do his
work, and then speak to him; shut the door when it is too late. Nay, He that is
the watchman of Israel, that knows the time and the hour, who has regard to
his sheep, is more wary; He Will not stand by and let a Wolf suck the blood of the
Lambs, and let him alone: No, one or another he will stir up, in whom he is, to
reveal, to smite him, with his sore* and great, and strong sword; he will
punish Leviathan, the crooked piercing Serpent, even Leviathan that crooked
Serpent, and shall slay the Dragon in the Sea. There Is no reconciliation,
there is no sparing, there is no mercy; It Is the murderer, it is the devourer,
it is the destroyer, that is entered under the garment of peace, satisfaction, and
union; who may not be endured; but by how much the more he is covered, by so
much the more is he to be unript, and the quicker; by how much the more, by his
opportunity, and interest, he may have place in those among whom he is; and by
whom he seeks to enter.

Hence it came to pass that the Spirit of the Lord in Paul, would not bear
with Peter, but withstood him to the face, and wrote to another Church of it;
for that he deserved to be blamed. What was the Reason? Why, Peter was a Chief
among the Apostles, and was the Minister of the Circumcision; and the enemy
being got into Peter, Paul knew, (or the Spirit of the Lord in Paul) what work
the enemy would make, and where he would be presently, even among them to whom
Peter had ministered; and it so came to pass, that many of the Jews were carried
away, and Barnabas also, with the same dissimulation. Therefore the Spirit of
the Lord in Paul upon such an occasion was quick at the Enemy, which was got
into Peter, and withstood him to the face.

And so, when the Devil got into Peter, and said in him, to Christ, Be it far
from the Lord, this shall not be unto thee; when he was going to Jerusalem to
suffer, and as he went was telling them of his sufferings, and that they should
put him to death, Get thee behind me Satan (said he) thou art an offense unto
me, for thou savourest not the things of God, but the things that be of men.
For, as the Devil in the Scribes and Pharisees sought to put him to Death, so
he wrought in Him, and in Peter, if so be he might keep him from being willing
to die; and so he had done his work. But, He became obedient to Death, (for he
was to die, and so to do the will of God, which was the will of God) even the
death of the Cross; therefore God highly exalted him, and gave him a Name above
every Name: That at the Name of Jesus every knee should bow, and tongue
confess; of things in the earth, and under the earth. And by death he overcame
him who had the power of death, which was the Devil. And therefore said he, I
have a Baptism wherewith I am to be Baptized, and Oh how am I straightened till it
be recomplished! Be it far from the Lord, this shall not be unto thee (said
Peter) One would have thought it to be but a tender word, who looked out) Get
thee behind me Satan. The Devil was in it, and his end as before; therefore he
made quick work with the Devil, who would have made quick work with him.

And so Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and the 250 Princes of the Congregation, who
gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron, and said unto
them, You take too much upon you, seeing all the Congregation are holy every
one of them, and the Lord is among them; wherefore then lift ye up your selves
above the Congregation of the Lord? Moses was quick with them, Even to morrow
(said he to Korah and all his company) the Lord will show who are his, and who
is holy, and will cause him to come near unto him; even him whom he has
chosen, will he cause to come near unto him. And he spoke unto the
Congregation, saying, Depart I pray you, from the Tents of these wicked men,
and touch nothing of theirs, lest ye be consumed in all their sins. -- And, --
Hereby ye shall know that the Lord has sent me to do all these works; for I
have not done them of mine own mind. If these men die the common death of all
men; or, if they be visited after the visitation of all men, then the Lord has
not sent me: But if the Lord make a new thing, and the earth open her mouth,
and swallow them up, with all that appertain unto them, and they go down quick
into the Pit, then ye shall understand that these men have provoked the Lord.
-- Here was quick work -- And it came to pass as he had made an end of speaking
all these words, that the ground clave asunder, that was under them, and the
earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up, and their houses, and all the
men that appertained to Korah, and all their goods; They and all that
appertained to them, went down alive into the Pit; And the Earth closed upon
them, and they perished from among the Congregation; and all Israel that were
round about them sled at the cry of them; for they said, Lest the earth swallow
us up also. And there came out a fire from the Lord, and consumed the two
hundred and fifty men that offered Incense. -- Now with an eye that looks out,
one would think it hard, that for such an offense (a small one, as one so might
judge, in comparison of the judgment that followed) a few words so spoken, and
such words as to Moses and Aaron (as aforesaid) such a sore and quick hand
should be turned on them, as has been rehearsed; the Earth open her mouth, and
presently too, and swallow them up, and all they had, and that appertained to
them: and the Fire come down from the Lord, and consume them. One might think,
could they not have been told privately of this matter, and reproved, and so
have let the matter to have passed, seeing they were eminent Men, Levites (who
ministered before the Lord) and Princes, Princes of the Congregation, and to
have borne the thing; especially, seeing that the Congregation was holy, and
the Lord in the midst, as he was with the Congregation: and this might be but a
mistake; or some Temptation that might get over them; or matter of Emulation,
and so might the easier be passed by, and covered. No, the matter was of
another nature; they being Eminent, Levites, Princes of the Congregation, and
having thereby an Influence upon the Congregation; this Spirit being got up in
them; the whole Congregation, on which they had influence, and in whom they had
place, was like to be endangered, and the thing to have run through them all;
and so they were in danger to have been destroyed. Therefore the Spirit of the
Lord in Moses was quick, which saw this, and the Wrath of the Lord which was
moving, and which would have destroyed them; and the Lord was quick, Separate
your selves (said the Lord to Moses and Aaron) from among this Congregation,
that I may consume them in a moment: And they fell on their faces, and said, O
God, the God of the spirits of all flesh, shall one Man sin, and will thou be
wroth with all the Congregation? And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, Speak
unto the Congregation, saying, Get ye up from about the Tabernacles of Korah,
Dathan, and Abiram. And how far their Spirit was got into the Congregation; and
so what need there was of this quick, and dreadful, and manifest Judgment,
appears in that (notwithstanding the Judgment was so eminent, and so quick, and
from the Lord; and according as Moses had said, that, Even to morrow the Lord
will show who are his, and who is holy; and will cause him to come near unto
him, etc. And it so came to pass as Moses had said: and the Lord thereby had
showed (as said Moses) who are his, and who is holy; and did cause him to draw
near him: yea, and that as soon as Moses had done speaking the Words of the
Judgment, the Judgment came as aforesaid. Yet) on the morrow all the
Congregation of the Children of Israel murmured against Moses, and against
Aaron, saying, -- [Ye have killed the People of the Lord -- ] Insomuch that the
Lord said the second time unto Moses and Aaron, Get ye up from among this
Congregation, that I may consume them as in a moment: and they fell on their
faces. And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a Censer, and put fire therein from off
the Altar, and put on Incense; and go quickly into the Congregation, and make
an Atonement for them: for there is Wrath gone out from the Lord; the Plague is
begun. And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the
Congregation; and behold the Plague was begun among the People; and he put on
Incense, and made an Atonement for the People; and he stood between the dead,
and the living, and the Plague was staid. Now they that died in the plague were
Fourteen thousand, and Seven hundred, besides them that died about the matter
of Korah: And Aaron returned unto Moses unto the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, and the Plague was staid. So that nothing less than this could
have been to save the Congregation; for the matter was grown high, and had took
its root before it appeared: and Moses saw its root; and he said unto Korah,
Hear I pray you, ye Sons of Levi, seems it a small thing unto you, that the
God of Israel has separated you from the Congregation of Israel, to bring you
near to himself, to do the Service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to stand
before the Congregation, to minister unto them; and he has brought thee near
to him, and all thy Brethren, the Sons of Levi, with thee; and seck ye the
Priesthood also: For which cause both thou, and all thy company are gathered
together against the Lord: and what is A^ron that ye murmur against him? And
Moses sent to call Dathan, and Abiram, the Sons of Eliab, which said, We will
not come up: Is it a small thing unto us, that thou have brought us up out of a
Land that flows with milk and honey, to kill us in the Wilderness, except
thou make thy self altogether a Prince over us? Moreover, thou have not brought
us into a Land that flows with milk and honey; or given us inheritance of
fields and vineyards: Will thou put out the eyes of these men? we will not come
up. And Moses was very wroth, and said unto the Lord, Respect not thou their
Off^ring; I have not taken an Ass from them; neither have I hurt one of them.
And Moses said unto Korah, Be thou, and all thy company before the Lord, thou,
and they, and Aaron to morrow; and take every man his Cencer, and put Incense
in them, and bring ye before the Lord every man his Censer, two hundred and
fifty Censers; thou also, and Aaron each of you his Censer; and they took every
man his Censer, and put fire in them, and laid incense thereon; and stood in
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation with Moses and Aaron: and Korah
gathered all the Congregation against them, unto the door of the Tabernacle of
the Congregation; and the Glory of the Lord appeared unto all the Congregation:
And the Lord spoke unto Moses and to Aaron, saying, Separate your selves from
among this Congregation, that I may consume them in a moment, etc. as aforesaid.

Now Friends, these things were Figures in the Outward, of that which is true
in the Inward, which answers thereunto, as the Body to the Shadow; and the
Substance to the Type: And these things were our Examples (said Paul to the
Corinthians of the Jews that murmured) to the intent that we should not lust
after evil things, as they also lusted; neither be ye Idolaters as were some of
them, as it is written, The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to
play: neither let us commit fornication, as some of them committed, and fell in
one day three and twenty thousand: neither let us tempt Christ as some of them
also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents: neither murmur ye as some of them
also murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Now all these things happened
unto them for Ensamples; and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are come: Wherefore let him that thinks he stands, take
heed lest he fall.

And so as to the Calf; Moses was in the Mount, receiving the lively Oracles
from God; and whilst he tarryed; said the People to Aaron, Up, make us gods
that shall go before us; for as for this Moses, the man that brought us out of
the Land of Egypt, we wot not what is become of him. And Aaron said unto them,
Break off the golden earrings which are in the ears of your Wives, of your
Sons, and of your Daughters (now these were the things they brought ou^ of
Egypt, which the Egiptians gave them when they came out of Egypt; and they
robbed the Egyptians) and bring them unto me: and all the people broke off the
golden earrings which were in their ears, and brought them to Aaron; and he
received them at their hand, and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he
had made it a mol^en Calf: and they said, These are thy gods, O Israel, that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. And when Aaron saw it, he built an Altar
before it, and made proclamation, and said, To morrow is a feast unto the Lord:
And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered Burnt-offrings, and brought
Peace-offrings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to
play. And the Lord said unto Moses, Get thee down, for thy People which thou
broughtest out of the Land of Egypt, have corrupted themselves; they have
turned aside quickly out of the Way that I commanded them; they have made them
a molten calf, and have worshipped it, and have sacrificed thereunto; and said,
These be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. And
the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this People, and behold it is a
stiff-necked people; now therefore let me alone that my Wrath may wax hot
against them, and that I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great
nation. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said: Lord, Why does thy wrath
wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought forth out of the Land of
Egypt, with great power, and with a mighty hand? wherefore should the Egyptians
speak, and say, For mischief did he bring them out to slay them in the
mountains, and to consume them from the face of the earth? Turn from thy fierce
wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people: remember Abraham, and Isaac,
and Israel thy servants, to whom thou swearest by thy own self, and said unto
them, I will multiply your seed as the Stars of heaven; and all this Land that
I have spoken of will I give uno your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever:
And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his people. And
Moses turned, and went down from the Mount, and the two Tables of the Testimony
were in his hand; the Tables were written on both their sides; on the one side,
and on the other were they written: and the Tables were the work of God; and
the writing was the writing of God graven upon the Tables. And when Joshua
heard the noise of the people as they shouted, he said unto Moses, There is a
noise of war in the Camp: and he said, It is not the voice of them that shout
for mastery; neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome; but
the noise of them that sing do I hear. And it came to pass, that as soon as he
came nigh to the Camp, that he saw the Calf, and the Dancing; and Moses anger
waxed hot, and he cast the Tables out of his hand, and brake them beneath the
Mount: and he took the Calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire, and
ground it to powder, and strewed it upon the water, and made the Children of
Israel drink of it. And Moses said unto Aaron, What did these people do unto
thee, that thou have brought so great a sin upon them? And Aaron said, Let not
the anger of my Lord wax hot; thou know the people that they are set on
mischief; for they said unto me, Make us gods which shall go before us; for as
for this Moses the man that brought us up out of the Land of Egypt, we wot not
what is become of him. And I said unto them, Whosoever has any gold, let them
break it off; so they gave it me, and I cast it into the fire, and there came
out this Calf. And when Moses saw that the people were naked (for Aaron had
made them naked unto their shame, among their enemies) then Moses stood in the
gate of the Camp, and said, Who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto me;
and all the Sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him, and he said
unto them, Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Put every man his Sword by his
side, and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the Camp, and slay every
man his Brother, and every man his Companion, and every man his Neighbor; and
the Children of Levi did according to the word of Moses: and there fell of the
People in that day, about Three thousand men: for Moses had said, Consecrate
your selves to day unto the Lord, even every man upon his son, and upon his
brother, that he may bestow upon you a blessing this day. And it came to pass
on the morrow that Moses said unto the people, Ye have sinned a great sin, and
now I will go up unto the Lord, peradventure I shall make an Atonement for your
sin. And Moses returned unto the Lord, and said, O this people have sinned a
great sin, and have made them gods of gold; yet now, if thou will forgive their
sin, and if not, blot me I pray thee out of thy Book which thou have written:
and the Lord said unto Moses, Whosoever has sinned against me, him will I blot
out of my Book: Therefore now, go, lead the people unto the place of which I
have spoken unto thee; behold mine Angel shall go before thee: nevertheless, in
the day that I visit, I will visit their sin upon them. And the Lord plagued
the People, because they made the Calf which Aaron made.

Now these things also were written for our Examples, upon whom the ends of the
world are come, and are Figures of the thing that is now, which the Lord sees,
and is offended with, and which his jealousy will take hold of, and his Plague
shall slay, for these are not light things before the Lord, but he will visit
them, in the day that he will visit their sin upon such, and will plague them.
But as for Levi, says the Lord of Hosts, My Covenant was with him, of Life,
and Peace, and I gave them to him, for the fear wherewith he feared me, and was
afraid before my Name: The Law of Truth was in his mouth, and Iniquity was not
found in his lips; he walked with me in peace and equity, and did turn many
from their iniquity: For, the Priests lips should keep knowledge, and they
should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts;
but ye have departed out of the way; ye have caused many to stumble at the Law;
ye have ^orrupted the Covenant of Levi, says the Lord of Hosts. And Levi was a
Type of Christ; and of Levi said Moses, Let thy Thummim, and thy Vrim be with
thy Holy One, whom thou did prove at Massah, and with whom tho^ did strive
at the waters of Meribah; who said unto his father, and to his mother, I have
not seen him; neither did he acknowledge his brethren, nor knew his own
children, for they have observed thy Law, and kept thy Covenant: they shall
teach Jacob thy Judgments, and Israel thy Law; they shall put incense before
thee, and whole burnt-offrings upon thine Altar: Bless Lord his Substance, and
accept the works of his hands: smite through the loins of them that rise up
against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not up again.

The same may be read in Joshua's circumcising the Israelites the second time,
after Moses was dead; and the Israelites were passed over Jordan to possess the
Land, and the waters divided hither and thither, so that they went on dry land
in the midst of the River, as the Red Sea divided when they came out of Egypt
(What ailed thee, O thou Sea, that thou fledst; thou Jordan, that thou wast
driven back; ye Mountains, that ye skipped like rams, and ye little Hills like
lambs? Tremble thou earth at the Presence of the Lord, at the presence of the
God of Jacob, which turned the rock into a standing water; the flint into a
fountain of waters: The Sea saw it, and fled, Jordan, and it, was driven back:
The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs: when Judah
was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion, when Israel came out of Egypt, the
house of Jacob, from a people of strange language.) I say after they had passed
over Jordan, and the waters divided hither and thither, and they were come over
dry-shod; and the waters which came down from above, stood and rose up upon an
heap very far from the City Adam, that is besides Zaretan; and those that came
down toward the sea of the plain, even the Salt-sea, failed, and were cut off;
and the people passed over right against Jericho; and the Priests that bear the
Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, stood firm on dry ground in the midst of
Jordan; and all the Israelites passed over on dry ground, until all the people
were passed over Jordan. I say, after all this, and that thereby they knew that
the living God was amongst them, and that he would without fail drive out from
before them, the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Hivites, and the
Perizzites, and the Gergashites, and the Amorites, and the Jebusites; as the
Lord had said to them before by the hand of Joshua; yet said the Lord (after
they were passed over, and this wonder wrought, and this word fulfilled; and
the heart of the Kings of the Amorites, which were on the side of Jordan
westward, and of the Canaanites which were, by the Sea melted, when they heard
that the Lord had dried up the Waters of Jordan from before the Children of
Israel (for it was at the time of harvest when Jordan overflowes all its banks,
that the Lord did this) neither was there spirit in them any more, because of
the Children of Israel.) I say, yet said the Lord unto Joshua, Make thee
[sharp] Knives, and circumcise again the Children of Israel the second time:
and Joshua made him sharp knives, and circumcised the Children of Israel at the
Hill of foreskins: And this is the cause why Joshua did circumcise all the
people that came out of Egypt that were Males; even all the men of war died in
the wilderness by the way, after they came out of Egypt. Now all the People
that came out were circumcised; but all the people that were born in the
Wilderness by the way, as they came forth out of Egypt, them they had not
circumcised: for the Children of Israel walked forty years in the wilderness,
till all the people that were men of war, which came out of Egppt, were
consumed, because they obeyed not the voice of the Lord; unto whom the Lord
swear that he would not show them the Land which the Lord swear unto their
Fathers, that he would give us, a Land that flowed with milk and honey: and
their Children whom he raised up in their stead, them Joshua circumcised: for
they were uncircumcised, because they had not circumcised them by the way. And
it came to pass, when they had done circumcising of the people, that they abode
in their places in the Camp till they were whole: and the Lord said unto
Joshua, This day have I rouled away the Reproach of Egypt from off you:
wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal unto this day. And the
Children of Israel encamped in Gilgal, and kept the Passover on the fourteenth
day of the month at Even, in the plains of Jericho; and they did eat of the old
Corn of the Land on the morrow after the passover, unleavened Cakes, and
parched Corn in the self-same day; and the Manna ceased on the morrow after
they had eaten of the old corn of the Land: neither had the Children of Israel
Manna any more, but they did e^^e of the Fruit of the Land of Canaan that year.

Now Abraham not tarrying for the Seed of the Promise, in which all the
Families of the earth were to be blessed, went into Hagar, whom Sarah (who
waited not) gave unto him, who was Sarahs Bond-maid, who bare him a Son, and
the Angel of the Lord called his name Jshmael, because the Lord had heard her
affliction; who fled from her Mistress, who was despised in her eyes, when she
saw she had conceived by Abram; therefore Sarah dealt hardly by her, and she
fled her face; and said the Angel, He will be a wild man; his hand will be
against every man, and every man's hand against him; and he shall dwell in the
presence of all his Brethren. And of this Ishmael, Abraham said to the Lord, O
that Ismael might live before thee: When the Lord had said to him, That he
would give him a Son of Sarai, and that he would bless her, and that a Mother
of Nations she should be, and Kings of people should be of her; then Abraham
fell upon his face, and laughed, and said in his heart, Shall a Child be born
unto him that is an hundred years old? and shall Sarah that is ninety years old
bear? And Abraham said unto God, O that Ishmael might live before thee. And
this after the Lord had changed his name from Abram to Abraham, and Sarah's
name from Sarah to Sarai, and had made his Covenant with him, and spoken to him
as aforesaid. And David had an Absalom, whom he cocker'd much, and unto whom
his soul longed to go forth, though he had killed his brother Amnon, and whom
he suffered to sit afterward in the ga^e, and to steal away the hearts of the
people: O that I were made Judge in the Land (said he to them that came in to
have judgment of the King) then every man that has any suite, or cause, might
come unto me, and I would do him Justice; and when any man that had a
controversy, came to the King for Judgment, then Absalom called to him, and
said, Of what City art thou? and he said, Thy servant is of one of the Tribes
of Israel: and Absalom said unto him, See that thy Matters be good and right;
but there is no man deputed of the King to hear thee. Absalom said moreover, Oh
that I were made Judge in the Land, etc. as aforesaid. And it was so that when
any man came nigh him to do him obeisance, he put forth his hand, and took him,
and kissed him: And on this manner did Absalom to all Israel that came to the
King for judgment; so Absalom stole the hearts of the men of Israel; and he
made David to flee out of Jerusalem (the Son of his bowels) and followed after
him with his Army of Israel; and David's chief Counselor, Achitophel (whose
word was as the Oracle of God) So was the Counsel of Achitophel, which he
counseled in those days, as if a man had enquired at the Oracle of God, (read
this, Friends, and see what is near you to hurt you, even in your bosoms, your
familiar friend. It was thou, a man (said David in his deep distress, when he
and Absalom put him to it) mine equal, my guide, and my acquaintance, we took
sweet Counsel together, and walked to the House of God in company; Had it been
an enemy that had done me this harm, I could have born it; but it was not an
enemy that reproached me; neither was it he that hated me, that did magnify
himself against me; but it is thou, as aforesaid: Let death (said he) seize
upon them (see the zeal) and let them go down quick into Hell; for wickedness
is on their dwellings, and amongst them) I say, as if a man had enquired at the
Oracle of God, so was all the Counsel of Ahithophel, both with David, and with
Absalom: and he put David to sore distress till he was taken up in the Battle
between the heaven and the earth, by the head, under the thick boughs of a
great Oak, which his mule carried him under, and went away, and Joab had
thrust three Darts through his heart, whilst he was yet alive in the midst of
the Oak; then David mourned for Absalom, when he heard he was dead that sought
his life, and thus put him to it for the Kingdom; and he wept, and said, O my
Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom, would God I had died for thee, O Absalom
my Son, my Son: And it was told Joab, Behold the King weepeth, and mourns for
Absalom: And the victory that day, was turned into mourning unto all the
people; for the people heard say that day, how the King was grieved for his
Son; and the people got them by stealth that day into the City, as people being
ashamed, steal away when they flee in battle: But the King covered his face,
and the King cried with a loud voice; O my Son Absalom, O Absalom, my Son, my
Son. And Joab came into the house to the King, and said, Thou have shamed this
day the faces of all thy Servants, which this day have saved thy life, and the
lives of thy Sons, and of thy Daughters, and the lives of thy Wives, and the
lives of thy Concubines, in that thou love thine enemies, and hate thy
friends; for thou have declared this day, that thou regardest neither Princes,
nor Servants; for this day I perceive, if Absalom had lived, and all we had
died this day, then it had pleased thee well. Now, therefore arise, go forth
and speak comfortable to thy Servants; for, I swear by the Lord, if thou go not
forth, there will not tarry one with thee this night, and that will be worse
unto thee, than all the evil that befell thee from thy youth until now: Then the
King arose, and sat in the gate, and they told unto all the people, saying,
Behold the King does sit in the Gate, and all the people came before the King,
for Israel had fled every man to his Tent. And this was the state of Abraham,
and David; and these things were Allegories, and written for our Examples (as
aforesaid) that by these things another thing may be read which it typifies
forth, and signifies.

But these things were not wrought at once, or presently, but after a long
space of time, when Abraham was grown old, and stricken in years, and had
waited long for the Promise, and Sarai was past childbearing, according to the
manner of women; then the enemy prevailed, and a Son was brought forth by the
Bondwoman, something like, of which, according to the flesh, Abraham was the
Father, and whom Sarah gave to Abraham, but Hagar was its Mother, who was ^he
bondwoman: And this Son of the bondwoman, persecuted the Son of the freewoman
(Isaac the heir of the promise) but it was some time first. It was thirteen
years after Ishmael that Isaac was born; and when Isaac was somewhat grown up,
and weaned, then Ishmael persecuted Isaac, he mocked him, and Sarah saw it. The
time was come that the Son of the freewoman was to inherit, and the Son of the
bondwoman to be cast out; and this time being come, the Son of the bondwoman
rose against the Son of the freewoman, he manifested himself, and Sarah saw
it, and she could not bear it, but spoke to Abraham: and the Lord said unto
Abraham, Let it not be grievous in thy sight, because of the Lad, and because
of the Bondwoman; in all that Sarah has said unto thee, hearken unto her
voice; for, in Isaac shall thy Seed be called; for the Child grew, and was
weaned, and Abraham made a great Feast the same day that Isaac was weaned. And
Sarah saw the Son of Hagar the Egptyian, which she had bore unto Abraham,
mocking, wherefore she said unto Abraham, Cast out this Bondwoman and her Son;
for the Son of this bondwoman shall not be heir with my Son, even with Isaac;
and the thing was very grievous in Abraham's sight because of his son. And what
says the Scripture (says Paul) Cast out the bondwoman and her son; for the
son of the bondwoman (how tender so ever Abraham be of him) shall not be heir
with the son of the freewoman. And it was a great while ere Absalom was grown
up, and had so wrought as aforesaid, and sought the Kingdom. And the Prince of
this world is the same in this day, as then, and by little and little he seeks
to deceive; and by little and little to get in, and he chooses him times and
seasons, and he nourishes his brood, and deceives the understanding, through
the carelessness of Friends, and their not watching to that which would discover
him, with that which he has begotten, and raises an opinion in such, or a
thought of being that which they are not, and against that which is; and by
Pride and Envy, carelessness and negligence, following the World and Pleasures,
vailes them, and brings a cloud over their eye, and darkens that by which they
should see; and then with these things, he quickens that of his own begetting,
which rises in such as the true seed, and it says, It is the true seed, (which
all this while lies under, and suffers) and rises in such against the true
Seed, which suffers for the seed in them and others, and cannot endure it, nor
to hear it speak in such (as suffer for the seed in them) if it can help it;
and if the Pride and Envy in such can but have a little color, under which to
shelter themselves against those that they would have but equal to, or under
themselves, who yet are above them in the Seed of God; for the enemy must have
something to keep them up in the thoughts of themselves, that they are
something, when it is not so, as they think, otherwise (he knows) they might be
jealous of their state, and come to see how they are deceived: and as for them
that are above them (as such judge) there he works, by bowing them under, above
what should be done, and by making them Idols, that so such as they make Idols
may uphold them; and if the Lord at any time refresh them for his Seed sake,
giving refreshing unto it, out of his tender Mercy, which they cannot but feel,
then this catches it; and what may be seen, or spoken to, as to the seed in
them, and raises them up the higher in an opinion of themselves, and of their
good state, when it is otherwise, and also the more against them who suffer for
the Seed. And so he leads them along (if the Lord show not mercy) till their
hour come, and the Enemy sees his time, and by a spirit that comes forth (and
he is suffered so to do) suitable to that which he has so begotten in them, by
the Son of Perdition, who comes after his working; and at the last cast,
working for his father, and his father in him, even Satan the old Deceiver, he
enters, and then he carries such away as with a flood, and they see not whither
they are going, till a Dart strike through their liver, and deep Judgment
over-take them, either to their eternal destruction, or, (which is more rare)
to the seeing of their State, for their Salvation, if the Lord show mercy.

Therefore Friends, it concerns ye to mind every one, what ye have within you,
and to sink down to that which shows, that tries your reins, and searches your
heart, that ye may know how it is with you; For this I declare unto you from
the Lord (as I said in the beginning) That the hour is come, and thus it is,
and you must be tried, that your Work may ^^^^ar of what sort it is; and this
will try you (...) blessed is he that watches, and keeps (...) Garments,
lest he walk naked, and they see his shame; For, behold I come as a Thief,
says Christ. And this is the Warning of the Lord to ye all, through,

Your Friend and Brother in the Covenant of Life, which makes no Covenant with
Death, but disanuls it, GEO. BISHOPE.

THE END.

