LICENCED,

October. 1. 1617. Rich. Pocock.

CLITIE, A NOVEL.

Written by Rich. Blackbourn, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Bentley and S. Magnes in Russel street in
Covent Garden. 1688.

To the HONORABLE Sir Edward Sebright, Bar.
SIR
THE Author's untimely death preventing his Desire of addressing this Piece to
your Patronage, I thought my self obliged (the Copy being left in my hands) at
once to make good his Intentions, and gratify my own Inclination. It being
therefore a Posthumous Work (though the first Fruits of his Fancy) your
favorable Protection will be the more generous. His Ingenuity might have made
some proportionable Offer at your Character; and indeed where so many
Accomplishments of Mind and Person are happily united, the most modest Account
that could be given, would have made no small Panegyric without any Assistance
of Artifice or Rhetorical Colors. I dare not undertake to draw you to the
Life, nor can pretend to touch those many shining Graces wherewith Art and
Nature have made you admirable. Besides, Sir, your own Modesty (that
inseparable Companion of ingenious Tempers) might think that too much, which
all that know you will find too little, and short of the fair Original. The
Charms of Behavior, Civility and Courtesy, (especially when they are the
Result of a good Nature) in a Person of Quality, are no small Inducements to
attract the Love and Esteem of Mankind. But if, besides the Accomplishments of
a Gentleman, the strongest Dispositions to Virtue and Knowledge, with an early
and eminent Progress therein, be enough to create an Expectation in the World,
your best Friends and nearest Relations have only this to wish on your behalf,
that your ripe Manhood may make good the Promises of your Youth, and render you
(as undoubtedly they will) an Ornament to the Nation. But, Sir, my present
Design being not to present you with an Encomium, but only to beg your Favor
to an Orphan-Piece of Ingenuity, if it have the good Fortune to divert your
leisure Hours (as it was the Author's Ambition) it will be no small
Satisfaction to,

Sir, Your devoted Humble Servant, N. TATE.

CLITIE, A NOVEL. PART I.
CLITIE is of an Extraction illustrious enough to make her esteemed one of the
greatest Ladies of the Kingdom; but her Merits and her Beauty yet render her a
thousand times more worthy the Respects and Adorations of all that ever knew
her. If Heaven has given her a Desert above others, and a Beauty more adorable
than ever was, it has not given her a heart less tender, or less passionate;
her Soul has naturally all the softness that Love is capable to inspire; and
none was ever made a fitter Object for the Seat of that soft Deity, than her
self.

She was but thirteen years of age when the whole Court looked on her with
admiration, and all the greatest Persons of the Realm made her Pleasure their
care and study.

Her Father (had many great Employments near the Person of the King) who loved
her extremely, nor did a day pass wherein many did not importune him to gain a
consent to marry her; but amongst the multitudes of those whom her Charms and
Beauty had rendered her Captives Darbelle and Amasis seemed to be the greatest
Trophies of her conquering Heart.

Darbelle was a man of great quality and although he was very young, and of a
Beauty not common to men, he was not less courageous, and extremely breve his
Father had spent much money in the Wars, and lived up to the height of those
Employments that were given him, which left him not that Wealth that the
deserved; however, he had a noble Command and no small Estate.

Amasis was not inferior to Darbelle in Birth, but was so rich and magnificent
that if Darbelle had some advantage on him by his Beauty and Behavior, he had
the advantage of Darbelle by his Retinue and Equipage, which were the most
agreeable, and most gallant of all the Court; it cannot be denied but he had a
natural Vanity, and never man was more puffed up with an opinion of his own
advantages, ^han himself.

Celse (who was Clitie's Father) had greater inclination for Amasis, than all
the other Suitors of his Daughter, and earnestly desired a Marriage between
them. But Clitie (young as she was) had a Wit and Judgment so discerning, that
she ^ou'd not avoid having far more indifference for him than for Darbelle.

But Amasis who was of a violent Temper, and whose Transports often carried him
even to Brutallity, after having rendered all the endeavors he was capable of
^o overcome the Rigours of Clitie, saw there was no hope for him, and that he
had no longer any pretensions of marry^ng her, (her Father having declared he
would, never force his Daughter's Inclinations, but leave her the free choice
of an Husband wholly in her own disposal) believed he could not better
disintangle himself from the Chains of this inhumane, but by applying himself
to some other Lady of the Court.

He had hardly thought of this design when the Eyes of the fair Julia helped
him to completing of it; he found her pliable enough to listen to him, and so
much the rather, because this Lady (who had no small esteem of her own Charms
and Beauty) had a mortal Jealousy against Clitie, who young as she was, had
already robbed her of a thousand Adorers.

Julia no sooner beheld the passionate Flame she had kindled in the Heart of
Amasis, but she was overjoyed, it being a matter of Importance, and of Glory to
gain so eminent a Victory over Clitie which was no small Argument of the good
Entertainment he received from her.

Amasis (on the other side) who had no intentions but to beguile his time with
Julia, and dissipate some of those Troubles the Cruelty of Clitie had given him
became really in love with her; and, as it is usual with Lovers to side with
their Mistresses in their Opinions, he failed not in a little time to share
with her the ill will she had for Clitie. In the beginning the matter was
dressed in a thousand little Raileries, which Amasis and Julia made on her,
which at first she laughed at; but at length the Insolence of Amasis ((...) to
please his new Mistress) came to be published in all places, that he had
received Favors of Clitie, and that it was one of her fault that she did not
marry him. Clitie could not hear these things (...) of her, without resenting
it with a mortal Affliction.

She had not long the power to dissemble the Subject of her Grief, for Amasis
with an unpatallell'd boldness, adds daily more and more to his Detractions,
and before so many Witnesses, that every thing came to Clitie's knowledge. Yet
nevertheless ere she would resolve on any Revenge, she would have better
grounds (...) what she heard, than public Rumor.

Darhelle, who was seldom absent from her, had no small share in her Troubles;
and she had also for him a great esteem, and some tenderness: He daily
entreated her to discover to him the cause of her Inquietudes in so obliging a
manner, that after having defended her self for two or three days from his
Importunacy, she could no longer resist making him her Confident. 'I can
receive no content (says she one day to him with Tears in her Eyes, which her
Grief drew from her) since I am so unhappy to be beloved of one the most
disingenious of all men, that is to say, Amasis; who I hear every day publishes
a thousand reproaches against my Honor.

Darbelle blushed at this Discourse, through Anger and Vexation, and made known
to Clitie how desirous he was to revenge the Injuries that Amasis had done her;
but she would by no means give way to it, but only entreated him, as a man that
espoused her Interest, that he would search out the Truth, whereby she might
take her measures for her Justification.

Darbelle promised what she required, and in pursuance thereof, the next day
sought for a fit occasion to discourse with him, and by good fortune found one
the most favorable that could be; for meeting him about four of the Clock in
the Afternoon walking in the Garden of Artulieries, he desired his Company to
the Orange-Garden, with a pretension to buy some of the Fruit. They both went
into Darbelle's Coach together, and arriving thither, they alighted and walked
some time on foot viewing the Oranges.

After some Discourse, Darbelle says to him, Amasis, you are the most happy man
that ere I knew, who have gained the Affection of so beautiful a Lady; but I am
ignorant how you should so soon become weary of her Favors; for my part (added
he) I have sighed for her a long time, and never was so happy as to obtain the
least favorable Consent from her in my Amors. Amasis at this Discourse, with
his usual Imprudence, answered him surlily; I do not think the happiness so
great as you imagine it, and should be much troubled to continue any longer in
her Fetters; Is it not enough (pursues he maliciously) that I have had Proof of
her weakness, but I must needs marry her? And think you, it is not much better
to cast off her Chains than continue in them as you do, who are but a Fool the
while?

Is it true ( answered Darbelle coldly) that you have received such Treatment?
It is most true ( replied Amasis) that she hates me not, and that she has
omitted no Endeavors to oblige me to marry her, but by good fortune I have
escaped it.

I could not believe ( replies Darbelle) that you were so base a Person as I
find you are; I have been told as much by many, but I thought it only your
Enemies that had done you an Injustice, and not what you merited; tho now I am
confirmed that there is no vile Action of which you are not capable, since you
have the Confidence to asperse one of such Quality and Virtue as Clitie.

Amasis was much surpised at this Discourse, and he would never have talked to
him after such a manner, but to raise in him a contempt of her, that so he
might have quitted her. Nevertheless he being resolute, and what he had told
Darbelle could not be recalled, he believed himself obliged to make him some
Answer, (assuming therefore the Discourse, he told him after a rallying manner:
You do well not to believe what I have told you, for it is not much for the
Credit of so gallant a young Man as you are, to consume your self in vain
Addresses to a Beauty, who is prodigal of her Favors to other, but does not
value you.

Darbelle could no longer endure this Insolence (but suffering himself to be
carried away with those Emotions that a true Lover cannot but feel when he
hears his Mistress wronged;) draws his Sword, which Amasis no sooner saw, but
was as ready to defend himself; they being both men of great Courage, made the
Combat more formidable: Darbelle received three Wounds ere he could touch
Amasis; but seeing his Blood flow from him on all sides, and fearing to be
overcome by the Efforts of so dangerous an Enemy. The Rage and Fury (wherewith
Love did then inspire) took such strong Possession of his Heart, that rallying
up all his Forces, he gave Amasis two such Wounds which laid him breathless at
his Feet.

This Combat was in place retired from all People, and whither Darbelle had
drawn Amasis, with no other design (at first) but that they might discourse
more freely, and that he might with the greater ease make a Discovery of what
he came about: And although this Quarrel was no premeditated thing, yet their
being in such a place, with other Circumstances, and the love that all People
knew they both had for the same Person, without much difficulty made every one
believe it was a set Duel.

The business was soon made public, and every body that were concerned, took
their Friends part: That of dead Amasis (who was the Heir of a vast Estate, and
a Person of great Quality) was the strongest. The King, who was willing to be
informed of the truth of the matter, was over-perswaded that Darbelle was the
Agressor, and openly declared against him, commanded a diligent search to be
made, and that his Process should be drawn up with all the severity that could
be, as was usual against Crimes of that nature.

In the mean time the unfortunate Darbelle foreseeing the Praemunire this
business had brought him into (all wounded as he was) retired to a Friend's
House of his, called Lycidas, none knowing where he was gone, or that he had
been wounded. And after some few days had past, they made no doubt but he had
made his Escape, and left the Kingdom; and his own Friends, to make the Report
more credible, gave out, That they had received intelligence from him out of
Spain, whither he was fled to secure himself.

In the miserable estate our poor Lover found himself in: ('it was not the fear
of Death, nor the Disgrace he suffered under by his Prince, that so much
afflicted him; but the unavoidable necessity of leaving his dear Clitie, and
that he had lost by it all hopes of ever possessing her;) he was almost
distracted when he found he was forced to leave her in a Country where there
was but little probability of his ever appearing there again. Thus were his
Thoughts employed, and his poor Heart almost broke with Grief.

Clitie in the mean time came to the Knowledge of this News, amongst the rest
of the Court, by the Rumor that presently spread it self every where. None
suspected her concerned, Amasis being dead, and having no evidence, they were
all ignorant of the true Cause; she alone knew what had passed between the two
Rivals; and looking upon her self as an (innocent) Cause of all Darbelle's
misfortunes, the violence she imposed upon her self to hide the trouble she was
in for it, cast her into a fit of Sickness.

It is certain that her Heart (which till then was ignorant of what it felt) in
the same moment found it self touched with a sense of his great Merits, and
those important Obligations for which she was bound to Darbelle, add to this
the Pity which his Misfortunes raised in her, notwithstanding all the
opposition she could make, created in her something so tender, that she found
she was no longer Mistress of her own Heart, and which would have rendered
Darbelle (did he but know it) in the midst of all his Miseries, the most happy
and contented man in the whole World.

She resolved in her self no longer to hide her Sentiments for him, and to
confess to him, that she had some Tenders of Love for him; nor could either her
Virtue or Reputation make the least Objection against this Resolution; for
Darbelle was one of the principal Men at Court, and there were not many that
could equal him in Quality. He had sought her in Marriage long before he had
moved it to her Father, and withal had got his Consent; and to this add the
Service he had done, wherein he had lost all for her; so perfectly finished the
Work, that she had not the least Repugnance in determining her Choice, and
resolving to make him her Husband; nor could she do less without incurring
Censure and blame when the Truth should be known.

But notwithstanding all these favorable Opinions (for Darbelle) had seated
themselves in the Breast of Clitie, he was nothing the more happy, he was
ignorant that she had the least Interest in his Affairs; he would fain have
made her seusible of 'em, but for some time it was a thing impossible, for he
was wounded in the Hand, and had not the use of it to write to her, nor durst
he trust any person with the things he had to relate to her.

Clitie, on the other side, was almost in despair, after not having heard from
him in four whole days; then 'twas her Fancy made her apprehend he had
received some mortal Wounds of which he since was dead; and that the Troubles
and Affliction he received from this Misfortune, would not permit to seek out
any Friend to whom he might have declared the Truth of the matter.

At length Darbelle, in spite of Surgeons who had him in cure, was so
impatient to know his Destiny, that he was not to be hindered from writing a
small Note to her, which was delivered into her own Hands by the means of one
of her Women (called Mariana) who was one she reposed much Confidence in, and
one to whom she had most freely opened the Secrets of her Heart. The Letter was
thus expressed:

I Have done, my fairest Clitie, what you commanded me; it has cost my Rival
his Life, but me a thousand times more, since by his death I am debarred from
seeing you; and from that moment the fear of losing you, has almost deprived me
of my Reason, so that I am resolved no longer to live, if you take not some
pity on me; appoint me then (if you shall think good) some place and time where
I may acquaint you more clearly with what you desire to know; but above all,
abandon not the most amorous, and the most unfortunate of all men.

This Letter was no sooner delivered to Clitie, but she was amazed and
surpised by a thousand Disturbances, which till then her Heart had never felt,
she opened it, and read it with eagerness; but when she understood Darbelle
still loved her most tenderly, and that he was not far from her, all those
Disquietudes were converted to Transports of great Joy; and losing not one
minutes time, writ to him an Answer in these words following.

I Am too much the Cause (tho innocently) of your Afflictions, not to have a
sense of them; assure your self I have born my share in them ever since the
first sad moment that I understood them: and if to make you satisfaction for
all those Misfortunes I have drawn you into, be but the want of my
Acknowledgments and Gratitude, you have reason to be content. I would willingly
grant you what you desire of me, but I am afraid of your life; expose not you
self therefore imprudently, but if you are resolved to visit me, put on some
disguise, and come this night to Mariana's Chamber.

This Answer was carried back to Darbelle by the same Messenger that brought
her his Letter; it is impossible to express the Transports of Joy that this
Note raised in his Heart; he read it over and over again, giving a thousand
Kisses; and if ever any died with Impatience, he did little less in attending
the blessed hour in which he was to be at Mariana's Chamber: But the fear he
had rather of exposing his dear Clitie, than himself, staid him, and made him
retard those precious Minutes, he employed all the rest of the Day in
contriving a proper Disguise, but after a hundred Inventions, he found none so
commodious to deceive the Eyes of all those that might meet him, as by putting
on the Habit of a Woman.

He was but about sixteen or seventeen years old, and as beautiful as the
Morning; and having attired himself in the Clothes of one of Lncida's Women,
even those that helped to make the Metamorphosis, could hardly know him now.

No sooner did the Night begin to spread its sable Mantle over that part of the
Earth, but Darbelle hastened to visit Clitie, and coming into Mariana's Chamber
(who by her Lady's order waited there to receive him) but she locks the Door,
and run to give her Lady notice, who after she had taken her leave as decently
as she could of those were come to visit her, she went to Mariana's Apartment.

No sooner did Darbelle behold her, but he fell prostrate at her Feet, and
transported by the Emotions of Fear and Love, durst hardly open his mouth to
speak a word; but at length after having a while kept silent (looking on her
with timorous Eyes, but so full of tenderness and passion, that Clitie seeing
him could not refrain bedewing her fair Cheeks with Tears; Lovely Clitie (says
he to her) you here behold a Criminal against whom both Heaven and Earth have
declared themselves, every body in this place have sworn my Death; but you
alone, most charming Clitie, are the person from whom I must learn my Destiny;
yes, dearest Madam, I value not all the rest who threaten me Death; and amongst
all those Tempests and Dangers to which I am exposed, I fear none but your
Hatred or your Anger; but (goes he on with Tears in his eyes) alas, my charming
Clitie! what will become of wretched me, if you forsake me!

In speaking these words, a thousand Sighs stopped the passage of his Speech,
which made him incapable of saying any more. And Clitie, during this Discourse,
felt such a tender pity at the bottom of her Heart, that she could no longer
suffer this unfortunate Lover (to whom she was so much obliged) to continue in
that deplorable Condition, told him (in so soft an Air, which was able to
eleviate the most cruel Pains, and comfort even the most desperate) You do me
wrong, Darbelle, to imagine I have so little Honor as to abandon my Friends
because they are miserable, especially since I my self am the cause of it; I
must confess, I am not yet thoroughly informed how yours have happened to you,
tho I cannot but believe I have contributed much to 'em against my Will; and my
Heart (innocent tho it be) is already so touched with a sense of the Guilt,
that you may easily imagine that I am impatient to know it, and have no small
desire to assist you, and render you such Services as may (if possible) make
you reparation for all those Evils I have brought upon you.

In finishing these words she obligingly pressed his Hand; and after Darbelle
had returned her Thanks (with an Air and Words the most amorous that ever were)
he told her the Conference he had with Amasis, his insolent Behavior, and the
Combat which put an end to all; he made her sensible he was not yet cured of
his Wounds, he told her both the name of the place, and his Friend to whom he
had retired, and gave her an exact account of all that happened since his parting
from her; but in the Relation which he made of all his unfortunate Adventures,
he inserted such tender Marks of a true Love, and delivered all his words (with
I know not what of languishing) so feelingly, that it would have moved the
Hearts even of the most insensible.

But Clitie, who was naturally of the most tender Disposition in the World,
being then in the prime of Innocence, sucked in the insinuating Poison of his
words; for some space after he had finished his Relation, she beheld Darbelle
with dying Eyes, and in those languishing looks discovered but too much the
Sentiment of her Heart; but no sooner did she perceive the small Command she
had of her self, but a certain blushing covered all her Face, and dyed it of a
Crimson Color, which rendered her so charming, that Darbelle was ready to
expire at her Feet.

Ah! most adorable Clitie, (cries he out) how shall I relate to you what I
feel, when in the extremity of my Misfortunes, you raise me to the highest step
of happiness? O, how much am I beholden to my Enemies, and to those Accidents
which seem to cross my life, who banish me from Court; and from the
Conversation of Mankind, that I may have no Disturbance in the Thoughts of you,
and who have been the means of procuring me all those Transports of Love
wherewith I am inspired. Once more, most charming Clitie, give me leave to
consecrate my life to you, and to present you with a Heart, which tho no ways
worthy of you, yet the most tender, and most passionate of all Hearts.

Clitie was about to answer when Mariana running to her, interrupted her, and
told her that her Father was just come from the Louver, and asked to speak with
her: the Grief and Trouble that this News put her in, was yet more obliging to
Darbelle than all that she had said to him; she gave him an absolute Command
that he should think of nothing but his Safety, and his Departure from the
Court.

But because in this first Interview they had resolved of nothing of what might
happen, he entreated leave to wait on her the next day about the same time, to
which she consented.

So they parted; Darbelle went to the outward Gate, accompanied by Mariana,
without being known, or suspected by any, although not a Servant in the House but
would have known at another time. Clitie went to her Father, who she found sad
and out of humor, (and being desirous to be informed) asked him the reason why
he seemed so Melancholy? My Child (says he) I am just now returned from
receiving the King's Orders, which much trouble me: It is strongly reported,
that Darbelle is yet in some place hereabouts, and that not taking notice of
the Decree against him, he has not fled from the Court.

The King thinks it a point of Injustice to let him escape unpunished, and
looks upon the Combat as a Crime of State; and (to be short) if he can be
taken, is possitively resolved he shall suffer Death; he has commanded me to
secure his Person, a hundred Men of the Guards will be with me within an hour;
and we have order to force open the House of Lycidas, in which it is supposed
he is concealed. Judge then, my Child (continues he) if I have any cause of
Joy, since I must be the Instrument of bringing so virtuous a Man as Darbelle
is to his end; one who is so dear tome, and one for whom I have a greater
respect than all the Court besides; however, his Majesty's Orders must be
obeyed, and it is not in my power to avoid it.



Clitie, who was not a little surpised at this Discourse, wanted not Prudence
enough to conceal it; but making an Effort upon her self, told her Father, that
indeed he had reason enough for his grief, yet nevertheless he ought to obey
his Majesty's Commands; but withal, she told him, she could no ways comprehend
that a Person so criminal as Darbelle was, should not ere this have made his
Escape out of the Kingdom. Their Conversation lasted a little while, after
which they parted; and Clitie, that she might have the greater liberty to be
alone, feigned that she had the Headache.

Lycidas she knew was the Man, at whose House Darbelle had concealed himself
ever since the Combat, insomuch that this pressing Accident, which so much
threatened him, and the Danger and Difficulty which appeared to Clitie in saving
him, did so extremely surprise her, and made so deep an Impression of his
Affairs in her Heart, that without any farther Consultation, she writ him this
Billet.

FLy unhappy Man, fly from your Retreat, the King and your Enemies have
knowledge of it, and in a very short time you will be apprehended; the few
moments on which your life depends, are too too precious to me to lose in
saying any more: Use all diligence then to save your self, if you would ever
have me think you love me.

Darbelle received this Billet from Mariana's hands, whom her Lady had sent
with it, he was much surpised at it. But the Interest which Clitie took in the
safety of his Person, was an incitement too powerful for him to slip the least
moment, and by good fortune he had not yet shifted himself out of his Woman's
Clothes, not dreaming the least of what might fall out; he was till now
ruminating on nothing but the various turns his Fortune had shown him.

Let us fly (dear Mariana) says he, let us fly, since Clitie has so commanded,
and the larger Interest she has in my Heart, the more will I make it my
Endeavor to preserve it for her. In finishing these words, they both went out
together; but hardly had they gone a (...) from the House, but they saw
Clitie's Father at the head of a hundred (...) men, who had already seized and
Guarded all the Avenues.

Both Mariana and Darbelle knew him a (...) ways off, which made them pull both
their Hoods over their Faces, and to (...) a little out of the way, the better
to avoid the Danger.

They passed them without any obstructions, but neither Darbelle nor Mariana
knowing that Clitie's Father had orders to apprehend him, were much surpised
to find him in this Equipage, they consulted a while about what they should do,
and to resolve to what place he should retire till the hour appointed to visit
Clitie.

In short, having well considered on the matter, Darbelle, not daring to trust
any, considered that it would be very difficult to go to any place in his
Woman's Habit without Discovery, took up a Resolution to go directly to
Clitie's, and shut himself up in Mariana's Chamber.

He accomplished his desire most happily for they both got in without being
perceived by any; and Mariana immediately went to Clitie to give her an account
of all that had passed.

Clitie was extremely pleased at the News; for Clitie's Father with the Guard,
departed to apprehend Darbelle almost at the same time that Mariana was sent to
give him notice of it. In the midst of these Troubles, fearing what might
happen to him, she endured strange Tortures; but no sooner did she understand
that Darbelle was safe arrived, but she went to him to testify the Joy she
received for his Escape.

Darbelle (says she, coming up to him) I have deceived both my Father and the
King to save your life; and it is no small trouble to me that it is not in my
power to do yet more, whereby I might testify to you what interest I take in
all that concerns you. My fairest Clitie ( answered Darbelle) you have had only
care of preserving a man who is wholly yours, but one who shall be employed on
no other account but your Service, and to adore you even to his Grave.

Falling on his Knees, and going to continue his Discourse, Clitie prevented
him (saying to him) Darbelle, our time is precious, and you have had a
wonderful escape in this present avoiding your Ruin; it is a great Argument
Heaven it self has no small interest in you, since it makes you so much its
care, and works such Miracles in your behalf: abuse not therefore its goodness,
but lay hold on the means it proffers you, and lose no time in making your
escape out of Paris, where your Enemies are so well informed of all that you do.

You cannot but be sensible, that you have been betrayed, since the King had
information that you were retired to Lycida's House; by very good fortune he
gave his Orders for apprehending you to my Father; and (not to hold you longer)
it was from him I knew the Secret, by which means I gave you timely notice. Tho
now you may imagine you are safe enough, who knows what may happen? How are you
sure that none has dogged you hither? Consider therefore how miserable shall we
both be, should you be taken in my Father's House! My Honor and your life must
be the Victims which our Enemies will sacrifice with all pleasure imaginable;
therefore both for my sake and your own, I entreat you would not think of
staying any longer here, not only at Court, but in the Kingdom; and many times
the Circumstances you lie under, become more calm and tranquil as they grow
old; and it is not impossible but after some time, a means may be found out in
your absence to pacify the King's Anger, and to change the Face of Affairs by
making the King understand the Truth of the matter, and that your Quarrel was
not a set Duel, but a Rancounter; your Friends are many and powerful, and I am
sure will not forsake you; and for my own part, I will use all the interest I
can, that I may see you once again at Court, and reestablished in the King's
Favor.



Darbelle having hearkened to this Discourse of Clitie's, without interrupting
her, being so overwhelmed in Sorrow, that he was incapable of saying one word;
and instead of returning her an Answer, stood almost drowned in Tears.

Clitie added a thousand other obliging things to comfort him; at length
Darbelle recollecting himself, uttered these word^^ but with so languishing a
tone as he we^^ just departing this Life: O my m^ lovely Clitie! does your
Heart account with you in what you say on my account Clitie, who already had
resolved to discover to him the tender Sentiments she had for him, and to give
him all the assurances of Love, that might become a Person of her Quality,
Honor, and Virtue: But one who still was under her Father's disposal, paused a
little ere she discovered her self.

In short, this was a lucky hour for Darbelle; for Clitie thought it would be
very difficult to persuade him to leave her, without giving him some hopes of
seeing her again, and being happy at his return; and she feared, that without
some (...) hopes, he might yet be guilty of some extravagant thing, in
endeavoring to obtain her Love, that might perhaps (...) him his Life: Having
considered these things, add to these the Passion she felt (...) Heart, which
now she was no longer Mistress of, she returned him this Answer; O, Darbelle!
how cruel are you thus not to understand me, and apprehend I love? Alas,
Darbelle! having given you such evident Proofs already, methinks you might have
been kind to me, and spared my Blushes in telling you I love you; and perhaps
(says she, with a deep sigh) more than you love me?

She blushed in uttering these words and turned aside her Eyes from looking on
Darbelle, who was so extasied with what he heard, and transported with the
excess of Love and Joy, he was not capable of returning her thanks;
nevertheless he threw himself at her Feet, embracing her Knees, and kissing a
thousand times over her fair Hands, at last he burst out; O you great Gods! are
you not envious of the happiness I have? Yes, my adorable Clitie, (goes he on)
your (...) is dearer to me than the Empire of the World: But, oh! not all the
Words (...) Eloquence, or Wit, can e're express my Love; and nothing but your
All-charming Beauty can come in Competition with it: And had I but the least
thought that any thing could change my Heart here I swear to you (my divine
Saint that I would this moment pierce the persidious thing a thousand times
before your Eyes.

He made a Million of Protestations (...) an everlasting Love; and Clitie gave
him an assurance that she would never marry any one but him, and that she would
not only refuse all such who should make their amor to her, but withstand the
very Will and Command of her Father should he ever attempt to bestow her on
(...) other.

Many passionate Expressions passed on (...) sides for Confirmation of their
Loves (...) Protestations; after which Clitie commanded him, but with the
greatest regret imaginable, to depart the next day: they (...) of 'em seemed to
disolve in Tears, (...) the unseasonableness of the time, and (...) return of
Clitie's Father constrained a (...).

Clitie promised she would not fail to (...) him again as soon as she could get
(...) from her Father; in the mean time (...) desired him to resolve whither he
(...) go, that so they might take (...) of informing each other how matters
(...), and that she would find some way (...) other for their easy and secret
Correspondence by Letters.

Darbelle sighing, returned her this Answer; I am too much your Slave not to
obey you in every thing, although I run the hazard of my life in the Performance;
And here I implore Heaven's Aid to give one power to bear my Sufferings. At
(...) words both parted, Clitie to visit her Father, who she found in a more
pleasant Humor than what she left him

My dearest Child (says he, looking on her) the poor Darbelle by good fortune
(...) evited Death, I have not found him (...) Lyeidas's House; the King can
blame none but those who have given him (...) Advice; I am so well satisfied
that (...) met not with him, that I cannot put (...) a Disguise to the
contrary, and seem troubled, especially since I am so well assured of my due
performing all (...) Commands I received from his Majesty's for searching that
House where they supposed he had concealed himself.

Clitie put on such an indifference during her Father's Relation, that the most
nice Observer could have suspected her to have been a Party concerned in the
Business Soon after her Father took Coach, to get and acquaint the King of his
Proceedings and Clitie flew to visit her Darbelle, carrying with her a small
Casket of Pearls and Diamonds for him.

Darbelle (says she) our Affairs are now in an exceeding good Posture, and
seeing you are resolved to follow my advice, I hope the Heavens will be pleased
some time or other to complete our Happiness, lose no moment, but quickly save
your self; here I present you with all my richest Jewels, which are of value
enough to assist you in whatsoever you shall stand in need of, and I make it my
request you would not refuse them; for (...) know it is very inconvenient for
you to seek for others of your own, and so great a Journey cannot but be
expensive.

Darbelle was amazed at her Bounty, and after having returned her a thousand
(...) very obligingly; Clitie (says he) there is no need of any thing more than
your Commands to make me leave this place, and to obey you; and nothing but the
Assurance of your Love and Fidelity which can support my Life when I am absent
from your fair Eyes; I love you (continues he) with too ardent a Passion to
give you any longer these Apprehensions of fear, which (for your sake) make not
so deep impressions on your Heart, as they do on mine.

And since you are pleased so to order me, I will be gone by break of day; as
for my Life it will be in no danger, the way that I intend to take; for I have
a Gentleman that has been brought up from his Childhood with me, and one that
has tied himself so to me, that he is resolved to share in all my Fortunes; he
is endued with an infinite Wit and discreet Conduct, by whose means I shall be
able to put on what Disguise I (...) till I shall arrive at some place where I
shall have no longer cause to fear.

It is some time since (says he) that I commanded him to be in a readiness to
execute what orders I should give him, and to be always prepared to follow me;
I will give him Instructions to attend me at St. Anthony's Gate to marrow by
the break of day; nor will I take any other with me, till I shall come to the
next great City through which I am to pass, where I will furnish my self with
other Servants to wait on me, who neither knowing my true Name, Quality, nor my
Business, are not liable to betray me, as apparently I have been already by
some of my People, though I know not whom to accuse.

As for Money, (most generous Clitie, says he) I have sufficient to serve me in
my Journey, I shall not put my self to unnecessary Expenses; the Passion that
possesses my Heart, will inspire me with nothing but your Idea, and force me to
seek out a Solitude where I may live free from all the noise of Pleasure, or
Disturbance of Delight.

I intend for Italy, where I will never rest (...) any place, but such, whose
Shades (...) melancholy Silence shall be agreeable to my Humor, and to whom
alone I (...) make my Moans, and lament your (...) Absence, sacrifice all to
the Griefs and Sorrows I suffer for you. After this manner, my heavenly
Mistress (says he) will I employ my Hour, and spend my Days while I am banished
from your (...); in the interim I will solicit all my Friends and Relations
by my Letters, to acquaint his Majesty of my Innocence, and give him a true
Account of all my Proceedings, and (if possible) oblige him once more to give
me free liberty of serving him, and the inestimable Happiness of seeing you
again: O Heavens! (added he, with Tears in his Eyes) behold, my incomparable
Clitie, what Resolutions I have taken to obey you; yet I doubt whatever
Endeavors I shall make, it will not be in my power to live after I have parted
with you.



Clitie hearkened to all his Discourse, and dissolving in Tears, conjured him
again to accept of her Jewels, but he still refused them, and only took an
enameled Picture of hers, which was in a Box made of an entire Emerauld, and
set about with Diamonds of an inestimable Price.

They agreed together to give a reciprocal Account of all the very least Action
(...) their lives; and that when Clitie writ to him, she should direct her
Letters as he would appoint her in his; and that he would direct his to
Mariana, who would deliver them to Clitie: he had sent a (...) to his Gentleman
(whose Name was La Rock) to have Horses in readiness in such a place as he had
appointed him, and had received an Answer, that he would not (...) to be there;
those who brought it, (...) knowing the Design, had orders to attend him at the
Corner of a Street before the dawning of the day.

All things being thus ordered, Clitie and Darbelle passed the rest of the
Night in discoursing about what they had to do, both as to their Commerce by
Letters, as well as the means to accommodate their Affairs, they made again a
thousand Protestations of Love to each other, that it should last till Death,
Sighs and Tears were their faithful Witnesses, and in them never did two Lovers
give better Testimonies; nor did Darbelle fail in the least point of Respect to
her.

It is true, that at that moment wherein they were to part, having for some
time looked upon each other without speaking the least Syllable, but with Eyes
(...) most eloquent in Love, and Tears and Sighs a thousand times more eloquent
(...) Words; Clitie pressing the Hand of (...) disconsolate Darbelle, and
rising to take her leave, all full of Grief and Sorrow, and not able to
disguise her Troubles; Darbelle detaining her for a long time, did nothing but
kiss her fair hand, which at length (as it were with a kind of Violence) he let
go, pronouncing and repeating twice or thrice these words, You leave me, my
adorable Clitie, and it is time that I should die.

Clitie flung out of the Chamber (her Handkerchief before her weeping Eyes) and
Mariana waited on her to her own Apartment, where Clitie threw her self upon
her Bed, pouring out a Torrent of Tears, and wanted little of pouring out her
life at the same time. Mariana returned immediately to Darbelle, who was no
less afflicted, and told him that it was Clitie's Orders that he should
forthwith be gone, and that he ought to do it, not only for the Preservation of
his own life, but the Honor and Reputation of her Mistress.

At last, being over-perswaded by what Mariana had said to him, and fearing to
disobey Clitie, he put off his Woman's Apparel, and dressed himself in a riding
Habit, which had been privately brought to him by the unknown Porters at the
Corner of the Street; being dressed he went to La Rock who waited for him with
his Horses; but his Grief had so changed him, that it is certain he could hardly
know him.

The Day began to appear ere the poor afflicted Lover, accompanied only with La
Rock, and guided by his Passion, took Horse to avoid the Displeasure of the
King, and prevent the Fury and Anger of his Enemies, who had used all their
Endeavors to take away his Life. He discoursed some time with La Rock, telling
him how much he confided in him, and acquainting him, that he was the only
Person that he made choice of amongst all his Servants, to partake of his good
or bad Fortune; he told him in few words the Resolution he had taken to quit
both the Court and Kingdom, to give time to his Friends to accommodate his
Affairs; that he would after a day or two take post to get to Marseilles as
soon as he could possible, from thence to pass into Florence, where he would
retire himself during his Exile. In short, he changed his Name, and took other
Servants, from whom he (...) his Adventures, and they only looked on him as a
Gentleman of Quality that was traveling.

In the mean time the beautiful Clitie (ever since the Departure of her Lover)
had so cruelly given her Heart up to all the Emotions of a tender and innocent
Passion, that she was obliged to fain her self sick to avoid the Profers that
all made her of diverting her self, and to hinder her answering all those who
were daily importuning her to know the cause of her Grief.

Mariana only knew the secrets of her Heart, and left no means unattempted to
comfort her; but alas! how do poor (...) deceive themselves, when they imagine
the sound of their Beloved's Name will ease their Sorrows? Clitie, who had no
experience in these matters, took delight in nothing but to talk of her dear
Darbelle, but in doing so, she wounded her Heart with a thousand mortal Stabbs,
which became incurable; and from that moment nothing was able to ease her of
that cruel Passion which she had suffered so strongly to possess her. The
second day of her Lover's Absence, she received a Letter from him, which made a
little calm in her Soul which stood so much in need of it: The Letter is as
follows.

IS it a Dream or a Truth (most divine Clitie) that I am absent from you? Oh,
it is certainly a Dream! for were it a Truth, I ought not to have supported the
Grief, but have died. But oh, in the mean time I cannot see you! to my Horror I
perceive (unhappy that I am) that every step I take bears me farther from your
fair Eyes. But, my most charming Dear, you have commanded me to live and love
you: Oh, how willingly would I obey you! how dear is your Idea to me! and I
ought to be content with it, if I have but raised the smallest Sense of what I
feel, in your dear Breast.

He gave her notice also in his Letter, That she might write to him at Lions,
and direct her Letter to a Person who was a Relation of La Rock's.

Clitie took no delight but in reading this Letter, and passed whole days in
discoursing Mariana about it; but when she was a little eased of the Grief
which his Absence had caused, she began to employ her Friends to act in the
behalf of the unfortunate Darbelle, to re-establish him at Court; every one was
now assured by the Letters he writ, that he was out of the Kingdom, which made
his Enemies less careful in looking after him.

In the mean time his Enemies, by underhand-dealing, were so powerful, and the
King so set against him, that he would by no means suffer any one to speak in
his behalf.

The Court of France was at this time in the greatest Splendour in the World,
and although France had Wars with almost all Europe, her Arms had gained in two
or three Battles such prodigious Conquests, that when Winter approached, it
brought an universal Truce, and Sports and Delights assumed again their place,
with a greater magnificence than ever, and the victorious Lovers would not give
place to Mars himself.

Clitie, who questionless was the most charming Beauty of all the Court, was
now in the Bloom and Spring of her Beauty, there was not a person of any Note
or Quality, who were not enamored of her; and those who dared not openly
declare their Passion, or make their Complaints to her, made it, nevertheless,
their business to please her with Masks and Balls; but those whose Births and
Estates made them her Equals, used all their Endeavors to marry her.

In all places whithersoever she went, a thousand Divertisements pursued her,
and augmented wheresoever she came, yet she took no delight in 'em, declaring
these glittering Pleasures were no ways agreeable to her: But what less can a
Lover do, when he is debarred telling his fair Mistress his Passion, but to
make Declaration of it by his Gallantry, by Treats, Balls, Masks, and
melodious Symphonies; and it is certain, how troublesome soever they appeared
to Clitie, they afforded much pleasure to those that accompanied her.

No Music so much delighted her as the sweet Choiresters of the solitary
Groves burdened Heart sought out the unfrequentedst places she could find, and
preferred the Complaints and tender Songs of sweet Philomel to all other
Harmony; yet do what she could, she was forced to accept the melodious Consorts
which Love had inspired her Adorers to present her with, and thereby sometimes
diverted the Current of her melancholy Thoughts.

Every one took notice, that this incomparable fair One, who was naturally of a
jovial Temper, now became retired and serious; and I know not what of
languishing and tender appeared in her Eyes, and accompanied all her Actions
after so agreeable a manner, that it was almost impossible to see her, and not
to love.

Thus she spent five or six Months, and none e're knew the Secrets of her
Heart, or the Resolution she had taken to espouse none but Darbelle; she was
daily importuned, and it is no easy matter to conceive the Trouble she was put
to, in defending her self from the Solicitations of that number that adored her.

There was not any, though never so perfect, in whom she found not some defect,
which she still used for excuses to her Father; she had no sooner cleared her
self of all these Lovers, but Fortune resolving still to persecute her, raised
up one whose Courtship and Love gave her much trouble.

It was the Prince Lysidor, he was indeed but a Stranger, yet allied to the
Court of France, and preferred to noblest and chiefest Employments of the
Kingdom; he was handsome to a Miracle, and by all looked upon, and the most
gallant and accomplished Person of the Court: He loved her to that excess, that
all feared it would have cost him no less than his Life; his Passion was made
public to all, and none that ever saw him, but had matter of Discourse, either
concerning his Love or his Mistress, the violence of his Passion, and his
assiduous Addresses to her, freed her from all other Pretenders; nor did he
miss a day in which he saw her not.

He made his Court to her, and had gained her Father's Consent, but by no means
could obtain the Daughter's; and all the Power of the Court and Kingdom strove
in vain to bring it about, she withstood all, and it may be truly said, that
never any was more constant and faithful than this fair One was, to what she
had promised Darbelle.

She was recompensed with the most endearing tender Letters that ever Love
indicted, which almost every day she received from him; nor did she omit to
answer them, letting him know the very least thing that passed. And if the
Absence of these two Lovers gave them unexpressible Sorrows, yet the daily
Commerce by Letters did not a little ease their Sufferings.

That which most tormented Clitie, was the extraordinary Passion that her
Beauty had inspired the Heart of Prince Lysidor withal, which raged so in him,
and became so violent, that some feared it might raise in him Thoughts of
stealing her away.

He was so extraordinary handsome, young, liberal, gallant, and magnificent in
all things, that it may be said, nothing could have raised him any Obstacle in
the Heart of Clitie, but that Darbelle had got possession of the place, and
without doubt had she been disinterested, none had sooner been preferred
amongst her whole crowd of Adorers than this Prince; but there needed no
greater Bar to his happiness, than Darbelle's Love. He could gain nothing on
her Heart more than an Esteem for him, which made her much concerned at his
Sufferings; she told him often, and conjured him to think on her no more, and
to give her Father no further Trouble about their Marriage, that it was utterly
impossible for her to alter her Destiny, and that her Father was to her instead
of the best Husband in the World.

These Repulses highly afflicted the Prince, but they wrought not their
designed Effect, and were no hindrance to him to love her more tenderly; and he
hoped in time her cruel Resolution might be changed.

His Merit, and the Gold which he was even profusely lavish of, in every thing
that might advance his Love, had gained the Heart and Friendship of Mariana, he
obliged her by many Presents, and left no means unassay'd to gain her Favor;
for he was not ignorant she was the only person in the World to whom her
Mistress entrusted her Secrets, and made her Confident; he knew they were never
asunder, whether walking abroad to take the Air, visiting, or at home; they
were often discoursing together, and Clitie and Mariana seemed never to be
weary of each others Company.

The particular kindness that Clitie had for her, was the reason which obliged
the Prince to make her of his Friends, he imagined he should search into the
Heart of her Mistress by gaining that of Mariana, he spared neither Cost nor
Presents to engage her to his Interests: Mariana was insensibly won to it, she
hearkened to his daily amorous Complaints, and promised to do him all the
Service she was able, and (if possible) to render him one day happy with Clitie.

Having gained Mariana, he doubted not the success of his Amors, and assumed
new hopes of one day overcoming Clitie's Cruelty, he acosted her with more
Courage, and better Assurance than ever.

Mariana knew that Clitie had infinite Wit and that none in the World had a
more apprehensive and piercing Judgment than she, took all possible care to
conceal the Correspondence she held with the Prince, and gave him Instructions
to that purpose, she would often before Clitie seem to be displeased at him,
that she might not be suspected of his Party.

In the mean time Clitie, who concealed nothing from Mariana, discovered to her
the Sentiments she had concerning the Prince, and often told her, That his
Misfortunes made her pity him, and that she was much troubled he should still
preserve a Love for one who could never make him any return, nor have any more
than an Esteem for him, so long as Darbelle proved constant.

Mariana was not wanting to extol the Worth of the Prince, and put her in mind
of all he had done for her; she recounted to her all his Languishings, and all
the Sighs her Absence gave him, when he came to visit her, and found her not at
home, and the Torrent of Tears that flowed from his Eyes, when he was forced to
complain of her Cruelty.

One day as Clitie seemed more than ordinary concerned for the Affliction of
Lysidor, Mariana made an Effort to batter her Constancy, saying seriously,
Madam, (...) believe you have much a-do to preserve your Heart entirely for
Darbelle, and to defend it against the daily Assaults of the love of the
Prince. Oh! if you had (...) heard the Complaints he made two days since
(thinking none had been near him) in a close Arbor in your Garden, and had you
seen (as I did) the Transports that his Passion hurried him to, I am confident
you could not but have pitied him. For my part (goes she on) who have less
reason to love him than you, especially since I have promised Darbelle never to
forsake his Interest, and daily to put you in mind of him; I swear to you, that
being witness to the Despair of this poor Prince (though he saw me not) I had not
the power to avoid shedding Tears as fast as he; for certainly (said she to
Clitie) it is impossible for him to live in the Tortures he indures for you,
and that a Heart so strongly attacked with so many Afflictions as his is,
cannot any longer resist his Fate. She spoke these things to the Advantage of
the Prince, with such Artifice and Cunning, that Clitie, whose Heart (was not
made of Adamant) was capable enough of the tender Impression of Love, and could
no longer defend it self from pitying this unfortunate, whom she had made so
miserable.

I am even in despair (answers Clitie) since this is arrived to this pitch of
Folly, that he must either marry me or die; for if I have seemed more cruel to
him than to many, whom I esteemed less, it was only to endeavor to free him of
the unhappy Passion he has for me: I am not altogether insensible, and I
acknowledge I feel a certain Compassion for him, when I behold such tender and
true Marks of his Love, as he daily gives me. But you know, Mariana (says she)
that nothing can dispossess Darbelle of my Heart, my Duty and Inclination plead
wholly for him; and it is impossible for me ever to alter; for which reasons I
am resolved to forbid the Prince ever to see me again.

Ah, Madam! (answers Mariana) do not drive him to this cruel Extremity, all the
World knows that he has endeavored unsuccessfully all means possible to cease
loving you, but since it is not to be effected, envy him not the Consolation of
dying in your sight.

As Clitie and Mariana were thus discoursing, the Prince (who had before been
informed of the Conversation that should be made) entered, he appeared (...)
dejected and sad, that (in short) Clitie was surpised and Mariana seemed to be
so much concerned at it, that she could (...) forbear pronouncing some words
that made known her Astonishment.

The Prince who seeing none present with Clitie but Mariana, told her (with
Tears in his Eyes) Alas! thou cruel (...) One, make an end at once both of my
Grief and Life, that I may no longer importune you; and since it is my
misfortune to persecute you thus to no purpose let me die to make an expiation
for all the Torment I have given you. Alas (pursues he) your Eyes (most Divine
Clitie) are a thousand times more beautiful than the Morning, but I cannot
render them either delightful or soft to me what then should I do with life? It
is much better for me to expire at your Feet, than daily to be the Object of
your Anger.

He uttered these words with a languishing sadness, which became him so well,
they would have moved compassion in the most obdurate Heart, when a Death-like
paleness covered all his Face, his Strength began to fail him, and he could no
longer keep himself from falling on the Couch whereon Clitie sat, just like a
man expiring; Mariana presently skreek'd out, O good Gods! he is gone, he is
dead; dear Madam (says she) say some obliging thing to him to recover him, if
possible.

Clitie, who is certainly the most excellent of her Sex, stood not now to
consult either the Love she bore Darbelle, or the Cruelty she had designed to
show the Prince, she regarded nothing at present, but the lamentable Condition
in which he was, and believing that unfeignedly he would die, if she gave him
not some Relief; Prince (says she) if it yet lies in your Power, have more
regard to a life so valuable as yours, and give not up your self, as you do, to
an unparalled despair; for be assured I have not the least unkindness for
you, and if I have not answered your Love in all Respects, it is because the
Heavens have other ways decreed it: I am so far from seeking your Death, that I
wish nothing more than that you may live, which by all the power you say I have
over you, charge you to obey. After these words which gave a little Comfort to
him, he began to lift himself up.

The Prince being come to himself again, would have returned her (...) for what
she had said to him, but Clitie reflecting on what her Compassion (...) made
her utter, fearing it would but augment his Passion, went out of the Room angry
with her self, leaving the Prince with Mariana, who pretended to stay while
with him, to prevent any extravagant thing his Despair might cause him do,
which might be more troublesome Clitie, tho her Design was only to discourse
with him, and to make a favorable Construction of her last obliging words, to
the Prince's Advantage.

Mariana no sooner came into Clitie's presence, but she feigned new Stories of
the Ravings, Sighings, Lamentations, and Tears of the poor afflicted Prince,
and the great pains and difficulty she had to recover him after Clitie had
parted from (...) nor did she leave any thing unsaid (...) might touch her
Heart in favor of (...) Prince.

But Clitie's Constancy and Fidelity would admit in her a love for none but
(...) Darbelle, his Merit, the many Obligations that she had had from him, and
those reciprocal Promises, and mutual Vows they had made eternally to love each
other, still possessed her Memory, and no less (...) Heart; besides she daily
received from him such pastionate and tender Letters, and full of Wit and
Judgment, that they (...) would have been potent enough to (...) defended him
against all his Rivals.

At length by little and little, the Prince's Presents, his Solicitations, and
the promises he daily made Mariana, that she (...) share with him in all his
good Fortune, quite corrupted her, and gained her wholly to his side; she now
forgets all he had promised Darbelle, and all the (...) she owed to Clitie, and
not considering the fatal Consequence this horrid Perfidy might cause,
discovered to the Prince all their Secrets, and assured the Prince, that Clitie
loved Darbelle even to death; and (...) that was the occasion of the Quarrel
between him and Amasis, and that he had (...) left her, but by her Command; and
after she had given him a thousand Assurances to love him to her Grave, and to
marry him as soon as their Affairs were in Condition to admit it; that no Day
scarcely passed wherein Clitie had (...) Letter from him; and that she as often
sent him Answers, (and to be short) the Darbelle was the only hinderance of
(...) happiness, and that she had cause to (...) confidently assured, that
nothing but the Pre-ingagement could hinder her from (...) him, and that his
Person and Addresses had nothing in 'em, but what (...) advantageous and
agreeable, did not (...) consideration of the Love she had to Darbelle
interpose.

This Relation of Mariana's (...) surpised the Prince, and sensibly afflicted
him; he was so amazed at it, that it (...) some time ere he came to himself,
and declared he had rather the Rigours and Cruelty of Clitie had sprung from a
hatred (...) his own Person, than from the love she had for Darbelle; he forgot
not to return Mariana a thousand Thanks for the Favors and good Offices she
had done (...) in discovering to him such important Secrets from which he hoped
to reap great Advantage: They swore a mutual Amity nor did they part before he
had (...) rewarded her for what she had done (...) him; he pulled off his
Finger a Diamond Ring of great Value, which he presented to her; and having
embraced her, he (...) (...) her never to forsake him, assuring (...) that
should not be his last Present: (...) desired him to come to her the next day
at an hour when she was confident Clitie would not be at home, that they (...)
farther consult what measures to (...) in order to the supplanting of Darbelle,
and by some means or other to (...) her to love the Prince.

Thus then they parted, after having (...) each other a thousand Promises of
Fidelity and Amity; Mariana failed not (...) go immediately to her Mistress;
and (...) better to disguise her Proceedings, she (...) her, That now she was
indeed worthy to be beloved; she praised the Grandeur (...) her Soul, and
admired the Constancy of her (...), who had so resolutely and rigorously (...)
the Efforts of the most powerful and sincere Lover in the World; she seemed
(...) put her in some way or other of (...) the Prince, and to prevent his
daily (...): In short, she so well played the (...), that Clitie confided more
in (...) now than ever she had done.

She received not one Letter from Darbelle, that Mariana showed not to the
since, and indeed almost all those that Clitie had writ in answer to 'em: This
perfidious Woman slipped not the least occasion of deceiving Clitie, and serving
the Prince, and it would be difficult to distinguish between the Fidelity that
Clitie had for Darbelle, and that which Mariana had for the Prince.

The day following Lysidor failed not to visit Mariana at the hour appointed,
(...) did she forget to tell him all that she (...) learned from Clitie, she
discovered to (...) all that Darbelle had writ to her, and what she had writ to
him by way of (...) and though the Entertainment was as a bitter Poison to the
Prince, yet he made her repeat the same things over and over a hundred times.

Their Conversation ended as the (...) had done, in Presents and Protestation
to be true and faithful. It is true, (...) the Prince had seriously considered
ever. Transaction, he found his Affairs (...) his Mistress were but in a
lamentable Condition, and he despaired, do what he could ever to gain her
Heart; he took a Resolution of leaving her, and no more (...) trouble these two
Lovers, in passion, which to him seemed so just, and ought to be applauded by
all virtuous People; no soon did his Reason break through and dissipate those
Clouds that did obscure his Glory but he was possessed with a mortal Aversion
for Mariana, and all her Treachery seemed odious to him; (and no doubt but the
Soul of this Prince was so great and glorious, that it was impossible to make
greater Efforts than he made to reduce his Heart from so unfortunate a love) he
intended no farther to engage her in his Business, and could not have good
thoughts of one who had so treacherously abused her Mistress: Now it was that
his Eyes being opened, he was sensible of the Deformity of Mariana's Actions,
that he had not any room in his Heart, but what was possessed with Rage and
Anger against her, he purposed forthwith to discover to Clitie what a Snake she
had harbored in her Bosom, and to tell her all that Mariana had made known to
him.

One day when Glory seemed to have the only sway of his Heart, and to have got
the Ascendancy over Love by the Endeavors he had made, he went to find out
Clitie, with a Resolution to ask her pardon for all the Troubles and Anxities
he had given her, and to inform her of all that he knew of Mariana.

Having that day found her alone, as she was gathering Jessimine-flowers in a
Terrase-walke before the Windows' of her Apartment, (he says to her with a
cheerfulness more than usual) Fair Clitie wonder not (I pray you) that I
presume this day to speak to you with more Assurance than formerly I have done
since I am persuaded the business I now come to discourse to you of, will be
more agreeable to you, than any I have yet spoke to you of since the first
minute I had the happiness to see you.

Know then, (pursues he) Madam, I am come to throw my self at your Feet, and
implore a forgiveness of all that your fair Eyes and my Passion have forced me
so often to say to you against your Approbation: In short, most beautiful
Clitie, I am resolved to leave you wholly to your own Disposal, and desire no
greater Favor than to be reckoned amongst your Friends, since I see it is
impossible for you to love me as I would have you, or for you ever to make me
happy; I am sensible of the Violence I should offer you, should I persecute you
any longer; and all that my Ambition craves, that you would suffer me to adore
and honor you above all others, and from this time I promise you no more to
entertain you with any discourse of my love.

Clitie was so surpised to hear him say this, that at first she gave no credit
to his words, but imagined it some amorous Stratagem; but at last he assured
her of the Truth, and wiping away all Suspicion, she looked upon him as a
Person infinitely obliging and virtuous.

Can it be (answered she) that what you tell me now is Truth? then have you
made me happy, and I will ever allow you the same place in my Amity that you
have already in my Esteem; for now I will no longer hide from you, that I was
driven even to despair, that I have made you endure so much Inquietude, which I
knew not how to redress; but (continued she) I never was more sensible of any
thing than the Cruelty of your Destiny, which had ordained a Person of your
Merits and Virtues, to sue to one so incapable of making you any Returns as I;
but since you only desire I should look on you as a Friend, be assured I esteem
you as my best.

The Prince returned her Thanks, (...) a thousand other obliging things, (...)
spent the rest of that Visit with an Air seemingly full of Content and
Satisfaction; he thought it not convenient yet (...) discover the Intelligence
between him and Mariana, fearing it might put her out of humor, therefore he
left that to some more proper season.

Thus he parted from her, with an intention of being only her Friend, and no
more to trouble her with his Love; but in a short time after his Passion, which
seemed to be a Sleep, rouses it self again in his Heart, and made him
apprehend that a Friendship only with Clitie, would but make him more
miserable; and being her Friend, he had now no more hopes for Love, but must
for ever live tormented with Despair: What (says he) my Heart! would you no
longer love Clitie? What then unhappy thing will thou do? Perhaps thou will
shortly see her in another Arms, whilst thou have no pretension but to
Friendship, that is to say, thou must be pleased to see her with thy Rival, and
rejoice in the soft Tenders of their Loves, which none but they must enjoy: O
God! (cried he out) how could I ever think, when this shall happen, that I can
look on without resigning up my life! No, no, Clitie, it is impossible but I
must still love you, love more than all my Rivals put together, and I will
dispute with them, your heart, to the last gasp. He walked hastily about his
Chamber in pronouncing these last words, just as Mariana entered, who was so
alarmed at her Mistress's telling her the Prince no longer loved her, that she
could not rest till she came to learn the Truth of it from himself.

The Prince, after having understood the Subject of her Visit, found he was no
longer in a Condition of being her Friend only, but on the contrary, that he
was a thousand times more enamored of her now than ever, thought it convenient
not to let her know the weakness he had been guilty of, and disguised from her
the Truth, fearing that Mariana would no more make him her Confident, and that
she would not so freely disclose the Secrets of Clitie, as formerly she had
done.

Is it possible, my dear Mariana (says he, composing himself the best he could)
that you should believe I could live one moment without loving Clitie? And do
you not apprehend all that she has told you of my yesterdays Visit to be but a
Love-mystery, whereby I flatter my self to make some advantage? Ah, Mariana!
(goes he on) be confident that my Love and Life are too inseparable to be ever
sundred, and there is nothing so dear to me I will not sacrifice to my Passion.

Mariana easily believed all he said, and was glad to hear him speak after this
manner, she flattered him in his Attempts, and assured him she would never
forsake his Interest: They had many other Discourses in which they continued
some time, concluding that before Clitie should be undeceived concerning what
she believed of the Prince, and that it was necessary to keep her in the same
opinion, the better to bring about their Designs.

He the same day composes a Song, which he had so ordered, that it should be
given to Clitie as a piece of new Gallantry, wherein none could have guessed
either of them concerned, though at the same time he did not question but when
Clitie saw it, she would find a perfect description of the last Conversation
that she had with him, and could not fail to guess both the Author and his
Intentions. The Song is as follows.

SONG.
(1)
To hold the first Rank amongst all the Friends
Of a Beauty, whom all do admire,
(...) short of attaining the Lovers chief ends,
And does but inflame his desire;
(...) Phillis decrees me no better a State,
And I must sit down content with my Fate.
(2)
(...) behold the soft Object, created my Grief
To suffer a wrack, under Friendships disguise,
(...) all this smart, without hopes of Relief,
And still to be stabbed by her cruel fair eyes.
Phillis the doom I Am sentenced to bear,
And ever to love, yet ever despair?
(3)
That Riddles are these, O you powers of love!
That Tortures should spring from a Fountain of Joy?
And all that should please me, my Torments do prove,
And the sweetest delights my Bliss do destroy.
Phillis! to live, and not to enjoy,
(...) surely the cruelest way to destroy.
(4)
But the pleasures of seeing ber, though as (...) Friend,
Docure the sad Wounds her Eyes do create,
'Twixt curing and killing my life has no end,
And to love without hope is doomed my sad Fate.
Yet it is better to serve her in Torments and Pain,
Than never to see my dear Phillis again.
This Song was given to Clitie at a Ball the next day after the Conference she
had with the Prince; she had no sooner read it, but reflecting on the last
Stanza, she became exceeding troubled; it appeared to her that all that the
Prince had said to her, was so lively represented in the Song that she could
not imagine but 'twas he that made it; and what confirmed her in this Opinion,
was, That she surpised him looking on her with great earnestness nor did he
take his. Eyes once off on her all the time she was reading it, which made her
often change Color. The Prince was not a little pleased that Clitie (...)
guessed the matter right: And she found such Appearances and Informations in
the Song; touching their last Discourse, that being of a genuine Wit, and quick
Apprehension, that she doubted no longer who was the Author; nor indeed was it
probable that a Love so great as that of the Prince's, should be so easily and
suddenly changed into Friendship, without some further Design. But Clitie
reflected no more on the matter, which now she had not the least doubt of, for
she soon understood from whom it came; she was informed that a merry Lady, out
of a frolic humor, would have picked the Prince's Watch out of his Pocket,
unknown to him, in drawing out the Watch, the Song fell to the ground, which
when she had taken up and read, she gave it to the rest of the Company ere he
perceived it.

But the business rested not here, for the Prince having taken out Clitie to
dance, desired to know of her what Paper that was she was reading but now; It
is (says she) only a little Forgery that some Man of Wit had made to oblige
some of his Friends.

What you say, (replies the Prince to her) fair Clitie, raises a curiosity in
me. They had not opportunity of saying any more, considering the place, and
what they were about, obliged them rather to dance, than to enter into a
Conference: the truth is, they danced together, because they could not now
avoid it, but any one might have perceived it was not with that exactness as it
ought, it being the least thing they thought of.

After Clitie had seated her self in her place, the Prince came to her, and
told her she had raised a Curiosity in him of what she had told him concerning
a Forgery she spoke of, that he had an earnest desire to see the Paper she had
read, if it were not a Crime to desire it of her: she told him it was not a
Secret, and that she was one of the last that had read it; and without further
hesitation, gave him the Song; (which he had taken care before to be writ in a
Hand different from his own) he read it, but seemed then to take little notice
of it: but a while after addressing himself to Clitie; Madam (says he) how much
I pity this unfortunate, and how lamentable is his Condition! I know not (says
she) what you may do, but I should not much pity him, were what he says, a
Truth, since 'twas only what himself had consented to. In the humor you are of
(answers the Prince, with sighing) I believe there is scarce any body in the
World that could oblige you to commiserate their Troubles: You take too much
pleasure (goes he on) in the Sufferings of those that adore you, to seek out
any Remedy for them, though it would cost you but a word's speaking: But pray,
Madam, wherefore should a poor Lover, who had made all the Efforts he was able,
to become only a Friend to his Mistress, and made it his whole care and study
to effect it, appear so criminal before you? It is because (replies she
briskly) that no honest man promises any thing which he does not perform; and
if it lies not in his power to do it, he ought to order the matter so, that his
Misfortunes trouble none but himself.

Clitie blushed in returning this Answer, and all the rest of the Evening she
so ordered it, that the Prince could have no particular Discourse with her. The
Ball being done, each returned to their respective homes; but Clitie and the
Prince were extremely troubled, since she no longer doubted but the Prince was
still as amorous as ever, and that he would not desist importuning her, as he
had already done. The Prince, for his part, could draw no favorable
Construction of Clitie's Discourse, and her manner of delivering it.

He could no longer defer the knowing the true Condition in which he stood with
her; the next Morning writ to her Woman Mariana, and begged her to let him know
(for he was impatient till he did) how the case stood with him and her
Mistress. She returned him in answer, That when Clitie was returned from the
Ball, she did nothing but weep and sigh, saying No Misfortune ever could
compare with hers, and that she plainly perceived the Prince was still as
passionate as ever, and that he only rallied with her, when he only desired to
become her Friend.

Mariana advised him to be firm in his Resolution, and to lose no time in his
Endeavors to mollify her; and that he should not fail to give her a Visit the
same day; and that she for her part, would with all her power be assistant to
him, in rendering him again in her Favor.

The Prince received this News with much trouble, and to increase his Misery,
he felt his love for Clitie renew after such a manner, that it was able to put
him upon doing all the extravagant things imaginable, maugre the Grandeur of
his Soul, which at any other time bounded it self in the limits of Glory: He
went the same day to wait on her, whom he found all alone much troubled and
melancholy.

I come (says he, going up toward her) Madam, to learn of you, why you gave me
that hard Treatment last Night, and wherefore I have so soon lost the happiness
of being of the best of your Friends; if it is so that I am not of that number,
I will no longer afflict my self with your cruel Indifference. You ought rather
to wonder (answers she) that I should still admit your Visits, after you have
abused all those kind Sentiments and good Opinions I had of you; but hereafter
I shall be more cautious, and less reduable to you for 'em. It will be
difficult to effect it, (replies the Prince) for a man so lost in love, as I
am, can never do too much to defend himself against the Cruelties of his
Mistress. What! (replies Clitie, interrupting him) do you so daringly tell me
you love, and not believe you offend me? Happen what will (replies the Prince)
I must confess I am a thousand times more amorous than ever; and since I have
used all means possible to dissipate my Passion yet in vain, it is most likely
I shall continue so to my latest Breath: As for what you threaten me with, I am
already so laden with Misfortunes and Miseries, that I cannot fear any new
ones; and all the power you have over me can never render me more wretched than
I am. It is true (continues he) that being quite wearied with suffering Woes
incredible, I thought to have made exchange of Love for that of Friendship; and
no sooner had I resolved it, but I told you of it; but if I have been deceived,
(cruel Clitie) is it my fault or your own? for I have not the power to see you,
but I must love you.

In finishing these words, a Flood of Tears fell from his Eyes, and Clitie (all
enraged as she was) could not avoid answering his Tears with her own, who were
as so many Witnesses that her Heart was touched with Compassion.

But what was most strange, (she having a thousand bitter things to reproach
him with, and would never have permitted him to come into her Chamber, but that
she resolved to forbid him seeing her any more) when she heard him speak in
that manner, with such a profound submission, and unparalled respect, and
with so sincere and transcending Passion, she had not the power to execute what
she intended: And (altring her tone) You would, Prince (says she to him') wear
out my life by importuning me daily, as you do, since all will be in vain; and
I must ingeniously declare to you, my Heart can never be in a capacity to
receive your Love. I hope not so (replies the Prince) yet, most adorable
Clitie, I shall never leave serving you; and for all, ask no other Reward, but
the liberty of seeing you, and paying my Adorations to your fair Eyes; which he
spoke with so profound, so true, and so ardent a Passion, that none could have
defended their Hearts, but such who had the Constancy of Clitie.

He used all his Endeavors during the rest of their Conversation, to reduce
her to Reason; at last she was persuaded that his Passion was rather an
Inchantation than any thing else, and that it was an Evil that would admit no
Cure: and she laid down to him the Bounds and Limits that a disinterested Love
ought to respect.

As unfortunate as the Prince was, he was well satisfied with this Visit; he
found a goodness in the Heart of Clitie that always afforded him some
Consolation, if it could not produce him any hopes. Mariana (on her part)
seeing matters so well accommodated, was not a little pleased she still
resolved to make the Prince continue his Suit; she was not so much concerned
whether it succeeded or no, so that he still continued to court Clitie.

Darbelle hitherto was not every way betrayed by Mariana, that is to say, his
Letters were daily delivered to Clitie, and Clitie's as duly given to him; but
seeing that whenever Clitie received News from her Lover, she became more
inexorable to the Prince, she resolved to push her falsehood home, and to
pretend hereafter she did not so often receive Letters from him, nor did she
fail daily to instill the Poison of her Malice into the Heart of Clitie, by
complaining of Darbelle's silence; by which she gave her unspeakable Disquiets,
and branded him every minute with a thousand Reproaches for his negligence:
Clitie stood not in need of any help to aggrivate the Impatience she had to
hear from him; a Love like hers furnished her with means sufficient to afflict
her self withal.

The Prince (on the other side) lived after his usual rate, showing a thousand
marks of Love and Respect to Clitie; and since he saw she would not become more
mild to him, he had some satisfaction to think that his Rival was not less
miserable. After a while Mariana kept up all the Letters that Darbelle sent to
Clitie; but as one Misery still follows the Heels of another, and that Lovers
are always more ingenious than other persons in doing ill Offices to their
Rivals, the Prince and Mariana resolve wholly to break off all Correspondence
between Clitie and Darbelle, and hereafter to conceal all their Letters.

This could not but highly please the Prince, and it was as duly performed; and
from that time Clitie received no more of Darbelle's Letters, nor he of hers;
for Mariana, to whom they were directed, received them without so much as
giving her one. This Treachery, was cruel enough of giving the Prince infinite
Satisfaction, (...) the greatest Pleasure Imaginable to see the sad Complaints
wherewith each Letter was charged; and the unfortunate Darbelle being a long
time without hearing any News from Clitie, was cast into a most lamentable
Affliction.

Darbelle knew not what Construction to make of her silence. Sometimes he would
suspect that she was changed, and false; sometimes that she was either dead, or
extremely sick; for he thought certainly were she not dead, or false, it could
not be but she would have writ to him: again, he found that the last Letters
she sent were in a style most soft and kind, giving him an exact account of her
Life, that he could not apprehend that she who made such a show of Love to him,
as Clitie did, could so soon fall from one extreme to another. All these things
rendered him unspeakably uneasy, and left him in a perplexing Incertitude. But
if Darbelle was so much troubled, Clitie, who they had so cruelly betrayed, was
not less afflicted, and of the two, was the most unhappy, since Mariana who
should have been her sole Comforter, made her much worse, that she might better
prepare the Poison she making her take, she daily pretended to have heard News
from Darbelle, which extremely tormented Clitie and although till now she had
never been the Messenger of ill News to her; yet with Tears in her Eyes, and
Venom in her Heart, she told her'twas the common Talk that he was married in
Florence to a Lady of great Qualit, with whom he had been extremely in love
ever since he arrived there, and that he was advanced to considerable
Emploiments by the Duke of Tuscany, who was extremely kind to him, and told her
withal, That he had sent orders into France for selling his Estate, and that he
never intended to return home again.

These things being assured to Clitie by a person in whom she had placed all
her confidence, together with the silence of the unfortunate Darbelle, wrought
such effects in her Heart, as are not to be conceived: and none but a Heart so
hard as Mariana's could be insensible of Pity to all her Complaints and Tears,
which was all the miserable Remedy she had recourse to, but all in vain.

One day when her Sorrows had made her almost expire in Mariana's Arms, having
told her that now she doubted no longer but he had blotted her quite from his
Memory, for another who he had (...) in her stead; and that all that had been
reported of him was Truth; she vowed never to be reconciled to her self for
loving so ungrateful a Person; she protested solemnly, she should have been
less troubled at the news of his Death, than that of his Marriage and
Inconstancy.

These last words (which Mariana marked well, and which Clitie was always
(...)) afforded her new matter, and means of promoting the Prince's Affairs,
and utterly destroying Darbelle's; she bethought her then, that to accomplish
her undertaking, she had nothing to do but to establish Clitie in the Opinion
of his Falsehood, (which she already began to credit) and after to spread abroad
a Rumor of his Death; and then when things were brought to this point, Clitie
imagining her self to be injured by him, would take from him perhaps not only
the Esteem she had for him, but her love: and then she doubted not to bring
about the Marriage of the Prince, for she knew she had no aversion to him, and
that he was the only person in all the Court who loved her with such respect
and submission, that in gratitude she ought to make him (...) return.

It is certain there was no hindrance but the Love she bore Darbelle, which
Mariana promised to remove, that it might no longer impede the Prince's
Happiness, who (on the other side) seeing the fortunate Success that this Maid,
in all Appearance might work for him, having a fair Prospect of once enjoying
Clitie, against (...) natural goodness and honesty, consented to the Cheat.

He failed not to give her many thanks for her care, nor did he ever forget to
make her large Recompenses to oblige (...) to be mindful of all occasions for
his Advantage. The poor Clitie thus betrayed and laden with Grief and Sorrows,
fell into a desperate fit of Sickness; for now she no longer doubted Darbelle's
Infidelity, which was more strongly confirmed by an unlucky accident, equally
unfortunate to both Lovers: For Darbelle having been some time without
receiving any Letters from Clitie, fell into so deep a Melancholy that his
Troubles would not permit him to write either to any one at Court, or to his
Friends about his Business; for he had abandoned himself wholly to his Griefs,
that every body in France at the same time began to complain of his Silence,
and all at once to accuse him of the same Crime.

The Report (which went current) of his new Amors and his Marriage (by the
underhand dealing of the Prince, and the management of Mariana) gained belief
in most people; but all this concerned none, nor wronged any but Clitie, who
with the thoughts of it almost dyed. It is true, that Mariana did her best to
comfort her in her Sickness, in telling her she was too constant, and afflicted
her self too much for so ungrateful a man; she entreated her to give truce to
Sorrows and Tears, and not daily to add fresh ones to 'em, as she did, since
Darbelle was rioting in the height of Joy and Pleasure, and no longer mindful
of her or his Vows, gave all those Tenders, and soft Embraces to another,
which he had only promised should be hers.

These Reasons were but weak Consolation to Clitie, but above all, the Anguish
that possessed her Heart, to think she was deceived by an Ingrate, for whose
sake she had withstood so many Assaults, counseled her at the same time to
abandon him, and fit him in his kind: But the Idea of this Lover (once so
faithful) presented it self to her always, and disjointed all the Resolutions
her Reason or her Anger could propose.

The Memory of her lovely Darbelle still haunted her, and she could not think
of those Tears he had so often showered down at her Feet, without taking his
part, even against her self; nor could all that was daily said to her of him,
make her believe he was yet inconstant.

The suspense in which she was, seemed to aggravate her Miseries; could she
have really thought Darbelle no longer loved her, Grief would put an end to her
life; or were she certain of his Falsehood, the Assistance and Helps she
received from every body by their Cares and Consolations might in time ease her
Sufferings; but in the plight in which she was now, ever felt such Grief and
Afflictions as the unfortunate Clitie.

In the mean time the Prince and Mariana made Advantages of all that happened,
and ceased not day and night to confirm her in a belief of the only thing in
the whole World that had the least truth in it, and was the most injurious for
her.

The End of the first Part.
CLITIE, A NOVEL. PART II.
THE Prince had so well by underhand Practice, spread through all the Court,
that Darbelle was married to a person of great Quality in Florence, whom he
entirely loved ever since his arrival in that Country, that at last there was
no more room left for Doubt, and every one talked of it as a thing most
certain. Clitie could no longer take the part of one whom she deemed so
unworthy her Affections, began to hate him now more than before she had loved
him.

It is certain she did it not without suffering inconceivable Perplexities; she
could no longer abide at Court: the constraint she lay under to appear as she
used, viz. making and receiving Visits, and being obliged every day to the
Company of such who made Pleasure their business, (who are inseparable from a
Court) had reduced her to a very low Condition, she became so altered that it
was difficult to know her; for which reason she resolved to pass away some time
at her House in the Country, where she might have more liberty; she doubted
not but there she should soon blot Darbelle out of her Memory, or at least have
more freedom to make her Complaints of his Falsehood, and to take more pleasure
in the Hatred she had conceived against him. Mariana failed not to follow her;
and the more to aggravate her Resentments for Darbelle, she never named him
without cursing his person, and forgot nothing that might make him appear more
criminal, urging still the Obligations he had to Clitie, and the Punishment he
merited.

What, (would she be continually saying to her Mistress) could not this false
man for a little time resist the Charms of one Woman, when you for him have
contemned so many gallant men at Court, and scorned so many Lords?

Is it possible (continues she) that his in-human Heart could be so false; so
soon as he once was out of your sight, to forget your Beauty, Merit, and all
that you have done for him? What Punishment can he think he deserves not? And
wherefore should you (for the Fault he has committed, and for her whom he has
married) never return to Court again, and use your utmost power to revenge your
self? Sometimes she counseled her to employ all her Friends utterly to destroy
him, and to declare a thousand injurious things against him, that he might go
no where where he might not hear of it, and know that you have no longer an
Esteem for him.

These cruel Discourses of Mariana seemed to indulge Clitie in her present
Condition, and she could not but hearken to the Railings and Revilings against
a man who she imagined had so cruelly abused her.

The Prince who wanted no information of all that passed in Clitie's Heart,
seemed far more concerned and troubled for her than ever, and more to bewail
her absence than any other; he sent to enquire after her health every day, and
fain would have gone himself to see her.

But Clitie, who was now possessed with a mortal Hatred against Mankind in
general, would not suffer any Visit, and whatever he endeavored to that
effect, was all in vain; she sent word she would see no body, and that nothing
could be more offensive or injurious to her, than to press her any farther.

This Resolution would not have been very pleasing to Lysidor, had he not known
the cause of it; and he thought it no difficult matter (since by Mariana's Care
and Management she was brought about to hate Darbelle) to make her in time
change the Resolution she had taken to seclude her self from the World, and to
persuade her to come again to Court.

It is certain, that considering the great and violent Passion he had for her,
he could hardly endure being so long absent from seeing her. But Mariana (to
deserve the Rewards he had made her hope) forgot nothing that might ease him;
she promised to order things so that he, himself, by her means, should be a
Witness of the obliging things which Clitie continually pronounced against
Darbelle.

The matter was not hard to compass, for Clitie had but few Attendance with her
in the Country, so that Mariana with ease found out a way to get him in
unseen, and hide him in her Chamber where Clitie commonly passed most part of
the day in reproaching, and vowing an eternal Aversion against the Infidelity
of Darbelle, and that she never would forgive him.

A while after it so fell out, that Clitie's Father fell sick of a dangerous
Fever, which obliged his Daughter to quit her Solitude, to come and attend
him. This Conjuncture so far was favorable enough to her; for during the time
of her Father's Sickness, none wondered to see her afflicted and sad; but all
things have their change, and at length her Father recovered his Health again,
and Clitie maugre the Condition in which she was, was forced to open her Eyes,
and look upon her old Acquintance, and was obliged to live at Court after the
same manner she formerly had done, but always with an Air altogether
melancholy, notwithstanding all the endeavors that were used to divert her,
could not persuade her to be loss sad.

The time that she had been in the Country seemed to have given her new
Charms, and to have made her more amiable; every one thought it a happiness but
to talk with her, and divert her; and the Prince more in love now than ever,
was not a little pleased to see his Affairs go so well forward.

He doubled his Cares and Addresses to her, and appeared yet more magnificent
than before, he spared for no Charges, he made Treats and Feasts that surpassed
all that ever were made, which pleaded so advantagiously in his Favor to his
Mistress, that he had no cause to repent it.

Mariana (on the other side) applied the matter home, talking to Clitie of
nothing but of him; nor was there one Servant in the house, who did not almost
adore him; so great a Master was he in attracting the Love and Respect of all
People, whom Gold and Presents had any Power over, every thing made to his
Advantage in Clitie's Heart; she now saw him much more importunate than before,
and although she gave him not the least hopes of marrying her, yet she appeared
not altogether so cruel and inexorable.

It is certain, that seeing so advantageous an alteration, he began to make new
Attempts, to the establishing himself wholly in her Favors; and her Father,
who wished nothing more than his Alliance, daily seeing the great Qualification
of the Prince, made new Proposals to his Daughter, with an earnest desire to
effect it.

Clitie seemed now more consenting than before, making but faint Denials, and
desired some time to consider of it. Now it was that the Prince saw the happy
hour approaching (which so long time he had despaired of) left no means
unassay'd to perfect it.

But when the time was expired wherein Clitie was to return her Determination,
and that she thought she had banished Darbelle's Image quite out of her Heart,
she found her self deceived; she perceived she had not that Command over her
Heart as she imagined, and there were yet some Remains of Love that combated
for the poor unfortunate, and though they produced not those lively
Representations they had done formerly, yet they were powerful enough to keep
her Heart still in balance (for some time) between a Lover whom she thought so
false and criminal, and a Prince who every moment gave her new Proofs of his
Passion.

Mariana, who was privy to all her disturbances and doubts, endeavored all she
could by her Addresses and Artifices to banish them. What remains there yet in
your Heart (would she often say to Clitie) for the worst of men, and the most
perfidious breathing, that can any longer hinder you from making happy the most
constant and passionate Lover that ever was? in truth (continues she) you are
now no more to be excused for being so little sensible of the most tender
Passion of a virtuous Prince, and the Affronts of so vile and perjured a Wretch
as Darbelle. What! (says she) when you should think of nothing but Revenge
against this Traitor, and strive to blot him for ever from your Thoughts, do
you put him in balance with so generous a Prince?

Alas! (replies Clitie with Tears in her Eyes) I could say as much as you do,
to any other person, and I cannot but disapprove the Sentiments of my Heart, as
the most unjust in the World, but it is for that Traitor Darbelle, whom I can
never hate enough; I have endeavored all I am able to bring it about, but I
cannot effect it as I would, there are still some moments wherein (ungrateful
as he is) I know not what Devil, envious of my repose, represents him innocent,
all night long my Heart is filled with his Idea, and he appears (all weeping)
on his Knees before me, more passionate and amiable than ever; nor can my
Reason all the day dissipate the Thoughts of my Dreams by night.

See there then (says she to her) Mariana, the source of my Misfortunes, and I
can sooner die than think to marry any other, till I am better assured (if it
be possible) that Darbelle is married, as is reported, and so ungrateful as we
think him.

This was the last Resolution that Clitie took, nor was she to be altered from
it: she spoke to Mariana to seek out for some body, in whom they might confide,
whom she would send into Florence, and who at his return might make her a
faithful account of all things.

Mariana found her self in no small perplexity at this Discourse of Clitie. The
Journey could not be performed but in some considerable time, and it was not
unlikely this delay might hinder the Prince's marrying her, fearing least
Darbelle himself might come back to know the cause of her silence, and so
discover the Cheat of the Prince and her self.

These things then, with a thousand others, which the Prince presented to
himself yet more cruel and dangerous, put him almost into despair: He consulted
with Mariana about what was to be done, and she made him sensible, that after
the manner that Clitie had so discoursed to her, it would be absolutely
impossible to compass his Designs, without deceiving her yet once more, in
pretending to execute her Orders, and that if they did not, all the time and
pains they had employed hitherto in making her change her Opinion, were to no
purpose.

He agreed then, that Mariana should propose to Clitie the sending a Brother of
hers into Florence, assuring her he was one in whom she might confide, both as
to his Secrecy, and the executing her Commands.

This Contrivance appeared very seasonable, and they had now no more to do,
than to put it in practice, which was no difficult thing to effect, since
Clitie had not the least Suspicion that Mariana was not altogether for her
Interest. The perfidious Mariana failed not to be very pressing in the
business, telling Clitie what she had thought of in order to her satisfaction,
she soon confirmed her in a belief of her Brother's fidelity and good
management. The poor credulous Clitie following her wonted custom, left all to
her Care and Expedition; she only desired to speak with him, giving him this
Caution, to believe nothing but what his own Eyes were Witnesses to, and
charged him strictly to get a sight both of Darbelle and his Wife, and to
inform himself the best he could, after what manner he lived with her, and to
neglect nothing that might satisfy her Curiosity, and to give her a faithful
Account of all that he learned.

Having given him this Charge, the Gentleman took his Journey (at least
pretended so to do) he furnished himself with all Necessaries such a Journey
required. They told Clitie that he had taken Post, when all the while he lay
concealed in the Prince's Apartment, knowing it was enough only to make him
disappear: This Journey could not be performed in less time than a Month, not
reckoning the time it would take up in performing all those Orders Clitie had
given him, in instructing himself in the Circumstances concerning the false
Darbelle.

During this time the Prince and Mariana had private Meetings where they
consulted together, to make all to their Advantage at the pretended return of
him whom Clitie supposed she had sent into Florence; they cause a Picture in
Minauture to be drawn of a most exquisite Beauty, who they designed should pass
for Darbelle's Wife, and composed in order all the Discourses that was to be
made to Clitie about this business.

Nothing of Novelty happened during this supposed Journey; Clitie hovered daily
between Fear and Hope, Hate and Love; and since the time she had sent to inform
her self of his Life, she imagined Darbelle less guilty.

The time being come for the return of Mariana's Brother, they forgot nothing
that they thought might be necessary to the deceiving Clitie; but this
Treachery seemed to have so agreeable a success, that there needed not such
extraordinary Care.

The Prince talked with Mariana's Brother, he gave him rich Presents, and
promised him much more considerable ones, if he performed his part well: On the
other side, Mariana had so fully instructed him, during the time he lay
concealed, that he was as perfect in the business as the Authors of the Cheat
themselves; they informed him of all the Questions that Clitie might be
supposed to ask, and the Answers he was to return.

At length they arrived wherein they appointed to inform Clitie of the return
of her Messenger; Mariana so ordered it, that she received a Letter before
Clitie's face, which gave her an Account of this News, she presently showed it
her Mistress, and seemed as eager to know the Success of the Journey as Clitie;
she returned an answer to her Brother, commanding him to come at such an hour
as she appointed, and to take off all Suspicion; she would not have her
Mistress believe that she had spoken to him ere she her self had seen him.

The Prince, to show as though he knew nothing of the matter, seemed to know
nothing of the return, and to keep Clitie in the belief that Mariana still kept
all her Secrets, abstained from coming to Clitie's House at the time. When the
hour appointed (by Mariana in her Letter to her Brother) was come, her Brother
enters her Chamber, with an Air of a man who had been exposed to the Fateigues
of a long Journey; Clitie was with Mariana the same time that he appeared, but
was so surpised, and so trembled, that she could hardly speak to him.

Mariana's Brother prevented her (saying) Madam, I have performed all that you
commanded; I have been in Florence, where I have seen both Darbelle and his
Wife; I was at their Palace, which is indeed the most magnificent of the whole
City.

He is looked on there as the Prince's chief Favorite, and in all appearance
is exceedingly well settled in that Country, he lives very happily, and well
contentedly with his Fortune; his Wife, who I saw at my leisure, is one of the
greatest Beauty's in the World, she is very fair, and exceedingly well shaped,
and as I am informed, of noble Extraction, and of no mean Quality. But, Madam,
(continues he) the better to satisfy your Curiosity, I have brought from
thence her Picture, I had no small trouble to get it, being one of the greatest
Beauty's of that Court, but by the help of my Gold I had it exquisitely well
painted by one of the most reputed Artists of that Place.

Who indeed informed me of the whole Story, how that he fell in love with her
as soon as he arrived in that Country, and was not long ere he was loved
again: that which for some time deferred their Marriage, was the distance that
he was from his Estate and Country, of which her Friends would first inform
themselves; and since the time of their being married, it is reported he adores
her.



Clitie, who had attended this Relation with a mortal sadness, could now no
longer endure it, so (saying to Mariana's Brother) Sir, you have too well
executed my Orders; and at the same time desired him to leave her alone, which
he performed.

No sooner was he gone, but she cried but (in so lamentable a Voice, that it
would have moved a heart of Stone) Perfidious Wretch! alas! then thou have
forgot me! ungrateful man! how have I deserved this usage? She repeated these
words a hundred times, then dropping down on her Couch, she fell in a Trance,
being a long time ere she could be brought to her self again.

Mariana seemed to be as much afflicted as her Mistress, and pursued her
Injuries yet further; Barbarian (says she) O that I could tear thy perfidious
Heart in pieces, for the cruel Abuses thou have made my dear Lady suffer!
unhappy thee (...) ever thou came hither to betray (...) with thy Falsehood. A
little after (addressing her self to Clitie) Ah, Madam! (says she) think no
more of that Monster, who does not deserve to have his Name pronounced by you;
and who (perhaps) is at this very instant laughing at your Credulity, and
scorning your Complaints and Sighs. Clitie continued many days in an
unspeakable sadness never giving any truce to her Tears and Sorrows; but at
length she forbore (...) Complaints, and her Hate got the upper hand of her
Love, and she resolved never more to think on this ungrateful man, (...) use
all possible means to be revenged (...) him.

The Prince next day, without seeming to know any thing that had passed, wass
very desirous to know the good or bad Success of his Affairs, pays a visit to
Clitie whom he was told was in Bed, and (...) him word, that she desired to be
excused that time, entreating him to stay some (...) days longer. For the poor
Clitie no sooner had heard the Relation of Mariana's Brother, with the
Circumstances of Darbelle Amors and Marriage, but her Heart was even broke,
and she was so disconsolate, that she had much ado to support her self in her
sad Condition; the showered down Tears in abundance, and never ceased uttering
over and over again, the most soft and tender things that Love could e're
invent.

Mariana did all she could to comfort her in this lamentable Estate, and it is
most certain, had she had any person, whom at that time she could have confided
in, as she did in her, the Emotions of her Heart would almost have made them
expire in Grief.

The Prince came as he was ordered, but with little Assurance, and as much
Trouble: He enters her Chamber with so sad and mournful an Air, but withal so
amorous, that Clitie (maugre the motions of her Spirit) could not forbear, (as
she confessed afterward) some Sentiments of Joy to see such marks of Love and
tender Passion in the Eyes of a man that she could no longer look on, but as
her Friend.

Well then (most charming Clitie, says he to her, falling on his Knees by the
Bed side) now the time is come in which your goodness has promised to pronounce
me happy, or for ever miserable; but (continues he) looking on her with Eyes
more tender and passionate than before, If (as I believe by the sad Conditio^n
in which I find you) that Death must be my Doom; for surely the Troubles in
which I see you, can proceed from nothing but a sense of Pity that has
possessed your Breast in the behalf of a most unfortunate Prince, who you are
sending to his Tomb: However (most adorable Clitie) say something whatsoever it
be to put an end to the Torments I endure, which are so insupportable.

He stopped at these words (his Tears falling down his Cheeks) Clitie had yet
no power to answer him, she only (...) forth many Sighs to intimate the
Affliction of her Heart from whence they came. The Prince interrupting them,
implored her again to declare his Destiny a long time without her speaking one
word, but at last she returned him this Answer.

Prince, I will never pronounce the Sentence of your Death, you merit too much
my Esteem, and indeed my Love, by all those Cares and Addresses you have
rendered me, and those Evils you have suffered for my sake, that I should not
confess that I believe you one of the most worthy men alive; but (says she) my
Heart is so sad, and so filled with Inquietudes when I propose to my self to
love any that I cannot without much difficulty make any Resolution, permit me,
I entreat you, only eight days more, that I may reduce it to an entire consent
to make you happy.

In finishing these words she dissolved in Tears, and whatever the Prince could
say or do to hinder her, was to no Effect. He departed thence the most
satisfied and contended man in the World, seeing so happy a procedure of his
Enterprise, while the poor unfortunate Darbelle wore way his tedious Hours with
a Sorrow not to be paralleled.

The sweet and undisturbed Content in which he had lived five or six Months,
wherein he almost every day heard News from his lovely Clitie, or had Letters
from her) cost him dear; for all those cruel Passions that are wont to attaque
the Hearts of the most desperate in love, had took possession of his; his Fears
and Jealousies were grown so strong, they hurried him even to despair; how
often would he think his Clitie dead? When (as often as he would) he read over
her Letters, and found such marks of Love and Goodness in them, that he could
impute her silence to no other Cause: But these Thoughts reduced him to so
lamentable a Condition, that it is not to be described.

All the Cares of La Rock (who only of all his Servants knew the true Reason)
was to no purpose; he now resolved to run all hazards and return again to
France, whatever danger might befall him: The Consideration only of Clitie and
the Hopes he still had daily to hear from her, deterred him for some time but
his Fears did not always predominate in his Heart, but sometimes gave way to
his Jealousy; he would imagine within himself, that it could be possible any
thing could have happened to Clitie that could have hindered her writing to
him, and that Mariana in whom he put such Confidence, was now silent by her
Mistress's Commands: tormented with these Thoughts, he could impute it to
nothing but her Inconstancy.

Oh, unhappy that I am! (would he often say in the depth of his Solitude)
Clitie for certain no longer loves me and I could never lose her Heart but
(...) the Happiness of some more fortune Adorer, who, for ought I know, she
loves a thousand times more, (while ^ am now speaking of it) than ever she did
me; and nothing but this change could have hindered her from writing to me; and
the great Obligations by which Mariana is bound to her, has prevailed with her
to hide from me the Secret, and not to let me know the least thing of it, lest
it should give me an occasion to interrupt their Pleasures.

To one who was so passionate a Lover, these terrible Suspicions made him utter
a thousand disobliging things against her; but pausing a while, and having well
considered his Misfortunes, he framed to himself what might seem most likely to
be true; he believed her Father (against her consent) had forced her to marry
some other, and that the Tenders she had for him, and her Love being weakened by
absence and length of time, were not furnished with Fortitude to withstand the
Commands of her Father, who was now weary with the continual Disobedience of
his Daugbter.

These Inquietudes wrought such Torments in his Soul, that it cast him into a
violent fit of Sickness in the same time that he had made a Resolution to
return again to France to be certify'd of his Fate. The Agitations of his mind
caused so raging a Fever in him, that he was reduced to the lowest ebb of
life: But after he had pretty well recovered, and the greatest danger past, he
was so weak and low for more than two Months, that he was not able to quit his
Bed, so that he was constrained to do what he could, to be exposed to the most
cruel Violences that Love was capable to inflict.

He had found out a Retreat the most suitable to his Condition of all the Seats
in Tuscany; it was near the City of Florence, on the Banks of the Arne, in the
bottom of a Valley, where all things that an amorous Heart could desire, were
met together. He bought an House from a certain Florentine, which was handsome
enough after his manner, it was ancient, and seemed to have been some old
deserted Castle, built all of Marble, the River Arne washing its Walls as it
passed gliding by; its Issues were of long Walks planted on each side with
green Lemmon and Orange Trees; at the ends of which was a Grove, in whose
Shades and Silence this unfortunate and disconsolate Lover found incomparable
Charms: In this sad Solitude had he made Arbours, in which he used to read his
Clitie's Letters, and to return their Answers, where indeed he spent most of
his time. This course of living was much more agreeable to him, being a man so
extremely amorous, who had never received any Favor from that blind Deity,
though by him he had suffered much Disquiet.

All his Actions were of Love, and one might truly say, Love was all his
business; he was endued with an admirable Wit, and composed the finest Verses
in the World; but the whole and continual Subject of 'em was his charming
Clitie, there was scarce one Tree about his Mansion in which he had not carved
his Clitie's Name after a thousand pretty ways; on some he drew it in Ciphers,
on some her Name at large, on others her Anagram and Acrosticks in soft and
pretty Verses; on some again he would write the whole History of his Love, so
that on which side soever one walked they might see something or other to
content their Curiosity; it seemed as though the very Spirit of Love governed the
whole place, and with such power, that all who came there, and took pleasure in
reading those amorous Devices, returned thence either more loving, if their
Heart had been touched before by that soft Deity, or else more fit to take the
Impression, if yet their Hearts had never felt it.

All the Nobility and Persons of Quality in Florence often came to visit him,
but he took little notice of any who came to see him, nor would he be troubled
with them, resolving to employ the Remainder of his Life in thoughts of his
dear Clitie, and studying means to see her again; so that most of those who
came to his House, contented themselves only in enjoying the Pleasures of that
agreeable Solitude, and returned without speaking to him.

Nothing was more talked of in Florence than this delightful Solitude; there
was something in it which at the same time gave content, and raised a Curiosity
in the most great and piercing Wits of that City; they could not comprehend why
such a Person as he, so young and handsome, whose Air and Mean spoke him not of
common Birth, should take delight in so solitary a place, as though he had
resolved to separate himself from the rest of Mankind, never imagining that
Love and the Estate in which he was, obliged him to it.

He always went by the Name of Conrade ever since he left Paris, and not one of
his Domestics ( La Rock excepted) knew but it was his right Name; and it was
no difficult matter for him to deceive every body by persuading them to believe
what he pleased himself of his Adventures.

His pretense for living in that lonely House, was the agreeableness of the
place (which he told them) was so conformable to his solitary Humor, and he
promised them it should not be long ere he would satisfy the Curiosity of so
many thousands, who endeavored so earnestly to know the Secrets of his Life.

This is the Estate in which Darbelle had put his Affairs while he was absent
from Clitie. A most solitary dwelling, the River Arne, one of the finest Rivers
in all Italy, and the green Woods and Groves which encompassed it, made it
altogether delightful, and a most admirable Landschape.

He had applied himself to play on the Lute, he had chosen the most skilful
Artist in Florence to instruct him, and having a Soul all amorous and tender,
was the more taken with this melancholy Exercise (which is usually the Delight
of the sorrowful, and those whom Love has wounded) and soon became a Master of
it.

In a word, all those agreeable Ingredients that can be found out to delight
Lovers, were to be had at Darbelle's House.

Could the unfortunate Darbelle have made a speedy return into France, and have
left this pleasing solitary Exile, before the Prince and Mariana had perfected
their Design, he might have found his (...) more kind; but Heaven, who had
otherwise ordered it, would needs give Clitie a Proof of his Constancy, by such
Misfortunes as never any Lover but himself had undergone.

It was now nine Months since he parted from Clitie to retire himself about
Florence in that solatary Castle, which we have but now described; six Months
whereof he passed away as happily as one in his Condition could have wished
(that is) he daily received Letters from his Misiress, by which he understood
all that happened to her, he returned her Answers, and could easily perceive the
Pleasures Clitie took in his Amors, by the Assurances she gave him of her
Faith.

It was after these six Months that the Prince and Mariana had contrived the
cruel Design to cheat them both, and set them at variance, beginning to
suppress the Letters of both parties, to open them, and make use of the
Contents to their own Advantage, and by little and little, seeing the happy
Success of their Enterprise, they insensibly persuaded Clitie, that he was
false to her, and was married. And this was it this unfortunate Lover perhaps
might have prevented, if the cruel Sickness which his Inquictudes and Troubles
(not to hear from her Mistress) had cast him into, had not obliged him to keep
his Bed more than two Months, having almost lost his life, and given over by
his Doctors.

If these Conjunctures were so troublesome to him, they were as favorable to
the Prince; for after a great many puts off, and infinite delays, which Clitie
made (...) she could resolve to marry him, she was solicited with such pressing
and urgent Importunities by her Father and the Prince, that at length she gave
her consent.

I must needs say, (as she her self has since confessed) that she had never
taken this Resolution, but thereby to free her self wholly from Darbelle, who
she could never banish from her Thought, how unconstant soever she believed him.

The Prince and Mariana now saw 'twas necessary to spread abroad the Rumor of
his Death, which was so effectually performed, that Clitie had not the least
hopes left of seeing him again; it would be a hard matter to express the Joy
the Prince received when he saw himself established in Clitie's Favor, and
that he doubted not the Possession of her Heart.

The Visits which he made her were so full of the Transports of Love, and
tender Respect, that none could see him with his Mistress without perceiving at
the same time some sparks of the Fire that burnt within him; his looks were
lively and piercing, and sometimes for languishing, that Clitie her self could
not avoid saying to Mariana, That she believed it impossible for any to love
better or more than he did.

On the other side, Clitie having a length banished from her Heart all that had
so long been Enemies to her Tranquillity and Repose, hardly ever thinking of
Darbelle, became so beautiful and charming, that none in the Kingdom could
compare with her: And the day before they were married she began to treat him
in so soft and tender a manner, which gave him a taste of those Pleasures that
he was to have ere long the sole fruition.

These Nuptials being so extraordinary both by the Quality and Merits of (...)
new Lovers, the Prince could but allow some day for their Preparation, during
which time all sorts of magnificent Diversions were seen every where; at the
end of which this happy Prince enjoyed an entire Victory over the Heart and
Person of Clitie, who no longer concealed the Sentiments she had for him, who
was one of the most amiable and accomplished men in France; she believing her
self obliged to make him some Retalliation for the sufferings she had caused
him to endure, gave her self up wholly to those Tenders and Devoirs that she
owed him.

On both sides Love had made them suffer such Torments, that now they began to
taste the Pleasures that had so long time been denied them; the whole Court
were Partakers of their Joy, and this Match was matter of Discourse for all
Paris; for as the Passion of the Prince was known to every body, so likewise
was the Cruelty of Clitie, and every one discanted on the business as they
fansied.

Never did two Lovers seem more contented, they were swallowed up in Delights,
and felt a reciprocal kindness; they gave mutual Caresses even in public, the
Names whereby they called each other, and the Expressions wherewith their
Discourse was filled, were the most agreeable and tender in the World.

Notwithstanding all this, there were some certain moments wherein the Prince's
Conscience accused him, and he considered that it was with the greatest
Treachery imaginable to which he owed the Conquest of his fair Clitie, nor
could he quite banish the Troubles and Disquiets these Thoughts would give him;
yet when they tyrannized most, they gave occasion for her to sooth him out of
his Melancholy, and to say a thousand obliging things to comfort him.

Mariana had no small share in the happy Fortunes of the Prince, which all
along she tasted by those infinite Presents that he made her, which swelled to
such a mass of Wealth, that she purchased a considerable Estate: But when
Clitie was once married, she made that a pretense to quit her Service, and in a
little time after was married her self to a Gentleman of very good Quality.

When the Prince had a little liberty from his Amors, (that is) after he had
reaped the Fruit of all his former Trouble and Pains, he betook himself more
than ever to the Court; he purchased great Employments near the person of the
King, his Princess was likewise admitted amongst the Ladies of Honor to the
Queen.

Thus they lived in peace and tranquillity, enjoying such Pleasures as made all
the World envy'em. When the King of France declared Wars with the Hollander,
the Preparations for it were prodigious, and there were no less than 20000 Men
in Arms; the Effects were sudden and wonderful: And the King who went in person
to command his Army, did such surprising Actions that Posterity will hardly
believe: In two Campaigns he overrun almost all Holland, notwithstanding the
Spaniard and the Emperor, with almost all Europe, were joined against him to
stop the Course of his Victories. The Sieges of Cities, which were at another
time almost impregnable, lasted not above ten or twelve days; and you might
have seen in one Campaign a large Province taken and retaken. It Is certain,
such great Enterprises were bought with the Life of many a gallant Man; and it
might be said, the Example the King gave to his Subjects, by being himself
present upon all Occasions, even in the hottest of the Battle, encouraged them
so well, inspiring them with so much Valor, that there was scarce a person of
any Quality in his whole Kingdom who had not put himself in the Service,
imitating the Actions of so valiant and hardy a Prince.

These Occasions, however agreeable to gallant Souls, could not but cost the
Lovers many a Tear when they were forced to quit the soft Embraces of their
languishing Loves, to put on the more rugged Fury of Arms, and no longer to
think of any thing but Blood and Death; but above all, these things were
insupportable to the Ladies; and as it separated them from their Lovers, they
employed all the time of their Absence in Mourning and Complaints, and appeared
greatly afflicted for their Departure. But their Lovers who were forced to
leave them, had (...) thousand other things to think on, they were employed in
making up their Equipages, and their Regiments, and many other things which
diverted them from thinking so much on their Mistresses.

Our new married couple, who as you were but as Lovers to each other, felt more
than any the sad separation this War did make; they complained in secret of
their sad Fate, they wept, and spoke all the soft and most passionate things
they could invent: But at last the time (...) come in which they must part. The
Prince who commanded two Regiments, one of Horse, the other of Foot, could no
ways avoid being of the number, and following that Royal Army to the War.

Clitie was inconsolable, yet she was forced to give way to her cruel Fortune
that thus ravished from her her dear Lord. She was no sooner left alone, but
all the Adventures of her Life represented themselves afresh in her memory one
after another, they were so extraordinary, and so surprising, that she wanted
no Employment (amongst the Confusion of her Thoughts) which furnished her with
an infinite number of odd Phansies.

The History of the unfortunate Darbelle, do what she could, was not the least
thing that filled her Thoughts, she used a thousand Endeavors to banish them
her Memory, but all in vain; having a long time withstood the Assaults, and
made her greatest Efforts against this cruel Idea, she would suffer her self to
be overcome, and this unfortunate Man would present himself to her Fancy a
thousand ways; she sometimes would imagine she saw him dying for love of her,
and banished the Kingdom upon her Quarrel; and sometimes she would look at his
Port and brave Aspect, which were enough to fetch Tears from the most
insensible; and as guilty as she thought him, the soft Impressions of her first
Passion, could not but make her feel some Sparkles of the same Fire which she
stifled as soon as they appeared.

These Thoughts never seized her heart, but they left her much disconsolate and
sad, she not being able to guess the cause; for nothing is more certain than
that all this while she had so mortal a Hatred to him, that it could admit no
Augmentation; and never did his Name, his Person, or any thing belonging to
him, present it self to her Eyes, or come into her Thoughts, but she branded
him with Falsehood and Treachery, and wished him a thousand Punishments in the
other World in which she thought he was; for the Prince and Mariana, to bring
about their Design of making Clitie consent to the Marriage, could think of no
way more infallible (after having persuaded her to a belief of his Inconstancy
and Falsehood) than to publish a Rumor of his Death, which passed for an
unquestionable Truth.

The Campaigne in which the King went himself to make the more Expedition,
carrying with him the chiefest Lords and Nobles of his Kingdom, lasted not
long, but was ended in a Month, in which he made himself Master of three or
four considerable strong Cities, and won a great Battle, which so weakened his
Enemies, and so dispersed their Forces, they were no longer in a Condition to
attempt any thing against him; he thought it necessary to give ease to his
Troops, and let them refresh themselves in their Enemies Country, while
himself and the Court returned to St. Germains.

As the Prince was most afflicted of any in parting from Clitie, he was also
the most joyful when he was returning to a place where he should meet her
again: This return gave them mutual satisfaction, and this second meeting gave
them all the Pleasures of a new Amor, so that none could be more happy than
they were. But Heaven had not bestowed this happy day on Clitie to let her long
continue in peace, for she was born to endure all the Perplexities of a Heart,
whom Love had subjected to his Laws, and the end of her Misfortunes was not yet
arrived. Darbelle at length, after having been a thousand times ready to die in
his Solitude, by the Violence of those Troubles the silence of his Mistress
gave him; by the careful attendance of La Rock, and the strength of his Youth
and Constitution, recovered: The danger was no sooner past, but he proposed
returning into France to ease his Troubles; La Rock, with all the Respect he
could, opposed his Designs, representing to him the Dangers he would run in
such a Journey, especially if it should so happen that Clitie had changed her
Sentiments of him; he put him in mind that he had been once betrayed already,
and that now perhaps he would betray himself by some inconsiderate Action; and
that since Love was the only cause of his return, he might (in all appearance)
do something or other that might discover him, and lay him open to the malice
of his Enemies. Again he represented to him, that as soon as he should be gone,
Clitie might perhaps write to him, and give him orders which he could not then
follow, and that without all doubt the silence of Clitie was occasioned by some
sickness which for the present hindered her from writing to him.

These Reasons had been convincing enough to any, whose Heart was not so far
carried away by the power of Love, who thought he had no other Employment for
life, but what might put him in a way of seeing his Mistress again: He answered
him, That, in short, he was resolved to be satisfied in his Destiny, and if
Clitie were dead, he had nothing to do but to follow her; and if she were false
to him, that he should not do himself Justice if he revenged it not, or at
least, trouble their Repose and Pleasures.

This Resolution put an end to all their Contestations, and so soon as he was
able to undergo the fateigue of the Journey, he parted, taking only with him La
Rock, leaving all the rest of his People at his solatary Mansion, with orders
to remain there till his return. He could not make such speed in his Journey as
he intended, his Body being yet very weak; and were he not encouraged by the
Assistance of powerful Love, it would not have been possible for him to have
done it: however at length he compassed it, and arrived safe in Paris.

He took up his Lodging in a retired and private place, and he had hardly
alighted off his Horse, but he told LaRock he would go immediately to Clitie,
and know his Doom. LaRock throwing himself at his Feet, conjured him not to
expose himself so to his Death, assuring him that he would undertake by his
Care and Management to do all things to his Satisfaction: He told him he would
soon inform him of all things, and that it was far more proper for him to
execute such a Design, than Darbelle, being unknown to every body, and might
with more ease be instructed in the Truth of all things, which would be more
difficult for Darbelle to perform.

The Consideration that La Rock might easier inform himself of what he sought
to know, made him consent to his going to Clitie. La Rock, after having
disguised himself, went out of his Lodgings, but in is impossible to describe
the impatience of the amorous Darbelle, every minute seemed to him an Age; he
was a thousand times in a mind to run through the City, and expose himself to
be discovered in so dangerous a place.

But the Transports and Agitations of his Soul are not to be conceived, Love,
Anger, Revenge, Fear and Jealousy, all at one time took possession of his
Heart, and made such terrible Emotions in it, that it had like to have killed
him. Oh, unfortunate Wretch that I am! what shall I do, if Clitie be dead? I
will not live a moment after so cruel a loss. Then all on a sudden another
Passion would predominate over his Sense. But (says he) if this ungrate should
prove false to me, what would become of me! Ha! I will revenge it with my own
Hand, I will stabb my Rival through her Eyes. All these different Passions,
every one having (...) much ground for them as the others, (...) him into such
dreadful Incertainties, that he was the most afflicted Man in the World.

Hardly had La Rock been gone one moment to inquire after his Mistress, but he
was still running to the Door, or looking out of the Window to see if he were
not coming back again: But after two hours La Rock enters so sad and dejected,
that Darbelle soon suspected he had no good News for him. Well then (says he) I
perceive you bring me little Comfort, by your looks, however speak freely, and
whatever Sentence you have to pronounce, let me hear it quickly; for the Doubts
and Inquietudes I have been in since you departed, has been more cruel and
tormenting to me than the worst that can befall me. Is Clitie dead? Is she
false? in short, What is become of her? and what will become of me?

La Rock who was extremely perplexed, could have wished with all his Heart some
other had his Office, was seized with a shaking all over, and knew not where to
begin his Discourse. But Darbelle, fired with Impatience, and not being able to
forbear any longer; La Rock (says he to him) hold me no longer in suspense,
unless you would see me expire before you. He pronounced these words with so
(...) and disconsolate an Air, that La Rock at the same time told him, Clitie
lives, but she lives no more to you, for she is married to Prince Lysidor; I
saw him at her Father's House, where this day he makes a great Treat; there is
nothing to be heard but confusions of Noises, Fiddles and Music, and Crowds of
curious People go in and out, so that it is no hard thing to enter there. La
Rock had no sooner spoke this, but Darbelle gave a lamentable Groan, and said;
O Heavens then is the unjust Clitie married? And could you look on and suffer
it? Then he fell in a Swoon on a Couch against which he was leaning: La Rock
run to his Assistance, and endeavored all he could to recover him, yet all the
Care and Pains he took, could not for above two hours draw him out of this
miserable Condition; but at length his Speech and Strength being a little
recovered, made fresh Exclamations against Heaven and his Mistress, accusing
them both of Falsehood that he had never merited; but it was not long ere he
turned his Complaints into Threats, all the while raving on nothing but Swords,
Daggers, and Poisons. La Rock for many Reasons dared not call for any body to
help his Master, and to reduce him from the pitiful Condition in which he lay,
for fear his Complaints and Transports should betray who he was, and was forced
to content himself with what he alone could do to comfort him; but the Evil was
too recent and violent to admit any Consolation, and there was an absolute
necessity to let it take its Course.

Darbelle (having all this while suffered a thousand Tortures) turned him
toward La Rock; Clitie has married the Prince Lysidor (says he to him) how was
you informed of it, and what Certainty have you for it? I was told it (answers
La Rock) at their own House, who were all in a Confusion; though I had no other
Information than the Music and Hautbois, who when I approached and commended
their playing and the fineness of their Aires, they were so pleased with me,
that there was nothing I could ask them that they did not resolve me.

They told me the Princess had given a great Dinner to a dozen Ladies of the
Court, and that after that Repast, there was to be a splendid Collation, and
all the Company would sup with her; and to finish the day, there was to be a
Ball, where many Lords and Noblemen would be in Masquerade, in the most gallant
Habits and Devices that could be invented. This is all I was informed of, nor
did I inquire into any more, knowing such sort of People could give me but
small Intelligence of the particulars of Clitie's Marriage; besides, this
unwelcome News had so surpised me with Grief and Trouble, that I had not the
power to ask any more, or to stay any longer.



Darbelle having heard this dismal Relation, made a thousand fresh Complaints,
and new Imprecations against Clitie, sometimes threatening her, and sometimes
saying he would kill himself: But after all the Disorders that Love and Anger
had produced in his Heart, he made a Resolution to see her the same Night, and
reproach her with her Falsehood: And adressing himself to La Rock; I am but a
Fool (says he) thus to torment my self for a perfidious Woman, who has not
deserved my Love; no, I will not kill my self, she is not worth that trouble;
but I will have the pleasure to make her miserable by the Disdain I will show
her, and by the Crosses I will give to all the Delights of her Life; this same
day will I go in Masquerade, and threaten her in the very midst of the Ball,
and raise in her all those frightful Apprehensions which ought to terrify one
so criminal as she, in having cast off so true a Lover as my self.

When La Rock heard him talk thus, he presented to him the hazard he run in
such an Enterprise, and that perhaps instead of revenging himself on Clitie, he
would be exposed to the loss of his own Life, and be so far from punishing her
Falsehood, that he would put her in a way no more to fear him. You mistake me
(says Darbelle to him) I have so great a desire to afflict Clitie, that I will
take care to preserve my self, and that I may the better effect it, I will be
more cautious than you imagine; and since the Feast of which you speak is to be
public, and the Ball free for all Masquers, I see nothing I need fear, being
well disguised. La Rock could not contradict him, only put him in mind that his
Disguise would not be enough, if he had not great care in governing his
Passions when he should see Clitie and speak to her. He warranted all things,
and wanted nothing but the Disguise that should gain him his Admittance.

Darbelle thought he could not invent a Dress that would more afflict Clitie,
than the Representation of one from the Dead; he imagined that one who was so
guilty as she, would be startled at the sight of a Ghost from the Shades below.
He sent for a Tailor, to whom he gave directions what to do; and in a short
time it was ready, it being a Dress of no great trouble, and few Ornaments.

It was made of white Satin, after the manner of a Vest, with large Sleeves of
the same, and covered all over with a Vail of black Crape spotted all with
white, which hung down to his Legs, which none could see without some
Apprehensions of Death.

La Rock disguised himself after another manner, for he intended to keep always
by his Master, but pretended not to be of the same Company; and he had ordered
him so to play his part, that still as Darbelle was absent from Clitie, he
should be near her, and narrowly observe all her Actions and Behavior.

All being now ready, and the Hour come, Darbelle went forth; yet ere he went,
he had writ in a Paper four Verses that might help to terrify her. All things
went as they could wish; Darbelle and La Rock arrived there, and separated
themselves as they entered. Darbelle appeared alone, and La Rock seemed to join
with another Company of Masquers: The Ball was begun ere they came; the Ladies
of which it was composed, made a glorious and splendid Appearance; but above
all the rest Clitie, who never in her life had dressed her self so rich, and so
much to her Advantage; she was so pleasant, so beautiful, and merry, that it
would have grieved any one to have disturbed her. The Prince her Husband was
not there, being engaged at play in another Company with the King.

Darbelle no sooner made his Entrance, but the whole Assembly were startled at
his Disguise; there was not one of the Company, whom it made not for some (...)
seem sad, especially after the manner of Darbelle's personating it; some at the
(...) took it for a Ghost indeed come from the Grave to disturb their Ball, and
put a stop to their Delights and Pleasures.

However he prudently concealed his Sentiments, and the Disguise he had on, was
a necessary help to hide the Violence he did on himself to keep in his Passion.
He took a Seat near to Clitie's, and for a long time he fixed his Eyes on her,
without speaking a word, which she soon took notice of. But since Masquerades
were designed only for Adventures, she imagined this some Frolic that some
Friend of hers had undertaken, and that she should know the meaning of it the
next day.

All this while Darbelle's Eyes were fixed on her, till he was taken out to
dance by a very pleasant humored Lady who said to him, as she gave her hand,
(...) long to have a Dance with Death. These words made him alter his posture;
he performed the Dance with a mournful Air, but nevertheless with the greatest
Grace that could be, which made 'em all to understand he was a Ghost of some
Quality.

After having paid his Devoirs to the Lady who had taken him out, he presented
his Hand to Clitie, as the Mistress of the Ball, and danced with her; and as he
was taking his leave of her to go to his place again, he slipped the Billet into
her Hand, which he writ ere he came forth, in which were four Verses. She was
strangely surpised both at the boldness of the Ghost, and the odness of the
Adventures, but having no small stock of Wisdom, she thought fit to say nothing
of it at that time, yet hoped to be informed of the meaning on it ere the Sport
was over; she almost died with Impatience to know the Contents of the Paper,
just as one came and made his Addresses to her to dance with him, so that at
present she had no opportunity; she pretended she was weary, and that she was
able to dance nothing but a Courant, which was no sooner ended, but she slipped
aside into a Corner where there were but few Persons of Quality, in respect of
the other parts of the Room, and going up to a Wax-Taper, he opened the Ghost's
Letter, where she read these four Verses:

This Ghost thou see was in thy Fetters tied,
By Falsehood and thy cruel Scorn he died.
And to revenge his Wrongs, is hither come
To bear thee to thy everlasting home.
When Darbelle writ these Verses he counterfeited his Hand, but whether in his
haste or otherwise, he had not so perfectly done it, but Clitie in the reading
saw some tracts of a Hand she had formerly known, though she could not
precisely say whose it was; she read the Verses, and imagined he should surely
have known the Hand. This capricious Adventure caused in her a thousand
Thoughts yet was she not able to conjecture whose it should be; she resolved to
take more notice of the Actions of this Ghost, whose Eyes were never off of
hers; she looked upon his Stature and his Mien, but for her life could not
guess who it was.

Having been a while in this musing condition, she found a means to get nearer
this Ghost which gave her so much Curiosity, and whispering him, Is it long
since you died, pray Mr. Ghost (says she to him) and may we not know in what
Body you lost your life? I am (answered the Ghost in a most lamentable sad
tone) the Spirit of Amasis, whom Darbelle killed in order to your Commands.
This Answer so surprising, and so unexpected, that spoke of the unfortunate
Darbelle and Amasis, whose very Names awakened (all at once) such cruel things
in Clitie's Soul, and so astonished her, that she could not refrain from
changing Color; and fetching a deep sigh, she fell into a melancholy which
held her all the rest of that Evening and the Night following. What is it (says
she to her self) that I have just now heard concerning Darbelle and Amasis? But
she had nothing to reply to the Ghost on this Subject for a long time; yet
having observed he kept his Eyes still fixed on hers, she entered into
Conference a second time, (and said to him) You have pronounced the Names of
two the most false and perfidious Men the Eye of Day ere looked upon, and
Heaven has been but just, if it has thrown them into everlasting Torments (as
you seem to intimate.) You do well for your own Credit to say so, (answers the
Ghost) you who are the most ungrateful person in the whole World, and the most
unworthy to be so entirely beloved, as you ever was by the unfortunate
Darbelle. This Discourse yet more surpised the Princess, since she feared the
Ghost spoke nothing but Truth, touching the most important Adventures of her
life; yet she could not refrain making him this Answer: Ghost, you are very
knowing, or (at least) you imagine your self so; but I pray you tell me what is
the reason you take upon you to meddle in my Concerns? And wherefore do you
take the parts of Darbelle and Amasis against me, who were so opposite in all
things (during their Lives) to one another? Is it because that since their
Deaths they are reconciled in the other World, and have ordered you to come and
tell me their Injuries in this? The Ghost took his turn now to be surpised,
hearing the Princess speak of the Death and Falsehood of Darbelle to Clitie, who
had always been so well treated by him, and who had always loved her so
tenderly; however, he resolved still to disguise the matter, and go on as he
begun; so that taking up the Discourse where the Princess left off; I could
pardon you (says he to her) the hate you have to the Ghost of Amasis, which you
see before you, and whom you your self have caused to be killed; but for that
of the unhappy Darbelle, wherefore do you insult over it, since he died only
for love of you? Is it not sufficient, that by an Ingratitude and Falsehood
(that has no parallel) you have violated the Faith you have given him, in
harkening to a Prince, with whom you fell in love, and at last have married?
What could you imagine (ungrateful as you are) but that the unfortunate Lover
(having once heard this News) could do, but ease his Sorrows by his Death? He
need not have been so much concerned as you report of him, if he had been alive
when I married, (answers the Princess) his beautiful Wife would have been
Comfort enough to him for greater troubles than these. As the Princess had
finished these words, there came a Company of Masquers of great Quality,
extraordinary well habited, amongst which it was supposed the Prince Alcander
was. These Masquers placed themselves about the Princess, and did not leave her
during the rest of the Ball: she her self silenced the Violins as soon as she
could conveniently, to the end that all. Parties might mix together the
remainder of the Night. The Princess (in whose head the Ghost and his Discourse
still run, and who was exceeding impatient to unriddle all that he had told
her) not being able to comprehend the least thing of it, did what she could not
to go out of her own Lodgings, but it was not to be avoided; for these new
Masquers were People of such great Quality, that she could not deny them, and
was forced to go with them.

She had not the opportunity of speaking any more to the Ghost, but in passing
by him (she said) I desire you, Mr. Ghost, not to go back to the other World,
before you have visited us once more; I will dance a Courant with you to morrow
in this very place, where I will have Music on purpose. All fell a laughing to
hear her speak so to the Ghost, but they turned it all to Raillery (saying)
Truly, she thought it but reasonable to have a little pity on the poor dead,
and to give them a little Diversion. So the Ball broke up, and every one
withdrew, Darbelle went out with the rest, and having met with La Rock, they
went home together. This Adventure furnished them with matter enough to
discourse of, but let them do what they could, they could not apprehend any
thing of the Princess's talk. Wherefore (says Darbelle to La Rock) does she
tell me of Death, Marriage, and Falsehood? Is it of me she spoke? Is there not
some other Darbelle who loved her? Certainly it must be so, and all she said
last Night was of a second Darbelle, not so much as dreaming on the first, who
has loved her so well, for else why should she (says he) go about to persuade
me that I am dead, married, and false.

La Rock did all he could to find out the meaning on it, but the more he
endeavored, the less was he satisfied, so that they set up their Resolution to
wait the Result till the next day at the time she appointed for their meeting
again, where they hoped they should know all; for they both observed that the
Princess was no less surpised at the odness of the Adventure than themselves,
and that she was loath to part from him, and that she had made that second
appointment only to satisfy her Curiosity: It is certain, that she was so much
confounded with what she heard, that she was not her self. She had heard that
Darbelle died for Love of her, and that was enough to give her Heart
Inquietudes. On the other side, the could not suspect the Ghost that gave her
this Account, to be one of the ordinary Masquers; he had told her things so
secret and so true, and what she believed no living person could ever know,
that it added to her Trouble; she was so surpised at the same time, that she
doubted if it were not a real Ghost that had appeared to her; she was in great
Frights and Agonies all that Night, and as it is usual with us to dream of
things which our minds have been filled with in the daytime: she had nothing
all this Night but Darbelle in her Fancy, she saw him in a hundred Shapes,
amongst the rest, that which so nearly touched her, was that of a weeping Lover
dying, and reproaching her with Marriage, as the Ghost had done at the Ball.
These Thoughts so disturbed her, that she could not rest all Night; and since
she went late to bed, it being almost day, she made that a pretense not to quit
it all the next day, that she might have the more liberty to consider what had
happened, and by that means to conceal the Confusion she was in.

Darbelle failed not to send La Rock three or four times to inquire how she
did, and being impatient to see her again, not being able, without much
Trouble, to attend the time of the Ball, he would needs write a Lettter to her
to prepare her for what he intended to tell her the next Evening, and to double
her Curiosity, that so she might be sure not to fail to meet at the time and
place appointed; he caused this Letter to be delivered her by an unknown
person, who was ignorant from whom he had it, and the place from whence it
came. The Letter was in these words.

Madam,
THe dead have those Privileges the living are debarred, they go where they
please invisible; and it is by this means that Darbelle's Ghost is with you at
this present, reproaching you with your shameful Infidelity, and to let you
know how false all those Accusations are wherewith you tax him, assuring you,
that he never yet loved any person but your self.


This Letter being delivered, the Princess at the same time she was profoundly
musing on Darbelle, not having any body with her, she was so affrighted, that
she fansied she really saw him come from the other World to talk with her; but
recovering her self a little from the Fright, seriously considered what the
meaning of all this might be, but could conclude on nothing. Thus she passed
away all the rest of the day; but in the Evening (that she might be better
informed in what she saw so obscure) she sent to invite a few of her choice
Friends to come to her House and hear the Violins: She gave orders to her
People to let all that came in Masquerade enter, (saying, she hoped it would
divert her.) The time was no sooner come but Darbelle enters, but he no longer
represented the Ghost; he had put on the Habit of a Shepherd, the most rich and
splendid that ever was seen, having all things answerable that made up this
Pastoral Equipage: She knew him not at first, he having changed his Dress.

But Darbelle being one of great Curiosity, was willing to conceal himself at
first, that he might observe her Behavior, and to see whether or no she had
any Impatience to converse with the Ghost: He was soon satisfied, for he
perceived the Princess observed every Masquer with such care and diligence,
that he might easily guess her Heart had no small disquiet; she always kept her
Eye toward the Door, and the least noise that was made either in coming in or
going out, raised in her some new Curiosity, which was not without some
satisfaction to Darbelle: But at last it was impossible that such a Lover, who
run all hazards to speak with his Mistress, would any longer let slip so
favorable an Occasion. He approached the Princess, and said to her; Madam, the
Gods have sent for the Ghost back again, who has given me charge to come hither
to you, and in his behalf to tell you that he will never forgive you his Death,
nor the Sufferings you have caused him to endure for you. At these words the
Princess looked at him, surveying him from Head to Foot, and having well
observed him, says to him; Whoever you be, I conjure you keep me no longer in
suspense, tell me what Interest you have in my person, and wherefore you speak
to me of Darbelle; I perceive well you have been his Confident, and that he has
discovered to you all the considerable Adventures of his Life; I Am sure you
have given me reason enough to think so: In short, say what is it you would
speak in his behalf; has he ordered you, as he was dying, to come to me and beg
my pardon for all his Falsehoods?

Darbelle, by the help of his Disguise, heard all she said without running any
Risque; but he was strangely amazed at what he heard, however he judged it
necessary still to conceal himself, though he had enough to do to perform it; he
made use of what the Princess had put in his Head, to clear himself; and
speaking to her as though he had really been the Confident of Darbelle, who at
his Death he had commanded to come and find her out, and tell her what he would
have her understand. Madam (answers he) I perceive you already know some of
those things I have already told you, since you are not ignorant of Darbelle's
Death; but it appears you are but little concerned at what has befaln him,
since you brand him with perfidious, and of whom you speak such injurious
things. I would therefore let you understand (adds he) that all the while he
was in Tuscany I was his dearest Friend; we lay together, and we concealed not
the least Secret from each other; you may well perceive he has not hid from me
the Love you had for him; he would talk to me of it a thousand times a day,
giving me a Description of you; and it is as certain that he is now dead: But,
Madam, you are the only Cause of it, every one of his Friends to whom he writ
to send him News of you, told him you had deceived him, and that you loved the
Prince Lysidor, at which he was so much troubled, that it cast him into a fit
of Sickness, from which when he had a little recovered, and that he had taken a
Resolution to come hither in person, and kill his Rival, he understood by his
Friends Letters that you had married him. At this second cruel News he fell so
violently sick, that his Despair in two days finished his life.

When he was breathing his last, he implored me with such words mingled with
Sighs and Tears (that I cannot recount them without a most sensible Affliction)
that I would come and seek you out, and tell you, that for love of you he died;
and charged me at the same time to accuse you of Infidelity.



The Princess when she saw he had finished his Discourse (answered) Sir, if you
had been sincere, you would have added to what you have said, and have told me
that he was married in Tuscany to one, who he so entirely loved, that he no
more thought on me, than if I had never been; perhaps he imagined the distance
of the places would hinder me from prying into these sort of Affairs; but I am
not so easily deceived as you believe: And for my part (goes she on) I cannot
yet apprehend that he has repented him of the Misfortunes he has made me
suffer, by his desiring you to tell me that he always loved me.

Darbelle (hearing the Princess say this) was ready to die with a desire to
discover himself, and know the depth of all these Mysteries; but he feared he
should spoil all, in the Circumstances in which he stood with her; he was
willing to disabuse her first (he took on him then the Discourse, saying to
her) Madam, these are all mere Inventions you have told me, which you ought not
to believe against the poor Darbelle; I have told you already that I was with
him all the time he lived in Tuscany, and what I have told you of his Love to
you, is a most infallible Certainty: As for a Wife, alas, Madam! he never had
any, and I am sure that for the love of you, he would have refused the most
beautiful, and the greatest Queen in the World: But, Madam, be ingenious, and
acknowledge that the Crime you lay to his Charge, is but to excuse your self
for what you have done contrary to your Faith and Promise, which was never to
marry any but himself.

Sir, I find you know me not (answers the Princess sharply) if you believe what
you say; but let us talk no longer of him (says she, fetching a deep sigh from
the very bottom of her Heart) Darbelle is dead, and I am married. She could not
refrain shedding some Tears at these words, and in the Rage and Shame that she
conceived, she left Darbelle abruptly, who was now alone, ruminating on what
the Princess had said to him, which gave him greater Astonishment and
Perplexity than what he had before; he questioned whether the Princess was in
earnest or no, when she accused him of Marriage, and for his life could not
guess the right meaning on it. All this while Love had got the ascendant of him,
and he could now no longer counterfeit; he beheld the Princess more beautiful
than ever, and her Discourse had disarmed him of much of the Aversion he had
conceived against her, he began to excuse her: yet after all, he was not the
less unhappy, since he had lost all hopes of ever enjoying her, knowing her to
excel in Virtue, and one who would never exceed the bounds of Duty and Honor.

Having a while considered these things, he addresses himself to her a second
time (saying) Madam, I have but one day longer to stay in this place, and I
have yet an hundred things to tell you ere I can discharge my self of the
Commands the poor Darbelle gave me at his Death. I humbly entreat you would not
refuse me one Meeting more, where I may acquit my self, and perform his Will.
She told him he might come to her House the next where he should have the
liberty of discoursing to her alone. I am much troubled, Madam, (replies our
Masquer) that I cannot be so happy as to wait on you at your own Lodgings, as
you have commanded me, therefore I humbly request you would permit me to pay my
Duty to you in some other place, for many Reasons which now I cannot tell you.
The Princess was surpised at this Discourse, nevertheless having thought of a
convenient place, I will (says she to him) grant what you desire; meet me to
morrow at the Theater in the second Box, where we shall have liberty to talk
without being known, I will not fail to be there, attended only by one of my
Women. As soon as she had said this, she mingled into the Company of several
Ladies of her Acquaintaince, not giving Darbelle any opportunity of speaking to
her any more. After they parted, Darbelle returned to his Lodging, the most
amorous, impatient, and most afflicted of men.

The next day he failed not to be at the Playhouse above three hours ere any
body else came there; he thought it convenient to let La Rock speak to the
Princess when she first came in, as though he had been the same person whom she
had been talking with the preceding days: He could not appear there in a
Disguise, and therefore he could not so well act his own part. He instructed La
Rock therefore in all that he had to say to her, and ordered him as soon as he
had thoroughly persuaded her of every thing he had a mind she should know, to
make some pretense or other to leave her, and that he himself would supply his
place, and there lay his Heart open to her; and the better to carry on their
Design, they dressed themselves both so like, that none could distinguish
between them.

Having thus ordered every thing, he made La Rock sit in the place which the
Princess had appointed, retiring himself at a little distance that he might not
be perceived. The Princess could not but show her Impatience by the haste she
made to go to her Assignation, where she believed she should be informed of a
thousand things, which had given her so much trouble, and of which she had so
great a desire to be informed. She came (accompanied only with one Woman) in a
careless Undress, with a Scarf that almost covered her all over: As soon as she
entered, she saw a single man whom she judged to be the Party whom she sought;
but at the same time I know not what of Fear possessed her Soul which set her a
trembling all over; nevertheless she advanced toward him, and took her seat
just before La Rock, having first paid him the common Civility. La Rock, who
knew her, although she knew not him, having a good Wit, thanked her for the
Honor she had done him, with a low bow, and supposing it not amiss to begin
their Conversation with some indifferent Discourse (wherewith those sort of
places easily furnished every body) Madam, (says he) I believe you will think
the time long (if you are not endued with a great deal of Patience) before you
hear the Music, or have any Diversion, which never begins so early. The
Princess who apprehended she was mistaken, and that this was not the man whom
she expected, was a little surpised when she heard him talk thus, imagining
that if this had been the person whom she looked for, he would have taken up
the same Discourse they were on the day before; she answered him nevertheless
in the same manner he had spoke to her, in civil and obliging words. But La
Rock perceiving the Princess to eye him well, and sought to be informed of
other things than what they were talking of, began his Discourse after this
manner: For my own part, Madam, I have so much reason to hate the World and all
its Pleasures, not to come to this place. But Madam (continues he) the Ghost
which you saw at the Ball two days ago, haunts me every where to give you an
Account of your Injustice and Infidelity; tell me therefore I beseech you, why
you have deceived Darbelle, and with what Reasons you can pretend ever to
excuse your self of the Contempt you have of him? Is it not sufficient that he
has died of Love and Despair, hearing of your Marriage, without giving the
utmost Marks of your Hatred in blasting the very Memory, as you do, of one who
died so innocent?

Clitie harkening to what La Rock said to her, with great impatience, could no
longer endure his Reproaches, but assumed the Discourse (and said to him) I
know not who you are, but these two days past I have suffered all that you have
entertained me with of the greatest Secrets of my Life, and now I have met you
according to your desire, I would willingly run yet a farther hazard, and tell
you something that yet you know not, provided (that on the other side) you
inform me likewise of all those things which give me so much Inquietude, and
have raised in me this Curiosity. Tell me then (says she) what was the true
Cause of Darbelle's Death, for you have been at too great Charges and Pains in
traveling so far to tell me things so contrary to Truth. What Devil was
assisting at his Death, that yet inspired him to deceive, even to the Grave?
And you that talk to me, and asperse me with Falsehood and Ingratitude, how dare
you say he loved none but me all the while he was in Tuscany, when he who
protested to me by his Letters of an Eternal Love, at the same time paid all
his Adorations to a Lady in Florence, whom he married, without giving me the
least notice of any thing that might resolve me why he made so sudden a Change?

Darbelle married! (answers La Rock) Ah, Madam! I swear, I swear to you by all
that is good and sacred, it is not so (...) and if you would give me leave to
acquaint you what Pleasures, and what Troubles he has had during his Exile, I
would tell you he never had any Satisfaction or Content, but when he received
your Letters, and that he gave himself up to all the Torments of Despair when
he wanted them; all the words that can express the most intolerable Pain,
cannot make you sensible of those that he endured when he saw that you forgot
him, he complained Night and Day of the severity of his Fortune. But, Madam, it
was in so moving a manner, that I (who was Witness to it, as well as Confident
of his Amors) swear to you I had not the power to hinder my self from being
sensible of his Afflictions, and share with him in all his Troubles.

What! (replies the Princess) is not Darbelle married in Florence? Is he not
Favorite to the Grand Duke? And (in a word) was he not established in that
Place with hopes to spend the remainder of his days there? No, Madam, (says La
Rock to her) nothing of all that you have said is true, and he never had any
other Employment (in a long solatary House (whither he had retired himself)
about three Miles from Florence) but to think on you, and to sigh and grieve
for your Absence Night and Day, which perhaps ere long you will believe. In
speaking these words he rose, and desired the Princess to give him leave to
speak to his Page, who he had sent about business, and waited there to return
him an Answer. No sooner had he left his place, but the Princes fell into a
great Confusion by what she had understood from him that she could not recover
her self.

She entered into a deep musing, so that she seemed immovable; she leaned
against one of the sides of the Theater, ruminating of a thousand things one
after another, and knew not what she should believe. Mariana's Brother had seen
Darbelle married, and La Rock swears he never was, but that he had always loved
her most tenderly; she considered that Mariana's Brother's Assertions were the
Foundations why she her self had married which was the Occasion of Darbelle
Death, after she had been the Cause of (...) Misfortunes: Calling to mind all
(...) afflicting Adventures, she could not refrain strain pouring down Floods
of Tears, and giving her self up to an excess of Sorrow which had took
possession of her Heart.

La Rock, who had order from his Master to leave his place to him, after he had
satisfied the Princess of his Innocence and made his Fidelity appear, returned
to give him an Account of what he had done, and in what Condition he had let
her, telling him she was now more perswadded of his Death than ever, insomuch
that this poor Lover dying with Impatience to discourse with her, with his
Heart laid open, could stay no longer, but went and supplied La Rock's place.
In this obscure place the Princess having pulled down her Hoods to hide her
Tears, so that Darbelle had no great Difficulty to keep himself unknown to her
for some time. She was plunged into so deep a study, that Darbelle was forced
to draw her out of it by speaking thus to her; Ah, Madam! what may be the cause
of all these Tears you shed? They would accuse a Heart (less barbarous than
yours) of Love? But after having made Darbelle die for Love and Despair, I can
never believe that you could ever be troubled for such a one as he. The
Princess at these words startled (as one new wakened out of a dreadful Dream)
remaining still leaning on the Pillaster that was by her, supposing him still
the same person that had spoke to her before, answered him; You but ill know my
Heart, which you so accuse of Infidelity, and I should be still happy, did not
my Love (in spite of me) yet seek for the dead, even to the Grave. Alas!
(continued she) Darbelle of whom you speak to me, is past seeing, and
notwithstanding all the Care and Pains you have taken to justify him, I know
too well he is false and ungrateful, yet nevertheless his cruel Idea still
haunts me every where. Believe not (adds she) that I would confess my weakness,
it I ever thought he could see me again; for, alas! he is dead; and could I
give the least credit to what you have told me of him, or that he died for love
of me, I know not the thing in the World that could afford me the least
Consolation.

Darbelle, who heard her speak, found so much Sincerity and Truth in her words,
that instead of answering her as La Rock had always done, at the same moment
felt such an Extremity of Grief, that it almost killed him; nor could he
refrain from bursting out in Tears. The Princess who found something more than
ordinary in his silence, lifted her Hoods a little up, and having perceived
Darbelle to weep, who still she took for La Rock Certainly (says she) Darbelle
is very happy in having such a faithful Friend as you, who so much interest
your self in things that perhaps have hardly ever concerned him. What would you
(ungrateful as you are, replies Darbelle) kill him yet a second time? O most
cruel Woman! satisfy your Malice in looking on his Blood that shall be added
to what you have already spilt. In saying these words, he drew out his Sword to
have pierced his own Heart, but the Princess, all in a fright, threw her self
about him, not yet knowing who he was, being in the same Dress with La Rock,
whose Face she had seen while he had discoursed with her, till the Transports
and the Words he uttered made her take more notice of him, who now she knew to
be Darbelle himself. She shrieked out, and stepping back to avoid him, she fell
down, being obstructed by the Bench which was behind her.

By good fortune there was not any body come yet into the place where they
were, that might observe what passed. The Princess being thus fallen down,
swooned with the Fright and Surprise, which she had to see Darbelle before her
Eyes, who so long she had imagined dead, obliged Darbelle to think of nothing
but to help her; but it was impossible so soon to bring her to her Senses, and
to recover her, the sight of Darbelle alive had struck her to the Heart with
mortal Wounds. She continued in this Condition for more than half an Hour; the
Woman who she brought with her came to her, and joined her Endeavors to those
of Darbelle and La Rock, not knowing the Cause of her Lady's Disorder.

At last after some time the Princess opened her Eyes, and looking first round
about her, she fixed them steadfastly upon Darbelle, gazing on him to be
informed if what she saw was Truth; but having well considered him, she let her
Head fall negligently, which she rested on her Hand Darbelle bid La Rock
retire, that so the Princess's Woman might do the like, which was soon
performed; and La Rock went some distance from them, with the Woman that came
with Clitie, who he entertained with Discourse. Darbelle seeing himself alone
with the Princess, took up the Discourse, and said to her;

Where are those happy minutes, Madam? How far have you banished from me, which
you said you would employ upon all occasions to see and speak to me? Alas! What
have I done since that time and what Crime have I been guilty of that you
should run the hazard of your life to shun my presence? Speak (ungrateful fair)
and tell me why you have so unworthily deserted me? Reproach me now with those
Perfidies with which these three days past you have made a pretense only to
excuse your own Falsehood: Pray tell me to whom I am married, as you would
persuade me; and to whom have I ever offered a Heart that I have carefully
(though to no purpose) reserved for you alone?

Darbelle pronounced these words with a tone in which Anger and Love had equal
shares, that the Princess was quite astonished. But the greatest Emotion that
the presence of Darbelle had raised in her heart, turned all to Joy, of that
Joy which she had to see him yet alive, who she so long believed to be dead,
nor could hinder her self from giving him marks of it; wherefore (without
studying any Answer to his Reproaches, nor concealing those Sentiments which
her Duty perhaps would have made her dissemble at another time, she said to
him) Ah, Darbelle! is it your self that I see? and may I be assured it is not
some Phantome that represents it self to me? Yes, Madam, (answered Darbelle) I
am yet living, but now I am ten thousand times more miserable than had I died,
since I am ten thousand times more amorous.

The End of the Second Part.
CLITIE, A NOVEL. The third and last Part, being an Addition to the two first
Parts.
IT was some considerable time ere the Princess could believe Darbelle was
alive, although she saw him before her Face; she had formed such strong Idea's of
his Death, that he himself could scarcely make her sensible he lived. They
gazed upon each other for a while, and the Emotions of their Souls were so
violent and sudden, that they hardly knew where they were, or what they did.

But if Darbelle was amazed to hear her ask if still he lived, the Princess was
no less confused, a thousand. Thoughts were crouding to get entrance into her
Heart, and her Tears and Sighs increased the cruel Tempest, and nothing but a
total wreck could be expected: A second time she falls into a Swoon, nor could
Darbelle with the assistance of La Rock and Celia ( Clitie's Woman) with all
their Care and best Endeavors call her life back to its fair Habitation: at
last it was concluded (lest the press of People who were now coming in, should
see her in this condition) that they should carry her unto her Coach, and send
her home with her Woman; nor did Darbelle fail to be by her on foot (meeting
many of his Enemies, who though they knew him not, made him suspect they did)
even to the Princess's Lodgings, where her Husband and several other Noblemen
were coming forth to go wait upon the King to the Playhouse.

La Rock having his mind more disengaged than Darbelle, told him the hazard he
was in of being known, and that this rash proceeding would be a means to
deliver him into the Hands of those who would not fail to take his life;
besides, he represented to him the Danger to which he exposed the Princess,
should he be found with her, who in the estate in which she was, could no ways
be capable at present of giving him any further satisfaction. But Darbelle was
deaf to all his Arguments, nor would he stir until he had seen the Princess
once again, who by this time (what with the shogging of the Coach, and Celia's
care) was a little recovered, and looking about her saw the disconsolate
Darbelle by her Coach side; she roused her drooping Spirits, and was about to
speak at the same moment he prevented her (saying) Madam, I find the sight of
me is grievous to you, and I could wish my Destiny had been so kind to have let
me had that Death you spoke of, rather than let me live a life that is
burdensome to all that know me. She interrupted him here, and in a soft and
mournful tone, her Eyes distilling Tears on her fair lovely Cheeks, and with
looks so sad and languishing, she said:

Darbelle, expose not thus a Life which Heaven is pleased to save, a Life more
precious far than all the Joys on Earth; and if you love me still, (as I have
cause enough to think) preserve it till we have unravelled this great Mystery;
I can no more at present, but ere long I Will send you farther orders what to do;
I see the Prince is going to the Play, and should he find us two together, the
Consequence I fear would prove too fatal, both to our Lives and Honors.

Darbelle was all Obedience, and lest they should be surpised speaking
together, left her entering into her Apartment, and hastened home to his. No
sooner was he got into his Chamber with La Rock, but he threw himself upon his
Bed, where for above an hour he lay without the least sign of Life, till (at
length) by the Assistance of La Rock, he began to open his Eyes, from whence
whole floods of tears did flow.

O, La Rock! (said he) was ever any Misery like to mine? What shall I do? what
will become of me? O lovely Charmer! (goes he on) there needed not this last
Affliction; why would you have me still preserve a Life so full of Woes and
Griefs? Then ceased a while; and after a small pause, which multitudes of Sighs
did cause, he began to rave, and cried, O you immortal Powers! what do you
mean! Can Heaven be Heaven? Can it be the Throne of Mercy, and yet not show one
glimpse of it to me? Has Justice banished thence all other Attributes, and that
bright sparkling Roof beset with Golden Characters of Light, has it not one,
not one propitious Star for me? Must I be still the Mark at which you level all
your Vengeance? But, oh! why name I you who silently look on and see the Sport
and Reaks my Fortune plays me?

La Rock, while his Transports were thus furious, thought it convenient not to
interrupt them, but stood a mute Spectator of his Master's Passion, who having
been silent for a time (his Grief and Anguish stifling all his words, lay
rankling at his Heart) steps to his Bedside, and with all the reason he could
urge, endeavored to allay his Trouble: What (says he to him) is become of all
your Courage? and whither is your Patience flown? Patience is stale (replies
he) and I am weary of it, my passive Fortitude has quite forsaken me, and
nothing but despair supplies its place. At least (answers La Rock) preserve
your self till you have found out the Cause of all these Troubles; my mind
still tells me Clitie is not so much to blame as you imagine, and it is most
certain there has been soul Play used to both of you; her last words to you
were not like those of Hate, but rather (might I judge) of Love and Pity; and
it is not impossible but Heaven may have yet in store a milder Fortune for you:
Wherefore once more look up, and hope the best, for worse cannot befall you.

O, La Rock! (says he, taking him by the Hand) these words imply you are the
best of Friends, but they can never ease my Heart; they are to me as Cordials
to a breathless Corpse, and Fate has set me beyond the reach of Comfort: Heaven,
my Friends, Clitie, and Hope it self, have all deserted me; could I admit the
smallest Hope, I yet were happy; but alas! that Bladder that should buoy up the
sinking man, with me is burst, and leaves me in the Ocean of my Miserles, it is
the last thing leaves us but our Lives; but Life is forced upon me still to
augment my wretched State; should Clitie (as you would persuade me) love me
still, what Profit will it afford me? She is another now, and I must never
expect to see her more.

The poor afflicted Princess was no sooner got into her Chamber, but she went
to Bed, watring her Pillow with those streams of Tears which fell from her fair
Eyes. She began to reflect on this last Adventure, Darbelle still lives (says
she to her self) and, as he says, (and I, alas! too late believe) is constant
still. What Demon (envious of our Loves) contrived such false Reports? And
cursed Adraste, what more hellish Devil could make thee tell me that thou saw
him married? Thus for some time she would take the unfortunate Darbelle's part,
when in an instant all her thoughts would change, (and she would say) What though
he does live, may he not yet be married? It Is true, I had no Witness of his
Death, but bare Report, but of his Falsehood, I have Adraste, Mariana's Brother,
who in Florence saw him with his Wife, and whose Portrait yet lies by me;
wherefore then should I afflict my self for one so false and treacherous, no!
let him go back again to Florence, there he will find relief, and in his
Spouse's Arms forget his Troubles. These Thoughts prevailed a while, yet
(maugre all) she could not think a man so guilty (as he seemed to be) would
leave his Wife, Employments, and the Favor of the great Duke, and run the
hazards of so long a Journey, nay, and his Life to boot to come to Paris,
unless it were to clear himself. She could fix satisfied on nothing, but with
the Impatience she had to be better fatisfied, early in the Morning she sent
for Mariana, who suspecting nothing of the business, came to wait on her; but
no sooner did she enter, but the Princess's Blood rose all in Blushes on her
Cheeks, and I know not what of shivering possessed her Heart.

They being alone, she made her sit down upon a Couch by her, then in a low and
lamentable tone she told her all that had happened since Darbelle came to
Paris, and that he was returned again alive and unmarried, and that her Brother
had deceived them all. Mariana was not a little surpised at this Relation,
however she concealed her Sentiments, and assumed the Discourse; Can it be
possible, Madam (says she) that what you say is truth, and are you confident
you are not abused? Yes, Mariana (answers the Princess) I am abused, and so is
he, but who has done this piece of Wickedness, is yet to me a Mystery. Mariana
was glad to hear her say this, and seeing she did not in the least mistrust her
(since she had so freely discovered to her all her Adventures with Darbelle,
and his return to Paris) and remembering that Machivillian Maxim, That those who
begin in sin, must never quit that Road till they have reached their Journey's
end,) seemed to be much concerned; and fearing lest the Princess should send
for Adraste, and by Gold and Presents get the Truth out of him (for she knew
him to be one who would boggle at nothing, if Gold were the Reward) told the
Princess that she would write to her Brother, who she pretended was gone into
England with the Ambassador, and know the truth, and would leave no means
unattempted to sound the very bottom of this business.

They had many other Discourses concerning this Adventure, when Mariana
pretended urgent business, and took her leave, promising to come and see her
again next day, in the mean time she would consider about what was best to be
done in an affair of such great Consequence.

She no sooner quits the Princess, but with all the Wings that Fear could lend
her, she flew to find out Lysidor, who she acquainted with the whole matter.
The Prince when he first heard it, was no less amazed at it, than she had been;
but having well considered every thing, he ordered her to meet him in the
Evening at a certain place which he appointed, in the mean time to keep all
secret, and to go back again to the Princess, and endeavor all she could to
wheedle out of her Darbelle's abode, whose Blood he told her, should wash all
clean again.

Mariana left him, but it was not in her power to quit the horror of her Guilt,
she now began to apprehend a fatal Consequence from all her Treachery had done,
and had she not been married and with Child, would have discovered the Deceit
to the Princess, and have made Atonement with her own Life; but her Heart was
hardened, and it was now too late to repent. She doubted not but if she could
contrive some means to send her Brother out of the Kingdom ere the Princess
could speak to him, all might do well enough yet. Upon which consideration she
sends word to her Brother to come to her with all speed, but by good fortune
the Messenger who she sent, found him not at home.

As soon as Mariana had parted from the Prince, he began to think what Course
he should steer, and after many Contrivances he found none so expedient as the
private making away Darbelle, and none so proper to effect the business as
Mariana's Brother, who had so much injured him, that it was impossible he would
ever pardon him; therefore sending a Lacquey to Adraste's Lodging, and not
finding him at home, he gave him orders to seek him out, and bid him come to
him, which was soon performed. And Adraste having already felt the Bounty of
the Prince, was not slack in making what haste he could to receive his
Commands. The Prince had on purpose taken Coach to go abroad and air himself,
and had told the Messenger who he had sent for Adraste, where he should meet
him.

The Lacquey performed his Master's orders so well, that in less than an Hour,
he brought him to the Prince, who at his first seeing him, ran to him, and
embracing him; Adraste (says he) I am already infinitely obliged to you, and
you are a man on whom I shall make it my study to show all marks of Favor to,
that I am able; and I doubt not in the least but you will deserve more than I
shall be capable of bestowing. Adraste wondered at this unusual Discourse of
the Prince, (and with a low bow, replies) Sir, I wish it lay in my power to
deserve these Favors you are pleased to speak of, at your Hands; and the small
service I have tendered you, your goodness has already largely rewarded: But
(goes he on) if the Life, or all the Fortune I have, will make me any ways
further serviceable to your Highness, you may command me as your humble Vassal.

No more, Adraste (replies the Prince) I am sufficiently satisfied of your
Power, and all I desire of you now, is the Will to put that Power in Execution,
not so much for my sake, as for your own future safety: For know Darbelle is
returned to Paris, and has already spoken to the Princess, but neither of them
apprehend as yet the Cheat that has been put upon them, nor must they; for it is
most certain when he comes to understand the Trick you have played him, in
averring that you saw him married in Florence, your Life must be the Offering
to atone his Rage and Revenge. Therefore for the present be not seen abroad,
but conceal your self in a place where I shall appoint you, till I get
Information where he is, and put you in a way of securing your own life, and my
quiet; and here are five hundred Pistols in part of what you may expect when I
can hear you say Darbelle is no more.

Adraste was much surpised at these Proposals of the Prince; but considering
there were no other means for his safety than by Darbelle's Death, and how
easily it might be done without any Discovery; but above all, the five hundred
Pistols in hand, and a Promise of as many more when the Deed should be done,
returned him this Answer; Your Highness is so generous and obliging, that my
Life and all that I have, are no longer mine, than while they are employed in
performing your Commands, which here I swear as soon as possible I can, to
execute; let me but know where this Disturber of your Peace and Quiet is, and I
will quickly ease you of your trouble. Having said this, the Prince assured him
of his Friendship, and both went into his Coach, which conveyed Adraste to a
private place to lie incognito till further Orders.

After this the Prince went home to his Apartment, and inquiring after the
Princess, he was informed she was not well, and kept her Chamber: The Prince
seemed to take no notice of it (though he knew well enough the cause of her
Malady) but made her a Visit after his usual manner, and was taking his leave
just as Celia enters and whispered her Lady, of which the Prince took no small
notice, suspecting it was something that concerned Darbelle (as indeed it
proved) however he kept on his way as tho he was the least concerned in it, but
calling to a Lacquey that was by him, gave him strict orders to watch Celia
when she came out of the Princess's Chamber, and to observe whither she went,
what she did, and with whom she should speak, and if it happened to be any man,
that he should carefully dog him home to his Lodging, and to make the most
exact and secret Enquiry that he could to learn who he was, and return him a
faithful Account.

The Prince's Suspicions were not to little purpose, for she came to acquaint
her Mistress, That one of the Gentlemen that were with her at the Playhouse
the last night, was walking in a little Orchard behind the House, and came from
his Master to enquire her Health, and receive her Commands.

The Princess had before given Celia private orders to watch when any one
should inquire for her, and to inform her of it, who had for that purpose writ
a Letter which she designed the first opportunity should be delivered to
Darbelle, which she put into her Pocket; and after some time, musing and
walking about the Room, she went down with a pretense to walk in the Gardens,
and take the air; Celia followed her to give her notice where he attended, and
the Prince's Lacquey followed her to give his Lord notice who he was.

She went not directly to the place, nor did our Spy directly follow them; but
the Princess having taken a turn or two in one Walk, went to another, from
thence to a third, till at last as though not designed, she came to the place
where La Rock waited, who no sooner saw her, but seemed as though he would have
retired to give way to the Princess's more private walking, who looking round
about her, saw none but her Woman, bid him stay; this while the cunning Lacquey
had hid himself behind a thick Hedge, where he could see all that passed, yet
be concealed that none could see him.

The Princess who knew she had no long time to stay there, it being a place
where most of the ordinary sort of those who belonged to the Palace used to
recreate themselves, walked by him, and slipped into his hand the Letter she had
before prepared. She inquired after his Health, bid La Rock tell him, if his
Master thought it convenient to let her know his abode, she would send the
faithful Mariana to him, who would be no small assistance to them in the
finding out the Foundation of both their Misfortunes. La Rock with all
Reverence took his leave of her, and flew to his Master with the Princess's
Letter; but Lysidor's Lacquey as nimble as himself, was as soon at Darbelle's
lodging as La Rock; he pretended a little while after to inquire for a
Gentleman, whose Name he had forgot, which he knew if he heard it named; but to
the best of my memory (says he) he told me this was his Lodging. I know not who
you should mean (answered the Servant of the House) for we have two Gentlemen
who lodge here, the one they call Mr. Conrade, the other Mr. La Rock. No,
certainly (says the Lacquey again) it is none of them, and sure I have mistook
his directions. Oh, I beg your pardon (goes he on) yonder just at the turning
of the Corner of the Street passes the very Person who I seek: so took his
leave, and went to find out his Prince, who he doubted not but to please with
his diligence and success, not only in dogging Celia (as he had been ordered)
but also by making a Discovery that the Princess was concerned in the business,
who had given the man a Letter, and that he had not only found out his Lodging,
but as he thought his Name which he was confident must be one of the two the
Servant where they lodged had told him.

La Rock no sooner entered, but with Transports of Joy he tells his Master that
he had seen and spoke with the Princess, and that he questioned not but he
would in the end find her free and innocent, and that undoubtedly there had
been great Treachery, could they but find out where it lay; to which purpose
she desired he would acquaint her with his Lodging, and that she would send
Mariana her faithful Confident unto him. But Darbelle (at the very Name of
Mariana (for what Reason he knew not) started, as at some sudden Accident, and
an unusual Horror seized him all over, his very Soul was turned, and a harsh
unpleasant noise seemed to grate his Ears at the very sound of Mariana --)
interrupted him (saying) I know no grounds I have for my Suspicion, but I fear
that Ma -- There his Speech faltred, and he could not go through with the word.
That Woman (I say) has had a large share in causing all those Miseries I now
endure; nor dare I any longer trust her; for if my Suspicions are true, that
it is she that has robbed me of my Rest and Peace, nay, of my Clitie too, she
will not stop there, but take from me my life, when once she has it in her
power.

La Rock knew there was much Reason for what he said, considering that after
all the Protestations she had made of Fidelity and Friendship to his Master,
promising to give him a faithful Account of all that passed with Clitie,
especially were there the least Suspicion of a Rival, kept silent: Add to this,
that they had heard that the Prince had given her a good Estate, and married
her to a Gentleman something related to him, they no longer doubted but she was
the Imposter that had betrayed them.

However, waving any further talk of her at present, he delivered him the
Princess's Letter, which Darbelle kissed a thousand times ere he opened it,
blessing the dear Hand of her who writ and sent it. The Letter was as follows.

NOw is the time my Misfortunes are grown incurable, since I find the
unfortunate Darbelle not only lives, but loves me still; I know not yet who to
accuse, but I have been persuaded not only by an universal Report, but by a
particular Messenger who (...) sent into Florence, that you were married there,
and had gotten the Esteem and Favor of the great Duke, and resolved no more to
think of seeing these Parts again, and withal brought me your pretended Lady's
Picture, which to my great Sorrow I have still preserved by me; and soon after,
not only my self, but the whole Court was assured of your death. Judge then,
Darbelle, if after all these Misinformations of your Inconstancy and Death, if
I could do less than give my self up to a total Despair, till by the Persuasion
of my faithful Confident, Mariana, and her Brother (who was the Person I sent
into Tuscany) together with my Father's Commands, and the assiduous Addresses
and daily Importunities of a Prince whose Love and Constancy seemed to
challenge some return; I made him Master of my self by marrying him. Nor did I
need any further Confirmation of your Infidelity, than after three Months
writing to you almost every day, I received not one Line of Answer. This I am
fore'd to tell you for my own Justification, and doubt not but you have as
large and specious Pretensions for yours; which though it will be some
Satisfaction to me to find you innocent, yet will it give me more in enjoying
the last fatal stroke my Misfortunes can lay on me, and ease me at once both of
my Life and Misery; and that since I cannot live for Darbelle, I can willingly,
and with content die for him.


Darbelle, after having read this Letter, seemed as a perfect Statue, and stood
as motionless as so much Marble. La Rock who was an Ear-witness to this. fatal
News became almost as senseless as his Master, but considering with himself,
that the Grief which bleeds not in the Eyes, still festers inwardly, and clogs
the Heart, broke silence first; Now it is plain (says he to him) you both have
been betrayed, and it is as evident by whom. O hellish Perfidie! O cursed
Crocodile! (says Darbelle) who whilst thou seem'dst to weep, and bear a part in
my Misfortunes, was thus contriving my Confusion. O damned deceitful Mariana!
Eve in her fall was innocence to thee. What Plagues, what Torture, Death, what
Hell it self has Punishment enough to give thee? And thy accursed Brother, more
false and treacherous, and more inventive of Lies, than that Devil that first
seduced Mankind, and flung him from the state of Innocence. But you are fruit
both of a Bough, which with the Stock and all the Branches, I will cut down and
throw to everlasting Ruin. And Lysidor, thou Prince (of naught but Devils) I
have marked thee out for sure Destruction; nor all the Kings on Earth, nor all
the Fears of Death, nay, nor thy Wife her self, shall stop this vengeful Arm
from doing Justice on thee.

Here he stood still a while and read again the Letter. Nay, I will do it (he
cried) if I were sure this act (with me) would ruin all Mankind, and mould the
World into a second Chaos. Thus the Transports of his Fury thought of nothing
but Revenge. But a little after, (with a deep sigh, his Eyes brim-full of Tears
and Languishments, Love takes his place) But, O La Rock, La Rock, (says he) my
dearest charming Clitie still is true; she loves, unfortunate as I am, still;
and since she cannot come a pure and spotless Virgin to my Arms, resolves to
wash her guilt off with her Blood. Alas! she was betrayed as well as I. Then
stops again, and having paused a while; Lie still my Heart (says he) and hush
thy Injuries a while asleep, and use the utmost means you can to save the life
of one more precious than my Soul, of one the Gods themselves would mourn to
part with, and grieve a Loss can never be repaid: She must not, shall not die
for me; or if she does, (flying again into a raving Fit) I Will sacrifice the
lives of all those wicked Monsters, nay, the Blood of all their cursed Race, to
appease her Injured Ghost.

In the mean time the Prince's Lacquey had given him a full Account of every
thing; Mariana being by, who as soon as she heard the Name of La Rock, knew the
other must certainly be Darbelle under the false Name of Conrade. The Lacquey
was dismissed, and the Prince and Mariana staid together above two hours
consulting what to do, knowing that without they could find some speedy way to
prevent it, nothing could hinder a Discovery of their Practice. They thought on
many Projects, but fixed on none but what they first designed (to wit)
Darbelle's Death. That will not be enough (says the cruel Mariana) for whilst
La Rock survives we are not safe; they must both die (as they have lived)
together. The Prince was soon brought to consent to it, and without more ado
left Mariana and went to her Brother, who (as was said before) was concealed in
a private House that the Prince had ordered. When he came to him (says he)
Adraste, have you well considered what I told you last? And are your
Resolutions firm to the Design? As firm (answers Adraste) as my Love and Faith
to you; and were I sure the Deed would brand me over with Curses, nay, throw
Anathama's on all my Race, and in the end procure the Wheel, I would not boggle
at it.

The Prince embraced him, and commended his Friendship and Resolution, and
withal told him, since none in the World but them two and his Sister knew of
the deceit, none but themselves should be employed in making good what with so
much Success they had begun. Therefore presently disguishing themselves in
Russians Habits, and arming with sure and good Weapons, (the Night now coming
on apace) they went out of the House into the Street, where Lysidor's Man had
told him he had dogged the Gentleman: They had not waited long ere (by a light
that was brought to the door) they perceived two Men in Cloaks come forth: The
Prince made no doubt but they were the very same he looked for, but for more
certainty he went up to one of them, and softly touching him on the Shoulder,
Darbelle (says he) a word with you in private: It happened to be La Rock who he
had taken for his Master; however the faithful La Rock thought it not safe to
inform him of his Mistake, but throwing his Cloak aside, says, Who is that? The
Prince replies, One from the Princess Clitie: At which La Rock stepping a
little nearer him to hear what he would say; The Princess, says Lysidor,
commends her to you, and has sent you this, running at La Rock with his Sword,
which by good chance missed his Body, and was so entangled in his Cloak, that
he had time to draw his own in his Defense ere the Prince could disingage it.
Adraste followed the Prince's Example, and set upon Darbelle, who as soon as he
had heard himself named, had put himself into a posture to defend him.

The Combat was not long, for the second Pass La Rock made, he run the Prince
quite through the Heart, who immediately fell, pronouncing these words, I am
justly rewarded for all my Treachery; and so ended his Life. But Darbelle,
after he had given Adraste several Wounds, seeing a light appear at the other
end of the Street, together with La Rock, (without inquiring who or what they
were had set upon them) fled to avoid being apprehended; they had both the good
fortune not to be wounded, and lodged themselves in another quarter of the City
in a place as private as, the former.

The Light (we spoke of) was a Magistrate of the City, with several of his
Officers, were going to search a suspected House in that Bye-street for Goods
that had been stolen; who, so soon as they came to the place (where before they
heard, as they thought, some clashing of Swords) they found the Prince (who at
present they knew not) dead, and a little from him the false Adraste (all
wounded and bloody) on the ground, who they perceived still had life in him; he
caused both the Bodies to be taken up, and conveyed to a House hard by, where
they laid Adraste into Bed, and sent for Chyrurgeons to dress his Wounds, and
if possible to recover him again, that they might learn of him the meaning of
that Adventure, and who he was that was killed, for the Disguise the Prince had
on, hindered them from knowing him.

The next Morning (the Prince not having been at his Lodging all Night, not
being known ever before to stay out) Enquiry was made to know what was become
of him, and about four a Clock in the Afternoon the Report of his Death was
spread over the whole City; but they kept it at present from the Princess, who
was bewailing the Misfortunes of Darbelle to Mariana, who was come at that time
to visit her; Alas, Mariana! (says she to her) What can we think of this
Affair? Who has betrayed us? What more than savage Beast could do so barbarous
an Act? What you tell me (says Mariana) is to me all Mystery, and it would
require some Oracle to solve the AEnigma; however, Madam, you can never be
blamed, and all that you have done, was what the most wise and virtuous Lady
living might justify; therefore afflict your self no more about it, but leave
it to the Heavens and Darbelle, who you say is alive and returned, (a thing,
but that you say it, I could scarce believe) to find out the Treachery. Come
dry those Eyes, and think of this no more; your Duty now does bind you wholly
to your Lord, in whom you will find those Joys and Comforts will allay your
Sorrows. You are young, and in your Beauty's Prime, and should not wear so
black a Cloud of Woes; you will give him cause, it may be, to suspect your Love,
and think some other Object has usurped your Heart; I would not for a thousand
Worlds that he should see you thus. O, Mariana! (replies Clitie) can you ere
think I loved, and loved so well, and entertain one mite of Joy, while I have
ruined the most constant, tender, and most deserving man alive; alive, said I!
alas, would he had died when false Report made me give credit to it; he is yet
alive, but will not long be so; his Griefs and his Misfortunes will soon put an
end to his Life, and all the Guilt will light upon my Head.

Thus were they discoursing when one came in and told them the Prince was
murdered, and that Adraste, Mariana's. Brother (who was mortally wounded, as
they believed) was suspected to have been the Murderer. My Brother kill the
Prince! (says Mariana) sure it cannot be; and without saying any more, she went
to know the certainty.

The Princess now was left alone, and fresh streams of tears run down her
lovely Face, when she complained thus to her self; Ah, wretched Clitie! when
will thy cruel Destiny have done? When will the Dregs of all its wrathful
Malice be poured out? What is reserved in all the power of Heaven to ease thy
Sufferings? Unhappy Prince! unhappy 'cause thou lov'dst me, and I a thousand
times unhappy 'cause I was thy Wife. Thus we will leave her bemoaning her sad
Misfortunes.

The Chyrurgeons had by this time searched and dressed all Adraste's Wounds,
who was now come a little to himself again, and had Promises from them, if he
would be ruled, he might do well. But Mariana arriving, would by no means be
kept from seeing her Brother; she ran to him, and conjured him to tell her how
he came thus wounded, and who had killed the Prince: But he (not suspecting
that she knew any thing of Darbelle's being in Paris, having been kept up close
by the Prince that he could not see her) told her, that as the Prince was going
upon a Design wherein he had done him the honor to make him his Companion,
they were set upon in the Street by men they knew not, who had left them in
that Condition. The Chyrurgeons would not suffer her to discourse or stay any
longer with him, alleging it would retard the Cure, if not render all their
Medicines useless, put her out of the Room, and left him to himself.

Darbelle was no sooner in his new Lodgings, but new Afflictions did possess
his Heart; he was more surpised at this last Adventure, than at all the rest;
he raised a thousand Doubts about it, which would not let him take one moment's
rest that Night; he reflected afresh on all his Calamities, and particularly on
this last Misfortune; and Jealousy was now the Master of his Soul, he turned
all to Clitie's Disadvantage, imagined her yet false, and all her Oaths and
Protestations Air, and the last Letter and the Message she sent by La Rock to
know his Lodging, was only a Trap to ensnare his Life; and that those Bravo's
who had assaulted him (as they themselves said) were sent to him by the
Princess; he raved and exclaimed against her like a Madman, nor could all that
La Rock could say, mitigate his Passion; he called her perfidious, ungrateful
Tygress, Murderer, and all the barbarous Names his Fury could invent; nor did
stick to threaten her self, and fully resolved the next Morning to execute this
Resolution.

La Rock still preached Patience to him, telling him this might be a Mistake as
well as all the rest, and desired leave to go out and inform himself what those
Assassinates were, and what they meant. Darbelle could not in reason but
consent to what so much he longed to know. La Rock putting off his Disguise he
had on when he saw Clitie, went to the Exchange and to several Coffee-houses,
where he was soon informed that the Prince was murdered last Night, and Adraste
mortally wounded, and that none knew the Murderers.

The unhappy Darbelle still raved of nothing but Blood and Revenge, pouring out
whole Volleys of Curses and Imprecations against the innocent Princess: What,
Traytress! (would he say) was it not enough for thee to murder Amasis, and make
me the wretched Executioner, but you must seek my Blood? Inhumane as thou art,
I who have over tenderly adored you, I that have suffered so many Afflictions
and Miseries for thy sake, must I be made (to sum up all your Cruelty) the
Draught to quench your bloody Thirst? Thou, worse than Hell, could not you
spare that life a few short minutes more, which would it self extinguish
shortly, but you must ride me post to death? In these and such like Cogitations
was he, when La Rock entered.

Well then (says Darbelle) what news from Hell? What was that She-Devil's
Design? And who were they that did attempt our Lives? He spoke these words in
such a furious tone, his Eyes all sparkling Rage and Fire when La Rock told
him, it is Prince Lysidor whom I have killed, and Adraste that you have wounded
mortally. Thanks, bounteous Heaven (replies Darbelle) I find you now begin to
mend your hand, and have not quite deserted me, so let all fall who have
contrived my Ruin, so let her fall who first occasioned it.

There is no question but there was diligent search made to find those men who
slew the Prince, but all in vain. In a few days after his Body was interred
with all the Pomp and State that became his Birth and Quality, while the poor
Princess bewailed a double Loss; for she began now to suspect Darbelle, and
impute it to his Jealousy, which gave her far greater disquiets than any she
had had. Will Fortune (says she) never tire! Can she be constant only to my
Miseries? Can she have any Vengeance yet in store? Or if she has, Why does she
thus by piece-meals deal it out? O Fate, be merciful in Cruelty, and heap my
Woes by Wholesale on, that with their Weight I may be crushed into my Mother
Earth again. But why do I complain? My cruel Destiny is deaf to all my Prayers,
and takes delight to see me suffer; what then remains, but that I brave my Foe,
and arm my self with Courage to endure the worst?

Hitherto the false Mariana was prosperous enough in all her Undertakings, and
all her Plots succeeded to her wish; but now she feared all her Deceits were
found out, and doubted not but they were Darbelle and La Rock who had slain the
Prince and wounded her Brother, and that the next that fell, must be her self;
she studied how to escape the Blow, and would not let her active Brain have
rest, till she had found some way to revenge the Prince's Death, and Adraste's
Wounds. She thought at first to have discovered, that Darbelle was in Paris,
but that Design soon vanished; for she imagined after the Prince's Death,
Darbelle had surely flown to his Retreat in Tuscany, and she should but alarm
the Town to no purpose, and therefore she contrived another way, which was to
write to the Princess, as from Darbelle, in which she made him own the Fact,
and glory in the Prince's fall; by which means she doubted not but to set so
great a variance between Darbelle and the Princess, that there should be no
likelihood of his ever seeing her, or at least speaking to her again.

Big with this Project, she hastens home and writes the Letter, and having some
of those Billets by her, which Darbelle had formerly writ to Clitie, and which
she had kept still by her, it was no difficult matter to imitate his Hand so
well, that the afflicted Princess in her Tears and Sorrows could not well
distinguish it.

Having finished her Letter, she went to the Princess's Apartment, with the
show of an inconceivable Trouble, which she did not now altogether dissemble,
for her Brother's Wounds, and the ill posture of her own Affairs, gave her no
small Inquietudes.

She found the Princess (as she could wish) alone, and almost drowned in
Sorrow, bewailing her hard Misfortunes, who as soon as she saw her enter, began
to renew her Complaints, and made such Lamentations they almost touched the
Heart of cruel Mariana, but she was pitiless, Remorse was still a Stranger to
her Breast; she looked on Clitie with so sad and mournful Eyes, as told her
almost what she came about. The Princess made her sit down by her, telling her,
now her Fate had done its worst; she demanded of her many things, but Mariana
answered all with Sighs and Tears, looking as though her Soul was just expiring,
which the Princess taking notice of, asked what new matter she had to tell her?
Surely (says she to her) your looks have something that would fain discover
what lies at your Heart; your Face seems filled with something of Import; the
things must needs be strange within the Book, when it does bare so sad a
Title Page. Mariana replied, My Countenance but suits my Heart, and blabs out
what I would gladly have concealed. -- But here her Soos and Sighs stopped up
the passage of her Speech. Speak on (says the poor Princess) for I can hear you
now, I am now grown familiar with my Misery. As soon (says Mariana to her
again) as Grief will give me leave, I will tell you one of the saddest Stories
ever pierced your Ear. Darbelle -- at that word the Princess started, as at
some horrid sight, Proceed (says she) What of Darbelle? Is he dead, or is he
taken? Alas, unhappy Princess! (answers Mariana) his Death's a Favor Fate will
not bestow on you; would he were dead, or rather (for why should I wish Death
to one I vowed an everlasting Friendship to) would I were dead ere I was made
the Messenger of these sad Tidings I am come to tell you, Darbelle (by what
means I know not) found my Lodging out, and coming to me (all wreaking in the
Prince's Blood, in which he took such pride, that I (amazed) could not demand
him any thing. Mariana (says he to me) I am come to give you thanks for all
your cares and faithfulness in my Amors with that perfidious Princess, and
have but this one last Request to make, which by our former Friendship, I
conjure you to perform. Go to that false Ungrate (says he) and tell her how you
see me; tell her (goes he on) I now have on my Wedding-Cloaths, and all the
Glory in the World would sit but loose and troublesome upon me, when compared
to this rich purple, bloody Dress: Bid her expect no more to hear from me, for
this shall be the last: With that, he put this Letter into my Hand, and went
directly forth again. Grief and the horrid Object of the dear Prince's Blood,
which still looked fresh and beautiful upon his Garments, strock such a Terror
in my Soul, that I no longer could support my self, but sunk down on the floor,
where I continued long before my Senses did return; but then, alas! it was too
late, or else I would have raised the House to have stopped the Murderer; and
fearing to bring your Virtue and Honor into question, if it should be known
that he who killed your Husband was the Ghost at the Ball, and the next night
the Shepherd, for whose sake you made a second Ball, where you appointed an
Assignation with him in the Playhouse. These things came all into my thoughts,
for which I let him make his escape, (knowing his own guilty Conscience will in
time be worse to him than death) and came to render you this true Account, and
deliver you the Letter which he left.

Mariana having ended her Discourse, the Princess took the Letter, and in
opening it, It is enough (she said) it is enough, you heavenly Powers, keep
back the remnant of your Anger, and let my Death at once appease your further
Wrath; then read these words:

The much wronged Darbelle to the persidious Clitie.
YOu taught me first the way to Blood, in which I am grown expert; you might by
Amasis have learned I could admit no Rival, I would condole your Widowhood, did
it not thwart the Joys which fill my Heart to see your Husband dead. My
Injuries were great, and nothing but his Blood could make me satisfaction; but
least my sight should ere offend your Eyes, I Will fly as far as day does spread
his Wings, and having by this glorious Act appeased my tortured Soul a little,
I Will take such ways, that I ere long will banish your Idea from my Heart, till
when I never shall be what formerly I was,

Darbelle.


The Princess read this Letter with a seeming calmness, but when that she had
done, and found Darbelle was indeed (for so the Letter tells) her Husband's
Murderer, it would require a Heart as much afflicted as her own, and one more
eloquent than ever was, but to conceive one half of what possessed her Soul,
she immediately took her bed, nor could the care of all her Friends, her
Kindred, or Physicians, procure one word from her, or make her take the least
nourishment for three whole days, which so dispoil'd the Beauties of her Face,
and brought her Body to that low estate, that all despaired to see her live a
day.

When a man was brought into her Chamber, sitting in an armed Chair, all sick
and wounded, and placed by her Bedside, he was Adraste, who hearing the sad
Condition of the Princess, and finding he was himself departing, desired leave
of her Father to be brought to Clitie, telling him that he, and he alone could
ease his Daughter, and work a Cure which no Physician with their Medicines
could: he desired to be left alone with her, or at least that they would
withdraw a little from the Bedside, for what he had to say was short, and only
for her Ear.

All things thus disposed (the almostexpiring Adraste) raising his voice so
high that the Princess might hear him, Unhappy Princess (says he to her) behold
a Malefactor at your Feet, imploring yours and Heaven's Pardon; behold the
false Adraste at the point of Death, yet cannot die till he has made you happy.
At the naming Adraste, the Princess (whose Eyes till now had been closed)
opened them, and looking on him, Can there be any happiness for me (replies the
Princess in a tone of one just giving up the Ghost)? Have you an Art to bribe
the Destinies? Or can you change an immutable Decree? No less than this can
ever make me happy. O hear me out (says he, interrupting her) my life is too
too short to tell you what I would, I feel it mouldring every minute: Darbelle
is yet true; the deceased unhappy Prince to gain your Love, did bribe me and my
Sister Mariana to betray you -- there he stopped. 'Speak on, Adraste (says the
Princess) for I feel something at my Heart, which bids me hear you out; speak,
and I Will lie as still as Death it self. In short, Adraste discovered to her the
whole Cheat (after the same manner as you have heard it in the foregoing Parts)
he told her how the Prince and Mariana kept back all hers and Darbelle's
Letters, and that the Picture he made her believe was Darbelle's Wife, was
nothing but a Counterfeit, which was made in Paris, that he himself (who she
had sent) had never been in Florence, but that all the time of his pretended
Journey he lay concealed in Prince Lysidor's Apartment: He told her that
Mariana had discovered all her Adventures with Darbelle, since his return from
Florence, to the Prince, and the Design the Prince and himself had to take his
life, which had brought them into the estate in which they were; That it was
none of Darbelle that slew the Prince, but his Servant, and that he himself was
the man with whom Darbelle fought. All this he swore to her was true as he
expected mercy from the Gods, who now had sent him Summons to depart this life.
Mariana having been at her Brother's Lodgings, and hearing that he desired them
to carry him to the Princess's Apartments, in order to discover something of
Importance to Clitie, found now all her Designs discovered, and all that she
had plotted utterly frustrated, especially this last inhumane horrid one she
had in hand, which was to have poisoned her Brother, who she found had at the
point of Death remorse, and in his repenting fit might betray her; she resolved
to have saved him the trouble of penitance by laying him asleep with a Cordial
she had with her, but missing of him, she made all the haste she could after
him, hoping she might yet prevent the Discovery, or if not, to make a larger.

No sooner did the Princess see her, but she cried out, O! for Heaven sake
help, and take that Monster from my sight, she is the cursed Cause of all my
Misery, and the sad Worker of the Prince's Death. Several at this Outcry
stepped in, and laid hands on Mariana, who seeing the Princess in that sad
Condition, and her Brother just fallen dead at her Feet, her self now in the
hands of Justice, desired leave only to speak one word before they forced her
away, which with the Princess's permission was granted her; I doubt not, Madam,
(says she, applying her Speech to the Princess, but my Brother has discovered
to you all my Treachery (I mean all that he knew) that the Prince deserved the
Death he found, and that Darbelle is yet spotless from any Ingratitude or
Falsehood, but he could not tell you it was my self that writ the last Letter to
you, as from Darbelle, and counterfeited his Hand, which had you nicely marked,
you might have found before. Here I protest to you I know not where he is, nor
have I seen him since he went to Florence, and what I told you of his coming to
me, was all forged; though I suppose he is not far from these parts.

All I have now to do, is to crave your pardon, which I can never deserve, and
Heaven and Justice will not grant.

Then taking the Bottle she had prepared for her Brother, she drank the Poison
off, and bid them bear her to her Bed, for she told them she had not half an
hour to live. They took her thence, but ere she could reach her own house, what
with the Grief, and the fatal Cordial she had taken, she expired.

These tragical Actions could not be without much Grief and Trouble to all who
were either Friends or Relations to any of them; they gave much matter of
Discourse, but more of wonder to those who were present, and heard Darbelle
named: Those who knew nothing of the forementioned Adventures, thought it only
some raving Fit, which the extremity of Grief for the Prince and her Brother
(who lay dead before her) had caused, took but little notice of it; so that in
few days there was neither talk nor thought of it among them, but all was still
as if it never had been.

Clitie's Father was not offended at this Discovery, which had brought his
Daughter to her Speech again, and seeing her now look with a more cheerful
Air, and follow all her Doctors Prescriptions, was overjoyed with the hopes,
that in a few days she might do well again. So strangly fond was this Old Man
of her, that all the time of her Sickness hitherto, he had not left her
Chamber; but being comforted with the Endeavors Clitie made, and the promises
the Doctors gave for her recovery, he grew weary and tired with long Watching
and Sorrow, went that night to his Bed; and after his first Sleep (which we'll
suppose was sound enough) he awaked with a certain heaviness at his Heart,
unlike to any he had felt before, but he continued not long ere soft slumbers
closed his Eyes again; and (as he told the King and others afterward) he had
this Dream.

Methought (says he) I was walking in the Garden of the Artulieres, and from
thence passing to the Orange-walks, I met a man all pale and bloody, who coming
up to me, asked if I knew him, I looked now a little more heedfully on him, and
told him (if I remembered right) he was the unfortunate Amasis, who the unhappy
Darbelle had slain, for which cause he had quit his own native Soil, and fled
to Tuscany, where he has laid his Bones. I am (says the Vision to me) the same
Amasis you speak of, unfortunate, as you have justly termed me, in that I was
the occasion of all that unhappy Man's and your Daughter's Misfortunes, and I
am come to tell you that he is wronged. My Friends have been too severe in his
Prosecution; it is true, he sent me to my Grave, but it is as true he did it
nobly, and like a Gentleman, having Reason and Provocation enough for what he
did. My vain Ostentation, and maintaining Injuries I had committed, urged me to
do those things which caused my Fall, and will not let me rest till I have
cleared him of my Death; nor can my Ghost have quiet, until he be again happily
established in the King's Favor, and your virtuous Daughter's Love, which none
deserves but he. He never was married (as is reported) and is still alive; he
has left his Solitude in Tuscany, and is returned again to Paris, where he
laments his sad Misfortunes; use therefore all possible means you can to
comfort him, and ease my weary Spirit.

In finishing these words the good old Man awaked, nor could he sleep again
that Night, a thousand Thoughts assaulted him at once, nor knew he what result
to make; but at the break of day he rose and went to Clitie's Chamber, who he
found pretty cheerful and hearty, for she had rested well that Night; he made
all quit the Room, and seating himself by her Bedside, he began a Discourse in
this manner.

My dearest Child, (says he) why will you let your aged Father pine and mourn
away, his few days left him, in Grief and Sorrows, and not ease his Pain? Thou
know I ever dearly loved thee, nor was there any trouble seized thy Heart,
in which I did not share. I do remember yesterday that Mariana spoke to you of
Darbelle, and what she meant by it, I come to learn of you; therefore dear
Daughter, hide from me nothing of the Truth, for if Darbelle be yet alive, and
not married (as I have cause to suspect) and in this City, I should be so far
from disturbing his Peace, that I will use all my diligence with the King to
get his Pardon, and perhaps establish him again at Court.

The Princess was not a little surpised to hear her Father speak in this
manner, though she could not but be well-pleased to see his kindness to Darbelle;
and not to keep her Father any longer in doubt, she acquainted him with the
whole Story from Darbelle's going into Florence, even to his coming back again
to Paris, all the Tricks and Cheats Mariana and the Prince had put upon them,
and lastly, the Murder he and Adraste would have committed, would the Heavens
have permitted it, who in the same time sent others to take their lives. The
Princess here altered a little the Truth of her Relation, for none but her self
knew who were they that killed them. Celse was a hundred times about to have
interrupted her, but the oddness of her Story, and her soft manner of relating
it, moved him to such a Commiseration of their Misfortunes, that it drew Tears
from the Eyes of the good old Gentleman, who when she had made an end, he
recounted to her his Dream, in all things so agreed with what Clitie had told
him, that he wanted no further Confirmation to establish his belief that
Darbelle was still virtuous, though still unhappy in his Princes's Favor, who he
resolved to solicit so in his behalf, that he would never let the King rest
till he had got his Pardon. Many Discourses they had touching the means to
bring it about, which now they had more likelihood to effect than before, since
the Prince Alcander, Amasis's Brother, and Lysidor, were dead, who daily
pressed the King for Justice (as they called it) against Darbelle.

Who having escaped the Hands of his Assassinates, and those of the Magistrate
and his Officers, returned again to their old Lodgings, fell into such
Perplexities and Torments of mind, that it cast him into a dangerous Fever
which held him some Months, with little hopes of his Recovery; but Youth and
Nature being strong, prevailed with Death, and once more set him on his Feet
again. He resolved to spend no more of his days in a place where every thing
combined against him, but to return again for Florence, where he designed in
solitude to end his days, and to efface whatever his Love had made him write
upon his Trees, in favor of his Mistress, and in their room to write
Invectives against the whole Female Sex. To this end one day he discovered his
mind to La Rock, and ordered to prepare Horses, and all things necessary for
such a Journey; and that at the beginning of the next Week he would set
forward. La Rock seconded his Design, and commended his Resolution, and in
pursuance to his Commands, went the same day to furnish himself with Horses,
when Fortune, who is never constant in any thing, conducted him to a man whose
Horses were at Grass in a Field in the Country, near the place where the
Princess had her House, and to which she was retired, in order to the better
recovering her Health. The Man and La Rock took Coach together, and went to the
place aforesaid, not being above four or five Miles from Paris, and while the
Horses were fetching in, La Rock walked forth to see the Beauty of the place,
which was certainly one of the finest Seats in that Country, and walking along
a River, whose purling Streams seemed to keep Consort with the noise the Winds
made among the Leaves of the Trees that grew in the Grove, he heard (as he
thought) at the other side of a thick Hedge, the Sighs and Complaints of a
Woman; his Curiosity led him to go as near as possible he could, without been
seen, and listen to what she said; who having seated himself in a convenient
place, could through the Leaves behold a Woman lying on a Bank of Flowers,
making her Arm (more white than Snow) her Pillow; her curling Hair hung
negligently over her Face, which as the friendly Wind removed away, made him
perceive a Cheek more beautiful and fair, than ever he had seen before; but
what moved him most, and hid what most he longed to know, was the other fair
Hand, that ever and anon was employed with a Handkerchief, in wiping away those
Tears which fell in streams from her distilling Eyes; he had not long attended,
but the beautiful disconsolate broke forth again into Words, and said,

Fond Wretch! what avails it to complain to Heaven, who, as they are just,
ought not to take thy part? Blame Heaven no more, but lay the Fault upon thy
own Credulity, that is it has wrought thy ruin, and the overthrow of one whose
Love and Constancy can meet no parallel. Oh! -- (there drying her Eyes again
with her Handkerchief, she stifled the name of some Man, so that he could not
understand who she meant.) What a foolish Man art thou to be so faithful to one
who has so little deserved it? How has thy Love blinded thee to make a second
Venture, when thy first cost thee so dear? And thy too much Constancy has been
the Cause of all thy sad Misfortunes? To what purpose do thou pursue thy
passion, when it leads thee to thy Ruin? And to what end do thou indulge thy
own Destruction? Here she ceased her words, and spoke with Eyes whose silent
Rhetoric ran gliding down her Face, and drew the perfect Map of Sorrow. But
(goes she on) thou can weep, and that thou think enough, a few Woman's
Tears, the next akin to Crocodiles. Could thou weep Blood, and through the
Sluices of thy Eyes, drain all the Moisture of thy Veins, 'twere yet too little
to wash away the Misery they have caused. Rest and Content are now grown
Strangers to me, or if perchance sometimes the Night gives me Repose, my
Sorrows waken with the Day, and gush upon me with the greater power. I know I
torment my self in vain, for he knows nothing of it; or if he did, his
Injuries, are grown so great, I never can expect Relief from him, nor ever to
possess the place I once had in his Heart, which I deservedly have lost, tho
Heaven can bear me witness, I always prized it more than life. I have chosen
here a solitary place to sympathize with him, and to be as far distant as I can
from that where my Afflictions first begun: But, alas! in quitting that, I
cannot quit my Grief, but must for ever mourn my cruel Fate.

La Rock was harkening to her moan when he observed a Woman to come up to her,
who he knew to be Celitie, with whom he had discoursed in the Theater, by which
he imagined the disconsolate Lady to be the Princess, and by the moving
Complaints she had made, he could think the man she meant, to be no other than
his Master; but he was soon put out of doubt, for Celia coming to her, says, O
dearest Mistress! give not way to your Distemper, we all must die, and he has
only paid a Debt that Nature will exact from you and me, and all the World.
Dear Princess, rise, your Father is arrived to see you. With that, she helped
her up, and then he plainly saw it was Clitie, whom all this while he had
heard, but was more surpised, when at her parting she turned her head aside,
and said in a low and mournful tone, O Darbelle, Darbelle, thou little know
what my poor Heart endures for thee!

La Rock was so surpised at these last words, and his Soul so transported with
Joy, that he was once in the mind to have followed her, and have told her that
his Master was still in Paris, and that nothing but her Commands could hinder
him from going where perhaps they might never see each other more; but upon
better Thoughts he resolved first to acquaint Darbelle of this Adventure, and
take farther Orders from him.

I need not tell you that he saw, liked, and bought the Horses which he came
about, and made all the haste he could back again to Paris, where we left
Darbelle venting his Griefs, and making exclamations against the poor Clitie;
his Heart was so acquainted now with Misery, which had so long been his
Companion, that all hopes of Comfort had long since been banished, he expected
no more to see the day with Comfort, or to pass the Night in any thing but
Sorrow; every thing was matter of new trouble to him; others Felicities
increased his Woes, and others Miseries did but add to his; and he could see
none so unhappy as himself, and all the Thoughts that filled his Mind were
either of his Mistress's Disdain, or of his Journey into Florence; and in this
Condition was he when La Rock came home.

Who gave him an Account of what he had done, that he had bought the Horses,
and had given order for all the other necessaries that would be needful in
their Travel. It is well done (says Darbelle) let us go, let us go, La Rock,
and enjoy our Solitude alone, where free from Noise of Pleasure and of State,
we shall in a soft quietude yield up our latest Breaths, and free from Woman
(would I could as well free my self from the Thoughts of 'em) live out the
remnant of our miserable days; we'll fear no Falsehood or Treachery amongst our
selves; for surely none will there envy our sorrowful Lives, nor endeavor to
shorten those few minutes Heaven will lend our Miseries. But (answers La Rock)
how if after all this, Clitie should be true, and love you yet more than she
ever did? Darbelle, with a scornful smile, returned, Why do thou talk of
things impossible? La Rock answered him, It Was not impossible, and that he had
more than probability for what he said. He related to him all that he heard the
Princess say, and how he came to the knowledge of it. Darbella was much
surpised at what he said, and imagined if this were true, his Condition was
not so bad as he supposed it; but Despair had so wholly possessed his Soul, that
it could admit no other than guess; however he resolved that the next day La
Rock should inquire further about it.

Clitie's Father had made what Interest he could with the King for Darbelle's
pardon, but as yet had received no favorable Answer, though he hoped to bring
the business to a happy Issue. But the next day being the King's Birthday, and
a time when all the Court appeared in Jollity, and no mourner whatsoever was
suffered to come within its Walls, Celse hoped that day would prove more
propitious to him than any hitherto, intended to set all Wheels to work, and
leave no means unattempted that might make his Enterprise successful, went on
purpose into the Country to bring the Princess up to Court to solicit
(amongst the rest) for Darbelle's Pardon, whose request he hoped, the King
would grant, for both the King and the Queen had a great Respect for her.
Nothing but this business could have prevailed with her to leave her Solitude,
and appear again at Court; for now she thought nothing she could do, enough for
one who had suffered so much for her; so that the same Night she returned with
her Father to Paris.

La Rock next morning went into the City, and as near the Court as he dare
venture (for he had notice that the Princess was come to Town) to get a sight
of Celia, who came up the Night before with her Mistress; he had learned also,
that the Princess intended to appear at the Solemnity, at the end of which
there was to be a great Ball, where most of the Nobility would be in
Masquerade, and that the Court was free for all Gentlemen that were curious
either to see, or partake of the Sport: He waited some time, but found there
was no likelihood of speeding that day, for he saw all sorts of Tradesmen going
in and out of the Princess's Apartment, Tailors, Milliners, Lace-men, Perfumers
and Jewellers, all to adorn a Beauty, which without those Foyles, was more
splendid and illustrious than any in the Court besides.

He returned home to Darbelle, who waited for him with incredible impatience,
thinking each minute an hour, and every hour a day: how often would he run to
the Chamber Door (if any body came up Stairs) expecting to meet La Rock? And as
often would return again with much disquiet when he found it was not he; at
last the so much longed-for minute came, in which he entered, he told him (in
short) all he had learned, telling him, there was no hopes for him to get a
sight of her that day, unless he would once more make use of his former device
of going in Masquerade. He was resolved to venture all hazards to see and speak
to the Princess, and from her own Mouth to receive his doom. But it was grown
by this time so late, that he had no time to get a Disguise made; and rather
than not go, he took that which had served him in one of the former Balls,
'twas that of the noble Shepherd, saying, he cared not what became of him; and
if Clitie still loved him (as La Rock had persuaded him) she would the sooner
know him, if not, it was but death at last, which would only shorten his
Misseries, and give him a Pass port to the other World but some few days the
sooner.

La Rock, by no Arguments he could use, could alter his mind; however he was
resolved to run all Dangers with him, and though Death it self should happen to
share with him in this Adventure.

The Night began to grow old when Darbelle and La Rock entered the Room where
they were dancing; but a more glorious show of Jewels, and Beauty which far
out-shin'd them, was no where in the World to equal what was there but above
all, the Princess was the Lodestone which attracted the Eyes of all the
Spectators; she had on a Gown so rich with Imbroidery, and so covered with
Gemms, that one would have thought would have purchased a whole Province; she
was dancing a Minua with the King, which hindered her from taking notice when
Darbelle entered, and it made much to his purpose, for at sight of her, he was
struck with a sudden Fear, which for the present deprived him of all his
Senses, and he stood just in the Door, not able to go forward, which most of
those at the Ball imputed to his unwillingness to enter till the King had made
an end of his Dance; by which time our Lover was ten times more amorous than
ever, and all those cruel Thoughts he had before of Clitie, quite disappeared,
and Love, All-powerful Love again had got possession of his Heart; he gets up
to La Rock, and speaking to him in a low voice, La Rock (says he) if I fall, I
shall fall gloriously, and never man received his Doom in so illustrious an
Assembly, let us go on, and dare the worst our Fate can do; for having seen
her, if she love me not, I have no further use for life.

The Princess being seated, had time now to look about her; but, O Heavens! no
sooner did she see our amorous Shepherd, but her Color went and came, and in
spite of all the Constraint she laid upon her self to hide her Surprise, she
could not hinder her self from falling into a Swoon; all run to her, amongst
the rest Darbelle was not idle; he had her by one of her Hands, while others
run for Water; the good old Celse was not least concerned, he got her in his
Arms, and bathed her with his Tears; but after a while she began to recover,
and Celse asking her what was the matter, she whispered in his ear, Darbelle,
the unfortunate Darbelle was in the Room. He seemed to take no notice of what
she said; but having placed her again in her Seat, and left her to the care of
the Ladies who were about her, he went to the King and talked in private with
him for some time; after which there was a Command given, that all the Doors
should be shut, and none stir in or out.

Darbelle till this time had Eyes and Thoughts employed on the Princess, and
observed not Celse's talking with the King, but when he heard this Command,
that none should go in or out, he was not a little surpised, who although he did
not in the least suspect that he was the occasion of it, yet was far more
astonished when the Princess was pretty well recovered, he heard the King give
a second Command, that all who were masqued, should pull off their Vizors, and
discover who they were. Now was the time our masking Lover saw himself the Mark
at which all was levelled, he began to repent his Curiosity, and within himself
to muster up all those Reproaches and Revilings he had had against Clitie: But
(in short) the King's Commands must be obeyed, and all unmasqu'd but Darbelle,
who was unwilling to discover himself, which drew the Eyes both of the King and
all the Company upon him, who admired who that should be, who was repugnant to
the King's Orders; when Celse himself comes up to him, and takes off his
Masque, crying out in a loud Voice, O Heavens! it is Darbelle.

It is not to be conceived the several Opinions that were in this Noble
Assembly, but above all, the poor Princess who did not dare to speak, and her
Heart was almost rent in sunder at this last unfortunate Disaster, she doubted
not but he was now become a Prey to the King's Anger, and inveterate Malice of
his Enemies; but she was more surpised when the King coming to her, took her
by the Hand, saying, Come hither Lady, do you know this Man? Then stepping to
Darbelle, he in an angry tone, asked him how he dared appear before a King so
much incensed? To which Darbelle (falling upon his Knees, and humbly craved his
pardon) answered, That that Love which made him first incur his Majesty's
Displeasure, had since so blinded him, that he was incapable of doing any thing
but what tended to his Love.

The King seeing our two Lovers in so great a Consternation, and resolving no
longer to amuse them, commanded Darbelle to arise, and gave him his gracious
Pardon for all that he had done, and taking him by the Hand, as old Celse did
the Princess; they brought them both into the middle of the Room, and joined
the Hands of two, whose Hearts were long before united. He told Darbelle he was
obliged to Celse, who had procured his Pardon, and contrived this Device to
make their Happiness surprise them when they least thought of it.

The END.
A Catalogue of some Plays Printed for R. Bently and S. Magnes.
1. BEaumont and Fletchers Plays: in all 51. in large Fol. 2. Mr. Shakespeare's
Plays: in one large Fol. Volume containing 43 Plays. 3. Tartuff, or the French
Puritan. 4. Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom. 5. English Monsieur. 6.
All mistaken, or the mad Couple. 7. Generous Enemies, or the ridiculous Lovers.
8. The Plain-Dealer. 9. Sertorius, a Tragedy. 10. Nero, a Tragedy, 11.
Sophonisba, or Hannibal's Overthrow. 12. Gloriana, or the Court of Augustus
Caesar. 13. Alexander the Great. 14. Mythridates King of Pontus. 15. Oedipus
King of Thebes. 16. Caesar Borgia. 17. Theodosius, or the Force of Love. 18.
Madam Fickle, or the Witty false One. 19. The Fond Husband, or the Plotting 20.
Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night-Adventures. 21. Fool turned Critic. 22. Virtuous
Wife, or Good Luck at last. 23. The Fatal Wager. 24. Andromache. 25. Country
Wit. 26. Calisto, or the Chaste Nymph. 27. Destruction of Jerusalem, in two
Parts. 28. Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 29. Misery of Civil
War. 30. The Murder of the Duke of Gloucester. 31. Thyestes, a Tragedy. 32.
Hamlet Pr. of Denmark, a Tragedy. 33. The Orphan, or the Unhappy Marriage. 34.
The Soldiers Fortune. 35. Tamerlain the Great. 36. Mr. Limberham, or the Kind
Keeper. 37. Mistaken Husband. 38. Notes on the Emperor of Morocco, by the Wits.
39. Essex and Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 40. Virtue betrayed, or Anna
Bullen. 41. King Lear. 42. Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 43. Town-Fop, or
Sir Tim. Tawdry. 44. Rare-en-tout, a French Comedy. 45. Moor of Venice. 46.
Country Wife. 47. City Politics. 48. Duke of Guise. 49. Rehearsal. 50. King,
and no King. 51. Philaster, or Love lies a Bleeding. 52. Grateful Servant. 53.
Strange Discovery. 54. Atheist, or the Second Part of the Soldiers Fortune.
55. Wit without Money. 56. Little Thief. 57. Valiant Scot. 58. Constantine. 59.
Valentinian. 60. Amorous Prince, 61. Dutch Lovers. 62. Woman Bully. 63.
Reformation. 64. Hero and Leander. 65. Love Tricks. 66. Julius Caesar. 67.
Fatal Jealousy. 68. Monsieur Ragou. 69. Island Queen, or Mary Queen of
Scotland. 70. Empress of Morrocco. 71. Commonwealth of Women. 72. The Noble
Stranger. 73. Duke of Millan. 74. The Knave in Grain. 75. Amends for Ladies.
76. Mammamouchi. 77. The Emperor of the East. 78. The Wedding. 79. St. Patrick
for Ireland. 80. Albumazor. 81. The Tragedy of Albertus. 82. Royal King. 83.
Humerous Courtier. 84. The Hollander. 85. Merchant of Venice. 86. False Count.
87. Rover, Second Part. 88. Counterfeits. 89. Troylus and Cressida. 90. Spanish
Friar. 91. Lucius Junius Brutus. 92. Brutus of Alba. 93. Caius Marius. 94.
Siege of Memphis. 95. Byron's Conspiracy. 1. Part. 96. Byron's Conspiracy. 2d.
Part. 97. Loyal Brother. 98. Disappointment. 99. Mackbeth. 100. Rollo, Duke of
Normandy. 101. The Love sick King. 102. Maids Tragedy.

