SERMONS PREACHED ON Several Occasions.

SHOWING, 1. The Saints Relief in time of EXIGENCY. 2. The Admirableness of
Divine Providence. 3. A Prisoner at Liberty, and his Judge in Bonds. 4. The
most Remarkable Man Upon Earth, or The true Portraicture of a SAINT.


By SAMVEL BLACKERBY, Minister of the Gospel, at Stow Market.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simmons, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Church
Yard. 1674.

To the Worshipful THOMAS BLACKERBY, Esquire.
My honored Patron, and Kinsman, with His honored Consort Mrs KATHERINE
BLACKERBY.
Much Honored,
THose that know my Relation to you, the Interest that you have in this place,
and those Obligations, which your Kindnesses to my self and Family, have laid
upon me, will not wonder at the Dedication of my first fruits of Printing to
you. You were the Instruments (under God) of my removal from a foreign County
to this place, where most of these Sermons (which are now exposed to public
view) were preached: Under your Patronage and Wing, have I now lived (for the
space of above ten years, in many respects) a comfortable, and pleasurable
life. For here I have enjoyed a large opportunity of Preaching, in season, and
out of season, the glad tidings of Peace, and the Gospel of Salvation. For
(through Grace) I can say it, that I prize my Liberty (in this respect) above
the Living, and my Work (though hard to flesh and blood) above any worldly
advantage. Here I have seen the goings of God, yea, power and glory in the
Sanctuary. Here some have been enlightened, convinced, and awakened out of a
dead sleep; and others strengthened to run the Christian Race, that is set
before them. Here are broken Reeds, and smoking Flax; yea, here are some newly
planted in the house of the Lord, who (I hope) will flourish in the Courts of
our God. So that I make no question, but many do at this day, sound forth the
praises of God, for guiding and disposing of your Heart, to take care of this
great place. You opened the door, and the Lord has made it effectual. You sent
an Earthen Vessel hither, and the excellency of the power has been of God, let
him have all the glory. Not unto us, not unto us; But unto thy Name, O Lord, be
the praise. But, O dear Sir, Do you account it your Honor to be used still as
an Instrument (under God) of doing good, and of being made serviceable to his
Church, in your Stations; that the Children unborn may bless the Lord for you.
This is the way to eternize your Name, to draw down Heavens blessing upon your
Person and Estate; yea, to attain the happiness, and comfort of Soul-ravishing
smiles, from the well-pleased face of the great Majesty of Heaven. Go on and
prosper, let your last works be as good, if not better then your first; and in
all, encourage your self in the Lord your God. My first Subject now Printed,
tells you, that when your Flesh and Heart fails you, God will be your strength;
and I hope your own experience bears witness thereunto. That trust that was
committed to you, when you was made High Sheriff of the County of Suffolk: The
great loss that you sustained by the Fire, in the Metropolis of our Nation,
together with other remarkable losses, and charges at the same time, did
require a more then ordinary influence for your support and relief: But I am
well assured, that the cheerfulness of your Countenance, and wise conduct of
your Affairs, under those heavy pressures and burdens, speak forth nothing
less then a divine support, and seasonable relief. But to my Labors upon Psalm.
73.26. I have added that Sermon which I preached upon your request at the
Assizes holden at Bury St. Edmunds, March 27. 1669. And all I do now dedicate
to you, as a Testimony of my thankfulness for those many Kindnesses, which you
have conferred upon me. However, by this Inscription, the Book is become yours,
with this humble and hearty desire, that it may not only receive grace and
favor from you, but that by your diligent perusal thereof, you may receive
Grace from it. So prays

Your most obliged Kinsman and Servant, Samuel Blackerby.
Stow-Market December. 2. 1673.
TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Would be sorry the luxuriancy of the Press, should cloy thy Stomach, to take
off thy Eye from a through review of this profitable Treatise, here commended
to thee: The Reverend Author whereof, did not calculate the greatest part of
it, for any other Meridian then his own Pastoral charge; and there it had lien
without exposing it to the Censure of critical eyes, had not the importunity of
Friends prevailed so far with him, as to afford it a Midwife to bring it into
the world. I had the happy advantage to be an Auditor of some of the Sermons,
wherein I observed such Spiritual Solidity, that what I then wished, I now
obtain; the publication of such elaborate exercises, for the common good. I am
not ignorant of the blessing of a Pulpit Dispensation, accompanied with the
gusts and gales of Gods Spirit: Yet it is pity such a Jewel should be a Pendant
on the Ear, without the privilege of a Press, to leave an impression upon the
Heart; Grapes that have past the Press, cannot but have a most delicious
relish. Hereby this Reverend Author living near, in the Hearts and Affections
of his People, who have given him no small encouragement, by their proficiency
under his Ministry, may abide with them after his translation hence; and the
Name of Blackerby, both in his worthy Father and Son, may like a box of
Spikenard, perfume their memorial, when this Servant of God is gone, following
his Father to receive a Crown, the reward of his unwearied Work. The Author of
this Treatise, has (like his Master) been a man acquainted with infirmities,
exercised diverse years, under bodily pressures, and thereby becomes the more
fit by his own experience, to commend to a gracious Soul, Divine Relief, in the
deficiency of Animal Spirits, and to teach a Soul how to lean upon her Beloved,
coming out of the Wilderness, Cant. 8.5. I have seen him diverse times in the
Pulpit, when he had more need to have been in his Bed, seeming to me, reduced
almost into his Socket, having spent his Lamp in giving light to others; yet
Divine Relief has carried him through his Work, with a revival of him, and the
Hearts of many under his Charge, so as he may say with the Apostle; When I am
weak, then am I strong, 2 Cor. 12.9. The joy of the Lord being his strength,
Nehem. 8.10.

For his way of Preaching, I am well acquainted with it, he is not ambitious of
that which some call the Knack of Preaching; to start some spruce Notion, or
crop the flowers of Elegancy. This is not his vein, or ought to be thy work:
But his dexterity lies in that which Luther terms the right Art of Preaching,
to hold forth Jesus Christ, and free Grace in a searching way, that his people
may learn to swim to Heaven in a Gospel Channel. I dare assure thee (Reader) if
thou shall peruse this Treatise, not cursorily, but with a serious and
judicious eye, thou will find enough, not only to exercise thy Head, but to
recreate thy Heart. So as thou may name this Work, as Lamech did his Son
Noah, Genesis 5.29. This shall comfort us concerning the work of our hands, when
others are exercised (in this Angry Age) in reading of Polemicks, the product
of their Animosities, by reading this Treatise, thou may retire, like an
Anima Seperata, into thy bosom, and view the complexion of thy own Soul, and
see what need thou have of Divine Relief, in all thy Exigencies, and Ark thy
self within Gods Pavilion in a cloudy day. I will detain thee (Reader) no
longer from satiating thy self, with Balm from Gilead in the ensuing Work;
desiring the God of Grace and Mercy to bless the Labors and Endeavors of his
faithful Servant, to the good of many precious Souls in this our Israel.

Thine to serve thee in our dear Lord Jesus Christ, Thomas Holborough, Some
time Rector of Battisford.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THE Life even of the best men is short, the strength of that Life is much
shorter, and the actual emprovement of that strength, must be acknowledged to
have yet a less proportion: The most painful and faithful Ministers of Jesus
Christ, while they are speaking unto others, are spending themselves, and when
they have served a while, their Generation fall asleep: But good men's desires
to be serviceable to God and his Church, are of a larger measure, they exceed
their actings, strength and life; as an expression whereof they sometimes make
their Labors survive their Persons, and give a more permanent existence to
their transient words, that being dead, they may yet speak, and be read, when
not heard, (Heb. 11.4.) Have thou so much charity, as to judge this to be the
reason, thou have, wherewith to excuse in great measure, the common offense of
the abounding Press. It will be no dishonor to the many worthy Servants of God
in the Gospel of his Son, whose extant works remain to the Church, to relate
among their number the Reverend Author of the following Discourses. Though the
instance of a degenerating posterity be too many, yet God has not left himself
without sufficient witness to prove the faithfulness of his holy Covenant, The
Geneneration of the upright shall be blessed, (Psalm. 112.2.) The just man's
children are blessed after him, (Prove. 20.7.) Mr. Richard Blackerby, the
Reverend Father of the Author, was none of the least Names in the Church of
God, in his Generation, the powerful and successful Instrument of the Spirit of
God for the saving of Souls: To him God gave (what Absalom had not) a Son, even
this Son, to keep his Name in remembrance, in honorable remembrance, that in a
gracious Son, that Divine Word might have its fuller accomplishment to a
gracious Father. The memory of the just is blessed, (Prove. 10.7.) We doubt not
to say, with respect to the present Age, that he has been, is, and we hope yet
shall be a singular Blessing to a very great Congregation. Considerable as for
its number, so especially for the many serious and sober Christians that are
found therein. Over which, after a few years intervening, the providence of God
happily placed him, in succcession to the Reverend, Learned, Orthodox, Prudent,
and Holy Dr. Young. Where, by the space of ten years (not without difficulty,
through much weakness and infirmity of body) by sound Doctrine, and good
Conversation, he has successfully built upon the happy Foundation, which was
before laid. The Neigbourhood in the mean time gladly partaking with his own
people of his weekly Lectures. Those little things, which some so zealously
contend for; as they are not the matter of his Preaching, so neither are they
matter of difference between him and other good men, therein dissenting from
him. The truth of Doctrine, power of Godliness, Real and Spiritual Religion, as
it is the subject, design, and business of his Ministry; so is it the object of
his affection and honor wherever he sees it, the delight and pleasure of
his converse, wherever he meets it. He that has no worse designs upon
others, may go abroad with danger or offense to none. He that has no worse
respects for others, when abroad, may expect reception and entertainment from
all. May thou reap the benefit which he designs, thou will pay thy respects
due to him, and thy thanks due to God for him, which is the hearty wish of

The Authors unworthy Brethren, Richard Jennings, some time Rector of Combs.
John Fairfax, sometime Rector of Barking.

ERRATA.
PAge 4. l. 11. for but is, r. but God is. p. 10. l. 3. for strength, r.
strengthen. p. 16. l. 14. for earns, r. yearns. p. 22. l. 8. for leads me some,
r. leads me to some. p. 23. l. 13. for Judge. 10. r. Judge. 20. p. 42. l. 9. for
subline, r. sublime. p. 54. l. 27. for not all, r. not in all. p. 66. l. 32.
for some say, r. some may say. p. 86. l. 21. for hands, r. heart. p. 126. l.
11. for clean for ever, r. clean gone for ever. p. 146. l. 20. for Jacob, r.
Joseph. p. 172. l. 29. for substructio, r. substractio. p. 177. l. 14. for it,
r. is. p. 180. l. 21. for peac, r. peace. p. 206. l. 10. for Magistratus, r.
Magistratu. p. 210. l. 21. for prevent, r. pervert. p. 211. l. 9. for bone, r.
been. p. 216. l. 31. for ring, r. reign.

TO MY DEAR Parishioners, And beloved Neighbors in the Borough of
Stow-Market, and Stow-Vpland.
Gentlemen, and Neighbors.
I Read of a Creature, which Historians call (...), One days life, dead as soon
as bred: And certainly that Title may be given to many Sermons, whose breeding
have cost more time, then their life amounts to. Several days for their
Conception, some considerable time for their Birth; but die, as fast as they
are brought forth, at the lips of the Preacher: For as they go in at one Ear of
some Hearers, they go out at the other. And this (I conceive) is one ground of
printing Sermons, that there may be a Resurrection of the Dead. And that that
which made no impression upon the Heart, when tendered to the Ear, may (through
Divine Blessing) be conveyed to the Mind (by being presented to the Eye) and
take up its lodging, and live there.

It Is now many years since I preached the Sermons, that have the precedence in
this little Piece, which I now offer to your perusal: And I am afraid, that (as
to some) they are dead, yea, buried in the grave of forgetfulness, and are, as
if they had never been preached. Upon this, and some other Considerations, am I
overcome, to do that now, which (formerly) I thought, none should ever have had
such an influence upon me, as to prevail with me to attempt.

I have been informed, that the preaching of them was very grateful unto
spiritual pallates; and that does encourage me to hope, that the Printing, and
Reading of them, will be so too.

You have them, and the rest, Printed as they were studied and penned, but I
cannot say, as they were preached. The Matter is the same; I, but they may want
something of their heat and life; unless a diligent reading of them be attended
with the Spirit of Life.

As the Subjects are various, so various motives, and impressions upon my
Spirit, put me upon preaching of them at Stow. And in all, I hope, I was under
a Divine Conduct. For,

1. When I perceived my Ministerial Labors and Employment were necessarily
augmented, and did exceed my first engagement and expectation, my Flesh and my
Heart began to fail: So that I was ready to say with the Apostle, Who is
sufficient for these things? and therefore could not fix upon a Text in all the
Book of God, more suitable then Psalm. 73.26. both to my self, and also to
others, who (at that time) had their failings of Flesh, and Heart also.

2. When I had experienced the power and presence of God with me, so that the
Hearts of many, both in the Town and Country, seemed to be knit to me upon a
Spiritual account; I was then thoroughly convinced, that it was the Wheel within
the Wheel that brought me hither, and therefore made choice of Ezekiels Vision
of the Wheels, or the Mystery of Divine Providence, as a fit Subject to treat
of in this place: And afterward, contracted the chief of the matter (contained
in many Sermons) into a narrower compass, and preached it in a more eminent
place.

I am not altogether insensible, that this precious Liquor broached, and drawn
forth in studying and preaching, has passed through an impure Pipe: This
Heavenly Treasure has been put into an Earthen Vessel, and therefore may have
received some hurt and detriment; yea, have a taste thereof. But I hope, that
the sense of your own imperfections, and failures in spiritual undertakings
(for we are all as an unclean thing, and our Righteousness as filthy rags) will
be an effectual enducement to you, to plead with God on my behalf, that what is
mine therein, may be pardoned, and on your own behalf, that what is his, he
will so own, as to make it powerful upon your Spirits, whilst you are reading
and meditating thereon, in order to your present, and eternal advantage.

I bless the Lord for any fruits of my Labors in preaching among you, and if
the Lord shall please to lengthen out my Life, to see an increase thereof by
Printing, I shall say with David, I will praise him yet more and more: Yea,
then I shall have gained my end in this New Work, and say with the Apostle in
reference to both. What is my crown and glory? are not even ye in the presence
of our Lord Jesus? However, Gods glory, your spiritual advantage, and public
service to the Church, being the marks I aim at in this Undertaking. If I spend
my strength for naught, and in vain at present, yet surely, my Judgment is
with the Lord, and my Work with my God; and when I am rotting in my grave, the
Seed which has been sowing in Stow many years, may spring up and bring forth a
plentiful and glorious harvest. The Lord grant, that none of you do make it
evident at the last, that you are either of the number of highway hearers,
thorny-ground, or stony-ground hearers. But that you all may be good-ground,
fit and prepared to receive the Seed, that God has yet to sow among you, by
the hands of his seeds-men; so that though they sow in tears, yet at last, they
may reap in joy. As for my self, I shall not cease to pray, yea, to beg the
prayers of others, that the Gospel may still run and be glorified among you,
that this Son of Light, Glory, and Grace, may never set upon you in a cloud,
and that your glorious day of Gods visitation in mercy, may not wind up in a
dark, and dreadful night of darkness and desolation.

I can do no less at present, then put you in mind of, and publish, the
kindness of God to you, and to my self in you, for that distinguishing mercy of
God, that is written upon S^ow, in a very fair, and legible Character, even to
the admiration of many that live near us; yea, to strangers also, whose
occasions have invited and drawn them hither: insomuch, that some very
judicious persons have expressed their Hearts to me, in these, and such like
words; That there is scarce a Town to be found (in many miles distance) so
eminently blessed, and that in many respects. What they have said upon Report,
I shall now publish upon my own observation, and experience; and that in some
particulars.

1. That there is so much Brotherly love and union of Heart among you, in order
to Spiritual, and Evangelical ends, although some difference in Judgment, as
to some Circumstances. 2. That in the space of almost eleven years, there has
not been one that professed Godliness in the Town, that has separated from the
public preaching of the Word. 3. That when the Arrows of the Pestilence flew
thick round about us, God preserved us. 4. That under your Peace and Liberty,
you have wonderfully thriven, and prospered in your worldly Estate; so that
there is a new face upon the Town. 5. That God has given you a more then
ordinary Spirit of Zeal for his Glory, and of Charity toward the Souls of
young ones in the Town: Witness the Agreement, and Subscription of many of you,
for the Education of poor Children; and a strict observation of the Lords Day.
6. I must not forget your Kindness to my self. And that, 1. In your Unanimity
of Spirit to receive, entertain, and encourage me, at my first coming among
you. 2. In your frequent Visits, and Night-watchings with me, in my Sicknesses,
and sore Afflictions. 3. But especially in your daily remembrance of me, at the
Throne of Grace; and constant attendance upon the Word preached in public.

I have often said it, that my Life has been given in to the Prayers of my
people. And let the Reader know, that I account it no small favor and smile
from Heaven, that I live among a praying people. Though all of them be not, yet
many are.

Now (Gentlemen and Neighbors) for all these Favors, I return you my hearty
thanks, and as a Testimonial thereof, I must tell the World, that I bless the
Lord, for his providence in my Removal hither, and in continuing me thus long
among you; and do not repent me of the hard Labor, Afflictions, Trials, and
Temptations, which I have endured here. The Lord grant, that our mutual Love
may not only continue, but increase, and that our winding up may be better then
our beginning. For then shall we triumph in glory, and sing Halelujahs
together, for ever and ever. For this end he shall not cease to pray for you,
who is,

Your Servant in the work of the Gospel, Samuel Blackerby.
Stow-Market, December. 2. 1673.
THE CONTENTS.
THe Introduction to the words of the Text. Page 1. The Psalmists twofold
Experiment, his Malady and Relief; a Demonstration that God is good to Israel.
Page 2 The Particulars contained in the Text, with the Observations raised from
each Particular. Page 4 The first principal Doctrine. That God is the Rock of a
Saints heart, strength, and portion for ever. Page 5 Divided into two Branches.
Page 6 The first branch, that God is the Rock of a Saints heart, strength,
proved by Scripture. ib. Explained in three particulars. 1. He is the Author
and giver of all strength. 2. He is the increaser and perfecter of a Saints
strength. 3. He is the preserver of a Saints strength. ib. Six Positions, laid
down by way of Demonstration. Page 7 1. All strength is in God originally, and
fully. ib. 2. The Israel of God, have a peculiar interest in the strength of
God. Page 8 3. According to the Saints communion with God, and Gods influence
into them, such is their strength. Page 9 4. According to the fullness, and
extent of Grace, promised in the Covenant of Grace, such is Gods influence into
the hearts of his people for their strength. Page 13 5. According to that
mutual Transact that is between God the Father, and his Son Christ Jesus, both
on Gods part, and on the Believers part; so does the Covenant give forth its
virtue, and grace to the Believer. Page 14 6. According to the Spirits
Revelation of this Grace in the Heart, such is our sense, and feeling thereof;
and according to our sense, and feeling thereof, such is our comfort. Page 18
Use of Instruction to all true Believers. 1. To account God their strength. 2.
To give God the glory of their strength. Page 19 The second Branch of the first
principal Doctrine. That God is Isreal's portion for ever, proved, and
explained. Page 40 Demonstrated, by showing how God comes to be a Saints
portion. Page 44 The Use of Inference is in three particulars. 1. That the
people of God, are the richest people. Page 52 2. That the people of God, are a
truly happy people. Page 53 3. That the people of God, cannot be made
miserable. ib. The second Use is of Instruction, to teach us, 1. Where to have
a Portion for our selves, and ours. Page 54 2. That if we would have God to be
our portion, we must be his. Page 56 The third Use is of Direction, and Counsel
to Gods Israel. 1. To learn the distinction to the height, between God in
himself, or God in the Creature, and the Creature without God. Page 59 2. To be
content with such things as they have. Page 61 3. Not to be solicitously, or
distrustfully careful, for what they want. Page 62 4. Above all, to be thankful
for the enjoyment of God. Page 63 The second principal Doctrine. That Divine
Relief flows from God to his people, according to their necessity. Page 64 The
particular Cases wherein a Christian stands in need of Divine Relief, are
failing of the Flesh, and failing of the Heart. Page 65 Divine Relief flows in
diverse ways, when the comforts of a man's life fails him. Page 66 Divine Relief
flows in diverse ways, when the outward man fails. Page 75 Divine Relief flows
in, when the Understanding fails. Page 87 When the Will fails. Page 94 When the
Memory fails Page 102 Divine Relief flows in, when the infused habits fail.
Page 110 God works four things for the Christians good, by his decay in Grace,
and falling into Sin. Page 114 1. Hereby God discovers that corruption, that is
in the Heart. ib. 2. Hereby God teaches the Soul, where its strength lies. Page
115 3. The falls of Christians, through the weakness of Grace, and the power of
Sin, are made notable Antidotes, and Preservatives, against final Apostacy.
ib. 4. These falls and decays, settle him faster, and make him root deeper in
Christ. Page 116 Four Cautions entered hereupon. Page 118 Divine Relief flows
in, when the Animal Spirits fail, through Disappointment. Page 122 When they
fail through the hiding of Gods face. Page 124 When they fail through a sense
of Sin, and Gods displeasure for it. Page 128 When they fail through a sudden
passion of fear. Page 132 When they fail through some strong temptation of
Satan. Page 136 The Doctrine confirmed by three Reasons. The First, Taken from
that near relation, that is between God, and good men. Page 140 The second,
taken from Gods design, in all his peoples straights and necessities. Page 142
The third, taken from the beautifulness of Relief in the time of necessity.
Page 144 A grand Case, put by a Christian that doubts of his Interest in God,
because he has no experience of Divine Relief, flowing into him, according to
his necessity, resolved. Page 145 Use 1. From this Doctrine is inferred the
woeful state, and condition of those, who have no Interest in God. Page 152 The
second Use is of Comfort to all that have an Interest in God. Page 154 An
Objection against taking Comfort from this Doctrine, drawn from the Christians
unworthy walking, of former Relief, answered. Page 155
Jehovah Iireh; OR, THE Saints Relief In a Time of EXIGENCY, Held forth in
several Sermons Preached at Stowe Market in SVFFOLK.

By Samuel Blackerby Minister of the Gospel and Vicar there.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simons, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Church
Yard. 1674.

SERMON I. The Saints Relief in a time of Exigency.
Psalm. 73.26. My flesh and my heart fails but God is the strength of my
heart, and my portion for ever.


THough Divine truth may be clearly understood by Divine revelation, yet the
heart of a Christian is then most confirmed, and settled in the belief thereof,
and most confident to assert it, when he has had some experience of the power
and life thereof in himself; when he can say, I know this by experience. The
first conception, and rise of true faith, and sound knowledge springs from
Divine principles, revealed and explained by the Holy Spirit: but the
confirmation thereof flows from experiments made, and had of those principles.
We need go no further, than this Psalm for a proof hereof. The Prophet (whoever
he was) was one that was endued, with a saving knowledge of Divine Principles,
and with faith therein: I, but the confirmation of his faith, was made by a
Divine work, in which the life, and power of those principles shone forth. He
did believe, at first, that God was good to Israel; I, but his faith was not
strong, and able to overcome an assault, and to quench this fiery dart that
Satan shot at him: until he had found the truth of this principle by experience
in himself: So you may see, verse, 2, 3, 13, 14. Sense prevails against his
faith, until such a Divine work was wrought in himself, as terminated his faith
and sense in one object. Now he can, with boldness, and great confidence,
assert, that God is good to Israel, etc. For he is able to give a demonstration
thereof from his sense, as well as from faith. This you have in the Text, My
flesh and my heart fails me, but God is the strength of my heart and my
portion for ever. q. d. I now find it to be true by mine own experience, and I
can give a particular demonstration thereof. God was good to me. I was in a
languishing and sinking condition; my strength gone, and my life almost gone,
the pains of death, and the sorrows of hell took hold on me, that I was giving
up all my hopes for lost: And then God appeared to me, and revived and
strengthened my heart. My case was very sad, and now it is as comfortable. My
hell is turned into an heaven of joy, and comfort. So that in the words you
have a two fold experiment brought in to demonstrate one precious truth. That
God is good to Israel, that is the truth.

1. The first experiment is the Prophets malady.

2. The latter is the Prophets relief.

The first is brought in to grandize and heighten the other. Had not the
Prophets malady been so desperate, his relief had not appeared so glorious. The
worse the Prophets state was, the more was Gods goodness seen, in his relief
and help.

Let us therefore take a further Surveigh of both,

First of the malady, and therein consider, 1. The nature or kind of it;
failing. 2. The Subject, wherein it was seated; both in the flesh and in the
heart. Failing of the flesh, notes out a consumption of the outward man, or a
loss of external supports. So we find flesh taken in Scripture, both properly,
for the outward man, or the body of man, when the strength thereof abates, and
departs, the bulk, or quantity thereof lessens, or the beauty and glory thereof
fades; and also Metaphorically, for the loss of external privileges. So Phil.
3, 4, Flesh is taken for all external advantages. These may fail. Failing of
the Heart notes out a sinking or dying. When, 1. The faculties of the soul
sink, and cannot perform their due offices; either by way of apprehension,
election, or retention. 2. When the infused or acquired habits of the heart are
indisposed to act, or are weakened, not only our moral, but our Spiritual
habits much abate. 3. When the Animal spirits are expiring and even breathing
forth.



This seems to be the Prophets disease and malady; he was brought very low,
even to the very pit, ready to die; soul and body failed, all his powers
weakened. When the body is smitten, it flies for succor to the heart, (the
spirit of a man will sustein his infirmities;) but when the heart is smitten
also and that fails him too, the man is done then, he can afford himself no
relief. Die he must, and will, if God comes not in. When communicated strength
fails, it is time for the man to look abroad, and seek for strength in God, or
else he sinks, and never rises more.

Secondly, This is the Prophets relief: God comes in and fetches life again;
reinsouls him, communicates a new supply of strength to him, sets him upon his
feet again; this makes him to say as you have it in the Text, But is the
strength of my heart, and my portion for ever, (...) the rock of my heart.

In which words we may take notice of five things,

1. The order inverted. When he mentions his malady, he begins with the failing
of the flesh, and then of the heart: but when he reports the relief, he begins
with that of the heart. From hence.

Observe, That when God works a cure in man (out of love) he begins with the
heart, he cures that first. And there may be these reasons for it, 1. Because
the sin of the heart is often the procuring cause of the malady of body and
soul. 2. The body ever fares the better for the soul, but not the soul for the
body. 3. The cure of the soul is the principal cure.


2. The suitableness of the remedy to the malady. Strength of heart for failing
of heart, and a blessed portion for the failing of the flesh.

Obs. That there is a proportionate remedy and relief in God for all maladies
and afflictions whatsoever, both within and without. If your hearts fail you,
God is strength if your flesh fails you, or comforts fail you, God is a portion.

3. The Prophets interest, he calls God his strength and his portion.

Obs. That true Israelites have an undoubted interest in God. He is theirs.

4. The Prophet's experience in the worst time. He finds this to be true, that
when communicated strength fails, there is a never failing strength in God.

Obs. That Christians experiences of Gods all sufficiency are then fullest and
highest, when created comforts fail them.

5. Here is the Prophet's emprovement of his experience, for support and
comfort against future trials and temptations.

Obs. That a Saints consideration of his experience of Gods all sufficiency in
times of Exigency, is enough to bear up, and to fortify his spirit, against
all trials and temptations for the time to come.

Thus you may improve the Text by way of Observation; But there are two
principal Doctrines to be insisted on.

First, That God is the Rock of a Saints heart, his strength and his portion
for ever.

Secondly, That Divine influence and relief passes from God to his people,
when they stand in most need thereof.

First, God is the rock of a Saints heart, strength and portion for ever.

Here are two members or branches in this Doctrine, 1. That God is the rock of
a Saints heart, strength. (...)
2. That God is the portion of a Saint.


Branch, 1. God is the rock of a Saints heart, strength. He is not only
strength, and the strength of their hearts, but the rock of their strength: so
Esaias 17.10. Psalm. 62.7. (...) the same word, that is used in the Text; from
hence comes our English word sure.

Explic. God is the rock of our strength, both in respect of our naturals, and
also of spirituals: he is the strength of nature, and of grace, Psalm. 27.1. the
strength of my life natural and spiritual. God is the strength of thy natural
faculties; of reason, and understanding, of wisdom and prudence, of will and
affections. He is the strength of all thy graces, faith, patience, meekness,
temperance, hope and charity; both as to their being, and exercise. He is the
strength of all thy comfort and courage; peace and happiness; salvation and
glory. Psalm. 140.7. O God, the rock of my Salvation; In three respects.

First, he is the Author and giver of all strength, Psalm. 18.2. It is God that
girdeth me with strength, Psalm. 29.11. he will give strength to his people,
Psalm. 138.3. Psalm. 68.35.

Secondly, He is the increaser and perfecter of a Saints strength: it is God
that makes a Saint strong and mighty both to do, and suffer, to bear and
forbear, to believe and to hope to the end; so Heb. 11.34. Out of weakness they
were made strong: so 1 John 2.14. And therefore is that prayer of Peter, 1 Pet.
5.10.

Thirdly, He is the preserver of your strength; your life is laid up in God;
Col. 3.3. your strength is kept by the strength of God; so Psalm 91.1. God does
overshadow the strength of Saints, that no breach can be made upon it; Psalm.
63.7. In the shadow of thy wings will I trust.

Now for Demonstration, I shall lay down six positions.

1. All strength is in God originally, and fully. God is the first strength,
and the fountain of strength; He is the root and spring of strength; He is all
strength in himself; He is wisdom it self, and light it self, and life it self,
and grace it self. (...) signifies sometimes the Original Fountain of things;
and God is called so, because he is the beginning and efficient cause of all
things, out of himself, thus Schindler. The strength of a Saint is but a drop
in the bucket, a beam of the Sun, a spark of fire in comparison of God. He
alone is all. Whatever is in the creature is eminently in God; it is much more
in him. Hence is that Character, which God gives of himself to Abraham, Genesis
17.1, I am the Almighty God: for this is peculiar unto him; Many beings may be
called strong or mighty; but none may arrogate the title of Almighty but God:
It Is God that is All-sufficient both for himself, and for all beings below
himself. The stream is often low, and yet the spring and fountain full and
high. The strength of the creature may fail; but the strength of God never
fails. It Is fully in God, when it is not in us. Life may go out of the branch,
and yet remain in the root; This is the happiness of Gods people, that though
they have little in themselves, they have enough in God. Blessed is the man
whose strength is in thee, Psalm. 84.5. For when communicated strength is spent,
yet there is an incommunicated fullness still in God. They may say, as the
prodigal, when he had spent his portion; in my fathers house, there is bread
enough, and to spare. My light is gone, and my life fails, and my grace fails,
and I am reduced to a sad condition in my self: I, but there is enough in God;
there is light enough, and life enough, and grace enough; God is All still,
even when I am nothing. I may allude to the story of Hagar; Genesis 21.15, to the
19. When the water was spent in her bottle, God opened her eyes, and she saw a
well of water; So when your bottles are all empty, if God do but open your
eyes, so as to behold him, you will see a well, a fountain of all strength.

1. The Israel of God, Gods chosen and beloved ones in Christ, have a peculiar
interest in the strength of God; the strength of God is their strength; so the
Prophet says, God is my strength. As when Jehoshaphat made a Covenant with
Ahab, to go with him to Ramoth-Gilead, he tells him that all he was and had was
Ahabs, 2 Chro. 18.3, I am as thou art, and my people as thy people, and my
horses as thine, i. e. he reserved nothing peculiar to himself, but gave Ahab
an interest in all: so does God, he reserves nothing peculiar to himself, but
his honor and glory (which he cannot give to another), but gives his people an
interest in all. All the strength of God, is made over to the people of God.
God has nothing, but what they have an interest in. Whenever God speaks to a
soul, as he did to Abraham, I will be thy God, at that time, God passes and
makes over himself to it: and now, that soul has a peculiar interest in God;
the strength the All Sufficiency of God is that man's, the wisdom of God, the
holiness of God, the mercy of God, the will of God, is his, that height, and
depth, that length and breadth of strength that is in God, is a Saints. When he
reads the Scripture, and there finds what riches of strength there is in God,
and through the Spirit of light is able to conceive very largely of God. he may
then say within himself All this is mine, All that God is, is mine. When Saints
go to God for strength, either of nature, or of grace, they do not go as mere
beggars, but as children go to a father, in whom they have an interest, and in
all that he has, and may with boldness plead their interest therein: a most
full place you have in Esaias 63.15, 16. and Psalm. 119.94. And so when God gives
forth himself to Saints, he does it, not as some great man gives boons to all
comers to express his bounty: but as a father gives peculiar gifts to his
children; so Esaias 43.1, 2, 3, 4.

3. According to the Saints Communion with God and God's influence into them,
such is their strength. Divine incomes give strength, and maintain it. When God
takes up his dwelling in the heart, it becomes strong and mighty: never before.
We may say of men, that are at a distance from God, as the Prophet Hosea to
Ephraim, how weak is thine heart? but of Saints, as Paul of himself, when I am
weak, then am I strong. 2 Cor. 12.10. Paul had close Communion with God and
Christ, and now the power of Divine grace rested upon him, and took up his
residence in him, to strength him. The nearer the soul comes to God, and the
more it enjoys of God, the stronger it is: a man full of God, is a man full of
strength; so you may see, Micah, 3.8, but truly I am full of power by the
Spirit of God: the Spirit of God was poured forth upon the Prophet, and this
filled him full of power. The Disciples of Christ were weak, and therefore
Christ promises to baptize them with the Holy Ghost, and with power; now they
are able and strong. Even as when the Prophet Elias had been fed by the Raven
he went in the strength thereof forty days, 1 King. 19.8. So when the soul has
fed it self upon Divine influence, it walks in the strength thereof. It is not
here, as with the lean kine of Pharaoh, that devour all the fat, and yet never
the better, for they that wait upon the Lord, shall renew their strength, Esaias
40.31. God never lets that soul depart without this blessing, that waits upon
him. I dare appeal to any experimental Christian for a witness hereunto. Hear
what Solomon says, Prove. 10.29, The way of the Lord is strength to the
upright; And also what David says, Psalm. 27.14, Wait on the Lord, and he shall
strengthen thy heart: wait, I say, on the Lord. This is that, which makes a
disparity between one Christian and another: yea, between a Christian at one
time and at another. What makes one Christian stronger then another, but the
incomes of God? one enjoys more of God, then another: one has more Communion
with God, then another: one receives more from God, then another. And hence it
is, that one can do that which another cannot, and one can suffer that, which
another cannot; one goes heavily and drooping under his burden, when another
sings, and is merry with a burden that is far heavier; One can slight a
temptation, and resist it, allthough it be very great, and another is overcome,
when it is small. I Will give you some Examples hereof.

First, Compare the first Adam with the second; the first was suddenly overcome
with a temptation, and fell from a state of happiness, into a state of misery,
because he had not Divine influence to support him, and keep him from falling;
his strength was placed in himself, and not in God. But the second Adam stands
his ground, and keeps the field, against Satan's strongest attempts and
batteries; yea, beats him with his own weapon, and forces him to retreat;
because the Godhead dwelt bodily in him: and in him dwelt all fullness.

Again, Compare Lot and his wife, with Abraham in point of trial; when God
would have Lot and his wife deny themselves, and leave their pleasant
habitation (of which it is said, that it was even as the garden of the Lord)
you shall find, Genesis 19.16, that Lot and his wife, were loath to obey God
herein; it is said he lingered, etc. But now when God tried Abraham in a far
greater matter, see how willingly he obeyed God therein: so you may see, Genesis
22. Romans 4.20.

The strength of a Christian lies not so much in his inherent Principles, as in
his assisting influences: a Christian is strong as they flow in. As a child, in
his fathers hand, may do that, which one of larger growth cannot do of himself;
so a young Christian in the hand of Christ, can do that which old Adam could
not do in innocence, when left to himself. A weak bearer with strong
supporters, may hold a greater weight, than a stronger bearer without
supporters. A weak Christian underpropt and upheld by Divine strength, may
undergo and bear more, then one that has a larger measure of inherent grace.
This is that which makes a Christian differ from himself: at one time very
weak, and at another time very strong; as buds open in the day, and shut at
night, as a man fasting, and full differs in strength. We see David, at one
time, is afraid of a little, 1 Samuel 27.1. 1 Samuel 30.6.
and at another time fears nothing. At one time he concludes, that one day he
shall perish by the hand of Saul, and yet not near him; at another time, when
his own people spoke of stoning him, he takes courage in the Lord his God. An
army of flies will terrify a Christian at one time, when as an army of Giants
cannot daunt him at another. Sometimes he can do nothing, at other times he can
do all things. Sometimes he does but creep, at another he runs toward heaven.
Full is that Ephesians. 1.19, we believe according to the working of his mighty
power, much or little; a little power put forth will produce but a little
faith, a great power will produce a great faith. So that this is clear, that
according to a Saints Communion with God, and Gods influence into him, such is
his strength: as a man receives from God, such is his power and ability: the
whole strength of a Christians heart depends upon the enjoyment of God.

4. According to the fullness and extent of grace promised in the Covenant of
grace, such is Gods influence into the hearts of his people for their strength.
The Covenant of grace is full and large, proportioned to the eternal love of
God, and the weak state of fallen man; So that there is no condition into which
a Saint can fall, but there is a proportionate and suitable good promised and
Covenanted to it. The Covenant is Gods dispensative, wherein all receipts for
all Spiritual weaknesses is held forth: there is not a heart failing, but there
is a receipt for it; some promise that is suitable thereunto. Now Gods strength
passes from God through the word of promise. As God speaks the word, so Divine
influence flows into the soul. The words that I speak (says Christ) are spirit
and life, Joh. 6.63. The Lord is therefore pleased, to set forth the power and
life of his promise by a lively similitude, Esaias 55.10, 11, 12, 13. Even as the
rain and snow gives strength to the earth to bring forth, and to bud, and makes
it fruitful: so does the word of grace give strength to a weak heart, to bring
forth grace and comfort, and makes it full of goodness. David had experience of
this, and therefore says, In God I will praise his word, Psalm. 56.4, 10, i. e.
This is my strength; God speaks the word and it is done: comfort and courage,
help and salvation flows in, through the word of promise. Alas, I were not
able to stand, if I had not this supporter to bear me up. So you may see, Psalm.
21.13, I had fainted unless I had believed. God does not only strengthen his
Saints, according to his word, but he strengthens them by his word. This is the
medium through which all Divine strength passes into the hearts of Saints: for
the strength of God is in his word of promise, as its proper life and virtue;
this makes it enlightening, enlivening, strengthening, encouraging, comforting
and sanctifying; Hence is that of the Apostle Peter, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. He that
takes hold on the Covenant, and on the promises of grace therein, takes hold of
Divine strength, and (as it is said of Sarah) shall receive strength to
conceive, and to bring forth the image, and life of God in his soul and
conversation. When God seems to stand at a distance from the soul, that she
cannot see him, nor find him out: yet if the word of promise be nigh her and in
her, she cannot want strength, for the strength of God is in it; and have you
not found it thus sometimes? that upon the reading, or hearing of a gracious
promise of God, held forth in the Scripture, such a clear light has shined
into your souls, and such a strength has flowed in therewith, as to raise you
up, and to work a mighty change in you.

5. According to that mutual transact that is between God the Father, and his
Son Christ Jesus, both on Gods part, and on the believers part, so does the
Covenant give forth its virtue and grace to the believer. You heard before,
that the Covenant of grace is Gods means, whereby he strengthens his people;
there is the strength of God laid out: now this means works not but as it is
moved; it gives forth nothing but as it is set on work. Though there were
healing, and strengthening virtues in the pool of Bethesda, yet they could not
put forth themselves, until the Angel moved the waters: so it is here, the
Covenant of grace is Gods strengthening pool: I, but the virtue thereof is not
put forth, without a motion; these waters are set on work by a mutual transact
between the Father and the Son.

First, Therefore God the Father takes the poor sinner, and puts him into the
hands of Christ; and says thus to him: Son take this poor wretched sinner into
thine own hands, for I cannot look upon him in himself, I can do nothing for
him, as he stands upon his own carnal bottom: he is undone, weak, and
wretched, and so he must abide without any help, unless thou do bottom him
upon thy self, and hide him under the robe of thy righteousness. I cannot hear
his prayers, nor own his desires, nor pity his groans, unless they be all
persumed with the odor of thine incense, and presented to me by thy hand. The
Covenant of grace, and the promises of grace are all made in thee, and must be
performed in thee, and therefore he can have no benefit by them, until thou
have an actual possession of him: he must be thine, or else they cannot be his.
Then the Lord Jesus, takes the poor sinner, and having sprinkled him with his
blood, and washed him from all his guilt, hides him in his own robes, and
presents him to the Father, as an object of pity and mercy. And after this
manner mediates and interceeds with his Father, on the sinners behalf, Heavenly
Father, here is one whom thou have given me, for whom I have shed my heart
blood, that I might make satisfaction to Divine Justice, for all offenses
committed by him against thee, and purchase all that grace, that is in the
Covenant for him: he stands not upon his own account, but upon mine: I am
touched with the feeling of his infirmities, his weakness and griefs are mine,
his troubles and pains are mine, his faintings and failings are mine, his tears
and cries are mine, his prayers and desires are mine: here I tender them to
thee in mine own name, and beg thine audience, and acceptance of them: my
sufferings and my blood shed for him cries to thee: yea, thine own Covenant,
ratified and confirmed with thine own oath, cries to thee for mercy and grace
to help and strengthen him. Now hereupon, the bowels of grace and mercy earns
and melts over a poor distressed sinner, and like the great wheel in the Clock,
sets all the lesser wheels a going by its motion; So the grace of God sets the
Covenant of grace on work, that it may give forth its virtue and strength to
the soul.

This glorious mystery will be best understood and cleared to you by several
steps.

1. That God the Father is the first mover in this great business. He first
loves; and then gives souls to Christ, 1 John 4.19. Heb. 2.13. There is a two
fold giving of souls to Christ.

1. By way of Covenant designation or decree made in heaven between the Father
and the Son, in which God made over all his elect to Christ, and Christ
undertook to bear their names. So Joh. 10.29. In this place he does not only
speak of those that did at the present believe, but of all others that should
believe. So verse. 16.

2. By way of actual possession, and so God gives souls to Christ, as his
mansion to dwell in. This is the Fathers work, Joh. 6.44. No man can come to me
except the Father draw him; When God does draw a man to Christ, then he gives
him to Christ for his actual possession.

2. Gods design in giving souls to Christ, is that they may be put into a
capacity for relief; for of themselves they are not. Out of Christ they cannot
come to God, there is no immediate access to God; His first giving them to
Christ by way of designation was for satisfaction; but this latter giving them
to Christ is for application, that they may reap and enjoy the benefit of his
satisfaction; that through Christ they might have access to God, and an
entrance into the grace of the Covenant; and therefore did Paul so earnestly
desire that he might be found in Christ.

3. The whole Covenant of grace with all the promises therein are founded in
Christ, and performed unto none but the chosen of God in Christ, and such as
are given to Christ. Hence is that of the Apostle, 2 Corinthians. 1.20. Acts 2.39.

4. The Lord Jesus owns every sinner that is given to him by the Father as his
peculiar trust; He becomes their shepherd, and takes the care of them, and
never leaves them, until he has brought them into actual possession and
fruition of all Covenanting grace; You have this fully set forth, Heb. 2.11,
12, 17, 18, with 4.15.

5. Having taken this trust upon him, and made it his business, he mediates
with the Father for them, that the Covenant of grace, with all the promises may
be performed to them, Heb. 7.25.

6. The Covenant being pleaded by Christ with the Father, must be performed to
the sinner. God cannot in justice deny it; this treasury and storehouse of grace
is presently opened, for the soul to come and receive grace and strength; most
full is that, John 14.12, 13, 14. and John 16.24.

6. According to the Spirits Revelation of this grace in the heart, such is our
sense and feeling thereof; and according to our sense thereof, such is our
comfort. Divine Revelation gives us the sense of Spiritual incomes and
influences, and a true sense thereof gives us comfort; the larger the discovery
is, the larger is our sense and comfort. There is many a gracious soul that
wants the strength of comfort, and yet does not want the strength of grace and
holiness, and the reason is, because he has not the sense and feeling of his
grace. This therefore is the office of the Spirit to reveal, and make known
those incomes, and Divine influences which the soul enjoys of and from God, for
his strength and support; As you may see, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12. The spirit reveals
all spiritual gifts to the souls of his Saints, that they may know them, and
have the sense and feeling of them in their hearts. And hence he is called the
comforter, because he reveals that to the soul which is matter of comfort. For
it is the knowledge and sense of things that administers comfort; To be without
a good, and not to know it, is all one in point of comfort; As what comfort
does any estate afford a man when he is ignorant of his interest in it, and
enjoyment of it. If a man have a rich Mine of Gold and Silver in any part of
his lands, and yet knows not of it, it is nothing to him. So if a man have
never such a measure of gifts and graces from God, yet if he be still in the
dark, and know it not, he can take no comfort therein. So long as a soul
questions and is in doubt about his spiritual estate, he cannot have comfort;
and therefore the holy Spirit comes, and makes it known to the people of God,
that they may have true comfort.

Use. If God be the rock of a Christians heart strength. Then this may serve
for counsel and instruction to all true Israelites.

1. To account God your strength. 2. To give God the glory of your strength.
First, To account God your strength; He is so in truth, let him be so in your
account. Own, and acknowledge God to be your strength alone. It is a Saints
great privilege that God is his strength, and it is his duty to account him
so. A Christian should live in the sense and feeling of this truth, in the
power and life of it. The notion of it is of little advantage, but the sense
thereof is of great use to a Christian. And that,

1. In point of settlement and quiet: this is a sure bottom for thy soul to
stay upon at all times; The soul is like the trembling needle, that cannot
stand still, but is ever in motion, and in fear, until it is directed to God
its North Pole. When a man accounts of any thing else as his strength, he puts
himself into a trembling posture: he cannot six himself, but is tossed to and
fro with fears and doubts. But now, let him fix his eye upon God, as the rock
of his strength, and then he is quiet and at rest, Psalm. 16.8, 9. Soul trouble
arises from two things principally, the loss of God, or the neglect of, and
non-emproving God: if God be either at a distance from us, or if we do not set
him before us, and keep him in our eye. Now he that does not fix his eye upon
God, by way of acknowledgement, will never fix his heart upon God for
settlement; and therefore must needs be in continual motion, and never quiet.
He that is strongest in wisdom, or riches, or friends, or graces, can never
settle, nor be at quiet in his breast, until he fix on God. For none of these
have an inherent, independent, and eternal strength; the strength of these is
in God; and if God does not conveigh some new supply of strength into them,
they will all fail us: and our experience hereof makes a man fear, that at one
time or other, he may be at a loss for strength: if a fit of sickness comes, a
man's wisdom and strength quickly fails him: if an enemy invade the Land, a rich
man may quickly be plundered of all, and made poor: and if a Christian be
surprised with a temptation, and fall into some gross sin, how will it wast and
consume his grace? So that here can be no settlement nor quiet. But now, that
soul that looks at God as his strength, may well be quiet and at rest. Most
excellent is that of the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 4.16, joined with Chap. 5. beg.
for which cause we faint not, (...): the word signifies to shrink back, as
cowards in war: they are afraid, and cannot stand their ground, they cannot
settle themselves to fight. Now says the Apostle, we do not thus: no, we are
settled and at quiet, whatever comes; for we look not at things that are seen,
we look not at a created strength: but at things unseen; we look to God. What
though we must break up house, and be dissetled as to our bodily condition: yet
we know, that we have a building of God, eternal in the heavens. We have a God
to go to, in whom we dwell now, and with whom we shall dwell for ever; a
Christian that accounts God his strength, is never at a loss: he can never be
dissetled.

2. In point of success, account God your strength, and that will carry you
out, and bear you up, until you arrive at a happy issue of all things. O
blessed is the man, whose strength is in thee: says the Prophet David, a
blessing does ever attend that man that accounts God his strength: he shall
never fail of a gracious issue: as Divine strength does accompany that man, so
Divine blessing does ever flow from Divine strength. Divine strength is a River
of broad waters, now a Christian that accounts God his strength, is like a tree
planted by a river of waters, that ever brings forth its fruit in due season,
Psalm. 1.3. and Jer. 17.7, 8. Whatever his state and condition is, and whatever
his work and employment is, Divine strength makes it fruitful and successful.
Many earthly things are strong and barren, but heavenly and Divine strength is
never barren. Nay, wherever it is communicated, it makes them fruitful; but
especially when the heart is filled with it, and acted by it, the fruits
thereof are full and glorious. A Christians graces, and his gifts and faculties
are like a flock of sheep, whereof every one bears twins, and none is barren
amongst them: They all bring forth much fruit unto God and his Church. Yea,
whenever a Christian goes forth in the strength of God to perform any duty
that God enjoins him, his work shall flourish, and be exceeding successful; So
Heb. 11.33. This leads me some particular directions herein, that you may thus
own God as your alone strength.

1. Be diffident of your own strength; go not forth in that, do not lean upon
that; this counsel is given us by the Holy Ghost; Prove. 3.5, 6, 7. Do not say,
I have strength enough, I can do this or that of my self, my wisdom, and mine
understanding, and mine abilities and parts shall help and relieve; direct and
carry me through: No, this is not to own God as your strength: but to set up
your self in the room of God, and to make it an Idol. Self strength is given us
of God to use, but not to be rested on; for this is a departure from God. Jer.
17.5, Cursed be the man that trusts in man and makes flesh his arm, and
whose heart departs from the Lord. Or as the Arabic Version has it: But his
heart is removed from the Lord. O take heed of this, 1. When your strength is
great in your own eyes. 2. When your work is little. 3. When your Spiritual
enemies are quiet.


First, When your strength is great in your own eyes, do not rely on it: But
still own God the rock of your strength. It is a great blessing to have
inherent strength, for a man to be wise, knowing, gracious, to be able to act
for God, to mortify sin, and to combat with Spiritual adversaries: but the
greater measure of inherent strength thou have, if rested in, the nearer it is
to a curse and blast. This is certain, that God does not always succeed designs
undertaken by great strength, and if God does not assist them, they will never
be effected: but he does ever frown upon, desert, curse and blast both the
strength and the design, when men rely upon it, and trust to it; let the
strength be never so great. I will give you some notable examples of this out
of the Holy Scriptures; Judge. 10. In this Sacred History you have three things
very observeable. First, Israel had a good cause in hand, as you may read at
large, Chap. 19. Secondly, Israel did far exceed the Benjamites in strength,
for the number of Israel was 400000 men, and the number of Benjamin was but
26000 men. Thirdly, the Israelites did ask counsel of God about the order of
their fight, verse. 18.23. And yet you shall find that God did not prosper them,
neither in their first, nor in their second attempt; but gave victory to the
Benjamites against the men of Israel, who lost 40000 in the two battles.
Neither did he go along with the men of Israel, until he had humbled them, and
brought them to a low frame of heart; So you may see, verse. 26. It Is true, they
had enquired of God before: I, but they too much relied upon their own
strength, and God would abase that before he gave them deliverance. Many a man
will pray, and rely upon his prayer, and not on God: I, But God will not own
such a prayer. No, thou must be emptied of all self, and make God thine All
strength, or else God will not own thee. Another example is that of Abijah, and
Jeroboam, 2 Chronicles. 13.3.16, 17, Jeroboams Army was double to Abijabs; and yet
the victory was given to Abijah. A third example will drive the nail home to
the head, and prove the thing in hand fully. It is that of the Apostle Peter.
He was a man, of all the Disciples the most courageous; and forward to confess
and own Christ at all times: yea, to obey his commands; As you may see, Matt.
14.28, and so Matt. 16.15, 16, Matt. 17.4. and Matt. 26.33. But observe, that
though Peter was thus stout and courageous, yet because he relied upon his own
strength, he fell by a threefold denial of his Master; So Matthew. 26.69. God
does ever dismount self confidence, and throw it in the dirt: a proud, self
confident Christan, is seldom successful, or instrumental in the work of God. I
have not read of any, as far as I remember. The truth is, a man is ever the
least able, and useful, when he thinks himself the best. The stronger thou
think thy self the weaker thou art. The more thou trustest to a strength
within thy self, the less thou shall receive from God. How often have we found
it by experience, that when we have expected great things by and from our own
strength, we have been most foiled: and the higher we have built our nest in
the rock of inherent strength, the lower we have fallen. What is the reason,
that when Christians have thought themselves the most prepared for an
ordinance, they have received the least benefit by it. And when they have been
the most enlarged in a duty, they have miscarried suddenly after it. And when
they have received the most comfort in a duty, or an ordinance, they have had
the darkest cloud upon their spirits immediately following? Nay, when they have
received the greatest influence from Divine strength, for the increase of
grace, yet they have found a sensible withdrawing of the Spirit of God
afterward from them. O Beloved, it is because they have rested upon these more
then they have upon God the rock of their strength: and therefore when your
strength is greatest, do not rely upon it.

Secondly, When your work is little, yet be self-diffident: It is not for a
Christian to say, my work is but small, and therefore I may rely upon my self
for ability to perform it. For though some works of a Christian are but little
in comparison of others, yet no work is so little, but will require a greater
strength, than what thou have received; full is that; 2 Cor. 3.5. What work is
less then that of thoughts? And yet says the Apostle, we are not sufficient of
our selves to think any thing, as of our selves: if thy Spiritual and Natural
strength be never so great, and thy work never so little, yet thou must have a
fresh supply of strength from God thy Rock, or else thou can not perform it
well. Beloved, we may as well give our selves a License or Commission, as we
may depend upon our own strength, for the discharge of the least duty. But if
we have no Commission for our work, but our own, it cannot own God for its
Sovereign: and if we have no strength but our own, to perform it by, it cannot
call God Father: neither will it be acceptable to him, or rewarded by him: as
you may see; Heb. 11.6. Without faith it is impossible to please God: As
without faith in Christ for acceptance, so without faith in God for assistance.
Works performed merely by a self strength, are not of the right stamp, they
come not from God, and therefore cannot have acceptance with God. They are not
the off spring of Divine strength; and therefore cannot entitle themselves to
Divine favor.

Thirdly, When your spiritual enemies are still and quiet: sin within, and
Satan without, are not always alike active against thee. No! they lie in wait
for an advantage, that they may take thee of a sudden, when thou art at a
distance from the rock of thy strength. What though the roaring Lion has
betaken himself to his Den, and there lurks, will any man be so foolish, as to
quit his place of safety; and (trusting to his corporal strength) walk to and
fro by the mouth of the Lions Den? much less should thou forsake God the
rock of thy strength, and walk up and down the world, where Satan lurks, and
sometimes hides himself from thee, with a dependence upon thy self strength for
safety: for thou know not how soon he may break forth upon thee. No! but in
the time of thy greatest peace, labor for the nearest and closest communion
with thy God. Betake thy self to that rock of strength, that must be thy safety
in time of trouble: excellent was that piece of policy of Asa, 2 Chro. 14.6, 7.
He that will not make God the rock of his strength in the time of peace, cannot
expect God to be his rock of strength in the time of war: He that will be
sheltered from a storm at Sea, must not quit and forsake the ship in a calm.
Gods counsel therefore to Noah was, to enter into his Ark before the storm
came: and this must be your practice if you would be safe; you must not trust
your own naked self strength, no, not in the most serene part of your life: for
you know not how soon a storm may arise, an enemy may assault you, and then
what will you do?

2. Rest upon God alone for all strength: throw thy self into his arms, that he
may bear thee up, and carry thee along through all thy ways. Psalm. 37.5, 6, 7,
Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust also in him, etc. Or roll thy way upon the
Lord; Throw thy self first, and then thy way upon God; for he is thy strength,
and supporter; So Psalm. 55.22, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall
sustein thee; The best way to ease thy self, is to lay thy load upon God, he
will take it up, and also carry thee. There is many a man would be willing to
go of himself, if another would but carry his burden for him: but if thou
throwest thy burden upon God, he will not only carry that, but will also carry
thee. He cares not how much weight a Christian lays on his back: a true
Israelite may ease himself, and best please his God at once. God delights not
to see tears in thine eyes, or paleness in thy countenance: thy groans and
sighs make no Music in his ears: he had rather that thou would free thy
self of thy burden, by casting it upon him, that he might rejoice in thy joy
and comfort. Now true confidence in God, and resting upon God, will both free
thee of thy burden, and also bring in the strength of God, to sustein and bear
thee up from falling: would thou therefore own God as thy strength, and
fetch strength from God to thy soul, rest upon God, roll thy self upon him. And
that, 1. In times of greatest weakness. 2. In times of the greatest service. 3.
In times of the greatest trials.


First, In times of greatest weakness; when thou feel thine inherent
strength to fail, yet be not discouraged, but rest upon the rock of thy
strength. That is the truest act of Faith, that has no created supporters: but
is terminated in God alone: it is no hard matter for a strong man to believe,
and to be confident, but it is a difficult thing for a man to discern the truth
of his faith, when created strength is at its height; take away the crutch, and
then you will see, what he will lay hold on next, to bear up his lame legs
with. When a Christian finds nothing in himself, then to rest on God, is an
evidence of true faith. Faith in God under poverty of Spirit, is a precious
faith: it is such a faith as is peculiar to the people of God; such a faith as
they must set on work; Zeph. 3.12, I will leave among you, men that are humble,
a poor people, and they shall trust in the name of the Lord. When God has
emptied a man of all self-strength, and made him poor, then is the time for him
to trust in the Lord. God has a way to make a rich man poor, and take nothing
from him, and to make a strong man weak, and yet not diminish his strength.
Quest. How does God this? Answ. By giving him an humble spirit; making him poor
in spirit, So that his heart is taken off his riches, and off his strength, and
now such an one will trust in God. But sometimes God makes men poor, and brings
them low indeed, on purpose, that they may learn to trust in God alone. 2 Cor.
1.10. We received the sentence of death, that we might learn, not to trust in
our selves, but in the living God; So 1 Timothy 1.5, She that is a widow, is left
alone, and trusts in God. Why truly to allude to this; there is many a soul who
has been wedded to a self-strength, and God has cut it off, and made her a
widow; one left alone, that she might trust in God, Romans 7.4. O Beloved if this
be your case, that God has widdowed your souls, and stripped you naked of all
created and communicated strength, that you are poor and weak, helpless and
comfortless, now is your time to cast your souls on God for all strength to
bear you up.

Secondly, In times of the greatest and highest service and employment, whether
doing or suffering, account God your strength, by resting on him, and trusting
in him; 1 Timothy 4.10, Therefore we labor and suffer reproach, because we trust
in the living God. The work of the Apostles and Primitive Christians was very
great, and very high; they stood in need of a mighty aid, for it was beyond
their inherent strength, and therefore they did commit themselves, and their
work, to the rock of their strength. As there is no work so little but exceeds
our strength, so there is no work so great, but there is a proportioned
strength to it, to be had in God. When God therefore calls thee forth to hard
and high service, such as makes every vein in thy heart to bleed, and every
string ready to crack, do not think it a work beyond omnipotency's power: sit
not down dejected, as if God required impossibilities of thee, but trust him;
and thou shall but bear the name, he will do the work: no man ever failed in
his work, who had the strength of God for his help. His strength ever rises as
his work rises, and the higher the service is, the greater shall be his
strength, Esaias 40.29, 30, 31. And therefore when God called Moses forth to
deliver Israel from the power of Egypt, see what he says to him, Exodus 3.10,
11, observe here, Moses is doubtful of his own strength, and pleads that, as an
excuse for his refusal of the work. Who am I? q. d. Alas, this is a work
beyond my skill and ability to perform. Now, to this, God answers, by a promise
of his presence; I will certainly be with thee: q. d. I will make up all thy
imperfections and weakness in mine own fullness and strength: the greater the
work is, the more I will manifest my self; and the less thou have in thy self,
the more thou shall receive from me. And therefore when Moses pleads his excuse
with a particular demonstration of his inability; God gives a particular
answer. Exodus 4.10, 11, 12, Lord (says Moses) I am not cloquent, but am slow
of speech, and of a slow tongue, and therefore very unfit for the work. I am
not able to deliver thy message either to Pharao or to the children of Israel,
but shall rather spoil it, then deliver it. Now God gives a particular answer
to this particular objection. First, by way of Interrogation; Who made man's
mouth? i.e. Cannot I that made the mouth, cure the imperfection of it? cannot I
give thee an eloquent and a ready tongue. Secondly, by way of particular
promise in reference to that particular case. Now therefore go, and I will be
with thy mouth, and teach thee what thou shall say; the like you have, Matt.
10.19, It shall be given you in that same hour, what ye shall speak. Divine
assistances do ever flow in according to the greatness of the work; It shall be
all one to thee, to perform a very high piece of service for God, with a
strength proportioned to it, as it will be to do a lesser work with a little
strength. Do but rest upon the rock of your strength, and you will never be
troubled at your work.

Thirdly, In times of the greatest trials: when thou art conflicting with
spiritual or corporal enemies, then rest on the rock of thy strength. Sometimes
a Christian is (as it were) drawn forth into the field to encounter with sin
and Satan, and these two grand enemies of the souls Salvation, do set all their
power and policy on work, to foil and ruin him: sin, that sets upon him (as
Satan's messenger) and buffets him, and Satan stands with his bow in his hand,
and shoots fiery darts at him, to wound and torment his soul: Now what should
he do in this case? why, rest on the rock of his strength. It was a saying of
Luther: He that most strongly trusts to Gods assistance, he most surely defends
himself. And I find it written of S. Augustine, that after his first conversion
to the faith, he was grievously vexed with inward conflicts against his corrupt
affections; and after long struggling with them by a self-strength, which he
found too weak to overcome, and musing what to do more, he heard a voice
saying, in te stas and non stas: thou stand in thy self, and therefore do
not stand. Whereupon apprehending that a self-strength could not mortify and
conquer his corruptions, he betook himself to the rock of his strength, and at
last found such inward assistance thereby, as made him stand his ground, and
overcome his enemies. And this is according to Holy Writ; as you may see,
Ephesians. 6.10, 12. Finally my brethren be strong in the Lord and in the power of
his might; for we wrestle not against flesh and blood, but against
principalities, etc. i.e. If you would be able to encounter with your spiritual
adversaries, and to stand your ground, you must rest upon the rock of your
strength: you must be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might. Fides
sit tecum, and tecum est Deus in tribulatione, Aug. in Psalm. 90, Have faith
with thee, and God is with thee. And know this, that the strength of sin and
Satan, could never match the strength of God; and hence it is, that the people
of God have ever conquered, both sin and Satan at the last, and are able to say
as Paul, thanks be to God that gives us the victory, 1 Cor. 15. 2 Cor. 2.
and causes us to triumph. And what though a Christian is beset with corporal
enemies, yet if he do but set faith on work, he shall find strength coming from
the rock of his strength to bear him up against them. And hence is that of
David, Psalm. 56.3, at what time I am afraid I will trust in thee. The flesh
will have its work in a good man, and stir up passions of fear and grief, when
danger is near; I, but these shall not get the upper hand, if faith be set on
work, and therefore says David, at what time I am afraid, I will trust in
thee. And as it overcomes our fears, so it overcomes our dangers too: for it
carries the soul to the rock of strength to help us against them. Most full is
that of Asa, 2 Chronicles. 14.8, 9, 10, usque fin. The like you have, 2 Chronicles.
20.12, 13, 15, and Judges 7.14. Psalm. 118.6, 7, to the 14, and David to Goliath,
1 Samuel 17.45.

This is the first branch of the use.

Secondly, Is God the rock of your strength? then give God the glory of your
strength: Take heed of robbing God, that you may sacrifice to your selves: but
as you have the comfort, so let him have the glory.

1. By due acknowledgements; say in your hearts and with your tongues, all my
strength is from God, and all my strength is in God, and God is the rock of my
strength: Thus does David, Psalm. 18.32. It is God that girdeth me with
strength. Psalm. 27.1. Psalm. 28 7, 8. and he exhorts others thereunto, Psalm.
68.34.

2. By a frequent reviewing and recording your experience of
heart-strengthening influences: call to mind and take special notice of the
incomes of strength from God, A Christian should be Gods Notary, and his heart
a book of Records, wherein all the memorable incomes of God, are written down.
He that sees not what God has done for him, will never give God the praise of
his doings: and he that buries Gods works in forgetfulness, makes God a looser
by his gains. Hence it is, that David rouses up his soul, and all within him,
and lays that charge upon himself, Psalm. 103.2. Forget not all his benefits; He
that will give God the glory of a mercy, must show it written first upon his
heart; the heart is the first mover in a man: all a man's members are but the
Organs of the soul, that sets them all on work; the tongue will sing and praise
God, when the heart dictates to it, and stirs it up: now unless a man's memory
be active, and his understanding quick in reviewing, and calling to mind the
incomes of God, the heart will lie dead, and never stir.

3. By employing your strength for God, that God may have his own returned with
advantage: This is Gods end in giving you strength, that you may work for him:
Oh, take heed of a sloathful idle spirit; for this is to bury your talent in
the earth of sensuality and vanity; and hence it is that Paul admonishes
Timothy, to stir up the gift that was in him, and not to neglect it; 1 Timothy
4.14. 2 Timothy 1.6. This is also his charge upon the Romans, Romans 12.12, an
unactive strong Christian is as unprofitable, as he that has no strength: and
an unprofitable servant is in great danger of five evils, 1. Of the loss of
Gods comforting presence. 2. Of the loss of Gods assisting presence for a time.
3. Of falling into some powerful temptation; So David fell. 4. Of corrupting
thy heart. 5. Of an abatement of thy strength.


First, Of the loss of Gods comforting presence; He that does not draw nigh to
God in duty, shall not find God nigh to him in comfort. Can any idle servant
expect the favor of his Master, and a reward at night, when as he has loytred
all the day? No more, may idle, unactive Christians. How can thou expect a
smile, from God, or any manifestation of love, that spendest thy most precious
time and strength in the service of another Master? as the withdrawing of Gods
quickening presence lays the soul up, that it grows dull and heavy: so a dull
and dead Spirit unto Holy Service, oftentimes causes God to withdraw his
comforting presence. You have both in one verse, Esaias 64.7, And there is none
that calls upon thy name, that stirs up himself to take hold on thee, for
thou have hid thy face from us, and have consumed us, because of our
iniquities. The reason why they were so dead and unactive, that they stirred
not up themselves, to take hold on God, was because God had hid his face from
them; and the reason of Gods hiding his face from them, was for their
iniquities, sins of omission, as well as of commission. Little do Christians
think, what they loose, when they neglect an opportunity of calling upon Gods
name, seeking Gods face, hearing of his word, and putting their graces upon
exercises: Why, they loose the comforts of God, that are to be enjoyed in those
exercises; the least ray and drop of which are more to be prized then the whole
world. God never hides his face so soon, and so long from a Christian, as when
he withdraws his hand from Holy work. As Apostasy from God and his ways
causes a total rejection, God turns his back upon that man, that withdraws
from him; so a deadness and dullness in the work of God, will most certainly
cause a frown from God. He hides his face from such, as being ashamed to own
them. And indeed it is a shame, that Satan's servants should be more active and
laborious in his vasallage and drudgery, then the servants of God oftentimes
are in their high and heavenly calling and employment. I say, God is even
ashamed of them, and therefore hides his face from them. O it is very good for
Christians to examine themselves, when they find an ebb in their comforts,
whether there is not an ebb in their spirits, that they are not so lively and
active for God as they have been.

Secondly, idle, unactive Christians, that do not lay out their strength for
God, are in danger of the loss of Gods assisting presence for a time. To what
purpose should God give in new influences, when as the soul neglects to lay out
his former incomes? What reason has the soul to expect, that God should stand
by him, and give in a new supply of grace, to sit still, and do nothing? God is
not so prodigal of his grace, and it is but folly in the soul to expect it. The
promise runs thus; the Lord is with you, while you are with him, i. e. when the
soul waits upon God in the way of obedience, and is faithful to lay out
communicated strength therein to the utmost, then God attends all his motions,
and communicates new supplies to help him forward therein: but now when the
heart grows dead, and the spirit dull to Holy employment, God withdraws
himself, and leaves the soul for a time. Some say, they must not enter upon a
duty, until the spirit of God moves them: Why truly such men oftentimes sit
still a long time without a motion from the spirit. No: we must attempt our
duty, and then we may hope for the motions of the spirit: but otherwise we
cannot. The Holy Spirit is an active Spirit, and he cannot endure to lodge in
an idle unactive soul: also when the soul once takes off his hand from Holy
employment, the Holy Spirit departs. The Church never found such a sensible
withdrawing of her beloved from her, as when she was laid down to rest her self
upon her pillow of ease and self enjoyment. As you may see, Cant. 5.2, 6. She
found it very hard to recall him, and recover her enjoyment of him. And so it
will be with all those that are in that posture. Mark her expression: I opened
to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and was gone: my soul
failed when he spoke. I sought him, but I could not find him, I called him, but
he gave me no answer. See here how God repays the soul in its own Coin. She
will do nothing for God, and now God will do nothing for her. She would not
answer God, when he called, but was dumb and silent, and now God will not
answer her, when she calls. She would not seek him, when he offered to be found
of her, and now he will not be found, though she seek him. She would not lay
out that strength for God which she had, and now he denies her that strength,
which she wants.

Thirdly, An idle, unactive Christian is in danger of falling into some
powerful temptation. When a man once leaves off working for God, Satan will
presently set him to work. If thou can not find in thine heart to pray,
meditate, believe, repent, and walk close with God, the Devil will find thee
work to thy cost. The truth is, the soul of man cannot lie still, it must move
and act: Now if it be taken off from that which is good, it will fall to that
which is naught. Little did David think, what a bait Satan had laid for him,
when he went up to the roof of his house, and there walked; from thence did
those two horrible sins of uncleanness and murder take their rise. When a man
goes forth out of his Chamber in a morning, with a purpose to spend a day idly
and vainly, he little thinks what the issue thereof may be before night. An
idle unactive Christian tempts Satan to tempt him, and Satan never goes up and
down unprovided, but according to the temper of the person, or the season of
the year, or the place of a man's converse, or the age of his life, fits and
prepares such a snare for him, as may most undoubtedly catch him, to the
breaking of his peace, and the wounding of his conscience; And indeed the less
any Christian works for God, the greater advantage Satan has to work upon him.
When thou intermittest thy seasons of praying and conversing with God in his
Holy Ordinances, then the roaring Lion comes, and makes a prey of thee: Thou
art then meat for his tooth: And know this, that sins of Commission do, for the
most part, if not always, take their rise at sins of Omission. Thou do not
perform that which God commands, and Satan provokes thee to that which God has
forbidden. Thou straglest and wanderest out of Gods way, and it is no wonder if
this high way adversary take thee up.

Fourthly, Thou art in danger of having thy heart more corrupted hereby. The
heart of the best is bad enough, but by idleness it will be worse. Standing
water will soon corrupt; and so will an idle unactive spirit. The less a
Christian is employed in Holy Duties, the worse will his heart grow, more prone
to evil, and less disposed to good. When a Clock stands still long, the wheels
will contract rust, and put it out of Order. Even thus it will be with the
heart of man; when it is not in continual motion toward God, and often wound
up into an heavenly frame, it contracts abundance of filth, that puts it out of
order, and renders it unfit for holy action: it his hard to get the heart into
a good frame for communion with God, if a Christian take never so much pains
with it; but if it be in never so good a temper, it will soon be out again, if
a man take not as much pains to keep it so, as to get it into it. The
corruption that is in man's heart, will quickly overtop his grace, if he stirs
not up himself to oppose it. An idle Christian cannot continue a good Christian
long.

Fifthly, If thou be idle and unactive thy Spiritual strength will much
abate: So much as thou abatest of this Christian work, so much will thy
spiritual strength abate. He that will not work when he can, will not be able
to work when he would. For as grace is strengthened by exercise, so it decays
by idleness; And it is a just judgment of God to take away our Talents from us
when we do not improve them for his advantage, Matt. 25.

Branch 2. God is Isreal's portion for ever.

Now in the handling this truth I shall do three things.

1. Prove it by Scripture. 2. Explain it. 3. Give you the grounds and reasons,
and so apply it.
First, For proof, turn to that of David, Psalm. 119.57. and 142.5. Jer. 10.16,
the same with Jer. 51.19, word for word, and Lam. 3.24.

Secondly, For explanation, I shall both give you the sense of the word; and
also show you in what respect God is a portion.

In the Hebrew word, there is a Metaphor taken from the old custom of dividing
inheritances, in which every heir had his part given him by lot: and that was
called his portion; so Josh. 18.5.6. In like manner God is Isreal's portion. A
division is made of heaven and earth; of God and the creature: the men of the
world have their portion in the world. Psalm. 17.14, and the Israel of God, have
God for their portion. Now a portion notes out a man's All; All he has to live
upon for sustenance content and satisfaction. But God is the godly man's All.
Deus est unde vivant. Aug in Psa. 119.57. He lives upon God. God is his
sustentation content and satisfaction. Though God sometimes is pleased to give
much of the earth to a godly man; as he did to Abraham, Lot, etc. yet that is
not their portion, not their All. And therefore says the Psalmist, Whom have I
in heaven but thee, Psalm. 73.25.
viz. as my portion? And so when God takes away all a Christians earthly
substance, he takes not away his portion. Job lost all his earthly goods, and
yet Job lost not his portion. God was his All still. When God gives riches in
abundance to a godly man, it is but God in those riches, God in lands, Dat deus
portionem in terra viventium, sed non aliquid a se extra se. Aug. in Psalm.
14.2.5.
God in money, God in All: and therefore these may be all taken from him, and
yet he keep his portion still. In like manner if a godly man have never so much
of the world, he is not satisfied therewith unless God be his too. When Luther
had many gifts sent him by good friends, he turned himself to God, and said,
That God should not put him off with these things: As an heir though he have
money, clothes and victuals, yet still looks after the inheritance: it is so
with a good man.

Secondly, In what respect may God be said to be a portion?

Ans. A portion has three properties in it; and all attributable unto God.

First, a portion is a good, Matt. 7.11, and hence a man's estate is called
bona; because it consists of several good things. Thus God is a portion for he
is good, Psalm. 100.5. Psalm. 34.8, O taste and see that the Lord is good. Nay,
God is the chief and highest good: not only good, but goodness it self; All
good in created beings is a participation of Divine Goodness. For there is but
one efficient, exemplary and final goodness: that from whence good comes,
according to which all good things are made, and to which all things tend. The
goodness of God is not only the Original copy and first Idea according to which
God drew all things, but the highest good, whereunto all things do tend, as
their ultimate end. So Romans 11 ult. For of him, and through him, and for him
are all things.

Secondly, A portion is a suitable good. Men do not give Stones and Scorpions,
Poison or Prisons to their Children as a portion, Matt. 7.11. Thus God is a
portion; For he is a suitable good; Nothing so suitable to the state of man, and
the nature of the soul, as God is. Name what you will, riches, honors,
pleasures in the world are not; these are heterogeneal things; The soul of man
is spiritual and subline: Such a good is God; and whatever the soul pants after
it is enjoyable in him. Hence God is resembled, and set out by such things as
man stands most in need of, and are the most delightful to the heart of man.

1. God sets forth himself by the element of water, so Esaias 33.21, Now water is
a refreshing creature, to the spirit of a thirsty man, Esaias 32.2.

2. God is also life, Psalm. 36.9. now what is more suitable or convenient unto
a dead man then life? a dead man cannot have true content and satisfaction;
nothing can sustein and keep a dead corpse from putrefaction and corruption,
but life. All beings sink and perish without life. They are comfortless and
miserable without life. I, but that soul that enjoys God, has life, his
presence quickens a dead soul to the life of God, the life of holiness, and the
life of happiness. So that he that enjoys God, is eternally sustein'd and can
never die. So John 6.50, to 57.3, God is also set forth under the notion of
light. Psalm. 27.1, a thing most comfortable and pleasant; and exceeding
suitable to the state of man. Darkness shuts up a man in misery: but light
brings him forth. Man is brought into the world in a state of darkness, and
never sees the light of life, until he comes to God, Psalm. 36.9, In thy light
shall we see light. In a word, God is that which the soul stands in need of to
render it happy and glorious. Whatever the soul wants, it must have from God.
It is he alone that gives grace and glory; and when he has given both; himself
must be all in all or else the soul cannot have content: given what you will to
a thirsty heart, and yet it is not content unless you give him that which is
convenient for thirst. It Is not gold, nor silver, that will satisfy him: No,
he must have drink: it is so in all other cases. In like manner, a soul that
hungers and thirsts after God, cannot be satisfied without the enjoyment of him.

Thirdly, A portion is an adaequate and proportionable good. Every legacy is
not a portion. A portion (as was hinted before) is a man's livelihood, his All.
Now a man's All must be proportioned to a man's necessity; it must be enough to
live upon. Thus God is the Saints portion; he is enough; the soul needs no more
then God to live upon; God may well be the Saints All; for he is
All-sufficient, Genesis 17.1, I am the Almighty God, or God All-sufficient; God is
pars abundantissima, and sufficientissima. The soul that enjoys God may truly
say as Esau to his brother Jacob, when he offered him a large present, Genesis
33.9, I have enough Brother, or as the prodigal said of his Father, there is
bread enough and to spare, Luke 15.17; there is not only enough, but much to
spare in God. The soul is of a vast capacity, all the world cannot give it
enough, I, but God can, and yet when it is satisfied, he has never the less
still. The heart of man is ever craving and begging until it be filled with all
the fulness of God; and then it is quiet. That man that takes up his rest, and
says within himself, I have enough, I need not ask any more, I may leave off
praying and seeking, is either very ignorant of the dimensions and fullness of
God, or else is very proud and self-conceited. For let a man draw never so
much, yet the well is deep, and there is as much as ever was. O the bottomless
goodness of God! O the inexhaustible fountain of Divine perfection! No heart is
able to fathom or contain it. Demonstration.

Q But how comes God to be the Saints portion?

First, it flows from Gods free donation, God has given himself to his Saints.
That is properly a man's portion, that his father gives him. Now because God can
give no greater good then himself, therefore he gives himself to his Saints.
God is their Father, and they must have a portion from him: and God cannot
think any thing below himself a portion for them. He can give the world to his
enemies, I, but he gives himself to his children; Hence it is said, that God
has set apart him that is godly for himself, Psalm. 4.3, and the Lord has
chosen Jacob for himself, Psalm. 135.4, even as a man takes a child and adopts
him, makes him his own, and then gives him a portion; so does God. 1 John 3.1,
and Romans 8.17. Now what is the inheritance but God himself? Nothing below God
is the inheritance of Christ who is the Son, and nothing less then God is the
inheritance of Saints, who are Gods younger children; but this is not by humane
purchase, but by Divine gift. For alas, all the gold and silver in the world,
is not to be weighed against God as a sufficient price. All the nations of the
earth, are but as a drop in the bucket, and, as the dust in the balance: Nay,
as nothing, and counted to him less then nothing. No, this is an inheritance
not to be bought by any finite price: Nay, whatever thou valuest the most, yet
comes infinitely short of a sufficient price. Were thou more righteous then the
Angels or Adam in innocence, yet all thy good works would not bring thee in a
ray of Divine glory by way of merit. Why else had not the Apostate Angels and
Adam in innocence the presence of God, for their sustentation to keep them from
falling, but to evidence this truth, that man's righteousness cannot purchase
the enjoyment of God?

2. This flows from a Saints self-denying resignation. A true Saint denies
himself in all but God, and to him he resigns up himself. Self-denial outs a
man of all earthly goods in point of affection and affiance; and carries him to
God alone for sustenance, content and comfort; So Psalm. 73.25. A true Christian
dare not own any thing as his All but God; He has a true right to all that he
enjoys as to use, but he does not account it as his portion; No, he resigns
himself to God, as his life and All; So David, Psalm. 27.1, God is my life, i.
e. I live upon God, and have all in him; I betake my self wholly to him; and,
to him only. So Psalm. 62.1. the word rendered (truly) signifies (only, i. e. I
betake my self to God alone; I go no whither else; and the truth is, none but a
true Christian knows the emptiness of the creature, and the fullness of God, and
therefore he alone lets all go for God. Those things which are the wordlings
gain, a Saint accounts loss for God; now when a man has thus outed himself of
All for God, he would have nothing at all to live upon, if he did not fix on
God; as S. Paul said, 1 Cor. 15.19, If our hopes were in this life we were of
all men the most miserable. What, to loose earth and heaven together? To deny a
man's self in all worldly advantages, and not to have a God to lay hold on? This
is most sad! No, therefore the Christian is so wise as to make an happy
exchange, to forsake all for God, and having forsaken all for God, God takes
him to himself; Hence is that gracious promise, ( Hos. 14.3.) The fatherless
shall find mercy; God is the portion of none but spiritual Orphans; he becomes
guardian to none other; Mercy in God supposes misery in the creature. Now when
the soul becomes the most wretched and miserable in its own sense, then it is
an object of mercy, Matthew. 5.3, Blessed are the poor in spirit for their is the
kingdom of God.

3. God is a Saints portion by way of fruition: he enjoys God truly here and
fully hereafter. God is not only round about his people, as their wall of
protection: but he is in their hearts as their life and wellhead of eternal
comfort and satisfaction, 1 John 3.24, He that keeps his commandments
dwells in him, and he in him. There is a mutual inhabitation; they dwell each
in other, and so enjoy one another. So vast is the soul of man, that nothing
but God can fill it, and therefore God dwells in a Saint: so immense and
incomprehensible are the dimensions of God, that nothing is able to hold them,
and therefore a Saint must enter into and dwell in God. Hence is that prayer of
the Apostle for the Ephesians, Chap. 3.19. that they might be filled with all
the fullness of Christ; So that of our Savior, Matt. 25.21. The more an earthly
portion dwells and lodges in the heart, the more it sinks and destroys the
man: but this is our life and salvation, our glory and our heaven, to be full
of God. Gods indwelling in the soul is its resurrection, and exaltation, Esaias
57.15, 16. Now for the right understanding hereof, you must know, that this
indwelling of God in the soul, is not essentially, as the Godhead dwelt in the
humane nature of Christ, and made up one person: but mystical and spiritual, 1.
By lively impression. 2. By gracious influx.


First, God dwells in the heart by lively impression: God stamps his own image
upon the heart, and so lives in it, as the father lives in his child: a soul
conformed to God, is a soul full of God. Then is the soul taken up into the
life and light of God, when it is made like to God, holy as he is holy. Then
God lives in the heart, when a spirit of holiness is planted in the heart; and
when the lines of his glory are drawn upon it; so says the Apostle, 1 John
4.12, 16. God is love. The love of God is his image; he that loves truly and
sincerely, he dwells in God, and God in him; There are some that dream of an
immediate vision of God, they see him in his Essence; but says John, No man
has seen God at any time: if we love one another, God dwells in us, and we
in him, i. e. If the image of Divine glory be enstampt upon our hearts, and
appears in its lively acts of grace and goodness, love and sweetness, then have
we true and close communion and fellowship with the Father. So 1 John 1.7. If
we walk in the light, as he is in the light, then have we fellowship one with
another. This is to see God, know him and enjoy him, for the soul to be made
like to him; transformation of the soul into Divine similitude gives it the
fullest enjoyment of God, that it is capable of. As the soul is in likeness
unto God, so it enjoys him. Perfection of holiness gives the soul a perfect
fruition of God. Saints in glory are perfectly holy, and therefore do enjoy God
perfectly.

Secondly, God dwells in the heart by gracious influx; he is continually giving
forth Divine virtue to a Saint; as he is a fountain of grace and goodness, so
he diffuseth streams thereof into the hearts of his people; he is ever doing
them good; and according to their needs, so does he supply them; mercy flows in
according to the state and condition of the soul; sometimes healing, sometimes
quickening, strengthening, comforting, directing, and teaching; Hence is that of
the Prophet; Psalm. 36.8 9.

4. It appears that God is a Saints portion by his improvement of his interest
in God: men usually do improve, and make the best of their estates they can,
that they may live the most comfortably upon it that may be. Saints are good
husbands, and they do not let their portion lie dead by them; but do make the
best of it they can.

1. By Contemplation. 2. By Supplication. 3. By Application.
First, By Contemplation, a Saint takes great delight to behold God, not
essentially as he is in his own beauty and purity; for so none can see God, and
live; but manifestatively, as he is pleased to reveal himself in his Son Jesus:
so John 1.18. When the Lord Jesus does declare his Father to the soul, it is a
ravishing sight; Even as a worldly man takes great delight to look upon his
estate, to see his bags of money, his Barns of Grain, his cattle in his
pasture; he feeds his mind upon them: so does the soul of a gracious man feed
it self upon God by contemplation, Psalm. 104.34. my meditation of him shall be
sweet. It was like sweet meats to the Prophets taste. So Psalm. 139.17, 18, how
precious are thy thoughts unto me, O God, etc. I am still with thee, i. e. I
think on thee in the night, and wake with thee in the morning; and wherever I
go, and wherever I am, still my mind is on thee, and every thought is admirable
and exceeding precious to me; a true Christian had rather spend an hour with
God in Contemplation, and Divine Meditation, then Eternity with the world; this
feeds his soul, and delights his heart, and takes up his spirit; Well might the
Apostle say, to be spiritually minded is life and peace; No such life, no such
peace as flows in this way.

Secondly, By Supplication; the more he enjoys of God the larger are his
desires after God. He must be ever sucking and drawing at Divine breasts, he
goes to God for all he wants, and the more he receives the more he craves;
grace widens the heart and draws out the spirit; so that a Christian never
thinks he has enough. He drinks, and drinks, and yet he is the more thirsty:
he prays continually and without ceasing; for one prayer begets another. As a
man that has an estate first calls for one thing, and then for another: and
the use of one makes him desire another, and more of all. So he that has an
interest in God first seeks one grace, and then another: and the use of one
grace puts him upon the begging of another. He wants knowledge, and he begs
that, but knowledge without humility puffs up, and this makes him beg the grace
of humility; he begs strength, I, but without faithfulness and skill to lay it
forth it profits not; and therefore he must have that: he prays for wisdom and
fidelity to use his strength. As graces are linked and combined together for
use and helpfulness each to other; so are the souls desires, like to hasty
messengers, ready to tread upon one another heels. A Christian sometimes is big
with twins of holy desires, and one comes first to the birth, and yet another
(like to Pharez) steps forth, and makes a breach upon it. It is excellent to
see, how the soul gets ground still, and goes on still further and further by
'its desires. As thriving men, first buy one piece of land and then another,
until they have enlarged their territories to a mighty compass: so do
Christians enlarge their graces and comforts. It is with a Christian, as it is
recorded of the rain that fell in Ahabs time at the prayer of Elijah, 1 King.
18.44. so a Christians desires and returns are little at the first: but they
greaten and greaten until they overspread the whole heavens of the soul. Matthew.
7.7, ask, and ye shall receive, seek and ye shall find, knock and it shall be
opened unto you; Here is a gradation; the soul proceeds by steps, and
accordingly receives; and as the soul arises higher and higher in its desires
and affections, so grace arises higher and higher in its answers. A prayerful
soul comes at last to be a graceful soul; Thou that art much with God in
prayer, shall have much of God in thine heart. As the Sun draws forth vapors
from the earth, not for it self, but to fatten the earth: so God draws forth
the desires of the soul, not to better, or to add any thing to his own being or
happiness, but to better the soul, and to add to its happiness and to make it
complete.

Thirdly, By Application the soul emproves God. A true Christian makes an
advantage of all Divine incomes and enjoyments; so that he increases daily with
the increase of God. As a worldly man turns the penny, and makes it double, and
at last an hundredfold; so does a Christian: he has an heavenly art, whereby
he trades with, and grows rich in all goodness; His four talents brings him
eight, and his five gains him ten; A Christians grace lies not dead by him, and
of no use, but is daily put forth into act and increases: The more he enjoys
of God, the more he acts for God, and the better he thrives: Prayer fetches
in, and love lays out, until the man grows wonderfully rich; and gains a
wonderful stock within himself.

Use, 1. By way of inference; and hence we may infer.

First, That the people of God are the richest people; they have the best
portion the best inheritance. So the Prophet accounts it, Psalm. 16.5, 6. The
Lord is my portion, the lines are fallen unto me in a pleasant place; Yea, I
have a goodly heritage. A goodly heritage; the best that can be had; the
fullest, the richest, and the most delightful. Saints have Benjamins portion, a
mess five times so much as the worldling's is; All is a Saints; for they have
God who is all; What though they are sometimes very poor in a worldly respect,
yet they are wonderfully rich in an heavenly respect. 2 Cor. 6.18. Jam 2.5. A
Christian is a mere paradox and heavenly riddle; he has nothing, and he has
All; he is poor and rich. Levi had no portion an ongst the tribes, and yet had
the best estate, for God was his portion. Alas, a worldlings portion is but a
dark shadowy representation of a Saints portion; his house and land, his food
and raiment, his money and Jewels, are but figures and resemblances of a
Christians estate; There was far more difference between Solomon's stables and
out houses for his horses and beast to stand in, and Solomon's Ivory Throne, or
Temple whereon Solomon laid out all his glory, than there is between the
richest worldlings portion and a Saints. We are exceeding apt to say of such a
man, He is wonderfully rich, he has a vast estate, he is worth so many
thousands by the year; or he is a Prince in such a Dominion, and a mighty man:
but alas he is not to be compared with one of Gods poor Saints; A Christian
that has not a penny in his purse, nor a rag to cover his nakedness, nor a bit
of bread to put in his mouth, is infinitely richer, then all the Princes and
Potentates of the earth; For God is the portion of his Saints, Psalm. 37.16.

Secondly, That the people of God are a truly happy people. So says the
Prophet, Aug. to 9. p. 48.
Psalm. 144.15. Men account them happy that have aurum in arca; but they are
truly happy, that have Deum in conscientia. For what is true happiness? Why, it
is the enjoyment of good commensurate to all our desires. Now this is the
happiness of Saints; they have a good commensurare to; yea, and infinitely
beyond all their desires. God is better to them, then they wish for or desire;
He exceeds the utmost bounds of the largest heart. God often gives his Saints
more then they ask, and yet the enjoyment of God, is beyond all his gifts.
Saints know not to the full, what they ask, when they beg to be filled with all
the fullness of God, and when God is enjoyed by them, they scarce know what they
have. These now must needs be happy, even to admiration. We may well say, O the
happinesses of that man, whose portion is the Lord.

Thirdly, That the people of God cannot be made miserable; as they are happy,
so they are eternally happy, for they have a durable and eternal portion;
worldly men are at a great uncertainty, they may be externally happy to day,
and very miserable to morrow; Nay in a moment a curse comes upon them like an
Eastern wind, and blasts them irrecoverably; but of the righteous we may say as
Isaac concerning Jacob, he is blessed, and he shall be blessed; blessed to day,
and blessed to morrow and for ever. A Saints estate is out of danger and
hazard: it is a treasure that cannot be plundered by thieves, nor devoured by
moths, nor corrupted by rust, nor taken away by unjust dealings: it is a sure
and undescisable estate: nay it is an estate that cannot be spent. A Christian
may live at as high a rate as possible he can; through faith and prayer, and
yet he cannot live at the height of it; he cannot lessen or diminish it: the meal
in the bowl, and the oil in the cruse will never be spent. Worldly men never
sink in their estates until they come to spend of the stock; if they can but
keep the Wolf from the door, they care not: it is so with a godly man; his stock
and his portion holds, whatever he spends he spends not that.

Use, 2. For instruction; Is God the portion of Israel, then this may teach us,

1. Where to have a portion for our selves and ours; Why, by making sure of
God; Alas, many persons are plotting about an estate and a portion for
themselves, and their children, but God is not all their thoughts: and
oftentimes it falls out as the Psalmist speaks. Psalm. 146.4, that whilst he
is contriving and laying out his heart in this design, his breath goes forth,
he returns to the earth, and in that very day his thoughts perish; he dies a
beggar, miserably poor in estate, both for body and soul, and leaves his
children nothing but an inheritance of their fathers sin, and it may be the
curse of God for it; that whilst he is roaring in hell, they are posting
thither as fast as they can to increase his torments and make them more
intolerable: But however, if it falls not out thus, that thou art defeated in
thy design; but thou scrapest up an earthly portion for thy self, and leavest
that to thy children, what is this to the enjoyment of God? Oh, what can
compensate the loss of God? Not the whole world if thou had it; For alas,
this earthly portion, is not the souls portion; I may help and relieve the
body, but can do no good to the soul; that is poor, wretched, and miserable,
without the enjoyment of God; the soul has nothing to live upon, whilst it is
without God; Now, what, must thy body be preferred above thy soul? Thy body,
that is clothed, fed, delighted, and kept safe; I, but thine immortal soul is
laid naked, starved, and miserable. It Is possible for thee, through the
delusions of Satan and the corruption of the flesh, that thou may shuffle on
a while; I, but when thy naked soul shall fit trembling upon thy lips, and ask
thee this one question? Now whither must I go? What portion is for me? What
can thou answer? Thou dare not say as Dives said, soul take thine ease,
thou have goods laid up for many years: For alas, thy soul then takes its
leave of all earthly goods, when it takes its flight from thy body, and if it
has not God for its portion to go to, it has nothing to live upon, no harbor
nor shelter to keep it from that eternal storm of Divine wrath which is showred
down from God upon it. I have heard it as one of the saddest complaints of some
women, when their husbands were ready to die, that they had not an house to put
their heads in, nor a friend to go to, and it may be little or nothing to help
and relieve themselves; and it may be the next news is, that they are thrown
into prison for their husbands debts. Why truly it is the godless souls case:
that when the body dies, the soul has no habitation provided for it; but must
speedily go to the common Goal, to be there kept as a miserable prisoner, bound
with the chains of eternal darkness, and to feed upon soul devouring flame of
Divine vengeance to all Eternity.

O friends, will not you be so wise therefore as to look out in time for a sure
portion for your souls; even for a God. Oh, live no longer godless, for so long
as thou live without God, thou have no provision made for thy soul.

2. This may teach us, that if we would have God to be our portion, we must be
Gods Israel, and Gods portion: as thou would have God to be thine, so thou
must be the Lords. Full is that of the spouse, Cant. 2.16. my beloved is mine,
and I am his; The interest between God and his people, comes to be mutual. So
Psalm. 33.12. Thou can never truly say, that the Lord is thy God, until thou
can say, thou art the inheritance of the Lord; Thou art never sure of God as
thy portion, until God has made sure of thee for his inheritance: He must have
some interest in thy heart, or thou have no fruition of him.

First, Therefore, Set thy heart upon God alone, do not suffer it to be divided
between many portions; let not the earthly portion share one part, and sin
another, and the Devil another, and then what is left thou will be content that
God should have it; But know, that God will be all or none; the love of the
world and the love of God is inconsistent; 1 John 2.15. You know when the
Merchant had found the pearl, he sells all for it; and so must thou; thy heart
must be taken off all for God, and given up to him only. God never matches with
an adulteress, with one that does not love him entirely: For then he would be
but as a cloak for wickedness to hide it self under, that it may be acted with
greater security; As men that marry whores, they are but their wife's cloaks,
they commit whoredom with the greater boldness; so would the heart of man, if
it could enjoy God with the love of the world; it would sin the more securely
and freely. God should be but a cloak to its wickedness. No, thou must not
think, that God will be thy portion, that thou may play the harlot the more
securely; Oh, therefore set thine heart upon God alone; let him have the whole
of thine heart; set thy heart wide open for God to come in, and take possession
of thy heart. Psalm. 24.7. This is the voice of Christ; open to me my sister, my
spouse; Cant. 5.2, and, Behold, I stand at the door and knock, if any man open,
I will come in. Now love to God is the opening of the heart to God, and lets
him in, entertains him, and bids him welcome. Thus God dwells in the heart, and
receives content and satisfaction from it.

Secondly, If thou would be Gods portion, and Gods inheritance; thou must
receive Gods mark upon thee, that thou may be distinguished from all others;
even as they that become the portion of Antichrist must receive his mark in
their foreheads, and in their hands. Revel. 13.16. So all they that do become
Gods portion, must receive Gods mark upon them; they must be sealed with Gods
own seal, Ephesians. 1.13. and Revel. 14.1. Even as Merchants set their mark or
seal upon their goods, so does God set his seal and mark upon all his goods,
that they may be clearly known to him by their mark, as well as in his own
decree. Now the distinguishing Character of a true Israelite from all others is
Gospel sincerity, truth in the inward parts, Joh. 1.47, a true Israelite in
whom is no guile, Revel. 14.15, in their mouth was found no guile, Psalm. 32.2.
Others may have gifts, and grace in show, but Gods portion must have grace in
truth; Others may have a form, but these have the power of godliness; Others
may have lamps, but these have oil in their lamps; Others may have a name, but
these have the name of God written in their foreheads. Alas, God cares not for
these hang-bies, who call themselves by Gods name, and cry up themselves as the
only people of God, and yet never received the name of God upon their
foreheads: but through a carnal liberty, which they assume to themselves are on
and off, in and out, when they please. Sometimes they are for God, and
sometimes for the Devil. No, Beloved, if you will be the Lords, you must be in
good earnest; fully engaged, marked out with this mark of holy sincerity, so
that God may have something in you, whereby to own you. When God shall look
abroad, and seek for his own, and find them scattered up and down, and mixed
with the world, God will take notice of none, but such as have his mark upon
them, none but such as are sincere and upright; it is not a form of Anabaptism,
or Quaking, or Seeking, but sincerity, that God will own, Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23.

Use, 3. For Direction and Counsel to all the Israel of God, who have God for
their portion.

I have four words of advice for you.

1. Learn the distinction to the height; God in himself, or God in the
creature, and the creature without God. There is a vast difference between the
enjoyment of God in himself, or in the creature, and the enjoyment of the
creature, without the enjoyment of God. Some enjoy God, and not the creature,
Some enjoy the creature, and not God, Some enjoy both. This is talked of
amongst us, and oftentimes little understood by us; but the right and clear
understanding hereof, is of great concernment unto Christians.

1. Some enjoy God and not the creature; these are (as I hinted before) poor
and rich.

2. Some enjoy the creature and not God, these are rich, and yet poor; as
having all, and yet having nothing.

3. Some enjoy God, and the creature; or God in the creature; These are rich in
all respects; they are worldly rich, and heavenly rich, they have a double
portion. But now here lies a great task and difficulty: it is hard for such a
Christian so to distinguish between these two estates and portions, as not to
confound them. As a man that drives two trades; it is very difficult for him to
keep them distinct: So it is here, when men have much of the world, and they
drive a great trade therein, it is very difficult for them to distinguish
between God, and that, i. e. so to use the world, as not to make it his All;
hence is that counsel of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.29, 30, 31, and so 1 Timothy 6.17,
18. Oh, Beloved, for a Christian to be still in the enjoyment of all, as if he
had nothing, this is right; to live in a constant dependence upon God as his
All, and to make the creature but as the vessel or cistern through which God
communicates himself: this is a true life; Such an one may say as Paul, I am
dead, nevertheless I live; I am dead to the world, and the world is dead to me;
such an one lives upon God, a true life of happiness and content. But I say,
this is hard and difficult: and our experience is a full demonstration thereof:
for according to creature enjoyments so we live; for when the creature is full,
and all things flow in according to our desire, then we are quiet, merry and
glad, but when that is low and dry then we fail and flag. Few Christians have
and keep an even temper of spirit in fluctuating and various conditions: for
few live so upon God, as to make him their All; and therefore when the creature
ebbs and flows, it carries them along in the stream, either high or low: but
this is to make God our portion, for Christians to make a real distinction,
between the enjoyment of God, and the enjoyment of the creature; so that when
all goes, yet the heart is born up in the enjoyment of God, as Habakkuk was;
Hab. 3.17. And also when all is enjoyed, Deuteronomy. 3.8, 10, 11.
God may have the glory and praise of all; Deuteronomy. 6.9, 10, 11. O Beloved,
maintain a constant sense of Divine fullness upon your spirits; it is not enough
for a Christian to make God his All: and to know him to be so, but to present
God thus always to his mind and spirit; What is it for a man to be worth a vast
estate, if he be unmindful of it? though he be never so rich, yet he looks upon
himself as poor, and so lives a dejected and a disconsolate life; Thus it is
with a Christian; though he makes God his portion, yet if he be unmindful of
God, his comfort will fade and fall. And so on the other side, when he is full
of the creature, his heart will be too much elevated, and puffed up, if he
forgets him who fills all in all; forgetfulness of God either raises a
man too high, or else casts him down too low; he that forgets God, will either
be proud or else despondent.

2. Is God your portion; then be content with such things as you have, Heb.
13.5. What though thou have not enough in the world, yet thou have enough in
God; and though thou have not a self-sufficiency, yet thou have an
All Sufficiency; God is thine All. Let not this trouble thee, that the world
cannot be a God unto thee, or that thou have not all, that the world can afford
thee in kind: for thou have more in God. Remember this, that the life of man
consists not in the abundance of riches, Luke 12.15. Thou can neither live
upon them, nor prolong thy life by them; thou can neither comfort thy self
with them, if God withdraws, nor increase them without his word of blessing;
but contentation with a little is great riches, if God presents himself to thee
in it, as thine All. O therefore murmr not, repine not, fret not thy self,
because the stream is low, when as thou have the fountain that can never be
drawn dry.

3. Be not solicitously or distrustfully careful for what you want; the
presence of God will fully supply the absence of any creature; thou have enough
to live upon, when all created comforts fail thee: Hence is that of the
Apostle, Phil. 4.6. God will not suffer thee to want any good that is needful
for thee. Psa. 34.9, 10. What thou can not enjoy in the creature, thou shall
enjoy in God himself. A Christians motto may be this; Nil habeo, nil careo, nil
curo, I have nothing; self-denial has outed me of all; all is to him as
nothing: I want nothing; for he has all in God: I take care for nothing; for
he looks upon God for his provision. A carking solicitous man takes Gods office
out of his hand: for God has made it his work to take the care of his people;
and has made it their duty to be careful for nothing, 1 Pet. 5.7. There is a
double care.

1. Cura officii. 2. Cura eventus.
First, There is a care of duty; and so every man is bound to labor in that
calling wherein God has set him carefully and industriously; It Is not only
lawful, but our duty to make provisions for back and belly, for our selves and
others; So Romans 12.17, and 1 Timothy 5.8.

Secondly, There is a care of event; and so we ought to be without care; we are
to look at God for the event and issue of all, and for a blessing upon all;
conscience of duty, and faith in God, are to be inseperably conjoined; we must
use the means and yet look beyond it. Neglect of means is disobedience, and
distracting care about the issue is infidelity; two rocks on which the soul is
apt to split, if not rightly steered by a Divine hand.

4. Is God your portion; then above all be thankful for the enjoyment of God;
every gift that comes down from God requires thanks? but much more when God
gives thee himself; in every thing give thanks (says the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians.
5.18.) For this is the will of God; but how much should our hearts be enlarged
with thanks and praise for the incomes of God himself? as the enjoyment of good
is the object of thanks: so our thanks should be proportioned to the good
enjoyed; the highest good, should have the highest praise; So David, Psalm.
118.28. Thou art my God, I will praise thee, thou art my God, I will exalt thee.

SERMON II.
PSALM. LXXIII. XXVI. My flesh and my heart fails, but God is the strength of
my heart, and my portion for ever.


WE have raised two Doctrines out of these words.

1. That God is the Rock or Strength of an Israelites heart, and his portion
for ever.

2. That Divine relief flows from God to his people, according to their
necessity.

We have dispatched the first of these, and shall now proceed to the Second.

That Divine relief flows from God to his people according to their necessity.
When flesh and heart fails, then God is the strength of their heart, and
portion; When the old stock is almost spent, God renews it again; When the fire
is almost out, he throws on new fuel; When the old house is falling upon our
heads, he underprops it; When the Cistern fails, the Conduit shall run; In
plain English, when a Christian stands in greatest need of relief and help, God
will communicate the most of himself to him. God oftentimes leads his people,
as he did Abraham, to the top of the mount of trials, temptations and
afflictions, and then appears to them in grace and goodness, that they may set
up their stone and write Jehova Iireh upon it; the Lord will be seen.

Now for the more methodical handling this Doctrine, I shall do these three
things.

1. Consider the particular cases, wherein a Christian stands in need of relief.

2. Show you how relief flows from God to Christians in those cases.

3. Give you the grounds and reasons thereof.

First, For the cases wherein a Christian stands in need of relief: and these
are reducible to two heads, according to the Prophet here in our Text.

1. Failing of the flesh. 2. Failing of the heart.
First, Failing of the flesh; and this is twofold.

1. When the comforts of a man's life fail him. 2. When the strength of the
outward man fails.
Secondly, There is a failing of the heart; and that is threefold, 1. When the
faculties of the soul fail, and cannot perform their due offices; either by way
of apprehension, election or retention. 2. When the acquired or infused habits
of the heart are weakened, or indisposed to act. 3. When the animal spirits are
expiring, and even breathing forth.


This (as I hinted at the first in opening the Text) was the Prophets case, who
penned this Psalm; He was brought very love, even to the very pit, ready to die,
soul and body failed; all without, and all within failed; and then God was the
strength of his heart, and his portion.

First, Therefore, we shall consider the failing of the flesh, and how Divine
relief flows from God to a Christian in that case.

First, When the external comforts of a Christians life fail him, as oftentimes
they do; he is stripped naked of all worldly and sensual glory, happiness and
comforts: divested, deplumed, and disrobed of all external delights, pleasures,
profits and advantages whatsoever, which this life affords to render a man's
sensitive life comfortable and happy. Why, this was Jobs case; God gave Satan a
Commission to seize on all that Job had; As you may see, Job 1.12. All that he
has is in thy power; God reserved nothing for Job, but made Satan Lord of all
he had; and accordingly he dealt with Job; he stripped him of all to the shirt
upon his back: as he could not go beyond his Commission, so he would not come
short of it in one punctillo: but turned him out of all to the wide world, to
shift for himself as he could.

Object. But some say, this was a singular case: we do not read of a parallel
to it.

Answ. I answer, in some respects It may seem singular yet in other respects it
has been the portion of many of the people of God: it is true it is not common
for God to give Satan such a Commission: but it is very usual for God to strip
his people of their external comforts, and to reduce them to a very low and
distressed state: The Prophet Habakkuk therefore proposes such a case to
himself; Chap 3.17. The fig tree shall nto blossom, neither shall fruit be in
the vines: the labor of the Olive shall fail, and the fields shall yield no
meat, the flock shall be cut off from the fold, and there shall be no heard in
the stalls: all means of livelihood and subsistence cut off; a perfect famine
must needs follow. Now when a child of God is tried with this soar affliction,
God is the strength of his heart and his portion: and this made Habakkuk
rejoice; Yet I will rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of my salvation;
the Lord God is my strength, i. e. what though this soar and most dreadful
affliction comes, that all the comforts of our lives fail us, what though I
have not a bit of bread to eat, nor a rag to cover my nakedness, nor any thing
to sustain nature with: yet as long as I have not lost neither shall loose my
God, I am not troubled at it; he is the God of my Salvaion and of my strength
still; I have a God to go to, when I have not a Field or Barn of Corn to go to
for bread; and as long as I can go to God, I care not; so may a child of God
say, I have a God to live upon when I have nothing in the world to live upon; I
shall have relief from heaven in this straight and exigency: He is the God of
my salvation. For,

1. Then God gives in most of himself, when he strips his people of external
comforts, and becomes that to a Christian, which the creature would be, if
enjoyed; he is their life and strength in the want of a livelihood. It is
impossible for all the creatures, if they were all collected into one body, to
supply the room of God; but one God can supply the rooms of all the creatures
in the world; And Saints then enjoy most of God, when they enjoy the least of
the world. As it is reported of a Musician, who having the hap to break one of
his Harp-strings in the middle of his Music; presently a Grasshopper leaped
upon his Harp, and most melodiously supplied the place of the broken string.
Thus it is with the people of God; No sooner do they break a string of their
instrument, wherewith they make themselves Music: No sooner does any created
comfort fail them, but God steps in, and supplies the place thereof, and
affords that to them, which the creature did; Though Jacob could not be a God
to Rachel; yet God could be to Jacob in stead of a Rachel. As we are oftentimes
furthest from God, both in affection, and affiance, when the creature is
present with us, so God comes the nighest to us, when the creature is set at
the greatest distance from us; When my father and mother forsake me, the Lord
will take me up; says David, Psalm. 27.10. It is a sad pill to swallow, for a
man to be forsaken of men, much more of near and intimate friends, but most of
all, to be forsaken of father and mother; but is there no relief to be had in
this case? Yes. When David's father and mother forsook him, God took him up; God
supplied the place of a father and of a mother to him; Sensible withdrawings of
the one, is joined with sensible manifestations of the other; It is Gods usual
way to make up our wants in the enjoyment of himself, and to be to us, instead
of all things; We loose the drop, and then are sure of the fountain; God is
that, and much more then the creature can be to us, when it is at the full, and
in its greatest strength and glory. Now says God to the soul, I will be thy
All; now I will fill thee full of my self, and enrich thee with the treasure of
an infinite being; Now I will make thee shine with a surpassing glory, and make
thee sparkle with the Gemms and Diamonds of mine own perfections; Now I will
adorn thee with those robes of beauty and amiableness, as shall outshine the
very sun in the firmament, and make thee beautiful in mine own eye. And is not
this a sufficient relief in the want of all sublunary comforts? Who would not
be willing to part with the one for the other? And therefore,

2. God is pleased to bow the heart to a free submission to Divine Will herein;
so that it rests satisfied, and content with its present state and condition;
Now contentment and satisfaction in an estate, be it never so low, and poor,
makes it a comfortable and happy state; What are riches if there be no
contentment, but poverty? And what is poverty with contentment? Why, it is
great riches; Godliness with contentment is great gain, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 6.6. A Christian gains more, when God gives him a contented heart, then if
God gave him a world without contentment; for all the world cannot give him
content; to know how to want, makes a man far more happy, then to be full. O
when the soul can say, Lord, I thank thee, I have learned to be content; I have
as much satisfaction and content, as if I enjoyed the greatest riches and
honors in the world; What though I have lost all, and have but from hand to
mouth, yet I am content herewith. I can still bless thee, though thou have
taken away all my out-ward blessings. So does Job, The Lord has given, and the
Lord bath taken, blessed be the name of the Lord: Wants with a thankful,
God-praising heart are a greater blessing, then fullness with an unthankful
spirit; and it is a greater mercy for God to give a thankful spirit, in a low
condition, then to advance a man to the highest pinnacle of outward prosperity
in the world; This I say, is a blessed relief, that causes the soul to bless
God in the want of all outward comforts.

3. When God is pleased to strip a Christian of all his outward comforts, he
gives in a greater measure of faith, that he may depend upon God, for a supply;
So that, though he has nothing to live upon, yet he is sure, he shall not
want; for true faith, looks not at secondary causes so much as at the word of
promise: and therefore if all means fail, yet as long as the promise fails not,
a believing soul knows, that it shall have a supply, although it cannot imagine
how or which way she shall have it. Now inward supports in time of want, and
secret intimations of a supply from God in his own way and time are a sweet
relief to the soul in that condition; So says David, I had fainted, unless I
had believed, to see the goodness of the Lord in the land of the living, Psalm.
27.13. True faith in God will keep the heart alive when a man has nothing to
live upon; and it is Gods way to fix a Christian most upon the objects of faith,
when the objects of sense are removed from him; when a Christian lives least by
fight then he lives most by faith. Now as a Christian believes, so comfort
flows in to him; Faith is to a Christian in stead of all things; for it is the
substance of things hoped for, Heb. 11.1. What ever a man wants, yet if he
believes truly, he has the substance of that, which he hopes for; A Christian
hopes for great things, greater comforts, more enlargments, and heaven at last.
Why faith is the substance of all; He that lives by faith has the substance of
heaven to live upon; and that must needs be a sweet relief to the soul, in a
time of need. It is the Christians comfort, that he has a durable, and a
lasting state, that will never fail him; and that he has a God to go to, that
will not fail him; but will give him such an allowance, as shall maintain him,
till he comes to his journeys end, where he shall be put into a full
possession, and fruition of it.

4. Those small repasts, which come from the hand of Divine Providence to
uphold a Christian under his wants, are filled so full of Divine Blessing and
strength that he can truly say, I have enough. A man would think that pulse and
water would afford but little nourishment: I, but Divine Blessing filled it
full of strength, that Daniel felt no want of better cheer. Let a Raven be the
Prophets Caterer, and if Divine Blessing attends the provision (as it did) he
shall walk in the strength thereof forty days, and not faint. Though poor
Christians in these days do not live upon Divine miracles, yet they live upon
Divine wonders, that makes them sometime wonder how they live; they cannot but
see a Divine hand in giving what they have, and then in blessing it beyond
expectation; for though they want much of that which others do enjoy, yet they
enjoy that which others want: and this makes them healthful and cheerful in
their wants. There is many a poor Christian, that has more joy in one day,
then thousands that enjoy the treasure of the earth; and why? It proceeds from
this very ground; the good man's little is given in love, with a heart-chearing
blessing: while the wicked man's plentiful estate is given in wrath, and with a
curse upon it: hence is that of Solomon, Prove. 15.16. Better is a little with
the fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith, i. e. they
that fear the Lord, have not that trouble with their little, which they that do
not fear the Lord have, with their great treasure, and therefore the good man's
little, is better then the wicked man's great treasure. The good man's little
comes with a blessing, for a blessing rests upon a good man, and all that he
has be it little or much; Now a Divine blessing ever gives strength and virtue
to any means; Let it be never so poor and weak of it self, yet Divine Blessing
makes it mighty and efficacious: so that it is no matter, what a Christian has
to live upon, if the blessing of God goes along with it.

5. When God strips a good man of all he has he then pours forth a mighty
spirit of prayer for a fullness of grace to maintain the life of holiness in
this estate. He that has nothing without to live upon, and but a small stock
of grace within will have much ado to rub through; and a gracious soul is
sensible hereof, and therefore God is pleased to draw out the desires of his
soul, after a greater measure, then yet he has attained; and indeed when
outward wants meet with a soul that is full of grace, they do not make such an
impression upon it, as when they meet with one, that has but little; the empty
vessel makes the greatest noise, and empty Christians are fullest of
complaints, until a spirit of prayer is poured forth upon them, whereby they
attain an inward fullness: and this keeps and maintains a spirit of holiness in
them. I confess he that prospers and thrives in the world, stands in need of a
large measure of grace, to keep his heart holy in that estate, and so he that
is low in the world, stands in need of a great measure of grace also, or else
he may miscarry. There is one eminent rock, upon which poor people are very apt
to split, and hazard their immortal souls; and that is the use of indirect and
unlawful means, for their relief and subsistence in the world; Hence is that
prayer of Agur, Prove. 30.6, 7, give me neither poverty nor riches, feed me with
food convenient for me, least I be full, and deny thee, and say Who is the
Lord? Or least I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain. Mark
this, least I be poor and steal; Noting out, that poverty has this temptation
attending it, if grace prevents not; poor men will be prompted to use some
indirect course for their subsistence; they will steal, rather then want what they
desire; I, but a good man dare not do thus; This in him would be not only a
breach of the eighth command, but also of the third; It is a taking the name of
God in vain; for this is a certain truth, that whosoever takes upon him the
profession of Christian Religion, and yet departs not from iniquity, he takes
the name of God in vain: now a true Christian in whom the fear of the Lord is
planted dreads this; and therefore cries mightily unto God to keep and preserve
him, that he may not do so unworthy an act, as to relieve himself by an
indirect course; for he would not take the name of God upon him in vain; he had
rather die then do it. Now when God has thus drawn out the desires of the soul
after grace, then he gives in such a measure as shall preserve it, and keep it
from yielding to the temptation; and Beloved, it is a gracious relief to be
kept in an holy and gracious frame of heart under a strong and powerful
temptation: it is worthy of a Christians taking notice thereof; So does the
Prophet; this poor man cried, and the Lord heard him; Psalm. 34.6. Beloved, if
you be never so poor, yet if God draws out your hearts after him in prayer, you
shall be kept, that you shall not take any indirect course to help your selves,
but be able to say, as David of himself, this poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him. As prayer is the desire of the soul, formed into requests and
petitions, so crying is the importunity of the soul in prayer; Petitions and
requests presented to God with an humble and reverential boldness; it is a
wrestling with God for a blessing: a perseverance in prayer with an holy
resolution not to be put off. Now it is the poor that thus cries; sense of want,
that pinches the soul, joined with some hopes of obtaining, makes the soul to
cry, and he that cries shall be heard; Divine relief shall come in to help it,
in this time of need. Thus you see how relief comes in to a good man in the
want of all outward comforts.

Secondly, When the strength of the outward man fails. And this is properly the
failing of the flesh, when a man is in a consumptive condition; God smites the
body and then the flesh wastes, the beauty thereof fades, and the senses grow
dull, and heavy; The Prophet David had great experience hereof: and therefore
often mentions it in his Psalms, Psalm. 38.10. my strength fails, and Psalm.
109.24. my flesh fails of fatness, and Psalm. 69.3. mine eyes fail; He was
brought low; even to the mouth of the grave: but Divine relief came in; As you
may see, Psalm. 116.6. I was brought low, and he helped me. God sometimes raises
a man from the very gates of death, and gives him a new life, restores him to
his former health and strength. But if God does not thus by a gracious man, yet
he shall have cause to say, the Lord is the strength of my heart in this weak
and low estate and condition. Divine relief shall be given to him,

1. To support and strengthen him to bear his affliction with patience: the
power and grace of God is wonderfully seen, in bearing up the spirits, when the
body sinks, and in giving grace to exercise patience, under the pains and
sorrows of death; you have heard (says Saint James) of the patience of Job,
Jam. 5.11. As you heard of his corporal affliction, how soarly he was handled;
so you have heard of his patience, how graciously he was he was supported, that
he could bear his affliction without murmuring or repining: it is true it made
him groan, I, but the stroke was heavier then his groaning, As he says, Job
23.2. Even to day is my complaint bitter, my stroke is heavier, then my
groaning. The spirit of a man will sustain corporal infirmities, when God
sustains the spirit. Now patience under afflictions is equivalent to a
deliverance from them; to be able to bear an affliction is as great a mercy, as
to be freed from it; if God rebukes the feavour of impatiency, and thereby
cures that, it is as much as to rebuke a bodily distemper, and thereby to cure
it; So you may see, 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no temptation taken you, but that
which is common to man; but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that you are able: but will with the temptation also make a way
to ^scape, that ye may be able to bear it, i. e. I can assure you, that thus
far you shall be set free from your temptations and afflictions, that you
shall be able to bear them. This is a gracious relief; for there is no
affliction, but impatiency makes a greater affliction: many afflict themselves,
when God does not, and many afflict themselves more, then God does; their
impatiency first makes their groaning heavier then their stroke, and then their
stroke heavier then it is in it self.

2. Divine relief and strength comes into the heart of a good man in this
consumptive condition, to renew the inward man as the outward man decays; So
says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4.16. Though our outward man perish, yet our inward
man is renewed day by day. As God pulls down the old house, the house of clay,
he frames and erects a new building, that shall abide for ever. So that a
Christian may say, as Peter Martyr said when he was dying: My body is weak, my
mind is well, well for the present, and it will be better for the future. The
flesh and spirit of a good man are like two buckets; when the flesh goes down,
the spirit gets up; he is ever best within when he is worst without; when the
body is going down to the earth, from whence it came, the soul is ascending to
heaven, from whence it came; And you have a gracious promise for it; Psalm.
92.13, 14. Those that be planted in the house of the Lord, shall flourish in
the courts of our God. They shall still bring forth fruit in their old age,
they shall be fat and flourishing; Old age shall have green fruit upon it. When
^he flesh proves the most barren, the spirit is most fruitful: a true Christian
never flourishes so much, as when old age has nipt the flesh; and it is a
lovely sight, to see gray hairs, a consumptive body, and a withered face, fat
and flourishing in Holiness and Righteousness; to see Summer-fruit, upon an old
tree in Wintertime: and yet thus it is with good Christians; their Winter of
old age is their most flourishing time. When nature is most spent, grace comes
to its greatest strength and perfection; Faith strongest, love to God and
Christ most enflamed, hope most lively, and holiness most beautiful and
sparkling; the greatest beauty in the soul, when the body is turning to
rottenness and putrefaction: When the natural breath smells of the earth, the
spiritual breath savours most of heaven; the eye of the soul most clear in
discerning spiritual and heavenly things, when the eye of the body grows dim
and dark; the hand of faith most steady to take hold on Divine promises, when
the corporal hand shakes with the palsy, and the feet of the soul run fastest
toward the mark, for the price of the high calling in Christ, when the bodily
feet cannot move; So true it is, that a Christian may say as S. Paul said, When
I am weak, then am I strong; weak in my outward man, but strong in the inward.

3. Divine relief comes in to the heart of a good man in a consumptive
condition, to consume, waste, and destroy that body of death, that he carries
about him. Bodily weakness, and sickness sanctified, is purgative: that as the
body wastes and consumes so sin wastes and consumes; for God will not suffer sin
to outlive a Saint; sin shall not enter into heaven with a Saint, for that
would mar his joy there, as well as here: And therefore God first purges that
out, before the soul can enter in; corruption cannot inherit incorruption;
though God does crown the grace of a Saint with glory; yet he will not crown
the sin and corruption of a Saint with glory. Heaven is an holy, and glorious
place, and will not hold any but holy and pure ones: it is the pure in heart,
that shall see God: Heaven is a place for none but triumphants: for such as
have fought the good fight of faith, and won the field, and conquered Sin,
Satan, and the World, and put them to flight: I, but here a Christian is
militant, and must encounter these three potent Adversaries; let him but worst
these, and then he will not fear Death, though it be the King of terrors, and
rereserved for the last. In this, now, the power of grace is clearly seen; for
that directs the Arrow that Death shoots at the outward man, that it shall
strike through the very heart of Sin, Satan, and the World; that these shall be
dead to him, as well as he dead to them. No sooner does a good man feel a wound
in his body, but if sanctified, if grace flows in, sin is wounded also, that
lies a bleeding in him. This is that which makes the children of God to rejoice
in bodily weakness and insirmities; because (when sanctified through grace) it
is a means to weaken the power of sin in them. For a true Christian bears an
unfeigned and implacable hatred against Sin; and therefore like to Sampson, can
be content that the house may be plucked upon his own head, that his enemy Sin,
may die with him. It is with the body spiritual, as in the body natural; there
are some Diseases that must be starved out; so long as the body is pampered,
the disease is nourished; it must be brought very low, or there will be no
cure. It Is so with the body spiritual; there are some sins in good men, that
must be starved out. So long as there is strength in the outward man, they will
be stirring and active: God therefore is pleased to bring the Body low, that
the Soul may get mastery and power over them. Or like to some Rebels in a
Castle, that will never yield, as long as any Provision is left: It Is so with
Sin, it will not yield, as long as corrupted Nature yields any Provision to it.
And hence it is, that sickly and weakly Christians, are the most mortified
Christians.

4. When a good man is in a consumptive condition, and begins to put one foot
in the grave; it pleases God to give in such clear evidence of his love to
him, and so full an assurance of his interest in eternal life, that he even
longs for a dissolution. He was a child of Grace, and an Heir before; but now
God makes him an Heir apparent. Now so clear a light shines into his Soul, as
does manifest his adoption and Sonship; so that he can cry Abba, Father, which
he could not do before. I deny not, but a true child of God, may die in a
cloud, and not fee the light of life, until it comes in Heaven: I, but it is
not always thus; but sometimes God is pleased to reveal his well pleased face
to the Soul at the last, and not before; that she can say, He is come, he is
come. Some Christians are like to Swans, that never sing, but a little before
their death; their comforts and joys come in at the last. The Holy Ghost is
the Guardian of a Christians comforts, and sometimes he deals with them, as a
Guardian does with an Heir, who is committed to his trust: When the Heir is
come to age, and is to enter upon his Estate; then the Guardian gives him in
his Evidences to preserve and keep himself. Even so sometimes, when a Christian
is to enter upon the Inheritance of Eternal Life; the Holy Ghost throws him in
Evidences for it, that he may carry them along with him thither. It Is true,
it is the duty of all Christians, to give all diligence to make their Calling
and Election sure; but some are fain to wait a long time, before they can
attain to this comfort; and then when they are leaving Earth, they have a
glimpse of Heaven. When their earthly house of this tabernacle is crumbling
down upon their heads, then God shows them his Building, An House not made with
Hands, eternal in the Heavens; and this is a gracious relief to a dying
Christian, for it is a beginning of Heaven, to have a sight of Heaven; it is
comfort enough to have an assurance and evidence of these unspeakable joys,
into which the Soul e're long shall enter. The Soul may then say, as he said,
when he lay upon his deathbed, putting his hand to his heart, Hic sat lucis,
Here is light enough. This is that which makes sickness and weakness so sweet to
a Christian: For though the Rod smarts, yet he tastes Honey at the end of it;
that opens his eyes, as it did the eyes of Jonathan, to see the salvation of
God: It is a most sovereign antidote against the sting of death, that it cannot
kill or destroy the Soul, although it does the Body. No messenger is more
welcome than this, that comes to call him home.

5. In all the weakness and consumptive condition of a good man, God does act
the part of a tenderhearted Nurse to him; and does tend him even as a Nurse
does a bedridden person, who is committed to her care; and is not this much?
Surely he shall be admirably well looked to, whom God tends. Now that God does
thus, is clear, Ps. 41.3. The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of
languishing, thou will make all his bed in his sickness. The Hebrew signifies
to turn, and so Arias Montanus renders it. As Bed-makers use to turn and toss
the Bed to and fro, that it it may be easy and soft to lie upon, so does God
deal with a good man, when he lays him upon the bed of languishing; he
mitigates and moderates the affliction, that it may not be so painful and
terrible to him, as else it would be. No Nurse can do that for a sick and weak
person, that God can and does for a good man. When a Nurse has turned the Bed,
and made it as soft as she can, that the sick man finds a little ease and
refreshment; yet the Bed will quickly grow hard again, and the man as weary of
it as before. But when God comes to make the Bed in our sickness, he moderates
the pain, and gives rest to the bones. Many a time, when those that are about
him, stand weeping over him, to hear his groans, and to see him toss and tumble
in his Bed, and know not how to afford him any relief; first they turn him to
one side, and then to another, but the man finds no rest; then God steps in,
gives a word of command, and that lays him to rest, refreshes and revives
him: in an instant the pain and sickness is removed, and the man thinks himself
in a new world.

Thus you see how divine relief comes in to Christians, in the time of their
greatest corporal weakness, when they are ready to despair of all help therein.
Sometimes by divine supports inabling to bear it with patience; as also by
renewing the inward man, and making that to thrive and flourish. Sometimes so
sanctifying it, as that it proves the effectual death and decay of the old man
in him. Sometimes giving him a sweet foretast of Heaven, in clearing up the
evidence of Gods love to him: and sometimes by mitigating and moderating the
pain and grief wherewith he is afflicted. In some, or all these ways, good men
have experience of the incomes of divine relief in this condition.

And thus much for the first particular, wherein I have shown you, how God is
the strength of a Christians heart, when the flesh fails.

Secondly, Let us consider the failing of the Heart, and see how divine relief
comes into a good man in this case. Now this failing of the Heart, I reduced to
three Heads.

1. The failing of the natural faculties; and that either by way of
Apprehension, or Election, or Retention. I call them Natural Faculties,
although they are sanctified and changed: for Grace does not alter and change
the essence of the Soul, but only the quality and inclination thereof. Now,
though they are thus altered, yet they may fail a man in whom true grace is,

1. In respect of Apprehension: The Understanding is the eye of the Soul,
whereby it sees, and discerns spiritual objects; I, but sometimes the eye
grows dim, so that though he be a child of light, yet he may walk in darkness,
as you have it, Es. 50.10. Who is there among you, that fears the Lord, that
walks in darkness and has no light? Sometimes God is pleased to withdraw, or
cloud up the light, and then though the eye be open, yet the soul is in the
dark; the day of divine discoveries and manifestations may be turned into a
dark night: But sometimes the light shines clearly upon the Soul, and yet for
want of a capacity to receive it, the Soul is in the dark still: as when the
eye is shut, a man sees no more, then he does, when the light is withdrawn
from him; and this was the case of the Penman of this Psalm, as he confesses
of himself, ver. 22. So foolish was I, and ignorant, I was as a beast before
thee. You know, whatever light of Reason is offered to a bruit, it receives it
not; because it is beyond its faculty and power: Read a Lecture of Philosophy
to it, and render it as plain as it can be made, yet it understands nothing
thereof. Even thus the Prophet complains of himself, That he was as a Bruit,
that understood not. It was not for want of light shining, but for want of a
seeing eye. He could not receive the light, and therefore was very much in the
dark, and that in reference to three things,

1. In respect of his own spiritual state, and therefore mistook that. He
thought it bad, although it was good; for so he says, ver. 13. Verily I have
cleansed my hands in vain, and washed my hands in innocence, i. e. All my
Religion is to no purpose; it does not at all advantage me, that I have lived
strictly according to the commands of God; I might have spared a great deal of
pains, that I have taken to cleanse my heart, and to wash my hands, and have
sped as well. For notwithstanding all this, I have been plagued all the day
long, and chastened every morning, ver. 14. Surely, had God loved me, had I
belonged to him, he would never have dealt thus with me.

2. In reference to the spiritual state of others; and therefore mistook that.
He thought the state of the foolish better then his own, because they seemed to
prosper, ver. 3. For I was envious at the foolish, when I saw the prosperity of
the wicked. As he concluded his own estate bad, so he concluded their's good:
He was so mistaken, that he could have been content to have exchanged states
with them; and yet had he done so, he had made a bad bargain for himself.

3. In reference to God's mind, touching his duty under this complexed
providence, he knew not what to do; but was at a great loss, exceedingly
bewildred in his own thoughts through that darkness, that had overspread his
understanding; and nothing less can be implied in these words, I was as a beast
before thee, i. e. I knew not how to carry, or behave my self toward God; but
acted very strangely and preposterously, as one that had no command of himself,
or of his passions: and this is the case sometimes of God's dear children; they
are so darkened in their Spirits, as that they know neither how to judge of
things, nor how to act under divine dispensations. And hence flow
misapprehensions of themselves, false conclusions of divine providence, and
cross actings to divine will.

Thus you see this particular case; Let us now see, what divine relief flows
into the Soul herein.

1. In time of the greatest darkness that is upon the Spirit of a Christian,
when it is dark night with him, when he meets with the darkest and most cross
dispensation of divine providence, that he concludes against himself, and the
goodness of his estate; then God is bringing about some glorious eminent design
for his good. The more glorious any design of God is, and the more it tends to
the good of any Soul, the more it is kept seccret, and the less the Soul
discerns it, until it be wrought out. There is many a good man that fears, that
God is setting himself in battle array against him, and shooting the arrows of
his displeasure and indignation at him, and that the full vials of his wrath
shall be poured forth upon him; and yet at that time, God is bringing about
some eminent design of good for him. It may be, thou art questioning thy
estate, and concludest against thy self, but God is about to clear it up to
thee: Thou doubtest of God's love, and he is making way for the manifestation
of it. Thou art laboring under strong temptations, and conflicts with strong
corruptions: I, but God is giving in a glorious conquest, and treading Satan
under thy feet; that which thou fear will prove thy destruction, shall be
thy salvation. God often works (as Luther says) in mediis contrariis, by
contrary means: God heals by wounds, and makes alive by killing; so that a
Christian may say, as he said; I had been undone, if I had not been undone. The
issue is good, although the means seem never so cross. This is excellently set
forth under a type, Ezekiel. 1.16. And their appearance and their work, was as it
were, a wheel in the middle of a wheel, i. e. very cross, and entangled one in
another; one goes one way, and another goes another way; and yet all perform
one and the same work. Thus is the providence of God, it is often very cross
and complexed, it works by cross and entangled means; yet carries on one
glorious design. All these cross ways and means work together (as the Apostle
says) for the good of them that love God, Romans 8.28.

2. When a Christian is most in the dark, yet he shall not want a secret,
(though insensible) conduct of Gods Holy Spirit, that shall secure him from
ruin in his way; It is a notable relief to a blind man, to have a sure guide:
God is a sure guide to a good man, when he is unable to direct himself. Alas,
no man is able to guide himself, without the assistance of Gods Holy Spirit; So
Jer. 10.23. O Lord I know that the way of man is not in himself, it is not in
man that walks, to direct his steps. Why how then shall he escape ruin and
destruction, when so many snares and rocks are in his way? See that Psalm.
37.23. The steps of a good man are ordered by the Lord. God goes along with a
good man, and orders him in every step he takes: though we cannot see a step of
our way, yet if we take God with us, he will direct us: I will guide thee with
mine eye; Psalm. 32.8. His eye is open upon the righteous, and he will guide
them in the right way, even then when they cannot see their way before them:
and therefore is that counsel of Solomon, In all thy ways acknowledge him, and
he shall direct thy paths, Prove. 3.5, 6. As God orders the steps of a good man,
so he orders the ways of a good man; It may be, thou art apt to walk in one
way, and God will put thee into another, where thou shall find the greatest
comfort and peace; we never walk so safely, as when God takes the sole care of
us. When Abraham followed God in the darkness of sense and reason, not knowing
whither he went, his course was never better steered: and oftentimes we do
best, when we know not what to do; when we are at the greatest stand, our
reason darkened, and our spirits perplexed, and all the ways we can imagine of
true peace and comfort blocked up, and we know not where to set one foot
forward, then God comes and takes us by the hand, and leads us into such a way
as we dreamed not of, where our desired peace and comfort is prepared for us;
There is an excellent promise for this purpose: Esaias 35.8. And an high way
shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called the way of holiness, the
unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for those: the way faring men,
though fools shall not err therein. Observe first, God makes out a way for
good men to walk in, an high way, Via Regia, the Kings way, the way of God, an
holy way, or the way of holiness; sin and wickedness is not Gods way. Secondly,
fools shall not err therein, i. e. the people of God sometimes are much in the
dark, and know not what to do in a particular case: I, but yet they shall be
guided, that they shall not loose their way; but how shall they be guided? Why
God will be with them; and so that passage may be read; for he shall be with
them; In our translation it is rendered, but it shall be for those; but it may
be read thus, but he, i. e. God shall be to them, or with them; to conduct and
guide them in their way. How many Christians have cause to bless God and say, I
could never have found the way to peace and comfort, had not God been my guide?
This very experience brought the Prophet to that confidence for the future; As
you may see in the second verses before my Text, Psa. 73.24. Thou shall guide
me with thy counsel, and afterward receive me to glory.

3. When a Christian is in the dark, God is so far the strength of his heart,
that he can wait for light. When they know not what to do, nor what to think,
yet they can wait for light; they are expectants; And now Lord, what wait I
for? My hope is in thee, says David, Psalm. 39.7. My soul waits for the Lord,
more then they that watch for the morning, Psalm. 130 7. As a man that has a
long journey to go, upon very great and important business, how does he watch
for the morning, because the darkness of the night suspends his motion; I, but
David waited more for the Lord, then a traveller watches for the morning; or
as the words may be read, as they that watch unto the morning; and so he makes
a comparison between himself and watchmen, i. e. There is no watchman does more
observe, and wait for the breaking forth of the light of the day, then I do
wait for the Lord. And this is a blessed relief to the soul, to be put into a
waiting posture. When the soul knows not what to do, yet it can wait for light;
Not like Saul, And, why should I wait for the Lord any longer; But as David, I
waited patiently for the Lord, Psalm. 40.1. Though a good heart will not let God
wait long; No, nor at all (willingly) for obedience, yet he is willing to wait
as long as God sees good for light to guide him in his obedience; loath is a
gracious heart to miscarry in his work, or to tread awry, or step out of Gods
way, and therefore he will wait for light; glad would he be of one beam of
light, to clear up his spiritual state to him; I, but he knows that Gods time
is the best; It is sad to him to be in the dark, yet he knows that none can
scatter the cloud, that overspreads him but God; and therefore he concludes
with the Prophet, It is good both to wait, and to hope in the Lord.

4. Though a good man may be in the dark, yet God will not always leave him in
the dark; Unto the upright, there arises light in the darkness, Psalm. 112.4.
Oftentimes when they least expect it, then it arises; as the night is darkest
a little before the day breaks: so when the thickest cloud has overspread the
soul, then God causes light to spring forth: Even as it was with Saint Paul in
another case, 2 Corinthians. 1.8, 10. We were pressed out of measure above
strength, insomuch that we despaired of life, but we had the sentence of death
in our selves, that we should not trust in our selves, but in the living God,
who delivered us from so great a death. When his condition was at the height,
when nothing could help or relieve him, but he was at the very point of death,
then God revived him; Even so it is in this case, when the darkness of the soul
is at the height, and the soul is at the greatest loss and plunge, no way open
for its comfort and relief, then God gives in some beam of Divine light to
guide and direct it unto peace and comfort; for though it be the portion of
good men, and of children of light sometimes to walk in darkness, yet they are
never cast into utter darkness; eternal darkness is not their portion, they
shall not lie down in darkness: light is sown for the righteous, and as God
has his seeds time, so they shall have their harvest; let the soul be never so
full of fears, and perplexity of spirit, yet this cloud shall vanish, these
fears shall be scattered; and the soul shall see and know, that it is under the
gracious dispensation of a most gracious God, who has ordered all things for
her peace here, and eternal welfare hereafter. This is clear in our Text; the
Prophet had been in darkness; I, but God had brought him forth into the light,
and now he is able to correct his mistakes.

5. That experimental light and knowledge, which a sanctified soul gains in the
time of its darkness, and from the flowing in of Divine Light to scatter that
darkness, affords the soul unspeakable joy and satisfaction: that she accounts
it a sufficient recompense for all her trouble and sorrow in the want thereof.
As there is knowledge of things by principles, so there is a knowledge, that
arises from experience; and it would be very strange, if the soul should gain
no experimental knowledge by the incomes of Divine Relief in the time darkness.
S. Paul says, Tribulation works patience, and patience experience. Hereby
the soul knows more of God, and attains clearer apprehensions of him, then it
had before, when she is able to say, It Is true I was in darkness, but then God
carried on a glorious design of doing me good, all though I could not see it; I
was blind and not able to guide my feet into the way of peace, but I had the
conduct of Gods Holy Spirit; I was very much perplexed in my Spirit, but Divine
strength kept me up in a waiting frame; Yea, I found at last, light breaking in
upon me in the darkest night; my dark night was turned into a bright shining
day. Now this experience must needs fill the soul full of ravishing joy and
satisfaction; that she may say as David, Return unto thy rest, O my soul, for
the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee; and this is one mair. end of Gods
drawing a cloud over the eye of a Christian, that he may have some experience
of Gods gracious dealing with him in this condition, and thereby attain a
fuller knowledge of the ways of God, then he did before. I confess it may seem
strange, but it is true, that a Christian gains light by the darkness of his
spirit. Did not the light of a Christian fail him, he would never have such
experience of Divine Relief, as now he has. This makes his light double to
what he had before: he had the light of instruction before, but now he has the
light of experience: and hence it is, that those Christians who have had the
greatest clouds upon their spirits prove the most knowing Christians; for
experience is the mistress of truth; and when the soul is taught by experience,
it knows the truth indeed. Now the soul is put out of all doubt; there is no
room for queries about it; she is fully satisfied in it. Many times when God
goes about to teach a man by his word, and reads him a Lecture of Divine
Promises made to the Soul in such and such a condition, he little minds it: but
when God teaches him by his works in fulfilling those promises, then he cannot
but sit down and admire at the riches of Gods grace, that God should deal thus
with so vile and wretched a creature as he is.

Thus you have seen how Divine Relief flows in to the Soul of a good man, when
his understanding fails him.

2. A second particular case is in point of Election. It cannot be denied, that
as the appetite of all men is carried out to that which is good, so the
appetite of a good man is fixed upon the highest good, and the ultimate end:
But then it must be granted, that there is sometimes a failing of the Will,
both in point of Liberty, and also in point of Domination.

1. In point of Liberty, which consists chiefly in making choice of such means,
as are most proper for attaining that end.

2. In point of Dominion, which lies in employing all inferior faculties for
execution of those means.

Now the failing of the Will in both these respects is, when the Will falls
into a kind of hesitancy, or indifferency, and begins to halt. God has
appointed proper means for the attaining this end; but the Soul may be at a
stand at some time, and not determined. Every good man cannot say at all times
with the Prophet, My Heart is fixed. It may be fixed as to the end, but not as
to the means: There may be at some time a wavering in the Will about it;
Christians find it so by experience.

2. When the strength of Resolution is not so powerful, as to stand out against
all assaults, and to bear down all opposition. The Will may be fixed, but not so
firmly as it ought to be; there may be a giving ground for a time to our
spiritual adversary, a small retreat in time of temptation. A Christian never
yields to a temptation of Satan, but there is at least a weakness in his
Resolution, and some presumption in his Will, against which David prayed, Ps.
19.

3. When the Will grows cold and dead; there is not that vigor or activity, as
ought to be put forth in the use of means; his heart fails him, when as he
grows like a silly Dove without heart; he prays, and hears, and confers, but
in all with a dead and lazy Spirit.

4. When the Will is fickle and inconstant; it is in and out, and keeps not in
one tenor and frame, but like a broken Bow, that soon starts aside.

This, this is the spiritual plague and distemper of a good heart. Now let us
see the remedy and relief that flows from God, for the cure hereof.

First, God is pleased to cure this sad distemper, by discovering the evil that
is in it. The failing of the Will is a greater evil, and is far worse, than the
failing of the Understanding. The more there is of Will in the commission of
Sin, and the less there is of Will in the performance of Duty, the greater is
the Sin. Other wants of the Soul will sooner be passed by in a duty, then the
want of Will; and therefore when God sets upon the cure of this distemper, he
first opens the wound, and shows the filth that is in it, i. e. he convinces a
Christian of the greatness, and heinousness of the sin. It is possible for a
Christian that is sound and upright in the main, to have so great a failing in
his Will, that for a time he may but jog on in the way of God, that other
Christians outstrip him far that set out long after him, and yet he may be very
insensible thereof, until God is pleased to strike a dart of spiritual
conviction through his very heart; and this wakens and rouzes him up, and makes
him bestir himself, and consider where he is, and what he has been doing all
this while. A clear place for this you have, Cant. 5.2. I sleep but my heart
waketh: it is the voice of my beloved, that knocks, saying, open to me, my
sister. This is the ingenuous confession of the Church, wherein she
acknowledges that carnal deadness and security, that had overtaken her; I
sleep, or I have been asleep. Now a Christian never sleeps spiritually, or in a
spiritual sense, but when his Will flags and fails; when that falls to a kind
of indifferency, or is not strongly bent and inclined, but grows cold and dead,
which is the symptom of a sleepy man. I, but did Christ suffer his Spouse to
lie in this sleepy state? No! See how he awakens and rouzes her up, he calls to
her, and bids her open to him; whereby, he let in a beam of divine light, and
convinced her of her sin, and this was the first step to her cure, this made
her open her eyes; as when a man awakes out of sleep, he first opens his eyes,
and then he rises. So it is with a sleepy and dull Christian: God's first work
upon him is to open his eyes, that he may see his sin, and be affected with it,
and this will make him stir. O beloved, it may be you do not know the evil that
is in a sleepy estate, the sin that is inindifferency and halting in the ways
of God, and in the weakness of your Resolution to walk therein; you take little
notice it may be, of the coldness and deadness of your hearts unto holy duties,
or of the fickleness and inconstancy of your Spirits in them; but at one time
or other, you must expect a Soul-awakening voice, that will make you open your
eyes, and then you will see how great a sin it is. What though thou do not
cast off the ways of God, yet this heartlessness in them is sin enough (if God
should charge thee with it) to sink thy Soul as low as Hell.

Secondly, God cures this sleeping evil, by reviving and renewing the
inscription and impression of Divine Law upon the heart. A good man never grows
dull and dead, but when Divine Law is not in its full strength and power upon
the heart. As this is a means of divine life, so it is a restorer and renewer
of life. When the heart is exceeding dead, and indisposed to any thing that is
good, this can quicken it; and hence is that of David, Psalm. 119.93. It is a
blessed thing for a dead and dull heart to be quickened unto, and in the way of
God: But this will not be, unless the word of God come with life and power upon
the heart. And this effect is worth remembering, and a good man will say with
David, I will never forget thy Precepts, for with them thou have quickened me.
It may be thou go to read or hear the word, with a dead and dull Spirit, and
by that God quickens thee: Oh, remember it, and never forget it. It was a great
and wonderful mercy to thee, that God did write his Law upon thy heart, when he
first brought thee under the bond of his everlasting Covenant; and then bowed
and inclined thy heart to a ready and free obedience thereunto. It was a day of
power, when he made thee willing to take his yoke upon thee. And it is a great
mercy, that he is pleased to revive and renew the characters of this divine and
heavenly Law upon thy Spirit, when they seemed to be obliterated and blotted
out; when thou had almost lost the power and life thereof upon thy Spirit,
that there was little stirring or moving in thy Will toward Heaven. God deals
with a Christian, as a man deals with his Watch; when it goes dull, and begins
to beat slowly, he gets the Spring, which is the principle of its motion,
mended and renewed: So when the heart of man grows dull and heavy, his motions
very cold and dead unto any good, God mends and renews the Will, which is the
spring and principle of motion in the heart; and for that end, he sets Divine
Law and will to work upon it. When God's Will moves upon our Will, then it is
quick and lively in its motions toward God, not else; if that be dead toward
him, the man is dead to any thing that is good. I know the Law, as it is a
Covenant of Works, is a killing Instrument; it slew Saint Paul, and laid him a
bleeding before God: but as it is a Covenant of Grace, so it is a quickening
Instrument, and sets the Soul a going after God, in the use of those means
which he has appointed.

3. Sometimes God cures this sad distemper, by shedding his love abroad upon
the heart: Divine Love is both a heart-quickner, and a heart-in-flamer. We
(says the Apostle) love him, because he loved us first, 1 Jo. 4.19. Our love
is but the reflex of his. Gods love to us is founded in it self. He loves,
because he will love; but our love to God, is founded on his love. Nothing in
us moved him to love us; but God's love to us, moves us to love him: and
therefore it is, that as God manifests his love to us, so we are able to love
him; The love of Christ constrains us, 1 Cor. 5.17. As when the Sun shines,
then Flowers open; so when the love of God shines upon the Soul, it opens to
God: then the Heart is enlarged for God, the Will is carried out with high
resolutions to follow him fully in all the ways of his commands. As the hiding
of Gods face is a great damp upon the Spirit, that makes it drive on very
heavily in the way of God; so the shining of his face, is a notable quickner of
the Spirit: it is like oil to the wheel, that helps on the motion with greater
ease. When once a Soul has tasted the love of God, and got some sense thereof,
the pulse of holy desires, will begin to beat strong after the enjoyment of
him; it is impossible for a Christian to remain dead, under the warm beams of
this most glorious Sun. It is very observable, that no sooner did God call to
Israel to return, with a gracious promise, of healing their backslidings, and
of pardoning their iniquities: But they answer, Behold, we come unto thee, for
thou art the Lord our God. Though their Hearts were turned even quite away from
God, and their Wills exceeding averse from returning; yet that expression of
Love and Grace to them, presently turned the bent and frame of their Spirits,
and quickened them to a speedy return. Behold, we come unto thee, for thou art
the Lord our God; as you may see, Jer. 3.22. And therefore it is that a
gracious Soul longs for the sense and manifestations of Gods love; not only for
the peace and comfort that it brings along with it, but because he knows that
it a is quickner of his Heart and Will, to a cheerful performance of obedience
unto God. It Is that which begets a free Spirit in the Soul; renders it ready
and prompt unto all holy service: And now set God call him to what he pleases,
and he stands ready pressed to do it. God has now (as it were) a string upon his
heart, he may lead him about whither he will.

4. Sometimes God cures the failing of the Will, by removing those impediments,
that stopped its motion. You know, if a wheel be scotcht, there is no stirring of
it, until that be removed; even thus it is here. Sometimes the Will of man
(which is the wheel of Motion) is scotcht, so that it cannot move forward,
until that be removed: Hence that of the Psalmist, I will run the way of thy
commandments, when thou shall enlarge my heart, Psalm. 119.32. The word enlarge,
does not only signify to widen, and extend a thing; but also, to set at
liberty, and to free it from impediments and encumbrances, and so it is used,
Psalm. 4.1. (...) Thou have enlarged me, when I was in distress; or, Thou have
set me at liberty. And as it is applicable to the outward state and condition
of a man, so the Prophet makes use of the same word, in reference to tie the
inward state, I will run the ways of thy commands. (...). when thou shall set
my heart at liberty. i. e. There is that in my heart, that cloggs me, and
hinders me, that I cannot run the way of thy commands, until thou do remove
it. Sometime the mind is clogged with strong temptations. Sometimes with sore
pressures of grief and horror. Sometimes with impetuous lusts and passions. And
until the Soul be set free, she cannot move in the ways of God. And therefore
divine relief comes into the Soul, in this case, to remove those obstructions,
and to take away those clogs. And many a gracious Soul has cause to say, Lord
thou have enlarged my Heart. My Heart was scotcht, but thou have set me at
liberty. I was pesterd with such a temptation, and with such a pressure of
grief and horror, or with such a passion and lust: but thou have removed it,
and set me at liberty. I know the perfect and full enlargement of the soul is
not wrought, until she comes in heaven; but God begins the work here: and
oftentimes when she is in the greatest straight, and so stopped in her motion,
that she is like an instrument, quite out of tune, and ready to be hung up, or
laid by, then God steps in, and affords this gracious relief to it.

5. Sometimes when God finds the soul in this dead and drowzie case, that it
has little mind or spirit unto duty, he makes use of the rod of correction;
and then when the soul feels it smart, she rouseth up her self, and sets to
work. Even as when Absalon sent for Joab to come to him once and again, and saw
he would not stir, he commanded his servants to set Joabs field on fire, and
then Joab makes all the have he could to Absalon, 2 Samuel 14.29 30.31. even thus
it is here; God sends for us, first one messenger comes and then another, to
tell us, that God would have us come to him: As you have it, Cant. 2.14. Let me
hear thy voice, let me see thy face. I, but we stir not, come not at God,
either to pray to him, or praise him; that at last, God is forced to fire us
out, and then we come. You have a notable place for this, Hos. 5.15. I will go,
and return to my place, till they acknowledge their offense, and seek my face:
in their affliction, they will seek me early. They that lay snorting in their
bed of security, in the time of prosperity, will be better husbands in time of
adversity; they will get up early: the word signifies they shall morning me, i.e.
they shall come in the morning of their time, and seek me. And so Esaias 26.16.
They poured out a prayer unto thee when thy chastning was upon them, and in
their affliction they visited thee; Mark it, when the rod was upon their back,
then they cry, and then they beg: I, they poured out a prayer. It was not (as
one observes upon the place) a dropping, now and then; but it was violent and
continual: the spirit was stirred and now it cannot lie still; Afflictions
commonly move and stir the heart one way or other: sometimes they stir the evil
and cross humors, that are in the heart of man, and then he rages and fumes
against God, and his ways: but where grace is, there they stir up a lazy and a
dull spirit to meet God in his way with mournings and supplications. The finger
may be in the eye, because grief is in the heart, but this sorrow will have a
vent, else the heart will not be at rest: God and the soul must be friends, or
she can have no satisfaction. When God corrects the soul in good earnest, then
she seeks him in good earnest, and will not be quiet until she finds him. So
Esaias 26.8, 9. In the way of thy judgments, O Lord have we waited for thee: the
desire of our soul is to thy name, and to the remembrance of thee. With my
soul, have I desired thee in the night, with my spirit within me, will I seek
thee early. Here is seeking indeed, the whole soul and spirit put forth, and
that diligently and constantly, and then with waiting until she find; We have
waited for thee. It Is true affections do not always work thus in the heart of a
good man at first. God whips and whips again, before the soul stirs; I, but God
will not give over whipping, until she stirs. Dull and heavy spirited
Christians seldom go long without a rod at their backs: and it is a great mercy
when the rod of correction is any ways efficacious to rouse them up out of
their drouzie and sleepy state.

3. A third particular case of the failing of the natural faculties of the
soul, is in point of retention; the memory may fail. As a man may have a good
head, and a naughty heart: so a man may have a good heart and a naughty head; a
head that will hold little or nothing, that tends to the support and comfort of
his soul, when his flesh fails him. A good Christian may be like a leaking
vessel, that retains no liquor long; he may let slip the word of Gods grace,
and the external works of Gods grace, and not retain them long with him. I dare
not question the truth of that man's grace, that cannot remember every truth he
reads, or hears delivered; Nor may we say, that the work of Gods grace is not
wrought in every one, that cannot at all times, call to mind. The great things
that God has done for him; the Apostle Paul writing to the Hebrews tells them,
That they had forgotten the exhortation, Heb. 12.5. Or you have forgotten the
consolation, as some render it; For the Greek (...) signifies both; because
consolation oft-times flows in by a word of exhortation; and it intimates that
they had forgotten, both the word of comfort, and the work of comfort. And thus
it is with many a good Christian; he comes to Church with great desire to learn
that which tends to the good of his soul, and he is resolved to treasure it up
in his memory: I, but that is not faithful to him, but presently loses that
which he has committed to its trust. And it may be, God has done great things
for him, and given him great experience of his fatherly care over him, and
tender love to him: I, but he has lost much of his experience; that it is to
him, as if it had not been. Oftentimes when Christians are under a cloud, they
forget that the Sun of Gods favor ever shined upon them. And when they are in
streights forget the great Salvation that God has wrought for them, when he
called them out of a state of sin and misery into a state of grace and
happiness. And this is a great affliction to him, that he cannot remember the
works of the right hand of the Lord, nor the gracious, and soul ravishing words
of his mouth. Now is there no relief to be had from God in this case? Yes, and
that I shall show you in three particulars,

1. Sometimes God brings truths and experiences to our minds and remembrance,
when we stand in the greatest need of them. God deals with us as natural
parents do with a dear child, whom they love exceedingly: it may be they bestow
a thing upon it, which is very useful for it, but for want of care, it loses
it; the parents finding it, lay it up for the child against a time of need, and
then bring it forth. Even thus does God sometimes; that truth and experience,
which we have lost, he treasures up against a time of need, and then brings it
forth, when he knows it will do us the most good, Comfort shall be given in,
when the soul has quite forgotten, that she ever had comfort. And as it is the
office of the Holy Ghost to comfort mourners, so in order hereunto, he must
teach the soul, and bring things to our remembrance. So it is promised, John
14.26. But the comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your remembrance;
First, He must teach the soul those things that belong to comfort: I, but the
soul is very apt to forget what she has learned; Why if it does so; then he is
a remembrancer to bring things forgotten to our remembrance. As it is a notable
comfort to a Christian, in the time of trouble and sorrow, to call the promises
and providence of God to mind; so it is part of the Office of the Holy Ghost
to bring things to our remembrance for our comfort. And sometimes when things
are quite out of our remembrance, and even buried in the grave of
forgetfulness, the Holy Ghost brings them all to our minds as fresh as if we
had but newly received them. Saint Paul wrote the same things to the
Phillippians, which he had either preached to them or wrote to them before,
that he might imprint them the better upon their minds: and some gather out of
Matthew. 5. compared with Luke 6.20. that our Savior preached the same Sermon
twice over; because many hearers are dull to conceive, hard to believe, and apt
to forget. And the Holy Ghost sometimes comes and Preaches that again to the
soul, which it may be she heard ten or twenty years before, but had forgotten
it. Perhaps thou art at a great loss for a promise, and for former experiences,
and would give any thing in the world for the comfort that once thou had
thereby: and then the Holy Ghost gives them in to thee. Dying Christians
sometimes have had experience hereof, when all their comfort has fled from
them, as the brooks passed away from the troops of Tema.

2. Sometimes when a Christian has forgotten old experiences, God creates new
for his joy, and comfort. When old mercies are worn out of our remembrance, he
engraves new mercies upon our minds; and when some promises of grace, and
comfort are slipped out of our memory, he points us to others that are as
suitable to our present state. It may be thou have forgot the promises of this
life, and God fastens the promises of eternal life upon thy spirit; thou have
forgot something of that which thou have learnt heretofore. And to supply the
want thereof, he teaches thee something which thou did never learn and
sometimes a word of precept is more needful to be taught, then the word of
promise; and a Christian finds it so. When the heart begins to grow wanton and
loose under gracious promises and experiences, it is just with God to take them
away, and to feed her with harder Diet: yet so, that she shall have cause to
bless God at last for it; for else she might have died of a surfeit. God does
not always administer that to us, which is most toothsome, but that which is
most wholesome; not always that which is most delightful, but that which is most
needful, as is hinted by our Savior, Matt. 6.8. Your father knows what you
have need of, i. e. You may be sure of that which God knows necessary and
suitable to your present state and condition; although he denies you that which
you most desire. A father does not always provide the same diet for his
children, but gives them sometimes one thing and sometimes another: but
however, they shall have that which is most needful for them; and when he
denies them that which their appetite longs for, and it cannot be had, he gives
them that which may be more for their health. Even thus God does with his
children: spiritual food they shall have; and although they must not always
feed upon the same dish, yet they shall have that which is best for them. New
mercies are oftentimes given in to them, who have forgotten old. So that a
Christian has a new song put into his mouth, to sing before the Lord, as the
Prophet says, Psalm. 40.3. He has put a new song into my mouth even praise
unto our God. I confess it is the sin and weakness of Christians to forget old
experiences of Gods goodness to them; yet such is the indulgence of our
heavenly Father, as to supply our defects herein by a suitable dispensation,
and to remember us, when we forget him.

3. Sometimes God supplies the want of a good memory, by a mighty and
efficacious blessing of his Holy Spirit; so that there is much conveyed into
the heart, to better that little that is retained in the head. A good work may
be wrought upon the heart, when very few words, that are delivered by the
Preacher, are remembered. The word sometimes passes through the soul, and leaves
a sweet savor behind it, although it stays not. It may be a poor soul goes
to hear a Sermon, and upon his return, would think he had lost all his pains,
were it not for this, that he has felt the power and efficacy of the Spirit of
God upon his heart to do him good; and for this he blesses God. He finds his
heart quickened, or melted, or established in the faith; and this is better to
him, than if he had it all by heart, without such gracious effects. It Is good
to remember what you hear; but it is better to be what you hear; when it may be
said of you, as our Savior of his Disciples, Now are ye clean through the word
which I have spoken to you, John 15.3. As a sieve will not hold the water, that
is put into it, yet is washed and cleansed by it; even thus it is with some
hearers, though they can retain nothing of the expression of the word, yet they
are cleansed by the lively and efficacious impression thereof.

Beloved, I speak not this to encourage any one in careless hearing and wilful
neglect of retaining what they hear: but for the comfort of those, who when
they have given all diligence in their attention, yet their memory fails them
in retaining what they have heard. And I desire that all would take notice of
this one thing; that though it be the duty of all, to treasure up the word in
their heads, yet the desire of their souls should be chiefly carried out after
an impression thereof upon their hearts. Head knowledge is good, but heart
knowledge is better. To be able to repeat a Sermon is good, but to live a
Sermon is better. And thou may be sure, that God will enable thee to live
truth, in some measure, although thou art not able to express the words
thereof, as they are delivered to thee; And this shall be thy Relief in this
case.

Thus much shall serve to show you how Divine Relief flows in to the soul, when
the natural faculties thereof fail.

2. Divine Relief flows in from God, to the Soul of a good man, when his
infused habits fail; and in the opening of this, I must hold to my propounded
method.

1. I shall show you, that they may fail, and how far they may fail.

2. How relief flows into the Soul in this case. First, The infused habits of
Grace and Virtue may fail. There is not a Grace in a Christian, but may fail at
one time or other. Though the state of Grace abides always; yet every man's
grace, (if any man's) does not always abide in the same state. A true frame of
Grace, shall never be destroyed, but the heart of a gracious man does not
always continue in the same frame. The stream may not be cut off, and yet
there may be ebbings, as well as flowings. It may be low water with a Christian
at some time, in point of inherent grace, as well as spiritual comfort. He that
has the most grace, may seem like him, that has the least; and that in three
things. 1. In respect of the strength of Grace. 2. In respect of the vigor and
activity of Grace. 3. In respect of the beauty and luster of Grace.

First in respect of the strength of Grace: Grace is not always in the same
strength. Abraham was strong in Faith, yet his Faith was not always alike. We
find his Fear too strong for his Faith: Abraham's Faith had ebbings and
declinings. Job's Patience at the first, was mighty to bear, and undergo his
afflictions; yet at some time it flagg'd.

Secondly, Grace may fail in point of life and vigor: The spiritual life of a
Christian, may not be always lively and active. Faith and love may not die,
and yet they may stir very little; the fire of holy affections not be extinct,
and yet not flame. The Church of Ephesus had left her first Love, but she had
not left off to love; she loved Christ: I, but not as she did at first; So it
may be with others; there may be an abatement of their love, although not an
extinguishment of it.

Thirdly, Grace may fail in respect of its beauty and loveliness; the beauty
thereof may fade much. It Is with a Christian, as it is with a fruit-bearing
tree; the beauty of the tree, is its leaves and fruit: Now when the fruit is
plucked, and the leaves fallen, the beauty is gone. Even so the holy fruit of a
Christian, is the beauty of a Christian; that which renders him and his grace
very lovely in the eyes of good men: but when the fruit is off the tree, when
you see not the fruit of holiness and of spirituality growig upon him, in his
season, the beauty of a Christian is departed from him. And thus it may be with
a good man for a time. He that formerly acted very humbly, may upon some
temptation, act very proudly. He that once acted very self-denyingly, may at
another time, act very self-seekingly. He that formerly walked like a Saint,
and truly acted the part of a Saint; may act not only below a Saint, but below
a man: Such changes and varieties are found upon the most gracious frames of
Spirit, which the best of Saints have in this world. The strength of grace may
so far abate, as that the strength of sin may increase. The vigor and life of
grace may so far abate, as that little or nothing may appear, but the deformity
of sin.

Secondly, What relief flows into the heart of a good man in this case? God is
still the strength of his heart,

1. By preserving the root and principle of grace alive that would die if it
were not preserved by a divine power. Every Christian would cease to be
gracious, as well as fail in the exercise of grace, if he were wholly left to
himself: I, but Christians are kept in a state of grace, by the power of God, 1
Pet. 1.5. Grace in a Christian, is the root of a Christian; and therefore
Believers are said to be rooted and grounded in love, Ephesians. 3.17. and as the
root may live, when the fruit falls off, nay when the trunk of the tree withers
and decays, that there is little life in it; so it may be with a Christian. I,
but how is this Root kept alive? Why, it is kept by an Almighty power. Though a
Christian does not always take care of his graces, that they may be lively and
strong; yet God does always take care, that the root of grace may live; he
will keep that alive. Divine power is like a strong Fort or Garrison to a
Christians Grace, that keeps it safe: It may be assaulted and beleaguered, but
shall never receive a mortal wound. It is the great security of a Christian,
that God will not trust him with the root and principle of grace. That shall
never be in thine own keeping, he trusts thee with the exercise of grace, but
not with the principle and root. No, he keeps that himself; he is both the
Garrison, and the Commander in it; and you may be sure that that is impregnable.

2. God is the strength of a Christians heart, when the infused habits of grace
fail, and sin grows strong and vigorous; by healing and restoring him. A
Christian never fails in the exercise of grace, but sin gives him a wound. And
therefore David prayed, Lord heal my Soul, for I have sinned, Psalm. 41.4. And
what David prayed for, God promises to his people, Hos. 14.4. I will heal
their backslidings. The weakness and decay of grace, brings a Christian
presently to the falling sickness; and so it did David and Ephraim: I, but God
will be a Physician to the Soul in this case, and will heal their diseases; and
so he did David's falling sickness: for which he returned the tribute of Praise,
Psalm. 103.3. My soul, praise thou the Lord, and all that is within me, praise
his holy name, who heals all thy diseases. David had many diseases upon him
once; for one disease is the cause of another: I, but God healed all, and
raised him up again. And herein the grace of God did shine forth with great
luster and glory, that even ravished his soul in the sense thereof. As it
appears wonderful in preserving spiritual life, and the root of grace, so it is
no less to be admired for its healing and restoring virtue, that it puts forth
upon the Soul, when spiritual diseases have ceised upon it. You have a notable
place for this, Cant. 8.5. I raised thee up under the apple tree. They are the
words of Christ to his Spouse: She had been feeding her self upon the forbidden
fruit of earthly delights, and sensual pleasures, until she could stand upon
her feet no longer, and there she falls and lies: I, but then Christ comes to
her seasonably, takes her by the hand and raises her up. Green fruit will cause
distempers in the body natural; and sensual delights and pleasures will cause
diseases in the body spiritual: none can cure them but Christ. When thou art
fallen under the Apple Tree, he must raise thee up; nay, Christ will do it:
though he may suffer the poor Soul to fall, yet he will not suffer it to lie
and perish. This is one main difference between the falls of a gracious man
into sin, and the fall of a wicked man. God lets a wicked man fall and lie in
his sin. As he falls willingly and resolvedly, so he lies wretchedly, and
desperately in his sin: But as a godly man falls through a weakness of grace,
so God pities him, and raises him up again. Peter fell foully, when he denied
his Master, but he did not fall finally: Christ raised him up, and restored him
to his former health and soundness. So you may see, Matthew. 26.75. And Peter
remembered the words of Jesus, and he went out, and wept bitterly. The way that
Christ takes to heal the backslidings of his people, is to break their hearts
and melt them into godly sorrow. When poor Souls have been almost drowned in
the ways of sin, he drowns their sin in the red sea of godly sorrow; the Soul
swims aloft, but his sin sinks to the bottom, that it may rise no more.

3. God is the strength of a Christians heart, when grace fails, by working a
new creation upon the heart. The giving of grace at first, is a creation; and
hence new Converts, are called new creatures. So the strengthening weak grace,
and reviving and renewing of grace, is no less a creation; it is the work of an
Almighty power upon the Soul. And therefore David prayed for it, under this
notion; Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right Spirit within me,
Psalm. 50.10. God puts forth the same power in strengthening the weakness of
grace, as he does in giving the first act of grace; as grace is not man's
creature, but Gods. We are (says the Apostle) Gods workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus, unto good works, Ephesians. 2.10. So the renewing and reviving grace,
is not man's work, but Gods. When he sees a poor Christian lie languishing,
that he is scarce able to put forth one act of grace he can neither believe,
nor love, nor obey, that Satan makes a prey of him, and is ready to carry him
away captive, as his prisoner, God creates new strength, and a new life, and a
new glory upon the Soul. If a Christian has his winter, he shall have his
spring also; he shall not be always without fruit. Most full is that promise,
Hos. 14.5, 6. I will be as the dew unto Israel: he shall grow as the lilly, and
cast forth his roots as Lebanon: His branches shall spread, and his beauty
shall be as the olive tree, and his smell as Lebanon. Observe Gods method in
working upon decaying Christians. First, he heals their backslidings, so ver.
4. I will heal their backslidings: I, but that is not all. For without divine
influence the Soul will be as apt to relapse as ever; and therefore God
promises, as a further act of grace, that he will be as the dew unto Israel.
Dew is of a fructifying and refreshing nature, it calls forth the fruits of the
earth, when they lie hid in the roots of trees, and herbs. Even so is Divine
Influence, it is of a fructifying nature, and calls forth the fruits of grace,
when they lie hid in the root thereof. Let but God send forth his power, and
Grace will send forth new buds and blossoms of holiness, that there shall be a
new face upon a Christian: He shall grow as the Lilliy, cast forth his roots as
Lebanon, his branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the Olive, and
his smell as Lebanon.

4. God is the strength of a Christians heart, by drawing forth much good out
of this great evil. It is a sore evil for a Christian to decay in grace. and to
fall into sin: I, but God works good out of this evil.

Four things God works by this, and they are all good for him.

1. Hereby God discovers that corruption, that is in the heart. As when the
water ebbs and grows low, then the earth appears; then you may see what is at
the bottom: So when grace ebbs, and grows low, then the corruption of the heart
appears; then it is quickly known, what foul dregs are at the bottom. There is
many a Christian, that little thinks how full of sin his heart is, until his
grace grows languid and weak; and then he comes to have a sad experience
thereof. Thus it was with David; When grace became so weak in him, as not to be
able to withstand a temptation, then he saw the uncleanness of his heart; and
therefore cried to God, to wash him and cleanse him; and it is as if he had
said, Lord, I see now, what a filthy and unclean Spirit dwells in me: Lord,
do thou purge it out, and cleanse me from it. If any one had gone to David, and
told him, that at such a time, he should be overcome by such a temptation, and
commit two great sins: he would hardly have believed that his heart had been so
bad. But after wards his expeperience taught him.

2. Hereby God teaches the Soul, where its strength lies; and on whom its
grace depends. The decay of grace shows, that the strength thereof is not in
man, nor in grace it self; but like the Vine, it must have a supporter. Grace,
cannot live, nor thrive, without constant influences: I, but good men are too
apt to depend upon their grace; and not to go to him for strength in whom it
lies. Now when a Christian feels the decay of his grace, and his own
insufficiency to relieve and strengthen it; this drives him out of himself to
Christ. This is one main difference between the total want of grace, and a
sense of decay in grace. The total want of grace drives men from Christ; but a
sense of the decay of grace, drives men to Christ. So it did David, his
weakness brought him upon his knees.

3. The falls of Christians, through the weakness of grace, and the power of
sin, are made notable antidotes and preservatives against final Apostasy. For
as there is nothing that estrangeth the heart from God, as spiritual pride and
self-confidence; so nothing keeps the heart so close to God, as a filial fear
of offending God. So you may see, Jer. 32.40. And I will make an everlasting
covenant with them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I
will put my fear in their hearts, that they shall not depart from me. This is
that which hemms in the Soul, that it cannot go astray. Now the falls of
Christians provoke and draw forth this filial fear into act The burnt child
dreads the fire; and he that has been stung with a Serpent, will shun his
hole; so it is here. None so fearful of falling into sin, as they that have
fallen. None so wary and watchful; none so resolute and stout against
temptations, and occasions of sin, as those who have been at a time overcome.

4. These falls and decays, are like mighty winds to the Oak, that settles him
faster, and make him root deeper in Christ. As the more the Oak is shaken (if
it falls not) the faster and deeper it is rooted in the earth: So when a
Christian has been shaken with the winds of temptations and corruptions, the
faster hold he lays upon Christ, and the deeper he is rooted in him. For, 1.
His experience of Christ's faithfulness in keeping him from falling finally and
totally, strengthens his faith in Christ. 2. His experience of Christ's
pardoning love, knits and unites his heart close to Christ.


First, His experience of Christ's faithfulness, in keeping him from falling
totally and finally, strengthens his faith in Christ. As it is a notable trial
of Christ's faithfulness, to keep Saints from falling away finally, when they
fall souly: so experience of Christ's faithfulness is a notable strengthener of
a Christians faith in Christ. They that know thy name, will put their trust in
thee, says David, Psalm. 9.10. A friend that keeps close to a man in time of
need, may well be trusted. Even so it is here. Christ keeps close to a
Christian, even at that time, when he deserves to be cast off, and is both a
shame and a grief to Christ. Surely the experience hereof, must needs be a
great encouragement to a Christian to trust him for ever. He sees that Christ's
strength never fails, although his own strength fail. He sees that there is
grace enough in Christ to support him in the weakest condition, and to raise
him up, when he is at the lowest. Nay further, he finds this strength put forth
upon him, according to the word of promise; and though he is unbelieving, yet
Christ abides faithful to him; And therefore he cannot but conclude from hence,
that Christ will be his strength for ever, and will never fail him.

Secondly, A Christians experience of the fullness and continuance of Christ's
pardoning love, knits and unites his soul faster to Christ, then ever; this
does endear Christ to the soul exceedingly; tried love is an endearing love;
and if any thing will draw out the souls affections unto Christ, and confirm
them against all future assaults, it is the renewing of pardons, upon the
renewal of offenses. When the soul shall hear Christ say as he does, Esaias
43.24, 25. Thou have brought me no sweet cane with money, neither have thou
filled me with the fat of thy sacrifices, but thou have made me to serve with
thy sins; thou have wearied me with thine iniquities. I am he that blotteth out
thy transgression for mine own sake and will remember thy sins no more; I say
when the soul shall hear this, it must needs be deeply affected herewith. What!
Will the Lord be gracious to such a vile wretch as I am? Will he pardon a
backslider? Will he forgive the sin of one that has made him to serve with his
sin, and wearied him with iniquities? O here is wonderful love; this is
transcendent love! and shall not I love him, that has loved me thus? Yet Lord,
thou know, that I love thee; it is true, I have backslidden, and grievously
offended; but I will do so no more. Thus God sometimes, does the soul much good
by that which in it self does him the greatest hurt: as, pain eases a
Christian, death revives him, dissolution unites him, so corruption clarifies
him; and this is a most gracious relief.

But before I leave this particular I must enter four cautions.

1. That no man take up the better opinion of sin hereby; for as darkness is
nevertheless an evil, though God bring light out of darkness; so sin is
nevertheless an evil, though God is pleased to bring good out of it. Poison is
destructive, although a Physician can so correct it, as to make it medicinal,
and so is sin; and the better opinion thou have of sin, the more evil and
mortal it will be to thee.

2. Take heed of lying in sin, with hopes of a relief from God: watch against
it, pray against it, that thou may not be overcome of it: but however if
thou art overcome by a temptation, if Satan has tript up thy heels, get upon
thy feet again, as soon as possibly thou can; if thou fallest with Peter, weep
with Peter, and labor to find as much bitterness in sin, as thou have found of
a seeming pleasure in it. Remember this, that more have fallen into sin with
hopes of rising again, then have risen after they have fallen. Many sin with
Peter, but few repent with him.

3. Labor to prevent decays in grace: It is easier to keep health, then to
recover it; And it is easier to maintain grace in strength and vigor, then to
recover any degree of grace, when it is lost. Though it be Gods goodness to
restore grace, yet it is your duty to prevent the loss thereof.

4. Watch the first decay of grace, least it grow to a total consumption of
all, observe the least flagging of faith and love, when it comes to a trial; a
little grace may serve to repair a little decay: but thou will stand in need of
much to repair a great decay; and therefore as soon as grace begins to fail, do
thou begin to repair. O, ply the throne of grace for strengthening influences,
least thy weakness prove dangerous and desperate: however, do not abuse
relieving grace by a present security.

3. The third particular failing of the heart is the failing of Animal spirits,
that the man is ready to fall into a swoon, or the soul just taking its flight
from the body, and leaving its old habitation. So the Church complains, Cant.
5.6. My soul failed; Arias Montanus renders it, My soul went forth; And this
made David cry out; Hear me speedily, O Lord, my spirit fails; I am like them
that go down into the pit. David was a man full of spirit, and yet he was at
this time, as if he had had no spirit; As it is said of Nabal, his heart died
within him, and became as a stone, 1 Samuel 25.87. And thus it may be with a good
man at some time, and that in these cases,

1. When hope is deserr'd and expectation disappointed; Hope deferred (says
Solomon) makes the beart sick, Prove. 13.12. i. e. When the thing hoped for is
deferred: a man's heart is set upon a thing, and he hopes for the obtaining it,
and he waits, and waits, and yet it comes not, this makes the heart sick; but
if his expectation be disappointed, then his spirit dies. It often falls out,
that man's time, and Gods time are not the same; Man sets a time to himself, and
thinks thus; at such a time such a mercy and such a good will come in: I, but
Gods time may be long after. Now when he sees that still he must wait, and yet
the mercy comes not, his heart fails, his spirit sinks.

2. When God hides his face from the soul, and she cannot see it; This was
David's case, Psalm. 143.7. My spirit fails, hide not thy face from me, least I
be like unto them that go down into the pit, i. e. The hiding of thy face will
quite kill my spirits. As the light of Gods countenance is the life of the
soul; so the hiding of Gods countenance is its death: No sooner does God depart
from a good man, but his soul is ready to depart; So it was with the Church,
Cant. 5.6. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself, and
was gone: my soul failed, when he spoke. I sought him, but I could not find
him: I called him, but he gave me no answer.

3. When the soul is wounded with the sense of sin, and of Gods displeasure for
sin; the burden and pain is intolerable, and then the spirit sinks. As nothing
sinks the spirit so much as sorrow and grief: So no grief is so heavy upon the
soul as grief for sin, and the sense of Gods wrath. You have a notable passage
for this, Job 6.4. For the arrows of the Almighty are within me, the poison
whereof drink up my spirits. An arrow is a deadly Engine, so called in Hebrew,
from its effect, cutting or wounding; and God sometimes shoots an arrow which
pierces into the soul, cuts and wounds it, yea, sometimes he shoots a poisoned
dart, and that drinks up the spirit, i. e. it kills the spirit. Even as a great
fire drinks up a little water, that is thrown upon it; So Gods wrath drinks up
the spirit; it leaves no spirit in the heart of a man.

4. A sudden passion of fear makes the heart to fail. So Luke 21.26. Men's
hearts failing them for fear; Fear when it is excessive, dispirits a man. When
Joseph's brethren found their money in their sacks, it is said, their hearts
failed them; and why? for they were afraid, Genesis 42.28.

5. Some strong temptation of Satan may make the heart to fail, especially if
grace be weak. Satan's assaults sometimes are very violent; they come upon the
heart with great power, like a mighty torrent, that overwhelms and sinks the
spirit. Thus Luther was assaulted by him; His temptation was so strong, that it
seemed to him, as if the swelling surges of the Sea did sound aloud at his left
ear, and that so violently, that die he must, except they presently grew calm:
afterward when the noise came within his head, he fell down as one dead, and
was so cold in each part, that he had remaining neither heat, nor blood, nor
sense, nor voice; and thus it has been with others. The temptations of Satan
are sometimes so strong, and violent upon the soul, as to cause the Animal
Spirits to fail.

These are the particular cases wherein God reveals and makes known the
greatness of his strength for the relief of his people.

1. When a man's heart fails him through a disappointment; then there is a
relief for him,

1. By exchanging a mercy; the soul hopes for one, and God gives in a better
and more desirable. God deals not with his people, as Laban dealt with Jacob;
instead of a fair and beautiful Rachel, he put him off with a blear eyed Leah.
No! God does the contrary, it may be thou art set upon a blear-eyed Leah, and
God gives thee a fair Rachel; My meaning is, when the heart of a Christian is
set upon, and strongly carried out after a low and inferior mercy, and the
soul is sick for want of it even ready to die, God gives him an higher, and
more glorious mercy. As God is often better to us then our desires, so he is
better to us then our hopes, and when he disappoints our hopes, he gives us a
mercy that is beyond our hopes; For God is no way tied to the hopes of his
people; but only to his word of promise; and that he will perform in his own
way and time. Now sometimes the hope of a Christian may be falsely bottomed,
and not rightly fixed on Gods word, and then it is no wonder if we meet with a
disappointment; I, but though God does frustrate our expectation, he will not
break his word. The promise of God does not fail; although we are apt to think
it does, when our hope and expectation is disappointed. The word of the Lord
stands sure; even then when we are not sure, that the thing we desire and
hope for shall be granted to us: and hence it comes, that instead of the mercy
we desire, God gives us in that, which he has promised, although not desired
nor hoped for.

2. God relieves the hearts of his people by giving in the desired mercy, when
they are past all hope of it. When the soul is at the very brink of despair,
then the mercy is given in to revive it; and that is implied in those words of
Solomon, Prove. 13.12. Hope deferred makes the heart sick, but when the desire
comes it is a tree of life, i. e. God may defer the mercy so long as to make
the heart sick, even unto death, and then bestow i^ upon the soul: now when it
comes it is a tree of life; an allusion to that tree, that God planted in
Paradise, Genesis 2.9. A tree that was a symbol or sign of life; as the
Sacraments are of grace. Now as the faith, hope, and comfort of a true
Christian is fed, nourished, and revived by these external symbols and signs:
so it is revived by the income of a desired mercy. When the soul has been
languishing at the door of hope, until it grows out of hope, and is ready to
perish, then God throws in the mercy to revive and comfort it. Nay further.

3. God sometimes gives in the mercy, in a way that is beyond all hope; in a
way that seems the most cross to the hopes of a Christian. Sometimes God shuts
up all the doors of hope; and makes that to be the way of conveying mercy to
us. So God promised to his people of old, Hos. 2.15. The valley of Achor for a
door of hope, i. e. when they should be destitute of those means, as might
encourage them to hope, and meet with the greatest difficulties and troubles,
that they could meet with, then the desired mercy should be given. Great
crosses oftentimes make way for, and usher in great mercies. Now when mercy
comes in unexpectedly, and in a cross way, it comes with the greater force and
power upon the Soul, to revive and comfort it. Mercies that are common to the
Soul, do not make such a strong impression upon it, as those that are either
more special, or come to the Soul in a singular and unexpected way. Such
mercies are very sweet and precious to the Soul.

2. As there is relief for a good man in this case, so when the heart fails,
through the hiding of Gods face. And that I shall show you briefly in three
things,

1. When a good man cannot see Gods face, God speaks to him, and gives him
strength to seek his face. When the Soul cannot hear God, yet sometimes she
hears the voice of God. So it was with David, Psalm. 27.8, 6. When thou said,
Seek my face; my heart said unto thee, Thy face, Lord, will I seeek. Hide not
thy face from me, put not thy servant away in anger. God hid his face from
David, I, but he did not shut up his lips; David had the happiness to hear his
voice, though it was but from behind a curtain: And this encouraged, and drew
forth his Soul to seek Gods face. So when Christ withdrew himself from his
Spouse, that she knew not what was become of him, she sought him, but could not
find him; I, but she heard his voice, Cant. 5.6. And it is a great comfort to a
good man, to hear the voice of God, when he cannot see the face of God.
Sometimes God speaks to the Soul by his word, and sometimes by his works; and
thereby draws it forth to seek his face. This is a notable sign; that God is
not wholly and eternally departed from us. When God leaves a wicked man, he
does not so much as speak to him, he shall not hear from God, unless it be by
way of denouncing judgment against him. But when he withdraws, and hides his
face from a good man, he shall hear the voice of God, though he cannot see his
well pleased face. God is desirous to see their face, although he hides his
own; and therefore calls to them, to come and seek his face. Thou said, Seek
my face, and this voice of God, caused an echo in David's Soul; And I said,
Thy face, Lord, will I seek. And this is one end of God in hiding his face from
the Soul, that hereby he may draw forth the desires of it after him. As a
mother sometimes turns her back upon the child, to see wehther it will cry
after her: Even thus does God; and it is wonderful delightful to him, to hear a
Soul cry after him, when he has withdrawn himself and his face from it.

2. Sometimes, when a good man cannot see the well-pleased face of God, he feels
the hand of God, not the weight thereof to crush him down, but the power and
strength thereof to sustain, and uphold him. That which the Church had
experience of in another case, when she was sick of love, Cant. 2.6. she did
promise to her self in this case, Cant. 8.3. His left hand should be under her
head, and his right hand should embrace her. Christ puts forth both hands; one
for the head, and another for the heart; to keep the soul from death in this
case.

1. The left hand of Christ is put under the head, to keep up and maintain a
good opinion of him. When the soul is full of inward trouble it is full of
thoughts; So Psalm. 94.19. In the multitude of my thoughts within me. Nay it is
apt to have hard thoughts of God; such as are unbecoming the dear children of
so gracious a father; We are apt to think, that when God hides his face from
us, he has forgotten to be gracious, and in anger shut up his tender mercies
from us; that his mercy is clean for ever, and that his promise fails for
evermore; that the Lord has cast us off for ever, and will be favorable no
more. To these and the like thoughts is a troubled soul very prone, when God
withdraws; Now Christ to prevent these, or to moderate them, puts his hand
under our head. As the putting of ones hand under the head of a sick person is
a great stay to it, and affords it some ease, that he may compose to rest; so
does Christ deal with a soul, that is sick and ready to die, in the sense of
Gods hiding his face from it. He puts under his hand to keep the judgment
right, that it may maintain a good opinion of God, and keep up good thoughts of
him, and this is a great ease to a good man; for there is nothing afflicts the
soul more, then such hard thoughts of God; they are a great torture and
perplexity to the soul, and when they are removed, the mind finds great
refreshment thereby.

2. The right hand of Christ is put forth to embrace the soul; As his left hand
is under the head, so his right hand does embrace a good man; and with this he
stays the heart and keeps it from dying: when the soul is going forth he stays
it and keeps it in. So says David, Psalm. 18.18. But the Lord was my stay. The
right hand of Divine Grace and strength does compass the soul about, and
thereby keeps it from going forth: and that is promised, Psalm. 32.10. Mercy
shall compass him about. The mercy of God is a long arm, and this does incircle
the soul and compass it about; the soul can stir no way but mercy meets it, to
stay its flight. Sometime God sends a friend to him, who out of his own
experience drops a seasonable word of comfort upon his soul, and that is a
mercy. Job 33.23. Sometime God applies a word of Grace that enlivens his dead
heart, and that is a mercy. Psalm. 119.50. Sometimes God brings to mind some
former intimations of his love, and grace to him, Psalm. 42.6. And sometime and
very often he stays the soul with this very thought; that it is a great mercy
of God to him, that yet he is on this side hell, Lam. 3.22.
and though he cannot see the face of God, yet he is not put so far off, but he
may have the happiness to see it at the last. It Is mercy, that he is not
eternally banished from his presence; And this stays the heart.

3. Though God hides his face for a time, yet he does at one time or other
unvail and discover it to the soul, for its unspeakable joy and comfort. If not
in this life, yet in the life to come, a true Christian shall see the face of
God again, although it be hid for a time. You have an excellent promise for
this, Esaias 54.7, 8. For a small moment have I forsaken thee, but with great
mercies will I gather thee: in a little wrath I hid my face from thee, for a
moment; but with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee, says the Lord
thy redeemer. Gods departure from a good man is not an eternal departure; His
hiding his face, is not for ever: Though thou can not see it now, yet thou
shall see it; Thou may say with David, Why art thou cast down, O my soul, and
why art thou so disquieted within me? hope thou in God, for I shall yet praise
him for the help of his countenance, Psalm. 42.5.

3. In case that the Animal Spirits do fail a man, through the sense of sin and
Gods displeasure for it, there is relief to be had from God: when the poisoned
arrows of Divine wrath stick fast in the soul, and drinks up the Spirits, there
is relief for it; And this I shall also make evident to you in three things.

There are three remedies that God makes use of to cure the wounds that sin and
Gods wrath make in the Soul. 1. The blood of Sprinkling. 2. The precious Balm
of Gospel promises. 3. The sweet oil of the Holy Spirit.

1. The blood of sprinkling, or the blood of Christ sprinkled upon the heart:
this washes and cleanses the wound; So 1 John 1.7. And the blood of Christ
cleanses us from all sin; And so Revel. 5. Unto him that loved us, and washed
us from our sins in his own blood: For as a wound in the body natural will not
heal, unless the blood and corruption be washed out, no more will the wounds of
the soul ever be cured, unless they be first washed with the blood of Christ.
And therefore this is Gods first work to apply the blood of Christ to the
wound; and it is very effectual for this purpose; as you may see, Heb. 9.13,
14. For if the blood of bulls and of goats* and the ashes of an heifer,
sprinkling the unclean, sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: How much
more shall the blood of Christ purge your conscience? It first stancheth the
blood, and then purifies the wound, and makes it fit for a plaster; The
meaning hereof is this, that the knowledge of our justification by the
righteousness of Christ is a singular and choice remedy, for the taking away
the sense of sin and Gods displeasure for it; It is not only requisite that
Christ shed his blood for us, and that God has accepted it as a full
satisfaction to His Divine Justice which was offended by our sin, but this must
be applied to us. As under the Law, it was not enough, to have the blood of
bulls and of goats, but it must be sprinkled, or else there was no cleansing;
even so, unless God applies the blood of Christ to thy conscience, and give
thee the knowledge thereof, that it is shed for thee in particular, thy
Spiritual wounds that sin and Satan has made in thee, will never be cleansed;
Thou may be justified before God, but still thine own heart may accuse and
condemn thee; Though God does not charge thy sin upon thee, yet thou will be
continually charging it upon thy self; and the burden will be intolerable; thy
wounds will still bleed; every remembrance of sin, will draw new blood from thy
heart; It is true the blessing lies in Gods free remission of our sin; but the
comfort lies in our knowledge thereof. A traitor may be pardoned, and that may
save his life, but if he knows it not, he loses the comfort thereof. Even
thus it is, until we know that God has freely justified us in the blood of
Christ, the sense of sin, and Divine wrath will be heavy upon the spirit of an
awakened sinner, and therefore God's sprinkling the blood of Christ upon the
conscience must needs be a sweet relief.

2. Another remedy which God makes use of for the curing of this spiritual
wound, is the balm of Gospel promises: there are two sorts of promises, by
which God speaks comfort to a disconsolate soul. 1. Inviting promises. 2.
Assuring and sealing promises.

1. Inviting promises and by these he encourages a poor distressed sinner to
come to him; Such is that, Matthew. 11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden; And that Esaias 55.1. Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to the
waters: he that has no money; come ye buy and eat, yea come buy wine and milk
without money and without price; And that Rev. 22.17. And the Spirit and the
Bride say, come, and let him that hears, say, come, and let him that is a
thirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely. Now
when a soul that hears these promises, considers with it self thus; Sure I
am, that I am weary and heavy laden with the burden of sin; sin is an heavy
load upon my soul; the arrows of Gods indignation have set my soul on fire,
that I stand in need of these cooling and refreshing waters; I am a poor
ceature; I have no money; nothing to give for the incomes of Gods grace and
love; I am a mere beggar; and therefore must needs be one that God invites. And
thus God draws the soul to him, that he may apply,

2. The assuring and sealing promises of comfort: Such as these, Heb. 10.16,
17. This is the Covenant that I will make with them after those days, says the
Lord, I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write
them, and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more; And that in Esaias
57.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. For thus says the high and lofty one, that inhabiteth
eternity, whose name is holy. I will dwell in the high, and holy place: with
him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the
humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones. For I will not contend
for ever neither will I be always wroth: for the spirit should fail before me,
and the souls that I have made. For the iniquity of his covetousness was I
wroth and smote him: I hid me and was wroth, and he went on frowardly in the
way of his heart; I have seen his ways and will heal him; I will lead him, and
restore comfort unto him. I create the fruit of the lips, peace, peace to him
that is far off, and to him that is near, says the Lord, and I will heal him.
Now as these promises are the matter of comfort, so they are the means of
comfort; For when God applies them to a wounded soul, there passes a virtue
and power through them to heal and cure it.

3. To this he adds the oil of his Holy Spirit, and that he drops into the
wound; and this does not only heal, but takes away the very scar of the wound,
and renders the skin as fresh and beautiful as before; Oil in Scripture sets
out joy and cheerfulness, and therefore it is called the oil of joy; And Esaias
61.3. To appoint unto them, that mourn in Sion, to give unto them beauty for
ashes, and the oil of joy for mourning; This cures the mournful sad and
perplexed spirit, and makes the face to shine again with brightness and glory;
according to that, Psalm. 104.15. And oil to make the face to shine. I do not
say, that God always raises the comfort of the soul thus high, but sometimes
he does, not only heal, but anoint and make the soul fair and lovely in his
eye; For there is no such sight in Gods eye, as a sanctified heart that is
cheerful and joyful before him; such a soul is the joy and delight of his
heart; and especially where he has made the deepest wound, and filled the soul
with the greatest horror in the sense of his wrath and displeasure, there when
he comes to give peace and comfort, he anoints the most; the greater wound the
greater measure of comfort; and hence it is, that many a soul blesses God for
its wounds, because else it would never have attained to such joys and comforts
as God gives in. Thus I have shown you what relief flows into the soul in this
case.

4. In case that the Animal Spirits fail through a sudden passion of fear;
There is relief for it, And that four ways.

1. Sometimes God preventeth the thing feared, and never suffers it to come to
pass. 2. Sometimes God delivers the soul from its fears. 3. Sometimes the thing
feared is so ordered and disposed by the Lord, that it is less then our fear,
not worth our fear. 4. Sometimes God turns the fears of his servants into the
right channel, that instead of fearing evil, they fear him more then ever they
did.
First, Sometime God prevents the thing feared, and never suffers it to come to
pass; or at least not at that time we are afraid it will: it is true Job could
say, the thing which I feared is come upon me, Job 3.25. I was not in safety,
neither had I rest, nor was I quiet, yet trouble came. I, but many a good man
has cause to say, the thing which I greatly feared is not come upon me; Though
God did not deliver me from my distrustful fear, yet he delivered me from that
which I did fear. As sometimes we groundlesly expect and hope for a thing that
never comes: so sometimes we groundlesly fear an evil that never comes. As God
denies the desires of a groundless confidence in great mercy, so he prevents
our groundless fears in mercy; For as wicked men are apt to fear evil less then
they should, so the godly are apt to fear evil more then they should. But as
that which wicked men fear not, comes suddenly upon them, so sometimes that
which a godly man fears, comes not at all; This made David say, Psa. 34.4. I
sought the Lord and he heard me, and delivered me from all my fears, i. e. He
delivered me from the evils which I feared; The effect is here put for the
cause.

Secondly, Sometimes the Lord delivers a good man from the fear of evil. I
mean, from a distrustful, distracting, and tormenting fear, which dispirits
him, and sinks his spirits; As some fear, where no fear is, so sometimes God
animates, and lifts up the soul above fear, where fear is; True faith will
strive with tormenting fears, and when it is made strong, will cast them out.
There is an excellent promise for this, Job. 11.14.15. If iniquity be in thine
hand put it far away, and let not wickedness dwell in thy tabernacle. For then
thou shall lift up thy face without spot, yea thou shall be steadfast, and shall
not fear. Noting out, that when faith is so strong as to purify the heart and
life from sin, then it sets the Soul free from the fear of those evils, that
come by sin. Now this is a great relief to the Soul. For to be freed from the
fear of evil, is better then to be freed from the evil. The promise runs not
thus, Thou shall be freed from evil, but thou shall be freed from the fear of
evil. Happiness consists more in removing inward, then outward trouble. He that
is afraid of evil, before it comes, may be happy though it comes.

Thirdly, The thing feared, is so ordered and disposed by the Lord; that it is
a lesser evil, then we feared, and is not worth our fear. Many are far more
afraid then hurt; or more hurt by their fears, then by the evils they feared.
We are indeed very apt to greater evils, and lesser mercies; and that is the
reason, that we meet with evils with so much fear, and mercies with so little
faith. The thoughts of one evil torments our Spirits more, then the thoughts of
many mercies cheers and comforts our Spirits. I, but Gods thoughts are above
our thoughts; and when we are afraid, that the evil impending will be very
great, it proves very little. It Is with many Christians, as with some
inexperienced Patients; they dread the taking of any Physic, lest it should
overpower nature: but when they come to take it, they find it works not half so
much, as they feared it would. A wise Physician tempers the potion, according
to the constitution of the body, and the nature of the distemper, and not
according to the fears of the Patient. Even thus does God oftentimes deal with
us; he orders and corrects all our evils, so that they prove less hurtful, and
more beneficial to us, then we could think; not one dram too much, or too
little. He proportions not our purging Physic according to our fancies, but to
our necessity; when a little will serve the turn, he will not exceed.

Fourthly, Sometimes God turns the fears of his servants into the right
channel; that in stead of fearing evil, they fear him more then before they
did; and the fear of God is a notable means to cure the fear of evils. (As one
says well) He fears nothing else, who fears that one thing, to sin; and he
fears none else, who fears that one, who is more then all, God. The fear of God
is an excellent antidote against the power and poison of all other fears. You
have a full place for this, Es. 8.13, 14. Fear not their fear, nor be afraid;
sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be
your dread. He that would not fear that which the wicked sometimes do, and
ought to fear, must fear him only whom they do not fear. And this is Gods great
work, to put his fear into the hearts of his people, and that will cast out all
distrustful and distracting fears.

Thus I have dispatched the fourth case.

Fifthly and lastly, In case that the Animal Spirits fail through some strong
temptation of Satan; there is relief for it. As Satan sets all his power and
policy on work against the Soul: So God sets all his power and wisdom on work,
to relieve and help it. And when Satan does his worst to destroy it, God does
his best to save it. Relieving power comes in according to invading power: when
All might is against him, then all might is for him. Three things God does for
an assaulted Christian. 1. He calls Satan off. 2. He calls the tempted Soul in,
and administers heart-cheering Cordials. 3. He crowns the victory.

First he calls Satan off. When God sees this roaring Lion, preying upon the
Vitals of a Christian, and ready to destroy him, God calls him off. For God
has Satan upon a string, and he can go no further, then he permits him. When
Satan would have touched the life of Job (as he had a great mind to it) then
God bade him hold; that was precious, and not a fit morsel for the tooth of
such a beast. Satan never engages, nor encounters with a Christian, but with
Gods leave. He cannot shoot a fiery dart at the Soul, until God is pleased to
loosen his Chain, whereby he has him at command. And no sooner is he in any
hopes of a victory over him, but God sounds a retreat. He must and shall fall
off: for God will not suffer him to kill, though he wounds. The Spirits may
fail, and the Heart may ache, when Satan thrusts sore at him; I, but Satan shall
not give him a deadly wound. If God does but appear on the behalf of a poor
assaulted Christian (as he does in the very nick of time, when there is but an
hairs breadth between him and death,) Satan cannot stand his ground, but gives
back, and the Soul enjoyes a sweet release. It is in this case, as it was with
those, that were possessed with the Devil. Christ did but give the word of
command, and Satan presently obeyed it. As you may see, Mark 1.23, 24, 25, 26,
27. And there was in their Synagoue a man that had an unclean spirit, and be
cried out, saying, Let us alone, what have we to do with thee, thou Jesus of
Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy one
of God. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace, and come out of him. And
when the unclean spirit bad torn him, and cried with a loud voice, he came cut
of him. And they were all amazed, insomuch that they questioned within
themselves, saying, what thing is this? what new doctrine is this? for with
authority commands he even the unclean spirits, and they obey him. The words
hold out the authority of Christ, put forth upon Satan in a time when there was
the greatest need thereof. When the poor creature was ready to be devoured by
him, Christ gave but the word, bade him come out, and he was not able to keep
possession any longer. Even so, when the Soul is assaulted by him; if God steps
but in, and lays his commands upon him, if God does but say it is enough, let
him alone; he is presently bound hand and foot, he cannot stir any further.
Satan never had, nor ever shall have his will upon one true Believer.

Secondly, God calls the poor tempted Soul in, and administers heart-cheering
cordials to it. A poor Soul never stands in more need of a Cordial, then when
it has been worried by this arch enemy of its comfort; and God stands as ready
to administer it. No sooner had Christ got rid of him, when he had worsted him
in open field, but God dispatched away some of his glorious attendants, with the
best Cordials that Heaven could afford. So you may see, Mat. 4.11. Then the
Devil leaves him, and Angels came and ministered unto him. Surely it must needs
be some rare dainty, that is sent by the hand of an Angel: what it was is not
expressed; a Christans experience does best discover it: for as Christ was in
all things tempted as believers are, so one main end of his temptations was,
that he might be able to succor those that are tempted, Heb. 1. ult. For in
that he himself suffered being tempted, he is able to succor them that are
tempted. He is sensible of that relief that he had from his Father, both in the
temptations, and after. And as he will have Christians conformable to him in
temptations, so they shall be in relief and comforts; He knows what it was to
be tempted, and what it was to be administered unto after the temptation was
over, when he came sweating out of the field, faint, and weary; and he has
learnt to succor and relieve his people in the like condition, and therefore
he sends to them, and sends for them to come to him, that he may administer to
them. He first sends down the holy Spirit into their hearts, to give them
notice, that this is a fit season for them to come to Court, and apply
themselves to him at the throne of Grace, that they may have grace and mercy,
in this time of need: and when they come and make their addresses to him, he
then applies himself to them, and administers to them according to their need.
No sooner was Luther released from a grand assault of Satan, and come to
himself; but presently he betook himself to Christ in prayer, and prayed most
earnestly, and received great comfort thereupon, and made confession of his
Faith. This made him say, that Meditation, Prayer, and Temptation makes a
Divine. I am sure it makes an experimental Christian.

Thirdly, God crowns the victory. Though a Christian may be tempted, yet he
shall overcome, In all these (says the Apostle) we are more then conquerours,
To. 8.37. What is that? Triumphers, 2 Cor. 2.14. Now thanks be to God which
always causes us to triumph in Christ. As sure as Satan leads a poor
Christian into the field, and there encounters him with his hellish
temptations; God will bring him out with an holy triumph. Hence is that of
Psalm. 5.11, 12. But let all those that put their trust in thee, rejoice: let
them ever shout for joy, because thou defendest them: let them also that love
thy name, be joyful in thee. For thou, Lord, wilt bless the righteous; with
favor will thou compass him as with a shield. The Hebrew word signifies, thou will crown him with a shield. Some think that the Prophet alludes to a custom
of the Athenians; who were wont, if a Soldier brought his Shield with him out
of the battle safe and whole, although he lost his Sword, to lay his Shield
upon his head, and with that, as with a Diadem to crown him. He that holds fast
the shield of Faith in an hour of temptation, shall wear it on his head as his
crown. The trial of a Christians faith, which is much more precious then of
gold that perishes, though it be tried with fire, shall be found unto praise,
honor and glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.7. And hence is
that of the Apostle, I have fought the good fight, I have kept the faith, and
from henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy 4.7, 8.

Thus I have opened the Doctrine, and showed you what relief flows from God to
his people, both when their flesh fails, and when their heart fails. 1. When
the natural faculties of the Soul fail. 2. When the infused habits of the Soul
fail, and 3. When the animal Spirits fail.

Now I will give you the grounds and Reasons thereof.

Reas. 1. Taken from that near relation that is between God and good men. He is
their Father, and they his Children, he is their Husband, and they his Wife.
Now this double relation speaks forth that infinite love, that God bears to
them, and special care, that God has of them. God bears a love to his people,
not only like to the love of a Father, but infinitely beyond the love of a
Father: the love of a Father to his Child, is but a dark resemblance of the
love of God to his Children: and therefore as God out-loves all Parents, so he
out-does all Parents. His love is the love of an infinite Father, and therefore
knows no bounds either of time or measure, and his relief is proportionable to
his love; Relief wrought by an Almighty arm. See this clearly held forth, Jer.
31.9. I will cause them to walk by the rivers of water, in straaight way,
wherein they shall not stumble, And why? for I am a father unto Israel, and
Ephraim is my firstborn. Divine Paternity is one main ground of a Saints
relief. This is the reason why he will cause them to walk by the rivers of
water, in a straight way, wherein they shall not stumble, because he is their
Father. You know what dear and tender affection a good Father bears to his
Children, especially to his firstborn. All the Child's wants, weakness, and
grief, are a trouble and grief to the Father. Much more is God affected with
the faintings and failings of his Children. So Es. 63.8, 9. He said surely,
they are my people: so he was their Savior. In all their afflictions he was
afflicted, and the Angel of his presence saved them: in his love and in his
pity he redeemed them, and he bare them, and carried them all the days of old.
The Prophet alludes to the Song of Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.11. As an Eagle stirs up
her nest, fluttereth over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them,
bears them on her wings: so the Lord alone did lead him. How does this silly
creature bestir her self, when her young ones are in danger. She stirs up her
nest, she fluttereth over her young, and spreads abroad her wings. And if all
this will not secure them, she takes them up, and bears them upon her wings.
But how much more will God, who is the fountain of such a disposition in his
creature, bestir himself, and put forth his Almighty arm for the relief of his
dear ones. He will bear them upon the wing of his providence, and carry them
out of all danger: Satan shall not make a prey of them. If any thing will draw
forth the bowels of a creature, the same will draw forth the bowels of God; yea
much more, Luke 11.13. If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts unto your
children, how much more shall your heavenly father give the Spirit? Alas the
love of the Creature is but a drop in comparison of the love of God: and
therefore there must needs be more life and vigor in the love of God, then in
the love of all creatures. As there is more heat in the body of the Sun, then
in all its rays, were they all contracted into one ray: so it is here. And
therefore if an earthly creature be so apt to tender the good and welfare of
those that belong to it, what propensity is there in the heart of God, to
relieve his people when they are in any straights? Many an Orphan sits down,
and weeps over himself in his calamity, and thus bemoans his condition, If my
Father were alive, he would not see me want, he would pity and relieve me in my
sad condition. Why, Beloved, there is never a child of God, that needs put
finger in the eye in this respect; for your Father is alive, he lives for ever,
he is an everlasting Father; and as our Text says, A portion for ever. And as
he is a tender Father, so he is a kind Husband. So Es. 54.5. For thy maker is
thine Husband. Though he will not relieve and help men, because he is their
maker; yet he will relieve and help all those to whom he is an Husband. As long
as marriage Covenant holds, God will take the care of his Spouse, in sickness
as well as in health, in poverty as in riches, in weakness as in strength. Nay,
as a good Husband is most tender over his Wife in the time of her weakness and
sickness: even so is God to his Spouse; she shall want nothing that an Almighty
hand can provide for her.

Reas. 2. Taken from Gods design in all his peoples straights and necessities.
God lets them fall into straights, that he may have the glory of their relief.
Whatever hand brings them in, it is a divine hand that must bring them out. We
may say of all a Christians troubles and failings both of Flesh and Spirit, as
our Savior said of Lazarus his death, John 11.4. This sickness is not unto
death, but for the glory of God: that the Son of God might be glorified
thereby. Lazarus must die, yea, and be buried also, that Christ might have the
glory of his resurrection, and that after he had been dead four days. His
sickness was unto death, but not to death eternal, for he had a speedy
resurrection that made his death but a trance, or a long sleep. Happy Lazarus
(as one says) though sick and dead, to be an instrument of glory, to be given
to God. Thus it is with Saints in their spiritual sicknesses: they are not unto
death, but for the glory of God, that Christ may be glorified in their relief.
Otherwise God is able to prevent them; but might nature always have its
course, there would be no room for wonders. Nature must sometimes have a stop,
that the glory of God may appear. Saints comforts and strengths must lie a
bleeding and die, that the glory of God may appear in their resurrection. And
wherein does the glory of God appear more, then in such a work as this? This is
a glorious work, a work that outshines all common and ordinary works of God.
For God to breath upon dead and dry bones, that they shall live again; For God
to bring a Jonas out of the Whales belly, where he was buried alive three
days; For God to set Job upon his legs again, and to put him into stock, both
within doors and without, when he had stripped him of all, and to make his last
days better then his first; this was a glorious work, a work wherein God is
much glorified. As the beams of the Sun reflected and sent back, renders the
Sun very glorious: So it is here.

Reas. 3. Taken from the beautifulness of Relief in time of necessity. Every
thing is beautiful in its season, Eccl. 3.11. And relief is very beautiful in
time of necessity, because it is seasonable. True necessity puts a decorum upon
every act, that is requisite to be put forth therein. It would be very absurd
to do that at one time, which may and ought to be done at another. Should those
things, be done for a person in health, that are done in the time of his
sickness, they would be very ridiculous; but done in season, and with due
order, they are very comely. God therefore times his works well, and that puts
a beauty upon them. Man's necessity, is therefore Gods opportunity, to express
the riches of his mercy. He calls not the righteous, but sinners to repentance.
Physic is not for those that are in health, but for the sick. So Divine Relief
is for those whose flesh fails, and whose heart fails. Divine strength is for
them, that have no might. And this beautifies Divine dispensations. For as God
loves to beautify the the house of his glory: so he loves to beautify the
works of his glory.

These are the Reasons of the Doctrine.

Now before I come to the Application, I must speak something to the doubts and
scruples of weak Christians.

Case. Perhaps some will be apt to say; If it be true, that Divine Relief flows
from God to his people, according to necessity, then I am afraid that I do not
belong to God, because I have no experience hereof. My flesh has falled, and
my heart fails; I, but I do not find relief coming in.

Resolution. Now to such I have three words, by way of Answer.

1. I beseech you take heed of charging God foolishly; for, for ought thou
understandest yet, this may prove a vain and foolish denying that grace of God,
which thou have not received in vain. Thou may have received relief from God
in many of these cases, and yet be insensible thereof. It may be with thee, as
it was with Jacob: God has been with thee, supported and relieved thee, and
yet thou not know it. God conveys Divine Relief insensibly sometimes, as well
as seasonably. When a man is in a swoon, many things may be given him to fetch
him again, and to recover his Spirits, and yet the man insensible thereof: it
may be so with thee. Thou have been in a spiritual swoon, and God has
administered many heart-reviving Cordials, that has brought thee to some life
again; and yet thou may be insensible thereof. It is good therefore to take a
more strict survey of thy spiritual state; and perhaps upon examination, thou will find some prints of Divine Relief upon thy Soul. For as wicked men do not
find their state so bad as it is, because they overlook it: so sometimes good
men do not find their spiritual state so good as it is, because they overlook
it. The piece of Silver that the woman thought she had lost, was in the house,
although she knew not where it was, until she did light a candle, sweep the
house, and seek diligently for it; as you may see, Luke 15.8. God may have sent
thee a token of his love, and thou may have it in thy heart, and yet not know
it. Thou had best set up a candle, even the word of God in thine heart, and
by that light search thy heart, and that diligently, and then thou may find
it. It Is true, some particular acts of relieving grace, are so full and strong
upon the heart of a Christian, that he cannot be insensible thereof: but there
are others, that are conveyed to the Soul, in a more secret and insensible way.
God writes a Letter of consolation to the Soul, sometimes in so small a
character, that she has much ado to read it: it is hard for her to spell out
the mind of God therein. God deals with Christians, as some wise Physicians do
with some of their Patients; they give them Physic, and they never know of it;
something must be put into their Beer, or something into their broth: Even so
God gives much relief to Christians in their spiritual weakness, that the Soul
knows not of. Little did Jacobs brethren know that they had their money in
their Sacks, when they came homewards out of the land of Egypt: No, when they
came to bait, and opened their Sacks, they found it. Even thus it may be with
many a child of God; thy money, thy relief may be in thy heart, and yet thou
ignorant of it. Perhaps when thou come to refresh, and look within to see
what thou have, thou may find that which thou dreamedst not of.

There are three things that sometimes hide relief from the eye of the Soul,
and are an occasion of the Souls mistake.

1. God works gradually herein; The cure is not perfected the first day that
God takes thee in hand, and some diseases are long before they will be cured.
Now here may be a great mistake. If thou think that God has made no
application to thee, because thou art not perfectly cured of thy distemper,
thou do wrong God exceedingly. Thou may be in a tendency to a cure, God may
have done much for thee, and yet thy sore may run, and thy wound be very wide
still. Look again therefore, and see if there be never a Plaster upon the
sore: thou may be in a way of cure, though not cured. Strength may be given
in, although thou art not strengthened with all might. Here may be rather
matter of thankfulness, then of complaint, and thou should rather give God
the glory of what he has done for thee, be it never so little, then sit down
dejected, because all is not yet done, that is requisite to a perfect cure.
Bless God for a little, and that will be the way to obtain more. Thou may get
that with a thankful spirit, which thou shall never get with a froward.

2. God works variously: he relieves all his people, but not all alike: he
cures all, but not always with one and the same receipt, nor after one and the
same manner and method. He varies his dispensations much; and therefore here
may be a mistake, that because God does not make the very same applications to
thee, which he does to another, therefore thou concludest, that God has done
nothing for thy cure, and relief. It Is here, as in the case of conversion. Some
Christians are apt to think they are not savingly converted, because God did
not work upon their hearts in the same way and manner, that others are wrought
upon. They were not brought under those legal terrors, nor held under a spirit
of bondage, in that measure and degree, that others have been. But this is to
tie up God to one way of working grace, when as he varies in his working. Even
such a mistake may be in this case. Perhaps thou think that God has
afforded thee no relief, because it came not in the same way to thee, as it
has done to others. It Is good to eye and observe the experiences of other
Christians, but not to limit God by them. As the thoughts of God will be ever
above our thoughts, so the ways of his providence will be ever past finding
out. No man can trace God in some of his ways, they are so mysterious. God
does not always leave the print of his footsteps where he goes. The way of
an Eagle in the Air, the way of a Ship in the midst of the Sea, the way of a
Serpent upon a Rock, are not so untraceable, as many of the ways of God. It is
mercy that God knows our Souls in the time of our failing, though we cannot
know every way and method of his relieving us.

3. Sometimes distempers work cross, that what is appointed for the cure of
one, is the occasion of another. It Is sometimes so in the body natural, and it
may prove so in the body spiritual. When God is curing the weakness and failing
of grace, and that begins to recover its wonted strength, then spiritual pride
breaks forth, some self-admiration begins to bud out, and that puts God upon a
new work. It is very rare for a Christian to be strong in some of his graces,
and not to be too much exalted in his Spirit: or for God to lift the heart up
in the sense of his love, and not grow wanton and secure. It Is pity that fair
weather should do any hurt: But it is thus with some souls, that the Sunshine
of Divine Favor and the light of Gods countenance is so ill emproved, that the
heart grows worse with it, and like bodies that have long fasted, or are newly
brought out of a languishing fit of sickness, take a surfeit of their diet, and
fall again, it may be, into some worse disease. Now here may be a great mistake
in this, if thou think, that because new failings and new distempers break
forth, God has done nothing toward thy cure. Had not thy distempers wrought
so cross, thou might have been upon thy feet again long before.

This is the first particular by way of answer to this case; Thou may have
received great relief from God and not know of it. And I have shown you
wherein the mistake may lie; in the gradation or variety of Gods working, or in
the cross working of soul distempers.

2. Thou say that thou can not set thy seal to the truth of the Doctrine,
because thou have had no experience hereof. Consider therefore in the next
place, that it may be, Gods time of relieving thee, is not yet come. God will
come in a time, that is most seasonable, though not always when we expect it.
Thy time may be come, but Gods time is not yet come. Gods hand is not
shortened, nor his arm weakened, nor his heart shut up; I but his time is
lengthened out beyond thy expectation. Some are fain to wait a long time for
relief, before it comes; their eyes fail, while they wait for God. So did
David, Psalm. 69.3. Mine eyes fail while I wait for my God. It may be thou have
thought the time very long. I, but if God sees it good thou must wait still;
We read in the Gospel, of a man that had an infirmity thirty eight years; a
long time, Job. 5.5. And what if God will try thee with thine infirmity as
long, yet when his time is come, relief shall be given in; thou shall be made
whole. It may be thy case is not bad enough yet: God will take thee a pin lower
yet; he will draw a little more blood from thee; and when there is scarce an
hairs breadth between thee and death or ruin, then relief shall come. And
therefore do not conclude, that because thou have no experience yet of the
truth of the Doctrine, that either it is not true, or thou have no saving
interest in God; for though thou have no experience hereof yet, thou may
have great and wonderful experience hereafter.

3. Consider that a Saints interest in God depends not upon his sense of Divine
Relief, but upon the All Sufficiency of Free Grace. Thy interest will hold when
thy sense thereof is lost. Though thou may think, that thou have lost thy
hold on God, and can not act faith on him, yet, if once thou have had an
interest in God, God will not loose his hold on thee. What though thou failest;
thy flesh and heart fails thee? yet Divine Strength cannot fail. In the Lord
Jehovah is everlasting strength, Esaias 26.4. And as long as God has an arm to
hold thee, thou shall not be lost. Remember I pray thee (says Eliphaz to Job)
Who ever perished, being innocent? or where were the righteous out off? Job
4.7. The ruin and perishing of souls is when they are totally and finally
forsaken of God, that God will not own them, nor be a God unto them; when they
are utterly and eternally driven from the gracious presence of God, never to
see the well-pleased face of God: I, but who ever see the innocent thus to
perish, or the righteous thus cut off? Joh. 10.28. I do give unto them eternal
life, and they shall never perish. What though thou can not see that hand
that holds thy soul in life; yet it will so hold thee, that thy spiritual life
shall not be taken from thee. If those afflictions and distempers which make
thy heart to fail, could cause the strength of Gods free grace to fail, then
thou would be in danger of an eternal ruin; they might prejudice thy
interest in God: but though these have some influence upon thee, they have no
such influence upon God. Now as long as they can have no influence upon the
grace of God to weaken that, they can have no influence upon thy interest in
God. And therefore do not conclude against thy self; for though thy hand of
faith be grown so weak that it cannot take fast hold on God, yet Gods hand is
strong and that will hold thee fast. So says the Prophet, nevertheless I am
continually with thee, thou have holden me by my right hand, verse. 23. God held
him fast, when he was ready to drop from God. He had lost the sense of his
interest in God: I, but his interest in God was not lost. God was his God,
though he did not know it. And so God may be thine, thou may have a sure
interest in him, although thou can not find the prints of Gods feet in thy
soul, nor trace him in his ways of goodness toward thee. And know this, that
it is better for thee to have an interest in God, although thou know it not,
then to have strong presumptions and be deceived. The want of sense and feeling
of our interest in God is no sin, though it be a great affliction. Christ
himself was without sense; I, he was so deep in it, that when he was upon the
cross, he cried out, Why have thou forsaken me? I, but a groundless presumption
is a sin, and leads to eternal ruin. None ever perished for want of faith of
evidence; but hundreds perish for want of faith of adherence. Oh, blessed is
the man who believes, and sees not; that can say with Job, Though he slay me,
yet will I trust in him. Though my flesh fails, and my heart fails, yet I will
believe that he is my strength and portion for ever.

Thus I have answered this case, and so made way to application.

Use 1. Hence we may infer the sad and woeful condition of those who have no
interest in God: for they that have no interest in God, can expect no relief
from God in a time of necessity. Wicked men have their failings, their flesh
fails them sometimes and their hearts fail them; but no relief comes from God
at those times. Of all men they are most to be pityed: for there is no help, no
relief for them. If I be wicked (says Job) woe unto me, Job 10.15. i. e. If I
be wicked, I can expect no mercy; no comfort from God. Nay, hear what God says
himself to such, Esaias 65.13. Therefore thus says the Lord, behold my servants
shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: behold my servants shall drink but ye shall
be thirsty: behold my servants shall rejoice but ye shall be ashamed: behold my
servants shall sing for joy of heart, but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and
shall bowl for vexation of spirit. The meaning is, God will not afford them any
comfort or relief in times of distress. When God invites his own servants to
feast with him, they must be shut out. And if God helps not, who can? No,
without me ye shall bow down, says God, Esaias 10.3. The wounds of the wicked
are desperate wounds: there is no cure for them. Mark that of Job, for what
portion is there from above? and what inheritance of the Almighty from on high?
is not destruction to the wicked? and a strange punishment to the workers of
iniquity? The latter verse is an answer to the former, and the sense is this,
all the portion and inheritance that the wicked can have from God above, is
destruction and a strange punishment, Job 20.2, 3. God is the strength and
portion of a godly man, when his flesh and heart fails him; but the wicked have
no other portion from God, then utter destruction and a strange punishment. So
Job 20.27, 28, 29. The heavens shall reveal his iniquity and the earth shall
rise up against him; the increase of his house shall depart, and his goods
shall flow away in the day of his wrath: This is the portion of a wicked man
from God, and the heritage appointed to him by God; Here is heaven and earth
set against him, the heavens shall reveal his sin, and the earth shall punish
him for his sin. But is there no relief for him in God? No, This is the portion
of a wicked man from God. The case of such a man must needs be very black and
dismal, when heaven and earth, and all the creatures therein are armed against
him and mustred up by a Divine Hand: Where can he have any relief then? If God
were for thee, it is no matter what sets it self against thee? But if God be
against thee, it is no matter what is for thee, it will not help thee. If misery
and destruction be all the portion that God will allow thee, there is nothing
then can save thee. If this be all thou have to live upon to eternity, thou will have a miserable living of it.

Use 2. Hence all those that have interest in God, may fetch comfort: here is a
well, out of which all good men may draw the water of consolation with joy. And
what can afford greater comfort to you, then this Doctrine does: that divine
relief shall be administered unto you, in time of your necessity; when your
flesh fails, and your heart fails, God will be the strength of your heart? It
is a great comfort to a Merchant-adventurer, to have an assurance from the
Ensuring Office, that his Adventure at Sea, shall be made good to him in case
the Ship miscarries. Even so it may be to a child of God, to have an assurance
given him, that if all fails him without, and within, he shall have relief from
God. Why, this Text and Doctrine gives thee an assurance hereof; and therefore,
as Job said, hear it diligently, and let it be your consolation. You may take
comfort in your greatest discomforts, that you shall have comfort. If there be
enough in God to relieve and help you, you shall not want relief.

Obj. But the doubting Christian may say; I could take comfort in this truth,
had I not walked so unworthy of that former relief, I have received from God. I
can truly say, the Lord has magnified the riches of his grace upon me; but I
have abused it, and it may be just with him to cast me off for ever. He has
helped me when I was in a low condition, he has strengthened me when I was in
a weak state: but I have not made suitable returns thereunto, and therefore how
can I expect relief?

Ans. Now to such I have five things to say.

1. The unsuitableness of a believer to, and his unworthiness of relief cannot
stop the current thereof. As divine relief is not administered to us upon the
account of our worthiness, as if we did merit it: so our unworthiness of it,
nor unsuitableness to it, shall not prevent it. Thy miscarriages may cause God
to correct thee with failing of thy flesh and of thy heart, but cannot cause
God to cast thee off, if thou have an interest in him. No, that love, that
moves him to correct thee for thy good, will also move him to relieve thee,
when thou art under the rod of correction. A most full place for proof of this
you have, Psalm. 106.43, 44, 45. Many times did he deliver them: but they
provoked him with their counsels; and were brought low for their iniquity.
Nevertheless he regarded their affliction, when he heard their cry. And he
remembered for them his covenant, and repented according to the multitude of his
mercies. Here is the case; First, God afforded them relief, He had many times
delivered them. Secondly, Here is their unanswerableness to that mercy. They
provoked him with their counsels. Thirdly, Although they did deserve to be cast
off, yet God did not cast them off; but as a father corrects his child, whom he
loves, so did the Lord correct them. He brought them low for their iniquity.
Fourthly, Did he leave them then? No. He regarded their affliction, when he
heard their cry. And why was all this? He remembered for them his covenant. God
did not eye their tempers so much as their interest, nor the frame of their
Spirits, or carriage toward him, as his Covenant made to them. The
unworthiness of a Christian comes, and pleads against the Souls relief in time
of necessity, yet Gods Covenant will carry the day for it. And though a
Christian may have too much forgotten God, yet God cannot forget his Covenant.

2. There is nothing more unbecoming a Christian, then to doubt of divine
relief after experience had thereof. Thy other miscarriages and failings may
seem worse in the eye of men; but nothing seems worse in the eye of God, then
unbelief. There is no sin (as one observes) so often and so properly called a
provocation, as unbelief is. It may be thou think it but thy modesty and
humility to make question, or to doubt of thy relief from God; and thou art
afraid to rest upon God for it in a time of need: I, but thou little imaginest
what thou do herein: Why, hereby thou provokest God. So you may see, Deuteronomy.
9.7, 8. Remember and forget not, how thou provrkedst the Lord thy God. Also in
Hereb ye provoked the Lord. Now how was that? You may see, Exodus 17.6, 7.
Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock in Horeb, etc. And thou
shall smite the rock, etc. And he called the place Massah and Meribah,
temptation and strife, because of the chiding of the children of Israel, and
because they tempted the Lord, saying, Is the Lord among us or not? They
doubted of relief from God in the want of water, and hereby they tempted and
provoked him.

Obj. But it may be thou will say. Isreal's sin lay chiefly in doubting of Gods
power: I, but I do not doubt of the power of God; I know God can do all things,
and nothing is impossible to him: All my doubt is about the will of God, for
though he can do all he will do, yet God will not do all he can.

Ans. Now to this I answer. To doubt of Gods will in reference to those things,
which he has promised to do, is as great a sin, as to doubt of Gods power; for
herein thou call the faithfulness of God into question, and make him that
is truth it self a liar; and therefore this must needs be a provoking sin. Nay
further, the attributes of God are so linked together, as that no man sins
against one through unbelief, but he sins against all. As he that breaks one
command of God, breaks all: So he that tempts God in one, tempts God in all. He
that doubts of the will of God revealed in a promise, does implicitly doubt of
the power of God, which is engaged for the performance of it.

3. Confidence in God for relief before thou stand in need thereof, is a
notable help to the exercise of faith in a time of need. He that distrusteth
God when he is full, will hardly trust in God when he is in want. I know that
many will say, they believe in God, when all things go well with them; and yet
when faith is put to a trial indeed, they discover that they have little or no
faith in them: but he that shrinks before the trial comes, will hardly hold out
in the trial. It is not an easy matter to raise thy Soul unto a believing
frame; it is not done in an instant; there must be a daily exercise thereof. It
is good for us to put faith to its trial, before God puts us upon trial, that
we may have some guess at the strength of our faith. When a Christian by daily
exercise has enured himself to live the life of faith, and to cast doubts out
of his spirit, he can with greater ease live by faith, when he has nothing
else to live upon. When a Christian can truly say, I have trusted God many
years, and he has not forsaken me, he will be apt to say, Shall I distrust him
now, when my condition calls more for his help, then hitherto it has done? I
know whom I have believed (says S. Paul) and I am persuaded, that he is able
to keep that which I have committed to him, 2 Timothy 1.12. Paul does not say, I
know whom I do believe, but whom I have believed: he had maintained the life of
faith, by a continued exercise thereof, and therefore was the more confident of
relief from God in a time of need.

4. Though, through thy miscarriages, thou have rendered thy self unworthy of
relief in time of need: yet God is most worthy to be trusted for relief. Though
thou do not deserve relief at his hands, yet he deserves thy trusting in him.
To trust in God, is a duty that all men owe to God. As all men are bound to
love God, and to fear him: so they are bound to trust in him. And God deserves
this trust. He and he alone ought to be the sole foundation of every man's
confidence: but especially of those, who have had experience of him. It is
common for one man to say of another, that is tried and found faithful, he is
worthy to be trusted; much more is God. He has bought thy confidence with the
price of many mercies; and shall God lose his purchase? this would be an act of
injustice to him. And therefore say within thy heart, though I am not worthy of
relief from God, yet because he is most worthy to be trusted in, I will trust
in him for ever.

5. Though thou have abused relieving mercy, yet thou have not sinned it out.
Relieving mercy is a fountain that can never be drawn dry. And as thou may
fetch new supplies of strength to help thee against miscarriages; so thou
may fetch new pardons of thy miscarriages. And the speediest way to obtain a
pardon, is to exercise faith on God in Christ, for a pardon. So Acts 13.38, 39.
Be it known unto you therefore, men and brethren that through this man is
preached unto you the forgiveness of sins, and by him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which ye could not be justified by the law of
Moses. Observe this; by Christ all that believe are justified. Now if God
justifies, who can condemn? Romans 8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the
charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies Who is he that condemns? It
is Christ that died yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of the father, who also makes intercession for us. Now if thy sin be
pardoned, then there is nothing, which thou can possibly fear will prevent
thy relief; and therefore be persuaded to set faith on work in Jesus Christ. Go
out of thy self to him for righteousness, that thou may be found in him; and
believe that with God there is still mercy for thee, and plenteous redemption.
Thus did David fetch in comfort against a time of need, Psalm. 130.3, 4. If thou
Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? but there is forgiveness
with thee, that thou may be feared. I wait for the Lord, my soul does wait,
and in his word do I hope. i. e. If Gods eye should be wholly fixed upon our
sins, and not upon Christ's righteousness, we could not be justified; we should
never be able to stand in his sight. And if our eye be only fixed upon our sins,
and not upon Gods mercy in Christ; we should never attain to any confidence in
God for relief in time of need. I but now, says David upon this ground: I can
wait for the Lord, and hope in his word. Yea, upon this very ground he exhorts
others to hope, v. 7. Let Israel hope in the Lord, for with the Lord there is
mercy. Still there is mercy; though we have lived upon this stock of mercy all
our days, yet there is enough still; nay, there is nothing spent of it. And
therefore take home the comfort hereof with you, that divine relief shall be
administered unto you in the time of your greatest need. When your flesh fails,
and your heart fails, God will be the strength of your heart, and portion for
ever.

FINIS.
THE PROPHET'S Amazing Vision, Of a Wheel, in the middle of a Wheel.

OR, The admirableness of DIVINE PROVIDENCE, Opened, proved and improved; In a
Sermon, preached at the Cathedral in Norwich, July 30. 1673. With some
additional Application.

By Samuel Blackerby Minister of the Gospel at Stow Market.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simons, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Church
Yard. 1674.

SERMON III.
Ezekiel. 1.16. And their work, and their appearance, was as it were, a wheel in
the middle of a wheel.


THese words have both their height of glory, and also their depth of
difficulty: much excellency wrapped up in them, but hard to be understood. As the
richest Pearls, and purest Mines lie lowest in the earth; and the sweetest
Kernel has the hardest shell: so the richest and most precious Truths are
wrapped up in a mystery, not obvious to every man's understanding, but must be
sought as Silver, and searched for, as for hid Treasure. As you have it, Prove.
2.4. Much pains must be taken, proper and suitable means used, and yet, when
all is done, we must pray with David. Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold
wondrous things out of thy law. And is not here a wonder? for here is an
invisible glory, represented to us by a visible thing; divine counsel set forth
in an Hieroglyphick: For in the foregoing verse, we have a wheel upon the earth
by the living creatures, with his four faces, and here we have a wheel in the
middle of a wheel. This, this is the amazing glory.

By the one wheel upon the earth, with its four faces, some do understand the
Universe, or visible World; which is as a wheel, round, and subject to
wheelings and turnings, mutations and changes, and that in all the four
quarters thereof; and much may be said for this interpretation. I shall only
take leave to add this; that this visible World is to be considered, as
consisting of, and containing in it, those second causes, instruments and
means, whereby God wheels about his own designs and plots, together with their
several appearances and faces, and yet with one likeness in conspectu Dei.

This is one part of the Vision, the wheel with its four faces.

The other is the wheel in the middle of a wheel. This may be taken two ways.

1. Transversly. 2. Comprehensively.
First transversly; and so two things are observable in it.

1. That the wheels seemed cross to one another, and entangled one in another,
as the lines and circles in a Globe, cut and cross one another; so say some.
And if so? they do most lively represent the crossness, intricacy, and
entangledness that is in all second causes each to other, both in their natures
and their motions. The whole world is but entangled and cross wheels; but I
shall not detain you herein. And therefore,

2. There are others that say, that all the wheels made up one spherical
figure, touching themselves at right angles, that without turning or delay,
they might run and roll any way, on any side. And if so? then they are a most
lively emblem of that harmony that is in all things; for though cross in
themselves, yet they serve to make one globe, and do carry on one ultimate
design. According to that of the Apostle, Romans 8.28. All things work together
for good.

This is the import of the wheels, if taken transversly. But

Secondly, They may be considered comprehensively; one wheel within another. As
in some Watches, there are wheels one in another, and one that moves the rest.

And if so? then here we have a Divine Mystery that outshines the former, viz.
That amazing glory of Divine Providence, which works in all created beings,
moves them, and sets them to work, as the great and sprincipal wheel moves the
lesser and inferior. And this, this is the true form and work of the wheels.
The wheel of divine providence is set up in all wheels, as the prime and
principal wheel.

Obser. From hence we shall observe, That divine providence is admirable, and
Soul-amazing. And this will appear, if we take into consideration, these three
particulars.

1. The esse, The being and constitution of this divine wheel. 2. The motus,
The motion thereof. 3. The mysterium, The mystery thereof.
And, Oh that my discourse upon these might be verbum in Rota.

First, The being of this divine wheel is very admirable: for it is made up of
infinite and transcendent glory.

1. Of the light and counsel of Divine Wisdom. 2. Of the sovereignty of Divine
will.
Both these beams of glory are infinite and transcendent, and do make up one
most glorious and incomprehensible wheel in the divine being. It Is true, they
are distinguished as to us, yet they are but one in God. And so says the
School-man. Cum esse and intelligere in Deo indistincta sunt, ipsum per suam
scientiam causare res oportet, adjuncta tamen voluntate. Or rather take it in
the words of the holy Apostle, Ephesians. 1.11. He works all things after the
counsel of his own will. For as the will of God, is the practick principle in
the Godhead: so it is a will full of Divine light, wisdom, and counsel,
directing it in all its determinations and resolutions. Hence it is, that as
there is not the least spot of error herein; so there is not post-repentance
thereof, Psalm. 33.11. The counsel of the Lord stands for ever, the thoughts
of his heart from generation to generation: for it is the counsel of his will;
or divine will joined with the highest light, wisdom, and reason. An infinite
will sparkling and shining with infinite counsel and reason; and indeed, the
Godhead it self must be divided, or else a separation cannot be made between
the will of God and the wisdom of God; no! (but as I hinted before) they make
up one wheel in the divine being, and this is that which Divines call eternal
providence. It is nothing else (as I humbly conceive) but one eternal and
undivided act of Divine Will, most wisely determining and appointing all things
with the most apposite means and highest end, and that after a most exact order
and method. Ipsa ratio ordinis rerum in finem providentia in Deo nominatur.
It Is true, as the pre-ordained means, so the pre-ordained ends are various; I,
but the highest and ultimate end of all his plots and contrivances, workings,
and administrations, is the glorifying and exalting the riches of his Essential
Glory. This I say, is the supreme end, the end of ends, the Corner Stone,
whereon all the designs and purposes of God do lean, and the mark at which they
are levelled; All other ends, though co-ordained with this, do strike sail to
this, and in this respect are but as means appointed to effect it; For God
being the first and the last, the highest being and the best good, must needs
be the highest and the ultimate end of all his own counsels.

And that in two respects.

1. In respect of his Philantie or self-love, which is above all that love,
that he bears to any other being; Great is his love to the man Christ Jesus, So
John 5.20. The Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that himself
does, and he will show him greater works, that ye may marvel. I but though his
love to Christ be thus great, yet not so great as that which he bears to
himself: nay take all that Love which he expresses to all beings below
himself, and you will find it to fall abundantly short of that love, which is
in God to himself; For all Divine Acts are proportioned to their objects, and
diversified by them, that love which God bears to a created being is
proportioned to such a being; and that love that God bears to himself, is
proportioned to himself, as he is an uncreated and an infinite being. Now as
there is a vast disproportion between a created and an uncreated, a finite and
an infinite being; so there is a vast disproportion between the love that God
has for the one, and that which he has for the other; he being the highest
being, must needs love himself with the highest love, and therefore cannot but
propose himself, and his own glory as his highest end; For else he should
express greater love to a creature, then to himself, to a less good, then to
the best good. But again,

2. It must needs be so, in respect of the nature of an end, especially of the
highest end. For this lies in two things, 1. In terminating the act. 2. In so
doing to give rest to the agent.


For as the end gives a beginning to the act, by drawing forth the agent: So
the agent is carried on to the attaining of that end, and cannot rest until
that be accomplished; the truth is, the work is never perfect but in that, and
there is no rest but in that.

Now I beseech you tell me, what is there in any being below the supreme, that
may be the highest end in these two respects; For can it be imagined that a
less good can draw forth God to act, when as there is a greater? Surely, no;
and therefore he being the highest and the best good, must needs be the highest
and ultimate end of all his counsels, determinations and workings; for in
himself, and his own glory.

1. His work is perfected. And

2. He himself has content, rest and satisfaction. Will I eat the flesh of
bulls, or drink the blood of goats (says God, Psalm. 50.13)? No! but offer unto
God thanksgiving; This, this is the joy and delight of his heart.

Thus we have given a dispatch to the first consideration of this Divine wheel.

Secondly, Consider the motion thereof, and you will find, that an admirable
being has an admirable motion; And therefore it is represented to us by a
Wheel in the middle of a Wheel, noting out the intensness of its motion; As
it is said of Elias, that he prayed in prayer, i. e. he was intense in prayer.
So a Wheel in the middle of a Wheel, notes the intensness of its motion; it
has heat and fervor in it, which makes its motion quick and powerful, and is
an argument of its supereminent excellency, and incomparable use; it is true,
creature motions are sometimes too intense, and therefore do miscarry, and are
of dreadful consequence. I, but that proceeds from their irregularity and
disorder. Zeal is good in a good act; I, but if it be not regulated and ordered
by a Divine Light, and an Holy prudence, it puts the agent upon a great hazard
of miscarrying therein. As a ship is never in greater danger, then when her
sails are spread, filled with a strong gust of wind, and her self upon the
greatest speed, in case that she be not well ballast, or wants a skilful Pilot.
I, but though it be thus oft-times in creature motions, yet it is not so in the
Divine; For in these there are not only heat, but light; And therefore in
Sacred Writ, there is frequent mention made of the eyes of the Lord. So 2 Chronicles. 16.9. and Zech. 4.10. The eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the
whole earth. Noting out, that all the motions of this internal and Divine Wheel
are luminous motions, full of light; as it is always in motion, full of
activity, vigor and life, so it is admirably regular in its motions; it turns
and rolls in a straight line. When the eyes of this wheel look various ways,
yet the wheel carries on one design. I say, this one wheel in the middle of a
wheel is all light, all eye. And therefore there can be no miscarriage in its
motion; No! as its determinations, so all its motions are regular and and
orderly.

This is that which Divines call actual providence; which differs from eternal
no otherwise then execution from determination.

Eternal providence is as the head, and actual providence is as the hand;
Actual providence is the evidence of eternal, it is the breaking up of Divine
Counsel. But you must note this, that eternal providence did not cease to be,
when actual providence first took place, but actual providence waits on
eternal, that Divine Counsel may be put in execution, and all things acted
according to the heavenly pattern; For so it is said in the forementioned
place, Ephesians. 1.11. That God works all things after the counsel of his own
will.

Eternal providence is as the womb, wherein all things are conceived, and
actual providence is as the midwise, whereby they are brought forth, as the
nurse whereby they are preserved and brought up, and as the governess whereby
they are ruled and ordered in their station and motion.

And so there is a threefold motion in the Divine Wheel.

1. Production. 2. Conservation. 3. Gubernation.
First, Production, for actual providence is constantly exercised in delivering
Divine Counsel of its offspring; and nothing but the Active Providence of God
can bring to pass the Counsels of God; Eternal Providence is Gods thinking of
things, and actual providence is Gods speaking of things, that the thoughts of
God may become a work of God. Yea, let him but speak the word and the thing is
done, as you have it, Psalm. 33.9. He spoke the word and it was done. Let there
be light, and there was light. Thus, thus (I say) this one Wheel in the middle
of a Wheel, Wheels about all Gods Divine Counsels and predeterminations into
actual being; let things be never so great, glorious, and unexpected, yet they
are wheeled about into actual being by a word of his mouth: Divine Plots and
contrivances do not, shall not prove abortive; but are and shall be brought to
light in their due time. So Genesis 41.32. The thing is established, and God will
bring it to pass; it is first established in the Divine Mind, and then brought
to pass by a Divine Hand; And therefore says the Prophet, Zeph. 2. The
beginning. Gather together, yea, gather together, Oh nation not desired, before
the decree bring forth. The Divine Mind had conceived, and time was now at
hand, when it should be delivered of its offspring. And indeed, Divine
Providence is never idle, but always at work, in bringing forth that which is
conceived in the Divine Mind, and nothing shall hinder. I will work (says God
Esaias 43.13.) and who shall let? The question implies a negation, q. d. None
shall let. No it is not in the power of earth or hell, to scotch this Divine
Wheel in its motion; As God wants no wisdom to contrive; so he wants no power
to execute; and therefore may well be resolute herein, and say as you have it,
Esaias 46.10. I will do all my pleasure. But

Secondly, Shall a Divine Offspring be left to the wide world for maintenance
and preservation? No! Divine providence is as well exercised in the one as in
the other. What she brings forth, she will bring up, to that which she gives a
being, to that she will afford Divine Influence for her sustentation and
support in being. And

This is called by Divines, the manutenency of God, because God does uphold
things by a Divine Hand. Thou have made (says Nehemiah, Chap. 9.6.) and thou
preservest all things; and the Apostle asserts the same, Heb. 1.3. He upholdeth
all things by the word of his power, or by his powerful word. For as the word
of God gives a being; so it upholds in being; thou hold our soul in life,
faith David, Psalm. 66.9. The four wheels are upheld by this one wheel, or else
they would soon turn into their first nothing, annihilatio est substructio
influxus divini, Let God hide his face, and then the wheels are scotched, but
let him withdraw his supporting influence, and then wheels are no wheels. I,
but though we read of destruction and dissolution in Scripture, yet we no where
read of annihilation. It Is true, sometimes God is pleased to make use of a
wheel for a time, and all that time has his work upon it, and then of a sudden
lays it aside; I, but he never lays any wheel aside, until he has wrought and
effected as much by it, as he intended; and indeed, as he has various works,
and various wheels to carry on his work by; so sometimes he moves and works by
one, and sometimes by another. I, but as long as he has any work to do by any
one, so long he maintains and upholds it in motion, as well as in being; Hence
is that of David, ( Psalm. 31.15.) My times are in thy hand. My time of being,
and my time of motion, q. d. I am one of thy wheels; I, but thou art in this
wheel for sustentation and support. I cannot be, I cannot act, unless thou
be as a Wheel in the middle of a Wheel.

Thirdly, As actual providence brings forth and brings up, so it governs: This
sits at the Stern, and Steers the course of all instruments and secondary
causes, and directs them in all their motions unto the designed end. Hence it
is, that God is called King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, because the government
of all things lies upon him; He is not only omnipotent but omniregent; So Psalm.
103.19. His Kingdom rules over all. And therefore we have it in the vision of
the wheels, verse. 18. That their rings were full of eyes round about. They were
(as one says) stellatae oculis, bedeckt with eyes, as the heavens with stars;
and therefore no wonder if they are regular in their motion, in reference to
their designed end. Nay give me leave to add this, as a thing most remarkable;
that Divine Providence does so rule in all, and overruled all motions and
actings, as that the greatest irregularities are made subservient to the
highest and most glorious ends; it is true irregular motions cannot be called
regular; I, but it is as true, that they are improved by the wheel within the
wheel for great advantage. Insomuch that light oft-times springs out of
darkness, and good out of evil. It Is true none ought to take encouragement from
hence to act irregularly, and to cross Divine Rule revealed and laid down in
the Word; No! at his peril be it, that does so. I but it is as true, that as all
things work together, so they work for good, yea, they terminate at the last in
the glory of God. God serves himself by the disservices of the creature; yea,
experience tells us, that Divine Providence sometimes takes occasion from the
very sins and corruption of man's nature to turn men from sin unto God. That
which (in it self is a means of alienation of the heart, is made use of as an
instrument to work it up into communion with God. As good example draws, so
sometimes bad example (when out of measure bad) serves to set out the
wickedness of man's heart (when lest to it self) and to drive men out of
themselves, and out of a state in nature, yea to bring them into a state of
grace. In a word, some had never been so good, if others had not been extremely
bad. However this I hope none will deny, that Divine providence moves in the
turnings and motions of created beings, and makes them instrumental to carry on
a most glorious design. How often does God convince and affect the hearts of
sinners by those Lectures which he reads to them out of the book of the
creature? Yea, sometimes the wheelings and turnings about of States and Nations
in the world; sometimes the changes that come upon men's persons or estates are
strangely improved for the change of their hearts. Sometimes an evil feared or
felt, a good hoped for or enjoyed; expectation frustrated, or hope deferred;
comforts multiplied, or turned into crosses; prayers heard or denied, are
sanctified and blessed for spiritual and soul-advantage; yea, there are many
men had not been happy, if others had not been miserable: the fall and ruin of
some, has proved the rise of others. Oh, the wheel in the middle of a wheel.

Thus you have heard something of the motion of this divine wheel, I but you do
not see it. For,

Thirdly, This is a mystery, a very great mystery: for it is a wheel in the
middle of a wheel; a wheel that no mortal eye ever saw, a wheel that the most
sublime understanding cannot reach, and as the wheel it self is a divine
secret, hid in the brightness of its own glory, so is its motion. And therefore
says the Psalmist, Psalm. 77.19. Thy way, O God is in the sea, thy paths in the
great waters, and thy footsteps are not known. And again, Psalm. Thy way is in
the Sanctuary. I, in that Sanctuary into which none can enter, but the high
Priest, unless the Veil be rent. Hence comes the prophetic Spirit to be of use
in its time; for had men been able to foresee the plotting and contrivances of
divine providence, or to trace it in its workings, the Spirit of Prophecy had
not been so necessary as it was. And therefore God raises up an Ezekiel, and
by an immediate vision instructs him, that he might let the people understand
their future state and condition; and indeed, it is in Gods light that we see
light. It Is true, external wheels are visible, instruments and agents may be
seen; I, but as the wheel within the wheel is invisible, so are all its
workings upon the wheels, until they are brought off. And therefore is that
counsel given, Prove. 27.1. Beast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know
not what a day may bring forth. Time travelleth with divine counsels; and in
its season brings them forth; I, but little do men know what is in the womb
thereof, until she be delivered. And therefore says the Lord, Es. 55.9. As
the heavens are above the earth, so are my ways above your ways, and my
thoughts above your thoughts. And indeed, an infinite mind must needs have
transcendent conceptions and thoughts, such as are above the reach of a finite
mind. Now the ways of God being correspondent to the thoughts of God, they
must needs be very dark and mysterious unto us. And hence it is, that men talk
so much of dark, and complexed providence. Not that there is any daskness in
them. Non caeco imp^tu volvuntur rotae; the wheels are not carried on blindly.
No! but because their motion is above our apprehension. And therefore it is
said, ver. 18. As for their Rings, they were so light that they were dreadful.
Things that are above our reach, are not only Soul-amazing, but sometimes
Soul-terrifying, and do put us in a posture of fear and trembling. When we know
not what to think of things, we are apt to dread them; that which is an object
of admiration, is sometimes a cause of fear and dread. Hence it is, that
sometimes, those providential administrations, that are big with Soul-mer^i^s
and refreshing comforts, are by our dark understandings misrepresented, and
rendered as dreadful to us, as if they were nothing else but signs of divine
wrath and vengeance. Even as Christ's walking upon the Sea toward his Disciples
for their relief and comfort, put them into a pannick fear, because they
thought that they had seen a Spirit. However, whether this be always the
effect or not, yet this is certain, that providential plots and works are very
high, very mysterious. We may say more truly of God, then we can of any man,
that he walks in the clouds; that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 18.9. if, full for the
purpose. He bowed the heavens and came down, and darkness was under his feet.
And again: He made darkness his secret place. For the truth is, nothing of God,
or the counsels of God is further known, then he is pleased to reveal. And so
the Apostle argues, 1 Cor. 2.11. For what man knows the things of a man, save
the spirit of a man which is in him, even so, no man knows the things of God,
but the spirit of God.

Hence it is that four things fall out frequently.

1. Carnal reason confuted. 2. Carnal confidence and hope disappointed. 3.
Unbelief reproved. 4. A well grounded faith honored and confirmed.
First, Carnal reason is often confuted by the mysteriousness of providential
administration: for they often tell the rational and wise men of the world,
that their apprehensions and assertions are a mere non sequitur. And therefore
Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 1.20. Triumphs over them with four sarcasmal questions.
Where is the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world?
Has not God made foolish the wisdom of this-world? Where are they? alas, they
are forced to get into an hole, and to hide their heads, as men confounded and
amazed; one act of providence scatters them, and makes them fly, at least
strikes them dead and dumb. They that were continually scribbling, cannot now
write. And they that thought themselves the only wise and knowing men, now see
that they know nothing. And they that would never be quiet, but would be ready
to quarrel with every one they met with, that were of a contrary opinion, and
spoke wisdom among them that are perfect, are now silent, for that which they
accounted reason and wisdom, appears to be folly; and that which they accounted
folly, appears to be reason and wisdom. Oh, what a change does a divine
providence work in some men's heads, at least, what a check does it give to some
men's apprehensions. And hence is that counsel given by the Lord himself to all
such men, Zech. 2. ult. Be silent, O all flesh, before the Lord, for he is
raised out of his holy habitation. And oh, that men were so wise as to take
this counsel in due time.

Secondly, Hence it is, that carnal confidence and hope, is often disappointed.
Men sow the wind, and reap the whirlwind; expect good, and meet with evil;
look for light, and behold darkness. So Mich. 1.12. The inhabitants of Maroth
waited carefully for good, but evil came down from the Lord.

Thirdly, Hence also it is, that unbelief is often really reproved. O fools,
and slow of heart to believe, is a frequent message that an unbeliever meets
with in the very acts of divine providence. Men will not believe that such and
such things (though promised in the word) can be effected, because they are not
able to conceive of the way, nor know the means whereby they shall be effected.
Turn to 2 Kings, 7.1, 2. and there you shall find this fully exemplified. For
there it is said, that when Elisha told the people of Samaria, that the famine
should be turned into plenty: An atheistical Lord answered, That if God should
make windows in Heaven might this thing be? I, but see how his Atheism and
unbelief was reproved. Behold, thou shall see it with thine eyes, but shall not
taste thereof. And most full is that of the Prophet, Es. 26.11. Lord, when thy
hand is lifted up, they will not see. But they shall see, and be ashamed. And
indeed, often times it falls out thus, that those providence, that do not work
to men's conviction and conversion, do work to men's confusion at the last.

Fourthly and lastly, Hence it is, that the faith of believers (bottomed upon a
divine word) is honored, and confirmed.

1. It Is honored, for hereby faith is tried, and holding out is commended.
That faith that can trust God upon a bare word of promise, and rely upon unseen
providence, is an honorable faith. And therefore is Abraham so much commended
for his faith, because he followed God in the dark, at a word of command, And
against hope believed in hope, that he might become the Father of many Nations,
according to that which was spoken; so shall thy seed be, Romans 4.18. And
indeed, as true faith gives glory to God (as you have it ver. 20.) so God gives
glory unto faith. So you may see, 1 Pet. 1.7. That the trial of your faith
(which is more precious then Gold tried in the fire) may be found unto praise,
honor and glory, at the appearance of Christ.

2. As it is honored, so it is confirmed. Divine promises: give faith its esse,
its being through divine influence, and providential administrations, gives its
porro esse, a further being. He that believes in God unseen, will trust him
more upon experience of his fidelity in performing his word. So Psalm. 9.10.
They that know thy name, will trust in thee. A literal knowledge of God a
knowledge by report and hearsay, may cause faith to flutter. I, but a
knowledge of God by experience will cause it to fly, yea, to tower aloft with
strength. Now that I may wind up the Doctrinal part of this divine proposition.
Give me leave to say, that, that which does confute carnal reason, disappoint
carnal confidence, reprove unbelief, honor and confirm the faith of Gods
elect, must needs be a Soul-amazing glory.

Applicat. 1. Infer. Is it so, that the providence of God is like a wheel
within a wheel; then this speaks dread and terror to the wicked: for this one
wheel within the wheel, counterworks them in all their ways and workings; the
wheel within the wheel, is above all wheels. Take it in Scripture language, in
the thing wherein they deal proudly, God is above them, Exodus 18.11. The
providence of God waits upon all the counsels, devices and imaginations of
Ungodly men, to detect and frustrate, yea, to turn them upon their own heads,
to their eternal woe and grief. So says David, Psalm. 9.16. The Lord is known
by the judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared in the work of his
own hands. Alas, there is no man that plots any evil against God, his
ordinances, appearances and truths, but puts his feet into a snare, out of
which, he is not able to extricate himself.

On some, God lets their conscience loose to be their own tormentors, with
intolerable horrors, and terrors; and so he dealt with Cain.

Sometimes he arms the creatures against them, even the least, as well as the
greatest. That treacherous man Phillips, who betrayed Mr. Tindal, was devoured
of Lice.

Sometimes God leaves them to themselves, as the executioners of his divine
vengeance; Judas went forth, and hanged himself.

Nay, sometimes the immediate hand of God falls upon them and ruins them. When
they cry peac, peace to themselves, then sudden destruction breaks forth upon
them. The wheel within the wheel, turns their own counsels and plots upon their
own heads.

2. Infer. Is it so, then this does administer abundant matter of unspeakable
comfort to the godly. It Is a breast full of the milk of spiritual consolation,
whereat thou may suck, and be abundantly satisfied. So you may see, Psalm.
16.8, 9. I have set the Lord always before me, therefore my heart is glad. A
clear sight of God in Christ is a heart-rejoycing sight; and so to behold God
in his administrations, as the wheel within the wheel, that turns all things
about to his own glory and our eternal good, this is a taking and a comforting
object. The word of promise is a Christians daily food, and the works of
providence are his cordials, and banquets, wherewith God bears him up, and
keeps him from fainting. Many a Soul would fall into a swoon, if he were not
stayed with these Apples, and comforted with these Flaggons. I shall say to
you, as Job to his friends, Hear diligently, and let this be your consolations,
Job 21.2. So I say, observe, consider, and meditate upon the providence of
God, and let them be your consolation; and that, both in your doing and
suffering the will of God, whilst you live here. Let this bear up, animate, and
fortify your Spirits against all fear and discouragements, that you meet with
in your Christian course. When God calls you forth to perform hard, difficult
and discountenanced duties, call to mind and remember those assistances which
he has provided in the Covenant of Grace, and exhibited to his servants of
old, when he has called them forth to such duties. You know it was an hard and
difficult work, for Joshua to succeed Moses in the conduct of Israel, into the
Land of Canaan: he was not only to meet with much opposition from the
Inhabitants of Canaan, but to conflict with the frowardness and perverseness of
Israel; Joshua could not expect better usage from them, then Moses had had
experience of. Yet observe how providence did fortify and encourage him, Josh.
1.7 first Verses. And turn to Hebr. 13 5. You shall find the same laid in for
all Christians for the future. This may be our consolation, that God will not
leave us nor forsake us; but be with us for our assistance, as he was with
Moses and with Joshua in their work. How God did manage and assist his servants
at all times, in every work whereto he has called them, Scripture speaks fully
and largely; Read Ezekiel. 2.6. Ezekiel met with briars and thorns; they were with
him in his work, and yet says God to him, be not afraid. What difficulties and
discouragements did the Apostles and servants of Christ meet with in their
dispensing the Gospel all along the primitive times; I, but how mightily were
they assisted and carried through all; Read Act. 13.45, 46. The more they were
opposed, the bolde^ they were. And so in respect of suffering, let the
providence of God support and comfort you. I have read this of Chrysostom, that
when Eudoxia procured his banishment; He said thus, None of these things
trouble me, but I said within my self, if the Queen will, let her banish me,
the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof: if she will, let her saw me
asunder, Isaiah suffered the same: if she will, let her cast me into the Sea, I
will remember Jonah: if she will, let her cast me into a fiery furnace, or
amongst wild beasts, the three children and Daniel were so dealt with: if she
will, let her stone me, I have Stephen and the Baptist for my blessed
companions; go tell her, nil nisi peccatum timeo. Thus should we support and
comfort our hearts by the providence of God exercised toward others, and
especially by the comforts, that others have received from God, in the same
sufferings and torments, that we at any time do or may endure. Bishop Ridley
writing to Latimer in Prison, says, ever since I heard of our dear Brother
Rogers his stout confession, and departing, I never felt any lumpish heaviness
in my heart, as sometimes I did before. And further, when you hear or read of
the providence of God in preventing evil determined by evil instruments against
his Church and people, this should raise your spirits to a greater pitch of
consolation, and holy courage. And indeed, how many wonders has God at all
times wrought in preserving and hiding his Saints and people from intended and
designed plots of mischief and ruin? is almost incredible. I remember what is
recorded in the life of Dionysius Areopagita; that when he was caused by
Sifinius the Prefect to be thrown to hungry wild beasts, they would not tear
him, and into an hot Oven, it would not burn him. The like is reported of S.
Ambrose; for a certain wizard sent his spirits to kill him, but they returned
answer, that God had hedged him in as he did Job: another came with a sword to
his bed side to have killed him, but he could not stir his hand, until,
repenting, he was restored, by the prayer of S. Ambrose, to the use of his
hands again. So the Circumcellians, being not able to withstand S. Austins
preaching and writing, sought his destruction, having beset the way, wherein he
was to go his visitation; but by Gods Providence he missing his way, escaped
the danger. And one says of Luther, That Luther a poor Friar should be able to
stand against the Pope was a miracle: that he should prevail against the Pope
was a greater: and after all to die in peace, having so many enemies, was the
greatest of all. When this was represented unto Moses in a type, it did much
affect his heart. Oh, says he, I will turn aside and see this great sight.
Exodus ^.2, 3, 4.
It was a great and glorious sight to see the bush in the fire not consumed:
but more to see the Church under great persecution, and yet not destroyed: the
people of God maligned and opposed, and yet to live: this is a miracle, a soul
comforting providence. But oh then, what a surpassing comfort, does the
consideration of Gods improving providence, afford to the Saints? those
providence (I mean) whereby he does extract the best good out of the worst
evil; So that the soul may say as S. Paul of a great evil; I know that this
shall turn to my salvation. Phil. 1.19. And therefore I rejoice. So 2 Cor.
12.9, 10. Most gladly therefore will I rather glory in mine infirmities. And
again, Therefore I take pleasure in infirmities, in reproaches, in necessities,
in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, for when I am weak then am I
strong. S. Paul's weakness was converted into strength; he never was so strong
in the inward man, as when he was weakest in the outward; and herein he
rejoiced. God does ever bring about some glorious design (as it were) at a back
door, and a contrary way; that the wrath of man shall praise God. And does not
this speak comfort, and courage to the people of God in all their dark and
cloudy fits? surely it does; and that which kills the hearts of others, may be
the greatest reviver of their hearts; For their greatest sorrows, shall turn to
their greatest joy; and their extremity of miseries, shall prove their highest
glories; their Winter, shall bring forth a flourishing Spring; and their
mournful Seed-time, a most plentiful Harvest. And therefore, let me exhort you
in the words of the holy Apostle, Heb. 12.12. Lift up the hands which hang
down, and the feeble knees. Be not dismayed or discouraged at any thing that
falls out: For know, that there is a wheel within a wheel, that works and
moves in all things; yea, that orders and disposes them so, that not one
iota or tittle of Gods counsel shall fail of accomplishment. Melancthon knowing
the rage of the Papists, and Cesar's threats, was much troubled, and gave
himself wholly up to grief, sighs and tears: Whereupon, Luther writes to him
thus, I extremely dislike your excessive cares, with which you say, you are
almost consumed: If the cause be bad, let us revoke it, and fly back: If it be
good, why do we not trust God in his promises? If Christ be the Conqueror of
the World, why should we fear it, as if it would overcome us? As for Luther
himself, he had an undaunted Spirit: For when our King Henry the eighth, had
written bitterly against him; He makes this Answer, Let the Henry's, the
Bishops, the Turk, and the Devil himself do what they can, we are the Children
of the Kingdom, worshipping and waiting for that Savior, whom they, and such
as they, spit upon and crucify. The truth is, there is no condition whereunto
the Church of God in general, or any Christian in particular can fall, but they
may hold up their heads, and lift up their hearts, to an high pitch of
consolation therein; if they do but lay the providence of God to heart, and
consider how that works in all, to bring about the will of God. They may say,
as Shecaniah said to Ezra, There is yet hope in Israel concerning this thing.
And as Mordecai to Hester, Comfort and deliverance shall come. And as Saint
Paul to the Corinthians, in the temptation God will make a way for an escape.
He has delivered, he does deliver, and in him we trust, that he will deliver.
What though Satan, and all the confederates of darkness, were now at work to
destroy one Soul, and to pluck it out of the hand of Christ; yet providence
will preserve it. What though Antichrist, and his adherents are combining and
plotting against Christ and his members, his truths and ordinances; yet
providence will over-shadow them. And Beloved, if every Error in the Nation
were an hundred, and every Heretic a thousand; yet truth, and the professors
thereof shall prevail, Acts 5.38. Providence has her secret ways of working,
that cannot be found out, and though we are not able to trace her way; yet we
may assure our selves of her issue. What was it but providence, that has
maintained the Gospel this 1600. years? What, but providence, that has kept up
a preaching Ministry and Sacraments hitherto, maugre the malice of all their
opposers? It Is true, God may suffer truth to be eclipsed, and the glory of the
Church to be much darkened, and the number of Christ's followers to be abated;
and yet turn the wheel of second causes, so as that there ^^^ll be such a
remnant kept, as shall multiply and increase more then ever. Nay, if all means
should fail, and all instruments perish, yet Gods work, and his design shall go
on without the least prejudice or hurt, Es. 63.5. We may take up the words of
the Prophet Habakkuk. Chap. 3.17. Although the fig tree shall not blossom,
neither shall fruit be in the vines, the labor of the olive shall fail, and
the fields shall yield no meat, the flock shall be cup off from the fold, and
there shall be no herd in the stalls: yet I will rejoice in the Lord: I will
joy in the God of my salvation. It Is all one with God, to work without means as
by means, and it is not out of any necessity, but to magnify the riches of his
wisdom, power, and bounty, that he does make use of any: and therefore, when
God comes down from the hills into the valley, we should not fear, nor be
despondent. Yea, whatever the subject be whereon he works, though never so dead
and dry, he can form it according to his own mind and will; dead and dry bones
he can cause to live: As you may see, Ezekiel. 37. begin. Rocks shall flow with
water, the Sea shall give way for Isreal's passage, the Ravens shall turn
Caterers and Cooks, Abraham and Sarah shall grow young again, and be fertile;
nay, the very heath, and barren wilderness shall become fruitful, and pleasant
places to dwell in. In a word, God does whatever he pleases; his hand is no
way shortened or weakened by working: And therefore he is pleased to make daily
repetitions of his old wonders, that the people of God may have full and strong
consolation.

3. Infer. Is it so; then this serves as a spur to quicken Saints to the
performance of holy duty, and to teach them to be admirable therein. Sirs, God
is admirable in his working for you, and therefore this should draw out your
hearts to admirable workings for God: your affections, and your actings should
be as so many wonders. True Christians should be the worlds wonders; and should
set men a wondering at the beholding of the admirableness of their
conversations. Sirs, you have admirable Spirits, admirable Principles, an
admirable Life, admirable Rules to walk by, and an admirable reward promised at
the last; and surely, all these are strong engagements unto an admirableness of
living. And yet besides all these, let me tell you, that you live upon the
wonders of divine providence; it is a wonder, that sinners live on this side
Hell, and enjoy so many forfeited mercies and comforts, as you do enjoy. And
therefore you may well take up the the words of the holy Apostle; seeing all
these things are thus, What manner of persons ought we to be. For I tell you,
that a common life is no way suitable to Gods admirable dispensations: No, God
says to all such, as our Savior did once to his Disciples, Matthew. 5.47. What
do you more then others? For it is not enough for you that live by, and under
the turnings of this divine wheel, to be good in the general; but you must
labor to be excellent. Every motion of this wheel, is a new engagement upon
your Spirits; take a few directions herein: For an admirable life lies chiefly
in a conformity to the life of God; no life is admirable, but the life of God,
and our conformity thereunto. And hence it is, that the life of God, is set up
as our pattern of imitation, Matthew. 5.44, 45, 48. But I say unto you, love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them which despitefully use you, and persecute you: that ye may be the children
of your father which is in heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. Be ye
therefore perfect, even as your father which is in heaven is perfect. The Child
is but the Father multiplied, it is Man in a new edition: And so he that lives
the life of God, is nothig else then a new edition, and a new copy of the image
of God. Holiness in life and power, is the image of God drawn upon the heart,
and life of man. Saints are living pictures of their heavenly father; they are
Gods looking-glasses, wherein he loves to view his own excellency and glory.
Hence it is, that they are said to be near to him; and that he takes pleasure
in them, Psalm. 148. ult. 149.4. As women will have their glasses before their
eye, and take pleasure in a true glass, that gives a true reflex of their
beauty. So Saints are a people near to God, and God delights in them; as they
are in Christ, so he loved them: but as he lives in them, so he delights in
them. Now that which is Gods delight, is the most admirable, and may well be
our wonder. Nothing should take up our hearts, thoughts, time and strength, so
much as the life of God: All other things should be of little force to take up
our hearts; But take heed, lest a form of godliness keep you from the life of
God. Religion is now in fashion, and every one (almost) makes some outward
show; I, but few do live the life of God.

2. In high and most eminent designs for God: He that knows God to be all in
all, must be all for God. Most sull is that of Paul, Phil. 1.21. To me to live
is Christ. i.e. All my designs are for Christ; for the advancing his designs in
the world; that he may be all, and have all subjected unto him. A Christian
should do nothing, but plot and design for Christ; he should be of a public
active Spirit, and lay out himself, and his abilities to the utmost for God.
It Is recorded of Levi, that he knew neither Father nor Mother. And Paul says,
That henceforth, we know no man after the flesh: We should be wholly for God. A
Christian should not know such a thing as Self, in his designs and aims;
self-interests, self-glory, self-comfort, and all should be thrown down at the
foot of God. All external wheels, are but instruments acted by this internal
wheel, and ordered and disposed of so, as that this may have the glory of all.
Shall the Ax boast it self against him that heweth therewith, or the Saw
magnify it self against him that shakes it? Es. 10.15. Nothing more improper
and absurd. Oh Beloved, take heed of carrying on self-designs, under a pretense
of acting for God. Wicked men will do so; but you must go beyond them: You must
do more then they can do.

3. In living by faith upon God; 2 Cor. 5.7. We live by faith and not by sight.
A Christian ought not to hang by the eyelids, eying and looking at external
wheels, and second causes only; but to exercise faith upon the wheel within the
wheel. This is that which must actuate and inliven all second causes, or else
they cannot work. What is it that thou do desire? this must bring it to pass;
Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, Zech. 4.6. Would thou have thy
corruption mortified, thy temptation conquered, thy graces strengthened, thy
comforts enlarged, thy fears prevented, thy prayers heard; rest not upon the
external wheels, but upon the wheel within the wheel. Means must be used, but
not trusted in; God alone is the object of a Christians faith. Say therefore,
In vain is salvation hoped for from the multitude of hills and mountains: but
in the Lord our God is salvation, Jer. 3.23. And let it be said of you, as it
is of Abraham, To. 4.18, 19. Who against hope, believed in hope. When all
instruments are dead, Ordinances dead, Comforts dead, Graces dead, heart even
dead; yet give glory to God by believing in him, who never dies. And for this
end, follow the example of the Prophet, Psalm. 77.10, 11, 12. I will remember
the years of the right hand of the most high. I will remember the works of the
Lord: surely I will remember thy wonders of old. I will meditate also of all
thy work, and talk of thy doings. Yea, would thou set this internal wheel, on
work, would thou move that? Why then, set faith on work, this is that whereby
divine providence suffers it self to be moved. How came Abraham to be the
Father of many Nations? but by the movings of this internal wheel; and what set
that a going, but the faith of Abraham: And therefore it is said, that he
believed in hope, that he might become the Father of many Nations. Beloved, if
ever you would set any instrument, or inferior wheel on work, you must move
the greater wheel: So it is here, it is God that must move, and you must set God
on work by faith. An active faith will not let God alone; it gives him no rest,
until he has set all second causes on work, and accomplished the desired
mercy. Now in this, you go beyond all moral men; they may make use of means: I,
but they cannot believe; they cannot set the great wheel on work.

4. In fixing your hearts upon things that are above. Let the constant openings
of your Souls be for the entertainment of Heavenly enjoyments. And this is a
wonder, Rev. 12.1. A Christians heart should be in Heaven, and the world under
his feet. The Earth is Gods, and a good man's footstool; thou may walk upon
it, but not be buried in it. Most excellent is the Apostles Rule, 1 Cor. 7.29,
30, 31. But this I say, Brethren, the time is short. It remains, that both
they that have wives, be as though they had none; and they that weep, as though
they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they
that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this world, as not
abusing it: for the fashion of this world passes away. And this was the
Apostles glory, that the world was crucified unto him, and he unto the world,
Gal. 6.14. He looks upon all, as so many dead corpse and carkases.

Fourth and last Inference, If this divine wheel be so admirable and glorious,
then this teaches you to maintain a constant communion with it. For you are
little wheels; I, but what will you do, if this divine wheel, be not as a wheel
in the middle of a wheel; what shall act and move you in order to your
comfortable winding up: Sure I am, you will be like Sampson, when his Lock was
cut off. Your strength is departed from you, and you like Instruments laid
aside, and of no use. I, but if God be in you, and with you, then you shall go
forth in the strength of an omnipotent power, and be admirable in working, yea,
you shall have cause to admire the wheel within the wheel, and sing with Moses,
Who is a God like our God, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders. Yea, with the heavenly Quire, saying, Amen, blessing and glory, wisdom
and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A Divine Paradox, OR, A PRISONER at LIBERTY AND HIS JUDGE IN BONDS; Being a
Subject Treated of, before the Right Honorable, the Lord Chief Justice Hales
at an Assize holden at Saint Edmunds Bury, In the County of Suffolk, March, 27.
1669.

By Samuel Blackerby, Minister of the Gospel at Stow Market.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simons, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Church
Yard. 1674.

Acts 24.25. And as he reasoned of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to
come, Felix trembled.


THat I may observe the watchword given, and confine my discourse to the time
allotted for it; I shall (at present) wave my usual course, and lay aside the
threads, by which I was resolved to have steered my passage to the Text: And
yet, before I can attempt to anatomize, and breath any vein of truth therein, I
must crave leave, to strip it of a double paradox, which (at first view) it
secmeth to be dressed up in. For, 1. Here is a Prisoner in liberty. 2. A Judge in
bonds.


Saint Paul the Prisoner, and Felix the Judge; the one we meet with in the
entrance into the Text, the other in the close; and both afford us matter of
admiration.

First, The liberty of St. Paul the Prisoner; for here we find him at liberty
to preach, and preaching with liberty.

1. At liberty to preach: That an Apostle should be a Prisoner, is much; but
that he, who was imprisoned upon the account of preaching, should have liberty
(whilst a Prisoner) to preach, and that before his Judge, this is more. Not
many days before, he was accused by a famous Orator, and libelled against
with a deep charge of high misdemeanors, and capital crimes, and that with so
much artifice and subtilty, that it is a wonder, that a sentence of death had
not passed upon him, according to the malevolent expectation of his malicious
enemies; and he for ever deprived of his liberty to preach any more; and yet,
to speak in the Ciceronian Dialect, Vivit, imo vivit, and in Senatum venit. He
lives, yea, he lives to preach: And that

2. With liberty; I, (...), with much liberty and boldness: For neither the
grandeur of the Auditor, nor the experience that he had of a former durance,
no, nor his fear of future, had any such influence upon him; as to seal up his
lips, or tempt him to play the Sycophant, or flattering Courtier, that thereby
he might have gained an enlargement of his present liberty: No! but in stead
thereof, he levels a piercing, and a wounding arrow at his breast, and reasoned
of such things, as he knew were wanting in him: For the Text tells us, that he
reasoned of righteousness and temperance. And where is the man almost in the
Apostles case, that dare preach such things before such an Auditor? the more is
Saint Paul to be admired, for his boldness and liberty in preaching, and
reasoning before Felix.

This is the first Paradox.

Secondly, Here is a Judge in bonds; for as the Apostles reasoning, argues his
liberty; so the Judge his trembling, argues his bondage; and so it is said int
he Text, Felix trembled. For this is certain, that there are no such pinching,
and soul-tormenting bonds, as legal and servile fear puts upon, and binds the
Soul with. It Is said of Joseph, that the irons entered into his Soul: I, but
none go so deep, nor wound so much, as the bonds and irons of servile fear; I,
but is not this a paradox, that he, that had the power of civil binding, and
loosing others, should be put into bonds, and that by his Prisoner? I say, do
not these things seem strange, are they not knots hard to be untied? Why,
surely they are; and therefore I shall take the assistance of three hands, to
untie them.

1. Manus authoritatis, The Prisoners call. 2. Manus integritatis, The
Prisoners integrity. 3. Manus reatus, The Judges guilt.
First, The Preachers Call, gave him liberty to preach before his Judge? It Is
true, quod officium, he had his authority from God, but quod exercitium
officii, he received authority from man; For so it is storied, ver. 24. that
Felix sent for him; and who might better open the door, then he that shut it?
And when was the time for the Apostle to enter, but when the door was opened?
It Is true, he took no more liberty, then was given; but, what was given, that
he took; else, he might have been checked with ingratitude to the Judge, (who
gave him a call, to preach at this time) and also, with unfaithfulness to his
Lord and Master, who gave him his grand and Apostolical Commission; and thus
the knot begins to be unloosed, and the wonder to cease. And therefore give me
leave, to make use of a second hand; And that is,

Secondly, The Preachers integrity; for this gave him liberty and boldness in
preaching: It Is true, Si sat accusatio, quis innocens? If to accuse were
sufficient, the Preacher had been guilty, and the Judge might well have
retorted, a turpe est doctori. But whoever reads his defense, in some preceding
Verses, shall find him to keep his ground, and hold fast the sense of his
integrity, although his enemies hoped, to have given him a rout. Now, as the
old Proverb has it, bonae causae spem adesse comitem. I shall only add, bonae
conscientiae, to make it full and clear. A good cause and a good conscience,
teaches confidence and boldness; and you have a better warrant for it, Prove.
28.1. The righteous is as bold as a Lion. And indeed, that Minister of the
Gospel, that does (...), may boldly, and freely (...). He that lives the life
of St. Paul, may courageously preach the Doctrine of St. Paul. He that is
righteous and temperate, may with confidence, and without a blush, reason of
Righteousness and Temperance, unless he be frowned into a mealy-mouthed
baseness, by his Auditors. And it is as true, that had the life of the Auditor
in the Text, been consimilar, and proportioned to the life of the Preacher, he
might have sat out the Sermon, with as much comfort, as it was preached with
confidence: For hic murus ahencus, nil conscire sibi. But as none wrangle
against the truth, but the erroneous; so none dread it, but the guilty; and
this leads me to the third hand.

Thirdly, The Judges guilt; for if Josephus, and Tacitus, may be believed in
their Reports, he was notoriously guilty; but we need go no further, for a
proof thereof, then his carriage toward the Preacher, and the naming of his
Wife Drusilla: for her, by enticements and magical arts, he allured to himself
from her Husband; and him he detained Prisoner two years unjustly, because he
would not give him a Bribe: And therefore no wonder, that as the Prisoner
reasoned, the Judge trembled. And thus you see, there is a wonder, and no
wonder; or the knot, and difficulty that lay before us, untied, that we may
consider the words of the Text, as they lie naked before us; and therein you
have three Considerables.

1. Modus concionandi, The manner of the Apostles treating his Auditor. 2.
Subjecta materia concionis, The subject matter of his Sermon. 3. Effectus
utriusque, The effect of both.
The manner was convictive, He reasoned.

The matter was substantial, summed up in three Topics; Righteousness,
Temperance, and Judgment to come.

The effect was glorious; for as the Apostle reasoned of the Topics, Felix
trembled.

All very considerable. For,

The manner serves for a Gospel Ministers imitation. The matter serves for all
men's information. And the effect gives us a ground of expectation, that
ministers so reasoning, as the Apostle did, and preaching such matter, as he
preached, may (through divine influence) meet with the like success of their
labors. And,

Upon this account, have I chosen the Text, and of these things, I shall take
liberty, to reason at this time.

1. By way of explication, as to part. 2. By way of application, as to the
whole.
Fist, by way of explication. And the

1. Thing that offers it self to be explained, is a Kernel, hid in the first
word of the Text, (...). For I find it variously rendered; sometimes to
discourse or confer, contend and dispute; but in the Text, to reason, and to
argue: For that is the most convictive way of preaching, or teaching; and, so
constantly used by the Apostle, that he tells the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 2.2. That
his preaching was not with enticing words of man's wisdom: but, in demonstration
of the spirit. Not (I bumbly conceive) as some would have it, and do assert it,
by working of miracles, as if the Apostles success of the Ministry, flowed only
from that. But (as a learned Annotator says) with demonstrations, fetched out
of the very marrow of the Scriptures. It Is very true, Miracles served much, to
evince the truth of the Gospel, and to beget an head conviction in many, that
were spectators thereof: but demonstrations drawn from the letter of the
Gospel, was the vehiculum spiritus sancti; the medium of divine influence, to
beget an heart-conviction: For, no sword will pierce the spirit of man; but the
sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. And therefore says the Apostle, 2. Cor.
4.7. We have this treasure in earthen vessels, (...). That the excellency (or
the hyperbole) of the power may be of God, and not of us. This Sword, and this
Treasure, we find in the second Considerable in the Text. And that is,

2. The Subject matter of the Apostles reasoning, for whosoever consults it,
will not find (...), a fruitless flourish of words, in stead of a rich Mine of
desirable treasure. No! but matter of an universal concern; for it concerns
all, both superiors, and inferiors, innocent and guilty, to be instructed in
these topics, righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come. The two first
relate to man, and the third to God. It Is man's duty to be righteous, and
temperate; and Gods Prerogative to judge; The two first are two Cardinal
virtues, and the third imports a judiciary trial of men thereby, at a time fixed
in Divine minds; men must be virtuous, for they shall be judged. There is a
time given to men to exercise virtue, and that is the time present; and there
is a time, for men to be judged by the rule of virtue, but that is to come. S.
Paul reasons of both, and so shall I. First, Of the Cardinal virtues instanced
in; and herein, I cannot but observe the Apostles imitation of a Master
Builder, that having laid a good foundation, ad solidum and in solido, leaves
it not naked, but erects the superstructure proportionate thereunto; For having
presented his auditour with the sum of the Gospel, in preaching faith in
Christ to him (that he might not appear a Solifidean or Antinomian) he
reasons of righteousness, and temperance, which are the proper and genuine
superstructure, upon that most choice and excellent foundation; For though
faith in Christ alone justifies in a figurative sense, yet that faith, that
justifies, is not alone; For as faith in Christ justifies the person, so virtue
justifies faith, and renders it to be of a Divine Stamp, even the faith of Gods
elect. Faith, without works, is dead, and works, without faith, do not please
him, whom, above all, we ought to study to please. Well therefore, did the
Apostle, as it became an Apostle, to build the silver, gold, and precious
stones of righteousness and temperance, upon the glorious, and precious
foundation of faith in Christ; for righteousness imparted, is a most suitable
structure to righteousness imputed, and renders the whole fabrique uniform, and
beautiful; the cost indeed is Gods, but the beauty is man's. And therefore the
moralist (in dressing up his moral Lady) says, that her head is wisdom, her
eyes prudence, her heart love her spirits charity, her thighs justice, her
health temperance, and fortitude her strength; For that person, that is endowed
with these virtues, is a lovely and beautiful person, although he has no other
ornament upon him; Nay I hope, without offense to Ladies, I may call him a
beauty; Others may be as beautiful as Absalon, as fair as Aleibiades in their
bodies without; and yet have corpora turpissima interne, as was said of the
last; foul and deformed souls. Yea, may justly be accounted Reipublicae morbi,
the botches of the Commonwealth. Alas, with many, to be religious, just, and
temperate, is too mean, too base, in their esteem: in their eye, virtue is the
vice, and vice the virtue; pudebat me non fuisse impudentem (as S. Augustine
has it in his confessions) may be written upon the foreheads of some persons,
and none of the inferior sort. For they do not only resist the impressions of
grace, but trace the stamp of nature and hope, with Herostratus, to be
memorable for villainy. But I must not be excursive, being confined to an
Apostolical method, and to an inch of time, in my reasoning hereof. And
therefore, once more I crave your leave, that I may reason of righteousness and
temperance apart, as the Apostle did. And,

1. Of righteousness; and herein (not to trouble you with the various
definitions, and descriptions thereof, laid down in sundry Authors) I shall
take the liberty, to give you this description of it, that it is an exact
conformity unto law, in our dealings with others, according to the sphere
wherein God has set us.

First, I say, it is an exact conformity unto law, in our actings toward, and
dealings with others; And therefore, some will have the Latin word, to derive
its pedigree from a word, in that language, that signifies Law; and say,
justitia habet nomen a jure; for this is an undoubted rule, id tantum possumus,
quod jure possumus; that, and that only is just, which is justifiable by Law,
either Humane or Divine; either Literal or Aequipollent. It Is very true, a
discourse of Law, becomes Westminster Hall, or an Inn of Court, better then
Gods Sanctuary: and yet I hope, a Gospel Minister may take liberty to press all
men to make Law their Rule; I, and the Law of man, as far as it is conform to
the Law of God. For I may say, of that as Tertullus of Felix; By that we enjoy
great quietness in our rights and possessions. But,

Secondly, This is not all; for righteousness is an exact conformity to Law in
the sphere and place wherein God has set us; for that is a righteous act, when
performed by one; which is unrighteous, when done by another: And therefore if
St. Peter draws his sword, (though in defense of his Master) and cuts of Malcus
his ear, he receives no better reward, then a sharp rebuke from his Master, the
King of righteousness, and Prince of peace. And if David cuts off the lap of
Saul's Garment, his heart smites him for it. It Is true, a national reformation
may be very necessary, at some times, and in some cases; but not to be
undertaken by private persons, Renuente Magistratus, against the express and
declared will of the supreme Magistrate. And hence arises that common
distribution of Justice, into distributative and commutative. The first whereof
refers to the Magistrate, and the other to the Privateer.

1. I say, Distributative Justice belongs to the Magistrate, qua Magistrate;
for he properly, and principally is (...). The keeper of Justice and Equity;
and if I may not style him Gods Ark, because that was, in an especial manner,
sanctified to keep the Law in? Yet, I may be bold to call him Gods Cabinet, to
whose trust, this precious Jewel is committed. He is custos utriusque tabulae,
and jus dicens.

But when I speak of Magistrates in general, you must know, that under that
notion, all their Assistants, and Officers, are comprehended, in reference to
the execution of Justice; not only the Judges and Justices, that sit upon the
Bench; but also many of those, that sit below; not only a Supervisor, but every
Civil Officer and Juror, is concerned herein. For in some respects, the Sword
of Justice is put into the hand of all these, especially at such a time as this
is. And that, 1. At the Bar of Nisi prius; in determining, and silenceing
controversies about right, between party and party. 2. At the Crown Bar. And
that, 1. In protecting the Innocent, and therefore Magistrates are called the
shields of the earth, because the shield serves for defense and protection. 2.
In rewarding the well-doer. 3. In punishing the offender.



These things I might have insisted on, but a word to the wise is sufficient,
and many words to others will not be of force, and therefore I shall forbear to
offer any thing more by way of explication of the nature of the duty; and only
give you some directions, as the time will permit, and so imitate the Apostle
in reasoning. And the,

1. Rule that I shall lay down is this, that justice must be done cito,
speedily, and you have an express for it, ( Ezra 7.26.) which (though it came
from an heathen King, yet) it is approved of by the Holy Ghost; it is this,
Whosoever will not do the Law of God, and the Law of the King, (for these must
not clash.) Let judgment be executed speedily upon him; and yet give me leave
to tell you, that Vespasians motto upon his Coin, will do very well in the
case, Sat cito, si sat been, That is soon enough, that is well enough. And
therefore,

2. Take this rule also, that justice must be executed prudenter; with
judgment and discretion. It Is easy to cut a knot, but hard to unty it; and
therefore Magistrates must be Seers, as well as Ministers, or else they will
not be Ministers to the Subjects for good; And indeed, upon this account, they
are called heads of the people. I, but what is an head, without an eye? and if
the eye be dark how great is that darkness? And therefore, says one, blind
Ministers are the Pest of the Church, and blind Magistrates are the Pest of
Kingdoms; and yet give me leave to tell you; That these eyes must not be
covered, nor blinded. And therefore says Solomon, Prove. 25.2. It Is the glory
of God, to conceal a thing: but the honor of Kings to search out a matter, i.
e. It concerns all, that are entrusted with the execution of justice, to search
out the matter. I, but hic labor hoc opus est; they must exercise patience, and
prudence herein; or else shoot at rovers, and wound where they should apply a
healing balsom; or else be Physicians of no value, in giving a Cordial, instead
of a Purge or Corrosive; They must, therefore, have an Eagles eye, as well as a
Ladies hand; that they may hit the distemper; Protection to whom Protection is
due, punishment to whom punishment is due. Let not one have that portion of
justice, that belongs to another; (...)
And therefore as one word in the Hebrew Language signifies an ear, and a pair
of balances, so the ear of all those, that are entrusted with the execution of
justice, should be as a pair of balances, first to weigh things, and then to
determine. Let not him that sits upon the Bench be a Merchant to carry the
balances of deceit about him, and justice will be duly administered; When res
cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concertet. When many words of a
different complexion, are dropped into a Judges, or a Justices ears, then is the
time for them to weigh, and consider things wisely, before they give out their
sentence; and that made much for the commendation of Philip, that he always
kept an ear open for the Defendant.

3. Justice must be executed universaliter, impartially, without respect of
persons; And therefore the common Emblem of Justice is drawn with covered eyes;
to intimate, that, though a Magistrate should not be blind as to causes, yet,
as to persons he should. Nay, in this respect Magistrates should be no men of
this world, but like the Angels in heaven, who know no such thing as a relation
or a friend; And say with the Apostle, (2 Cor. 5.16.) We know no man after the
flesh; friend and foe, rich and poor, old and young, must have justice done
them; And so the Law of God requires, Levit. 19.15. Thou shall not respect the
person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty. And again, Exodus 23.3.
Thou shall not countenance a poor man in his cause, i. e. If his cause be
unjust; the rich must not be injured, that the poor may be countenanced; For
Magistrates are not called to do acts of Charity, but acts of Justice. God
himself cannot endure, that any one should be wronged under a pretense of doing
him right; And therefore says, ( Esaias 61.8.) I the Lord love judgment, I hate
robbery for burnt offerings. Now if we may not unjustly take from men, to give
to God; certainly, we may not take from man, to give to man; no! not from a
foe, to give to a friend; not from the rich, to give to the poor, nor from the
poor, to give to the rich; but as the Law was made, so it should be put in
execution, without respect of persons; not rendered like Tardalus his web,
wickets for some, and snares for others; an unlike judgment must not be given
to those that are alike, nor alike judgment given to those that are unlike in
point of offense. A Magistrate must not weigh the big looks of the sons of
Anake, nor make any difference in civil, or criminal causes, betwixt the mighty
Nimrods of the nation, that declare their sin as Sodom, and the cowardly
lurchers, that dare not show their faces; A powerful oppressor, a valiant
Dueller, a gallant highway-man, and a mad Hector, should receive no more favor
from the Sword of Justice, than a sneaking Cutpurse.

4. Justice should be administered gratis, not for filthy lucre sake, but for
justice sake; and that upon the account of a Sacred, and Divine Statute, Deuteronomy.
16.19. Thou shall not respect persons, neither take a gift; for a gift does
blind the eyes of the wise, and prevent the words of the righteous; and indeed
experience tells us, that if a man has the eye of an Eagle, a most piercing
eye, yet a gift, a bribe, like a vail or covering, muffles him up in darkness,
that he cannot discern a difference in things, or causes; and hence it is, that
sometimes, not he that has the best cause, but the best purse carries the day;
a bad cause is good weight, and a good cause found too light to pass; or to
speak in the Language of one of the Ancients; auro loquente, Greg. Naz.
iners omnis oration; all motions and pleadings (though never so much to the
purpose) are of little, or no effect. It Is true the Holy Ghost compares justice
and Judgment to waters, and gives an express charge, ( Amos 5.24.) That
judgment should run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream: I,
but it is sad, when Angels trouble these waters, that they cannot run clear and
smooth. However, this I am certain of, that there is a sad complaint, in many
places of the Nation; that either Justice is not administered, sat cite, not
soon enough, or not sat bone, not well enough. And truly, when I consider men's
boldness, and impudence in their lewdness, I am somewhat jealous, that there is
some reason, or ground for the complaint: For men swear, and drink, and whore,
and commit all manner of wickedness, as if they had received a a Law, to do
such things. For, qui non prohibet peceare, cum possit, jubet.

But I must not insist upon this particular any longer, for there are some
persons in a lower Orb, that I must a little reason with; and that, in reference
to that other part of Justice which we call,

2. Commutative. Take it in the Apostles words, Romans 13.7. Render to all their
dues.

1. To your Superiors. 2. To your Equals.
First to your Superiors: And that according to the command of Christ, Matthew.
22.21. Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; or, as the Apostle
proceeds in his direction, Tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor. Once more, 1 Pet. 2.17. Fear
God, honor the King.

Secondly, To those that are upon a level with you, and are your equals, and
neighbors. And oh, that that golden rule were written upon your hearts, and
made legible in your lives, which Severus the Emperor, was so taken with, that
he caused it to be written in his Palace, and elsewhere; it is this, Quod tibi
fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris; What you would not have others do to you, do
not you that to them; and the rather, because it was delivered by our Savior,
and stands upon record, in the affirmative, Mat. 7.12. The extent whereof is
this, That what we would have other men to think, speak, and do to us, with a
rectified will, that we must think, speak, and do to them, and no worse.
Would thou have good weight, and full measure in buying? why, thou must give
the same in selling. Would thou have another faithful, in a trust committed
to him, by thy self? why, that also may be justly expected from thee, when ever
thou art trusted. Would thou have another keep his word with thee? why, thou
must be as careful to keep thine with others. Art thou unwilling, that others
should wound thy name, blast thy credit, by reproaches, or bearing false
witness against thee? why, then take heed of doing that to others; and give me
leave to tell you, that were this Rule observed, our Vine would not be as the
Vine of Sodom, nor our Grapes, the Grapes of Gall. Judgment would not spring
up as Hemlock in the furrows of the field, nor righteousness be turned into
wormwood, but we should be the habitation of righteousness, and the mountain of
holiness; and yet, if any of you think this Rule too general, or too narrow,
for you to walk by, take some other that may convey a more particular light to
you. That in Levit. 19.35, 36. Ye shall do no unrighteousness in judgment, in
mete yard, in weight, or in measure, just balances, just weights, a just epha,
and a just bin, shall ye have. And Deuteronomy. 25.13. There is to the same purpose; I
know, that a caveat emptor is a Salvo to the stupid and seared conscience of
many a Seller; I, but the Apostle gives him another caveat, that he must
observe, or else the other will not serve his turn. You have it, 1 Thessalonians. 4.6.
That no man go beyond, or defraud his brother in any matter, for the Lord is
the avenger of all such. It may be, the man whom thou defraudest in thy
dealings with, is not able to right himself upon thee, and therefore must put
up the wrong that thou have done him; I, but God will not: No, he will avenge
it, unless prevented by a timely repentance, in which, thou must not forget, to
make restitution and satisfaction, according to thine ability.

Thus I have finished my discourse upon the first cardinal virtue. And
therefore, briefly of the

2. Viz. Temperance, for so the original word (...), is rendered here, by our
English Translatours, as also, Gal. 3.23. 2 Pet. 1.6. And therefore (though I
find it otherwise expressed, in diverse foreign Translations) yet I shall not
quit our own; and the rather, because I humbly conceive, that the design of the
Apostle was not only to lop of a luxuriant branch of incontinency in his
Auditor, but also to strike at the root, from whence that branch did sprout;
and further, to implant a contrary fundamental virtue in him, that would
produce better fruit; for (if I mistake not, from hence springs chastity,
righteousness, moderation, clemency, self-denial, meekness, sobriety, and such
like. He that is temperate, is endued with all these virtues: For temperance is
nothing else, but a kind of Lordship, which man exercises over himself,
subjecting himself, and all his passions and affections to right reason. When
rectified reason is in power, and keeps the reins straight in her hand; then
the affections and passions become regular in their motions, and those motions
may pass under the title of distinct virtues; but if so, what shall we call the
opposite, and contrary motions of man's passions and affections, but so many
distinct vices? at least, give to every one the black title of Intemperance,
even those very impetus primo primi, the first risings of original corruption,
and the least degree of lust and will, that is not conform to the rule of right
reason, and curbed thereby, is sinful and intemperate; not only, when the
desire is enlarged, as Hell; but also, when it is any ways inordinate:
However, I am certain, that none can, with any color of reason, deny, but
those belluine, and beastly lusts of the flesh, Drunkenness, Gluttony,
Fornication, Adultery, and such like, may very well pass under the notion of
intemperance: For as the actions of these do not at all conform to the rule of
right reason, so they have the same names given to them (in Scripture) that the
bruits have; for the truth is, they do unman themselves; and as it is recorded
of Eli's sons, They made themselves vile and contemptible: Yea, so much the
more vile, because that they take so much care to satisfy their lusts; and so
little to save their immortal Souls. But oh, that we could weep over such, as
one once did, Pambus.
when he saw an Harlot dressing and trimming her self, with her comb, and her
glass, upon a double consideration. First, because she took so much care to
undo her Soul; and secondly, because he took so little care, in providing for
his own. For this is an undoubted truth, and the Apostle tells us so much in
the Text. That

2. There is a future judgment, a judgment to come; and this is the motive
which the Apostle makes use of, both to dehort his Auditor from Vice, and also
to press him to the practice of Virtue. And so I pass from explication, to
Application.

I have already, according to my Text, presented you with a chequer table, and
discovered the black of Vice, that all must shun and avoid, together with the
white of Virtue, which all ought to pursue in their respective spears and
stations. All therefore, that the time will suffer me to do, is to hand out a
coal from the Text, and to convey a quickening beam from the Sun of truth, that
shines therein: It Is this, Be righteous in your Sphere, and temperate in your
Spirits and actings; for there is a future Judgment, wherein God will call you
to an account. It Is reported of Augustus, that he enforced all the Roman
Knights, to give an account of their lives; sure I am, God will. We must all
(says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.10.) appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
that every one may receive the things done in the body. Mark this, we must all
appear; for no man is either above, or past Judgment: No! They that sit in
Judgment upon others, must come to Judgment; And they that take an account,
must give an account; and they that pass the sentence of Judgment upon others
here, must receive a Sentence themselves above; for with God, there is no
respect of persons in Judgment. All men, of what degree and rank soever, will
be divided into two sorts, Sheep and Goats; with a venite benedicti, to the
one; and an ite maledicti, to the other. If the former be your Sentence, then
you shall enter into your Masters joy: but if the latter; then nothing but
horror, and trembling, weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth, in that
lake, that burns with fire and brimstone for ever. And therefore, I shall say
to all here present, as the Apostle does, 2 Corinths 5.11. Knowing the terror
of the Lord, we persuade men, to flee from the wrath to come. For neither
Riches, nor Honors, nor Garments, No! nor Mountains, can shelter, or profit
you in that day. Nothing but righteousness, will deliver from death; and
without question, it was the apprehension and belief of this, that made guilty
Felix tremble; or, as the Syrian has it, filled him with fear: As the earth
filled with vapors, trembles and quakes, so this made an earth quake in his
conscience; as the Handwriting upon the wall, did in carousing Belshazzars; a
sign that Fear was in its height and reing. The sinners in Sion, are afraid
(says the Prophet, Esaias 33.14.) fearfulness has surprised the hypocrite; and
why so? Who among us shall dwell with the devouring fire? Who among us shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? For I can assure you, that Hell is no painted
Fire, nor like the crackling of thorns under a pot, that make a blaze, but is
soon extinct: No! the element of Fire, is but a dark and shadowy resemblance of
Hellfire. For, as it is far more tormenting, so it is everlasting; and that
adds to the misery of that Soul, that must endure it. Oh, when the Soul must be
always suffering, and yet never satisfy; and always dying, and yet never
die; this must needs be intolerable. And therefore, I do most humbly beseech
all guilty persons, to consider this, and seriously to lay it to heart; that
you may tremble so here, as not to tremble hereafter; and so to repent here, as
you may not repent when it is too late. And in particular, give me leave, to
make my address to all you that are concerned in the work of the day: And I do
as earnestly beg it of you, that no cause may be pleaded at either of the Bars
here, but that which may have an Advocate in the Judgment to come; and that
those things, and nothing else, may be Presented and Endicted, but what will be
presentable in the Judgment to come; and that if possible, no Bill may be
found, but that which will be found to be a Billa vera in the Judgment to
come: And that none of you do take an Oath, but that which will appear to have
been taken in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, in the Judgment to come:
And last of all, that no Evidence be given, either in Civil, or Criminal
causes, but such as will have the testimony of a good Conscience, in the
Judgment to come: For else, even in this life; when a Lecture shall be read to
you of Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, you may be brought to
tremble; for so was Felix: As you have it in the Text, As S. Paul reasoned of
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, Felix trembled.

FINIS.
THE MOST Remarkable Man, UPON EARTH; Or, the true Portraicture OF A SAINT; As
to his Birth, Life, and Death: Delivered in a Sermon, at the Celebration of the
Funeral of Mr. Francis Bowtel, of Parham in High Suffolk. Jan. 14. 1668.

By Samuel Blackerby, Minister of the Gospel at Stow Market.

LONDON, Printed for Nevil Simons, at the Princes Arms in S. Paul's Church
Yard. 1674.

To the truly Honored Barnaby Bowtel, Of Parham Hasta, Esquire; With Madam
MAGDALEN his Lady, Grace and Peace.
THe preaching of the Sermon, which I here present you with, and the choice of
the Text preached on, at the Funeral of Mr. Francis Bowtel, your deceased
Father, were (as you inform me) his dying Requests, and conceived in his Breast
some time before: But had the choice of the Preacher, and the Text been left to
me, I should have chosen a Newcomen, or an Harris for the Preacher, And know
you not that a great man is fallen this day in Israel, for the Text.

The Task was so much the harder, and more difficult for me to undertake,
because confined to so little time, at so great a distance, in the depth of
Winter, in a crowd of Business, and also having never preached on the Text
before. But verba morientis -- his Desires were as Commands to me; and
therefore since it was, as it was, I must humbly beg of you, to receive the
Sermon as it is, without emendation or correction.

The Reason why I refused to print it, when desired by one, or both of you,
was; because then I was utterly averse to that work: but now being drawn
thereunto, I cannot but account my self obliged to conjoyn this with some
others, that I may lie no longer under the censure of Ingratitude, and also,
that the memory of so worthy and remarkable a Person, may be revived and
perpetuated.

I know, that Funeral Sermons, are (mostly) made but matters of form, and men
come to them, as to a great Feast. The first course, wherein God is most
concerned, is lightly passed over: The second, wherein Man is represented, is
(commonly) most expected, and stood upon: but herein I was prevented, and it is
like, did frustrate the expectation of my Auditors; partly, by reason of my
short acquaintance with him; and partly, that I might not give an alarm to my
own people at home, and provoke their Spirits to accuse me of partiality in
serving them up with the first, without the second; even at the Funerals of
some persons of great worth, for true Piety and Godliness. And yet I hope
without offense, I may take liberty to write that of him now, which I did not
then speak. As to his natural Pedigree, I shall not concern my self, nor the
Reader with it, for his spiritual is chiefly in mine eye, as that which speaks
him to be one of the remarkable men in the Text, whilst living, and dying; for
those that knew him better then my self, cannot but say this of him, that he
was a Perfect and an Upright man. He had the external form of Godliness, and a
name to live: for, as he was a constant attendant upon public Ordinances of
Divine Worship, where he could enjoy them, and whilst in health and strength;
so his Gesture and Behavior therein was reverent and decent, suited to their
nature and kind. His Speech was seasoned with Salt, that it might administer
Grace to the Hearer. Yea, (as I have been informed) when he went forth to take
an oversight of Servants and Day-Labourers, or when he met with poor people in
his way, he would be speaking to them of the things of God, and that which
concerned their eternal peace; A rare Practice in a Gentleman. As to the
Education of his Children, and bringing them up in the nurture and admonition
of the Lord, I hope, that the sobriety, temperance, and gracefulness of yours
(Dear Sir) and your Sisters Lives, are the genuine fruits thereof; and yet this
is not all. For to the outward form (without question) there was the inward
power. He was nobly descended, being born again, not of Blood, nor of the will
of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God: Yea, stamped with the Divine
Image, made partaker of the Divine Nature, and richly adorned, and beautified
with the gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit: So that he did not act merely
from external motives, but from internal principles, that could not be hid; and
hence it was, that he was filled with the fruits of Righteousness, and like a
Tree planted by the Rivers of water, bringing forth his fruit in due season: Or
rather a Tree planted in the House of the Lord, and flourishing in the Courts
of our God, still bringing forth fruit in old age, so that his Gray Hairs were
a Crown of Glory to him, being found in the way of Righteousness.

He lived about ninety six years a natural life, began the very day of his
Death in Sabbath-work, and finished the work of his Natural Life with the
ending of the day, and so went to his eternal rest, in the bosom of his dear
Jesus; he lay down, and slept in the Lord. But, as he did not live (though he
lived long) undesired, so he did not dye unlamented; witness the Throng and
Concourse of serious Christians, that accompanied his Corpse to the Church,
where his Body was interred, and laid to rest, (and that in sharp weather, in a
bitter Evening) with a silent and grave deportment, as true Spiritual Mournerrs
are wont to do, at the Funeral of some eminent and remarkable man. Leves
loquuntur, ingentes stupent --

Honored, My design is not to renew your grief, on the one hand, nor to
flatter you on the other, but to be your Remembrancer, and to put you in mind
of those things which you know, and are well assured of, being Eye, and
Ear-witnesses thereof, that you may be stirred up to make a right use of his
holy Example and Copy, which he left behind him, and with you in particular, to
imitate and write after. So shall you approve your selves to be of the number
of the remarkable ones on the Earth, and your End shall be in Peace. I have
nothing more to add, but that I am

Your very humble Servant, Samuel Blackerby.
Stow-Market, December. 2. 1673.
Psalm. 37.37. Mark the Perfect man and behold the Upright: for the end of that
man is peace.


COsmographers divide the inhabitable world into sundry, and many parts, and
tell us, that of those many, the fewest are those that own the Christian
Religion, or the name of a Christ: but alas! how few of these, are the men, we
find in my Text, perfect and upright men? the heap of chaff, is far greater
than the wheat; and the number of Bristol, or pebbles stones, far greater then
of Pearls and Diamonds. Christ's flock is a very little, little flock (as the
Greek expresses it, Luke 12.32.) Many are called, but few are chosen, Matthew.
20.16. Cast out the grossly ignorant, the practical Atheist, the debauched and
profane, such as have made a covenant with death, and are at an agreement with
hell, that can drink and whore, swear, and blaspheme the Sacred Name of God,
profane his Sabbaths, contemn his Ordinances, cast his Law behind their backs,
and hate to be accounted serious in Religion, least they should bear the odious
title of Phanaticks: I say, cast out all these walking dunghils, and monstrous
miscreants; what a small number will be left behind, that have any color, or
appearance of reason to account themselves of the number of those that are
deciphered and characterized in my Text? I, but then, cast out all hypocrites,
such as have a name to live, and yet are dead; such as have the form of
godliness, and yet deny the power thereof; such as have their lamps of
profession, but are destitute of the oil of saving grace: Why, then perhaps,
you will be at a stand, and ready to say, we scarce know where to find these,
heaven may be full of such, but the earth bears but a few of them, if any:
Herb-a-grace is very scarce: and it is very true, such as these, are very rare:
there are but a very, very few of perfect and upright ones; but where ever they
are, they ought to be marked and observed; for so says the Psalmist in my
Text, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is
peace.

In which words we have two considerables.

1. A double duty enjoined; Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright. 2. A
reason or motive to enforce the double duty; For the end of that man is peace.
First, Here is a double duty enjoined; Wherein you have, 1. The Subject
Matter, or Act. 2. The Object.


1. The Subject Matter or Act; Mark and behold. 2. The Object; The perfect man,
and the upright.
First, Here is the Subject Matter or Act.

1. To Mark. 2. To Behold.
1. To Mark; The Hebrew word (Shamar) in its Primitive signification, signifies
to keep or preserve one from danger; And therefore, a Noun, coming from this
Verb, signifies a watchtower, a place to descry a danger for prevention of it:
Now because it is the duty of a watchman, that is set in a watchtower, to
observe all comers and goers, enemies as well as friends; I, and to be very
diligent and accurate in his observation of them: Therefore I conceive, the
Holy Ghost is pleased to make use of this word, here in our Text; For such a
kind of observation we ought to make of the perfect, and upright man, that a
watchman should, of all comers and goers near the watchtower. We should be
very accute herein, as of a matter of great concern; a slight thought of him is
not sufficient. No! we should take special notice of him, as a person most
remarkable; mark the perfect man.

2. As we should mark him, so we must behold him; Mark and Behold; The latter
word imports more then the former; For, in the Hebrew Language it signifies,
sometimes, to behold an object with pleasure, delight, and admiration; as
persons exceedingly taken, and taken up with the object; and so here, for there
are many that will very accutely and exactly Mark and observe the perfect and
upright man; I, and watch him too, in all his motions and actings, as far as
they can: I, but they watch and observe him with an evil eye; Not with any
pleasure or delight in him; Not with an eye of approbation, but with an eye of
reprobation; Not with an eye of admiration, but with an eye of detestation; not
with an eye of imitation, but with an eye of malediction; unless he chance to
trip and stumble in his way; and then, they make no better use of it, then
this: they that were careless and remiss before, in observing, and beholding
themselves in reference to their own sinful ways, grow more careless and remiss
after, until they become past recovery, and eternally wrapped up in misery,
unless grace prevents. Such watchmen there are in the world, but they do not
observe the watchword in the Text; for that is of another import: and certainly
it must needs be great injustice, to fix an evil eye upon one, whom the holy
Ghost is pleased to set forth, under two glorious and admirable titles, as are
expressed in the Text. The object is no contemptible object: but a rare and
soul taking object. The Holy Ghost does not set thee to feed thy eye, and thy
soul with a mere shadow, a low and empty thing: but with that which may afford
thee a due, and fit object of soul-contemplation.

1. The perfect man. 2. The upright man.
Two inseparable companions in one Subject: for no man is perfect, but he that
is upright, and no man upright but he that is perfect, in a Gospel sense: And
therefore, I find the same word, that is rendered here, perfect, in other texts
is translated upright; And so Genesis 17.1. Walk before me and be thou perfect,
or, as in the Margin, be thou upright; for as uprightness, and sincerity, is
Gospel perfection; so they always go together. And yet, when we have both the
expressions, in one text, as here, we must distinguish the sense: for it is not
a tautologie: And therefore, says a Divine of ours, the former may be taken
for inward soundness, the latter for outward justice and equity, respecting a
man's dealings in the world, or in two words, a perfect man, is a plain hearted
man; and an upright man, is a plain dealing man: in the one, you may mark, and
behold, the holiness and grace of his heart, in the other, the holiness of his
life; and both are to be marked and beheld, with much accuteness of
observation, joined with admiration and delight.

Object. But some will say, is this a truth, that any man is perfect in this
life, does not S. Paul, an eminent Saint and servant of God deny perfection,
Phil. 3. Not as though I were already perfect?

Answ. By a distnction.

There is a twofold perfection, 1. A Perfection of Justification. 2. A
Perfection of Sanctification.


1. A Perfection of Justification: and in this respect all true believers are
completely perfect, i. e. They are perfectly justified: So Heb. 10.14. By one
offering he ( i.e. Christ) has perfected for ever them that are sanctified.
And Col. 2.10. And ye are complete in him. It Is true in themselves they are
incomplete and imperfect: but in Christ they are complete and perfect: in
themselves sinners, but in Christ righteous. For as a man looking upon an
object with a pair of colored Spectacles, takes the object to be of the same
color; So God looking upon persons through Christ, who is righteous, looks
upon them, as righteous, their sin is charged upon him; and his righteousness
is imputed unto them: So says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.21. He was made sin for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. So that God looks
not upon a true believer, as a sinner, but as righteous, for he looks upon him,
in him, that for his sake, was made a sinner, not by inhaesion or
transgression, but by imputation.

2. There is a perfection of Sanctification, and this is twofold, 1. A
Perfection in respect of Parts. 2. A Perfection in respect of Degrees.


As a child that has all the parts of a man, may be said to be a perfect
child, although it be not grown up to the age, and stature of a man: So a Child
of God, that has all the saving and sanctifying graces of Gods Spirit, and the
lines of his image drawn upon him, may be said to be perfect, although he is
not yet come to his full age, and growth in grace; such a one is fundamentally
perfect, although he is not complementally perfect; grace is glory inchoate,
and glory is grace consummate; As soon as ever a man becomes a new man, he is a
young glory, although he be not complementally glorious: yea, he is such a
glory, and so perfect in glory, at the first, that he is worthy of our due
observation; and a fit object of contemplation with great delight, and
admiration. Mark the perfect man and behold the upright: observe him
accurately, and thoroughly; yea, fix the eye of your souls upon him intensly,
and with the greatest delight, pleasure, and admiration, that you can.

Thus I have opened the first part of my text, and shall resolve it into this
proposition.

That a perfect and upright man, is a remarkable man, worthy of a delightful
contemplation; or thus, a godly man is a taking object; there is much in him to
take the heart, and feed the eyes of men with delight, and pleasure. And
indeed, next to God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit, he is the most taking the
most delightful object: the whole world affords not the like: in that respect,
he is a none such. I, what though he be never so poor in the world, that he
has scarce a rag to cover his nakedness, or a piece of bread to put into his
mouth, or an house to put his head in: yet for all this, he is a taking object;
for I may say of him, as our Savior of the Lillies, that Solomon, in all his
glory, was not arrayed like one of these. So the greatest person upon the
earth, in all his outward glory and splendor, if he be destitute of true
grace, is not clothed as one of these; all his beauty is but deformity: his
greatness but meanness, and his riches but poverty; the righteous, says
Solomon, is more excellent then his neighbor. I, though the neighbor be never
so great in the world? it is grace that renders a man truly excellent, and truly
honorable. For,

1. Look upon him as to his pedigree and birth, and see from whence he came,
and you must needs take him for a great and noble personage; So John 1.13. born
not of blood (or, as in the Original, not of bloods) nor of the will of man,
but of God. Many men boast, and brag much of their parentage, and the family or
house they came out of. Such a Duke, such a Lord, such a great person was their
Father, or Grandfather, and such a great person is their brother, or their
uncle or near allies. But alas, what is this to a man's being born from above,
to come out of the family of heaven, to have God for thy Father, and Christ for
thy Brother, and near ally? the other is not to be named with this. No, were
thy earthly parents beggars from door to door, and thou born naturally upon a
dunghill, yet if thou have God for thy Spiritual Father, thou art more nobly
descended, then all the great ones in the world, if they are not born from
above, as well as from beneath. I tell thee thy relation speaks thee noble and
honorable.

2. Look upon him as to his education and breeding, and see how he is
disciplined and trained up, and you must needs be taken therewith. He is
remarkable for that there are many that will boast of their breeding, if not of
their birth; And indeed, there is as much to be considered in that, if not
more, then in the other. And therefore Alexander the Great, thought himself as
much bound to his Tutor, as to his Father; because the one gave him his being,
but the other his well-being; the one was the instrument of life, and the other
fitted him to live in the world. Why Beloved, a godly man has not only the
best birth, but the best breeding, for as he is born of God, so he is taught of
God. Whoever is the usher or sub-tutor, God is the Master-teacher; So John
6.45. It is written in the Prophets; And they shall be all taught of God; And 1
These. 4.9. Ye are taught of God to love one another. Now if God undertakes the
work, it must needs be admirably well done; those must needs be well taught,
that have God for their teacher; for as he teaches men the best things that
can be taught, and learnt: so he teaches them in the best way that can be
used; not only in the best method, but also with the greatest efficacy and
power; he makes them such, as he teaches them to be, and causes them to do
that, which he teaches them to do: And in all, enricheth and ennobleth the
minds and spirits of his Disciples, with such kind of learning and knowledge,
as is not to be found in the whole world; he makes them all experimental
Scholars in the great and profound mysteries of Heaven: So that there is not
one in all the world, that can be a match for the meanest Scholar in his
School: No, take a man that with Bereugarius, is able almost to dispute de omni
scibili; or with Solomon, to unravel Nature, from the Cedar to the Hyssop; yet
a poor Soul, in the lowest form in Gods School, that is taught of him, is able
to baffle, and to confound such an one, if once they come to engage in the
matters of Heaven. It Is very true, Beloved, Humane Learning ought not to be
despised; Humane Arts and Sciences are brave ornaments to the mind, and are
very useful in many respects: I, but not to be compared with divine and
heavenly light and knowledge. If Humane Learning be as the Ring, Divine
Learning is as the Pearl or Diamond in the Ring; and far exceeds it in worth
and excellency.

3. Look upon him as to the complexion of his Soul, and the air of his
Countenance. And indeed, as a man may read much of the complexion of another
man's Soul in the air of his Countenance; so did Jacob in Laban's, which put him
to the flight: So there is much glory, and beauty in the Soul and Countenance
of a godly man. Solomon says, Wisdom makes the face to shine; how much more
does it make the Soul to shine, for that is the seat thereof. Mark that of the
Apostle, 2 Cor. 3.18. We all, with open face, beholding as in a glass, the
glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image. Now if there be beauty and
glory in the Original, there must needs be beauty and glory in the Copy; else
the Copy will not be any ways answerable to the Original. And therefore, says
Christ to his Church, Cant. 2.14. Let me hear thy voice, and see thy
countenance, for pleasant is thy voice, and thy countenance is comely. Yea, he
is so taken therewith, that it puts him, as it were into a rapture, it
ravisheth his Soul, or takes away his Heart, as the Hebrew signifies, Cant.
4.9. And indeed a gracious Soul, is a lovely and amiable Soul; the greatest
beauty in the world. She stands not in need of a black patch, to set her off,
or to commend her to others.

4. Look upon a godly man, as to his life and conversation, and you must needs
say, that he is very remarkable; for he is one, that walks with God, in the way
of God, even in that way, that leads to the fullest fruition, and enjoyment of
God: Nay, he is one, that lives the life that God lives, in some measure; for
he lives a life of holiness, and that is the life that God lives. It Is true, he
lives on the Earth, but his conversation is in Heaven, where his God and his
Treasure is: Yea, it is true, he lives in Flesh, but not after the Flesh; for
whilst he lives in Flesh, he lives in the Spirit, and walks in the Spirit; and
so turns the life of Nature, into a life of Grace. Now the more excellent the
life of any being is, the more remarkable and admirable is that being. What is
it, that renders an Angel so admirable, but because he lives an Angelical life.
And what is it, that advances a man above a beast, but because he lives a
better life, then a beast does. I speak now, of men that live like men, and not
like bruits; and so, that advances a godly man, above all other men; because
he lives a better life then others do. The life of Reason, is better then the
life of Sense; but the life of Grace and Religion is far better then the life
of Reason. Had I but time to set it forth in some particular instances, this
demonstration would carry a strong conviction with it, into the hearts of any
unbyassed hearers, and cause them to confess, that none upon the face of the
earth, live such honorable and noble lives as Saints do. Holiness of life is a
conformity to the most noble and honorable Rule, even the law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus. Holiness of life, is a conformity to the most noble and
honorable pattern. Holiness of life is the power and virtue of Christ,
expressed to the life; it is the Divine nature manifested in Humane flesh, it is
the Spirit of God, breathing through corporal acts. Holiness of life, is the
admiration of Angels, the joy and delight of the eternal God: (he takes
pleasure in his Saints) and therefore must needs be a taking object; it is very
true, it is a great Paradox and Riddle to the men of the world: For it is
simplicity, without foolery; it is gravity, without moroseness; it is humility,
without will worship; it is singularity, without affectation; it is reservedness,
without narrowness and streightness of spirit; it is an holy freedom and
liberty, without licenciousness; meekness, without cowardice; stoutness and
valor of Spirit, without pride and cruelty; patient for God, but impatient
against sin; a sufferer in its own cause, but a warrior in Christ's; a death
unto sin and the world, but a new life unto righteousness, and unto God. The
man dies to all things here below, that are sinful, vain and transitory, and
lives unto things above: Nay, which is the most to be admired in him, is this;
that a Saints life is not only cross, and contrary to the life and conversation
of wicked and ungodly men; but ever when others are worst, then he labors to
be best. Thee have I seen righteous, says God to Noah; I, the worse they grow,
the better he labors to be; like the glowworm, that shines brightest in a
dark night. Then Daniel opened his window, when Prayer to the true God, was
decried, and by the most restrained. Then did Elijah plead for God, when almost
the whole Nation were for Baal, and Baals Prophets were 450; here was great
odds between them, and yet the Prophets holy zeal carried him through his
undertaking, until he saw a good success thereof. Holiness of heart and life,
has ever carried away the Bell, and Crown at last: And therefore, well might
the Psalmist say in our Text, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright:
for the end of that man is peace. The end of his actings, and the end of his
life is peace. And that leads me to a

5. Demonstration of the excellency and admirableness of a godly man, and is
the second part of the Text, viz. The motive or argument, wherewith the
Psalmist presses and urges his exhortation and holy injunction. Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright: for the end of that man is peace. The
finis cui, the end for which he is set, is for Peace. And the finis cujus, his
end and winding up is Peace. Arias Montanus renders it; The last to the man is
peace. It Is true, he meets with many a brush by the way; in the world, Saints
shall have trouble on every side: none meets with so many, all winds blow cross
to him, at one time or another. Sin, Satan, and the World; he is their But and
Mark, at which they level all their poisonous, and deadly Arrows. If an Heathen
could say, Nos fuimus Troes, agitamur ventis. What may not a Saint say in this
respect: Surely as the Prophet, Esaias 54.12. I am afflicted, tossed with a
tempest, and not comforted: Or as the Apostle St. Paul, Without were fightings,
within were fears: Or as the Church, Psalm. 128.3. The plowers plowed upon my
back, they made long their furrows. I, but still mark and behold him in all
this, look not only to his setting out, but to his Journeys end; for though he
sails through rough and rugged waves, and is often in danger of splitting upon
Soul-ruining Rocks, or sticking in the Sands; yet at last he arrives at the
Haven of Rest: The end of that man is peace. And it must needs be so; for as
Christ has forewarned him of the one, so he has assured him of the other,
John 16.33. In the world you shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace.
If they have not it, in this life; yet they shall not miss of it, in the life to
come: The end of those men is peace. The best Wine is reserved for the last,
and the Crown for the Conquest. It Is very true, that Grace is given to men here
in this life, or else it is never given: I, but it is as true, that if Peace be
denied to a gracious Soul in this life; yet it shall not be denied to her, in
the life to come, Esaias 32.17. Though the Soul sows in tears, all the time of
her abode in the body; yet she shall reap in joy, when she has got her freedom
from that prison. Below she may happily spend her days in mourning; but above,
she shall spend an eternity in singing and rejoicing. Here she mourns, and
sighs, and cries, because she is no better; but there she shall rejoice and
sing, because she is so well: And indeed, the word Peace, is of large extent;
it comprehends all the desires of the Soul of man, even felicity and happiness
to the utmost: And therefore the ancient Salutation of the Jews, was Peace; for
that is the most desirable thing. Heaven would be no Heaven, if there were no
Peace enjoyable there: And Hell would be no Hell, if Peace were enjoyable
there. Give a man true and solid Peace, and you give him Heaven; take Peace
from him, and he is in Hell. Holiness and Wickedness, divides the World; and
Peace and Trouble, divides the states of men in the world. To the wicked God
says, There is no Peace; to the godly he says, The end is Peace. For,

1. Then he is above all danger; above the power of Sin, the malice of Men, and
the rage of Hell. He has nothing to trouble, or disquiet him; no temptations
from without, nor from within; he is now sinless, and therefore sorrowless. A
godly man goes free into Heaven, and there enjoyes the utmost freedom.

2. Then he is at his Center, and there enjoyes Rest, and therefore Peace; God
is the proper Center of the Soul. And therefore (as the ancient Father has it)
we are not at rest, until we come to God. I, but when we come to God, then we
are at rest, for then we are in our proper Sphere. In thy presence is fullness
of joy, and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore. I, joy without
sorrow, and pleasure without pain; I, and such a fullness, as puts an end to all
anxious and painful desires; for in God the Soul enjoyes full, and perfect
satisfaction, without any glut. When I awake (says the Psalmist) I shall be
satisfied with thy likeness. And when the Appetite is satisfied, and the Belly
filled, we say, the Bones are at rest. Sure I am, when the Soul is full, she is
at rest; here she is in motion, traveling from Duty, to Duty; and from
Ordinance, to Ordinance; and from Scripture, to Scripture; and all to get
something of God whom she loves, and after whom she breaths: but in Heaven, she
is at rest, for there she is filled with all the fullness of God: God is the
All, of a gracious Soul here, and there he will be all in all to her, and all
in her: The lines of his glory will be completely drawn upon her then, and she
swallowed up in divine embraces, without the least interruption. Alas, Sirs,
here you have but a taste; but there a Saint shall swim in the Ocean of divine
goodness and love. This, this is the great end of a perfect and upright man;
who is born of God, taught of God, beautified by the indwelling of God, and
raised up by the power of the Divine Spirit, to a most admirable converse with,
and conformity to the life of God; The end of that man is peace. As soon as
ever he enters into the Mansion of Glory, he enters into Peace. (As you have
it, Esaias 57.2.) And all the time he lodges there, he dwells in peace: For
though the end of that man is Peace, yet the Peace of that man shall never end;
the Crown of Life, is a never-fading Crown; not a Crown of Gold, but of Glory:
The Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom.

Now, Beloved, put all these things together, and see if a perfect and upright
man, be not a remarkable man, and worthy of your observation, and delightful
contemplation? The truth is, he is often the worlds wonder; I, but it is very
certain, he is a person of whom the world is not worthy. As you have it, Heb.
11.38. Not that he has any worth in, and from himself; no, in himself he has
nothing that is good. In my flesh (says Paul) there dwells no good. But as he
lives from God, and lives in God, and receives communications from him, he is
an admirable piece, next to the man Christ Jesus, he is the Masterpiece of
Divine Love and Grace. Oh, where is the person so blind, so sottish and mad, as
will not be taken with such a man! for so are all those, that are not taken
with him; but why should we wonder at this? when as there are so many that take
little or no notice of God, so few that fix their eyes upon their maker, so few
that love him, or take any delight in him. If the Original be slighted, no
wonder if the Copy be: The Panther bears an implacable enmity and hatred
against Man, and therefore cannot endure the picture of a man; and so here, Men
by nature are enemies to God, and therefore they hate his Image where ever it
appears.

Application. But O Sirs, let me beg of you, that you will not be of that
number: No, but let your hearts fall under the power of this Divine Truth in
the Text. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright.

I know that unregenerate men ought to be marked and observed: But how, 1. That
we may reprove them, according as occasion offered. 2. That we may pity and
commiserate their lost and undone estate. 3. That we may be stirred up to pray
for them, and commend their condition to God. 4. That we may admire free Grace,
that makes the difference.


I, but though we should mark, and behold the wicked; yet not as we should mark
and behold the godly: No, we should mark the latter. So as

1. To admire God in him; for what is the perfection and uprightness of any
man, but God in the man, working and framing him to such a gracious temper in
his heart and life? I tell you, if you do admire the goodness and grace of any
man, and do not at that time, look upon God as the fountain and efficient
thereof, you do but set up an Idol: No, God is the all, and the do-all in the
man; and therefore he, and he alone is to be admired. Oh, when you see the man
in the Text, say, God is in the man; and therefore I am taken with him.

2. To mark and observe him so, as to imitate him, as far as he is imitable. So
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye followers of me, even as I am also of
Christ. I know that the best of men in themselves, and left to themselves, are
but men; and therefore not to be followed in all things, at all times. David,
Solomon, etc. are not to be imitated in all things: I, but so far as their
acting, and behavior speaks forth God in them, they are to be marked for our
imitation, and Copy, after which we should write; For you can never be like him
in his end, unless you be somewhat like him in his beginning and progress. You
must not only desire with Balaam, that you may die the death of the righteous,
but you must also live the life the righteous; you must be perfect and upright
ones, or else your end will not be Peace. This eternal Crown will not be set
upon any man's head, but upon his that has run the race of Gospel-perfection
and uprightness, and finished his course; does not only begin, but holds out to
the last: For the Text tells us, that it is he, and he only, whose end and last,
or winding up, shall be Peace. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright:
for the end of that man is Peace.

FINIS.

