THE SUFFICIENCY Of a Standing REVELATION in General, AND Of the Scripture
REVELATION in Particular. BOTH As to the Matter of it, and As to the Proof of
it; AND That NEW REVELATIONS Cannot Reasonably be Desired, and Would Probably
be Unsuccessful.

In Eight SERMONS, Preached in the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, London; At the
LECTURE Founded by the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire in the Year MDCC.

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, D. D. Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

THE SUFFICIENCY OF A Standing Revelation.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, January the 1st.
1699/700. BEING The First, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

To the most Reverend Father in GOD, THOMAS Lord Arch-Bshop of Canterbury; Sir
HENRY ASHURST Baronet; Sir JOHN ROTHERAM, Sergeant at Law; JOHN EVELYN Senior
Esquire; Trustees appointed by the Will of the Honorable ROBERT BOIL Esquire.
Most Reverend and Honored,
I Beg leave humbly to present you with these First Fruits of my Labors in
that Station which you have been pleased to assign me for this Year; Taking
this Occasion both to acknowledge publicly, and with all Thankfulness the
Honor you have done me in appointing me to this Work; and likewise to give you
Assurance that the After-fruits shall also in due Time be offered to you, if
God shall be pleased to give them a Season to ripen; And I heartily wish they
may be better and more worth your Acceptance than I am sensible these are.

However, I hope the same Goodness and kind Opinion of me which moved you to
nominate me to the Employment will incline you to forgive all my Failings in
the Management of it.

And if my Labors shall be well accepted by you; And especially, If by the
Blessing of God, (who only gives the Increase) they shall any Ways contribute
toward the Promoting the pious Design of the Honorable Founder of these
Lectures, of blessed Memory, I shall be very easy under the too just Charge of
Insufficiency for such an Undertaking, which I make no Doubt will be cast upon
me by those who will be inwardly glad that I have performed my Task no better,
and will earnestly wish that the Christan Cause may never have an abler
Advocate.

But that by your wise Choice of Persons to succeed in this Employment, they
may see themselves every Year disappointed in this their Wish, is the hearty
Desire of,

Most Reverend and Honored, Your most obliged and obedient Servant OFSP.
BLACKALL.
Feb. 26. 1699/700.
St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

THESE words contain some of the Discourse that passed between Abraham in
Heaven, and a certain rich Man in Hell; occasioned by a Request which he had
made in the foregoing Verses, in the behalf of his five Brethren whom he had
left alive upon Earth; that Abraham would be so kind as to send Lazarus to
them, to testify to them, lest they also should come into that Place of
Torment. And the general Design of them, and indeed of the whole Parable of
which they are a Part, is to assert the Sufficiency of those Means which God
has thought fit to use to bring Men to Repentance, particularly by granting
them a standing Revelation of his Will; and the probable Unsuccessfulness of
any other Method that we could propose, and perhaps might think more proper for
this Purpose.

And when these Words were first spoken, it was with a special Reference to the
State of the Jews, and and to that Light, and those Means of Salvation which
were afforded to them, at the Time when our Savior began his Preaching; when
all the standing Revelation of God's Will, was contained in the Books of Moses,
and in the Writings of the Prophets.

But since then our Lord Jesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, a more credible
Messenger than Lazarus from the dead, has come himself in Person to assure us
that there is a Heaven and a Hell, and to show us the Means of attaining that,
and avoiding this; and God having raised him up from the dead, after he had
been crucified by the Jews, has given sufficient Assurance to the World of his
divine Mission; And that Jesus did and said such things, and that he died and
rose again, we have the Testimony of his Apostles, and others, who were Eye and
Ear-witnesses thereof, and who in Confirmation of their Testimony were
empowered by God to do as great Miracles as Jesus himself had done; And lastly,
of what was done and taught by our Savior and his Apostles, we have very
credible Records still remaining, viz. the Books of the New Testament; the
Authority of which is at least as well proved to us, as ever the Authority of
the Old Testament was to the Jews: So that we now have plainly more and
stronger Motives to Repentance, than the Jews before our Savior's Time had; we
consequently do stand in less need of new Miracles and new Revelations than
they did; And therefore the Argument in the Text, as it may be applied to us
who live now, is much stronger than as it was here urged by Abraham with
Reference to the Jews, while they had only Moses and the Prophets.

And thus in my Discourse upon the Words, I shall now consider it, viz. as if
the Request made by the rich Man in the Behalf of his Brethren, in the two
foregoing Verses, were made now in the Behalf of those to whom the Revelation
of the Gospel has been given, but without Success; and as if the Answer here
returned to it by Abraham, had been suited to the present State of things.

And from the words, thus largely understood, I shall take occasion to speak to
these Three Points.

I. I shall endeavor to show that the present standing Revelation of God's
Will, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament is abundantly
sufficient to persuade Men to Repentance, if they are not unreasonably blind
and obstinate. They have Moses and the Prophets, (I add, they have also Christ,
and his Apostles;) let them hear them.

II. I shall show that having already such good Grounds of Faith, such full
Directions for Practice, and such strong Motives to Repentance, it is an
unreasonable Request to desire more. Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto
them from the dead, they will repent. And,

III. Lastly, I shall endeavor to show, That in case God should condescend to
gratify Men in this unreasonable Desire (working every Day new Miracles before
their Eyes, or sending their deceased Friends to them from the dead, to assure
them of a future State, and to warn them to prepare for it) it is highly
probable that very few or none of those who do not believe, and are not brought
to Repentance by the Preaching and standing Revelation of the Gospel, would be
persuaded by this Means. If they hear not Moses, and the Prophets (nor Christ
and his Apostles) neither will they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

I. I shall endeavor to show that the present standing Revelation of God's
Will, contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament is abundantly
sufficient to persuade Men to Repentance, if they are not unreasonably blind
and obstinate. They have Moses and the Prophets, (Christ and his Apostles) let
them hear them.

And, I think, that if the standing Revelation which God has made of his Will
in the Holy Scriptures, can upon any account be thought insufficient to effect
this Design, it must be upon one of these two Accounts; viz. Either, 1. Because
no standing Revelation can be sufficient for this Purpose; Or, 2. Because there
are some particular Defects in that standing Revelation which we have in the
Holy Scripture, which render it not so sufficient for this Purpose as it is
possible a standing Revelation might be.

1. It may be pretended that no standing Revelation can be sufficient for this
Purpose. I am now therefore to enquire with what Reason this can be pretended.

And in speaking to this Point, it does not lie upon me to prove that God could
not reveal his Mind afresh to every Man in every Age of the World, if he so
pleased; for there is no question but that the same God who in diverse manners
spoke in times past to our Fathers by the Prophets, could, if he pleased, speak
to every one of us their Children, in such Manner as he then spoke to the
Prophets themselves; so that we might be all immediately taught of God as they
were. But every thing that may be done is not expedient to be done; And whether
this Method would be expedient or not, will be hereafter enquired.

Neither does it now lie upon me to prove, that this Way which God has thought
fit to take to instruct the greatest Part of the World, viz. by a standing
Revelation, is the best Way, and the most like to be effectual of any that
could be used. Of this I shall likewise have Occasion to speak somewhat
hereafter.

But what lies upon me at present to make good, is only this, That a standing
Revelation of God's Will may be so well contrived and so well attested as to be
sufficient to persuade Men.

And if there be any Ground for the contrary Pretense, I think it must be,
either, 1. Because all Matters necessary to be known and done by Men at all
Times, cannot at once be committed to Writing: Or, 2. Because there cannot be
sufficient Evidence given to satisfy a Rational Man, that any Writing that is
said to be of divine Inspiration and Authority, is indeed so.

1. It may be said, That all Matters necessary to be known and done by Men at
all Times, cannot be at once committed to Writing: Because every Age of the
World produces new Opinions, which whether they be erroneous or not, cannot be
judged by a Criterion that was given many Ages before these Opinions were
broached: And as the World grows older in Years, it likewise improves in
Wickedness, which cannot be restrained and suppressed by an old Law which was
made before several Instances of those Wickednesses that are now practiced were
either known or thought of. And if it were not so, what need would there be of
such a number of Books as are written in every Age to direct Men how to
distinguish between Truth and Error, and what Opinions to fix upon in that
great Variety of Opinions that are offered to them? Or what need would there be
of so many new Laws as are daily made in every Commonwealth to restrain the
growing Extravagances of Mankind, and to keep them within due Bounds? So that
if there be any Necessity at all of divine Revelation to teach Men the Belief
of Truth and the Practice of Righteousness, it is necessary that there should
be a new and fresh Revelation made, at least as often as any new Error is
broached, or any new Piece of Villainy is practiced in the World.

But to this Objection against the Sufficiency of a Standing Revelation, I
suppose a full Answer will be given in these two particulars.

(1.) That there is no Arguing from the Wisdom and Power of Men, to the Wisdom
and Power of God. It may be granted to be impossible for a Man to write such a
Book as shall be sufficient to confute all the Errors that can possibly at any
time afterward spring up; Or to compile such a Body of Laws as shall be
sufficient to prevent or punish all future Crimes; But what is impossible with
Men, may be possible with God; who has a perfect Foresight of all the Errors
that will ever be broached, and of all the Wickedness that will ever be
practiced by Men to the End of the World, To a Being of infinite Wisdom and
Knowledge it may be not only possible, but very easy so to contrive a
Revelation, designed by him for the Direction of future Ages, that no Addition
shall ever after need to be made to it. Nay indeed,

(2.) The Thing it self, that is, That a standing Revelation should be thus
perfect; that it should be so contrived at once, and at first, as to be
sufficient to answer all the Ends of a divine Revelation as long as the World
shall last, is not very hard to be conceived.

For though Error be infinite, Truth, at least all Truth necessary to be
believed, is finite and limited; And after a divine Revelation is once given,
no more is necessary to be believed in after Ages than was at first; nor will
there ever be more things necessary to be believed to the End of the World,
unless God shall please to add some new Revelation to the former. And this
Revelation of all necessary Truth once made, being given to Men that are endued
with Reason, nothing more is, or ever will be needful for the Discovery and
Confutation of all Errors that can possibly spring up in after Ages, but only a
right Understanding of the Truths already delivered, and a right Use of Reason
in making Inferences, and drawing Consequences therefrom. And this is all that
is pretended to by the Books of Controversy that are written in every Age: The
Design of them is not to declare new Truths, or to establish new Articles of
Faith, but only to show that those Opinions which they represent as false and
erroneous, are either in themselves, or in their true Consequences, contrary to
some Maxims that are already received as true.

And it is no less easy to conceive that a standing Revelation may be at once
so contrived as to be for ever sufficient to direct Men in all Points of
Practice: Because although it is possible that every Age may afford new Instances
of Wickedness, yet the Law that they are all Transgressions of, may be but one.
And the Rule once given is a perpetual Direction, not only what to do, but
likewise what to avoid; and this, as well in those Instances of Wickedness
which may be invented afterward, as in those which were in Practice before the
Rule was made. For he that giving Direction to a Traveller in his Way, bids him
keep strait forward, shall not need, (if he speaks to a Man of Reason) to tell
him, over and above, that he must be careful to avoid all Turnings to the right
hand or to the left; and much less shall he need to give him a particular
Account of every Turning that he is to avoid. And though in Time to come there
would be many more By-ways and Turnings out of the Road than there are at
present, yet the same one Direction, to keep strait forward, will be as full
and as sufficient a Direction then, as it is now.

And the Necessity that Humane Lawgivers find themselves under to be every Day
repealing former Laws and adding new Ones, is not caused by an absolute
Impossibility of making at once such a Body of Laws as might be sufficient for
all after Times; but arises (as I suppose) Partly from the Nature of Humane
Laws, which are, for the most part, Negative and Prohibitive only; and by such
a Law nothing is rendered unlawful but what is named; and to name at once every
thing that is then, or may be in all after Ages needful to be prohibited, would
indeed be a Work of very great Difficulty; Partly, from the Nature of that
Obedience that is due to a mere Humane Law, which is only an external
Obedience, and to the Letter of the Law; and that indeed must needs be a Law,
or a Body of Laws of a prodigious Bulk, and very difficult to be contrived at
once, which in the Letter thereof shall comprehend and give Direction
concerning every Action, and every Mode of Action that are necessary to be done
or forbore, in order to the preserving Justice and Peace among Men; Partly,
from the little Regard that Men generally have to the good of Posterity, which
makes them only careful to contrive such Orders and Constitutions, as they hope
will suffice to preserve Peace in their own time, leaving it to those that come
after, to take the like Care for themselves in their Times; Partly, from the
Weakness and Ignorance of the wisest of Men, who not understanding exactly the
Tempers of all their Subjects, cannot know certainly what Effect their Laws
will have, till after they have been for some time experienced; And partly,
from the unexpected Difficulty that is sometimes met with in the Execution of a
Law, which may make it necessary afterward to enforce it with a greater
Penalty, or to take some further Care than at first was thought needful to see
it executed.

But none of these Reasons of the Necessity of new Laws among Men are of any
force to show that it is also necessary that God should be every Day making new
Declarations of his Will, and that no Standing Revelation can be sufficient for
all Times; For the Laws of God are positive and commanding, enjoining the
truest and heartiest Love both to God and Men, and every natural and proper
Expression thereof, and by consequence prohibiting every Affection of Mind, and
every outward Act that is contrary thereto, whether it be expressly named or
not; And the Obedience that we owe to a divine Law, is the Obedience of the
Heart and of the whole inner Man, such as looks beyond the Letter to the Design
and Intention of the Law, and avoids as carefully whatsoever is contrary to the
Reason of the Law, as if it had been forbidden in the most express Words: And
God being King for ever and ever, has the same Relation to all Men in all Ages,
and cannot but be supposed to design the good Government of his Subjects in
after, as well as in former Times; And he also, understanding fully the Tempers
of all his Subjects, knows beforehand what Effect the Laws he gives them will
have, and can never be disappointed in his Expectation; and so can never be
obliged to repeal or alter any of his Laws, by an unforeseen Experience, that
they are not so convenient, or so effectual as he thought they would be; And
lastly, He, having all Power in his Hands, and a sovereign and uncontrollable
Dominion over all, can appoint what Penalty he pleases to the Transgression of
his Laws; can at any time convict Transgressors by his own unerring Knowledge
only, and the Testimony of their guilty Consciences, without other Witnesses;
and has it in his own single Power, without any Help of others, to execute,
whenever he will, whatever Penalty he threatens.

Thus, I think, it appears that a standing Revelation may be so well contrived,
as to be sufficient for all Times; that all Matters necessary to be known and
done by Men at all Times may be at once committed to Writing.

2. But Secondly, Though this be granted, it may be still further objected
against the Sufficiency of a Standing Revelation, that it can hardly be
sufficiently attested; that there cannot be sufficient Evidence given to
satisfy a Rational Man, that any such Writing, which is said to be of divine
Inspiration and Authority, is indeed so; And that, (1.) Because there is no
Way, but Eyewitness, to be sufficiently assured that any Book was written by
the Person who is said to be the Author of it; (2.) Because there is no Way to
be sufficiently assured, that the Author of such a Book did not design to
impose upon his Readers; And (3.) Because no Man can be sure, that he himself
was not deceived in his Opinion of his own Inspiration, or of a Revelation made
to him; or in the Truth of any other Matter which he has related as of his own
Knowledge.

(1.) It may be said, that there is no Way but Eyewitness to be sufficiently
assured that any Book was written by the Person that is said to be the Author
of it.

But that is very strange, that there should be no other Way to be sufficiently
assured of the Author of any Book, and yet that there are a great many Books in
the World, ancient as well as modern, the Authors whereof were never in the
least doubted of; who yet, I suppose, did not use to call together a Company of
Men to stand by, and see them write those Books which they intended to Publish.

It seems then, that either there may be, besides Eyewitness, sufficient
Reason to believe that a Book was written by the Person under whose Name it
goes; or else that all the World has been extremely credulous in receiving an
infinite Number of Books as written by such and such Authors, without
sufficient Assurance thereof. But I believe the Truth is, There are some Men,
who for Reasons best known to themselves, (but which may, some of them be
easily enough guessed at) will not allow that to be sufficient Evidence that a
Book was written by a Prophet or an Apostle, which they must and do allow to be
sufficient Evidence in any other Case of the like Nature.

For in other Cases we make no Doubt to receive a Book as written by such an
Author, if he owns himself to be the Author of it; or if it be shown written
with his own Hand; or if they that are the Publishers of it, declare that they
had it from him, as his own; or that they transcribed or printed it from a Copy
which they knew to be of his Handwriting; or if it passes current in common
Fame and Report to be his, and his most intimate friends believe it so, and he
himself does not disown it, and there be none else that pretend any Claim or
Title to it. Where these or most of these Circumstances do concur, we never
doubt but that the Person said to be the Author of such a Book, is so indeed;
unless there be some very clear Reason, grounded upon the known Incapacity of
the Person to write in such a Language, in such a Style, concerning such a
Subject, or the like, whereby it may be demonstrated, that (whoever was) he
could not be the Author of it. The truth is, Now adays, (and I suppose the Case
was much the same formerly) whoever is the true Author of any Book, finds very
little Difficulty to make Men believe that the Book is his; the greatest
Difficulty is for a Man to conceal himself, in case he be not willing to be
known to be the Author of it.

And when once a Book is generally received as written by such a Person, (when,
I say, it is thus received) in that Age in which it was first published, and by
those that were in the best Capacity to inquire and to judge who was the true
Author of it; they that live in after times never think it reasonable to
question the Authority thereof, unless there be, evidently, something, either
in the Language, Dialect or Style; or else in the Matter of the Book, as in the
Relation of some Piece of History, the References to some ancient Customs, the
Citations out of other Authors, or the like; by which it may be clearly made
out that the Book cannot be of such Antiquity as it pretends to, or could not
be the Writing of that Person who is reported and has been commonly taken to be
the Author of it.

Upon such Reasons as these, a great many Books are every Day received as
written by such and such Authors; and though we cannot be so sure of a thing that
we believe upon these Inducements, as we are of what we see with our own Eyes;
yet such Reasons as these are by the general Consent of Mankind judged to be
sufficient in a Matter of this Nature, which is hardly capable of better Proof.
And for a Man to disallow in one Case that same Evidence of the Truth of a
Matter of Fact, which in other Cases of the like kind he allows to be
sufficient; for a Man to receive a Book as written by another Person, and not
to receive a Book as written by a Prophet or an Apostle, when he has as much
Reason to receive one as the other, and no more Reason to reject one than the
other, is not Judgment, or Discretion, or reasonable Caution, but manifest
Prejudice and Partiality. But,

(2.) It was further said, That though we might be well enough assured that a
Book was written by the Person who is said to be the Author of it; there is no
Way to be sufficiently assured that who he was the Author of it did not design
to impose upon his Readers.

It seems then, there is no Way to be sufficiently satisfied that any Man is an
honest Man, and fit to be credited; that he does not lie in every thing he
says, and intend a Cheat in every thing he does. For if a Man may be believed
in what he says, he may as well be believed in what he writes; And if he may be
trusted in one Concern, he may be as safely trusted in another, unless good
Reason can be showed to the contrary.

But in judging of humane Nature in general, Men commonly judge of others by
themselves: What they are inclined to, they think is the Inclination of
Mankind; what they allow themselves in, they think others, (whatever they may
pretend) make as little scruple of as they do; what they freely practice, they
make no Doubt other Men would practice as freely, on the same Occasions, and
upon the same Inducements; So that when any Man is so very suspectful of the
Honesty and Veracity of other Men, it gives but too just Ground to think that
the Reason of his Aptness to distrust all others, is his Consciousness of his
own evil Designs, and of the little Regard that he himself has to Truth in his
own Assertions. And if those he has to deal with should refuse to give any
Credit to any thing that he affirms, because, according to his own declared
Opinion, very little Credit can reasonably be given to the Report and
Affirmation of others, I do not see with what Reason he can blame them for so
doing.

Not but that, after all, it is possible that a Man may ('it is doubtless what has
been done by some) give out a Report, or write Book on purpose to deceive
Mankind; But nevertheless, I say, that it ought not without very good Reason to
be suspected that this is any Man's Design; and that we may have Assurance
enough that a thing is not, which yet we must grant was possible to have been.
-- Particularly as to the Matter we are now speaking of.

First; In case the Author of any Book, or of any Report relates a Matter of
Fact, of which there are not, nor well could be, any other Witnesses but
himself; as if he says that he has received from God such a Revelation, with
order to publish it to the World, or that he himself was an Eye or Ear-witness
that such a thing was privately done or spoken by another; the Credibility of
such a Report, whether written or spoken, depends, Partly, upon the Nature of
the Report its self; Partly, upon the Credit of its Author; And partly, upon
the Proofs that he gives of his Honesty and Veracity in that particular. And
where there is a full Concurrence of all these, that is, When the Matter of the
Report is credible in its self; when its Author is a Person of Credit; and when
he gives the best Proofs that can be of his Veracity in that particular; there
is no Reason to reject his Testimony, there is sufficient Reason to give Credit
to it.

1. If the Matter of his Report be credible in its self. And if what he reports
be, that he himself has received such a Revelation from God, with order to
publish it to the World; I say, that this Report in the general is a credible
Report; because it is very agreeable to the Goodness of God, and therefore not
unlikely, that he should impart to Men, by a special Revelation, such things as
are very useful for them to know, and which could not be known, or not so well;
not so fully, clearly and certainly any other Way as by Revelation; and it is
certainly not incredible, that he that has given us a Tongue to utter Words,
and Skill to express thereby our Thoughts to one another, should have Power and
Means to reveal and express his own Mind in such a Manner, that a Man may
understand his Meaning; and it is likewise certainly not incredible in its self,
that God, intending to declare his Will to Mankind, should make Use of the
Ministry of a Man for this Purpose, and having made known his Will to one Man,
give him Commission to communicate the same to others.

If therefore there be any thing incredible in the Report of a divine
Revelation, it must be in the special Matter of it. But although the particular
Matter of any such divine Revelation be such a thing as we could never have
found out by natural Reason; I say, it is nevertheless credible as a Matter
divinely revealed; if it implies no Contradiction; if it be not contrary to
natural Reason; if it be not repugnant to a former divine Revelation that is
well attested; and if it be a Doctrine worthy of God; that is, If in its true
Consequences it has no Tendency to encourage Sin; but on the contrary, has a
plain Tendency to promote the Practice of Piety, and Virtue among Men. Against
such a Revelation as this there can be no just Objection made from the Matter
of it; There is no Improbability that such a Thing as this should be the
Subject of a divine Revelation.

Or if what he reports be, that he himself was by when such a thing was
privately done or spoken by another; In this case the Matter of his Report is
credible in its self, if what he says he was an Eye or Ear-witness of, be a
proper Object of those senses; if it be not an impossible thing; if it does not
imply a Contradiction. And in this case, the Difficulty, the Strangeness, the
Uncommonness of the Thing; its being a thing that was never known to be done or
said before, or which no account can be given of by Reason, or natural Causes,
is no just Exception to the Truth of it. There is nothing in this kind
absolutely incredible, but what is plainly impossible. But,

2. The Credibility of any Report, (supposing the Matter of it to be credible)
depends, in good Measure, upon the Credit of its Author.

And then a Man may reasonably be thought an Author, or a Witness of good
Credit, in Matters of his own Knowledge, when he appears, and by all his other
Words and Actions shows himself to be, grave, sober, considerate, and in his
right Wits; when he is a Person of unblemished Reputation; when he was never
known to lie, or feign, or deceive in other Cases; when he gives no just Ground
to suspect that he is an intrigueing or designing Person; And lastly, when he
himself is no Party to the Cause, has no worldly Interest carrying on in it, no
Design of Honor or Profit, or other temporal Advantage, that, to appearance,
can be served by his giving such Testimony; when he will be neither the better
if his Report be credited, nor the worse if it be not believed. Such a Witness
as this cannot reasonably be excepted against.

3. But 3dly, Even such a Report made by such a Person, is still further
credible, in case he gives also the best Proofs that can be given, or that the
Case will bear, of his Veracity in that Particular.

And it is one very good Token of a Man's own firm Persuasion of the Truth of
what he says, if he gives his Testimony in a grave and serious Manner, and if
he appears to have at that Time a good sense of Religion in his Mind. Upon
which Account a Solemn Oath, by which God is called upon to witness the Truth
of what is said, is reck'ned the greatest Assurance that ordinarily can be
given of the Truth of any humane Testimony; and therefore by Evidence given
upon Oath all Questions of the greatest Consequence to Men in this World are
finally decided; Heb. 6.16.
An Oath for Confirmation is to Men an End of all Strife. Seeing therefore that
the great Credit that is given to an Oath, is grounded upon that serious Sense
of Religion which the Witness is supposed to have in his Mind, when he declares
that he speaks as in the Presence of Almighty God; whenever there is good
Evidence given by any Person of the same serious Sense of Religion, his
Testimony, 'tho' without the Formality of an Oath, is not less credible.

Again, It is a further Token of a Man's firm Belief of what he reports or
affirms, in case, the Matter of his Report being such as is naturally
influential upon Practice, he himself lives and acts in all Respects agreeably
thereto: And especially, if in Consequence thereof he declines making such Gain
and Profit to himself as it is probable he would have done had he been otherwise
persuaded; and denies himself those worldly Pleasures and Sensual
Gratifications which other Men not so persuaded, do freely allow themselves in;
and voluntarily undertakes such Labors, and endures such Hardships as it can
hardly be supposed any Man of another Persuasion would undergo.

But the surest Token that any Man can give of his Veracity, is persisting in
the Evidence he has once given to the last; When no Promises of Wealth, Honor
or Promotion can persuade him to forbear speaking the things which he has seen
and heard; when being brought before Kings and Rulers, and straightly threatened
to hold his Peace, he is thereby rather the more emboldened to speak; when
being racked and tortured to retract his Evidence, he continues in the midst of
the greatest Torments to witness the same thing that he did before; And in
fine, when having a certain Prospect before him of losing all that can be dear
to him in this World, and even his Life its self, unless he will either go back
from what he has said, or at least forbear to repeat and confirm it; he
willingly and cheerfully seals his Testimony with his Blood.

Such Assurance as this we may have of the Honesty and Veracity of a Person
that witnesses a thing only of his own private Knowledge; And this being the
best we can have, he is an unreasonable Man that desires more, or says this is
not sufficient.

But Secondly, in Case the Author of any Book, or of any Report, relates a
Thing that was done or spoken publicly, in the Sight or Hearing of many others
besides himself, we may have still greater Assurance, of his Honesty and
Veracity, and of the Truth of the Report its self; And we have so, (we have, I
think, the the greatest that can be,) if, after the Report is published,
especially if it be a Matter of great Consequence to the World, it be not
contradicted by any of those that were present; and much rather, if they all,
or a great many of them, agree in testifying the same thing; Especially if they
also are Persons of the like good Credit, and if they also give the same Proofs
and Tokens of their Veracity that he did.

Such Evidence as this of the Veracity of any Author in what he writes, is
beyond all reasonable Exception. And therefore when many, and especially when
all these Evidences of Truth and Honesty do concur, I think we may be
sufficiently assured that he did not design to impose upon his Readers. But,

(3.) If we may be well enough assured of the Author of any Book, and also of
his Honesty; yet, it was further objected, that this Author, whoever he was,
could not be sure that he himself was not deceived, in his Opinion of his own
Inspiration, or of a Revelation made to him; Or in the Truth of any other
Matter of Fact which he has related as of his own Knowledge.

But, first, If he could not be sure of his own Inspiration, or of a Revelation
made to himself; how then could any Man now a days be sure of the same, if God
should vouchsafe to speak to us now, as it is said he did in former times to the
Prophets and other inspired Men, by himself, or an Angel? So that this
Objection, if it be well grounded, cuts off not only all reasonable Belief of
former Revelations, but likewise all reasonable Belief of any Revelation that
can now be made, to our selves or others; And it is to no Purpose to offer at
any thing to convince those of the Truth of any Revelation who are of Opinion
that even the infinite Power and Wisdom of God cannot make such a Revelation of
his Will to them as would be credible; such as they should reasonably judge
sufficient for their Conviction.

This therefore is all that I shall say to this Part of the Objection; that if
they suppose, as they seem to do, that Almighty God cannot any ways so reveal
his Will to any Man, as that the Prophet himself can be assured that it is a
divine Revelation; they suppose God to be of less Power and Skill than a Man
is, who can utter his Mind in such a Manner to another, that the other shall
have no Doubt, who it is that speaks, or what he means: But if they will but
vouchsafe to grant, that God could now speak, or otherwise reveal his Will, in
such Manner to us, as that we could not possibly have any Doubt, whether it was
the Voice of God or an Angel or not, then I say there can be no Question but
that he might speak in as plain a Manner to Men in former Times; and there is
almost as little Question but that he has done so.

But many (it may be said) have pretended to Inspiration or Revelations, and,
we have Reason to believe, have thought themselves inspired, when yet the
Matter they have said they were inspired with, or which they have said has been
revealed to them has been such as has clearly evidenced to all rational Men the
Falsity of their Pretense.

True; And so likewise many Men have thought themselves at such a Place, in
such a Company, hearing, seeing, speaking or doing such and such things, when
yet, as it proves afterward, they have been all the while only in a Dream: But
what then? Does it follow that because a Man may think himself awake when he is
in a Dream, he can therefore never be sure that he is awake? And as little does
it follow, that because some Persons of weak or distempered Brains have thought
they have had Revelations, therefore no sober and judicious Man in his right
Wits, can ever be sure of a Revelation.

But suppose a Man at the first, being (as it may well be imagined he must be)
in a great Surprise and Astonishment at the Strangeness and Novelty of the
thing, should not be very certain of the Reality of the Revelation, should not
well know whether he was awake or asleep; yet certainly the same signs which
are sufficient afterward to satisfy other Men of the Truth of his Inspiration
or Revelation, must be allowed to be sufficient to satisfy himself of the same
thing.

And therefore, If Moses (for instance) when God first spoke to him in Horeb
out of the burning Bush, Exodus 3.
was in some Doubt whether he was in a Trance, or awake and in his right Mind;
whether he really heard a Voice, or only dreamed so: it cannot well be supposed
that he continued in the same Doubt afterward, when having at God's Command,
cast his Rod upon the Ground, Exodus 4.3, 4.
it became a Serpent; and having at the same divine Command taken it up by the
Tail, it became a Rod again in his Hand: And when after that, V. 6, 7.
by his first putting his Hand into his Bosom it became leprous as Snow, and
after his putting it in the second Time, it came out like his other Flesh.

Or if it can be imagined that he might possibly take all this to be only a
Continuation of his Dream; or at least, might not in all this while be sure
that it was not a Dream; it is not conceiveable, however, that in all the Time
that he was traveling from Horeb into Egypt, he should not ever be so
thoroughly awake as to be sure that he was awake; and if he was, that he should
not in all that Time make such Reflections upon what had passed, as either to
perceive plainly that it had been only a Dream, or else to be very certain that
it had not been a Dream, but a Reality.

Or if it can be conceived that his Amazement and Concern at what had happened
was so great, that in all this Time he might not be so well come to himself, as
to be sure that he had had a true divine Revelation; yet I think it was not
possible that he should remain in the same Uncertainty, after he had been in
Egypt for some while, and had wrought, not only those two Miracles over again
in the Sight of the Israelites, whereby they were fully persuaded of his divine
Mission; but likewise all the other great Signs and Wonders mentioned in the
7th. and following Chapters of Exodus, some of which the Egyptians, and even
the Magicians themselves could not but acknowledge were done by the Finger of
God.

But this, It may be it will be said, is proving one doubtful thing by another
as doubtful, a Revelation by a Miracle: for it was further urged in the
Objection, that no Author of any Book could be sure that he was not deceived in
any other Matter that he has related as of his own Knowledge; that it is
possible there might be Mistake in the Sign and Proof of the divine Revelation
as well as in the Revelation its self; that it is possible that the Author of
the Report (whether it was the Prophet himself, or any other Man who has
reported the Miracles done by the Prophet, as Matters of his own Knowledge) did
imagine he saw things which he did not see, and that he heard things which he
did not hear.

But if this be supposed possible, that any Man, and much more that several Men
agreeing in the same Report, the Organs of whose Senses were rightly disposed,
and who by all their other Actions and Discourses appeared to be sober, and
considerate, and judicious, should yet in the Day time, and in a clear Light,
and when they were sure they were broad awake, be mistaken in the plainest
Matters of Sense; then there is no such thing as Certainty in the World; Then
they that make the Objection can be no more sure of what they themselves see
and hear than other Men can be; And it is to no Purpose to hold an Argument with
such as dare not believe their own Eyes and Ears. The only sense whereby, I
think, such Men can be convinced, must be Feeling: And it will be well for them
if they can carry the same Skepticism with them into the other World, and when
they are compassed about with the Flames of Hell, can be able to doubt whether
it be a real or a painted fire, whether they are tormented in that Flame, or
not.

Leaving these therefore to be convinced in the other World, as being, I think,
not capable of Conviction here; I shall content my self with having said, what,
I suppose, is enough to satisfy others, That the Witness of a plain Matter of
Fact may be sure of the Truth of what he witnesses; and that it is possible for
God to speak so plainly to Men, that they may be certain they have had a divine
Revelation; and that such Evidence may be given of the Veracity of an Author,
and of the Authority of a Book as is sufficient to satisfy a reasonable Man.

And by this, and what was said before, I hope I have made it appear, that a
Standing Revelation of God's Will may be so well contrived and so well attested
as to be sufficient to effect its Design, viz. to bring Men to Repentance.
Whether the Standing Revelation which we have in the Holy Scripture be
sufficient for this Purpose, will be Matter of Enquiry in the next Discourses.

In the mean time, what has been already said may serve to dispose us to hear
without Prejudice the Arguments that may be offered to prove the sufficiency of
the Holy Scripture. For,

1. If it be possible that there may be such a Standing Revelation, it is very
probable that there is one; for from that natural Notion that we have of the
Goodness of God it may be fairly argued, that he is not wanting to Men in the
necessary Means of Salvation; and therefore, it being evident that there are
not new Revelations made every Day, it may be reasonably concluded that the
Reason is, because there is already some Standing Revelation of God's Will
extant that is sufficient to direct us in the Way to Happiness. And,

2. If there be already any such Standing Revelation extant, it may be strongly
presumed, that it is that which we have in the Holy Scripture; because there is
no other Book, that we know of, which has such good Evidences of divine
Authority and Inspiration as that has.

Let us then be prepared to inquire into the Grounds and Reasons of the
Christian Faith and Religion with unprejudiced Minds, with a sincere Love and
Desire of Truth, and with a Resolution to hear Reason and to be convinced by it.

And above all, (which indeed is the best Preparation for Truth, and the best
Security against Error) let us in the Sincerity of our Hearts, apply our selves
to God for his Help and Direction; And that our Prayer may be effectual, let us
be careful to approve our selves to him, by a conscientious Discharge of all
those Duties of Piety, Justice, Temperance and Charity, which are clearly
taught even by natural Reason; and be readily disposed to practice whatever
else we shall learn to be our Duty by any farther Illumination: Joh. 7.17.
for if any Man will do his Will, he shall know of the Doctrine whether it be
of God.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN Epist. Ded. l. 3. r. Archbishop, p. 8. l. 31. r. forborne, p. 13. l. 19. r.
he who, p. 14. l. 16. r. a Book.

THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE Scripture-Revelation, As to the Matter of it.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, February the 5th.
1699/700.

BEING The Second, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

THE first thing which I propounded to do in Discoursing on these Words, was,
to endeavor to show, that the present Standing Revelation of God's Will,
contained in the Books of the Old and New Testament is abundantly sufficient to
persuade Men to Repentance, if they are not unreasonably blind and obstinate.
They have Moses and the Prophets, (they have also Christ and his Apostles,) let
them hear them.

And if that Standing Revelation which God has made to us of his Will in the
Holy Scriptures can upon any Account be thought insufficient to effect this
Design, it must be, I think, either, 1. Because no Standing Revelation can be
sufficient for this Purpose; Or, 2. Because there are some particular Defects
in that Revelation which we have in the Holy Scriptures which render it not so
sufficient for this Purpose, as it is possible a Standing Revelation might be.

I have, therefore, in a former Discourse upon these Words, endeavored to show
in general, that a Standing Revelation of God's Will may be so well contrived,
and so well attested as to be sufficient for this Purpose.

I proceed now, in the second place,

2. To Consider whether that Standing Revelation which we have in the Holy
Scriptures, be such a Revelation; whether it be sufficient to persuade Men to
Repentance, and fully to direct them in the Way to Happiness; Or, whether there
be not some particular Defects in this Revelation, which render it not so
sufficient for this Purpose as it is possible a Standing Revelation might be.

And if there be any such Defect in the Holy Scripture, it must be either in
the Matter of it, or in the Proof of it: And if it be in the Matter of it, it
must be, either that it does not give us sufficient Directions what to do, or
that it does not propose sufficient Motives to persuade Men to do what it
requires.

And therefore in speaking to this Head, I shall show, (1.) That the Holy
Scripture gives us sufficient Directions what to do. (2.) That the Motives
which the Scripture proposes, are sufficient to persuade us to do what it
requires; And, (3.) That we have sufficient Reason given us to convince us of
the Truth and Authority of the Holy Scripture, and consequently of all the
Doctrines which are taught by it.

(1.) I shall show that the Holy Scripture gives us sufficient Directions what
to do.

And of this there can be little Doubt among those that believe the divine
Inspiration and Authority of the Holy Scripture; because to them its own
Testimony of its own sufficiency is a Proof thereof beyond all Exception. For,
if, as the Apostle says, 2. Tim. 3.16. it be profitable for Doctrine and for
Reproof, and for Correction, and for Instruction in Rigteousness; it is plainly
profitable for all the Purposes for which we can desire a divine Revelation.
And, if, as he says in the next Verse, it was given to make perfect the Man of
God (that is, the Man whose Business it is to teach and instruct others;) and
thoroughly to furnish him unto all good Works, it cannot be deficient in
delivering all such Rules and Directions as are necessary to be given by a
Pastor to the People committed to his Care. And, if, as the same Apostle had
said at the 15th. Verse of that Chapter, it be able to make us wise unto
Salvation, we have no Reason to desire to be wiser than this excellent Book can
make us. And if all this could truly be said by the Apostle, before the Canon
of the New Testament was completed; if it could be said by him of those Holy
Scriptures which Timothy had known from a Child, that is, of the Books of the
Old Testament only, much more may it be now said of the Books of both
Testaments together.

But to speak at large of this Point, at present, would be too great a
Digression from the Design of these Lectures, which were intended only against
Infidels, not against any Sect of Christians; and such they pretend to be; such
(because they hold the Foundation Christ Jesus,) they may in Charity be allowed
to be, who do chiefly differ from us in this Article, and deny the sufficiency
of Scripture, only because they are resolved to maintain some gainful Doctrines
and Practices of their own Church, which they are sensible have no Warrant from
Scripture, and so can be maintained no other Way but by affirming that they
have been delivered down to them by Tradition, and that unwritten Tradition is
a necessary Supplement to the written Word, and of equal Authority with it.

For between us and Infidels who reject the Scripture, the Sufficiency of the
Scripture as a Rule of Faith and Manners, is hardly Matter of Controversy: for
these do not reject the Scripture because it teaches too little, but rather
because it teaches too much: because it teaches Doctrines above their Reason,
and commands such Duties as they do not like to practice; and if it taught less
than it does, they would be more ready to own its divine Authority.

But nevertheless even these Men (that they may leave no Stone unturned) will
be sometimes discoursing upon this Point; and although those Books of Holy
Scripture which are now extant, and which are now generally received, do teach
much more than they themselves are willing to believe and practice, yet, that
they may, as much as they can, unsettle the Belief of others, do not stick to
argue againast the Christian Religion from this Topic, and to affirm that the
Books of Holy Scripture which are now received do not contain the whole Will of
God. For there were, say they, in former times, several other Gospels, and
Epistles, and other Tracts, designed to instruct Men in the Christian Religion,
which were written by the Apostles or other inspired Men, and which were
consequently of the same Authority, in themselves, with those which are now
received into the Canon, of which nevertheless we have nothing now left, but
the Names and Titles, or some imperfect and uncertain Fragments; so that it may
well be doubted, whether those few Books which are now remaining, are
sufficient to instruct us in all necessary Points of Knowledge and Practice.
And of this Matter of Fact, there is, they say, some Evidence even from the
Scripture its self: For St. Luke, in the Beginning of his Gospel, takes Notice,
that many before him, had taken in Hand to set forth a Declaration of those
things which were surely believed among Christians; that is, had written and
published Narratives of the Life, Actions, Miracles, Preaching, Death and
Resurrection of our Savior. But there are no Histories of this Kind, no
Gospels now extant, that were written before St. Luke's, except only St.
Matthew's and St. Mark's; and if there had been no more extant at that time, it
would have been very improper, they say, for the Evangelist to have said, that
many had written upon this Subject, when he spoke only of those two. And that
there was Matter enough for several such Narratives (so that though they were
very different Gospels, they might nevertheless be all true) we are told by St.
John, who wrote his Gospel the last of the Four Evangelists, Joh. 20.30. Many
other Signs truly did Jesus in the Presence of his Disciples, which are not
written in this Book; and again, Chapter 21. Verse. 25. There are also many other
things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I
suppose that even the World its self could not contain the Books that should be
written.

Now if it be true, that there were several other Books formerly extant, but
which are now lost, that were written by the Apostles and other inspired Men,
and consequently by divine Inspiration; either these were needless when
written, (and it is unreasonable to suppose that any Book written by divine
Inspiration was needless) or else the Loss of these Books is a Loss to
Religion; and we cannot be well assured, that those which we have now remaining
do sufficiently instruct us in all Points of Christian Faith and Practice.

But admit the Truth of this Matter of Fact, viz. that more Books were written
by the Apostles, or inspired Men, than are now extant, (which I will not now
dispute, because I think it needless; because I think it may be granted without
any Prejudice to the Christian Cause; although there be none, or at most but very
slender Evidence of it;) nay, admit more than is upon any good Grounds
alleged; viz. not only that several, but that every one of the Apostles and
immediate Disciples of Christ, every one that had heard him Preach, and had
been a Witness of his Life and Miracles and Resurrection, and had received the
Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost, did write a distinct Gospel giving an
Account of some of the most remarkable Passages of our Savior's Life which he
had been a Witness of; and did likewise as he had Occasion write Epistles or
other Tracts for the Use and Instruction of the Christian Church; every one of
all which Books, if they were now extant, and as well attested as the Books of
the New Testament are, would be of equal Authority with them, because dictated
by the same Spirit, by which all the Apostles were led into all Truth, and had
all things that Jesus had spoken brought to their Remembrance; yet, I say, it
would by no Means follow from hence, either that those Books which are now lost
(if indeed there are any lost that were written by the Apostles) were needless
when they were written; or that those which do now remain are not sufficient.
And a very little Consideration of the State of things as it was then, and as
it is now, will make this which I have said very plain.

For the Case then was thus: The Gospel of Christ was to be preached to the
whole World by a few Persons who had been Eyewitnesses of his Miracles, and
were enabled by the Power of the Holy Ghost to confirm their Testimony of him
by doing the like Miracles themselves; And that this great Work might be
accomplished within the Term of their Life, it was necessary that they should
quickly disperse themselves into all Parts of the World, one going this Way and
another that, according as they had agreed among themselves, or were directed
by the Spirit; And in this Division of Countries, every one had a large
Province assigned to him, so that having much Work to do in a little Time, he
could not well stay long in one Place; And upon this account it might be very
proper for him after he had preached the Gospel in one City, and made a good
number of Converts, and ordained Elders and established a Christian Church
there, when he went thence to leave behind him in Writing the Sum of what he
had before preached among them, for the Help of their Memories, for the
Direction of their Pastors, and to prevent any Mis-representation that might
afterward be made of his Doctrine by ignorant or designing Men; And after he
was gone from thence, he might have frequent Occasion to send them Letters,
either to confirm them in their Faith, or to caution them against some Errors
which he had heard were springing up among them, or to correct some Fault in
their Discipline or Manners.

By this Means, I say, it might well enough be (though there be no Evidence that
it was so) that in the first Age of Christianity, there might be, besides
occasional Letters, as many distinct Gospels as there were Apostles; every One
writing a Gospel for the proper Use of those Churches which he himself had
planted, and in the Language that was best known to them. And this, if it was
done, might be no more than might be then necessary, when it was not so easy as
it is now (since the Increase of Commerce and Navigation, and the Invention of
Printing) to communicate and disperse the Books that are Published in one
Country, to other Countries that are far distant. Besides, if this could have
been done then, it cannot well be supposed that a Gospel written by any other of
the Apostles, who had never been in that Province or Division, and of whom they
had never heard perhaps more than only his Name, should be at first of so great
Authority to them, as a Gospel written by that very Apostle, by whose Ministry
they had been converted, and of whose Miracles they themselves had been
Witnesses.

Thus it might be; (and if it was so, it might be agreeable to the divine
Wisdom and Goodness so to order it) that before those Books of the New
Testament which we now have could be well dispersed, and upon good Attestation
received in all Christian Countries, some particular Churches, and especially
those most remote from Judea, should have for their present Use, other Books
written by some other of the Apostles, containing the same Form of sound Words,
and relating the same things concerning the Life and Doctrine of our Savior
that these do.

And that some of those many Books which might be written by the Apostles or
other inspired Men upon this Subject, should be lost, is no Marvel at all: it is
rather a Wonder (considering the Poverty of the first Christians, and the
constant Persecutions they were then under, and the many Revolutions of
Government that have been in Christendom since that time,) that so many as we
have now left could be preserved for so many Ages before Printing was found
out. And those were of all the most like to be lost, which were published in
rude and barbarous Countries, and which were written in some Language that was
peculiar to one Nation only: And those the most easy, and consequently the
most probable to be preserved, which were published in the learned Part of the
World, and written in the most learned Language then in Use.

But although a greater Number of inspired Books than are now extant, might be
necessary in the first Age of Christianity; before the Christian Churches, then
newly planted in all Countries of the then known World, could have
Communication with one another; it cannot be argued from hence that those Books
which we have now remaining are not sufficient for the present Time, and for
all the Time that has passed since the other Books were lost; But rather, it
may very reasonably be presumed, that there was nothing more, for Substance, in
those Books, which are supposed to be lost, than there is in these which are
now remaining; so that the Loss of them may be no real Loss or Detriment to
Religion, and those which remain and are now received in all Christian
Churches, may be abundantly sufficient to instruct us in all Points of
Christian Faith and Practice.

And there is indeed no Reason to think they are not, seeing some of those
single Books which we have now, were written for this very Purpose, were
designed as Compendiums of the whole Christian Institution: For St. Luke wrote
his Gospel, that Theophilus, might know the Certainty of those things wherein
he had been instructed; And if this was the Evangelist's Design, Luke 1.4.
it cannot be supposed but that he thought he had put into his Gospel whatever
was necessary or very material: And St. John in the same Place where he
acknowledges that he had omitted the Relation of many things which Jesus did,
Joh. 20.30, 31.
says that he had written the things contained in his Gospel, that Men might
believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing they might
have Life through his Name: By which it appears that he thought he himself had
written enough in his Gospel to persuade Men to believe in Christ, and to
direct them in the Way to eternal Life. There being therefore in those Books of
the New Testament which we now have, several Abridgments of the whole Christian
Doctrine, it cannot with any Reason be pretended, that all these Books together
are not sufficient fully to instruct us therein.

Besides; The Gospel of Christ that was preached suppose, by St. Thomas in
India, or by St. Simon in Africa, or by any other of the Apostles in Countries
remote from Judea, or without the Bounds of the Roman Empire, was undoubtedly
the very same Gospel that was preached by St. Peter, and St. Paul, or those
other of the Apostles whose Books are now extant, and received by the Catholic
Church; for they were all taught by the same Master, Christ; and were all
enlightened by the same Holy Ghost: so that if any of them did, (as it is
reported they did) write any Gospels for the present Use of those particular
Churches which they had planted; though they might be somewhat different from any
of the four Gospels which we now have, in the Expression, or perhaps in the
Relation of some particular Passages of our Savior's Life, which our
Evangelists have omitted: (just as the four Gospels which we now have, do
differ from one another) yet for Substance they must needs have been the same
with these, and with one another, if indeed they were all true Relations of the
Matters of which the Authors thereof had been Witnesses; so that if we had them
all now, they could all together teach us no other Doctrines than are taught in
the Books of the New Testament.

Nevertheless, I do not deny but that if we had more Books of this Kind than we
have; that if we had all the Books that were written by the Apostles, or their
immediate Successors who had been taught by them, they might be of very good
Use to us, to help us to understand more readily and easily those Books which
we have (as now we receive from some Portions of Holy Scripture, great Light,
to help us to understand, and to put a right Interpretation upon others:) But
perhaps it was for this very Reason that the Providence of God did order no
more to be written, than were written, or has suffered those to be lost that
are supposed to be lost, that it might cost us some Pains and Study to
understand our Religion; that so our Knowledge as well as our Practice being in
some Measure the Fruit of our own Industry, might be a proper Subject of Reward.

In short, That there were more Books in the first Age of Christianity, written
by Apostles or other inspired Men than are now extant, or than if extant can be
well proved to be of their Writing, is a Point which I believe cannot be now
upon any certain Evidence either affirmed or denied: But if it be granted, I
say however, there is no Reason to infer from thence, that those which we now
have are not sufficient. For if there be a God and a Providence, and if there
be any Truth in the Scripture. Declarations of the Love of God to Mankind, and
that he would have all Men to be saved, and to come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, most certainly the necessary Means of Men's Salvation is a proper Subject
of the divine Care: And if so; it cannot be thought but that the same good
Providence which (as is now supposed) took Care for the writing of more Books
when more might be necessary, has likewise taken Care for the Preservation of
so many of these Books as are now sufficient.

Or if the Men we are now arguing with, will not grant that there is such a
particular Providence of God; yet if they will but allow that God is just: that
he is not a hard Master, expecting to reap where he has not sown, I think they
must allow that all things necessary to our Salvation, not knowable by Reason,
are taught in the Books of Holy Scripture which we now have, because there are
no other Books extant which we have reason to receive and accept as divine
Revelation.

Or if they deny this, it will lie upon them to produce those other Books which
we ought to receive besides these, and to give good Evidence to the World of
their divine Authority. Which when they have done; or if they shall but only
show that there is as good Reason to receive them as these; We must own our
selves to blame, if we shall not then take them also into the Canon of
Scripture.

But till that shall be done, what has been already said is enough to show
that the Holy Scripture is a complete Rule both of Faith and Manners.
Especially considering (as was noted before) that whenever the Insufficiency
of Scripture in this Respect, is urged by those who do not believe the
Scripture (which are the Persons I have now to deal with,) it can be only for
Cavilling sake: the true Reason of their Backwardness to receive it as a divine
Revelation, being, not because it teaches not enough, but because it teaches
more than they are willing to believe, and commands more than they are disposed
to practice. For I cannot imagine that these Men do truly desire more Duty than
is laid upon them in the Books of Scripture now received by the Christian
Church; But what they may most reasonably be thought to desire, is, either some
better Encouragement to undertake that difficult Task which the Scripture lays
upon them, or some better Evidence that the Scripture is a divine Revelation.

I proceed now therefore to the second thing propounded, which was,

(2.) To show that the Motives which the Scripture proposes are sufficient to
persuade Men to do what it requires.

Now Hopes and Fears are the great Springs of Action; and the greater the Good
is we hope for, or the Evil we fear, the stronglier do they move and incline us
to Action; And therefore how difficult soever the Undertaking be, (so it be but
possible;) if the Motives are proportioned to the Difficulty, they must be
granted to be sufficient Inducements to undertake it.

But that the Task or Business required of us, is possible to be done, needs
not to be proved now, because it must be granted by those who say they believe
they should be persuaded to do what is required, if they had better
Encouragement; for no Arguments or Motives whatsoever can reasonably persuade a
Man to undertake a thing that he believes impossible.

Supposing it therefore possible; I say that whatsoever Difficulty there really
is, or we may apprehend there is, in a Christian Life; if any Motives that
could possibly be proposed to us can be thought sufficient to induce us to
undertake it; most evidently, those Motives which the Gospel proposes, are so;
because better or greater cannot be so much as conceived or imagined; seeing
both the good things which it promises to persuade us to Virtue, and the evil
things which it threatens to deterr us from Sin, are, as to the Matter of them,
the greatest that we are capable of enjoying or suffering; and consequently the
most probable to raise our Hopes, and to excite our Fears to the highest Pitch.

For the Arguments that do most strongly persuade us to any thing, are from
Interest; from the Profit and Advantage we shall reap by doing it; from the
Tendency it has to make us happy; and Happiness consists in being perfectly
free from all Pain and Trouble and Vexation; and in the full and free Enjoyment
of whatsoever is pleasing and delightful to us.

But now both these the Gospel gives Assurance of to all those that believe and
obey it; that is, that they shall thereby be freed from that intolerable Pain
and Misery, which the Wicked and Unbelievers shall be condemned to, and also
that they shall thereby be instated in the perfectest and compleatest Happiness
both of Body and Soul; In a Happiness far greater than any they do or can enjoy
now; nay, in a Happiness much greater than any they can now have so much as a
Conception or Idea of in their Minds. 1 Cor. 2.9.
For Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the Heart of
Man the Things that God has prepared for them that love him.

But there is, besides, a remarkable Circumstance which does much enhanse the
Value of any Good, and likewise much aggravate the Evil of any Pain or Misery;
viz. its Duration: For how great soever the Good or Evil proposed to persuade
us to any thing, are in themselves; yet if they be but of short Continuance, if
they will soon expire and be at an End, we reckon it not worth while to be at
much Pains to obtain such a short-lived Good, or to avoid such a transient
Evil; But in this Respect also, the Motives both of Hope and of Fear which the
Gospel proposes to us, do far surpass all those Persuasives or Inducements
which Sin can offer: for the most we can hope to escape by the Commission of
any Sin, is the Pain and Suffering of a few Weeks or Years, or a temporal
Death; which last, yet, we cannot be so vain as to hope to escape clearly, for
we can at most but delay it for a short Season; And on the other side, the
greatest Good we can propose to our selves, or so much as hope to obtain by any
Sin, is the Pleasure of a short Life: In which Hope, Men are likewise very
often most sadly disappointed; their sinful Gratifications commonly bringing
with them, or drawing after them, much more Trouble and Vexation even in this
World, than the little Pleasure they can reap from them is sufficient to
compensate for. But if it were not so; If the Pleasures of Sin were certain and
sincere; yet they are but for a Moment; They can be but short, because our Life
its self is but short; Jam. 4.14.
being (as St. James says) a Vapor, which appears for a little time, and
then vanishes away.

But the Motives of both kinds, which the Gospel proposes, have in this Respect
also, (that is, in Respect of the Duration of the Good or Evil proposed) all
the Advantage that is possible. For the Misery we shall escape, and the
Blessedness we shall attain, by yielding Belief and Obedience to the Gospel,
are, both of them, Mark 9.46, 48. Matthew. 25.46. Mark 3.29. Matthew. 18.8. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Jude 13. Rev. 20.10.14.11.
of eternal and endless Duration. A Worm that never dies, a Fire that never
shall be quenched; Everlasting Punishment; Eternal Damnation; Everlasting Fire;
Everlasting Destruction; The Blackness of Darkness, for ever; A Lake of Fire
and Brimstone, where they shall be tormented Day and Night for ever and ever;
and where the smoke of their Torment ascends up for ever, and ever. These are
the Evils which the Gospel threatens to Sin: And if these be not sufficient to
deterr Men from it, what can be sufficient? What Evil can that Man be supposed
to be afraid of, who is not afraid of everlasting Burning? A greater Evil
cannot be threatened; and he who is not scared by this, would certainly be less
scared by the Threatening of a less Evil. And on the other side, Everlasting
Life; a Crown that fades not away; a Kingdom that cannot be moved; an eternal
Weight of Glory; Fullness of Joy in the Presence of God; and Pleasures for
evermore at his right Hand; these are the good things promised to Obedience;
And could greater things be promised than these? could we our selves if we were
put to desire what we would, desire more? and if the Promise of unspeakable and
everlasting Blessedness, be not sufficient to prevail with us to undertake a
Godly and Christian Life, certainly nothing can be sufficient. If God should
make never so many Revelations of his Will to Mankind, he could not propose
greater Encouragement to Obedience, than he has done already in the Gospel: And
if those good things which he has promised, do not move us, it is not because
they are not great enough to move a wise and considering Man, but because we
are so bent upon Sin that we will not give way to any Considerations that might
serve to restrain us from it.

In a Word; The Gospel Motives to Repentance and Obedience comprehend all that
we can fear or hope for; so far therefore as Fears or Hopes can work upon us,
there is plainly nothing wanting in that Standing Revelation that God has made
of his Will, by Moses and the Prophets, and especially by Christ and his
Apostles, to make it successful, that is, to persuade Men to Repentance, if
they will but hear what they say and give Credit to it.

But it is not, perhaps the Infidels will say, a better Rule that they Want,
than the Scripture is, or better Motives to persuade them to lead their Lives
according to it, than the Scripture proposes; but what they chiefly want, is
some better Evidence, some greater Certainty of the Truth of the Scripture.

This therefore was what I propounded to do in the next place; viz. To show
that we have sufficient Reason given us to convince us of the Truth and
Authority of the Holy Scripture, and consequently of all the Doctrines which
are taught by it.

But because the handling of this Point would take up too much Time, I shall
choose to deferr it; and conclude this present Discourse with an earnest
Exhortation to all those that do sincerely believe the Gospel, to consider
often and seriously of those great Motives which it proposes to persuade Men.

For though we live in an Age of great Infidelity; wherein some are bold enough
to strike at the very Foundation of all Religion, and to dispute at least, if
not deny the most evident and undeniable Truths of it; and others think they
pay Respect enough to the common Reason and Judgment of Mankind, if they do but
grant themselves to be Deists; and wherein, even among those that openly
profess the Christian Religion, there is in a great many a Spice and Tincture
of Atheism and Infidelity; and though they do not actually disbelieve the Gospel
truths, yet they believe them so coldly and faintly, that their Faith may
rather be called an Inclination to believe, than a full Persuasion; I say, even
in this incredulous and unbelieving Age, I am nevertheless verily persuaded,
that for one Man that is ruined by Infidelity, many hundreds are ruined by
Thoughtlesness and Inconsideration; that where there is one that is wicked,
because he believes nothing of the Gospel-motives, nor that there is any such
Place or State as Heaven or Hell, there are a great many that do believe these
things, and yet continue in their wicked Course, because they never take any
time seriously to consider what Heaven and Hell are; and that vast, that
infinite difference that there is between these two States; and how much it
behooves them to use all Diligence to attain that, and to avoid this.

Leaving therefore those who believe little or nothing of these things to my
following Discourses, wherein I hope to prove the Truth of the Gospel
Revelation, beyond all reasonable Exception; I shall now address my self to you
that do believe these things, and who, every time you meet together in the
Church do repeat all the Articles of the Christian Faith, and declare your
Assent thereto. And what I would desire of you is; that you would frequently
think of those things which you profess to believe, that you would meditate
much and often thereupon, that you would seriously consider the Meaning thereof.

Particularly, That Summary of the Gospel Motives to Faith and Repentance
before spoken of, that great and last Article of the Christian Creed, The Life
everlasting; Consider what it means, and do not content your selves only with
saying every Day that you do believe an everlasting Life after this, but
meditate likewise every Day, or very frequently at least, what an everlasting
Life is, and of what Sort and Kind that everlasting Life will be.

Now Life is a state of Sensation; By this a Living Body is distinguished from
a dead Carcass, that the living Body feels what is done unto it, and is
affected thereby either with Pain or Pleasure; whereas a dead Carcass is not
capable of either, has no Sense or Feeling of any thing. When therefore in
repeating the Creed, we declare that we believe we shall live again, after our
death, the meaning is, that we shall be hereafter in such a State of Sensation
as we are in now; that in that Life we shall be as sensible of Pain or
Pleasure, as we are in this Life.

But then, what makes the great Difference between this Life and that, is, that
this is short, transient and momentary, that if it be pleasant, it is soon
over, and that if it be painful it will not last long; whereas that, such as
it is once, such it will ever be; for that is the Meaning of a Life everlasting;
it is a Life that will never be ended; A Life that will continue to all Eternity.

And now that we come to speak of Eternity, though the Word has a fixed Meaning;
yet how are our Thoughts lost and bewildered when we set our selves to meditate
thereupon? When we speak of a thousand, or ten thousand, or even of a Million
of Years, we have some Notion of what we say; but when we come to multiply
these thousands, and Millions, by ten thousands, or ten Millions, or by
Millions of Millions, our Thoughts are not capacious enough to conceive, and
our Mouths want Words to express that infinite Length of Time which these
Numbers do comprehend; And yet all that these Numbers denote, is nothing in
Comparison with Eternity.

If the whole Sea were to run out Drop by Drop, what a prodigious Length of
Time would this take up? and yet in time this would be done; and they that live
for ever would live to see the vast Caverns of the Ocean without one Drop of
Water left in them: And which is more yet, there would be no Part of their
Eternity then spent, they would then be as far from dying as they were at first.

Or if only once in ten thousand Years, one of the smallest Sands or Dusts were
to be taken from the Earth, they that live for ever would live to see all this
vast Bulk of the Earth by these slow and imperceptible Degrees wholly removed,
not so much as a Grain or Atone of it left; Nay, and even in this prodigious,
this unconceivable Length of Time, their Life would not be in the least
diminished, they would have the same boundless Eternity still before them that
they had, when the first Sand was taken away.

But what do I speak of these little Numbers, these Moments of Time, as they
may truly be called, in Comparison with Eternity? For even all those Years in
which the whole Earth might be removed, if only one single smallest Dust
thereof were to be taken away once in ten thousand Years, I say, all these
Years may be expressed in Figures, in a Line of a few Inches long; But if the
whole Expanse of Heaven were written quite over with Figures from the Top to
the Bottom, and from one Side to the other, even all these Figures, though set so
close that there was not Room left for one more, would not denote or express
Eternity; And when all these numberless Millions of Years were spent, He that
lives for ever, would be (as it were) but just then beginning to live; and his
Sight and Prospect of the Time before him, would be still as boundless as ever.

Thus you see what is eternal Life; Or rather, you see what it is not; It is a
Length of Time that cannot be expressed in Words, or signified by Figures, or
conceived in Thought: It is a Length of Time to which all that we can have any
positive Notion of, bears no Proportion.

And when we believe that we shall live such a Life, after this short Life is
over; does it not highly behove us to think of it now; and to make the best
Provision that is possible that we may be happy in it?

And this leads me to the other Branch of Meditation on this Subject, which we
ought likewise frequently and seriously to dwell upon in our Minds; namely of
what Sort and Kind this eternal Life will be.

And as it is Life, it is (as was said before) a State of Sensation; and as it is
an everlasting Life, it is a State in which we shall for ever feel our selves,
either in Pain or at Ease.

And if there were no more in it than this; though the Pain we shall then endure
were the least of those Pains wherewith we are now afflicted, a little Pain or
Aching of one Joint or Member only; Or though the Pleasure we shall then enjoy,
were one of the least of those Pleasures wherewith we are now delighted; yet
when we have added Eternity to these, what an infinite Difference is there
between these two States? And how well must we needs think it worth all the
Pains and Labor that we can take in this World, to secure to our selves a
Portion in that better Sort of everlasting Life, in that Life in which there is
no Pain, though there be but little Pleasure?

But still our Thoughts are short; we have not yet a just Notion of the
Difference between these two States. For if we believe the Scripture (and I
speak now to those that do believe it,) that everlasting Pain which the wicked
will be condemned to, is not a light or gentle Pain; but the sharpest, the
acutest, the most tormenting that can be endured; and that eternal Joy which we
have a good Hope of by the Gospel, is ^ikewise the greatest, the fullest, the
compleatest that we are capable of; for in representing the former to us, the
Scripture all along expresses the Torments of Hell by such Pains as are here
most afflicting to us; ^s the Biting and Gnawing of a Worm, the being ^eaten
with Stripes, the noysomness of Brimstone, and ^he Burning of Fire; And on the
other side, when it would represent to us the Happiness of the Blessed, ^t does
it by resembling the heavenly Joys, to such Pleasures as do here upon Earth
most sensibly delight ^s, such as are the Pleasures of a spacious, rich and
^ommodious Dwelling, of the choicest Delicacies to ^lease the Taste, of the
rarest Melody to delight the Ear, of a Crown, and a Kingdom, and an exceeding
Weight of Glory, and of whatever else can gratify or ^lease any of our Senses.

Now though these Representations or Descriptions of Hell and Heaven are not
perhaps to be understood li^erally; the Scripture herein speaking, not
according ^o the Strictness of Truth, but according to our pre^ent Capacities
and Apprehensions, who have now very ^ittle Notion of any Pain or Pleasure but
what affects ^he Senses of our Body; yet thus much may most certainly be
concluded from those Descriptions of these two States which we meet with in
Scripture; that both the Torments of Hell and the Joys of Heaven, are as great
as they can possibly be; far beyond any thing that we now feel or enjoy, or can
have any Notion of; And in a Word, that as the Pain of Hell is endless, so it
is likewise intolerable, and that as the Joy of Heaven is perpetual, so it is
likewise unspeakable and full of Glory.

And now after this short though very imperfect Representation of these two
vastly different States of Men in that other, and everlasting Life that will
begin when this is over; I think I may fairly ask again, What God could have
done more, either to deterr us from Sin, than to threaten Hell torments to
those that live in it; or to encourage us to Obedience, than to promise to
those that continue in well doing, the unspeakable Happiness of Heaven?
Certainly, if these Motives will not prevail upon us, no other can be proposed,
that would prevail.

Nay further; Though I have hitherto spoken to you as to Christians, which
believe the Scripture, and that there will certainly be another Life after
this, even such a Life as I have been speaking of, an everlasting Life of
perfect Happiness, or extreme Misery; yet if you have at all attended to, and
are any whit affected by that Representation that I have made to you, of the
Pains of Hell, and of the Joys of Heaven, and of the Eternity of both; I should
now dare to address my self to you, even though I thought you believed very
little of these things; and methinks I should not doubt, but that I might
prevail with you, and persuade you to Repentance, by these Gospel Motives of
Heaven and Hell; even although the Revelation thereof were not certain and
undoubted, although there were some just Reason to question the Truth of them.

For put the Case that it is very uncertain whether there will be an eternal
Life or no; Nay, put the Case that it is ten to one, that it is much more
probable, that there will not be any such Life after this; Yet when we consider
what Eternity is, and what a vast Difference there is between living in perfect
Joy, and in everlasting Burning; and when we consider withal the Shortness of
this present Life; and how little we can lose in it by abstaining from Sin; and
how little we can suffer in it, by the strictest Holiness and Virtue; even the
bare Possibility that there will be an eternal Life, though we had no certain
Revelation, and no other very good Assurance given us of it, would be
abundantly sufficient to deterr us from Sin, and to stir us up to well-doing.
For if we live well here, and there be really an eternal Life, it will be happy
for us that we have made this Preparation for it; but if there should indeed be
no other Life after this, we shall be then no Losers by what we have done; we
shall be then in as good a Condition, as others will be in who did not believe
it, nor live in Expectation of it; And all that Trouble which the Exercise of
Piety and Virtue now costs us, is not worth speaking of; it is no more than we
ought in Reason and Prudence to be at, although at the same time we believed it
to be very uncertain whether there would be any such eternal Life or no.

For this is what we call and account Wisdom in all other Cases; viz. to
provide not only against Certainties or high Probabilities, but (when it may
easily and conveniently be done) even against Possibilities too. We reckon him
an unwise Man for the World, who being in a good Way of getting, spends all as
fast as it comes in, when he has no present Need to spend so much; and lays up
nothing against old Age, when, if he lives to it, he will be past his Labor,
and not in a Capacity to get enough to support himself: And yet of all those
that do wisely make some Provision for old Age, not one in ten perhaps lives to
it. But nevertheless the bare Possibility that a Man may live to old Age, and
the very great Inconveniences that he will suffer, if he shall have nothing
then to live upon, make it very advisable for every one of the ten, to lay up
somewhat, (if he can do it) against that time; And he, of the ten, whose only
Lot it will be to live to be old, is not a wiser Man for making such Provision,
than the other nine are, who yet, in the Event, will be never the better for
their Labor.

Put case therefore that there is the same, or even a much greater Uncertainty
whether there will be an eternal Life after this; yet when we consider what an
eternal Life is; when we consider, that if there be a Heaven, and we can
procure our Portion to be there; we shall be happy, infinitely and unspeakably
happy to eternal Ages; And that if there be a Hell, and we do not take Care to
avoid it; our Lot will be extremely miserable, and we shall be tormented Day
and Night, for ever and ever, in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone:
And when we consider withal, the very little Trouble, in Comparison, that it
will cost us to attain that and to avoid this; that it is but the Labor of a
few Years, and that the most we can suffer by it, is the Loss of a little
Sensual Pleasure, for which, after this Life is over, we should be never the
better; or the enduring of some little Pain or Hardship which will be soon
over, and for which, if no Good should ever come of it after this Life, we
shall however be then never the worse; Considering, I say, thus, the infinitely
vast and wide Difference, that there is between being eternally happy and
eternally miserable, it is enough that it is possible, it is more than enough,
that it is probable that there will be such a state; and if we neglect to make
Provision for it, because we are not absolutely certain that it will be, it is
plain, that we do not act so prudently in this, as we do in other Cases that
are of infinitely less Moment and Concern to us; and that (as our Savior says)
The Children of t^^ World, are in their Generation wiser than the Children of
Light.

Now this is the most that the professed Atheists or Infidels can pretend;
They Will say perhaps, that for their own parts, they do not believe the Being of
a God, or a Judgment, or a Life to come; and that they do not see any good
Reason to believe these things; forasmuch as all the Proofs that are brought
for them, do, in their Judgment, fall short of Demonstration; and they are
resolved not to believe them, till such Proof thereof shall be offered, as they
can make no Exception against; not till they shall see with their own Eyes that
there is a Heaven and a Hell, or till they shall have a Messenger sent to them
from thence on purpose to assure them thereof: And be it so as they say, that
there is not an absolute Certainty of the Truth of these things, that we have
not yet such a sure Proof of them, as ocular or mathematical Demonstration
would be; yet this is the most they can say, they themselves cannot pretend
that there is any Demonstration on the other side. They are not sure, they say,
that there will be another Life, or that it will be everlasting; Well: but are
they sure that there will not be such a Life? is it absurd or impossible that
there should be such a Life? this I Am sure they cannot say; and all that they
have yet dared to say, is only that those Proofs thereof, that we rely upon,
are not, in their Opinion, sufficient.

But suppose them as insufficient as they can think them; yet still, if they
are not sufficient to prove the Certainty, they may be sufficient to prove the
Probability of what they are brought to prove; or if not so; yet still a future
Life, if it be not certain, nay if it be not probable, however may be possible;
And if it be only possible that we may live for ever; and that we may be
eternally happy, or eternally miserable; this Possibility alone, (considering
what an infinite Difference there is between these two States,) ought in reason
to put us upon taking the best Care we can, that if there be an eternal Life,
we may be eternally happy in it.

But after all, our Proof of this and other great Truths of our Religion, is
not so very weak and slender as these Men would represent it; It is indeed as
good as the Nature of the thing will bear; and he is an unreasonable Man that
requires a better Proof of any thing than it is capable of.

This therefore is what I should now in the next Place, proceed to do; viz.
(3.) To show, that there is sufficient Reason to give Credit to the Scripture,
wherein these Truths are plainly taught. But this being too large a Subject to
be handled now, I have already said, I would deferr it to the next Opportunity.

FINIS.
THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE Scripture-Revelation, As to the Proof of it. PART I.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, March the 4th. 1699/700.

BEING The Third, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By OFFSPRING BlACKALL, Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

HAving in my first Discourse on these Words endeavored to show in general,
that a Standing Revelation of God's Will may be so well contrived, and so well
attested as to be sufficient to persuade Men to Repentance if they are not
unreasonably blind and obstinate; I came the last time to consider whether that
Standing Revelation which we have in the Holy Scripture be such a Revelation;
Or whether there be not some particular Defects in it, which render it not so
sufficient for this Purpose, as it is possible a Standing Revelation might be.

And if there be any such Defect in the Holy Scripture, it must be, as I said,
either in the Matter of it, or in the Proof of it; And if in the Matter of it,
it must be, either that it does not give sufficient Directions what to do; Or
that it does not propose sufficient Motives to persuade Men to do what it
requires.

And therefore in speaking to this Head, I propounded to show (1.) That the
Holy Scripture gives us sufficient Directions what to do. (2.) That the Motives
which it proposes are sufficient to persuade us to do what it requires: And
(3.) That we have sufficient Reason given us, to convince us of the Truth and
Authority of the Holy Scripture, and consequently of all the Doctrines that are
taught by it.

And the Two first of these I have already done. I proceed now to the Third,
viz.

(3.) To show that we have sufficient Reason given us to convince us of the
Truth and Authority of the Holy Scripture, and consequently of all the
Doctrines that are taught by it; And that I shall presume to be sufficient
Reason in this Case, which we readily accept and allow of as sufficient in all
other Cases of the like Nature.

And I suppose it will be granted that we have sufficient Proof given us of the
Truth of the Things contained in Holy Scripture, and of the Authority of it, if
it can be shown, 1. That we have sufficient Reason to believe that the Books of
Holy Scripture were written by those Persons who are said to be the Authors
thereof. 2. That there is sufficient Reason to give full Credit to them in
their Relation of those Matters of Fact which they have recorded. And 3. That
if the Matters of Fact recorded in the Scripture are true, they are sufficient
Proofs of the Truth and divine Authority of all the Doctrines that are therein
taught.

These things therefore I shall now endeavor to make good.

But in speaking to this Point, I shall (for Brevity's sake) confine my
Discourse only to the Books of the New Testament; Partly, because these are the
Books wherein our Christian Religion is chiefly taught; And especially because
I think there are none who receive the New Testament as of divine Authority,
that do (or ^ndeed can, with any Reason) reject the Old.

1. Then, I am to show that we have sufficient Reason to believe that the Books
of Holy Scripture, (of the New Testament in particular) were written by those
Persons that are said to be the Authors thereof.

This indeed is a Point that it does not properly lie upon us to make any Proof
of; For as a Man's Possession of an Estate, is alone a good and a sufficient
Title to it, till a better is shown by the Person that endeavors to eject him:
so it is here; These Books are generally received as written by such and such
Persons; These Authors have the Name, these have (as it were) ^he Possession of
them; and that is Title enough, if no other could be produced, so long as no
Evidence is of^ered to show that any other Persons have a better Title ^o them.
It lies on them therefore who deny that the Books are theirs, to give a Reason
of what they say; ^ither by alleging some special Matter out of the Books
themselves, whereby it may be proved that they could ^ot be of their Writing;
or by producing some cre^ible and authentic History testifying that they were
written by some other Persons, and not by them. And ^ill they can, and shall do
this (which I am persuaded ^an never be done) we may very well refuse to
pro^uce any positive Evidence to affirm or prove their Title, their Possession
being a good Title enough, till a better appears. And a Tenant might with as
good Reason refuse to pay Rent to the Person, of whom he ^ook the Estate, and
to whom he has ever hitherto said Rent, and whose Right to it is not at all
controverted, until he shall suffer his Writings to be perused and examined,
and by them make it plainly appear that he is the lawful Landlord; as any Man
can now refuse to give that Credit to these Books, as written by the Apostles,
which has been given hitherto, and is still given by all Christians, unless he
may have now as good positive Evidence of their being written by the Apostles,
as might have been given thereof at first, and as, it may be presumed, was
given before their Title to them was so universally acknowledged.

But nevertheless what a Man is not under any Obligation to do for the
asserting of his Right, he may do wisely enough for his own Satisfaction. And
it must needs be a Satisfaction and Pleasure to a Man, although his Title to his
Estate be not at present controverted, if in looking over the Writings and
Evidences of it, he sees plainly how it descended to him by a lineal Succession
from Father to Son for many Generations past; and how it came at first to his
Ancestors, by a clear and fair Purchase from the former Possessors; or by
Donation from the Prince, in the Division of a wast or conquered Country; and
if he also finds ancient Terriers agreeing in the same Measure, and Boundings,
and exactly describing the same Estate which he now possesses; and if moreover,
looking far back, he sees, that upon some Disputes or Lawsuits that have
formerly been concerning it, Judgment has been always given on his Side. It
cannot but please him, I say, that upon such a Search into Antiquity, he finds
that he is so very well provided to make out his Title, if there should ever be
any Occasion for it; although by Reason of the long and quiet Possession, that
he, and his Ancestors before him, time out of Mind, have had of it, he has no
just Cause to fear he shall ever meet ^ith any Disturbance.

And so it is here: These Writings, the Books of ^he New Testament, are
generally acknowledged to be ^ritten by the Apostles of Christ, and their
Autho^^ty is at present uncontested; It may therefore rea^^nably be presumed,
(especially by those who have ^ot Parts or Learning or Leisure to examine into
the ^easons of such things,) that they would not have ^^en so universally
acknowledged and reverenced as ^^ey are upon this Account, but upon very good
^rounds; though what the Grounds thereof are, they ^^ve not yet inquired; Their
being in Possession is ^one Reason enough to acknowledge and assert their
^^tle. It lies upon them that deny these Books to (...) theirs, to produce
satisfactory Evidence of their ^ing forged or counterfeit; and till they shall
pro^^ce some Evidence thereof that has a Show and Ap^^arance of Truth, we have
no Reason to be stag^^red in our Belief by their bare, however bold and
^^nfident, Denial of their Authority; And much ^s shall we need to give our
Reasons for our re^^ving them as written by the Apostles, till our Ad^^^saries
shall offer some Reasons why we ought not (...) receive them as such.

But nevertheless, because we see there are some, in ^s incredulous Age, that
show a good Will to deny (...) Authority of these Sacred Books; and whose
In^est it would be to prove them Spurious; and be^se we cannot tell what
unwarrantable Practices ^ir Inclination and Interest may put them upon; (...)
what Writings or Evidences, plausibly forged (...) counterfeited, they may
hereafter produce: it cannot be amiss for us to inquire and see; and it cannot
but be a Pleasure and Satisfaction to us (who hold our Hope of eternal Life
chiefly by these Writings) to find and consider how well provided we are to
detect and disprove any such Forgeries, if they should be offered, by being
able to produce, in Opposition thereto, as good positive Proof that these Books
are genuine, as such a Matter is capable of, much better than I believe can be
produced for the Authority of any other Books of the like Antiquity.

And it gives us some Satisfaction in the Belief w^ have been bred up in, that
these are the genui^^ Books of the Authors to whom they are ascribed, t^ find
that they are received as such, not by a sma^^ Party of Men, not by that Church
and Nation onl^ to which we belong, but by all Christians disperse^ in all
Parts of the World; and likewise that they a^ agree with us in the same
Testimony, viz. that the^ received then, as such, from their Fathers. For th^^
these Books should be thus generally received an^ acknowledged, by so many
different and far distan^ Nations, without some good Grounds, is not
conce^vable; because it can neither be imagined that the Christians of the
present Age, dispersed in all Countri^ should combine together to say that they
receiv'^ these Books from their Fathers, as the genuine Wr^tings of the
Apostles, if they had not so received them nor that their Forefathers, in any
of the Ages pa^^ should have all agreed together, to put a Cheat upon their
Posterity, by delivering down to them the^^ Books as written by the Apostles,
when they themselves had no good Reason to believe them so, or wh^^ they knew
the contrary.

It is a further Satisfaction to us, to observe and consider, that the
Authority of these Books is as well proved as it can be, not only by oral, but
also by the best written Tradition; The Christian Writers of all Ages, citing
them (as they had Occasion) as the genuine Writings of the Apostles; And that,
as well before the Canon of the New Testament was defined and declared by
Councils, as since.

And lastly, It gives us very good Satisfaction that these Books are the
genuine Writings of the Persons to whom they are ascribed, that we do not find
they were ever excepted against, as spurious and counterfeit, in those times
when it would have been most proper to have made the Exception; and by those
Persons whose Cause and Interest it would have served very much to have proved
them Spurious, if it could have been done.

For the proper time to have made this Exception to these Writings, was when,
or soon after, they were first published; when it would have been easy to have
proved them Spurious if they had been so; and no less easy to have brought
positive Evidence of their being Genuine, if indeed they were Genuine; either
by the living Testimony of the Authors themselves, or of others that knew their
Writing; or by producing the original Copies under their own Hands; And
therefore their being then received as the Writings of the Apostles, by those
who were best able to know whose Writings they were; and their being not (for
ought appears) excepted against, upon this Account, at that time, ^s a very
good Argument that there was no just Ground for any such Exception.

And the most likely Persons, they whose Cause and Interest it would have
served most, to deny that these Books were written by the reputed Authors
thereof, were the Enemies of our Religion, The Jews, or the Heathens; who
neither of them wanted either Malice or Wit, to allege any Fact that they
could have justified the Truth of, in Disproof of the Christian Religion. It is
therefore no small Satisfaction to us to observe, that they never argued
against the Christian Religion from this Topic; that they never denied that the
Books which the Christians received as written by the Apostles were genuine;
Nay, that Julian himself, one of the subt'lest, as well as of the bitterest
Adversaries of the Christian Faith, did yet expressly own that the Books read by
the Christians, as the Books of Peter, Paul, Matthew, Mark and Luke, were
indeed theirs.

After all indeed it must be owned that we have not such Demonstration that the
Books of the New Testament were written by the Apostles, as is self-evident,
and cannot possibly be contradicted; for the Matter it self is not capable of
such Demonstration. But we have such Demonstration of it as cannot be
contradicted with any Reason; We have as good Assurance of it as we have, or
can have, of any Matter of that kind; We have as good Evidence of the Truth of
it, as, supposing it to be true, we could have of it; and more than this cannot
be desired. We are as morally certain that these Books were written by the
Authors to whom they are ascribed, as we are that any other ancient Book was
written by the Person who is said to be the Author of it; There being no
Argument, by which it is, or can be proved, that any ancient Book was written
by the Person who is said to be the Author of it, which does not prove the
Authority of these Books, rather more strongly, than it does the Authority of
any other Book; And there being no Argument, that is, or can be urged, against
the Authority of these Books, which may not, with as good Reason, be urged, to
disprove the Authority of any other Book of the like Antiquity; nay indeed, of
all the Books in the World, ancient or modern, the Authors of which are not now
living, or of whose Writing the Books ascribed to them no living Evidence can
be produced.

For what is there that can be said to disprove, or to render suspected the
Authority of these Books, but only that there is a Possibility that Things may
not be as we believe them to be? It may be, (the Atheist, or Infidel will say)
that these Books were not written by the Persons under whose Names we receive
them, but by some others; It may be, (he will say, for Instance:) that there
never was such a Man as Matthew the Publican, afterward an Apostle of Christ;
Or if there was, yet, it may be, that the Gospel that goes under his Name was
not of his Writing, but is a Book of a much later Date; It may be, that it was
written by some crafty Priest, no longer ago than the last Age; And that he and
some others in Confederacy with him at the same Time that they forged this
Gospel in the Greek Tongue, did likewise make and contrive all those
Translations of it into several Languages that are now extant, some of which
pretend to very great Antiquity, and which are all made with such an Appearance
of Truth, and with such Congruity to the several Times in which they are said
to be made, that none of the Learned Men of the present Age have been able to
discover the Fraud; And, It may be also, that when they forged the Gospel it
self, they forged likewise all the other Books, that are pretended to be
written by several Historians and Divines, in diverse Languages, and in several
Ages of the World for Sixteen Hundred Years past, in which this Gospel is
either testified to be written by St. Matthew, or is cited or commented upon as
his; And it may be likewise that at the same Time, that they trumped up all
these Books in one Country, they had their Confederates and Correspondents
that did the same in all the other Countries where they are now found; not only
exposing them to public Sale as Books of ancient Date and venerable Antiquity,
but likewise slily conveying an infinite Number of written and printed Copies
of the same into all Libraries, both public and private, unknown to the
Keepers and Owners thereof; And it may be that all these things were done so
secretly, that none of the Confederacy did ever confess, nor any besides ever
discover the Cheat; And it may be that all the rest of the World was so much
asleep at that time, as to have no Suspicion of what was done, nor any Sense of
that great Alteration that had been made in the World by these Books; nor any
Remembrance, afterward, when they awoke and found themselves Christians, that
they had been of some other Religion before, when they were first taken with
that Lethargick Fit.

But if these things may be, what is there of this kind that may not be? If the
World be so much mistaken in this Matter, it may be as much mistaken in any
other Matter of the like Nature. And then, It may be, that there never was such
a Man as Homer, or Virgil, or Coesar, or Cicero, or Plutarch, or any other of
those Persons, as whose Writings we now receive the Books that go under their
Names; but that all the Books pretended to be written by those Authors, and
likewise all the Books of later Date, whereby the Authority of those former
Books is attested, were in like Manner contrived, and made and dispersed, by
such another Gang of crafty and designing Knaves who took a Pleasure in abusing
the rest of the World, or hoped to make a Gain to themselves ^hereby.

Nay then (for why should we stop here?) It may be, that not only the Laws of
our Religion, but the Laws of our Civil State too, are all forged and
counterfeit; It may be, that once upon a time, The Keeper of the Public
Records, having by much and long Observation attained to good Skill ^n the
ancient Ways of Writing for many Ages backward, and being a complete Master of
his Pen, and having also gotten an Art to make a fresh Writing seem just as old
as he had a Mind it should be thought to be, did compose, and deposite in their
proper Places, those Original Acts of Parliament which are now taken to be the
Laws of some of our former Kings; and that to confirm and establish his Fraud,
he procured some other Persons at the same Time to Write or Print, and to
convey into all Shops and Libraries, several Books of Reports and Pleadings,
wherein these counterfeit Acts were cited and referred to; and it may be that
while as this was doing, none else had their Eyes open to see it, nor had ever
after the least Suspicion of what was done; Or if they had, yet that they were
so well pleased with the Cheat, (which they thought would be a good Means of
preserving Peace and Justice in the Nation) as to be willing it should pass to
Posterity undiscovered. These May be's are I am sure every whit as possible and
as likely as the other.

Either therefore let those Men who upon this Account doubt of the Authority of
the Books of the New Testament; Or who would make others doubt of it, only by
suggesting that it is a thing possible in Nature, that they may be all forged
and counterfeit, (let them, I say, either) entertain and suggest the same Doubt
concerning all other ancient Books, of the Antiquity and Authority of which
there is not greater Evidence than there is of these; And then they will render
themselves so justly ridiculous to the World that there will be no Need to
expose their Folly; for then they must call in Question the Authority of all
Books and the Truth of all History: Or else let them fairly own that the true
Reason of their making a Doubt concerning these Books rather than concerning
others, is because they do not relish the Matter of them; because they find it
easier to resist that strong Evidence that is given of the Authority of these
Books than they do to govern their Lives according to those strict Rules of
Holiness and Purity that are therein prescribed, and to bring their Wills to
the Obedience of Faith. And if they will but own this, (which I believe is the
Truth) their Prejudice and Partiality will be so evident to all, that it may be
reasonably hoped their impious Suggestions will do but little Harm in the
World; and that few Men of any Sense or Reason will be so foolhardy as to
venture their Souls and run the Hazard of a miserable Eternity, upon so many,
and such very improbable (I had almost said, such impossible) may be's as must
be supposed to have been, if indeed these Books are forged and counterfeit, if
indeed they were not written by those Persons whom they are commonly ascribed
to.

But yielding this Point (may the Atheist or Infidel farther say) viz. that the
Gospel called St. Matthew's was written by St. Matthew, and that of St. Mark by
St. Mark, and the Rest of the Books which are ascribed to any other certain
Authors, by those Persons to whom they are severally ascribed; yet the
Authority of the whole New Testament will not, by this Concession, be
sufficiently established. For of some Books of the New Testament the Authors
are not known, of others they are doubted; Some Parts of this Book that are now
received have been rejected in ancient Times, and others not universally
received. And besides, it is cer^ain that in the early Times of Christianity
there were several Counterfeit Gospels and Epistles, some of which may possibly
have slipped into the Canon unawares. And lastly, If it be granted that all the
Books of the New Testament were originally written ^y the Apostles or other
Inspired Men, yet however the Books that we now have are but Copies, in which
many Alterations may have been made by designing Men, or careless Transcribers.

These Objections (or Cavils rather, for such I am sure they would be accounted
in any other Case) against the Authority of these Sacred Books have been urged
by some Men both anciently and lately; But they have been also so well and
fully answered by those learned Persons that have written in Defense of the
Canon, that I once thought to have taken no Notice of them, and I believe had
not done it, but that I considered on the other Hand, that when an old
Objection that has been answered an Hundred times is urged afresh, a great many
may take it for a new one, and if it be not quickly answered, may be apt to
think it unanswerable; so that in this Case it may be better to repeat the same
Answer (if it be a good one) that has been often formerly made to it, than to
say nothing. And besides, in this degenerate Age, in which any wild or
Atheistical Discourse passes for Wit, it may be the Hap of some Persons, who
have not much Mind or Leisure or Opportunity to read Books, to hear these
things in Conversation, and not knowing readily what Answers to make to them,
to be somewhat staggered in their Belief thereby; Especially if they be such
whose loose and licentious Way of Living makes them easy to receive, without
Examination any Notions that may give them Ease or Encouragement in Sin.

For these Reasons therefore I thought it would not be amiss, (especially
because it is a Matter properly belonging to the Subject I am now upon, and
because I have some time left for it) to mention, as briefly as may be, the
Answers that have been usually given to these Objections.

And, 1. Whereas it is said, that of some of the Books of the New Testament the
Authors Names are not certainly known (as namely of the Epistle to the Hebrews)
and that of others, the Authors have been doubted, (particularly, of the second
and third Epi^tles of St. John.) To this it has been answered,

1. That the Credit and Authority of a Book depends many times much more upon
the good Assurance that we have of the time when it was written, and of the
Character of the Person that wrote it, than upon the certain Knowledge of his
Name. It is therefore a Matter of no great Conse^uence whether the Epistle to
the Hebrews was writ^en by St. Paul himself (as is commonly, and upon ^ery
probable Grounds, believed;) Or (as some have ^onjectured) by St. Luke his
constant Companion; Or (as others) by St. Clemens his Fellow Laborer those
Name was in the Book of Life; Phil. 4.3.
Or (as others) ^y St. Barnabas his Assistant in Preaching the Go^pel, Acts
14.14.
and who is dignified by St. Luke with the Ti^e of an Apostle. And so, neither
is it very ma^erial whether the Epistles called the second and third Epistles
of St. John, and commonly believed to be written by the same Person that wrote
the first, were indeed written by St. John the Apostle and Evangelist, or (as
some have thought) by another ^ohn, who was made Bishop of the Jewish
Christians ^t Ephesus, by him; For it is sufficient that the Writers of these
Books, (which soever they were of the Persons beforementioned) were of good
Ability and Integrity, and well instructed in that Doctrine and Religion which
they wrote about; And of this, besides the Testimony of the Ancients, there is
good Evidence enough in the Writings themselves.

2. In Answer to this, and to all other Objections of this sort, against these,
or any other Books, or Chapters, or Paragraphs of the New Testament, it has
been farther truly said, that there is nothing singular in these Books, that
there is no Doctrine of Christianity taught in any Part of the New Testament of
the Author or Authority of which there has ever been any Doubt in the Church,
which is not taught in some other undoubted and uncontroverted Part of the same
Book. So that if it were granted that those Parts of the New Testament, of
which there has been formerly any Doubt were still of uncertain Authority, our
Christianity would suffer no real Loss thereby; Only giving up these
controverted Places we should sometimes want a good Help to enable us to
understand readily those other uncontroverted Places of the New Testament,
wherein the same Doctrines are (but perhaps more briefly or obscurely)
delivered.

2. Whereas it is said that some Parts of the New Testament have been rejected
in ancient Times; This is granted. But then it has been shown, that,
considering by whom they have been rejected, and under what Notion and for what
Reasons they were rejected, this Objection is of no force to invalidate the
Authority even of those Parts of the New Testament which have been so rejected,
and much less of the rest of the Book which has been allowed by all.

Thus, some Portions of the New Testament have been rejected by Heretics,
because they contradicted their private and singular Notions; Some by Judaizing
Christians, as the Two first Chapters of St. Matthew, because they were not
found in that Hebrew Copy of that Gospel which they used; and all the Epistles
of St. Paul were likewise rejected by the same Persons; but not, as not written
by St. Paul, but only because they were written by him, whom they looked upon
as an Enemy to their Nation, because he levelled them with other Nations, and
as too averse to that Religion which had been introduced by Moses, which they
continued so wedded to, even after their embracing Christianity, that they
could not but suspect him to be a false Apostle who had so plainly taught the
Abrogation thereof. And for the like Reasons some other Parts of the New
Testament have been likewise rejected by some few Men; that is, not because
they wanted the same Attestation which the other Parts of it had, or because it
appeared by credible History that they were Spurious, but only because they
contradicted too plainly some Notions which their former Prejudices or
Education had made them fond of. So that this Argument against the Authority of
the New Testament, taken from the Rejection of some Parts of it, by some
particular Men or Sects, is manifestly of no Strength, unless there was some
good Reason for their Rejecting them; And that there was good Reason for it,
has not yet been shown, but the contrary has been shown very plainly by the
ancient Writers of the Church, in several Books, (written by them in
Confutation of those Sects and Heresies) which are still extant.

And 3. Whereas it is further said, that some Books which are now received as
Parts of the New Testament, were not universally received in the most early
Times, when their Authority (if they were authentic) might have been asserted
upon more certain Grounds than it can be now; viz. the Epistle to the Hebrews,
the Epistle of St. James, the 2d. of St. Peter, the 2d. and 3d. of St. John,
the Epistle of St. Jude, and the Book of the Revelation: This is likewise
granted. But in Answer to it, it is said;

1. That there is good Evidence from Antiquity, that these controverted Books,
were received in the most early Times, by those who had the best Opportunity of
satisfying themselves of the Authors and Authority thereof, viz. by those to
whom they were sent, and in general by the whole Greek Church.

2. That it is no Wonder, that these Books (being written either to Christians
dispersed, and consequently only published by giving out Copies thereof to
some, to be communicated, as there was Opportunity, to others; or else to
private Persons, living perhaps at great Distance from the Places from which
they were sent) were not so easy to be attested, and upon that Account were
not at first so generally received, as the others were, which were either
written to particular Churches, to which the Authors Hands, and the Messengers
that brought them were well known, or which were first published and received
in the same Places where they were written. And,

3. That even those Churches which did for some time doubt of the Authority of
these Books, were persuaded at last to receive them as the Authentic Writings
of the Apostles, or other Inspired Men. If therefore it be supposed, that while
they doubted of these Books, they had Reason for their Doubt; that is, that
they did it, because they were not as yet fully satisfied that they were
Apostolical Writings, (which the Objectors, I believe, will readily enough
grant) it may be very reasonably presumed, that they had afterward greater
Reason to lay aside their Doubt; and that when they did receive them, it was,
because there had been then lately such Evidence and Attestation given of their
being written by the Apostles or other Inspired Men as they had not heard of
before, such as they could not then, with any Reason, contradict or gainsay;
For ordinarily a less Reason will persuade a Man to take up an Opinion at
first, than will persuade him to go back from an Opinion (how weakly soever
grounded) which he has before embraced and defended. So that this Objection is
so far from lessening, that it rather strengthens the Proof we have of the
Authority even of these once controverted Books; And it is, besides, a very
good corroborating Evidence of the Authority of all the other Books of the New
Testament. For the Backwardness of some Churches to receive these controverted
Books at first, (when they had nothing to object to the Matter of them) makes
it evident, that the Christians of the first Ages were not so very easy and
credulous as some have represented them; that they did not so very greedily
swallow any Book for divine Revelation that contained a great many Miracles,
mixed with a few good Morals, without making due Enquiry concerning the Author
and Authority thereof. But on the contrary, their being so hard to be persuaded
to receive these controverted Books for some time, while they wanted, as they
thought, sufficient Attestation, (although the Doctrine of them was in all Points
agreeable to the Doctrine of the other Books which they had before received;
their being so hard, I say, to receive these Books) of the Authority of which
there nevertheless really was such Evidence, as they themselves, after having
well weighed and considered it, declared themselves satisfied with, gives very
good Ground to believe, that they had from the Beginning, such Evidence as was
without Exception of the Authority of all those other Books (that is, of much
the greatest Part) of the New Testament, which were never controverted, which
were from the first, and with universal Consent received by all Christian
Churches; For if there had not been very undeniable Evidence of their being the
genuine Writings of the Apostles, or other inspired Men, there would certainly
have been the same Doubt and Controversy concerning them, that there once was
concerning these.

But, 4. It has been further objected, that in the early Times of
Christianity, there were several counterfeit Gospels and Epistles, which passed
among some for the Writings of the Apostles; and that it is possible some of
them may have slipped into the Canon, unawares to the first Christians, who, by
all the Accounts of those Times, were more remarkable for their Honesty and
Simplicity and Zeal, than for their extraordinary Parts and Learning.

But this Objection, (granting the Matter of Fact alleged in it to be true) is
so far from lessening, that it rather adds to that reasonable Assurance that we
have, that all the Books of the Canon are true and genuine. For there is
nothing so apt to put Men upon using Caution, as a great Probability of being
cheated if they be not cautious. Thus, when the Coin is generally good, and
there is very little base or counterfeit Money stirring, Men commonly take it
by Tale, without examining the Weight and Purity of every Piece; and so may
more easily have a single Piece of lighter Weight or baser Metal put upon them
without discerning it: But if the Coin be much corrupted, they look more
narrowly upon every single Piece of Money that they take, and if there be the
least Cause to suspect it, make Trial of it by the Scale or Touchstone, before
they accept it as good. If therefore there were in the early Times of
Christianity, many counterfeit Pieces given out, and perhaps received by some,
as written by the Apostles, and which were, some of them, discovered to be
spurious; (and there is not greater Evidence from Antiquity, that there were
any such spurious Writings, than there is that the Spuriousness of some of them
was soon discerned;) this could not but put the Christians of those Times upon
examining more strictly, what Evidence and Attestation there was that those
other Books were true and genuine which had been generally received as such. So
that the more there were of these spurious and counterfeit Books, so much the
more assured and confident we may reasonably be, that none but such as were
undoubtedly true and authentic and very well attested, were admitted into the
Canon; And, of the two, it is much more probable, that they did, for Want of
clear Attestation, refuse to admit some that had been written by the Apostles,
than that they did, without sufficient Attestation, admit any that were not.

And that the Christians of those early Times (who had the best Means and
Opportunities of satisfying themselves whether any Book, given out as written
by an Apostle, was so or not) wanted not Skill to discern between a true and a
spurious Writing; (as is maliciously suggested by some Men) is abundantly
evident, from those Monuments of the excellent Parts and Learning of some of
the first Converts to Christianity, which are still extant in their Books; and
from the Testimony that is therein given to the like good Ability of several
others, who were famous in their Generation, for their Preaching and Writings,
and for their stoutly maintaining the Truths of Christianity both against
Infidels and Heretics, but whose Books are now unhappily lost.

But 5. and lastly; It was further said; That though it be granted that all the
Books of the New Testament that are now received, were originally written by
the Apostles or other inspired Men, yet those which we now have are but Copies;
in which, by so many Transcriptions thereof as must have been in about 1400
Years, many Alterations may have happened, through the Ignorance, or Oversight,
or evil Design of the Transcribers; And that several Changes have been made, i^
undeniably plain, by the various Readings that have been observed in comparing
the best Manuscript Copies, that are now, or have been extant since Printing
began; So that we cannot be sure whether any particular Passages once found in
those Books, are the very Words of an Apostle, or of some ignorant or careless
Scribe. But to this it has been answered;

1. That so far as this Objection is of any Force, it ^nvalidates the Credit of
all History, and of all other Books of ancient Date, as well as of the New
Testament; Nay, indeed of all other Books, much more than of ^his; for the
faithfully Transcribing whereof, it may ^easonably be presumed, there was
formerly, greater Care taken, (as there is now for the correctly Printing
(...)) than there ordinarily was of other Books, that ^ere of less Consequence.

2. That though it be certain that some Heretics ^ave attempted to corrupt the
Text of the New Testa^ent in some Places, and have made Changes in some ^^w
Copies thereof; it is almost as certain that their ^ttempts of this kind
neither have nor ever could ^^ount to a Corruption of all the Copies thereof
that ^ere generally in Men's Hands; In which there is ^en to this Day an
admirable Agreement in all Mat^^rs of Moment. And from that general Agreement
^^at always was in all the Copies of this Book, (ex^^pt those few that were
sometimes corrupted by He^^ticks, to serve a Turn) their Attempts of this kind
^^ve been always rendered successless; and those false ^octrines, that were
justified only by their own false ^opies of this Book, solidly confuted.

3. It is further answered, that not only there is no ^^idence that there has
been, but that it is morally ^^possible that there should be a general
Depravation (...) the Copies of this Book, either designedly, or by ^ance, in
any Place of great Consequence either Point of History or Doctrine. For when
was it possible that this Corruption should be? Was it in the Copies that were
given out, in the Days of the Apostles, and while they were living? This cannot
well be supposed; Or if it had been done then, it cannot be thought but that the
Authors of these Books, being living, would have taken Care to have had such
false Copies of their Books suppressed, or well corrected; or at least have
given public Notice, in order to their Correction, of those Faults that had
been committed in the transcribing, which did either obscure or spoil their
sense.

Was it then in the Times immediately after the Apostles were dead? But neither
could this be; for by this time an infinite Number of true Copies had been made
and dispersed in all Parts of the Christian Church; And besides the Autographs
of the Books themselves were then probably, all in being; For Tertullian who
lived in the Third Century, witnesses that some of them were extant and to be
seen even in his Time; So that by comparing of the new false Copies with the
ancient true ones, or with the Originals themselves then extant, the Fraud
would have been quickly discovered, or the Mistake easily rectified.

Was it then in the Times after this, when the Originals were lost or worn out?
This was still less possible; For by this Time not only a greater Number of
true Copies thereof, in the Original Greek, were dispersed and in the Hands of
all Christians; but several Translations thereof had been likewise made into
other Languages, several Commentaries had been written thereupon, and the most
material Passages thereof had been, occasionally, cited by the Christian
Writers of those or the foregoing Times.

And the further we go on downwards, 'twas still (for such Reasons as have been
given already) more impossible that the Copies of this Book should be generally
corrupted in any Place or Matter of Moment; as well as more likely that there
should be every Day an Increase of such small and literal Mistakes, as could
hardly be avoided by the greatest Care and Faithfulness. And these are the
Various Readings before spoken of; Concerning which, and in Answer to the
beforementioned Objection, so far as it is grounded upon them, it is farther
said --

4. In the fourth Place; That they are no other than such as are to be met with
in Comparing the Manuscripts of all other Books; That these various Readings
(if they be compared together with Judgment) are more like to lead us to
understand the true Meaning of the Writers, than to endanger our mistaking
their Sense; it being very probable that when there are several Readings, one
of them is the right, and easier by their Help, to rectify the Mistakes that
may have been made in some Copies, than it would have been, if all Copies had
agreed in the same Mistake. And lastly, that it is, hardly in any Place of
which there are such various Readings, very material which is the true Reading;
there being no Point that is of the Substance either of the History or Doctrine
of Christianity, that is grounded upon any Text, of which there are, in
different Copies, various Readings, but which may be proved by some other
Texts, in the Reading whereof all Copies do agree.

5. And Lastly, In Answer to this Objection, that the Text of the New Testament
is depraved and corrupted, and consequently of uncertain Authority, it is
further said; That supposing these Books to be written by the Apostles, and by
divine Direction and Inspiration, (which must be supposed, or at least, for
Argument sake, be allowed by those that make this Objection; Or else the
Objection is trifling) it is by no Means credible that the same Goodness of God
which took Care for the Writing, has not likewise taken Care for the preserving
of these Books, so free (at least) from Corruption, that they may be sufficient
to answer the Ends for which they were written; that is, fully to instruct Men
in all Points of Christian Faith and Practice, to make them wise unto
Salvation, and thoroughly to furnish them unto all good Works.

And now from all that has been said I hope it appears, that we have
sufficient Reason to believe that the Books of the New Testament were written
by those Persons whose Names they bear, or to whom they are ascribed, viz. by
the Apostles of Christ, or other inspired Men; Which was the first thing I was
to make good.

Whether there be sufficient Reason to give them Credit in the Matters of Fact
which they have related; and whether the Doctrine of the Gospel be well proved
by the History of it, shall (God willing) be hereafter enquired.

In the mean Time (supposing their Testimony to be credible) what has been said
upon this first Head may serve to show, in some Measure, the Unreasonableness
of those Men, who are not satisfied with the Scripture Revelation.

For I believe there are few that have heard anything of the Manner of the
first Preaching of the Gospel, but who think, that they that lived in those
Times, and heard the Apostles themselves, had sufficient Reason to receive
their Testimony; And this (perhaps they will say) is what they could with for
themselves; viz. That they might have heard the Apostles themselves; or that
they might now have as good and sure Grounds of Faith as those had who were
converted to Christianity by the Preaching of the Apostles; which if they had,
they make no Doubt but they should be, not only almost, but altogether such, as
the Primitive Christians were, both in Belief and Practice.

But if they are not such now, it is much to be doubted whether they would have
been such, if they had lived then. For by what has been now said it appears,
that the Books of the New Testament, being (as we have very good Reason to
believe they were) written by the Apostles themselves, are their Words; their
Sermons; that therein the Apostles themselves being dead, do yet truly speak to
us, the very same things, though not just in the same Manner, that they spoke
before while they were living; and that their Testimony written, if indeed it
be theirs, (which I have shown there is no Cause to doubt of) is as credible as
their living Testimony was.

For in Matters of common Testimony we make little Difference between Speech
and Writing; If a Man whom we dare trust sends us a Letter, and therein relates
such and such things, as heard or seen by himself, or as well attested to him
by unexceptionable Witnesses, we give as full Credit to his Letter as we should
do to his Words.

So that in Truth, our Case, who live now, is not very different from theirs
who lived in the Apostles Days, and heard them saying those same Things, which
we now read in their Books; and if we think those inexcuseable who did not
receive their Testimony when given by Word of Mouth, we cannot in good Reason,
hold our selves excused, if we receive not the same Testimony of the same
Persons given under their Hands.

In one Respect indeed, it must be granted, that they had the Advantage of us;
viz. because they might be surer that they heard an Apostle speak, than the
Nature of the Thing will admit we should be, that we read the Words of an
Apostle, written; But we are sure enough of this; We have as good moral
Certainty of it, as we can have of any thing, that is not capable of any other
than a moral Certainty: And if the Words that we read in the New Testament are
the Words of the Apostles of Christ, we have, in some Respects, the Advantage
of those who lived in those early Times; for we have the concurrent Testimony
of several of the Apostles, written; whereas hardly any in those times, (when a
few Persons were to bear Witness to all the World) could have more than the
Testimony of one single Apostle only, by Word of Mouth; and many Witnesses are
more credible than one; And besides, there being several Witnesses, their
Testimony if it be false, may be more easily proved so, by their Disagreement
with one another, than the Testimony of one single Witness could be; And
lastly, a Writing, which we may review, and read over as often as we will, and
which we may take what time we please to consider of, may be more thoroughly
understood, and better digested, than a Sermon or Discourse only once spoken
can well be.

But if it be granted that the Faith of the first Converts to Christianity,
which came by Hearing of the Apostles, might be built upon more certain and
infallible Grounds, than ours, that comes only by Reading, is; (And some
Reasons may perhaps be given hereafter, why 'twas fit it should be so) it is
enough, however, to render our Infidelity inexcusable, if the Grounds of Faith
that we now have, are very rational, if they are a sufficient Support for such
a Faith as will enable us to please God, and to overcome the World.

And this may be farther said for our Comfort, and to make us easy and
satisfied with those Grounds and Reasons of Faith which are afforded to us by
the written Testimony of the Apostles in the Books of the New Testament; that
as there is more Certainty in that Belief, (if it may be called Belief) which
is grounded upon Demonstration, or infallible Evidence; so there is more Praise
and Virtue in that good Disposition of Mind, which makes us rest satisfied with
such Grounds of Faith, as though not absolutely and infallibly certain, yet
cannot, with any good Reason, be denied or excepted against; According to that
Saying of our Savior to St. Thomas, in a like Case, with which I shall
conclude; Joh. 20.29. Thomas, because thou have seen me thou have believed;
blessed are they, (that is, they are more blessed, their Faith is more
excellent and praiseworthy, and so will entitle them to a greater Reward) who
have not seen, and yet have believed.

Which Blessedness, that we may all attain, God of his great Mercy and Goodness
grant, for the sake of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 8. l. 19. for then, r. them,

Books Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Sermon Preached before the Honorable the House of Commons at St. Margaret's
Westminster, January the 30th. School/9.

The Sufficiency of a Standing Revelation; A Sermon Preached at the Cathedral
Church of St. Paul's, Jan. 1st. 1699/700. being the first for the Year 1700. of
the Lecture Founded by the Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire

The Sufficiency of the Scripture Revelation, as to the Matter of it. Being the
Second for the Year 1700. of the Lecture Founded by the Honorable Robert
Boil, Esquire These Three by Offspring Blackall, Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

A Persuasive to Prayer; A Sermon Preached before the King at St. James's.

A Sermon Preached before the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament
Assembled in the Abbey Church at Westminster, Jan. 30th.

Fifteen Sermons Preached on several Occasions; the Last of which was never
before Printed. These Three by the most Reverend Father in God, John Lord
Archbishop of York, Primate of England, and Metropolitan.

The Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man.

A False Faith not Justified by Care for the Poor; Proved in a Sermon Preached
at St. Paul's Church.

Mysteries in Religion Vindicated, or the Filiation Deity and Satisfaction of
our Savior asserted against Socinians and others; with Occasional Reflections
on several late Pamphlets. These Two by Luke Milbourn, a Presbyter of the
Church of England.

Two Sermons of Mr. Young's, about Nature and Grace, Preached at Whitehall.

THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE Scripture-Revelation, As to the Proof of it. PART II.

TWO SERMONS Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, April 1st. and May
6th. 1700.

BEING The Fourth and Fifth, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the
Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

THE Point I entered upon the Proof of the last time was this,

(3.) That we have sufficient Reason given us to convince us of the Truth and
Authority of the Holy Scripture, and consequently of all the Doctrines that are
taught by it.

And for the Proof of this, having, for Brevity sake, confined my Discourse
upon it to the Books of the New Testament only, (the rather because the
Authority of that being granted, the Authority of the Old Testament cannot
reasonably be questioned) I propounded to show, 1. That we have sufficient
Reason to believe that the Books of the New Testament were written by those
Persons who are said to be the Authors thereof. 2. That there is sufficient
Reason to give full Credit to them in their Relations of those Matters of Fact
which they have recorded. And, 3. That if the Matters of Fact related in the
New Testament are true, they are sufficient Proofs of the Truth and Divine
Authority of all the Doctrines that are therein taught.

And I hope enough was said the last time, to show that we have sufficient
Reason to believe that the Books of the New Testament were written by those
Persons who are said to be the Authors thereof. What I am next to do, is,

2. To show that there is sufficient Reason to give full Credit to these
Authors in their Relations of those Matters of Fact which they have recorded.

And I hope none of you that hear me (whom I presume to be all Christians) will
take Offense at it, if now, while I am arguing this Point, I sometimes speak of
the Holy Evangelists with the same Freedom that might be used in speaking
concerning any other Authors, and if I sometimes Plead for no more Credit to be
given to them in their Relations than is fit and reasonable to be given to any
other Historian that was naturally as well furnished and qualified to write a
true History as they were, and whose Fidelity and Veracity is as well attested
and confirmed other Ways as theirs was. For you will consider, I hope, that my
Business is now with Infidels, with whom we can argue only upon the Principles
of common Reason: And though we who are Christians already, do believe, as one of
the first Principles of our Religion, that these Sacred Writers were divinely
and supernaturally assisted in their Work, and that upon that Account they
deserve much greater Credit in what they have written than other Historians do;
yet this is what those who are yet Infidels will not allow; And in Disputation
nothing is to be presumed on one side but what will be readily allowed by the
other Party. So that the divine Inspiration of the Evangelical Writers and the
supernatural Assistance which we believe they had in their Writing cannot as
yet be regularly insisted upon as an Argument to gain them Credit; But it is
what will easily be granted afterward, when the Truth of their History shall
be well established upon other Grounds; (as I hope it will be in the following
Discourse) and it is what may then serve to procure a religious Respect and
Reverence to these Sacred Writings, 1 Thessalonians. 2.13.
and to engage us to receive them not as the Word of Men, but (as they are in
Truth) as the Word of God.

But this one thing nevertheless I suppose I may presume, viz. that if the
Books of the New Testament (the Historical Parts of it in particular) were
written by those Authors to whom they are ascribed (which has been already
proved) the Matters of Fact recorded by the Evangelists in Writing are the same
which they and the other Apostles testified by Word of Mouth in their
Preaching; For it cannot, I think, with any Reason, be suspected that their
Preaching and Writings were disagreeable to each other, because such
Disagreement would, most certainly, have utterly destroyed the Credit of them
both.

And this being supposed, I hope, it will clearly appear that there is
abundantly sufficient Reason to give full Credit to these Writings, if these
following things be considered; (1.) If we consider the Nature, Conditions and
Circumstances of the Matters that are recorded in the Historical Books of the
New Testament, and of the History its self. (2.) If we consider the good
Capacity that the Authors thereof were in to know the Truth of the things they
have related. (3.) If we consider the strong Obligations they were under to
write nothing but the Truth, according to the best of their Knowledge or
Information. (4.) If we consider the good Evidences that we have of their
Honesty and Faithfulness. And (5.) Lastly, If we consider the Confirmation that
was given to the Truth of their History by God himself.

1. I say the Evangelical History will appear to be highly credible, if
(without any Regard as yet had to the Ability and Integrity of its Authors) we
only consider the Nature, Conditions and Circumstances of the Matters therein
recorded, and of the History its self. Concerning which there are two things
especially that may be observed, 1. That the Matters recorded by the
Evangelical Writers are such as might be certainly known. And 2. That they are
such, and in such manner related by the Evangelists, that if their History of
them had been false, it could never have gained Credit in the World.

1. First, I say the Matters recorded by the Evangelical Writers are such as
might be certainly known; I mean, either by the Historians themselves, or by
those from whom they had their Information. For,

1. They are, for the most part, plain Matters of Sense, which those who were
present at them could have no doubt of without Distrusting their own Faculties
of Hearing or Seeing; and which those who testified them might be as certain of
the Truth of, as we can be of any thing that we hear with our own Ears, or see
with our own Eyes. For, thus, whether our Savior gave out himself to be the
Messiah foretold by the Prophets; whether he said that he was the Son of God;
and whether he uttered those other Speeches which the Evangelists have recorded
as spoken by him, could not but be certainly known by the People who often
heard him; and especially by his Apostles who constantly attended him.

And so likewise whether he did those many wonderful Works which the
Evangelists have recorded of him could not but be known by those that were
present with him; They might be certain either that he did them, or that he did
not do them. Thus for instance, it might be certainly known to those that first
affirmed that he gave Sight to the Blind, whether those Persons had been once
blind, and whether afterward they ^aw; and to those that witnessed that he
gave Strength ^o the Cripples, whether the Men whom they said he wrought this
Cure upon, had been Lame or disabled ^n their Feet, Hands, or Body before, and
whether ^fterwards they walked and had Strength like other Men; and to those
that testified that he raised the Dead, whether the Persons said to have been
raised by ^im, had been truly dead, and whether afterward ^hey lived.

But above all, his own Resurrection (which the pre^ent Season as well as the
Wonderfulness and Impor^ance of the thing obliges us to have a special ^egard
to) was a thing that might be most certainly ^nown to those that pretended to
be Witnesses of it; This Sermon was Preached on the Monday in Easter Week.
^hey might be certain whether he had been once dead, and whether he showed
himself alive after his Passion ^y many infallible Proofs, and was seen of them
forty Days. Of this they might be rather more certain than ^f any other of his
Miracles, because it was a thing ^ot to be judged of by one sense only (as some
of the ^est were) but by almost all their Senses; for by their Sight they might
be assured that it was he himself whom for more than three Years before they
had been well acquainted with, whom they then saw with their Eyes; and by their
Hearing, that it was his own Voice and not a Stranger's, that Voice which they
had often heard, and which they well knew, that then spoke to them; and by
their Touch, that it was a real Body which they saw and heard, and not an airy
Apparition; not a mere Voice: and also that it was that very same Body, which
they had seen before hanging upon, and which they had taken down dead from the
Cross, when they were permitted (as they say they were) to handle and feel him,
Luke 24.39. Joh. 20.27.
to put their Fingers into the Print of the Nails, and to thrust their Hands
into the Gash that had been made in his Side by the Spear that pierced his
Heart.

And of the other Matters recorded by the Evangelists, but not as Matters of
their own Knowledge those from whom they had their Information might have the
same Certainty which they had of these things* For his Mother could not but
know whether she had conceived him without Knowledge of a Man; and whether his
Birth had been foretold her by an Angel* And she, and her Relations, and the
whole Neighborhood might have a certain Knowledge of the Time, Place and all
other Circumstances of his Birth as they ar^ related in the Gospels.

They that testified such plain Matters of Sense as most of those are, which
are recorded in the Evangelical History, could not but know either that the
things which they testified were true, or that they themselves were egregious
Liars when they testified them to have been so.

2. As the Matters recorded in the Evangelical History are chiefly Matters of
sense; of which, as such, the greatest Certainty and Assurance may be had; and
in which any single Witness thereof may be very confident that he is not
mistaken; so it may be ^lso observed, that most of them are related as Mat^ers
done in the Sight, Hearing, or Presence of a ^reat many; which Circumstance
adds very much to that Certainty which any single Witness of such Mat^ers may
receive by his own Senses only.

For though it be a common Saying, that Seeing is Be^ieving, and we ordinarily
desire no greater Assu^ance of the Truth of any Matter of Sense, than our ^wn
Sense and Perception of it; it is nevertheless ^o unusual thing for a Man when
he is relating ^omewhat that happened that was very extraordinary and
surprising, to say, that though he saw it himself, ^e could hardly believe his
own Eyes. And this ^ight well enough have been the Case of any one ^f the
Witnesses of any of our Lord's Miracles, (and ^specially of his Resurrection
the most wonderful of ^^l his Miracles, and which gave Confirmation to all ^he
rest;) for though they were plain Matters of ^ense, yet they were withal so very
strange and asto^ishing, that if any Man had seen them alone, he ^ight probably
have had some Distrust even of his ^^n Senses, or he might afterward have been
ready ^o doubt whether he had been well awake or in a ^ream. But a Man cannot
so reasonably suspect that his own Senses do deceive him, when he per^eives
that the thing appears to all others that are ^resent, just as it does to him;
nor can he after^ards so easily fancy that he was in a Dream, when he finds
that all the rest that were there have the same Notion and Remembrance of the
thing that he himself has. So that by this Additional Evidence, I mean by the
Agreement that a Man finds there is between his own senses and other Men's, he
becomes more certain and confident of the Truth of the things he sees, than he
would have been by his own Eyesight only.

2. Secondly; The other thing which I said might be noted concerning the
Matters Recorded in the Evangelical History, is, That they are such, and i^
such manner related by the Evangelists; that if their History of them had been
false, it could never have gained Credit in the World.

And this may in part appear from what has bee^ said already; For as there is
nothing that can be mo^^ certainly known and attested than a plain Matter o^
Sense at which several are present; so there is nothin^ more liable to be
contradicted and easy to be disproved than such a Matter is, in case it was
not (...) done as it is reported to have been.

But there are several other things that are he^ proper to be considered; for,

1. It may be considered that the Gospel Histo^^ comprehends a very great
number of Relations o^ such Matters of Fact and Sense; Considering therefore
how very easy it was to disprove every one o^ them if it had been false; it is,
most evidently, morally impossible that a History stuffed with nothin^ else but
Lies and Forgeries of this sort, (as they mu^ suppose the Evangelical History
to be, who will no^ allow it to be a true History) should ever have obtained
any Credit. And most of the things recorde^ by the Evangelists, being related
by them as Matters ^f their own Knowledge; if the Falsity of only one ^ngle
Relation had been made appear, the Credit of ^he whole History would have been
thereby de^^royed.

2. It may be also considered that all these things ^re related in the Gospel
History as done in that same ^ountry in which the History thereof was first
pub^^shed; and that a Country but of small Extent, not ^bove two hundred Miles
in length at the most, and ^ot half so much in breadth; and yet not all in the
^^me part of it, but some in one place, some in ano^^er; and those usually the
most considerable Towns (...) Cities of Judea and Galilee. And by this, their
^istory of these things, if it had been false, was still ^ore easy and liable
to be disproved; there being ^ery few of those to whom these Matters were first
^lated that needed to have gone many Miles from ^ome to have enquired into the
Truth of some or ^her of them. And if any Man had found the Apo^^^es false in
their Report of any Matter that was ^d to have been done in his own
Neighborhood, (...) would hardly have gone farther for more satisfa^^ion; he
would readily have concluded without ^^rther Examination, that being found
False Witnes^ in one thing, they were not fit to be believed in ^^y thing.

3. It may be moreover considered, that the Go^^el History was written and
published in a few years ^er the things therein Recorded are said to be done.
(...) is not certain indeed in what Year precisely the ^^spels were written;
But if they are but allowed (...) be the genuine Writings of the reputed
Authors; (which I hope has been already sufficiently proved) it is certain they
were all, (even the latest of them, that of St. John) written before the Memory
of the Things therein recorded could be worn out; nay if we further suppose (as
I think we may do very reasonably) that the Things recorded by the Evangelists
are the same which they and the other Apostles and Disciples of our Lord
testified by word of Mouth in their Preaching, we may truly enough say that the
History of the Gospel was begun to be published on that same Day on which the
Apostles began to preach, viz. on the Day of Pentecost, ten Days after our
Lords Ascension; and that it was fully published in a very short time after. So
that most of the things recorded in the Gospels are things that had been done
or ha^ happened in the compass of less than four Years before the History
thereof was first published, for it was no^ so long from our Lord's Baptism to
his Ascension; and the earliest things of all that are therein recorde^ (which
are but few, and make but a small part of the History) viz. the Birth of St.
John Baptist, and o^ our Lord, and the things that happened about th^^ Time,
were things done not above thirty five Year^ before at the most.

And the History of the Acts of the Apostles (which because it ends with St.
Paul's Imprisonment at Rome we may reasonably think was published about tha^
Time) comprehends a History of some very remarkable things, the very first and
earliest whereof had no^ been done thirty Years before.

And this Consideration affords another very probable Argument of the Truth of
the Evangelical History; because by this it still further appears how very
easy it would have been to have disproved it if it had been false; for it
being an History of things done so very lately, it must needs be that several
of those into whose Hands it first came, must have certain Knowledge whether
some of the things therein related had been so or not; And they who had not
this Knowledge, might easily have had certain Information, (from others, I
mean, besides the Apostles and Disciples of our Lord) whether the Relations
therein contained were true or falfe. -- Especially if it be considered
further, in the 4th Place.

4. That the Facts related in the Evangelical History are commonly related with
all the Circumstances that were needful or proper to be noted in order to the
rendering an Enquiry into the truth of them exceeding easy to such as had any
distrust thereof. For in the Account which the Evangelists give us of our
Savior's Speeches, they commonly tell us not only his Words, but likewise
when, where, to whom, and upon what Occasion they were spoken; and in the
Account that they give of his Miracles, they usually note the Places where they
were done, and very often ^he Names, or Characters at least, of the Persons
they were wrought upon, and sometimes they mention ^lso who were by and
Witnesses thereof, and what Discourse concerning him was thereby occasioned;
And in relating the things that were done or happened before our Savior's
Baptism, about the Time of his Birth, they carefully note the Time, the Place,
and other Circumstances, whereby their Readers were (as it were) challenged to
make Enquiry, and desired not to ^ake things only upon their Credit; and were
also directed readily whither to go, and to whom to apply themselves to obtain
the fullest satisfaction whether the things they reported were so or not. The
same may be observed in the Acts of the Apostles.
And if all the Circumstances of every particular Story which they relate are
not always so punctually set down, the Omission thereof sometimes is not of
much Consideration, because it was so very easy by enquiring into the Truth of
those many other Stories which are related with all Circumstances for any
Person to be satisfied whether their History in general deserved Credit or not;
And whoever had found any one Story falsely reported by them, would hardly have
troubled himself, (at least not for his own satisfaction) to have examined
further into the Truth of the rest.

5. It may be further considered that most of the things recorded by the
Evangelists are related by them as things that were done very publicly, as
things that were well known to a great many. For very few in Comparison of
those Discourses of our Lord that are recorded by the Evangelists were
addressed in private to his Apostles only, but most of them were spoken in
public; his set Sermons commonly to great multitudes gathered together on a
Mountain, on the Seashore, or in a Synagogue; and the rest more commonly in
Places of Resort, in populous Towns or Cities, in Jerusalem or the Temple, when
many were by to hear what he said. And his Miracles were done for the most part
in the best Inhabited Cities of Judea and Galilee; or if in other Places, yet
in the open Daylight, and commonly when there was a great crowd of People
about him; Or if at any time the Miracle its self was done privately, in an
House, or a Chamber, the Effect of the Miracle was usually very visible, and
such as could not but be taken notice of by a great many. And even of those few
things which were spoken or done by him most privately, there was no want of
Witnesses; there being (except very rarely) no fewer than twelve in constant
Attendance upon him, and several others besides that Companied with them all
the time that the Lord Jesus went in and out among them. Acts 1.21.


And this Circumstance of the Facts recorded by the Evangelists, as it made
them capable of better and more certain Attestation, being true; so it
contributed no less toward the rendering it easy to disprove that Relation
which they had given of them, if it had been false. For when a Man witnesses a
thing of his own private Knowledge there may be no way to invalidate his
Testimony, but either by showing that the thing which he testifies was not
possible, or by offering some just Exception to the Credit of the Witness; But
when neither of these can be done (and they cannot always be done although the
thing testified be false) yet in case the Matter was done publicly, it is the
easiest thing in the World to convict a false Witness by the contrary Testimony
of several others that were present and as capable of knowing the Truth of the
thing as himself; or by the Clashing of the Witnesses among themselves. Nothing
therefore could have been more easy than to have disproved the Evangelical
History in almost every particular of it, if it had not been true.

For most of our Savior's Speeches and Miracles are related as spoken and done
in the Presence not of his Disciples only, but of a great many others that
happened to be by, by Chance, or that followed him, not for any Liking that
they had to his Person or Doctrine, but only out of Curiosity, or for the Sake
of the Loaves; and very often they were done before such as came on purpose to
watch what he said and did, with a Design to lay hold on any Occasion that was
offered to represent him to the People as an Impostor. Can it be supposed then
that these were ignorant whether the Relation which the Apostles and
Evangelists gave of these Matters was true or false? Or can it be imagined that
they would all have held their Peace? that not one, of those many that could
have done it, would have opened his Mouth to have convicted the Apostles of
Falsity, if they had either in Word or Writing related any one of these things
otherwise than it had indeed been transacted? And if in any one of these
things, of which the Apostles pretended they had personal Knowledge, they had
been found false Witnesses, their Credit would have been ruined for ever.

Nay if they had been found false in their Report of any of those other Matters
which they have left upon Record, of which they had not a personal Knowledge;
though this indeed would not have been such a Proof of their Dishonesty (for any
Man may very innocently be mis-inform'd) it would however have been such a
plain Argument of their foolish Credulity, as would have destroyed their Credit
no less than if they had been found in a known Lie. For these also were Matters
of the same public Nature; nay indeed they were rather more public than the
other; they were so very public that any Man with very small Trouble might
have been fully satisfied whether they were so or not.

For thus, they tell us that our Lord was of the Seed of David; (and it was a
Matter of the greatest Consequence to the Christian Religion that he should be
known to be so;) How very easy was it at that time, when the Genealogies of
all the Jewish Families, and of the Family of David more especially, were kept
with the greatest Carefulness and Exactness for them to know this? And how very
easy was it, for any one that doubted it, to have inspected the public
Registers, and seen whether it was so or not?

They tell us also several Circumstances of our Lord's Birth, Luke 2.1. etc.
and several Accidents that happened about that time; They tell us, for
instance, that Joseph being of the House and Lineage of David, was forced with
Mary his Wife, at a very inconvenient time for her, being great with Child, to
take a long Journey of about an hundred Miles, from Nazareth in Galilee, where
their Habitation then was, to Bethlehem in Judea, the City of David, that so
their Names might be enrolled with the rest of the Family of David, when
Augustus Coesar had ordered a general Enrolment of the whole Jewish Nation;
they tell us that then and there Jesus was born; Mat. 2.1, etc.
that at the time of his Birth certain Wise Men out of the East, conducted by a
Star, came to Judea in Quest of the Messiah; that they informed Herod of the
Design of their coming; that he were directed by the Council of the Chief
Priests and Scribes to look for him in Bethlehem; that Herod disappointed of
the Design he had to kill this newborn King of the Jews, by their not returning
back to him according to his Appointment, sent forth, and, that he might make
sure work of it, slew all the Children in Bethlehem that were under two years
old; and several other things they tell us of the like kind, easy to be known
if true, and no less easy to be disproved if false; for whether there had been
such a (...).
Taxing or Enrolment of the whole Nation of the Jews according to their
Families, by the Order of the Emperor, could not but be well known to all the
Jews; And the People of Nazareth could not but know when Joseph went from
thence, and whither he went, and upon what Occasion, and how long it was before
he returned; and the People at Jerusalem could not but long remember the Story
of the Wise Men, at whose coming Herod and the whole City with him was so much
troubled; and if there had been no such thing, would readily have contradicted
the Apostle's Relation of it; And the Mothers at Bethlehem which survived the
Loss of their dear Children, could never after while they lived forget that
general Mourning there had once been amongst them, nor the Occasion of it. If
therefore these and such like things related by the Evangelists as things
publicly done, and much talked of, and of which (as they say) the Rumor was
spread far and near, had not been so as they are related, their whole History
would have been thereby so much disparaged, that no part of it would ever have
had much Credit.

It Is true indeed there are some things related by the Evangelists that were
not altogether so public as those I have before mentioned, for there are some
things, of which (according to the Account that is given of them in the
Evangelical History) none but the Disciples of Christ were Witnesses; such in
particular was the Resurrection of our Lord, which we at this time commemorate;
and which is for that Reason most proper to be now instanced in. Of this then I
say (as well as of some few other things) it must be granted, that it was a
Fact that could directly be witnessed only by his own Friends, by his Apostles
and Disciples; for so St. Peter observes, speaking of this Matter, Acts x. 40,
41. Him God raised up the third Day, and showed him openly, not to all the
People, but to Witnesses chosen before of God, even to us who did eat and drink
with him after he rose from the Dead. But nevertheless, considering how long,
and how often, he is reported to have appeared to them, and the many
Circumstances that are noted concerning his several Apparitions, and the great
Number of those whom he is said to have appeared to, (for St. Paul affirms that
besides his frequent Apparitions to his Apostles, 1 Cor. 15.6.
he was seen at once by above five hundred Brethren) their Testimony in this
Matter, if it had been false, was very near as easy and liable to be
disproved, as in any of the Matters before spoken of. For it is very hard for
so much as two Men that are hired, or agree together to give in a false
Evidence, to be so well instructed in the Evidence they are to give, or to
concert the Matter so well between themselves, but that upon a separate
Examination their Falsity may easily be detected by their Disagreement in some
considerable Circumstances of the Matter they bear Witness to; How very much
easier then would it have been to have done this, in a Matter clothed with
such great variety of Circumstances, and that was testified by so many, by
Twelve, by Seventy, by above five hundred Persons.

Or if it can be supposed, that they might have all so fully agreed beforehand,
in what Manner and with what Circumstances to tell this Story, that it might
not be possible to catch them in a Contradiction; yet the thing it self was of
that Nature, that the false Evidence they had given concerning it (if it had
been false) might easily have been shown other ways, for what they testified
was that that same Jesus whom the Jews had Crucified, and whom they had seen
laid into the Sepulcher was risen again, and had been seen alive three Days
after his Passion by several of his Disciples; Had this therefore been false,
how very easy would it have been for the Jews to have disproved their Evidence
of it, by only going to the Sepulcher, and taking out thence his dead Body, and
exposing it for some time to public view? And thither doubtless they did go,
and with this Design; but the Body they could not find, and yet they had taken
all the Caution that was possible to prevent its being conveyed away, Mat.
27.62.
having obtained from Pilate a Guard of Soldiers on purpose to keep watch over
it for three Days. This therefore is a strong Confirmation of the Truth of the
Apostle's Testimony concerning our Lord's Resurrection, that it being such as
might with the greatest Ease in the World have been disproved if it had been
false; the Jews had nothing to say against it, nothing to oppose to it, but
only that very ill contrived, that self-contradicting Evidence of the Watchmen;
Mat. 29.13.
who said that while they were asleep, that is, when all their senses were
bound up, and when they were not in a Capacity of knowing any thing that was
done, the Disciples came and stole the Body away. But if they saw the Body
removed (in which Case only they could be good Witnesses of it) they were not,
as they said they were, asleep when the thing was done; Or if indeed they were
asleep, when it was removed, they could not be positive how it was removed,
they could not say he was not risen from the Dead.

6. Another thing that may be considered in order to show how very improbable,
or rather how impossible it was that the Gospel History should ever have gained
Credit in the World if it had been false, is this; that as it was a History of
such Matters and was so contrived that it might with the greatest Ease have
been disproved, so the Matters therein related were in themselves, and
especially in their Consequences, such as must needs have engaged a great many
to make the strictest Examination that was possible into the Truth of them; and
if they had discovered any thing of Falsehood therein, to make known their
Discovery to the World.

For the whole Doctrine of Christianity was grounded upon the Truth of the
Evangelical History; This disproved would have destroyed that, and this being
admitted, there was no way to put a stop to the spreading of that; And the
certain Consequence of receiving the Christian Religion in the World, was the
Abolishing of all the other Forms of Religion that were then any where received
or established; even of that which had been introduced by Moses amongst the
Jews, by the Appointment of God himself, as well as of the several sorts of
Paganism and Idolatry that were received in other Countries. Now when any
Religion, be it true or false, is the established Religion of a Country, there
must needs be a great many engaged by the strongest Worldly Interest to support
and maintain it. For it was not only at Ephesus that a great number of
Craftsmen got their Wealth by making Silver Shrines for Diana, Acts 19.24, etc.
but in every other Country the Living of a considerable Number depended upon
the Religion that was therein received; which being destroyed, and their Trade
or Profession thereby at an End, they must of necessity be hard put to it to
get Bread by taking up some new Employment. And besides, there is nothing that
all Men, of what Trade or Profession soever they are, are generally so zealous
and concerned about, nothing that they are so afraid of any Change or
Innovation in, as Religion; This, be it well or weakly grounded, yet if it be
that Form of Religion that they have received from their Fathers, and been bred
up in from their Childhood, they will not easily let go.

So that I said too little, when I said before that a great many must needs
have been engaged to set themselves to discover the Falsity of the Evangelical
History; for this was in truth the common Concern of all Mankind, except only
of those few Persons who had been Instructed by our Savior, and believed him
to be the Christ; All others, whether Jews or Gentiles, Rich or Poor, Learned
or ^gnorant, Priests or People, were engaged either by Interest, or Prejudice,
or, Conscience, or upon some other Account to convict the Apostles of Falsehood
in their Relation of the Matters contained in the Evangelical History; and if
any Falsehood had been ther^in, it is impossible, (considering how obvious it
must needs lie to Discovery, and how many were at Work to find it out) that
they could have failed of their Aim; And if any one had made the Discovery, it
cannot be imagined he would have been long before he had imparted to others a
Piece of News so very welcome as that would have been to the Generality of
Mankind; or that such a Discovery of the Falsity of the Gospel History, in any
one particular, once made and published should ever after have been stifled or
suppressed; because the same Reasons that put them at first upon making the
Discovery, were of the same Force afterward to engage them to preserve the
Memory of any Discovery of that kind that had been made.

And therefore I add, in the last Place; And it is that which gives Weight and
Strength to all that has been said before upon this Subject, and fully
compleats that Argument which I am now upon for the Proof of the Truth of the
Gospel History.

7. That notwithstanding the Easiness of the Disproof of this History if it had
been false, and the incessant Endeavors of the Adversaries of Christianity, to
find out some Falsehood therein, (to do which ^hey were not only prompted by
their own Interest and Inclination, but also frequently and boldly chal^enged
by the Christians themselves, as may be seen in ^he ancient Apologies for the
Christian Faith) it is nevertheless a History of very good Credit now (cavilled
^t perhaps, but not denied, not pretended to be disproved either by Jews or
Mahometans, or any other ^ort of Infidels) and that it has been of the like
good Credit for many Hundred Years past, even ever since ^he first Publication
of it; and that it is not so much ^s contradicted in any Point, by any other
Historian that living in or near the Time of its Writing, was in a Capacity to
contradict it upon good Grounds; viz. upon either certain Knowledge of his own,
or very credible Information from others that any Matter therein had been
falsely related.

True, perhaps the Infidels will say, There is indeed no History of competent
Antiquity now extant, by which the Gospel History can be disproved; but that
there has been no such History cannot with certainty be affirmed. This
therefore (say they) is our Unhappiness, that though we have a good Cause we are
destitute of Means to support it; and are in the Condition that the Israelites
are said to have been in in the Days of Saul, 1 Samuel 13.22.
when they had War with the Philistines; It came to pass in the Day of Battle
there was neither Sword nor Spear found in the hand of any of the People. But
what was the Reason of this? Why, the Philistines had disarmed them; Ver. 19.
they had taken away the Weapons they had before, and would not permit more to
be made. And this, say the Infidels, is exactly our Case; In the War we have
now with the Christians we are forced to fight without Sword or Spear; And though
for other good Reasons we are confident the Gospel History is false, and are
resolved never to believe it, and make no doubt but that in former times it has
been opposed and contradicted; yet in this the Christians have been too hard
and too cunning for us; that while they have kept their own Weapons they have
slily taken away ours; for they have been careful to preserve the ancient Books
that were written by those of their own Party in Defense of their Superstition,
but the Books of their Adversaries they have been as careful to suppress and
destroy; And they have had such good success in it, that of all the Books or
Discourses of the ancient Champions of Judaism, Paganism or Deism (Trypho,
Celsus, Porphyry, Julian, and other great Names) not much is now remaining
besides Fragments (and those perhaps imperfectly or falsely cited) to be picked
up out of the Books of those who have written Answers to them, who, we may well
presume, took notice only of those Passages therein which they thought were
easiest to be answered. But this is no unusual thing, for the powerful and
prevailing Party to stifle that Evidence which they know not how to disprove,
and to sup^ress those Books which they cannot answer. And ^his, say they, we
take for a good Argument that ^here was something very considerable in these
Books, and not easily to be answered, because otherwise the Christians of
former times would have been more willing that they should be preserved and
transmitted ^o after times, that so Posterity upon a fair Hearing ^f all that
had been said on both sides, might be ^ble to pass a right Judgment upon the
Case, and either to choose or to reject the Profession of Christia^ity, with
Prudence and Discretion.

This is what has been sometimes suggested by ^he Enemies of our Religion; and
indeed I know not that else can well be said to invalidate that Proof of ^he
Gospel History which I am now upon. But what ^ender ground there is for this
Suggestion, and how ^ery little the Christian Cause is affected by it, a few
Words will suffice to show.

For, 1. Whereas it is said, that though indeed there ^^e no Histories now in
being whereby the Gospel ^istory can be disproved, it is possible however there
^ay have formerly been several Narratives extant that were perfectly
contradictory to it, and those too perhaps better attested and confirmed than
the Gospel History was; To this I answer; That it is never allowed to be a good
Proof that a thing is, to say that it is possible it might be. And besides, if
this surmize or suggestion of a thing barely possible be a good Objection
against the Gospel History, it is as much an Objection against all other
ancient Histories; If for this Reason the Gospel History be not credible, no
other History is so; for there is no ancient History in the World now extant,
which we can be sure was never contradicted by some other, as ancient History,
that is not extant.

But, 2. As there is no Evidence that the Gospel History was contradicted when
it was first published, that is, when, if it had been false, it might most
easily have been disproved; so there is on the other Side, as good Evidence as
such a Matter is capable of, that it never was thus contradicted or disproved;
Because if the Facts recorded in the Evangelical History had been then denied
or disproved by any competen^ and credible Witnesses, it is impossible that the
Christian Doctrine, which was grounded upon and chiefly established by these
Facts, should ever have spread so fast as by the Confession of all Parties it
did, from the time that it began to be preached by the Apostles. Nothing but
the strong Evidence that there was of the Truth of the Gospel History (and
strong it cannot be accounted, if there was stronger and better Evidence on the
other side) could have supported the Profession of Christianity, (when it had
nothing t^ recommend it self by but its Purity and Truth) against that violent
Opposition which it met with every where in the World.

And, 3. Whereas it is further suggested, that the Loss of those ancient Books
which are supposed to have been written to disprove the Gospel History, is
owing to the Power and Subtlety of the Christians of those early times, who
thought it best to stifle that Evidence which they could not gainsay or refute;
this Suggestion is manifestly as groundless as it is malicious.

For many Books of all sorts and of all sides, have perished by Accident, or
been worn out by Time, without any formal Design of any Party or Persons to
suppress and destroy them; And I see no Reason why these Books written in
contradiction to the Gospel History (if indeed any such were ever written) may
not have perished one of these ways as well as many other Books have done.

Or if a Reason must needs be given why some Books (and why these in
particular) have been lost, while others of the same or greater Antiquity have
been preserved; I think the little Value that Men generally had for those Books
that are lost, is the best Reason that can be given why they were suffered to
perish; and that the most probable Cause of Men's having so little value for
them, was because the Matter of them was so evidently false, or the Reasoning
of them so manifestly weak and fallacious, that no Man thought it worth his
while to be at the Pains or Charge of getting them transcribed.

Or if the Men we are now arguing with will not allow this to be a good Account
of the Loss of such very valuable Books as they think these Anti-Gospel
Histories were, let them find out a better; But I Am sure that that before
suggested by them, viz. that it was by Design; the first Christians purposely
abolishing and destroying all Testimonies and Records that made against them,
is a much worse Account of it, and infinitely more improbable than that which I
have given.

For it must be supposed either that these Anti-Gospel Histories were written
very early, as soon almost as the Gospel History was published by the Preaching
or Writing of the Apostles, or else in after Times; And if they were destroyed
by the Christians, this must have been done, either soon after they were
written, or else after they had been for some time received and allowed as true
Histories by the Adversaries of the Christian Faith.

Now if it be supposed that these Books were not written till a good while
after the Apostles had preached, and the Evangelists written the Gospel; they
were written too late to be of sufficient Authority to weaken the Credit of the
Gospel-History: For how could those that were not born when the things recorded
in the Gospel were said to be done, pretend to contradict the Testimony of
those who were living at that time, and who testified either that they saw them
with their own Eyes, or that they received that Account of them which they
published from very credible Persons, who said they had been Eye witnesses
thereof?

But if it be supposed that these Books were written sooner, even as soon
almost as the Evangelists wrote, or the Apostles began to publish, by their
Preaching, the Gospel History; then I say it is impossible they should be
suppressed and destroyed by the Christians, either then, or afterward.

Not then; for though we grant that Christianity from the very first Preaching of
it, made a very swift Progress in the World; and from a Beginning no bigger
than a Grain of Mustard Seed, grew up quickly to be a goodly Tree, shadowing
many Nations under the Branches of it; yet it did not spring up like a Mushroom
in a Night; it did not grow to this Bigness all at once. And what were the
Christians in the weak and infant state of the Church, but an Handful of Men in
Comparison with their numberless Opposers, and those too without Wealth,
without Power, of no Interest or Esteem in the World; that they should
undertake to corrupt or stifle the Evidence that was given against them, which
was supported by the Secular Power, and gladly received and embraced by all
other Men but themselves? What were they, that they should be able to call in
all the Books that had been written against them, and to suppress and destroy
them at their pleasure? and that too so fully and effectually, as that with the
Books themselves which they destroyed, all Memory of them should likewise
perish? A powerful and prevailing Party, with the Government on its side, may
indeed do much in this kind, and yet hardly so much as this; But they that
believe the Christians to have been such a powerful and prevailing Party early
enough to hinder the spreading and dispersing of any Books that were written
against them, believe without any Ground or Warrant from History, a more
unaccountable and incredible thing than any that is recorded in the Gospel.

But if this could not be done then, it might perhaps be done afterward; For
in progress of Time it is certain (it may be said) that the Christians did come
to be of very great Power and Interest, and able to bear down all their
Opposers; and it is likely enough that then they might set themselves to destroy
all those Monuments of Antiquity whereby their fabulous Gospels had been
contradicted and disproved; And it is not incredible that they should so far
succeed in their Attempt as to leave no means to Posterity to discern how weak
and sandy a Foundation their Religion was built upon.

But this Supposition (taking it altogether) involves a greater Difficulty, and
supposes a greater Miracle than the former did. For whatever the Christians
might attempt to do, or whatever they might be able to do, after they had
attained to such great Power, and were become the most numerous and prevailing
Party; it is utterly incredible that they ever could have attained to such great
Power, that they ever could have become the most numerous and prevailing Party,
if indeed the Gospel History had almost from the very Beginning, been opposed
and contradicted by other Histories that were more credible than the Gospel
History was.

For it must be, and is granted by all, that at the first Preaching of
Christianity all worldly Power and Interest were on the other side, and engaged
most strongly to hinder the Growth and spreading of it. Now when Truth is on
one side, and Power and Interest on the other, it is not impossible that Truth
may at last prevail against Interest, and bring the Power also to be of its
side; But if Truth (I mean that which has most Appearance of Truth, I say if
Truth) and Power and Interest are all on the same side from the Beginning (as,
it must be allowed, they were, by those who say that the Gospel History was
quickly proved false by other Histories written and published about the same
time) than I say it is utterly impossible that an Imposture quickly discovered
to be an Imposture, and which served no worldly Interest, should ever have so
gained ground as Christianity did, against that apparent Truth and mighty Power
and Interest that were on the other side. So that whatever Progress
Christianity might have made for a short time at first, by reason of the
Boldness and Confidence of its first Preachers, it must needs be that
immediately from and after the Time that the Anti-Gospel Histories (of better
Credit and Authority than the Gospel History was) were published, it must have
declined much faster than it had before increased; and in a very few Years have
so dwindled to nothing, that it is like in the Age in which we live there would
hardly have been so much as any Remembrance of it left.

And now, if nothing more could be said upon this Subject (for I have not time
at present to take into Consideration the other Proofs before hinted at of the
Truth of the Gospel-History) I think what has been said already is enough to
show that there is sufficient Reason to give full Credit to the Evangelical
Writers, in their Relations of those Matters of Fact which they have recorded;
This I Am sure of, that upon much less Evidence and Assurance of Truth than we
have in this, we generally give Credit to other Histories.

For we believe other Historians in their Relation of such Matters as they
could not have so certain Knowledge or so good Assurance of as the Evangelical
Writers might have of those plain Matters of Fact and Sense which they have
related in their History.

And again, we believe other Historians giving an Account of things which they
do not pretend to have had a personal Knowledge of; which were done in
Countries far Distant from them; and in Times long before them; which their
Readers had no Means to enquire into the Truth of; which were done in secret,
or when but few were by; and which if they were falsely related, none were
engaged by any Worldly Interest to be at much Pains to disprove.

And lastly, If two Historians of the same Antiquity give different or
contradictory Accounts of the same Matter, we do not for that Reason alone
presently reject either of them; but we enquire which of them was in the best
Capacity to know the Truth, and which of them is the least liable to the
suspicion of falsehood, and which Story is the most probably related, and to the
Belief of that we incline.

If therefore there be any Man that thinks there is any truth in History, and
who does give Credit to other Histories, (and I believe there is no Man but
does so) and yet will not be persuaded to allow that the Gospel History is very
credible, (which contains a Relation only of such Matters of Sense as it was
morally impossible there should be any Cheat or Deceit in; and in which if
there had been any Deceit or Mistake it was morally impossible that it should
not be discovered and disproved; and which, yet, neither is now nor ever was
contradicted by any History of competent Antiquity and good Credit;) I think we
may very well conclude, that it is not Reason or Judgment; but Prejudice, or
Interest, or the Love of some Vice or Lust that makes him an Infidel.

The End of the Fourth Sermon.
THE Fifth Sermon.
St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

THE Subject I was upon in my last Discourse on these Words, and which I left
unfinished, was to show, That there is sufficient Reason to give full Credit to
the Authors of the Historical Books of the New Testament in their Relations of
those Matters of Fact which they have recorded.

For the Proof of which I proposed these following things to be considered; (1)
The Nature, Conditions and Circumstances of the Matters they have recorded, and
of the History its self. (2) The good Capacity they were in to know the Truth
of the Things they have related. (3) The strong Obligations they were under to
write nothing but the Truth according to the best of their Knowledge or
Information. (4) The good Evidences that we have of their Honesty and
Faithfulness. And (5) Lastly, The Confirmation that was given to the Truth of
their History by God himself.

The last Discourse was spent in the Consideration of the first of these
things. I proceed now to the Second, viz.

(2.) The good Capacity that the Writers of the Evangelical History were in to
know the Truth of those things which they have related.

Now the Matters of History which are related in the Epistles are but few, and
those, for the most part, such as had been done by, or had happened to, either
the Persons that wrote them, or the Churches or Persons to whom they were
written; so that of these we shall not need to say any thing.

For the Bulk or Body of the Evangelical History is contained in the Four
Gospels, and in the Acts of the Apostles; And of the Authors of these Books
there is no Controversy in the Christian Church; And if they were written by
the reputed Authors, a few Words will suffice to show that they were in a very
good Capacity to know the Truth of the Things they have recorded, much better
than most other ancient Historians, whose Relations, nevertheless, are
generally thought worthy of Credit.

For St. Matthew and St. John two of the four Evangelists were of the number of
those Twelve who were in constant Attendance upon our Lord, from the Time that
he first began to preach and to make Disciples, until he was taken up into
Heaven; so that they were themselves Eye or Ear-Witnesses of most of the Things
which they have recorded.

Of St. Mark and St. Luke indeed the same cannot be said; neither is it certain
that they were of the Number of the Seventy Disciples, (though that be affirmed
by some of the Ancients:) But this I think is agreed to by all; that St. Mark
was for some part of his Life a constant Companion of St. Peter, who was not
only one of the Twelve, but, most probably, the First that was called to be an
Apostle, and who was also one of the three with whom our Lord was most intimate
and familiar (for we often read, that Peter, Matt. 17.4.26, 37. Mark 5.37.
and James and John were singled from the rest to be Witnesses of some of the
most private Transactions of his Life:) And it was generally believed in the
Ancient Church, that St. Peter was more truly the Author of the Gospel called
St. Mark's than St. Mark himself; He being only the Scribe or Amanuensis, and
St. Peter the Person that dictated the things written by him; whence also this
Gospel is by some of the Ancients styled the Gospel of St. Peter. And of this
there seem to be some Tokens even in the History its self; particularly in that
Relation that is therein given of St. Peter's Denial of his Master, and of his
Repentance for it; for his Denial is there told with some more Circumstances
than in the other Gospels, (such as the Person himself chiefly concerned was
best able to know and might best remember;) And the Account that is given of
his Repentance, is by this Author expressed more modestly (as it best became a
Person to speak who spoke of himself) than it is by the other Evangelists; for
St. Matthew and St. Luke say that he wept bitterly; but St. Mark (or rather St.
Peter himself dictating those Words) only says, that when he thought thereon he
wept.

It is likewise agreed on all Hands that St. Luke, if not one of the Seventy
Disciples (which, it is most probable he was not) was, however a very early
Convert to Christianity; that he conversed frequently with the Apostles and
immediate Disciples of our Lord, and was a constant Companion of St. Paul, for
a good while, in his Preaching and Travels; so that of almost all the Things
which he relates in his History of the Acts of the Apostles he might be, and of
much the greatest part of them, it is most probable, and of some, it is certain,
he was an Eye or Ear-Witness.

So then, There are three of the five Historical Books of the New Testament
that were written by those who were present at most of the things which they
have related, ( viz. the Gospels of St. Matthew and St. John, and the Acts of
the Apostles;) and another of them though it bears the Name of St. Mark the
Person by whom it was penned, yet if it was (as has been generally believed)
dictated by St. Peter, may be added to that number, and be likewise reckoned
the Testimony of One who was an Eye Witness of the things he has related.

In this Respect therefore the Gospel History is manifestly as credible as it is
possible any History should be; for no Historian can record any thing upon
better Assurance of its Truth than the Evidence of his own Senses.

But the Gospel of St. Luke, it must be granted, is not of this sort; He
himself does not pretend that the Matters by him recorded were of his own
Knowledge; he only says, Luke 1.2, 3.
He had perfect understanding of them from the very first, from those who from
the Beginning were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word. And of some few
Matters recorded by the other Evangelists, the same must likewise be granted
(particularly of the things that were done before they were called to be
Apostles; of these things I say, it must be granted) that it is most probable
they were not Matters of their own Knowledge, that they recorded them only upon
credible Information from others; But when it is considered on the other hand,
that there are very few things related by St. Luke which are not to be found in
some of the other Gospels, his Testimony that he had perfect Information of the
things he has recorded from several Eyewitnesses, adds a Degree of credibility
even to the other Gospels, and is a good corroborating Evidence of their Truth;
And all the Matters recorded by him, or the other Evangelists only upon
Information of others, must be granted to be more credible than the Matter of
most other ancient Histories of good Credit is, if we reflect upon what was
said in the former Discourse concerning the Nature and Circumstances of the
things recorded; particularly, that they were such things as might be most
certainly known, and were capable of the best attestation; and that they were
things done in the same Age, and in the same Country in which they lived who
have written the History thereof.

And what has been said is, I hope, sufficient to show the good Capacity the
Authors of the Historical Parts of the New Testament were in to know the Truth
of the Things they have recorded; most of them being such as it is probable
three of the Evangelists (as Two of them, without all Dispute) were Eye
witnesses of, and the rest such as they might have certain Information of from
several Persons then alive, and well able to witness the same.

Of the Ability then of these Authors to write a true History of these Matters,
I think, there can be no reasonable Doubt; And that there is as little Reason
to doubt of their Honesty and Faithfulness, will in part appear; if we consider
in the third place,

(3) The strong Obligations they were under to write nothing but the Truth,
according to the best of their Knowledge or Information.

Now the Obligations that Men are under to speak or write Truth may be reduced
to two Heads, Honor and Conscience; By both which the Evangelical Writers were
more strongly obliged to Truth in their Relations than commonly other
Historians are.

1. One Obligation that lies on all Men to speak or write nothing but what is
true, is Honor. For there is nothing that is generally accounted more base or
dishonorable than to tell a Lie; there is nothing that by those who stand most
upon their Honor is thought more reflecting and disparaging, and more
necessary to be resented as an high Affront than to have the Lie given them.
What therefore is generally thought to be a great Reproach it may reasonably be
presumed (unless the contrary appears) a Man will be careful to avoid by not
giving any just Occasion to have it cast upon him.

And this is one Ground of that great Credit that is generally given to ancient
Histories; it is presumed (unless there be evident cause to think otherwise)
that the Authors of them were Men of so much Honor, and that they had such a
sense of the Reproach and Discredit that it would be to them to be found out in
a Lie, as made them careful not to record any thing as a certain Truth, but
what they had good Knowledge or Information of.

But that this Obligation to Truth was stronger on the Authors of the
Evangelical History, than on most other Historians is abundantly evident from
what was noted the last time concerning the Nature and Conditions of the things
by them related, and of their History of them.

For the Matter of most other ancient Histories is such that the Historians
might report many things untruly or upon slight Information, and yet be pretty
well assured that they should not be reputed Liars; because the Matters
recorded by them being things either done in some Places a good way of, or in
some time long before, or in the Presence of but few Persons, they might know
that none of those into whose Hands their Histories would fall would be in a
Capacity to contradict them though they were false; Or they might reasonably
suppose that their Readers would rather acquiesce in their Report, than travel
so far or take so much Pains as they must have done to disprove it; especially
if it was a Matter of no great Consequence to their Readers whether their
Report was true or false.

But in the Gospel History the Case was quite otherwise, and the Historians
themselves could not but know that it was so. For there were a great many
concerned to find out some Falsity in it, and there were a great many that
would have taken any pains to have done it; and yet the Matters related by the
Evangelists, and their Manner of relating them were such, that their History,
if it had been false in any particular, might have been disproved with the
greatest ease, without being at any Pains to do it; because most of those into
whose Hands it first came, would either have known it to be false, or would
readily have been told that it was so, by abundance of Persons that could of
their own Knowledge have contradicted it. So that if it be supposed that the
Evangelists had any Regard at all to their own Reputation, it cannot be imagined
either that they did record any thing contrary to their Knowledge, or that in
Matters that were not of their own Knowledge they neglected to get the best
Information and Intelligence that could be had; because if they had done either
of these, they could not have been so vain as to hope to escape being Censured
as the most notorious and shameless Liars that ever wrote. But,

2. The strongest Obligation that lies on all Men to speak or write nothing but
the Truth, is Conscience; And the sense that all Men are supposed to have of
the natural Turpitude of a Lie, is the chief ground of that very great Credit
that we give to humane Testimony in Cases of the greatest Concern and
Consequence.

But this Obligation to Truth was likewise stronger on the Authors of the
Evangelical History than on most other Historians; 'twas indeed so very strong,
that nothing less than an evident Proof of their Falsity can justify the
entertaining so much as a suspicion of it. For to speak and write the Truth was
what they were obliged to, not only by the Law of Nature to which all Men are
alike subject, but also by the Rules of that Religion which they had been bred
up in, (by which they had been expressly forbidden to lie one to another, and by
which they had been taught that a False Witness that speaks Lies is an
Abomination to the Lord. Lev. 19.11. Pro. 6.16, 19.
) and especially by the strict Command of him whom they had lately taken for
their Master, and whose Laws and Religion they were to preach and propagate in
the World, by which they were obliged, and under the severest Penalty, no less
than Eternal Damnation, to put away all Lying, Ephesians. 4.25. Rev. 21.8.
and to speak every Man the Truth to his Neighbor.

The Subject Matter of their Relation did also lay upon them the strongest
Obligation to have a strict Regard to Truth in every thing that they wrote. For
if it be a Sin to speak an Untruth in any common Matter, it is manifestly a
greater Sin to do it in grave and serious Things, when Truth is most expected;
and especially in Matters of Religion, wherein a Lie is most unbecoming; And if
it be a Sin to utter a Slander, or to tell a Lie of a Man, it is evidently a
Sin of a more heinous Nature, to report an Untruth concerning God, and to utter
a Falsehood in the Name of God; And if to lead Men into any Mistake by a false
Relation be a Practice not to be justified, although the Mistake they are led
into be of no hurtful Consequence either to themselves or to the World, it is
evidently a great Aggravation of the Lie if Men are thereby deceived in a Case
of the nearest and dearest Concern to them, if they are led thereby into an
Error that may prove fatal to them to all Eternity; And lastly, If it be a very
great Sin, only once to speak an Untruth that may be prejudicial to one Man, it
is plainly the greatest and the most unpardonable Sin of this kind to record an
Untruth, with a Design thereby to deceive to their Everlasting Destruction all
the Men that shall ever be born into the World in all future Ages.

If therefore the Gospel History be false, there was manifestly such a
Complication of most horrid Wickedness in the Publishers and Compilers of it,
as it is not fair to suppose even one single Man would be guilty of; and much
less can it be reasonably supposed that several Men ( viz. not only the Four
Evangelists, but all the other Apostles who preached the same things that they
wrote) did consent to the reporting of so many, and such notorious and hurtful
Untruths.

But this, it may be it will be said, is not a direct proof that the
Evangelists were true and faithful in their Relations, but only a probable
ground of presuming that they were so. And I grant it is no more, But
nevertheless, I think, if nothing more could be offered, this alone would be
sufficient to render their Testimony highly credible, so long as nothing is
alleged on the other side to disprove it; And in all other Cases we allow it
to be so. For by the Testimony of Persons of whose Truth we have no other
Assurance but such a probable Presumption, all (Questions and Controversies of
the greatest Concern, relating to the Lives and Estates of Men, are in this
World finally decided; every Man that bears Witness in any such Case being, by
the common Judgment of Mankind, taken and accepted as a good Witness, unless
the contrary appears; And by the Testimony of two or three such Witnesses we
all consent that every Matter should be established.

But then I add further, that besides this reasonable Presumption of the Truth
of the Witnesses of the Gospel History, (which is all that we ordinarily have,
or do desire in other Cases) there is as good positive Proof of their Truth as
can be required. And this was the next Thing proposed to be considered, viz.

(4) The good Evidences that we have of their Honesty and Faithfulness.

And here it may be noted (for though it be a thing that we lay no great stress
upon in this Case, yet I think it is not to be omitted, because it is one of the
best Evidences that we can have of the Faithfulness of any Historian whose
personal Character is unknown to us) that the Authors of the Evangelical
History seem to have related all Matters with the greatest Impartiality; that
they seem as free in telling the things that were, or might be accounted
disgraceful to their Master or themselves, as in telling those things that were
most glorious and reputable. For thus, in their History of the Life of Christ,
as they tell us the wonderfulness of his Birth, the many Miracles that he
wrought, the Testimony that was given him by the Descent of the Holy Ghost upon
him, and by the Voice of God, his Glorious Resurrection from the Dead and
Ascension into Heaven; so they stick not to tell us also the Meanness of his
Parentage, the Obscurity of his Birth, his poor and low Condition in the World,
the Affronts that were given him, the Contempt he was had in, and the shameful
Death he was put to. And of themselves, They have left it upon Record to all
Posterity, that they were of the meanest Extraction, and bred up to very poor
or scandalous Employments, that they were Fishermen, Tent-Makers, Publicans;
They own that they were ignorant and unlearned Men; they tell their own
Childish Mistakes about the Nature of the Kingdom of the Messiah; they mention
their own foolish and ambitious Contentions with one another about worldly
Greatness; they confess their own Baseness and Cowardice in forsaking their
Master when in Danger, after the most solemn Profession of Friendship, and
repeated Assurances of Stedfastness and Fidelity. St. Peter's Denial of Christ
is a thing noted by all the Evangelists, and by St. Peter himself (if the
Gospel of St. Mark be accounted his) is told with its worst Circumstances; and
St. Paul freely owns that before his Conversion to Christianity he was a
Blasphemer; a Persecutor, and injurious, and the chief of Sinners. Now their
Recording such things as these concerning their Master and themselves, as it is
an Evidence of their Impartiality, is consequently a good Argument of the Truth
of their History; for had they allowed themselves a Liberty of varying from the
Truth in any particular, it cannot be imagined but that they would at least
have concealed their own Frailties and Infirmities; it cannot be supposed they
would have furnished their Adversaries with Matter wherewith to reproach them.

But it is possible that an Historian who means to deceive his Readers in some
Matter of greater Moment, may purposely insert some few such Passages as these,
thereby to gain himself an easier Belief in other Things, and to cover his
wicked Design. It Is therefore another and a better Evidence of the Truth of the
Gospel History, that the Evangelists and other Witnesses of the Facts recorded
in the Gospels, were Persons not liable to any just suspicion of Unfaithfulness
in their Relations; because whatever they had been before, they were then in
all other Respects Persons of a very good Character. 1 These. 2.10.
Ye are Witnesses (says the Apostle) and God also, how holily and justly and
unblameably we behaved our selves among you. They that could not be charged
with any other Crimes were not justly to be suspected guilty of Forgery and
Lying. And we have abundant Reason to believe that they were in all other
Respects unblameable, because there is no Evidence that they were ever charged
at all, (either truly or falsely) even by their greatest Enemies, with any other
Fault but only too great Zeal and Industry in propagating their Religion. And
it is no Wonder that this should be thought a Fault by those who were of another
Religion; or that by the Powers that then were, who endeavored with all their
might to suppress the Growth of Christianity, the Apostles who were so zealous
to spread it should be looked upon as disaffected to their Government, and
Movers of Sedition; But however, this, if it had been a Fault, was not such a
Crime as could justly have rendered their Honesty suspected, but on the
contrary, it was rather a very good Argument that however they might possibly
be mistaken, yet they did believe themselves; it is a fair Proof that they
thought they had good Evidence of the things they testified, and that they
reckoned themselves under a strict Obligation to testify the same.

For it is plain (and that is another good Argument of their Veracity) that they
could have no Worldly End or Design either in the Framing or Publishing of
those Stories which they related; so that if they were Fables which they told,
they were far from being cunningly devised Fables, because, as the World then
was, they could not be so vain as to hope to raise themselves either to Honor
or Wealth by preaching a Crucified Messiah, to the Jews a Stumbling Block, and
to the Greeks, Foolishness. Now it is not to be supposed that any Man will frame
or report a Lie for nothing; Whoever knowingly deceives another, must be
supposed to intend some Advantage to himself thereby; And therefore if there be
no Untruth appearing in the Relation, and no Gain or other Advantage that the
Reporter can be supposed to make to himself by it, it may very reasonably be
presumed that the Report is true. But so far was this, if it was a Lie, from
being a profitable and advantageous Lie to the Forgers and Reporters of it,
that on the contrary it was, and they could not but readily foresee that it
would be very prejudicial to their Worldly Interests, exposing them to all
sorts of Persecutions from all sorts of Men; For both Jews and Gentiles, and
every Sect and Party of every other Religion, however hating one another with a
mortal Hatred, readily joined together to persecute the Christians, and those
above all others who were the Witnesses of Christianity, the Ringleaders (as
they called them) of the Sect of the Nazareens.

This therefore may be reckoned another Evidence of their Truth; (and as it is a
stronger Evidence of Truth than any that has been yet mentioned, so it is such
an one as I believe no History in the World has, but that of the Gospel) viz.
That no Threats or Punishments could move the Witnesses of those things that
are recorded in the Evangelical History so much as to desist from giving fresh
Testimony to the Truth of the Things which they had once related. For this
seems to have been all that was ever required or expected from them; not that
they should retract the Testimony they had given, but only that they should not
speak or teach any more in the Name of Jesus; Acts 4.18.5.46.
And upon this Condition alone any of them might have expected both a Pardon
for what they had done before, and likewise all fitting Favor and
Encouragement. But this was what they all refused to do, giving no other Reason
of their Refusal but this, that they were very sure of the Truth of the things
they had spoken, and that there was a necessity laid upon them to preach the
Gospel. Whether, say they, Acts 4.19, 20.
it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge
ye; for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard. And the
more they were threatened to hold their Peace, so much the more boldly did they
speak, not only filling Jerusalem with their Doctrine, but likewise spreading
the same in all the World. And though they knew that in every City where they
came Bonds and Afflictions did abide there; None of these things moved them,
Acts 20.23, 24.
neither did they count their Lives dear unto themselves, so that they might
finish their Course with Joy, and the Ministry which they had received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the Grace of God.

And if these Proofs and Evidences already mentioned of The Truth and
faithfulness of the Apostles and Evangelists are not thought sufficient to gain
them Credit, what is there that would be sufficient? for more Evidence, or
better Proof cannot reasonably be desired, so good is very rarely to be met
with, or expected; And indeed I think there is but only one stronger Proof
thereof that can ever possibly be given by Men; And that is when a Witness lays
down his Life to confirm the Testimony he has given; for if when a Man has
witnessed any thing, and is questioned for it, and threatened with Death if he
persists in it, he still continues boldly to testify the same thing; and
especially if when upon the Rack or on the Cross, in the midst of the sharpest
Torments, and even at the Hour of his Death, he Justifies the Truth of his
former Testimony, he certainly gives the best Assurance that it is possible for
any Man to give of his Honesty and Truth; And if any humane Testimony be
credible, this is certainly so in the highest Degree.

That therefore our Belief of the Gospel might be built upon the surest
grounds, it pleased the Divine Wisdom so to Order it that all those who were
the first Witnesses thereof to the World, should give likewise this best
possible Proof of their Veracity. For of all the Apostles and Evangelists of
the manner of whose Death there is any Memory preserved either by History or
Tradition, St. John is the only Person that did not seal the Testimony he had
given with his Blood. And that he did not suffer Martyrdom as well as the Rest
was not occasioned by his forbearing to repeat the Testimony he had before
given, and much less by his Retracting it, but was merely an Act of Divine and
Miraculous Providence, whereby though he was put into a Cauldron of Boiling Oil,
his Life was preserved; so that in Truth, considering the Hazard he ran of his
Life, which could not have been saved but by a Miracle, he may very well be
accounted a Martyr for the Testimony of Jesus, no less than the other Apostles,
although he did not actually expire under his Sufferings as they did.

Now if it be supposed that a Man, especially one who stands much upon his
Credit, may be willing, after he has told a Lie, to suffer a great Deal rather
than own himself a Liar; (though I think it cannot reasonably be supposed,
either, that any Man would suffer so many other great Evils as the Apostles
did, only upon a Point of Honor; or that the Apostles did stand so much upon
their Honor) yet when it is brought to this, that a Man who has told a Lie
must either retract it, or die for it, and that he may in all Probability save
his Life by retracting it, it is not to be supposed that any Man will be a
Martyr for a known Falsehood; for it is a very true Saying, and to which there
is hardly any Exception, though it was spoken by the Father of Lies, Job 2.4.
that Skin for Skin, yea all that a Man has he will give for his Life? It Is
not credible therefore that so much as one Man should be found so foolish as to
sacrifice his Life to a known Lie, and that too an unprofitable Lie, to
himself, to his Family, and to all The World; and this only to save his
Reputation; It is much less credible that so many Men, viz. all the Apostles
and Evangelists, and most if not all the rest of our Lord's immediate Disciples
should be guilty of such prodigious and unheard of Folly; and it is least of
all credible that among so many as there were that bore Witness of the Facts
recorded in the Evangelical History, not so much as one Man should be found
that was honester and wiser than the rest; not one that could be persuaded to
give Glory to God by the Confession of his Fault, and satisfaction to the World
by a public owning of the Cheat he had been engaged in; not one that would
choose to undergo the Disgrace of a Liar rather than the shameful Death of a
Malefactor.

These are in short the Evidences we have of the Honesty and Faithfulness of
the Evangelical Historians, those Evidences I mean which they themselves have
given thereof; and they are plainly as good as could be desired, they are the
best that could be given by Men.

And putting together all that has been said on this and the foregoing Heads,
now, and in my last Discourse, for the Proof of the Truth of the Evangelical
History, I think we may truly and confidently affirm, that although we consider
it only as a mere humane History, we have much greater Reason to give Credit to
it than to any History in the World besides.

But if we receive the witness of Men, (and who is there that does not? 1 John
5.9.
) the Witness of God is greater; And therefore in Order to show further that
there is sufficient Reason to give full Credit to the Evangelical Historians in
their Relations of those Matters of Fact which they have recorded, I proposed
to be considered, in the Fifth and last Place,

(5) The Confirmation that was given to the Truth of their History, by God
himself. For what St. Paul says of his own, was likewise true of the Speech and
Preaching of all the other Apostles; viz. That it was in Demonstration of the
Spirit and of Power; 1 Cor. 2.4, 5.
that the Faith of their Hearers should not stand in the Wisdom of Men, but in
the Power of God. And so St. Luke says; Acts 4.33. With great Power gave the
Apostles Witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus. For at the same Time
that they Witnessed the Miracles of their Master, they gave Assurance to Men of
the Truth of their Testimony by doing the like Miracles themselves, healing the
Sick, casting out Devils, raising the Dead, etc. just as Jesus himself had
done. And at the same time that, pursuant to their Commission, they preached
the Gospel to Men of all Nations and Languages, they plainly demonstrated, both
that they had such a Commission from God, and that it was the Truth of God
which they preached, by speaking to every Man of every Nation in his own Tongue.

Thus, as the Author to the Hebrews says, Heb. 2.4.
God did bear them Witness both with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse
Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost, according to his own Will. And he might
well say, that God did hereby bear them Witness, because that Power wherewith
they were endued was so evidently from on high, that none that saw their Works,
Luke 24.49.
and considered withal the Purity and Excellence of the Doctrine of
Christianity that was thereby established, could have any reasonable. Doubt
whether they were done by the Power of God or no. We know, Joh. 3.2.
said Nicodemus to our Savior, that thou art a Teacher sent from God, for no
Man can do the Miracles that thou do, except God be with him: Joh. 14.12.
But the same Works that Jesus did, did his Disciples also, after he had sent
down the Promise of his Father upon them, on the Day of Pentecost; yea and
greater Works than those did they do; so that whoever beheld their Works, might
(so far as Miracles are Evidences of a Divine Power) be rather more certain
that God was with them, than Nicodemus could be, that he was with our Lord
himself. For though their other Miracles, that were of the same sort with those
which our Savior had done, were such Proofs of Divine Assistance as could not,
with any Reason be gainsaid; yet, I think it may truly be affirmed, that the
Gift of Tongues, which was peculiar to them, and wherein they did (as we may
say) excel even our Lord himself, was more convincing than any of them; For he
that saw one of their other Miracles might possibly entertain some little Doubt
whether the Effect that appeared to him to be Miraculous might not yet be done
by some secret Power of Natural Causes that was unknown to him; But we all know
the Power of Nature so well, that we are sure, the Knowledge of a Language
cannot possibly be attained Naturally, even by a Person of the quickest Parts
and faithfullest. Memory, but in so much time, at the least, as it will
necessarily take up to be told by Tutors, or to learn from Lexicons, what every
particular word of the Language to be learnt, is by the People of that Language
designed to signify; because Words have not a Natural Relation to the Notions
or Things thereby expressed, but are mere arbitrary Signs thereof. So that
whoever knew the Education of the Apostles, and that they were before
altogether ignorant and unlearned, and yet saw them every one, on a sudden, on
the Day of Pentecost, able to speak readily in all the Languages of all the
Nations under Heaven, from whence had come some of the Jews that were present
at Jerusalem at that time, could have no possible Doubt of their Supernatural
Assistance; They that heard them speak with Tongues, which they had never
learned, could not but conclude that it was the Spirit that gave them this
Utterance, Acts 2.4.
because nothing else could give it; So that this was not only (as their other
Miracles were) a Proof of Inspiration, but likewise an Instance and Example of
it: It was a Proof of an inward and invisible Inspiration, by an Inspiration
that was (as I may say) outward and visible; by an Inspiration that was
discernible even by the Bodily Senses of all those that were present.

But be it so, perhaps the Infidels will say, that they that saw the Miracles
which the Apostles are reported to have done in the Name of Christ, had Reason
enough to believe their Testimony concerning him, and as well that which they
have left in Writing, as that which they gave by word of Mouth; Yet what is this
to us that live now? For we neither saw the Miracles that they wrought, nor
heard them speaking with Tongues; neither have we any Assurance that they ever
did either the one or the other but only from themselves. They indeed tell us
that they did a great many wonderful things (such as we are willing enough to
grant could not be done but by the Power of God) in Confirmation of their
Testimony concerning Jesus; But we see no more Reason to believe this their
Testimony concerning themselves, than there is to believe their other Testimony
concerning him; so that this cannot in reason be reckoned a Proof or
Confirmation of that; Nay, rather, we think they are less credible Witnesses in
their own Case than they were in his. So that to us the History of the New
Testament (granting it to be written by the Apostles) is of no more Authority
than their Writing it (considered only with respect to their Natural and Moral
Capacities and Qualifications) could give to it; Because that Seal of Miracles
which is said to have been affixed thereto by God, is now, by length of Time
quite worn off; or at least the Impression thereof is now so defaced, that we
cannot distinguish whose Seal it was, or whether it was a true Seal or a
counterfeit one; And that this Seal was ever affixed to their Testimony, is
testified only by those same Witnesses, whose the Testimony its self was.

To this Objection therefore (which, it must be confessed, has some Appearance
of Weight and Reason in it) I answer,

1. By denying the Ground it is built upon, viz. That the Testimony of the
Apostles themselves is the only Proof we have of the Miracles which they
wrought for the Confirmation of their Testimony concerning Jesus. For besides
the Testimony of the Apostles, in their Epistles, and in the Acts, Witnessing
their own Miracles, we have likewise the Testimony of all the other Christian
Writers, whose Books are preserved, that lived in or near the Apostle's Times,
Witnessing the same Thing; And this Testimony, not only given as it were in
secret, in order to the making Proselytes of such as they found to be easy and
credulous; but in the most public manner, in those Apologies for the Christian
Faith which they presented to Magistrates, and published to the whole World; in
which, for Proof that these Miracles had been wrought by the Apostles, they
appeal to all the Histories and Records of the Apostle's Times then extant; in
which, they challenge any that could do it, to contradict their Testimony; in
which, they testify that the same Miraculous Power did still continue in the
Christian Church, and was sometimes exerted, often enough, and openly enough to
prove its being, though not so frequently as it had been by the Apostles
themselves, when there was more need of showing it, viz. at their first
Preaching of the Gospel.

Now these things, if they had not been true, the first Christians, in the
Circumstances they were then in, would not have dared to affirm; and if they
had been false, they might easily have been disproved, and they would most
certainly have been at least boldly denied and contradicted by the professed
Adversaries of the Christian Faith. But they did not deny or contradict, they
did not offer to disprove the Report that was then generally believed of the
Miracles that had been done by the Apostles. Nay so far were they from this,
that there is good Evidence from Antiquity still remaining, that several even
of those who took upon them to oppose the Christian Doctrine did yet expressly
own that great and mighty Works had indeed been done by the Hands of the
Apostles, as well as of their Master; But then they had been done, they said,
(and that was all they could say in the Case) by Magic Art, by the Help of the
Devil; just as the Jews had said before of our Savior, Mat. 12.24. This Fellow
does not cast out Devils, but by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils.

I shall not stay now to show how groundless as well as malicious this
Suggestion was with reference both to our Lord's Miracles and to theirs,
because I suppose I shall have a better Occasion to do it hereafter in my next
Discourse; it is enough for my present purpose, if the Matter of Fact only be
granted, viz. that the Apostles did do many Miracles in the Name of Christ, and
to confirm their Testimony concerning him; And that they did so cannot I say,
be reasonably doubted, because it is witnessed not only by themselves, but by
all the Christian Writers of those or the succeeding times, and is not denied,
nay is granted even by their Adversaries and Opposers. But,

2. If we had not so good Proof of the Miracles done by the Apostles, if there
were no Witnesses thereof but themselves, I say however that their Testimony
alone would be very credible; Nay indeed the thing testified by them must, I
think, necessarily have been acknowledged by us, although there had been no
History or Record at all of it transmitted to our Times. I do not mean that
without the Light of History we could have known that they did just those very
Miracles which are recorded, but I say that without this we might have known in
general that they did do Miracles, or that they were assisted by a Supernatural
Power; (This, I say, we might have been sure of) by the permanent Effects of
such a Power, continuing after their Times, and testified by all Historians,
Heathen as well as Christian, of all Ages ever since; and which are even still
extant and visible.

For that a great Part of the World is now Christian we see and know, and that
it has been so for many Ages past we are as sure as we are that there have been
any Ages past before our own; And looking back to see when and how it came to
be so, we learn, by the concurrent Testimony of all History, Jewish, Pagan and
Christian, that Christianity had its Beginning in Judea, just at that Time in
which the Sacred History places it; And by the same concurrent Testimony of all
History we learn that in a very short time, in less than forty Years after, it
was Preached in all the Provinces of the Roman Empire, and in all other
Countries of the World that were then known, and of which we have any History
left; and that wherever it was Preached it made a very swift Progress, insomuch
that in a few Years the number of Christians became very considerable and bare
a great Proportion to the People of all other Religions; For it was not much
above threescore Years after the Apostles had dispersed themselves in order to
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, when Pliny Proconsul of Bithynia, wrote that
Epistle to the Emperor Trajan, wherein giving an Account of the Christians then
under a severe Persecution for their Religion by the Emperor's Order, he tells
him that there was a great number of Men obnoxious to Sufferings upon that
Account; that many of all Ages, of all Orders and Degrees and of both Sexes
were every Day called in Question for it; that the Contagion of that
Superstition (as he calls it) had spread its self not only in great Cities, but
also in Towns and Country Villages, insomuch that the Temples of the Heathen
Gods, had for some Time before been in a manner desolate, and their Worship and
Sacrifices intermitted.

Now this is certain that there can be no Effect without a Cause of sufficient
Power to produce it; And it was evidently impossible that Christianity should
make so swift a Progress, and prevail so much in the World, as it did, in so
short a time, only by Natural Means. For without good Skill in the Languages of
the several Nations wherein the Apostles were to preach the Gospel, it had been
in vain for them to have gone about to Convert all Nations; Or if they had
attempted it, it is impossible it should have been with success; And how can it
be conceived possible that twelve grown Men, who before understood not a word
of any but their own Mother Tongue, and that perhaps not well, who had never
been bred up to Study, and who were then past the proper Age of learning
Languages, should yet be able in so short a time to become perfect Masters of
all the Languages then in use in the World, so as to speak them readily and
fluently, as if every one had been their own Native Tongue? and that after
this, they should have time enough still left to go and preach the Gospel in
all Countries? So that the speedy Conversion to Christianity of such a great
number of Men in all Parts of the World by their Ministry, is a direct proof of
that Gift of Tongues wherewith we believe they were endued; And whoever can
believe that they had this Gift, which was peculiar and extraordinary, and such
as had never been heard of in the World before, may, I think, more easily
believe all the other Miracles that they are reported to have done, which were
not near so wonderful, which were such as had been done by other Prophets in
former Times.

But suppose this Story of the Gift of Tongues to be false, and that indeed the
Apostles were Men of such ready Natural Parts as to be able to learn all the
Languages which they could have any use of in as few Days as it would have
taken other Men Years to do it in; or else that they had in truth been bred up
to the Study of Languages from their Childhood, and only concealed their
Knowledge thereof until that famous Day of Pentecost, that so then it might be
taken to be Miraculous; Yet what could twelve Men furnished with this excellent
Skill, do by their own Natural Power only, toward the Conversion of the World
to Christianity in so short a time?

For it is to be considered that the Religion which they were to reach in the
World was the most contrary that could be to the Carnal Lusts and Passions of
Men; that it promised no Worldly Greatness, no Increase of Riches, no Enjoyment
of Sensual Pleasures; but on the contrary taught all those that embraced it, to
be mortified to all these Things, and not to set their Affections on any thing
here below.

It Is to be considered also, that it proposed to Man's Belief such Doctrines as
to the carnal Minds of Men could not but appear foolish or incredible; As that
the Eternal Son of God did for our sakes become Man, and take on him the Form
of a Servant, that in that Form he submitted to be scornfully used, cruelly
scourged, and at last barbarously Crucified as a vile Malefactor by his own
Creatures; that this same Jesus was afterward declared to be the Son of God
with Power by the Resurrection from the Dead, that he was taken up into Heaven,
seated at the right Hand of the Father, had all Power in Heaven and Earth
committed to him, was ordered to be Worshipped and adored by all Men with the
same Honor wherewith they honor the Father, and was appointed by God to be
the Judge of the quick and dead, etc.

It Is to be considered likewise, that it was a Reli^ion perfectly destructive
of all other Forms of Reli^ion then received or established in the World; and
upon that Account only must needs meet with the strongest Prejudices; all the
Men it was preached to being before from their Childhood bred up, and already
fixed in another way.

And lastly, it is to be considered further, that the Facts upon which this
Religion was grounded, that is, by which the Divine Mission of the Lord Jesus
was proved, viz. his Miraculous Works, were such as being above the known Power
of Natural Causes were not like to be easily credited. That he healed the Sick,
that he gave Sight to the Blind, Hearing to the Deaf, Speech to the Dumb, Feet
to the Lame, and Strength to the Cripples; that he did cast out Devils; that he
raised the Dead, and all these only with a Word's speaking; that he fed
sometimes great Multitudes of four or five Thousand with only so much Bread and
Fish as to Appearance was not sufficient for twenty Men; and that after they
were all satisfied, there was more in Bulk left in Fragments than there had
been before in whole Provision; That he walked on the Water as on dry Land;
That he had the Winds and Seas obedient to his Command; And above all, that he
Raised himself to Life after he had been three Days Dead; These and such like
were strange Stories to be told to Men in order to persuade them to take upon
them a new Religion.

What then, I say, could twelve Men, though never so well furnished naturally
with Parts and Learning and all other Endowments proper to qualify them for
such a Work, do toward the persuading the World to embrace Christianity?
Suppose they had gone (not as they did, one into this Country another into
that; often singly, seldom more than two in Company; but) all together in a
Body into some one Country remote from Judea, and there with concurrent
Testimony born Witness of the Things they had seen and heard; yet who would
have believed their Report? The Report of Strangers coming from a far Country,
and of whose Honesty and Truth they could have no Assurance but only from
themselves vouching for one another? Who would have given Credit to a Relation
of such incredible Stories, told with a Design to introduce a Religion that was
unknown to their Fathers? and such a ridiculous Religion too, as this, at the
first Proposal, would probably appear; viz. the Worshipping as God, a Man, who
by their own Confession, was rejected and set at naught, and at last Crucified
as a wicked Malefactor by his own Countrymen.

Or if it can be supposed that the Apostles, by the Boldness of their Speech
and the enticing Words of Man's Wisdom, might after some time have prevailed
upon some few to become Proselytes to their Religion; yet the multitude of
their Disciples could not have been very great, before the Government of the
Country would have taken the Alarm, and have called in Question these Setters
forth of new Gods, these Movers of Sedition among the People, as they would
certainly have been accounted, and as, in fact, the Apostles were accounted in
every place where they came. And this would quickly have put a stop to a
growing Sect; They that liked the Religion well enough before, because it was
new, would quickly have left off to like it when they saw it would be dangerous
to profess it; it is not likely their Followers would have continued to stick to
them, when they perceived the Government and the whole Nation in general
engaged on the other side, and resolved by all means possible to extirpate the
Belief they had entertained; and when they saw their Preachers Imprisoned and
Scourged, tortured and put to Death, they would quickly have deserted the
Service of a Master, who, they would then readily think, was not of Power to
save either himself from the Cross, or his Disciples from Suffering. And after
this, had the Residue of the Apostles, who might possibly have escaped
Martyrdom in this Country, gone into another, there they must have expected the
like Reception and Usage, and not better in a third; and so in a few Years
their Lives would have spun out in doing nothing, and their Religion would have
perished with themselves.

And if their united Testimony would have had so little Credit, much less can
it be supposed that the single Witness of One Apostle only could ever have
gained any Credit at all; And yet unless the Testimony of some single Witnesses
had been believed, it is impossible there should have been, in so short a time,
so great a Conversion of Men to Christianity in all parts of the World, by the
Preaching of so few Men.

So that whoever believes that Christianity could make so swift and so great a
Progress as it is certain by all History it did, only by the Preaching of the
Apostles without any Miraculous Gifts or Supernatural Assistance, wants not
Faith enough to be a Christian, if he had but a Will to it; for he believes
already a much greater Miracle than any that is recorded in the Evangelical
Story.

And now by all that has been said, in this and the last Discourse, I hope it
appears that there is sufficient Reason to give full Credit to the Authors of
the Historical Books of the New Testament in their Relations of those Matters
of Fact which they have recorded. This I Am sure I may say, that there is not so
good Reason to give Credit to any History in the World besides, of the same
Antiquity; And that a History so well confirmed as this is cannot reasonably be
rejected, nor indeed any ways be discredited, but either by some other more
credible History contradicting it, or by some intrinsic Evidence of Falsehood.

But better or more credible History contradicting it, I have already observed,
there is not, nor indeed is there any History contradicting it that is of
sufficient Antiquity to disprove it. Nay there are many very considerable
things of those recorded in the Gospel-History that are occasionally mentioned
by other Historians of those or the succeeding Times, who had no Design thereby
to do any Service to Christianity; as namely that there was such a Man as John
the Baptist, that he was a Person of great Piety and Austerity, and a Preacher
of Righteousness, and that he was put to Death by Herod: That there was also a
Man named Jesus, who called himself and was owned by many to be the Christ,
that he did many wonderful things, and was at last Crucified by the Jews: The
Names of some other Persons likewise spoken of in the Gospel-History are
mentioned under the same Character in some other Histories, as Pilate, Felix,
Festus, Caiphas, Agrippa, etc. In other Histories also we find notice taken of
the Cruelty of Herod in slaying the Infants at Bethlehem, and among them (as
it is thought) his own Son; which made Augustus, when the Story was told him, to
say, that it was better to be Herod 's Swine than his Son; and likewise of that
remarkable Eclipse of the Sun, when the Moon was at the full, which the
Evangelists say happened at the time of our Savior's Passion; and of that
violent Earthquake that was at the same time, and lastly, of the prodigious
Increase of Christianity in all Parts of the Roman Empire, soon after its first
Publication.

And if upon this Occasion it should be said that the Facts recorded in the
Evangelical History and the Events that followed thereupon were so very
wonderful and remarkable, that if they had been true they must in all
probability have been more taken notice of than they are in other Histories; I
answer, that supposing them to be true, it could not be reasonably expected
that more mention should have been made of them by other Historians than there
really is; because they were plainly foreign to their purpose, or else such
Stories as though they had heard of them they did not believe, having perhaps
never taken any pains to examine into the Truth of them. For what was it to the
Purpose of an Author that was writing the Life of one of the Roman Emperors, or
the History of some famous War, or giving an Account of the Affairs of the
Civil State, to make a large Digression concerning a Religious Sect begun in
Judea by a Person that was despised in his own Country, and carried on and
continued by mean and contemptible Persons who made no Figure in the World? Or
how could it be expected that an Historian who was not himself a Christian
should yet give a large Account of the Miracles of our Savior and his
Apostles, and other Facts upon which our Religion is grounded; which had he
believed (as he must be supposed to have done, if he had delivered them to
Posterity as Truths) he must have been a Christian? It Is enough in all Reason,
and as much as could be expected in this Case (supposing there Facts to be
true) that they are not by any Historians that were of another Religion,
contradicted or attempted to be disproved; more than this would have been too
much. And should we now in some ancient Manuscript History new brought (...)
Light, and bearing the Name of some Jewish or Heathen Author, find a large and
formal Account of any of those Facts relating to the Christian Religion that
are recorded in the Gospel; this would give very just ground to suspect, that
the whole History (whatever other Appearance it had of Truth) was forged and
counterfeit, or at least that those Passages speaking honorably of the
Christian Religion or the Author of it, were knavishly foisted into the Book by
some Christian Transcriber. For this is indeed the best Argument that is
brought to discredit some Passages of this kind that are now to be found in
some Heathen or Jewish Historians, and particularly in Josephus, viz. that they
say more than was proper or likely to be said by Heathens or Jews; that if
those Passages are genuine, and the Authors had believed what they themselves
wrote, they must have been Christians.

Now this I Am sure is not fair Dealing, that the Paucity and slenderness of
those corroborating Testimonies to the Truth of the Christian History that are
to be met with in other Historians, and that the Multitude and Fullness of such
Testimonies, should both be urged as Arguments against Christianity. And
therefore when they are both urged (as they are and have been by our
Adversaries) we may reasonably conclude that the Truth is in the Mean; and that
there are indeed no more, nor no fewer Testimonies of this kind to be met with
in other Writers, and that they are not either more or less to the Purpose,
than (supposing the Christian History to be true) might fairly be expected.

It only remains then that we enquire whether there be in the Gospel History,
any intrinsic Evidences of Falsehood. And it is pretended by the Adversaries of
our Religion, that there are many such; For there are, they say, some things
related in the Gospel History, that are altogether incredible; and there is,
they say, oftentimes great Difference, in the several Relations of the same
Story, by the several Evangelists; And not only so, but there are, they say,
besides, in their several Histories compared together, some flat Contradictions
and Repugnancies.

I intended therefore at the End of this Discourse, if I had had time for it,
to have spoken largely upon this Subject; But because I have not, must referr
you to those Books that have been written on purpose to give an Account of the
difficult Texts of Scripture, and to reconcile those that are seemingly
repugnant; Or for want of such Books to any good Commentary on the Bible, in
which you will hardly fail to meet with Satisfaction in any Difficulty of this
kind, if you read it with a Mind disposed to receive satisfaction. And I shall
conclude this Discourse with only observing in General,

1. That the pretended Impossibilities that are said to be related in the
Sacred History, are only Difficulties; They are indeed Events above and beyond
the known Power and common Course of Nature, but they are such as are easily
Credible when they are ascribed, as they must be, to the Almighty power of God.

2. That the Difference that may sometimes be observed in the several Relations
of the same Story by the several Evangelists, is very inconsiderable;
consisting only in this, That one perhaps relates the Story in a different
Order of things than another does; Or that One tells it briefly, another more
at large; Or One with a few, another with more Circumstances; Or that some
Circumstances are mentioned by each of them which the other had omitted. So
that this Observation is so far from being a just Objection against the Truth
of the History, that it is rather a Proof and Confirmation of it; For it is an
Argument that the Evangelists did not conferr together in the Writing of their
Histories, and that they did not Copy or Transcribe from one another; but that
every one of them reported the Story he wrote in such manner as he himself
remembered it to have been, and with such Circumstances as he himself took most
notice of. And,

3. As to the Repugnancies and Inconsistences that are said to be in the
Evangelical History; These we absolutely deny. I have not time now to consider,
or attempt to reconcile all the Places that are pretended to be contradictory
to each other, but those Passages which seem most liable to this Exception,
are, I think, the Relation of Judas's Death, and the Account of our Savior's
Genealogy.

But as to the first, There is plainly no Impossibility, no Contradiction in
it, if we should say that after he had hanged himself, as St. Matthew Mat.
27.5. Acts 1.18.
says, he did fall down, and his Bowels gushed out, as St. Luke affirms; Or it
may be that he did not hang himself, but only was (...).
choked or suffocated by the violence of his Grief, and that the same Passion
by which he was strangled made him also fall down headlong and burst assunder
in the midst so that all his Bowels gushed out. And as to the other, when it is
remembered that by the Jewish Law the next of Kin was to raise up Seed to his
near Relation that died without Issue, Deuteronomy. 25.5.
by Marrying his Widow, and that the Firstborn of the Woman after such second
Marriage was reputed in Law the Son, as well as he was the Heir, of the
Deceased; so that consequently the same Person might be the Legal Son of one
Man, and the Natural Son of another Man; though it may be difficult, perhaps
impossible for us, at this Distance of Time, to say with certainty which of the
two different Lines by which our Savior's Pedigree is deduced from David is
the Legal, and which the Natural Line; it is very easy nevertheless to believe
that one is the Legal and that the other is the Natural Line; and if so, there
is plainly no Contradiction between the two Evangelists, although St. Matthew
Mat. 1.16.
makes our Savior to be descended from Solomon, and St. Luke from Nathan,
although St. Matthew says that Joseph the Husband of the Blessed Virgin was the
Son of Jacob, and St. Luke Lu^e 3.23.
that he was the Son of Heli.

And now the Truth of the Gospel History being, as I hope, by what has been
said sufficiently established, I should proceed to show, That if the Matters of
Fact related in the New Testament are true, they are sufficient Proofs of the
Truth and Divine Authority of all the Doctrines that are therein Taught; But I
am sensible that I have trespassed too much upon your Patience already, and so
shall reserve this for the Subject of my next Discourse.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN Sermon III. Page 25. Line 1. for once, read now, for those, read these.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Three remaining Lectures for this Year are to be at St. Paul's, on the
first Mondays in September, October, and November. But the first Monday in
September being the Fast Day for the Fire of London, when there will be, in the
Morning, a Sermon, suitable to that Occasion, Preached before the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Companies of the City; Mr. Boyle's Lecture on that Day, is
Ordered to be Preached in the Afternoon.

THE SUFFICIENCY OF THE Scripture-Revelation, As to the Proof of it. PART III.

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, September 2d. 1700.

BEING The Sixth, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, D. D. Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

IN Order to show that we have sufficient Reason given us to convince us of the
Truth and Authority of the New Testament, and of all the Doctrines that are
taught by it, I have formerly propounded to show, 1. That we have sufficient
Reason to believe that the Books of the New Testament were written by those
Persons who are said to be the Authors thereof; 2. That there is sufficient
Reason to give full Credit to them in their Relation of those Matters of Fact
which they have recorded; And, 3. That if the Matters of Fact therein recorded
are true, they are sufficient Proofs of the Truth and Divine Authority of all
the Doctrines that are therein taught. And the two first of these Points I
have, I hope, already made good.

I proceed now to the third; viz.

3. To show, That the Doctrine of the Gospel is well grounded upon the History
of it; That if the Matters of Fact recorded in the New Testament are true, they
are sufficient Proofs of the Truth and Divine Authority of all the Doctrines
that are therein taught.

And Here, by the Doctrines of the Gospel, I understand both the Articles of
Faith which it proposes to our Belief, and the Rules which it prescribes to our
Practice. Many of the former of which are themselves Parts of the Gospel
History, as the Incarnation, Life, Sufferings, Death, Resurrection and
Ascension of our Savior; and the rest, of both sorts, are taught in the New
Testament, either by our Savior himself, or by his Apostles.

And I suppose it will be readily granted that all their Doctrines are true,
and also of divine Authority, if it shall appear that they were commissioned
and sent by God to instruct the World; for he whom God has sent speaks the
words of God, Joh. iii. 34.

The single Point therefore to be considered at this time, is, whether there be
sufficient Evidence from the Matters of Fact recorded in the History of the New
Testament, that our Savior and his Apostles were commissioned and sent by God
to instruct the World.

And first, Whether there be sufficient Evidence from thence that our Savior
himself was a Teacher sent from God.

Now that he said he was sent from God, is a Matter of Fact, and a part of the
Gospel History, Joh. xii. 49. See Joh. 5.37, 38.8.38.14.10, 24.
I have not spoken of my self, but the Father which sent me, he gave me a
Commandment what I should say, and what I should speak.

And that he said that he was the Messiah which had been foretold by the
Prophets, is likewise Matter of Fact, and a Part of the same History, Joh. iv.
25, 26. The Woman of Samaria says unto him, I know that Messiah comes which
is called Christ; Mat. 16.16, 17. Mar. 9.41. Luke 24.46. Joh. 9.47.
when he is come, he will tell us all things; Jesus says unto him, I that
speak unto thee, am HE.

The Question therefore is, whether from the things which are recorded of him
by the Evangelists, there be sufficient Ground to believe the Truth of either
or both these Pretenses; I say of either or both of them, because either of
them is a sufficient Reason to receive his Doctrine as True and Divine. for
which cause therefore I shall not, in speaking to this Subject, distinguish
between the Evidences which the Gospel-History affords of his being a Prophet,
and those which it affords of his being the Messiah, but shall propose them
promiscuously as they come to mind.

And here I shall consider, First, The Credibility of our Savior's own
Testimony concerning himself; and Secondly, The Confirmation that was given to
this Testimony by God; grounding all that shall be said on both these Heads,
upon the Gospel-History; the Truth of which I now take for granted, as being, I
hope, already sufficiently proved.

First then, I shall consider the Credibility of our Savior's own Testimony
concerning himself, when he said that he was sent by God, and that he was the
Christ the Son of God.

And I know it is commonly said that a Man is not to be believed in his own
Case. And this very thing was objected to our Savior by the Jews, Joh. viii.
13. Thou bear Record of thy self, thy Record is not true. But this Saying is
not without Exception.

When indeed what a Man witnesses is for his own Benefit, his Testimony, if it
be single, may reasonably be rejected; especially, if any Proof be made that at
other times he has told a Lie; or done any other ill thing for his Advantage;
But otherwise a Man's Testimony concerning himself may be credible; nay in some
cases it may be more credible than another Man's; because he may sometimes be
surer of what he says concerning himself than another Man could be. And
therefore our Savior, who in Joh. v. 31. allows of the Reasonableness of that
Saying; If I bear witness of my self my Witness is not true; yet when this very
thing was afterward objected to him by the Pharisees, in the Place
before-cited, makes answer in the following words; Though I bear Record of my
self, Joh. 8.14.
yet my Record is true, for I know whence I came, etc.

And that the Testimony of our Lord concerning his own divine Mission was such
as we might rationally give Credit to, though we had no other Evidence of it,
will, I suppose, sufficiently appear, if these following things be considered.

1. That his whole Life (according to the Account that is given of it by the
Evangelists, which we now build upon, as true) was in all Respects spotless and
unblameable; 1 Pet. 2.22. 1 Pet. 1.19.
He did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth; He was a Lamb without
blemish and without spot. And this he himself urges as a Reason why his
Testimony ought to be credited; Joh. viii. 46. Which of you convinces me of
Sin? and if I say the Truth why do ye not believe me? And a very good Reason it
was; for it could not justly be suspected, that a Person of whom no other ill
thing could be said, was yet indeed in the whole Course of his Life guilty of a
Crime of the greatest Magnitude, viz. of Lying in the Name of God; of saying,
that the Lord had sent him, when indeed the Lord had not sent him, nor spoken
by him.

2. It may be also considered, that this Testimony of our Lord, though it was
concerning himself, yet was not for himself; I mean it was not for his own
worldly Advantage. And this Consideration he himself likewise offers to the
Jews, as an Argument of the Truth of his Testimony, Joh. vii. 18. He that
speaks of himself seeks his own Glory; but he that seeks his Glory that
sent him, the same is true, and no unrighteousness is in him. Had the Doctrine
of our Lord, which he pretended was what God had commanded him to teach, been
contrived to advance the Worldly Honor and Greatness of himself or his
Followers, this would have been a just Prejudice against it, and a reasonable
Ground of suspecting that he spoke of himself; but when it was evident to all
that heard his Discourses, (and is no less so to us that read them) that he
sought not his own Glory in any thing, but the Glory of him that sent him, and
that his whole Doctrine tended to advance the Honor of God, and to promote the
Practice of Piety and Virtue in the World; this rendered his Testimony very
credible, when he said he was sent by God to teach it to the World; for when a
Doctrine is plainly worthy of God, and according to Godliness, 1 Timothy 6.3.
it may reasonably be presumed that God is the Author of it.

3. It may be further considered, that this Testimony of our Lord concerning
himself was so far from being to his own Benefit, that it was as much as any
thing could possibly be to his Worldly Disadvantage, exposing him to the Envy
and Malice of the Jews, and to the Jealousy of the Romans, and to all the
cruel Sufferings which he endured from both of them. And certainly a Man's
Testimony concerning himself may be allowed to be credible if it be against his
own Interest, if he himself be a great Loser or Sufferer by what he Testifies;
for it cannot be imagined what else but only the Evidence of Truth, and an
Obligation to declare it, should ever induce a Man to say such things
concerning himself, as will procure his own mischief.

And I know not what can be said to avoid the Force of this Argument for the
Truth of our Savior's Testimony that he was sent from God, and that he was the
Messiah, unless it be that he was disappointed in his Expectation; and that he
hoped to make himself Rich and Great in the World by these Glorious Pretenses,
though in the Event it proved otherwise. But the Gospel-History furnishes us with
a very clear and full Answer to this Objection in those many Predictions of our
Lord therein recorded concerning his own Sufferings; Mat. 16.31.20.17.
whereby it clearly appears, that the Sufferings which befell him for giving
this Testimony concerning himself did not happen to him unexpectedly, but that
he knew long before all that afterward came to pass. And therefore I say
again, that no Reason can be imagined why he should say that he was sent from
God, but only because he knew it was true, and had received a Command from his
Father to declare this Truth to the World. Especially if it be considered
further --

4. Lastly, That he continued to testify the same at his Death which he had
done before in his Life, giving thereby the best Assurance that a Man can give
of the Truth of his Testimony. For the main Matter of his Accusation to Pilate
was that he had given out himself to be the Messiah, and the Messiah was
(according to the Expectation of the Jews) to be a great Temporal King; had our
Lord therefore but denied this Charge, had he but granted that he was not the
Messiah, he might have saved his Life. But this he would not do; he disowned
indeed the false Notion that the Jews had of the Messiah; my Kingdom, John
18.26. Mat. 27.11. Joh. 18.37. Mat. 26.63, 64. Mar. 14.61, 62.
says he, is not of this World; But that he was a King, and that he was the
Messiah he boldly owned, as well when the Question was put to him by the Roman
Governor, who had Power of Life and Death, as when it had been put to him
before by the High Priest. This therefore is a strong Confirmation of the Truth
of this Testimony of our Lord; and is alone sufficient to make it credible,
that he witnessed the same good Confession before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6.13.
which he had done before his own Nation, and Sealed his Witness with his
Blood. For it is not to be supposed that any Man tells a known Lie for nothing;
and it was plainly then too late for him, to hope for any good to himself in
this World by persisting in this Testimony; (his only Hope had been in
retracting it) and it is not credible that any Man should be so foolish as to
expect to better himself in the other World, by dying with a Lie in his mouth.

Thus, I hope, it appears that the Testimony of our Lord concerning his own
divine Mission, was credible in it self; so that we might rationally believe,
that he came from God, and that he was Christ the Son of God, although we had
only his own Word for it.

But we have more than his own Word for it; I am not alone, says he, Joh. viii.
16, etc. but I and the Father that sent me. It is also written in your Law,
that the Testimony of two Men is true; I am one that bear Witness of my self,
and the Father that sent me bears Witness of me. And this was the other thing
I proposed to consider, in order to show the good Reason that we have to
believe that our Savior was sent from God, and that he was the Messiah; viz.

Secondly, The Confirmation that was given to this Testimony of our Lord, by
God himself. And this was given several ways.

1. God bare him Witness by the Testimony of ancient Prophets; And to this our
Savior frequently appeals, Joh. v. 39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye
think ye have Eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me; And again,
v. 46. Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me.
And this St. Peter (comparing it with that Voice from Heaven testifying him to
be the Son of God, 2 Pet. 1.18, 19.
of which he himself had been an Ear-witness) calls a more sure word of
Prophecy. And indeed it was as certain an Evidence of his divine Mission as
could be desired.

For it was a Matter of the greatest Concern to the World, to discern the
promised Messiah, that so they might know in whom to Believe, and from whom to
expect Salvation: And to this End God was pleased, by the mouth of all his holy
Prophets since the World began, to give several Marks and Characters of the
Messiah, by which he might be certainly known, and readily distinguished from
all Impostors; for they foretold exactly the Time of his Coming, his Pedigree,
and the Place of his Birth, the manner of his Life, the Things he was to do,
the Sufferings he was to undergo, and all the remarkable Accidents that were to
befall him in this World; all which Predictions were punctually fulfilled in
the Person of our blessed Savior, as must be granted by every one that allows
the truth of the Gospel-History. And this is an undeniable Proof that he was
the Messiah; for it is manifestly inconsistent with the Wisdom of God, when he
meant to give Marks and Characters by which the Messiah might be certainly
known, to give only such as might belong to another Person no less than to him;
and it is no less inconsistent with his Goodness that his Providence should
ever permit that all the Marks and Characters of the true Messiah should meet
together in an Impostor; because by this, Mankind must have lain under an
inevitable Necessity of being cheated in a Matter of the greatest Consequence
to their Eternal Salvation.

But the ancient Prophecies of Christ were many of them in Types or Figurative
Expressions, not readily to be understood 'till they were accomplished, nor
then very easy to be applied by every one to the Person of the true Messiah
without the Help of a Teacher. How can I understand what I read (said the
Eunuch, Acts 8.31.
even when he was reading one of the plainest Prophecies of Christ that is in
the Old Testament) except some man should guide me? And therefore God was
pleased to give a yet more certain and distinct Knowledge of him to the Men of
that Generation in which he appeared; And this he did --

2. By the Testimony of John the Baptist, who was a burning and a shining
Light, and did not, as the former Prophets had done, only lay down Marks and
Characters, by the wise Application whereof Men might discern the Messiah when
they saw him; but pointed to him, as it were with his Finger, as he stood
before their Eyes, so that the simplest among them could not but know whom he
meant; Behold, says he, the Lamb of God, Joh. 1.29, 30.
which takes away the Sin of the World. This is he of whom I said, after me
comes a Man which is preferred before me.

And to this Testimony of John our Savior himself frequently appealed, as to a
Testimony that was full to the purpose and could not be denied; Ye sent unto
John, says he, and he bare witness unto the Truth, Joh. v. 32. Mat. 21.23. etc
And when the Chief Priests and Elders questioned him about his Authority, he
perfectly confounded them by only asking them whether the Baptism of John was
from Heaven or of Men; for that John was a Prophet, although he did no Miracles,
was so evident to all by the wonderful manner of his Birth, and the miraculous
Circumstances that attended it, that they could not; and he was also so
generally received and accepted among the People as a Prophet, that they dared
not deny it: If, they say, we shall say of Men, all the People will stone us,
for they be persuaded that John was a Prophet; and yet had they granted this,
which they could not deny, they had answered their own Question, and seen
clearly by what Authority our Savior acted and taught; for no Testimony of his
divine Mission could be plainer and clearer than that of John was; and it was a
thing granted by the Jews, that he is a Prophet without all doubt and needs no
farther Trial, unto whom another Prophet bears Witness.

3. Another way by which God gave Witness to our Savior, that he was sent by
him, and that he was the Messiah, was by a Voice from Heaven; which Testimony
was given him three times.

Mat. 3.16, 17. Mar. 1.10, 11. Luke 3.22.
First, at his Baptism, when being come up out of the water, the Heavens opened,
and the Spirit like a Dove descended upon him, and there came a Voice from
Heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. And of this
Voice it is highly probable St. John Baptist was an Ear-witness; for it is said
expressly, that he saw the Spirit descending like a Dove from Heaven, and
abiding on him, John 1.32.
and that was at the same time that the Voice was uttered.

A Second time was at his Transfiguration on the Mount, when the Glory of God
appearing in a Cloud, Ex. 24.15. etc. Mat. 17.5. Mar. 9.7. Luke 9.35.
as it had anciently used to do, there came a Voice out of the Cloud which
said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him. And at
the uttering of this Voice, three of his Apostles were present, 2 Pet. 1.17.
John 1 14. 1 John 5.7.
two of which have witnessed the same to us under their own Hands.

A Third time was after the raising of Lazarus, when were present not only his
Apostles who constantly accompanied him, Joh. 12.20, 28.
but several others both Jews and Greeks. And this Voice was so loud as to be
heard by all that were present, though not by all so distinctly and articulately,
as it was by some, who, as it is probable, were nearer than the rest; which was
the occasion of that Difference that was among the People concerning it; some
saying that it Thundered, and others, that an Angel spoke to him. Ver. 29.
To doubt therefore of his divine Mission whom God thus testified to by Voices
from Heaven, is to make God himself a Liar, as the Apostle speaks, 1 John 5.10.
because we receive not the Record that he gave of his Son.

4. Another way by which God gave Witness to the divine Mission of our Savior
was by enduing him with the Gift of Prophecy, or foretelling things to come.
Mat. 16.21.20.17, etc. Mar. 9.31.10.33.
Several Instances of which we meet with in the Gospel-History, for he foretold
very often his own Sufferings and Death, with all the remarkable Circumstances
thereof; He said that he should be betrayed by one of his own Disciples, Mat.
26.21. John 6.70.
when none of them suspected that there was a false Brother among them, and the
Traitor himself knew not yet the falseness of his own Heart; Mat. 26.34.
He told Peter but a few Hours before, that he should deny him thrice; when He
at the same time was very confident of his own strength, and declared himself
resolved to die rather than deny him once; Mat. 26.31.
He told the rest of the Disciples that they would all forsake him, when they
every one professed themselves resolved to suffer with him, Joh.
3.14.8.28.12.32.
rather than leave him; He signified before by what Death he should die, and
who should be instrumental therein; Mat. 16.21.26.32.28.16.
He assured his Disciples that after three Days he would rise again, and
appointed them a Place in Galilee, where they should all see him; He Prophesied
that notwithstanding the Contempt he was had in, and the greater Contempt that
his ignominious Death would bring upon him, his Religion should by their means
(a Company of poor illiterate Fishermen) be preached with good success in all
Parts of the World; Mat. 24.14.3.19
He foretold likewise the utter Destruction of Jerusalem and the Temple, Mat.
24. Mar. 13. Luke 21.
before that Generation passed away, and the Dispersion of the Jews into all
Nations: And several other things, which it would take up too much time now to
mention, he foretold should be just in that manner in which they afterward
came to pass.

Concerning which it may be noted, that some of his Prophecies were fulfilled
soon after they were spoken, the punctual Accomplishment whereof, was to those
that both heard them spoken and saw them fulfilled, an evident Proof of his
Prophetical Spirit, and a just Ground of expecting the Accomplishment of all
his other Prophecies in their Season; and that others were not to be fulfilled
'till a good while after, the Accomplishment whereof at the time foretold, and
long after the Predictions thereof had been recorded by the Evangelists, was a
good Evidence to those that lived then, and is also to us that live now, and
either read the Accomplishment thereof in History, or see the same with our own
Eyes, that he was endued with a Divine Spirit; and likewise takes away all
reasonable Ground of a Suspicion which we might otherwise have had, that in
those Instances wherein both the Prophecy and the Accomplishment of it are
related by the same Authors, the Prophecies were forged after the Events were
come to pass.

Now if this be true (and it is certainly true, if the Gospel-History be so)
that our Savior did foretell many things which afterward happened, and those
very casual and contingent things, depending upon the free will of Men, this
was an evident token that he had a divine Spirit; for none can certainly
foretell such things but God only, or those whom he enlightens with his Spirit;
And therefore the Prophet Isaiah made this Challenge to the Idols of the
Heathens, Isa. 41.23. Show the things that shall be hereafter, that we may know
that ye are Gods.

And if to this it should be objected that future Events have been sometimes
foretold, by such as have not been true Prophets of God, nor enlightened by his
Spirit, as by Diviners, Astrologers and South-Sayers, and by the Oracles of the
Heathens; this may be granted without any weakening of the Argument I am now
upon for the Proof of our Savior's divine Mission.

For there may be some future Events upforeseen by us, and yet depending so
entirely upon the Course of Natural Causes, that unless hindered by a Miracle,
they will as certainly come to pass as the Sun will rise tomorrow; And these,
the Devil, who understands much better than we do the Power and Course of
Nature, may foresee and consequently foretell; and When such a thing is
foretold, we, who understand very little of Nature, may think it a Prophecy,
whereas in truth there is no more of a Prophetical Spirit in the Devil when he
foretells such things, than there is in a skilful Astronomer, when he
Calculates and foretells to a Minute for several Ages to come, the Motions and
Eclipses of the Sun, Moon, and Planets.

And even in future Contingencies, it is no wonder that the Events have
sometimes verified the Predictions of the Devil and his Prophets; for this also
may well enough be accounted for, without allowing that any Being has a
certain Foreknowledge of future Contingencies but God only, if we do but
suppose, as we may very reasonably do, that the Devil has a perfecter
Knowledge than we can have, of the Counsels, Intrigues and Interests of Men,
that he understands their Tempers and Inclinations, that he has lived a great
while, and made very exact observations, that he has had a long Experience of
things, and has also a notable sagacity much beyond what is in any Man; for so
even a wise observing and experienced Man, may without a Spirit of Prophecy,
see much further before him than Men commonly do, and may foretell, by a Guess
that shall rarely fail, a great many things which a less thinking and
experienced Man would never have thought of; And when the thing happens that
was foretold, it may be past the Skill of others to judge, whether it was
foretold by a Sagacious Guess, or by a certain Foreknowledge of what would be.

And that the Predictions of Diviners, and the Oracles of the Heathens
concerning future Contingencies, have been no more than only probable
Conjectures (unless when they have been borrowed from divine Prophecies, as
they may have often been) is evident by their uncertain Accomplishment; Some
things indeed have happened as they have been foretold, but others have not so
happened; and because the Devil could not always certainly tell what the Events
of those things would be which he was Consulted with about, he commonly gave
out his Oracles in ambiguous Expressions, that so, whatever happened he might
be thought to have foretold it. And when the Predictions of any Person
pretending to Prophecy, have failed in some Instances, though in others they have
been accomplished, this is a certain Argument that he did not Prophecy by a
divine Spirit; according to what is said, Deuteronomy. xviii. 21, 22. If thou say in
thine heart, How shall we know the word which the Lord has not spoken? When a
Prophet speaks in the name of the Lord, if the thing follow not nor come to
pass, that is the thing which the Lord has not spoken, but the Propheth has
spoken it presumptuously. In which words it seems to be implied (though it be not
expressly said) that if the thing foretold) did come to pass, and especially
that if of many things which the Prophet had foretold, and which could not be
fore-known by the greatest Skill in Natural Causes, (such as are the Actions of
a free Agent) not one thing failed, but his words were made good by the Event
in every particular, they might then depend upon it that he was a true Prophet;
except only in one Case mentioned in Deuteronomy. 13. Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3.
viz. When he made use of that Credit which the Accomplishment of his
Predictions had gained him, to draw Men from the Worship of the true and only
God, to the Worship of Idols. And accordingly it is observed in 1 Samuel iii. 19,
20. that because the Lord did let none of Samuel's words fall to the Ground,
all Israel from Dan even to Beersheba knew that he was established to be a
Prophet of the Lord.

The before-named Exception having therefore no Place in our Savior, for his
Doctrine was, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, Mat. 4.10.
and him only shall thou serve; and there being not one of those many
Predictions that he gave forth (though several of them were concerning the most
casual Events that could be) which has not been in its due time fulfilled, we
may safely conclude that he was a true Prophet of God, and consequently, that
he ought to be hearkened to in every thing that he said.

5. Another Testimony that was given by God to the divine Mission of our
Savior, was by the Power of working Miracles, more and greater Miracles than
ever had been done before since the beginning of the World, the Relation of
which makes up a great Part of the Gospel-History.

Mat. 11.4, 5. Joh. 10.25, 37, 38.14.11.15.24.
And to these our Savior himself frequently appeals, as to a most evident Proof
that he was sent by God, and that he was the Son of God; Joh. v. 36. The Works
which the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I do bear witness
of me that the Father has sent me.

And indeed what better Evidence can be desired that a Person speaking in the
Name of God is sent by him, than to see him do the Works of God, that is, such
Works as cannot be done but by the Power of God? And that our Savior's
Miracles were such, cannot, I think, be doubted by those who believe they are
truly related in the Gospel, which it is now supposed they are.

And if to this it be said, that the first Opposers of Christianity both Jews
and Gentiles, who either saw the Miracles of our Savior, or had such good
Assurance thereof from Eyewitnesses, or Credible History, that they could not
deny them, yet were not thereby convinced that he was a Prophet of God, but
rather thought that he did all his mighty Works by Magic Art, and by the Help
of the Devil; I answer,

1. That it is a thing which we cannot be sure of, that the true Reason why any
of those who saw our Savior's Miracles, or were persuaded of the Truth of
them, did yet refuse to receive him as a Prophet sent from God, was because
they were not convinced that his Miracles were done by a divine Power; for Men
do not always act according to their Judgments; for we read of some of the
Chief Rulers in Joh. xii. 42. that they believed on him, that is, they were
convinced in their Judgments, by the mighty Works that he did, that he was the
Person he pretended to be, but they did not confess him, lest they should be
put out of the Synagogue; for they loved the Praise of Men more than the Praise
of God. And therefore I think it most probable, that they who attributed those
Miracles of his which they could not deny, to the working of the Devil, did
not, nay could not believe what they said, but only said it, because they were
resolved never to receive a Doctrine (whatever Evidence was given of the Truth
of it) that was so contrary as our Savior's was, to their Prejudices, Lusts,
and Worldly Interests; and they could not tell what else to say to justify
themselves to the World. But,

2. If their Blasphemy in ascribing our Savior's Miracles to the power of the
Devil, was not merely malicious, 'twas, however, most evidently groundless. For,

(1.) Though the Devil be without doubt of much greater Power than we are, and,
understanding better than we do the Force of Natural Causes, can do many things
which to the Eyes of Men may appear Miraculous, because it may be past their
Skill to give an Account of them by Natural Causes; there is no reason however
to believe that he can do a true Miracle; that is, that he can ever alter the
Course of Nature, or produce any Effect but by the Means of Natural Causes,
working in such a manner, and by such Laws and Rules as God has appointed: And
therefore the Apostle calls those strange Appearances which are done by the
working of Satan, 2 These. 2.9.
Lying Wonders.

But they were not Lying Wonders which were done by our Savior; they did not
only seem to be done, but were done, and they were Miracles not only in
appearance but in truth, being many of them such Effects as were evidently
above and beyond the Power of Nature, and therefore such as could not be done
but by a Power Superior to Nature, that is, by God's.

For who, but he only who at first brought all things out of nothing, Mat. 14.
Mark 6. Luke 9. John 6.
could with five Loaves, and two small Fishes, satisfy the Hunger of more than
five thousand Persons, leaving a Remainder of more than twice the number of
Baskets-full of Fragments, that there had been of Loaves at the first? Luke
7.11, etc. Joh. 11.39, etc.
Or who could restore to Life a dead Carcass that began to putrefie, but he
only who first formed it out of the Dust of the Ground? Who could call back the
departed Soul, and fix it to its former Residence, but he only into whose Hands
it was returned, and who first breathed into our Bodies these Immortal Spirits?

And as to some other of his Works which may be thought to be such as might be
produced by the working of Nature only, the manner in which they were done,
plainly shows that they also were done by a Power Superior to Nature; for thus,
a Sick Man may be restored to perfect Health, in time, and by degrees, by the
use of proper Medicines, and such a Cure we reckon Natural; But those were
plainly Supernatural Cures which were wrought, as our Savior's for the most
part were, without the use of any Medicines, only by a Word speaking, and many
times at a great distance; and by which those who had been long Sick or Infirm,
or Cripples, were restored to perfect Health and Strength in an instant of
time. To suppose therefore that the Devil can thus at his Will alter the Course
of Nature, is to attribute to him such a Power as is peculiar to the God of
Nature, who only does great Wonders. Ps. 72.18.136.4.
But

(2.) If the Miracles of our Savior had been only such as we might reasonably
think did not exceed the Devil's Power to do, yet that they were not wrought by
his Help, and consequently that they were done by the Power of God, is
abundantly evident from the Design of them; which was to establish a Doctrine
the most contrary that could be to the Devil's Interest. For to this Purpose
the Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the Devil; and
he did it, 1 John 3.8.
by preaching to Men to turn from the vanities of Idols to the worship and
service of the Living God, Act. 14.15. Tit. 2.12.
who made Heaven and Earth; and by teaching them to deny Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World.

Now the Devil is certainly as subtle as he is powerful, and therefore if he
has indeed any power to alter the course of Nature and to do a real Miracle, he
would not, however, we may be sure, make use of this Power against himself, he
would not thereby assist another to destroy his own Kingdom. And by this
Argument our Savior himself clearly confuted this Calumny, in Mat. xii. 25.
When the Pharisees had said that he cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of
the Devils; he answered, Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to
Desolation -- and if Satan cast out Satan, he is divided against himself; how
then shall his Kingdom stand? And

(3.) Lastly, As it is not credible that the Devil has such power; or if he
has, and was let alone to himself, that he would make use of this power to
destroy his own Kingdom; so neither is it credible that Almighty God, who has
all power in his Hands, and can control and limit the workings of the Devil
and all created Beings as he pleases, would ever permit the Devil to outdo
himself in such wonderful Operations; so that more and greater Miracles should
be done by an Impostor, than ever had been done before by any true Prophet;
which yet is manifestly the Case, if indeed our Savior was an Impostor.

2 Timothy 3.8.
He suffered indeed Jannes and Jambres to withstand his Servants Moses and Aaron
for some time, and to do, or seem to do some wonderful Works like to theirs;
Ex. 7.10, 12.
for Aaron cast his Rod upon the Ground and it became a Serpent, and so did
they: And Aaron stretched out his Hand over the Waters, Ex. 8.6, 7.
and the Frogs came up and covered the Land; and the Magicians did so with
their Enchantments, and brought up Frogs upon the Land of Egypt. But though he
suffered the Magicians thus to contend with his Prophets, the Victory was
clearly on his Prophet's side; Ex. 7.12.8.18.
for Aaron's Rod swallowed up their Rods; and when the Magicians endeavored by
their Enchantments to bring forth Lice, as Aaron had done, they could not; but
were forced to own before Pharaoh that it was the Finger of God; and from that
time forward strove no more for Victory.

And thus it may be consistent with the Wisdom and Goodness of God, Deuteronomy 13.1,
etc.
at any time, in order prove his People, and to know whether they love the Lord
with all their Heart, Mat. 24.24.
to suffer the Sign or Wonder foretold by an Inticer to Idolatry to come to
pass; and to distinguish his Elect from Reprobates, to permit false Christ's and
false Prophets, 2 These. 2.8, 9, 10.
to show great Signs and Wonders; and in just Judgment upon such as will not
receive the love of the Truth that they may be saved; to let them alone to be
deceived by that wicked one, whose Coming is after the working of Satan, with
all Power, and Signs and Lying Wonders, and with all Deceiveableness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish. But it cannot, I think be reconciled to
these Attributes of God, that he should permit greater Wonders, and more clear
and undoubted Miracles to be done by a false Prophet, than ever were done by
any true Prophet; because this would be too great a Trial for Humane Nature;
such Signs and Wonders would be sufficient to deceive even those that enquire
after Truth with the greatest sincerity of Heart. And I cannot conceive it
consistent with the Goodness of God, to permit that such as are of honest
Minds, and sincere Lovers of Truth, should, after a fair Examination of the
Proofs on both sides, have greater reason to embrace Error than Truth; which
yet they plainly have in case the Miracles done by false Prophets be more and
greater than have been done by any true Prophet, unless the Falseness of the
Doctrines which they would thereby establish be more evident than the Truth of
their Miracles. So that upon the whole, I think we may well conclude this Head,
with those Words of Nicodemus to our Savior, Joh. iii. 2. We know (we are
assured of it, we have no Reason to doubt of it) that thou art a Teacher come
from God, for no Man can do these Miracles that thou do, except God be with
him.

6. Another way by which God himself bare Witness to the Truth of our Savior's
Testimony, was by Raising him from the dead. Joh. 2.19. Mat. 12.40.16* 4.
To this great Miracle he himself often referred those that had any doubt of
the Truth of his other Miracles, as what could not but be satisfactory to all
that were capable of receiving Satisfaction. And this was the chief Subject of
the Apostle's Sermons, Acts 2.24.32.3.15.4.10.10.40.13.30.
the main Proof that they insisted upon to convince Men that Jesus was the
Christ: And they seem to have no doubt upon them, that if they could but
persuade Men of the Truth of his Resurrection, they would readily own that he
was the Christ, and without further scruple receive every thing that he had
taught them in the name of God as a divine Truth. Acts 17.30.
By this, say they, God has given Assurance unto all Men, that he has ordained
him to be the Judge of the World: By this, say they, he was declared to be the
Son of God with Power; because it was a thing evident to all, Romans 1.4.
that no Power less than God's could raise the dead.

When therefore this was done, (and it was done if the Gospel-History be true)
this was a plain Seal set by God himself to our Savior's Testimony; a Seal not
possible to be Counterfeited, and wherein the Divine Power is so clearly and
deeply engraven, that whoever looks attently upon it, must be satisfied whose
Seal it is. So that to grant the Resurrection of our Savior, and yet to doubt
whether he was the Person he gave out himself to be, is to doubt of the Truth
of God himself; for granting our Savior's Resurrection, it cannot be supposed
that he was an Impostor, without supposing that God himself did consent to the
Imposture, and work the most evident Miracle that ever was done, on purpose to
persuade Men to believe a Lie.

I shall mention at present but one way more whereby God was pleased to confirm
our Savior's Testimony of himself; And that was --

7. By the Witness of the Holy Ghost, which witness was given to him at his
Baptism, Joh. 1.32, etc.
when the Holy Ghost descended in a visible manner as a Dove and rested on him.
It was also given to him during the whole Course of his Ministry; for the
Holy Ghost not only descended, but abode upon him; and therefore St. Peter,
speaking of him, Act. 10.38, etc.
says that God anointed him with the Holy Ghost, and with Power.

But that Witness of the Holy Ghost which I now chiefly design, was that which
was given to him after his Ascension into Heaven, and was an evident Token that
all power in Heaven and Earth was then committed to him; I mean those Gifts of
the Holy Ghost which he showred down on his Apostles on the Day of Pentecost;
when being met together, Acts 2.1, etc.
there came suddenly a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty Wind, which
filled all the House where they were sitting, and there appeared unto them
Cloven Tongues like as of Fire, which sat upon each of them; whereupon they wre
all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the
Spirit gave them utterance.

And this Testimony of the Holy Ghost our Savior promised before should be
given to him; Joh. xv. 26. When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto
you from the Father, even the Spirit of Truth which proceeds from the Father,
he shall testify of me: And the Testimony indeed was very plain and full; for
by this it clearly appeared that all his former Miracles had been true, and had
been wrought by a divine Power, when even after he had left this World, he was
still able to make good this Promise to his Disciples, and to empower them to
do greater Works in his Name, than he himself had done while he was living upon
Earth; This was a clear Demonstration that he was the beloved Son of the
Father, and was, as St. Peter says, Act. 2.33.
exalted at God's right hand, when he did shed forth that wonderful power upon
his Apostles, of which all that then dwelt in Jerusalem, or had come thither
from all parts of the World to Worship, were Eye and Ear-Witnesses.

And this Testimony of the Holy Ghost was given to our Savior, not at that
time only, not one Day and no more, but was continued to be given to him all
the time of the Apostle's Preaching, (who were also enabled to communicate to
others by laying on of Hands, Act. 2.38.8.17.10.44.19.6.
the same Miraculous Gifts of the Holy Ghost which they themselves had
received) until they had finished their Ministry, and planted Christian
Churches in all the Countries of the then known World.

Thus I have briefly mentioned the great Evidence that the Gospel History
affords of the Truth of our Savior's Testimony of himself; the Matters of Fact
I have taken for granted, as being parts of the Gospel-History; the Truth of
which has been, I hope, already sufficiently proved; and the Evidence it self
is so clear and full, that I thought it needless to open it in more Words than
I have done; for that the Testimony which God did by all these ways give to our
Savior, is a rational Inducement to believe the Truth of what he said
concerning himself, is what I think, cannot be doubted by those that allow
themselves any time to consider things.

This I Am sure I may say, that if this strong Evidence that the Gospel-History
affords of our Savior's divine Mission be not sufficient to prove it, there
never yet has been sufficient Evidence of the Truth of any divine Revelation; I
had almost said, nor ever can be, but that I know it is not for us to say, what
Infinite Power and Wisdom can do.

But as some Jews in our Savior's time said, Joh. 7.31.
when Christ comes, will he do more Miracles than these which this Man has
done? So I may ask, and I believe it will be very difficult to make answer to
it, when Christ comes (if indeed he be not already come, if indeed that Jesus
on whom we believe be not he) how shall we do to know him? What greater
Assurance can he give us that he is the Christ, than Jesus has given? What
better Reason can we ever have to believe any Messenger that shall be sent from
God, than we have to believe our Savior?

For we have as much Reason, (supposing the Gospel-History to be true) to
believe him to be sent from God, as we have to believe any thing; we are as
secure that we are not deceived in him, as we are that we are not deceived in
the plainest Matters of sense. For the best, the only security that we have
that our senses do not deceive us, and that every thing in the World is not
quite otherwise than it appears to us to be, is the Goodness of God; and this
same security we have that we are not deceived in our Savior's divine Mission.
Nay we are more secure of this than we are of that; because it is more plainly
inconsistent with the Goodness of God, to deceive us in a Matter on which our
everlasting Welfare depends, than in Matters only of this Life, which are the
chief things for which our bodily Senses are of use to us: And if indeed we are
deceived in our Savior, it must be said that God himself has deceived us,
having given us all the Reason imaginable to believe him to be, as he said he
was, the Son of God.

And now having been so large in showing the Evidence that there is from the
Matters of Fact recorded in the History of the New Testament, that our Savior
himself was a Teacher sent from God, I shall not need to spend much time in
showing that his Apostles were likewise Commissioned by God to instruct the
World; and consequently that we ought also to receive all the Doctrines taught
by them (whether in their Epistles, or in their Discourses, interwoven by St.
Luke with his History of their Acts) as true and divine; for --

1. There is plainly no Reason why we should not receive them as such; because
they are the very same that our Savior taught, and no other. Some Points of
Christian Doctrine are indeed more largely explained and handled by the
Apostles in their Epistles, than they are in those Discourses of our Savior
that are recorded by the Evangelists; but between the Doctrines taught by our
Lord himself, and those taught by the Apostles, there is such a perfect Harmony
and Agreement, that if we had only their own Word for it, that they spoke and
wrote by the Inspiration of the Spirit, we might securely believe them; for
though one Man may, without Inspiration, say the same thing which another before
him has spoken by Inspiration; yet if the second says that he also is inspired,
there can be no Hurt, though there may be a Mistake in believing him; seeing
whether the Man was Inspired or no, it is certain that the Doctrine was. But,

2. If there be any Doctrines taught by the Apostles, which we do not see were
taught before by our Savior, I say there is however from the History of the
Gospel, Evidence enough of their divine Mission also; so that we may very
securely take upon their Credit, as true and divine, any Doctrine which they
have instructed us in. For,

(1.) That they were sent by our Savior, is past all Dispute, if the
Gospel-History be true; Joh. xx. 21. As my Father has sent me, so send I you;
and again, Mat. xxviii. 19, 20. Go ye and disciple all Nations, Baptizing them
in the Name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, teaching them
to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you. And that he had
Authority to grant them such a Commission, he shows in the words before; All
Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, etc. And,

(2.) That they were taught by God, and enlightened by his Holy Spirit, is what
cannot be doubted, if we believe the power of our Savior, and the Truth of the
Gospel; for before our Lord went from them, Joh 20.22.
he breathed on them, and said, Receive ye the Holy Ghost: And to what Purposes
the Holy Ghost was to be given them, he had told them before; Joh. 14.26.
The Comforter which is the Holy Ghost whom the Father will send in my Name, he
shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your Remembrance whatsoever
I have said unto you. And, when he, the Spirit of Truth is come, Joh. 16.13.
he will guide you into all Truth; being thus therefore taught by the Spirit of
Truth, our Savior might well say as he does, Luke x. 16. He that hears you,
hears me; and he that despises you despises me; and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me. And,

(3.) Lastly; We have all the reason in the World to receive them as Messengers
from God, and to believe that all that they have taught is the Will of God,
because they had the same Attestation of God to the truth of their Doctrine,
that our Savior himself had to his. I do not mean that God did bear them
Witness all those ways by which he bare witness to our Savior, for that could
not be; but he bare witness to them all those ways by which it was proper for
him to do it, and by which he had born witness to any former Prophets.

For he bare witness to them that they were sent by him, Joh. 13.22.20, 21.
by the Testimony of our Savior, as he had done to our Savior by the
Testimony of John: And if the Testimony of a Prophet was credible concerning
our Savior, much more is the Testimony of the Son of God highly credible
concerning a Messenger sent by him.

He bare witness to them also by enduing them with the Gift of Prophecy; Joh.
16.13.
for when the Spirit of Truth is come, says our Savior, he will show you
things to come.

And lastly, he bare witness to them, by that which is the most plain and
sensible proof of a divine Mission, Mar. 16.20.
viz. By the Power of Miracles, and manifold Gifts of the Holy Ghost. The Lord
worked with them, and confirmed their word with Signs following, says St. Mark.
And, with great Power, says St. Luke, gave Acts 4.33.
the Apostles witness of the Resurrection of the Lord Jesus. And the greater
part of the History of the Acts of the Apostles is spent in relating the
wonderful Works that they did, by the Name of Jesus, and the Power of the
Holy Ghost, in confirmation of the Truth of their Doctrine.

But St. Paul (perhaps it will be said) of whose Writing are most of the
Epistles, was not one of them, not called by our Savior to be an Apostle as
they were, nor so much as an Eye and Ear-witness of our Lord's Miracles and
Doctrine; what Reason then have we to receive his Writings as Portions of Holy
Scripture?

I answer, as good, though not in every particular just the same that we have to
receive the Writings of the other Apostles as such.

For he was Converted, and Ordained to be an Apostle, in a more wonderful
manner than they were; as you may see in Acts 9.

And as our Lord himself gave witness to their Divine Mission, so he did also
to his; Acts ix. 15. He is says our Lord, a chosen Vessel unto me, to bear my
Name before the Gentiles, and Kings, and the Children of Israel.

To him also as well as to them, Act. 20.22, 25.27.10, 22. 2 Th. 2.3, etc. 1 Timothy 4.1, etc. 2 Timothy 3.1, etc.
the Spirit foreshew'd things to come; several Proofs of which we may observe
in the History of the Acts, and in his Epistles.

And Lastly; His Speech and his Preaching was, 1 Cor. 2.4. 2 Cor. 12.12.
as theirs, in Demonstration of the Spirit, and of Power. In him all the Signs
of an Apostle were seen, no less than in them, viz. Signs and Wonders, and
mighty Deeds. And of him, with Barnabas in Company, Acts 14.3.
it is that St. Luke speaks, when he says, that the Lord gave Testimony to the
word of his Grace, and granted Signs and Wonders to be done by their Hands. And
the latter part of the History of the Acts, from the 10th Chapter to the End,
contains little else but an account of St. Paul's Preaching, and of the
Miracles that were done by the Power of God to confirm the Truth of his
Doctrine; So that if we believe the Gospel-History, we can no more doubt of his
divine Mission and Inspiration than we can of theirs; we must conclude, that if
they were Apostles, so was he; that if they were Ministers of Christ, 2 Cor.
11.23. 2 Cor. 11.5. 2 Cor. 12.11.
so was he too; forasmuch as in nothing he was behind the very chiefest
Apostles; so that consequently we have as much Reason to believe his Writings
to be Inspired, as we have theirs.

And now by all that has been said, I hope, I have fully made good the Point I
was to prove; viz. That if the Matters of Fact recorded in the New Testament
are true, they are sufficient Proofs of the Truth and divine Authority of all
the Doctrines that are therein taught, whether by Christ himself, or by his
Apostles. For if it be true that they were sent by God to instruct the World,
and to declare the Will of God to Mankind; (and that they were, is sufficiently
proved by their Credential Letters, which we have now perused and examined) we
can no more doubt the truth of those things which they, as the Messengers and
Ambassadors of God have delivered to us in his Name, than if we had heard God
himself uttering the same by a Voice from Heaven. So that I cannot but persuade
my self that the Proofs which have been offered in the foregoing Discourse of
the Truth of all the Doctrines that are taught in the New Testament, are
sufficient to convince any Rational and Considering Man of the Truth of any
Doctrine, the Falsity whereof is not Notorious and Self-evident.

And therefore this, I think, is the only thing that can with any show of
Reason be pretended by any Person to justify his not receiving the Gospel as a
divine Revelation, viz. That the Matter of it, in some Particulars, is such as
will not admit of any Proof at all; because no Arguments can make a thing
credible, which in it self is incredible. And such, it may be pretended, some
of the Christian Doctrines are which are taught in the New Testament; and
especially the Doctrine of the Trinity.

And that this Doctrine is clearly taught in the New Testament, we freely
grant. But why should it be deemed incredible? Does it imply a Contradiction?
Can they that except against it, or against the Gospel-Revelation upon the
Account of it, show that it is impossible it should be true? Can they
demonstrate that it is impossible for an Infinite and Eternal Being to beget a
Son in his own Likeness, Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Person? Or can they
show it to be impossible that there should be a third Person proceeding from
both these?

No, perhaps they will say; But that these three should be one, as the Scripture
teaches, that, they think, exceeds all the Measures of Belief; that, they cannot
but think a manifest Contradiction.

But why so? Do the Christians hold, or does the Scripture say, that they are
three and one in the same respect? does it say that the one God is three Gods;
or that those three whom it speaks of as three distinct Persons, ascribing
personal Acts to each of them, are nevertheless but one single Person? No, it
only tells us in general that these three are One. But how they are Three, or
how they are One; wherein consists their Distinction, and wherein their Unity,
it says not, at least not very plainly. And I think it the safest Course in
such high Matters, Psalm. 131.1.
in Matters so much too high for us, not to exercise our selves, nor to pretend
to be Wise above what is written.

If therefore there be no Contradiction in the Doctrine of a Trinity in Unity;
(as there is not unless we say that God is One and Three in the same Respect)
that is enough; that is all that needs to be said upon this Occasion. For though we
may (as indeed we must) allow it to be an incomprehensible Mystery, there is no
Reason to Cavil at the Gospel-Revelation, or to deny it to be a true divine
Revelation upon this Account.

For we live in a World of Mysteries; we must believe Mysteries in abundance
whether we will or no; I mean, there are some Truths so very plain even to our
Reason that we cannot doubt of them, and yet so very high and Mysterious, that
we can no more fathom them than we can the Doctrine of the Trinity.

For thus, that Matter is not Eternal, we are as sure almost as we are of any
thing, for Matter could not exist of it self; and yet how Matter should be made
out of nothing, is as incomprehensible by us, as it is how the One undivided
Godhead does personally subsist in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

And thus again, that God is Eternal we are certain by Reason; (for by God we
mean the first Cause of all, and he who was first could have none before him)
and yet that any thing should exist without a Cause of its Existence is
unaccountable; and if we were not sure that it must be so, we should be ready
to say that it was impossible, and a manifest Contradiction that it should be
so.

Thus, I say, we are led by the Light of Reason only to a firm belief of some
Truths, which yet we can give no Account of by our Reason; and I think, it is
very hard that we will not receive an incomprehensible Doctrine, upon the
Credit of a very plain and well attested Divine Revelation, as well as we do
and must do the same upon the Evidence of Natural Reason.

Especially considering the Subject of this incomprehensible Doctrine, which is
the Essence or Substance of God, who is an Infinite Being and so must needs be
incomprehensible by our finite Understandings; by our Understandings, I say,
which are so very shallow, that I believe I may truly say, we understand not
the Essence or Substance of any thing. For we understand not what is the
Essence or Substance of Matter or Body, though it be a thing that all our Senses
are continually exercised about; all that we know of it, is some Properties or
Accidents thereof; that it is something (but what we know not) that has Figure
and Dimensions, that is hard, soft, fixed, fluid or the like. And we understand
no more, but rather less, what the Essence or Substance of our Soul is; all
that we know of it, is, that it is something that thinks, and because it thinks
we know it must be something; and because none of those Properties which we
observe in Matter, have any Relation at all to Thought, we conclude that the
thinking Soul is an immaterial Something; though what is immaterial cannot be
explained by us, unless we could say what is material.

Seeing therefore (as the Wise Hebrew speaks) we do hardly guess aright at
things that are upon Earth, Wisd. 9.16.
and with Labor do find out the things that are before us; is it any wonder
that we cannot search out, and fully know and comprehend the things that are in
Heaven? If we are not able to understand even our own Essence, and how by an
ineffable Union of Spirit with Matter, the whole together becomes one Man, is
it any Wonder, Job 11.7.
that by all our Searching we cannot find out God, that we cannot find out the
Almighty unto Perfection?

And what has been thus briefly said, is, I hope, sufficient to show that a
Divine Revelation cannot reasonably be excepted against or refused, only upon
the Account of some Mysterious and Incomprehensible Doctrines that are therein
contained. And if not, then, I hope, what was said before is enough to satisfy
any considering Man, that the Gospel is a true Divine Revelation.

To Conclude all therefore; having Christ and his Apostles continually
Preaching to us in the Books of the New Testament, Jam. 1.21, 22.
Let us (as the Text says) hear them; Let us Reverence these Sacred Writings as
the Oracles of God, and receive with Meekness the engrafted Word, which is able
to save our Souls. But let us be Doers of the Word, and not Hearers only,
deceiving our own selves. For, (as the Apostle argues, Heb. 11.3, etc.) If the
word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every Transgression and Disobedience
received a just Recompense of Reward; How shall we escape, if we neglect so
great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was
confirmed unto us by them that heard him, God also bearing them witness both
with Signs and Wonders, and with diverse Miracles and Gifts of the Holy Ghost,
according to his own Will?

FINIS.
ERRATA.
IN Sermon IV. and V. page 14. line 23. for more read most; p. 47. l. 12. for
they r. be. l. 27. for there r. them. In Sermon VI. p. 5. l. 3. for him r. ber.

No Reason to desire NEW REVELATIONS;

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, October 7th. 1700.

BEING The Seventh, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, D. D. Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

WHEN I first began to Discourse on these Words; I proposed to speak to these
three Points.

I. To show that the present Standing Revelation of God's Will, contained in
the Books of the Old and New Testament, is abundantly sufficient to persuade
Men to Repentance, if they are not unreasonably blind and obstinate. They have
Moses and the Prophets; (I add, they have also Christ and his Apostles;) let
them hear them.

II. To show that having already such good Grounds of Faith, such full
Directions for Practice, and such strong Motives to Repentance, it is an
unreasonable Request to desire more. Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto
them from the dead, they will repent. And,

III. Lastly, To show that in case God should condescend to gratify Men in
this unreasonable Desire, (working every Day new Miracles before their Eyes, or
sending their deceased Friends to them from the dead, to assure them of a
future State, and to warn them to prepare for it) it is highly probable that
very few or none of those who do not believe, and are not brought to
Repentance, by the Preaching and Standing Revelation of the Gospel, would be
persuaded by this means. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets (nor Christ
and his Apostles) neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

The first of these has been the subject of several former Discourses; the
second I design to speak to at this time; viz.

II. To show that having already such good Grounds of Faith, such full
Directions for Practice, and such strong Motives to Repentance, as I have shown
we have, in that Standing Revelation of God's Will which is contained in the
Holy Scripture, it is an unreasonable Request to desire more. Nay, Father
Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.

And the Unreasonableness of the Request which the Rich Man here makes in the
behalf of his Brethren; viz. That God would be pleased to send one from the
dead to preach to them; or in general, how unreasonable it is for men now
adays to desire, or look for more means of Conversion, or Motives to
Repentance, than God has been pleased to afford us in the Standing Revelation
of the Gospel, will appear, if we consider these following things.

1. That the Principles of Faith and the Motives to Repentance which we have
already, being well grounded upon Matters of Fact, which have been once already
sufficiently proved and attested, it is altogether needless that any fresh or
further Proof should be given of them; and it is what we never think reasonable
to desire in other the like Cases.

That when God requires us to believe or do any thing, and sends a special
Messenger to acquaint us with his Will, he should grant to this Messenger such
Testimonials, as are sufficient to satisfy reasonable Men that he is no
Impostor, but a Teacher sent from God, is indeed a thing that may fairly be
expected. And if God should not do thus, we should be excusable in not
harkening to such a Messenger, because we could not know whether he was a true
or a false Prophet; and God does not require, neither indeed is it reasonable
that we should believe every Pretender to Revelation. And the clearest Proof of
any Man's being sent from God to teach us any thing, being a Power of doing
such Miracles and Mighty Works, as are manifestly above the skill and strength
of a Man to do, it was therefore highly requisite, and what might reasonably be
looked for, that God should grant such a Power as this to all those whom he has
ever inspired with new Light, and Commissioned to make any new Revelation of
his Will to Mankind. And this he has always done.

He gave this Power to Moses in a large measure, because the Matters that Men
were to trust him for, were many, and very considerable.

He gave it also to some of the succeeding Prophets, but in a less measure,
because their Business, for the most part, was only to Interpret, or to press
the Observation of the Law of Moses, which had been sufficiently proved before.

And he gave it in the largest measure of all to our Savior and his Apostles;
because the Revelation made by them was of Truths very mysterious, some of them
above the Reach and Comprehension of Humane Reason; It was also a Revelation,
in a manner wholly new, even to the Jews themselves, and much more to the
Gentiles. And besides, it was a Revelation in many Points, to appearance,
contrary to a former Divine Revelation; inasmuch as it ordered the Abolition of
many things which had been before enjoined by divine Authority; viz. all the
Ritual and Ceremonial Law of Moses. And therefore to gain Credit to their
Testimony, that they were inspired and sent by God to teach such things, it was
very requisite that they should produce more, and more plain and undeniable
Testimonials of their divine Mission, than Moses himself had done. And such
Testimonials they had, such they did produce, working more Miracles, and those
as I may say, more wonderful and Miraculous, than Moses and all the Prophets
together had wrought before.

But when these Testimonials had been once fairly produced, and examined, and
by all reasonable Men allowed to be true and sufficient; and when Christ and
his Apostles had made and published all that Revelation which they were
Commissioned to make; And when to prevent all misunderstandings of it, or
mistakes concerning it, they had committed it all to Writing; and the Men that
lived in those times, and were capable of enquiring into the Truth of it, were
well assured that the Books said to be written by the Apostles and Evangelists,
were indeed theirs, and contained in substance all the same things, and no
other, which they had before declared by word of Mouth, and confirmed by
Miracles; After this, I say, when the Divinity of the Revelation was thus once,
at the first Publishing of it, so fully confirmed, there was no need that it
should be proved any more, and all other Proof thereof would have been
superfluous; because the whole Matter, both Doctrine and Proof, being once
faithfully recorded, and those Records well attested, there could afterward be
no reasonable Cause to call it again in Question. So that the Reason of working
Miracles being then ceased, it was reasonable that the Power of working
Miracles should cease too; at least till such time as God should think fit, to
make some Alteration in, or Addition to his former Revelations; (which we have
good Reason to think he will never do) or 'till he should please to undertake
the Conversion of those Nations to the Christian Faith, to whom the Knowledge
of the former Miracles that had been wrought for its Confirmation could not be
so well communicated by credible History as it is to us.

For (as was hinted before) Credible History is all the Proof and Evidence that
we ever think reasonable to require in other Cases of the like Nature.

As for instance; When a new Law is made concerning any Matter; it is
requisite, according to the Custom of our Country, that it should pass both
Houses of Parliament, and that the King should ratify and confirm it; and that
afterward it should be some way so published and promulged, that all the
Subjects that are then alive should have sufficient Assurance given them that
such a Law is made. But after this Law has been once so passed, and ratified
and promulged, it is passed and ratified and promulged for ever; and no Man is
so unreasonable as to expect that every Parliament that is called afterward,
should read and pass over again all the Laws that have been made before their
Time; or that every King that succeeds to the Throne should afresh ratify and
publish all the Laws that were made by all his Predecessors. But all the Proof
that we ever require of the Authority of any ancient Law, is a true Copy of it,
and a good History or Record of its being made at such a time, by such a King,
confirmed by the Tradition of all the intermediate Ages to our Time, which have
allowed of its Authority, by citing it as a Law of the Land, by Pleading from
it, and by giving Judgment according to it.

And he who will not allow of the same Proof and Evidence of the Authority of
the Christian Institution so many hundred years ago established, but would
needs have new Miracles and new Revelations to confirm the former, is every
whit as unreasonable as that Criminal would be, who being Indicted upon some
Ancient Statute, should refuse to plead to his Indictment, upon Pretense that
he knew not whether there was any such Law or not; it being made (if ever it
was made) long before his Time, and there being none now alive that were
present at the making of it. Show him the Law in the Statute Book; why, how
does he know, he would say, but that the Printers had a mind to put a Cheat upon
the Nation, by Printing a Law of their own making, as a Law made by some of our
ancient Kings; nay show him the Original Record, still he would say, There have
been abundance of Forgeries in the World, and how does he know but that this is
one? The Record he would own perhaps, looks like an Ancient Deed, and has all the
Marks of such Antiquity as it pretends to; but after all, it is possible it may
be, and therefore he cannot be sure it is not a Forgery; and 'till he is
assured of this, he will not plead to an Indictment that is grounded upon it.
But if the King and Parliament that now are, will be pleased to declare that
this is a good Law, and if he himself may be allowed to be by when they shall
declare it; or if at least two or three Witnesses that he can trust shall
testify upon Oath, that they were present when it was passed into a Law, then
he will allow it to be a good Law; and after that, will be content to suffer
the Punishment of it, if he shall ever again be a Transgressor.

Now what Man is there that would think this a reasonable Demand? Or what Judge
or Court would ever allow of such a Plea? And yet, as unreasonable as it is, it
is just the same with theirs, who pretending to be more wise and cautious than
their Neighbors, will not allow of the same sort of Proof (though indeed much
better in its kind) of the Truth of the Christian Religion; but though we have as
Authentic Histories as any are in the World, (such Histories as the greatest
Adversaries of Christianity have not been able to say any thing to invalidate
the Truth of) which declare that Christ and his Apostles taught such and such
Doctrines, and wrought such and such Miracles to confirm the Truth of their
Doctrine, yet will not believe that the Doctrine of Christianity is true and
Divine, unless they may have special Messengers sent to them to declare a-fresh
all the same things which the Apostles once did; and those endued with a Power
of working in their sight and presence the same Miracles over again, that are
said to have been formerly done by Christ and his Apostles, to confirm the
Testimony that they gave.

2. The Unreasonableness of that Request which the Rich Man here makes in the
Behalf of his Brethren, viz. That God would make a new Revelation for their
particular Conversion; or, in general, The Unreasonableness of our now desiring
fresh Revelations; new Miracles or Apparitions of Men from the dead, to confirm
the Truth of those things which are already sufficiently proved to us by the
Standing Revelation of the Gospel, will further appear, if we consider; That to
us who live now in Christian Countries, other Grounds of Faith or stronger
Motives to Repentance than we have already in the standing Revelation of the
Gospel might be inconsistent with the Excellency of Faith, might destroy the
Virtue of Believing, and might be too great a Force and Constraint upon us,
such as would in a manner take away our Liberty of Choice.

For there is no Virtue at all in Believing what we see; there is no Praise or
Thanks at all due for doing what we are driven or forced to do; and for us, who
have already abundantly sufficient Grounds to believe and embrace Christianity,
to have fresh Miracles wrought every day before our own eyes (such Miracles as
we could not possibly doubt the Truth of) to confirm those Doctrines which are
already sufficiently confirmed, would not be to persuade us, but to force us to
be Chistians; so that then the State we are now in would not be, as God
designed it should be, a State of Trial; for the Trial of Wisdom is, when there
are some Reasons on both sides; and he is the Wise Man who in that Case gives
Judgment on that side on which the Reasons are strongest.

But against what I have now said perhaps it may be objected, That the Evidence
which we desire of the Truth of Religion is no more than we are told has been
already given to some Men; particularly to those who lived in our Savior's and
his Apostle's times, and we cannot see why it would be more inconsistent with
the Nature of Faith and Religion now than it was then, or how it would more
destroy our Freedom than it did theirs, or how it would be a greater Force upon
our Choice than it was upon theirs, to have the very same Evidence of the Truth
of the Christian Religion which they had.

But in answer to this, it may be considered; that as they then had some
Evidence of the Truth of the Christian Religion which we have not, so we now
have some Evidence thereof which they had not: They indeed saw with their own
Eyes some of the Miracles that were wrought for the Confirmation of
Christianity; but they had not, as we now have, a credible History or Record of
a very great number of Miracles that were wrought for that purpose. And
therefore (without considering at present which of these Evidences of the Truth
of the Facts upon which our Religion is grounded, is the most convincing) thus
much is plain; That if we, who have already very good Reason to believe them
upon the Credit of a well attested History, were also admitted to be Eye
Witnesses of some fresh Miracles, such as we are told were then wrought, both
these Evidences together would be stronger and more irresistible, than either
of them alone; So that consequently, if we who have already one of these
Evidences, were allowed to have the other also, we should have more Evidence in
the whole than they had, our Choice consequently would not be so free as theirs
was, it would not be so much in the Power of our Wills to be Infidels, as it
was in theirs.

True, perhaps you will say, we should indeed in that Case have more Evidence
than they had, but that is not the thing we desire; all that we could wish for,
is, the very same Evidence that they had; and upon that Condition we could be
well contented to want the Historical Evidence which we have and they had not;
for we cannot but think, that the Evidence that they had is much stronger than
ours, and that they had much greater Reason to be Christians than we have. For
1. The Apostles of Christ who (as it is said) both saw his Miracles, and were
enabled by the Power of the Holy Ghost to do the like themselves, had plainly
greater Reason to believe, than even those had who heard from their mouths the
Testimony that they gave concerning our Lord, and saw the Miracles that were
done by their Hands in Confirmation of their Testimony. And 2. They who saw
with their own Eyes the Miracles that the Apostles wrought had more Reason to
believe, than those had to whom they were only Reported by Eye Witnesses, and
therefore much rather than we have who receive this Report only by a History
that was written many hundred years ago. Now this is all that we desire, viz.
To be upon the same Level with those who lived in the Primitive Times, and to
have as much Reason to be Christians as they had; and we cannot see why this
Request should be thought unreasonable; we do not understand why there would
not be then as much Freedom, and consequently as great Virtue in our Believing
upon such strong Evidence as there was in theirs.

In Answer to this therefore I shall consider distinctly the two Cases
beforementioned, and compare the same with ours.

(1.) I shall consider the Case of the Apostles, who both saw our Lord's
Miracles, and were enabled by the Power of the Holy Ghost to do the like
themselves.

And that they had a surer Ground of Faith than any since, or than any besides
themselves ever had, I believe must be granted; but then it is to be considered
on the other side.

1. That the Apostles were but few in number, only twelve Persons, or if we
should reckon in to the number, as in this respect, equal to the Apostles, all
those that were called by our Savior himself to be his Disciples, and who were
very much, though not so constantly in his Company as the Apostles were, we read
but of seventy of them; or if we add to these all those that were convinced by
our Saviors Miracles that he was the Christ, Luke 10.1
and that owned themselves his Disciples while he was upon Earth, it is probable
that all these together were no more than five hundred; viz. those five hundred
Brethren, 1 Cor. 15.6.
to whom when met together in Galilee, our Lord showed himself alive after his
Passion.

2. It may be also considered; that their Case was extraordinary and peculiar,
and that this Advantage of greater Evidence (as we reckon it) which they had
above all others was no more than was necessary to qualify them for that
special Office which they, and none but they were to be employed in; which was
to bear Witness to the Men of that Generation by word of mouth, and to all
future Ages by their written Testimony, of the Doctrines and Miracles of our
Savior; for no Man is a proper Witness of any matter of Fact, but only he who
was an Eye Witness thereof.

3. It may be further considered, that as they had a more clear and
unexceptionable Evidence of the Truth of Christianity, than any besides ever
had, so they had also a greater Burden laid upon them, than any Christians
since have had; and it might be no more than necessary that the Grounds of
their Faith should be as much surer and stronger than those on which other
Men's Faith is built, as their Duty was larger and more difficult than other
Men's Duty is. For a weaker Foundation is as well able to support a low
Building, placed in a Bottom, and well sheltred from Storms, as a much stronger
is to bear a high built Tower, situated on the top of an Hill, or by the
Seashore, and continually exposed to violent Winds and Tempests.

And this was the Condition of the Apostles in Comparison with ours. We have
indeed several Temptations to resist by the Power of our most holy Faith, but
then they are only such Temptations as are common to Men, and for the
overcoming whereof a Faith grounded only upon good Historical Evidence is
sufficient; for by the Power of such a Faith a great many in all Ages have
happily overcome them; But the Apostles had Difficulties and Temptations of
another sort to contend with; they wrestled not only against Flesh and Blood,
but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness
of this World, against Spiritual Wickedness in high Places. It was their
Business to go in an untrodden Path, to break the Ice and to make plain the way
for all that were to follow; and our Work (very easy in comparison with
theirs) is only to follow in that Way, which they have made plain and smooth,
to that Kingdom of Heaven, into which they could not enter but through manifold
Tribulations.

That the Apostles therefore had stronger and more convincing Proofs of the
Truth of the Christian Religion than we have, and such as they could not so
easily resist, as we may those which are afforded to us, may be granted; and
yet it may be unreasonable for us to desire the same, unless we were to be put
to the same Trials of our Faith that they were; which in a Christian Country
can hardly be.

And indeed as desirous as we seem to be of having such Evidence of the Truth
of our Religion as we are told the Apostles had, I believe there are very few
of us but had rather be contented with less Evidence, than have so much as the
Apostles had with its appendant Burden; which was to travel all the World over,
even into the most rude and barbarous Countries to plant Christianity;
expecting wherever they came Bonds and Afflictions, meeting every where with
the most violent opposition and roughest Usage; encountering every where the
greatest Dangers, and sure at last to be made a bloody Sacrifice to the Malice
and Fury of their Persecutors. How much St. Paul alone endured (and it is like
the Sufferings of the other Apostles were not much less) you may see in 2 Cor.
xi. 23, etc. and yet he was not then come to the end of his Sufferings; In
Labors abundant, in Stripes above measure, in Prisons frequent, in Deaths often;
Of the Jews five times received I forty Stripes save one; thrice was I beaten
with Rods, once was I Stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck, a Night and a Day I
have been in the Deep; in Journeyings often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of
Robbers, in Perils by mine own Countrymen, in Perils by the Heathen, in Perils
in the City, in Perils in the Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Perils among
false Brethren; In Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and
Thirst, in Fastings often, in Cold and Nakedness; Besides those things that are
without, that which comes upon me daily, the Care of all the Churches. And
therefore he might well say, as he does, 1 Cor. iv. 9, etc. I think that God
has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to Death; for we are
made a Spectacle to the World, and to Angels, and to Men; we are Fools for
Christ's sake -- we are weak -- we are despised; even unto this very hour we
both hunger and thirst, and are naked and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling Place; and labor working with our Hands, being reviled -- persecuted
-- defamed; we are made as the Filth of the World, and are the Off-scowring of
all things unto this Day. It was therefore plainly necessary that a Faith which
was to undergo these severe Trials, should be built upon the surest Grounds;
but for us, and to enable us to overcome the World, a Faith that is founded
upon less certain Evidence may be as sufficient.

(2.) The Second Case beforementioned was of those who heard with their own
Ears the Testimony which the Apostles gave concerning our Lord; and saw with
their own Eyes the wonderful Works that they did in Confirmation of their
Testimony. We could wish at least that we had such strong Evidence of the Truth
of the Christian Religion as they had; and if we had, we see not why there
would not be as much Choice, and consequently as much Virtue in our believing
as there was in theirs.

But here it may be considered,

1. That it was the Lot but of very few, even of those that lived in the
Apostles times, except of the Jews that dwelt in Judea, to hear the Apostles
themselves, or to see with their own Eyes the Miracles that they wrought; and
even of these there were but few that had the opportunity of seeing many of
their mighty Works; so that all things considered the Evidence that we have of
the Truth of our Religion, if it be not fully equal to, is very little inferior
to that which they had; for it being (as has been formerly shown) morally
impossible that the Gospel History which is now in our Hands should be forged
or spurious, or corrupted and altered, what can be thought to be wanting in the
Clearness of the Evidence that we have (being given in Writing and not by word
of Mouth) is made up by the Fullness and Abundance of it; we having in the
Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, several Witnesses testifying the same
Miracles, and every one of them Witnessing more Miracles, than any except those
who were constant Attendants upon our Lord, or Companions of the Apostles were
in a Capacity to witness. But,

2. Granting it to be true, that in the Apostle's times those to whom the
Gospel was preached, had generally clearer and stronger Evidence of the Truth
of Christianity than we have now; yet I say, even that Evidence of Sense which
they had was not more apt or like to convince and persuade them, than the Proof
which we now have, though in it self it be less, is to convince and persuade us.

For when Men have already taken up an Opinion, (no matter upon what Grounds)
or when by their Worldly Interest they are engaged to be of such an Opinion, it
cannot be expected that the same Reasons, I mean Reasons of the same strength in
themselves, should be sufficient to persuade them to alter their Opinion, which
would have sufficed to have fixed and established them in their former Notions.

And this is plainly the Difference between those Times and ours; for when the
Revelation of the Gospel was first made by Christ and his Apostles, all, both
Jews and Gentiles, were most strongly prejudiced against it, each of them
having been bred up in a Persuasion that their own way of Worship was right,
add the Jews in particular having had good Assurance that their Law given by
Moses, (to which the Doctrine of Christianity seemed very opposite) had been of
Divine Institution. But however, when a Man has been bred up in the Belief of
any thing, and has believed it a good while, he takes it for granted that he
had reason to believe it, whether be had so or not; so that the Prejudice
against Christianity was as powerful, though not altogether so just, in the
Gentiles, whose Religion was merely fabulous, as in the Jews, whose Law was
indeed of Divine Institution.

And besides, (which was an Impediment alike common both to the Jews and
Gentiles) they could not either of them then embrace and profess the Christian
Religion without apparently hazarding the Loss of all things that were dear to
them in this World. And how very apt a strong Worldly Interest is to blind Men's
Eyes and to bias their Judgments, is what we cannot but daily observe in all
other Cases.

But our Case now is quite otherwise; our Prejudices and our Interest are both
for Christianity; for we sucked it in with our Mothers Milk, and we found it
the established Religion of the Country where we were Born; for which Reasons
we believed it, or at least were strongly inclined to believe it, before we
knew or had beard of any other Reasons; so that to us, who are already inclined
on this side; to us, who to be sure, are not prejudiced against it; to us,
whose Interest leads us to continue in the Religion we were first bred in, such
Proof as we always accept and allow of in other Cases of the like Nature, is
Proof strong enough. And therefore much rather when we have, as indeed we have,
a stronger and more uncontrouled Tradition for the Truth of the Gospel-History,
that of any History in the World besides, we shall be inconsistent with our
selves, if we do not allow it to be sufficient.

So that upon the whole Matter, considering the Prejudices both from Education
and Interest which they lay under who lived in those Times when the Gospel was
first revealed and preached; even their own Eyesight of some of those Miracles
that were then wrought to confirm it, was not more persuasive than is that good
Assurance that we now have by credible and undoubted Records that such Miracles
were then wrought. The Proof they had, considered in it self, was indeed
stronger than ours; but considering our different Circumstances, that Proof was
not more apt or likely to convince them, than that which we have given us is to
convince and persuade us. And if we had now the very same Proof and
Demonstration of the Miracles wrought for the Confirmation of our Christian
Religion, viz. The Evidence of our own Senses; this, which was but sufficient
to them, might to us be such a Proof as would be, in a manner, a Force upon us;
such clear Demonstration meeting with no strong Prejudice or considerable
Interest on the other side, might be enough to overpower us, so that we could
not be Infidels if we would, and then there would be no Virtue in Believing.

3. The Unreasonableness of desiring more Proof of the Truth of Religion than
God has been pleased to afford us by the Standing Revelation of the Gospel, and
particularly of desiring that God would be pleased to work new Miracles for our
particular satisfaction, or for the Conviction of some of our Friends that are
not persuaded by the Gospel-Revelation, will further appear, if we consider the
equal Right that all other Men have to desire the same, and the many
Inconveniences and Absurdities that would follow, in case all Men should be
gratified in this Desire.

For as to the first of these, viz. The equal Right that all other Men have to
desire the same; What Reason can I pretend for my Infidelity, which another Man
my not also as well plead for his? Have not I as good Proof of the Truth of
Religion as my Neighbor has? Have not I as free Recourse to the Holy
Scriptures as he? and the same Evidence of the Truth and Divine Inspiration of
them that he has? And are we not also in all other Respects alike? Being Born
in the same Country, and having had the same Education, and consequently being
probable to have the same Inclinations toward, or the same Prejudices against,
or Aversion to the Christian Faith? And if so, what Reason can I plead for any
extraordinary or peculiar Favor? For is not he God's Creature as well as I?
And has not God the same Tenderness and Regard for him that he has for me,
and consequently the same Desire of his Welfare, that I can suppose he has of
mine? Why then should not God grant him this same Request whether in the Behalf
of himself or his Friend, as well as I can expect he should grant it me? In a
word, Why may not every Man desire the same as well as I? And why should not
God grant it to all that desire it, as well as to any one?

But now if God should do this, see what Inconveniences and Absurdities would
follow thereupon?

One sort of Men would not believe, unless they might see Apparitions; If one
went unto them from the dead, they would repent. And so for their sakes the
World must be filled with Ghosts; the Dead must never be at Rest in their
Graves, and the Souls in Bliss who once rejoiced in the thought of being for
ever got clear out of a troublesome World, must be content (to gratify these
Men) to leave their Place in Abraham's Bosom, and to be deprived of the
Beatifical Vision, and the unspeakable Joys of Heaven, as long and as often as
any of these unreasonable Men are pleased to desire it.

But another sort of Men it may be there are, that would not like this kind of
Proof; A transient Apparition of a Ghost they would look upon perhaps as a thing
too liable to Cheat and Imposture; they would therefore desire some more plain and
sensible and permanent Miracles than this; some such Miracles as those were
which our Savior and his Apostles wrought; and if they could but see such,
they make no doubt but they should be convinced: And so for their sakes, and
for their Conviction, half the Men that are born into the World, must be born
Lame or Blind, that so they may be afterward Cured by Miracle, for the
satisfaction of these Men: And a great many must be possessed with Devils, and
be grievously torn and tortured by them, that these Men may have the Pleasure
of seeing with their own Eyes the Evil Spirits cast forth; and of observing how
much more calm and sober the Men are after the Devil is gone out, than they
were before.

But even these Miracles, it is like, would not satisfy all; but some it may
be, would be apt to suspect that there might be some Trick or Collusion in
them, and that what they saw, was done only by a Confederacy between the
Physician and the Patient, to amuse and deceive the Beholders; and therefore,
what they, it may be, would desire for their particular satisfaction, would be,
to see a dead Man raised to Life again after he had been dead several Days, and
began to stink; and such a Miracle as this they are sure would convince them.
And so for their sakes a great many Men must die two or three times over, or
much oftener; because perhaps every time before they have been dead a Week, some
other Person that was not present before, may have a desire to see with his own
Eyes the same Experiment tried over again.

But even this Miracle also would perhaps be excepted against by some, and
nothing less would satisfy them than the very same Evidence which the Apostles
themselves had, who conversed with our Savior for some years together, and
heard all his wise Discourses, and saw all his Miracles and mighty Works, and
were present with him when he expired on the Cross, and assisted at the laying
his dead Body into the Sepulcher, and within three Days after saw him alive
again, touched and handled him, eat and drank with him; and after they had
thus, several times, by the Space of forty Days, been, by many Infallible
Proofs, assured of the Reality of his Resurrection, saw him visibly taken up in
his Body into Heaven.

They that had this, they grant, had very good Proof and Evidence of the Truth
of the Christian Religion; and had they but been of this happy Number, they are
sure they should not only have believed, but also willingly have suffered as
much as the Apostles themselves did for Bearing their Testimony to the Truth of
those things which they had seen and heard.

And what now must be done for the Satisfaction of these Men? For these have as
much Right to a full Satisfaction as any others; and by the same Reason that
others do expect to be gratified in what they desire, these may do so too.

And therefore in order to their Satisfaction, it is necessary that our Savior
should be Born into the World in every Age of it, or indeed much oftener; and
that in every Country at least, if not in every Town and Village he should live
and Preach and do Miracles, and be Crucified and Rise again; for that these
things have been once done, they cannot, they say, believe only upon the
Testimony of other Men who say they did see them; And therefore by the same
Reason, if they themselves should see them, other Men that should come after,
or live in other Countries, would have as little Cause to believe their
Testimony.

So that for the full satisfaction of all such Doubting Men as these our
Savior must have suffered often since the Beginning of the World, and must
continue to do so very frequently as long as the World shall last, because with
some Men, nothing but seeing is Believing.

But that this should be, is what I presume none besides themselves can think
it reasonable either for Men to ask, or for God to grant.

4. Lastly, The Unreasonableness of desiring any further or additional Proof of
the Truth of Religion, besides what is already afforded us in the Standing
Revelation of the Holy Scripture, will farther appear by considering our own
Interest in being convinced and persuaded of the Truth of Religion by such
Arguments and Motives as are in themselves sufficient for that purpose, although
they be not so very strong and forcible as we could wish they were.

And this Argument I shall handle in the way of Reproof, (and a just and
seasonable Reproof I think it) to such bold and presuming Persons as I have
been now speaking of, who will needs stand upon their Terms with Almighty God,
and will not be persuaded to Believe and Repent, but just by such Reasons and
such Motives as they themselves shall be pleased to require. Tell not us, say
they, of Moses and the Prophets, and of things that were done a great while
ago, we know not when; We'll have fresh Revelations, and new Miracles, or
Messengers from the Dead, or else we will not Believe and Repent; that we are
resolved on.

Very well; Then I say you may, if you will, continue still in your Unbelief
and Impenitence; Nevertheless I would advise you, before you fully determine to
persist in this Resolution, to take a little time to consider seriously, whose
Interest and Concern it is, either that you should Believe, or that you should
not Believe; consider who it is that will be a Gainer or a Sufferer, either by
the One, or by the Other. For let me tell you, if there be really a Heaven and
a Hell, and a Judgment, and a Life to come, it is not your not believing them
that will make them not to be; and if these things are true, it is your own Life
and Soul that is at Stake; and if you are resolved to lose both unless you may
be Saved your own way, you your selves will be the greatest, nay you your
^elves will be the only Sufferers.

And this is a Consideration that affects the Case very much, and makes it very
unreasonable to insist upon having such satisfaction in this Case, as in some
other Cases might, not so very unreasonably, be desired.

For if any Man tells me a Story which it is for his Interest I should believe,
it is his Concern to give me such Assurance of it as I shall require, even
although less than I require would be in all Reason sufficient; And therefore if
I will not believe one or two Witnesses, though it may be unreasonable in me not
to believe them, yet it is his Business, and what it behooves him to do, to
produce, if it be possible, ten or twenty Witnesses, or as many more as I shall
ask for; And if one sort of Proof, though in it self it be never so good, will
not satisfy me, it is his part, and what he ought in Reason to do, if he be
able, to bring other Proofs of it; and so to go on multiplying his Witnesses
and his Proofs, 'till such time as I shall declare my self fully satisfied; And
the Reason is, because the Loss or Inconvenience will be his, and only his, in
Case he cannot convince me of the Truth of his Relation.

But now on the other side, if the Story which he tells me be true, and it be
for my Interest and Advantage only, not at all for his that I should believe it
to be true; If, I say, he will be neither a Gainer nor a Loser, whether I
believe his Report, or whether I do not believe it; then, if he gives me such
Evidence of the Truth of it, as is sufficient to convince a Man of Reason, he
has done enough; he has done all that belonged to him as a Friend to do. And if
after this, I make it my Business to cavil at and to except against his
Evidence, and go about to prescribe to him what sort of Proof he should give me
of the Truth of what he relates; declaring withal that less or other Proof than
just that which I require shall never satisfy me; he may justly reject my Suit
as unreasonable, and condemn me for a Fool, that will not see my own Interest,
nor know when a Friend has done enough.

And this is exactly our Case.

God has sent his Son to us with the Promise of Eternal Life, and has given us
sufficient Assurance of his Divine Mission, and thereby of the Truth of that
Revelation which he made. Now if we will believe this, well, and good, the
Profit will be all our own; we shall save our own Souls alive; But God will
receive no Advantage to himself by our Believing; his perfect Happiness being
not capable of any Increase. But if we will not Believe this Testimony that God
has given of his Son, if we except against his Witnesses, and cavil at his
Evidence, and will not Believe but just upon that very sort of Proof which we
our selves are pleased to pitch upon; why then, we may even take our own
Course, we may be Unbelievers still; but it is we only that shall suffer by our
Unbelief; the Infinite and Essential Happiness of God, being as little capable
of Diminution, as of Advancement. And, as if we Believe and Repent, God will be
Glorified in our Salvation, so, if we will not Believe and Repent, he will be
no less glorified in our Destruction.

Seeing therefore whether you Believe or whether you do not Believe, God will
be neither a Gainer nor a Loser; but the Profit or the Damage will be all your
own; it is plainly your Interest as well as your Duty to give Credit to such
Evidence, as really and in it self is Credible (and such, I hope I have already
shown that to be which is given us of the Truth of Christianity) and not to set
your selves to cavil at it, and to study Exceptions to it; not to take upon you
to prescribe to God Almighty, and boldly to tell him what sort of Evidence he
must give you, or else you will not be satisfied.

Do not then stand in your own Light; do not bring Destruction upon your selves
when you may avoid it; but give Ear to what Moses and the Prophets and Christ
and his Apostles speak to you in the Holy Scriptures; and hear them without
Prejudice, with a Mind ready to hearken to Reason, and resolved to be persuaded
by it; and then what they will say to you will be abundantly sufficient to
satisfy you; for they say as much in this Case (or more) as by the common
Voice and Reason of all Mankind is judged to be sufficient in all other Cases
of the like Nature.

But if you are resolved not to be persuaded so long as there is any
Possibility of Doubt or Scruple left; if you are resolved not to Believe unless
you may have just that very Evidence given you that you your selves are pleased
to require; if you will boldly and arrogantly take upon you to teach God, (as
if he knew it not) what Evidence he ought to give Men of the Truth of Religion;
and are resolved to find or make Exceptions against any other; Look you to it;
For if God has done enough already, he is under no manner of Obligation to do
more; more, did I say? Nay he needed not to have done so much; for it was mere
Grace and Favor in God that he has done so much as he has done; that he has
made us any Promises at all, and given us any Assurance of the Truth of them.
And therefore for what he has done we ought to be thankful, and not to find
fault with him that he has done no more. Such Impudence and Sauciness as this
(for I can call it by no better a Name) from a Man to his Maker, from a mean
inconsiderable Creature, to the Great Lord of Heaven and Earth, is I Am sure no
proper Qualification to merit extraordinary and peculiar Favors. For as our
Savior says to some in a like Case, to some who formerly made the like
unreasonable Demand that you now do, Matthew. 12.39. Mark 8.12.
It is an Evil and Adulterous Generation that seeks after a Sign, and
therefore there shall no Sign be given -- Verily I say unto you, there shall no
Sign be given to this Generation.

Let us then be content with that assurance which God has given us of the Truth
of Religion; for greater than this we shall not have 'till it be too late. Let
us thankfully accept of, and readily comply with this, and not expect or wait
for more; for God will not gratify us in our unreasonable Desire. He is
resolved to deal with us as with Men, to incline, not to determine our Choice;
to persuade, not to force us to be Happy. And having already given us the
Standing Revelation of the Gospel, which is sufficient both to instruct and
convince us, and having proved the truth of this sufficiently to us, he will
not be making new Revelations, or sending more Prophets Divinely inspired, or
working fresh Miracles every Day. He has done enough already to satisfy our
sober Judgments; and he will not do every thing that we can think of to
gratify our wild and extravagant Fancies.

And there is the less Reason that he should do so, because if the Ordinary
Means which he uses for our Conversion do not succeed, the Fault lies wholly in
us; And therefore it is highly probable (so certain that it need not be tried)
that any other means proper for God to use to reclaim us, would be alike
unsuccessful. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the Dead.

This is the last Reply that Abraham makes to the Rich Man's Request; and it
was the third of those three Points which I at first propounded to speak to;
but which I must reserve for the Subject of my next Discourse.

FINIS.
NEW REVELATIONS Would probably be UNSUCCESFUL:

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, November 4th. 1700.

BEING The Eighth, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, D. D. Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.

IN Discoursing on these Words, I have already done these two Things.

I. I have shown that the present Standing Revelation of God's Will in the Holy
Scripture is abundantly sufficient to persuade Men to Repentance, if they are
not unreasonably blind and obstinate. This is intimated in the first Verse of
the Text; They have Moses and the Prophets; (Christ and his Apostles) let them
hear them. And,

II. I have likewise shown, that having already such good Grounds of Faith,
such full Directions for Practice, and such strong Motives to Repentance, it is
unreasonable to desire more. This was what the Rich Man had done at the 27th.
and 28th. Verses; and which he still continues to do in the 2d Verse of the
Text, even after Abraham had told him that the Standing Revelation of God's
Will in the Holy Scripture was sufficient; Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went
unto them from the dead, they will repent.

He says it positively, they will repent; He speaks it as a thing that no Doubt
could be made of. In Answer to which therefore Abraham tells him in the last
Verse of the Text, that that which he thought so very certain, was not so much
as probable: If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And this was the third Point I propounded to speak to in discoursing on these
Words; viz.

III. To show, that in Case God should condescend to gratify Men in this
unreasonable Desire, (working every Day new Miracles before their Eyes, or
sending their deceased Friends to them from the Dead, to assure them of a
Future State, and to warn them to prepare for it) it is highly probable that
very few or none of those who do not believe, and are not brought to Repentance
by the Preaching and Standing Revelation of the Gospel, would be persuaded by
this means. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, (I add, nor Christ and his
Apostles) neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And the Truth of this will, I suppose, sufficiently appear if these following
things be considered. 1. That we cannot have better or stronger Motives to
Obedience and a Holy Life than are already offered in the Holy Scripture to
persuade us. 2. That the Proof and Evidence already given us of the Truth of
Religion is such as cannot be fairly excepted against, and that there is no
Proof thereof that could be offered, but what is liable to Cavils and
unreasonable Exceptions. 3. That if God should gratify all Men in this
Request, the Abundance and Commonness of the Miracles that must then be wrought
would go near to destroy the Efficacy and Persuasiveness thereof. And, Lastly,
That it is Matter of Fact, and Experience that new Miracles have been generally
unsuccessful upon those who have not hearkened to nor been convinced by a
Standing Revelation of God's Will.

1. I say, we cannot possibly have, as to the Matter of them, stronger Motives
to Obedience and a Holy Life, than those which are already offered in the Holy
Scripture to persuade us. For there we have Life and Death set before us,
Blessing and Cursing; on one Hand, the Promise of this Life and of that which
is to come; and on the other Hand all the Evils that we can justly dread, the
wrath of him who is a consuming Fire; who often punishes Transgressors with
remarkable Judgments in this Life, and has threatened to all impenitent Sinners
Eternal Torments in the next.

Now if a new Revelation was to be made, and we our selves were to contrive the
Matter of it, what stronger Motives than these could we think of? Or if one
should come from the dead to Preach to us, if Lazarus were sent on purpose to
persuade us, what could he offer more toward it? Could he give us Assurance of
any thing better or more desirable than of God's Readiness to forgive us upon
our Repentance, and of complete and perfect Happiness both of Body and Soul to
all Eternity if we do Repent? Or could he threaten any thing more like to deter
us from Sin than intolerable and everlasting Misery? If not, to what Purpose
should he be sent to us? Or indeed to what Purpose should there be any new
Revelation at all? For these things are already promised and threatened clearly
enough in the Holy Scripture; Life and Immortality are already fully brought to
Light by the Gospel; And if the Hope of Eternal Life and Happiness, and if the
Dread of Everlasting and Intolerable Torments will not persuade us, nothing
certainly will or can persuade us.

All that, I think, could in any new Revela^^on be added to that Encouragement
that is already given us in Scripture to Virtue and Godliness, or to that
Discouragement that is therein given as to Vice and Wickedness, would be an
Assurance that there should be always as remarkable a Difference made, by the
Providence of God, between good and bad Men, in this World, as we are told in
Scripture there will be, by his righteous Judgment, in that which is to come.
And a good Assurance given us of this by some new Revelation, confirmed by our
own constant Observation that it was always well with the Righteous and ill
with the Wicked in this World, we may think perhaps would do much more toward
the Reformation of Mankind, than only those Promises and Threatenings of future
Happiness or Misery that we meet with in the Scripture have done, or are ever
like to do.

And this indeed might be. But then it is to be considered that a new Revelation
to this Effect would be inconsistent with the Nature of Religion, and would
frustrate the Design of God in sending us into this World, which was to prove
and try us, to see whether we love the Lord with all our Heart; whether we can
believe him for those things which we do not see; and whether we are so wise as
to prefer a greater future Good before a less that is present, a Blessed and
Glorious Immortality after this Life, before the Pleasures of Sin which are but
for a Season. For if the Reward of Virtue and the Punishment of Vice were
always visible and present, there would be no Room left for Faith in God, which
is a firm Belief of the Truth of his Promises and Threatenings, though we do not
see a present Performance of them; Heb. 11.1.
Faith (as the Apostle defines it) is the Substance, or (...). Hom. in Loc.
confident Expectation of things hoped for; the Evidence, or (...).
Conviction of things not seen. And if all the good things both of this Life
and of the next were the certain Portion of Virtue, and all the evil things
that can be suffered both in this World and in the other were the certain and
never-failing Consequence of Sin, there would be no room left for a virtuous
and wise Choice; nay indeed there would be hardly Matter for Choice at all; for
it cannot be conceived that a Creature that has Understanding and a Power of
choosing and refusing, should knowingly choose all Misery rather than all
Happiness. Such a Revelation as this being therefore so evidently inconsistent
with the Nature of Faith and Religion, and with the Design of God in sending us
into this World, cannot be expected. And I say that, bating this, there can be
nothing added to the Matter of the Scripture Revelation. From whence therefore
it plainly follows, that such as are not persuaded by the Gospel Motives to
Repentance, are not capable of being persuaded by any such Motives as,
consistently with the Nature of Faith and Religion and Virtue, could be offered
to them; And it cannot be supposed that any true divine Revelation should ever
offer any Motives to persuade us that are not such.

But it may be said perhaps, that though better or stronger Motives to Repentance
cannot be offered by any new Revelation, than are offered already in Holy
Scripture, yet we might by a new Revelation, have better Assurance given us of
the Truth of the Gospel Motives; and that if we had, it is very like they would
be then more prevailing than they now are.

And this likewise I believe must be granted. But then it is to be considered,
that the Nature of Faith and Religion, and of that State of Trial which we are
now in, requires that there should be a reasonable Boundary set to the
clearness of that Evidence that is given to Men of the Truth of those Motives
whereby they are to be persuaded, as well as to the Force and Strength of the
Motives themselves; Because (as I noted in my last Discourse) such very clear
and strong Evidence of the Truth of Religion as leaves no Room for a
possibility of Doubting, would destroy our Freedom of Choice, and, with it, the
Virtue and Excellency of Believing; for it is not Faith to believe what we see
and feel; and it is no Commendation to a Man to be good and Virtuous, if his
Virtue be not the Fruit of a wise Judgment and a free Choice; which it would
not be if his Judgment was over born by irrefragable Demonstration. And if that
farther Proof and Evidence that is desired of the Truth of Religion, be no
other than such as will leave us a Freedom of Choice and a Possibility of
Doubting, then I say it is not likely it should be more convincing to us than
that which we have already in the Standing Revelation of Holy Scripture. For it
may be considered further in the second Place.

2. That the Proof and Evidence already given us of the Truth of Religion is
such as cannot fairly be excepted against; and that there is no Proof thereof
that could be given us, (unless it be such as is not resistible, and
consequently such as is not fit for God to give us, while we are here in a
State of Trial) but what is liable to foolish Cavils and unreasonable
Exceptions; so that consequently the same Temper and Disposition of Mind, and
the same unwillingness to believe which now disposes Men to Infidelity, and
prompts them to make Exceptions to the present Grounds of the Christian Faith,
would work the same Effect in case other Proof and Evidence were given of the
Truth of it.

I say, first, That the Proof and Evidence already given us of the Truth of the
Christian Religion is such as cannot fairly be excepted against.

To show this has been the Design of several former Discourses. Sermon. III, IV,
V, VI.
And therefore to what has been said I shall only add, that if the Exceptions
that are made to the Evidence already given us of the Truth of the Christian
Religion were fair and reasonable, they would be allowed by Mankind to be so in
other Cases of the like Nature; which yet they are not. Nay if they who make
these Exceptions in the Case of Religion did themselves think that they were
just and reasonable, they ought to make the same in all other Cases, that are
equally liable to the same Exceptions; and in all other such Cases they ought
to live and act as if they had the same Doubts and Scruples upon them, which
they say they have in the Case of Religion; But we see the quite contrary every
Day we live.

For that same Infidel who will not allow of the Testimony which was given to
our Savior by his Apostles, though they gave the best Assurance that it was
possible for Men to give both of their Knowledge of what they testified, and of
their Honesty in relating it, yet readily allows that in all other Cases the
Testimony of two or three Credible Persons should be received, without any
collateral Evidence of the Truth of their Testimony; and thinks it reasonable
that all Disputes and Controversies among Men concerning their Civil Rights,
their Estates, nay and their Lives too, should be thereby determined. And he
that questions whether the Books of the New Testament were written by the
reputed Authors, yet makes no Question but that other Books, of as ancient or
older Date, and of the Authority of which there is not half so much Traditional
Evidence, were written by those Persons to whom they are ascribed; and he would
think those very unreasonable Men, who, when he was arguing any Point of
Learning with them upon the Authority of Virgil, or Cicero, or Seneca, should
refuse to admit his Argument till he had first undeniably and demonstratively
proved that the Aeneids were written by Virgil, or that the other Pieces that
have been allowed in all Ages ever since to have been written by Cicero or
Seneca, were not falsely Fathered upon those Authors. The Infidel who doubts of
the Truth of the Gospel-History, at the same time has no Doubt at all of the
Truth of other Histories, as ancient, and much more possible to be false, and
of the Truth of which there is not the hundredth part of that Evidence that
there is of the Truth of this. And he that pretends to be uncertain whether
there ever was such a Man as Jesus of Nazareth, and whether he said and did the
things Recorded of him by the Evangelists, and whether by the Preaching of his
Apostles he did spread his Spiritual Empire over all the Countries of the
World; (An Empire which is still kept up in most of the Countries over which it
was first extended, and of which there are evident Marks and Memorials still
remaining even in those Countries that have since revolted from it;) He, I say,
that doubts of these things although witnessed by the Writings of those who were
Eyewitnesses thereof, yet makes no Doubt but that there was such a Man as
Alexander the Great, who lived above three Hundred years before, and that he
translated the Empire of the World from Persia to Greece; and he also gives
full Credit to the other things which he finds related of him, by Curtius,
Plutarch and Arrian, although none of these Authors were Eyewitnesses of his
Wars and Greatness, but either Copied what they wrote from former Histories, or
took it up from Report; and although there are perhaps no Remains of that Empire
now left in the World. And if he was but as sure of a good Estate, as that the
History of Alexander's Expedition and Conquests is in the main a true History,
he would not, I believe, give the Hundredth Part of its Value to ascertain his
Title to it.

Those therefore are manifestly unreasonable Exceptions to the Proofs of
Christianity which no Man will allow, which even those that make them in this
Case do not think reasonable to make, in other Cases of the like Nature; so
that it is not at all likely that any Person that is not convinced by these
Proofs, should be convinced if more were given.

For (as I farther noted) there is no Proof that could be given us of the Truth
of the Christian Religion, (unless it be such as is not resistible, and
consequently not fit for God to give us, while we are here in a State of Trial)
but what is liable to foolish Cavils and unreasonable Exceptions.

This I think is so self-Evident, that nothing plainer or more undeniable can
be said to prove it. For though the Demonstration of the Truth of Religion were
as plain as Demonstrations in the Mathematics, yet even these may be cavil'd
at by such as will allow of no Postulata's, nor grant the Truth of the clearest
Axioms. Nay there have been Scepticks in the plainest Matters of Sense, and
some have denied Motion at the same time that their own Tongues were moving to
deny it.

Not that I think the Demonstration of the Truth of Religion is as clear as any
Propostion in Euclid, or as the shining of the Sun at Noon, (for that cannot be,
and I have already given Reasons why, if it might, it should not be so) but it
is as clear as such a Matter is capable to be. And I dare be bold to say that
there is no other Proof of Religion fit to be offered, or reasonably to be
desired, to which a Sceptick might not make as just and plausible Exceptions as
he can to the Standing Proofs of Christianity. For one single Miracle done in
his own Presence would be nothing near so convincing as the many Miracles
wrought by Christ and his Apostles were, of some or other of which there were
more than ten thousand Witnesses; and if he can suppose that so many were
deceived in plain Matters of Sense, he may much rather suppose that he, a
single Man, may be imposed upon. And an Apparition of a deceased Friend would
be a Matter wherein any one Man might be more probably Cheated, or be more
easiy persuaded that he was Cheated, than the Apostles could be in the
Resurrection of our Lord, when he was seen by them very frequently, and
sometimes by a great Company of them met together, by the space of forty Days.
And a single Miracle that is over as soon as done, could not make such a deep
and lasting Impression upon a Man's Mind, as that constant Power of working
Miracles, and especially the Gift of Tongues, which lasted a whole Life, must
needs do upon the Apostles and those that lived in their time, who were either
Partakers of these Gifts themselves, or constant Witnesses thereof in others.

In short, whatever Miracles we can desire may be wrought for our Conviction,
either they must be seen by us with our own Eyes, or else they must be received
by Testimony from others.

And though they should be seen by us with our own Eyes, yet so long as it is
against our Inclination, or inconsistent with that Love which we bear to the
World or to our Sins, to believe that they are true Miracles, we should easily
be apt to fancy that they were only melancholy Delusions, or Tricks put upon
us by Designing Men, which our first Fright or Amazement hindered us from
discovering the fraud of; and so they would probably have no effect at all upon
us longer than till our Fright or Amazement was well worn off.

But if we should only have an Account of them by Testimony from others, they
would be yet less likely to persuade us; because there can be no Testimony
concerning any such Matters of Fact more clear and unexceptionable than that
which we have already of the Truth of our Savior's and his Apostles Miracles;
so that if we believe not this, we should hardlier believe any other Testimony,
because we can scarcely have so good Assurance of any Man's Truth as we have of
the Sincerity and Veracity of all those who are the present Witnesses to our
Religion; and we can hardly be surer that we hear any Man whom we know,
speaking to us, than we are that we hear the Apostles speaking to us in the
Books of the New Testament.

And therefore I think it plainly follows (as I farther noted) that the same
Temper and Disposition of Mind, and the same Unwillingness to believe the
Truths of the Gospel, which now dispose Men to Infidelity, and prompt them to
study and make Exceptions to the Proofs already given us of the Christian
Faith, would work the same Effect if other Proof and Evidence were given of it,
and that Men would then quickly make as good Exceptions to that, as they do now
to these. For from what has been said, I think it is plain that if Men do not
see the Truth when it is placed in so clear a Light as it is in already, the
Reason must be because they wilfully shut their Eyes, or else are so blinded by
a Love of this World, or of their sinful Lusts, that if the Light were ten
times brighter than it is, they would see no more than they do now. And it
would be to as little Purpose, in order to the Conviction of such perverse and
obstinate Men, to add an more or stronger Proofs of the Truth of Religion, as
it would be to light up abundance of Torches to a Man that is quite blind.

For this is indeed the true Cause why Men will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, why they will not believe Christ and his Apostles, testifying the
certainty of a future State and other Truths of Religion; it is not, I say,
because there is any just Exception to their Testimony, but because they do not
like the Matter of it, and so are resolved not to believe. They love their Sins
so well that they can upon no Account be persuaded to part with them, and being
so resolved, it is an easy thing to cavil at any Motives or Arguments that are
urged to persuade them to it; Seeing they will not see, and hearing they will
not hear nor understand; and to Men so obstinately resolved against Conviction,
no Proof can be convincing enough.

And this is the sad effect of Love to Sin; it Viciates the Judgments of Men,
so that they cannot distinguish between things that differ most vastly; it
darkens their Understanding, so that the plainest Proposition or the clearest
Consequence in the World, if it be against the Interest of Sin, seems dark and
obscure to them; and it renders their Minds so averse to Religion, that they
cannot with any Patience so much as hear the Arguments that are offered to prove
it; And be a Reason never so good, it is not to be hoped it should be convincing
to a Man who will not hear it, or who will not allow himself calmly to consider
it.

From all that has been said therefore upon this Head, it plainly appears,
That the proper Cure of Infidelity is not the Addition of more Proof of the
Truth of Religion, but a right Prepaartion and Disposition of Mind to consider
well the Proof thereof that is offered; which is sufficient to convince and
persuade all those that have a Love of Truth, and a Will disposed to Virtue.
The Causes of Infidelity must be first removed, and then the Cure of it will be
easy, by those Means which God has provided and directed us to use, and there
will be no need of his Working Miracles for Men's Conviction; But 'till the
Causes of it are removed, it is hardly to be Cured even by a Miracle.

But it will be said perhaps that though fresh Revelations and new Miracles might
not be sufficient to convince all, they might however convince some; because
there are several Degrees in the Perverseness and Obstinacy of Men; Some indeed
there may be whom no such Proof of Religion as is fit to be given us in this
State of Trial would persuade, whose Case therefore must be given over as
desperate; but then there are others, Acts 26.28.
who (as King Agrippa was) are almost persuaded to be Christians; and when the
Scales are already near even, a small weight put into the lightest will make it
overbalance the other; so that it may reasonably be hoped that some small
Addition to the Proof of Religion (no more than might be made to it without
destroying either our Freedom of Choice or the Excellency of Faith and Virtue)
would prevail with these Half Christians.

And perhaps it might; But God is wiser than we are, and knows better than we
what is fit for him to do toward the Conversion of Men. We ought therefore to
conclude that he does all that is fit to be done, though we do not see but that
he might do more.

But this, it may be, will not be taken for an Answer, but will rather be
thought a way of avoiding a Difficulty too hard to be accounted for. And
therefore I say further, (and it was the third thing which I proposed to be
considered,)

3. That if God should gratify all Men in this Request, working new Miracles
every Day for the Conviction of particular Persons; Sermon VII.
(and, as I have formerly noted, there is no Reason in the World, why any one
Man should be gratified in this Request rather than others, when they have all
equal Reason and equal Right to desire it; should God, I say, gratify all Men
in this Request) the Abundance of the Miracles that must then be wrought, would
be so far from adding to the Proof of Christianity, that if would rather lessen
or weaken that Proof of it which we have already; because Miracles (the
properest Proof of a Public Divine Revelation) would not be then so convincing
as they are now.

For that which most of all affects Men in a Miracle is the Unusualness of it;
because it is such a thing as was never or but rarely before ever seen or heard
of; As the Blind Man that had been Cured by our Savior well observes, Joh. ix.
32. Since the Begin^ing of the World has it not been heard, that any Man has
opened the Eyes of one that was born Blind. Had ^t been a common thing it would
have been no Miracle; I mean it would not have appeared so, it would ^ot have
been thought so by Men. For that which makes Men wonder even at a true Miracle
is not so much because it is such an Operation as they cannot ^ive a fair
account of by Natural Causes; for this ^hey cannot do, (I Am confident I may say
they have not ^et done it) of many of the Works and Productions ^f Nature; But
they therefore conclude such a thing not to be a Natural Operation, because it
is not usual, because it is such a thing as was never before known to be done:
And if the same thing which now, for this Reason, we should account a Miracle
was done every Day, the Virtuosi would presently set themselves to invent, and
would quickly fancy they had found out some Natural Solution of it; And I
believe there are not many Miracles that have been done which they might not
after long Study be able to give as clear and probable an Account of by Natural
Causes, as they have done of Gravity, of Fire, of the Loadstone, of Vision, of
the Production of Vegetables, of the Generation of Animals, and of many other
things which yet are doubtless the Works and Effects of Natural Causes.

So that I say the most probable Consequence of having Miracles so very common
as they must be if they were wrought for the Conviction of particular Men,
would be this, that they would cease to serve for that Purpose for which
Miracles were designed; because being common they would be disregarded, or
would quickly be looked upon to be the Effect of Natural Causes only; There
would not be wanting those that would offer to give an Account how they were
done; and all those would be despised by the Scorners of Religion, as too much
addicted to Superstition; who rather than attribute the greatest Miracle to a
Supernatural Power, would not acquiesce in that Solution (how silly soever)
that was given of it by mere Matter and Motion.

And in particular, I question not but that if it was a common thing for dead
Men, after they had lain in their Graves for some time, to come forth again and
show themselves alive to their Friends, this wonderful Effect would be
attributed by a great many to some Vital Principle in the Body, which only
Slept for a while (as it does in Corn or other Seeds while they are kept dry
and above Ground) but afterward, when the Body was buried a while, was excited
by some Natural Virtue that was in the Earth to exert it self, and so by its
Plastic Power formed the Body into the same shape it was in before.

This I say would in all probability be the Effect that the greatest Miracles
would have in the World, if they were very common; They Would only serve to set the
Philosophers Wits to work to invent new Forms of Matter, and new Laws of Motion
by which to solve them; and any Solution of them, though never so improbable,
though only by Occult Qualities, would serve turn, and be thought better than to
recur to an Almighty Power. The Consequence of which would be, that this which
we desire as an additional Proof of Christianity, would in effect destroy one
of the best Proofs of it that we have already. But,

4. Lastly, If it be supposed that Miracles would still be thought Miracles
notwithstanding their Commonness, yet Abraham might well deliver it as a
General Truth, to which there are none or very few Exceptions; that he who is
not wrought upon by a Standing Revelation of God's Will, would not be persuaded
by an extraordinary Message or a new Miracle; because it is Matter of Fact and
Experience that this last Method has been generally unsuccessful upon those who
have not hearkened to nor been convinced by a Standing Revelation.

For this was the very Case of the Jews in our Savior's time; the Parable was
literally fulfilled in them. For as they would not believe Moses and the
Prophets testifying of our Savior, so neither did they any more believe our
Savior himself when he came down to them from Heaven in the Power of God; And
as they did not believe him while he lived amongst them, and went about
Preaching and doing Miracles, so neither did they believe him a jot more after
he came again to them from the dead. Never were there such Signs and Miracles
wrought for Men's Conviction, and yet never was there such a number of obstinate
Infidels as then. Very few even of those who were Eyewitnesses of our
Savior's Miracles were the better for them, but many were a great deal worse,
wilfully blaspheming that Spirit by which he wrought them, and attributing
those Operations to the Help of the Devil which they were convinced in their
own Judgments were done by the Power of God. The opening the Eyes of the Blind,
Joh. 9.39.11.47.12.10.
did but make those that saw the Miracle more blind than they were before; And
when once a dead Lazarus did come forth out of his Grave and appear to them,
(which was the very thing that the Rich Man here desires in the behalf of his
Brethren, as being in his Judgment the most powerful, and so like to be the
most effectual method to reclaim them; when I say this was done by our Savior
in the presence of a great number, so that the Truth of the Miracle could not
be doubted, and was not denied by any of them) all the Effect that it had upon
those obstinate and incredulous Men, was only that it made them enter presently
(sooner perhaps than otherwise they would have done) into a close Consultation
to put to death both Jesus and Lazarus too.

Some Examples indeed, it must be granted, there are on the other side; For we
are told in Acts xi. 41. of a great number about three thousand that believed
upon the first Preaching of St. Peter, and sight of that great Miracle, the
Gift of Tongues, wherewith the Apostles were endued.

But then it may be considered, that it was not the Miracle that convinced
them, I mean not that alone; for many that were then present, Verse 13.
and heard the Apostles speaking with Tongues, were so far from being persuaded
thereby, that they most falsely blasphemed that, as they had done all our
Savior's Miracles before, attributing the fruit of that most evident Power of
the Holy Ghost to new Wine. And it may be further noted that those who were
persuaded by it, were such as before they saw the Miracle were in a good
Disposition to embrace that pure Religion that is taught in the Gospel, or else
that Miracle would not have persuaded them; for the Persons convinced thereby
were not of the Pharisees or unbelieving Jews that had rejected our Savior
before, Verse 5.
but they were Devout Persons, Jews or Proselytes, who had come at that Feast
of Pentecost, from other Parts of the World to Jerusalem to Worship, and who
had probably never heard of our Savior before more than by uncertain Report;
but being well read in Moses and the Prophets, and giving good heed to them,
were Converted, more by the manifest Accomplishment of all the ancient
Prophecies concerning the Messiah, in the Person of our Savior, than by the
sight of that great Miracle.

This therefore being Matter of Fact and Experience, what has been done and
come to pass already, that new Miracles have been generally unsuccessful upon
such as have not regarded a Standing Revelation of God's Will, we may
reasonably infer that it is highly probable if not certain, that the same
Experiment tried over again would have no better success.

The Sum of all therefore is this; such as are (as St. Luke says they were who
were Converted by the Preaching and Miracles of the Apostles) (...).
Predisposed or fitted for Eternal Life; Acts 13.46.
that is, such as are modest and teachable, who hear without prejudice, and
judge without Partiality, and have no Interest of Sin or the World that stands
in competition with their Desire to obtain everlasting Happiness; such as
enquire out the Truth with the same Indifference that a Traveller does his Way,
who has no Inclination to one Way more than to another, but only desires to be
directed right, and is resolved to take that way which he is persuaded is the
right, though it should not prove so very clean and smooth and pleasant as he
hoped it would; (such, I say, as are of this honest and docible mind) will be
persuaded by a good Reason, especially if it be as good as the Matter is
capable of, though it falls short of Demonstration; and if there be Reason or
appearance of Reason on both sides, they will judge on that side on which the
Reasons seem most weighty; and for the Conviction of such as these, the
Standing Revelation of the Gospel, being so well proved as it is, is abundantly
sufficient; so that such shall not need new Miracles or new Revelations. And on
the other side, such as only do need them, that is such as being of perverse
Minds, and stubborn Wills, and devoted to Sin, will not hearken to Moses and
the Prophets, nor to Christ and his Apostles speaking in the Scripture, would
very probably receive no Benefit from new Miracles or new Revelations. For
nothing will serve to convince those who will not be convinced at all; no
Arguments can be sufficient to persuade a Man to that which he is strongly
prejudiced and fully resolved against; And this being the Case of all those who
do not hear Moses and the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles preaching to
them in the Holy Scripture, or are not persuaded by them, we may well conclude
with Abraham in the Text, that any other means that might be used to reclaim
them would most probably prove as ineffectual as this has been, and that they
would not be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And now having shown that the present Standing Revelation of God's Will in the
Holy Scripture is sufficient to convince and persuade Men; having also shown
that more Proof and Evidence than we have of the Truth of our Religion cannot
reasonably be desired. And having likewise shown that any other Proof or
Evidence thereof would probably be ineffectual upon those who will not hear
Moses and the Prophets and Christ and his Apostles preaching to them in the
Holy Scripture; I have finished all that I proposed to do in discoursing on
these Words.

I shall conclude all with an useful Exhortation; first to Infidels, who will
not by all that has been said be persuaded to admit this divine Revelation; and
secondly to Christians who do receive it.

1. To you who are yet Infidels, (if there are any such here, as I hope there
are not; or if these Discourses shall happen to fall into the Hands of any
such) I beg leave to address my self in a few words.

And I would desire you, in the first Place, to prepare and dispose your Minds
to hear gravely and without prejudice the Reasons that are offered to prove the
Truth of Christianity, by considering seriously the great Importance of
Religion, if it be true. And if you do but consider this, you will quickly see
that it is well worth your while to be at some pains to satisfy your selves
fully whether Religion be true or not. For if Religion be true (and you cannot
be sure it is not, till you have well examined the Grounds and Proofs of it)
you have a great Concern at stake; and in a Matter of such Moment it becomes
not a Wise Man to be determined by a Jest or a Quibble. And if you seriously
consider the great Importance of Religion, you will likewise readily see, that
of the two you had much better be mistaken in believing the Truth of Religion,
though it be false, than in disbelieving it, if indeed it be true; so that
consequently if it can ever be reasonable for a Wise Man to be under a
Prejudice, it would be most reasonable that you should be prejudiced on the
side of Religion. You will also then see, that if in any Case it be Wisdom to
be over-credulous, that is, to believe beyond the strength of the Evidence, it
is so in the Case of Religion; because the greatest Damage you can suffer by
Over-credulity, in case Religion be all a Cheat, is infinitely less than will
be the Consequence of unreasonable Infidelity, if indeed Religion be true.

Next, I would desire you to examine your selves seriously, whether in your
Enquiries into the Grounds and Reasons of Religion, you have not hitherto had
some Bias upon your Minds; whether at the same time that you have set your
selves to consider of the Proofs of the Christian Religion, you have not
secretly wished that you might not find them satisfactory to your Reason. And
if so, I desire you to examine further, what was the Cause of this; whether it
was not some worldly Pleasure or Profit which you foresaw you should be
debarred from in case you should happen to be convinced of the Truth of the
Christian Religion. And if it was, I hope that some serious Consideration of
the great Importance of Religion, which I before advised in order to the
removing unreasonable Prejudices, will also suffice to satisfy you how
unworthy of any Love or Regard any Worldly Pleasure or Profit is in Comparision
with that Eternal Happiness which is promised in the Gospel; so that
consequently when you are enquiring into the Grounds and Reasons of our Hope of
that Eternal Life, all other Thoughts ought to be laid aside, and you ought to
have no Eye at all to any thing else; because to a Man who must be unspeakably
happy or miserable to all Eternity (which is the Case of all of us, if indeed
Re^igion be true) it is not a matter worth thinking of, whether his Worldly
State and Condition will be rendered better or worse by his endeavoring to
secure to himself a blessed Portion in the other World.

And if by these Considerations your Minds shall be ^^eed from Prejudices and
from all Bias of Worldly In^erest, I would, after this, desire you to take a
fresh unto your Consideration what has been offered in the ^oregoing Discourses
for the Proof of the Christian Re^^gion, and the much more that has been better
said by ^^thers upon the same Argument; for there can be no Hurt in considering
these things over and over again, although after all, you should remain as
unsatisfied as you are now. But I cannot but hope, I cannot but think that if you
do consider without Prejudice or Partiality the Reasons that have been offered
to prove the Truth of Christianity, you must needs be convinced thereby.

However, if the Reasons that are or may be offered for the Proof of it should
not be sufficient perfectly to cure your Infidelity and to make you become
Zealous Christians; they may be, and they certainly are, sufficient to satisfy
you that the Christians have some Reason for their Belief; even the same at
least (if not better) that you your selves are swayed by in all other Cases;
and consequently that they are not such very easy and credulous Fools as you
perhaps have hitherto taken them to be. I Am confident you must grant that if
the Reasons of our Religion are not demonstrative, they are at least probable;
and that if our Religion be not true, it has at least a fair show and
Appearance of Truth.

And if you will but only allow this, it is then a Reasonable Request, and what
I would next desire of you, not to make a Boast of your Unbelief; not to
ridicule our holy Religion; not to make it your Business to proselyte Men to
Atheism and Infidelity.

1. Not to make a Boast of your Unbelief; For if indeed you have no Religion,
yet what Interest can you have in telling the World so? Nay is there any thing
that you could do, more to your own Prejudice? For though you are not under the
Direction and Influence of any Religious Principles, yet so long as you appear
to have some Religion you will be employed and trusted as other Men are; Men
will believe you to be Honest 'till they shall find to the contrary; and in the
mean time you will have an Opportunity of raising your selves to Wealth and
Honor. But when once the World shall come to know that you are Men of no
Principles, that you are under no Restraints of Conscience, that you will do
whatever you can safely do for your own Advantage; that is, whatever you can do
without danger of a Prison, a Pillory or a Gibbet; (and they will have Reason
to think all this of you, when you your selves shall tell them that you are of
no Religion;) Who, do you think, will employ you? Who, do you think, will trust
you? So that the only way you will then have to make your Fortunes, will be by
open Force and Violence; and in that you will meet with such opposition from
all the World, as will quickly work your Ruin.

But you think, it may be, that it is a mean and ungenerous thing to disown your
Principles, or rather your no Principles; that it is beneath a Man to seem to
be what he is not; and to put on a face of Religion when he has none, how
profitable soever his Hypocrisy might be to him.

Very well; Then you may (if you are willing to suffer the Inconvenience of it)
freely own your selves to be of no Religion; but at the same time you should do
well to consider that the greatest part of the World is against you; that not
only the Ignorant and Illiterate, but the Wisest, the Gravest, the most Learned
and the most Noble Persons have generally been Men of Religion; or at least,
(which is all we can judge by) have outwardly professed themselves persuaded of
the Truth of it, and have expressed the greatest Zeal and Concern for it. And
therefore --

2. Though you do believe nothing of it your selves, and scorn to conceal your
Unbelief, you may however be civil to our Religion; for it is but good Manners
to treat with some Respect that which those with whom you Converse account
Sacred. Besides, whether Religion be true or false, the Subject of it is grave,
and therefore ought to be handled with a decent Reverence. Do not then show
such ill Breeding as to make that the Subject of your Sport and Raillery, which
all besides your selves account the most serious thing in the World. Be not
guilty of so much Indecency as to discourse of any Matter in a manner so
unsuitable to the Nature of it. But if you will needs be attacking our
Religion, compose your selves first to Gravity and Seriousness; and let it be
seen by your way of Treating us, that your Design is manly and generous, only
to undeceive and disabuse us, not to make Sport with us. Isa. 41.21.
Produce your Cause (as the Prophet speaks) and bring forth your strong
Reasons; by them it may be, if you propound them seriously, you may convince us
that we are in a mistake; but we are now in too grave an Humor to be wrought
upon by a Jest; and how strong soever your Objections against Religion are, by
a light and trifling way (of expressing them, you will make them lose all their
Force. But indeed --

3. To what purpose is it for you to make it your Business, any ways, or by any
Arguments, to endeavor to proselyte Men to Atheism and Infidelity.

For whether our Religion be true or false, it is better for you, as well as
for all the World besides, that it should be generally believed; and that Men
should think themselves obliged to live according to the Rules and Precepts of
it. You cannot, surely, be so unacquainted with the World, if you have lived any
time in it, or read any thing of History, but that you must needs know that
before the Principles of Atheism and Deism prevailed so much as they have done
of late Years, there was a great deal more Truth and Justice and Honesty and
fair Dealing in the World than there is now. So that if you should succeed in
your Endeavor, if you should be able either to reason or to laugh Religion
quite out of the World, the most probable, nay the most certain Consequence of
it would be, that when the Godly Man ceased, Ps. 12.1, 2.
the faithful would also fail from among the Children of Men; that then they
would speak Vanity every one with his Neighbor, with flattering Lips and with
a double Heart would they speak; That then Strength would be the Law of
Justice, Wisd. 2.11.
and that which is feeble would be found nothing worth.

If therefore you have (as you think perhaps you have) found out the Cheat of
Religion; it is your best Prudence, however, to keep your Discovery to your
selves. Delight your selves as much as you will with the Contemplation of your
own Happiness above other Men, in that you are now freed from the Terrors of
Conscience and the Fears of another World, by means of that notable Discovery
which you have made of the Vanity of Religion; please your selves as much as
you will with thinking that are not now as others are, tied to speak truth when
it is to your disadvantage, to suffer any thing in this World for Conscience
sake, or to be just and honest in your Dealings, when you can get considerably
by Fraud and Oppression, and can order the Matter so secretly as to safe from
Discovery, and consequently from all Shame and Punishment from Men: But be the
Advantage which you have gained to your selves by discovering the Cheat of
Religion never so great, yet the greater it is, and the greater you think it,
so much the more cautious you ought to be not to make known to others what you
have so happily discovered; for when once others shall come to know as much as
you think you do, viz. That all Religion is a Cheat, all your Advantage above
them will cease; they will then be all upon the same Terms with you; they will
then be all as much at Liberty to defraud, oppress or otherwise injure you, as
you are now to defraud oppress or injure them. You ought not therefore in
Prudence, to try to convince them of their Mistake, though you were sure it was a
Mistake; for why should you make it your Business to cut in sunder those Cords
of Religion, by which they are now tied up from doing you mischief?

In a word; either Religion is true and well grounded, or it is not: and which
soever it be, it is better both for them that do believe the Truth of it, and
for you also, that they should continue in the Belief of it; why then should
you be at Pains only to do mischief?

For put Case, first, that Religion is vain and groundless, it must be
confessed however that it is of some present Advantage to them that do believe
it; because it serves to bear them up under the unavoidable Pains and Troubles
and Misery of this Mortal Life with the comfortable Hope of a blessed
Immortality; and it will be no Disadvantage to them hereafter; for when they
are dead, if indeed there be no Life after this, they will be as if they had
never been, they will not be then in a Capacity of grieving for their
Disappointment. And it is also for your present Advantage, that they that are
mistaken in believing the Truth of Religion, should continue in their Mistake;
because it makes them better to you in every Relation than they would otherwise
be, more Just and Merciful Governors, more Loyal and Obedient Subjects, more
Loving Parents, more Dutiful Children, more Gentle Masters, more Faithful
Servants, and more Just, Honest and Loving Neighbors; why then should you be
at any Pains to Cure that Mistake (if it be a Mistake) which does them no harm,
but rather good; and which is likewise so profitable for you? Especially when
you cannot be so vain as to expect to merit Heaven (if indeed there be no
Heaven) by your Zeal for the Truth of Atheism.

But if indeed Religion be true; (and you cannot be sure it is not, how
deficient soever you may think our Proofs of it are) as I shall not need to say
that it will be better for them that believe it, that they should persist in
their Belief of it; so I shall not need to say much to show that it will, in
the Event, be better for you, that you should not endeavor to pervert them;
for, certainly, if there be a Hell, they will be condemned to the hottest place
in it, who not only withdrew themselves from their Subjection to Almighty God,
and would not suffer him to reign over them; but made it also their Business to
corrupt others, to form a Party against Heaven, and to raise an Universal
Rebellion against God.

These things, and more to the like Purpose I would say to the Atheists, if I
thought they were here to hear me. And I should not be without Hope, that
although what was said before in the foregoing Discourses was not sufficient to
cure their Infidelity, what has been now said might serve to convince them that
it is the wisest Course to keep their Infidelity to themselves; that how little
soever they believe of the the Truth of Religion, it is not Prudence to tell
the World that they are Men of no Principles, and consequently not fit to be
employed or trusted; that it is not good Manners to make a Jest of Serious and
Sacred things, and to affront the common Reason and Judgment of Mankind; and
that it is not for their Interest to endeavor to bring other Men over to their
side, because if none had more Religion than themselves, they could not be near
so safe and secure in their Rights and Possessions, and in their Lives (the
only things they value) as they now are.

But I do not think there are any here present concerned in this Part of my
Discourse, and therefore shall lengthen it no further. Heb. 6.9.
I am persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation; For
your Presence here, in the House of God, and in the Assembly of Christians,
makes it reasonable to believe, that you are already convinced, not only of the
Being and Providence of God, but likewise of the Truth of the Christian
Religion and of the Divine Inspiration and Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

2. To you therefore who are Christians I shall now turn my Discourse. Heb.
13.22.
And I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation; it is only this.

Since you have Moses and the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles, and
believe that they are Messengers to you from God to instruct you in his Will;
receive the Truth and the Law at their Mouths; mind what they say, and be
careful to follow their Directions in all things.

For even we who have the Scriptures, the lively Oracles of God, may perish for
want of Knowledge as well as they that have them not, unless we make that Use
of them which they were given for; unless we are diligent in reading them, and
careful to practice what they teach. For the Rich Man spoken of in this Parable
had the Scriptures, but his mere having them did not keep him from Hell. And
his five surviving Brethren had likewise the Scriptures, and yet were then in a
fair way of following their Brother to that Place of Torment. They had Moses
and the Prophets but they did not hear them.

And this also may be our Case, who have not only these, but also Christ and
his Apostles Preaching to us; if we do not hear them; for what Advantage can it
be to us to have good Instructors, if we will not mind what they say; if we
stop our ears to all their Counsels and Reproofs? No Man was ever made a
Scholar only by having a good Library in his Possession: No Man ever learnt any
Art or Science, though it was never so well taught in any Book, only by keeping
the Book in his Chamber, or carrying it about in his Pocket. And as little
shall we be the wiser only by having the Holy Scriptures, though (as the Apostle
says) they are able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
if we do not read and study them with an honest Design to furnish our selves
from thence with a stock of useful Knowledge, and with a firm Resolution to lead
our Lives according to the Directions which they give us.

Nay so far shall be from receiving any Advantage only by our having the Holy
Scriptures given us, and free Liberty allowed us to look into them, (a
Privilege we of this Nation have above most of our Neighbors) that if we do
not read and study them, it will be much the worse for us; our Condemnation
will be the greater, and our Destruction so much the more certain. For the Case
of those who offend through Ignorance, when their Ignorance is unaffected, is
very pitiable; and though we cannot certainly say how God will deal with those who
had no clear Revelation of his Will made to them; this we may be sure of, that
God, who is a merciful God, will deal mercifully with them. John 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, says our Savior, they had not had
Sin. But the Case will be quite otherwise with those, Luke 12.47.
who knew their Master's will and did not do it; They, as our Savior says,
shall be beaten with many Stripes. And it will be all one if they did not know
it, if their Ignorance of it was occasioned by their own fault, in neglecting
those Means of Knowledge which God has afforded them; And much rather, if their
ignorance of their Duty was affected and chosen, that they might Sin with less
disturbance of Mind; for our Savior's Judgment in this Case is very plain and
(and it is his Judgment by which we must stand or fall to all Eternity) Joh.
iii. 19. This is the Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men
loved Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were Evil.

Having therefore Moses and the Prophets, and also Christ and his Apostles,
continually Preaching to us in the Books of Holy Scripture, let us hear them;
This is both our Duty, and our Interest.

And that our study of the Scripture may be with good success, and we may
thereby be thoroughly furnished unto all good Work; Let us Pray as we are
taught by our Church in a most excellent Collect suited to the Subject I have
been Discoursing of.

Collect for 2d. Sunday in Advent.
Blessed Lord, who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
Learning: Grant that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and
inwardly digest them, that by Patience and Comfort of thy Holy Word we may
embrace and ever hold (...) ^he blessed Hope of everlasting Life which thou
have given us (...) ^ur Jesus Christ. Amen.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 55. line 10. for some, read same.


