RULES For ASSIZING of BREAD, viz. By TROY-Weight, or STERLING. AND By
AVOIRDUPOIDS Weights. TOGETHER With the Rule of Coequality of both WEIGHTS: AND
The Assize by a Standard-Weight FOR WHITE, WHEATEN, and HOUSEHOLD. LOAVES,
Assized by A Certain Price, Rising, and Lowering, as the Price of WHEAT Rises,
and Falls, in the Market.

All Three Calculated exactly according to the Statute Assiza Panis 51. H. 3.
now in force in IRELAND.

DUBLIN: Printed by Joseph Ray in Skinner-Row, and are to be Sold at his Shop,
over against the Tholsel, 1699.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE LORD MAYOR, RECORDER, ALDERMEN, SHERIFFS, Commons
and Citizens, OF THE CITY of DUBLIN.
May it Please Your Lordship and Worships,
THese Three Books of Assize, most humbly crave to be admitted to the Freedom
of this Honorable City. Their Design is not to Intrude on any Corporation, but
rather to be Admitted among them all, as a help to each Member. First, To the
Majestrates, to ease them of the great trouble of Calculating every Assize, and
Regulate the Weight of Bread, so that every one (but especially the Poor and
the Soldier) may have their full Weight for their Penny: According to such
plenty, as GOD will be pleased to afford. Secondly, To the Bakers, that they
may not mistake in the Weight they ought to give, and so prevent the Seizure of
their Bread; and the Punishments which follows. Thirdly, To all other Freemen,
that they may be Judges themselves whether they get full Weight or not: But
particularly to the Grand-Juries, who are the proper Judges between the Bakers,
and the poor Prisoners; unto whom all Bread under Assize do justly belong.

The Premises considered, and for as much as they will without doubt be useful
to all Citizens.

May it please your Honors to grant this Humble Request, and unto me the
Liberty of Subscribing my self, as in Reallity I am

Your Lordship, And Worships, Most Humble, And Obedient Servant. G. Blac^kall.

To the Impartial Reader,
WHEN I published my Rule of Assize by Troy weight, I thought it would have
prevented the former Complaints made by the Bakers against the Magistrates of
this City, and that I should escape in my time their usual Accusations, of not
being assized as the Statute directs: But I found my self very much mistaken;
for on the contrary, in a little time after they charged me, (both before
Government and Council, and before the Parliament,) of having refused to
conform to some Order of Council, and of having Assized them contrary to it,
and at such Rates and Prices, as they could not live by. Particularly by their
Maslin-Bread, which was never assized in Ireland, before the time of my
Magistracy; and insisted positively, that by the Statute, they ought to be
Assized by the second highest price of Wheat, and not by the MIDDLE price as I
had Assized them by.

All these Charges I answered, and at a public hearing in Council their
Petition was dismissed, and afterward rejected by the Commitee of the Honorable
House of Commons, after an exact Examination of the Statute of Assize, and of
all my proceedings in assizing them; and my Rules of Assize were found so
exactly like those of the Statute, that I was desired to print them again, and
to add to it, the Assize by Avoir-dupoids, and by a Standard weight for Bread,
assizable by a certain price, which I have accordingly joined here together.

But notwithstanding these public Determinations, they have since persisted in
the same Assertion, having an implicit belief for a certain Bakers Book, who
pretends to have found out in the Statute the Word Second Price in stead of
MIDDLE Price. Therefore I think it necessary to insert here the Statute it
self, that every one may judge of their gross mistake.

Statute Assisa Panis 51. H. 3. Anno Dom. 1266.
THE King, to all to whom these presents shall come, greeting. We have seen
certain Ordinances of the Assise of Bread and Ale, and of the making of Money
and Measures, made in the times of our Progenitors, sometimes Kings of England,
in these Words: When a quarter of Wheat is sold for 12 pence then (1)
Wastel-Bread of a Farthing shall weigh 6 l. 16 s. (2) But Bread cocket of a
Farthing of the same Corn and Bultel shall weigh more then the Wastel by 2 s.
(3) And cocket Bread made of Corn of lower price, shall weigh more then the
Wastel by 5 s. (4) Bread made into a Simne^ shall weigh 2 s. less then Wastel.
(5) Bread made of the whole Wheat, shall weigh a Cocket and an half, so that a
Cocket shall weigh more then a Wastel by 5 s. (6) Bread of Treet shall weigh 2
Wastels. (7) And Bread of common Wheat shall weigh two great Cockets.

And it is to be known, that when a Baker in every quarter of Wheat, (as it is
proved by the Kings Bakers,) may gain 4 d. and the Bran, and two Loaves for
advantage; For three Servants, 1 d. ob. For two lads, ob. In Salt, ob. For
kneadind, ob. For Candle, q. For Wood, 2 d. For his bultel, ob.

The Assise of Bread (as it is contained in a writing of the Marshalsey of our
Lord the King delivered unto them,) may be holden according to the price of
Wheat, that is to say, as well Wastel, as other Bread of the better, second and
third sort, shall be weighed as is aforesaid by the MIDDLE price of Wheat, and
the Assize or weight of Bread shall not be changed, but by six pence increasing
or decreasing in the Sale of a Quarter.

By the consent of the whole Realm of England, the Measure of our Lord the King
was made, That is to say, that an English Penny, called a Sterling, round and
without any clipping, shall weigh 32 Wheat Corns in the midst of the Ear; and
20 d. do make an Ounce; and 12 Ounces one Pound; and 8 Pound do make a Gallon
of Wine; and 8 Gallons of Wine do make a London-Bushel, which is the 8th. part
of a Quarter.

Forasmuch as in our Parliament holden at Westminster, in the first Year of our
Reign, we have granted that all good Statutes and Ordinances made in the times
of our Progenitors aforesaid, and not revoked, shall be still held, we have
caused, at the request of the Bakers of our Town of Coventry, that the
Ordinances aforesaid, by tenor of these presents shall be examplified.

This Statute is the only in force in Ireland for the exact Assize of Breads
and its Rules are so well disgested, that it would be very difficult, to find a
better or easier Method:

There is another Statute ordering that the price of Bread and Ale shall be
according to the price of Corn.

And also the Statute of the Pillory and Tumbrell, for the punishing of Bakers
and Brewers, which authorizes Grand Juries to inquire, in these following
Words: After how, the Bakers Bread in the Court do agree, that it is to wit,
Wastel and other Bread, after Wheat of the best, or of the second, or of the
third price. Also upon how much increase or decrease in the price of Wheat, the
Assize and weight of Bakers Bread ought to change. 51 1 H. 3.

There is not a Word here of Assizing by the second price, but by the price of
all the Wheat, and as the Magestrates should find lawful after Inquiry made as
the Statute Assisa Panis do direct.

There were Ordinances made before, and confirmed by Henry the Third, Edward
the First, or Edward the Second, in these Words: The Assise of Bread shall be
kept according as it is contained in the writting of the Marshalsey of our
Sovereign Lord the King; after the Sale of Wheat. That is to wit, the better,
the worse, and the worst, as well Wastel-Bread as other, of what sort soever
they be, shall be weighed according as it is said of the Sale of the MEANER
Wheat.

This Word MEANER, is far from that of second price of the best Corn, which the
Bakers would be assized by, and signifies rather, the least sort but one, then
the second best.

Sergeant Rastal in his Abridgment of the Statute explaines it thus: The Assize
of Bread be holden according to the Sale of Wheat, by the Sale of the MIDDLE
Corn.

And Edmund Wingate in his new Abridgment of The said Statute Paragraph VI. The
Assize of Bread shall be rated according to the MIDDLE price of Wheat.

I shall not paraphrase any further on the Statute, it explains it self clearly
enough. And if the Bakers will be assized by the second price, they must choose
those places to bake in, where such an Assize is established by Custom, or
otherwise. But the Magistrates of Dublin have no other Rule but this Statute,
and ought to conform to it, according to their Oath, as Clerks of the Markets.

The Corporation of Bakers taking Advice on this Point, and finding themselves
mistaken in the Word SECOND and MIDDLE, took hold of the several names of Bread
mentioned in the Statute, and White, Wheaten, and Household, being not in the
Statute, they thought it enough to maintain, that the Magestrate could not
assize those three sorts of Bread by the Statute, upon which they got under the
hand of their Council his Opinion in that point of Law, advising them, to bake
under Assize, and when, and as often, as the Magistrate should take their Bread
for want of weight, to Replevy the same, and by a Scire Facias bring their
Cause to a Trial.

I shall not enter into dispute about Points of Law, I leave that to the
Gentlemen at the Bar. I shall only mark, that by such Means the Citizens would
be very much wronged, as the beginning of it proved sufficiently: For as soon
as they agreed in their Hall to follow that course, they shut up their Shops,
and sold their light Bread in their Backhouses, refused to take any Assize from
the Magistrate, sent no Bread to Market, and helped no Body, but such as they
pleased, and at what Rate they thought fit. Now if the Magistrate had gone to
their several Houses, and seized all their light Bread, he would have brought
on him more Suits at Law in the Year of his Magistracy, then there are Hours in
the whole Year.

But the Government of the City thought fit to take another course; They
considered, that it was but an old Trick, acted heretefore in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, by the Bakers of Dublin: Therefore they followed the Example of their
former Government, who passed an Act of Assembly 36 Elizabethae. That whereas
the Country-Bakers gave more weight, then the City-Bakers, and yet the latter
used their own Wills, as not to bake but at their own will and pleasure,
pretending they could not live, if they should follow the Assize given by
Master Mayor. It was concluded and agreed, That from thenceforth, all such of
the Country-Bakers, and others that should come in Market-Days with Bread to be
sold, should have free Liberty to sell the same, without Let or Interruption
of any whatsoever.

This Method had the same effect in this juncture, as it had then: For although
the Foreigners, and Country-Bakers, had been scattered, (as I shall prove in
the Objection against a Trial,) yet the encouragement given them by
Proclamation, put the Freemen upon thinking: And finding that some of the
former had begun to bake, who found themselves considerable Gainers, they
presently opened their own Shops again, and fell a baking good, wholesome, and
assizable Bread, instead of the light glutinous Bread they had baked incognito,
some Days before, and without their Mark, contrary to the Statute. From which
we may easily infer, that they are sufficient Gainers by their Trades, and
would have more Money in their Coffers, had not they spent so much as they
have, in their continual Prosecutions against the Magistrates.

As to their pretended Point of Law concerning the Names of Bread mentioned in
the Statutes, I believe, they will not insist any longer on it, when they are
once satisfied, that the Magistrate by the Common Law has Power to assize Bread
according to the value of the Corn, and that the Statute Law confirms on him
the same Authority, as appears by the several Statutes concerning the Assize of
Bread; and that besides the same Bread we now call White, Wheaten, and
Household, are included in the Statute. I shall take them in Order, as they are
in the Statute:

I. Wastel Bread, in Latin, Libum, which signifies a Cake; some Interpret it to
be a Cake made with Honey, a Cake made with Meal and Oil; and some others, a
Wafe^; But Edmund Wingate in his Abridgment of the Statutes, calls it a sort of
small Bread, out of use, and left out of Assize in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, as
also Cocket Bread made of the same fine Flower, and Bultel.

II. Cocket Bread, called in Latin Panis Secundarius, is the Bread, made of
Corn or Flower of less price than Wastel, which ought to weigh more then the
Wastel by Five Shillings, viz. Seven Pounds one Shilling, which is the Rule of
all the Assizes that ever were extant in England: and is called white assizable
Bread, in all the English Ordinances of Edward the Second, Henry the Seventh,
Henry the Eighth, and Queen Elizabeth.

And in the Records of Guild Hall, London, Anno 1311, there is a Duplicate of a
Trial made in Edward the Second's time of 3 Quarters of Wheat; one of the best
sort, one of the second, and one of the last, into White, Wheaten, and
Houshhold Bread.

In the 12th Year of Henry the Seventh, another Trial was made after the same
manner.

In the 8th Year of King Henry the Eighth, another Trial was also made of 3
Quarters of Wheat, divided into four parts; one in White Bread, two in Wheaten,
and one in Household Bread; and this was when Sir William Buttler was Mayor of
London, and entered in Guild Hall, in the Journal, folio 238.

In the 34th Year of Queen Elizabeth, Anno 1592, a like Trial was also made,
and an Order confirming the former Orders, appointing three sorts of Bread only
to be made, viz. White, Wheaten, and Household: And therefore I conclude, that
Cocket Bread, and White Bread is both of the same kind under two different
Names.

III. Simnel, called by the Latins Collyra, and by Plaut. Panis genus in
cineribus cocti; by other a Cracknel, a Sop or Sippet; and by the Statute it
self, Bread twice baked; was a sort of small Cakes made in those Days: And we
had some very lately made in Dublin, in form of a Cup or small Porringer, of a
hard and brickle Quality; which answers very exactly the Word Cracknet, and
very fit for a Sop or Sippet, when filled with good Ale, etc. and those who
sold it in the Streets, called it Simnel^ Cakes. This was, and is also out of
Assize.

IV. Bread made of the whole Wheat. There is no need of further explanation;
for every Body knows that any Bread made of the whole Wheat, is neither White
nor Brown, but participates of both; and must of necessity be Wheaten, from the
two Extremes, White and Brown. And the Words of the Statute marks what it is;
That it shall weigh, (says the Statute,) a Cocket and a half, that is, one
moiety of the White; and being a Cocket, one moiety of the Brown or Household,
which by the Statute is to weigh two Cockets, and both three Cockets, the
moiety thereof is one and a half, the Wheaten participating of both in that
proportion, or else Bread made of all the sorts of Wheat mixed together, which
imports the same thing.

V. Bread of Treet, called in Latin Mantissa, Auctarium, Words of Surplusage,
Advantage, overplus, more then weight, over and above, and by Plaut. Throw so
much into the Bargain. And the English Dictionary renders it, Bread of
Advantage, or over Measure, Advantage, or over weight. The Statute explains it
in these Words, Bread of Treet shall weigh two Wastels; which was very near the
weight of Household Bread, and almost of the same kind; being a little better
than Household, and something worse than Wheaten; and the difference so little,
that none but a Baker could discern it; and therefore it was left out of
Assize. This is one of those sorts of compounds of Bread, I do mention in my
Exceptions against a Trial to be made by refined Bakers.

VI. Bread of common Corn, the Name bears its own Signification, Bread for the
common, or Servant, or for the Household. But at this Day the Bakers mix in it,
all their short Meal, which formerly was given to Horses; and some of late have
got the way to grind their very Bran so fine, that it incorporates into it, and
still call it Household, or Bread of common Corn; but it is far from the true
Substance of Bread of common Corn, or Household, and none will believe, that
such a compound with Bran, can feed the poor People so well, as that of all
common Wheat. But on the contrary, that for want of true Substance, Nature soon
throughs it out, and therefore it rather purges then nourishes the Body, as the
Lord Mayor told the Bakers lately; who, instead of excusing themselves, seemed
to vindicate their ill doing, by an Impertinent Answer, That it would procure
to His Lordship more Customers for his Apothecary Druggs.

Having thus vindicated the assizing of White, Wheaten, and Houshold-Bread, it
remains to prove that my assizing of Meslin was according to Law, and
necessary; and that I did it upon good ground, and not out of my own Will, as
Master William Cocq did assert and complained of, both before the Government,
and in Parliament; although in Truth he was the very Man with Master Richard
Allen, who desired me to assize that Bread.

Those who keep the Bills of Mortality, and Master Crook, the Printer, who has
all my Assizes signed by Me, will justify, that at the beginning of my
Magistracy, and till the middle of November 1694, I assized only the White,
Wheaten, Household, and Horse-Bread, (or Crutchlo) in Imitation of England. But
on the 16th of that Month, at the Instance of Master William Cocq, (then Master
of the Corporation,) and with the Approbation of the Government, I made use of
the Power, granted by Law, to the Magistrates, as Clerk of the Market, and by
the Statute or Ordinances of Henry the Third, Edward the Second, and Edward the
Third, in these Words (mentioned before,) That as well Wastel-Bread as other,
OF WHAT SORT SOEVER THEY BE, shall be weighed or assized, according as it is
said of the meaner Wheat: And then, I did assize the Meslin-Bread, according to
the value of that sort of Corn, and at the Assize of Houshold-Bread, and I left
off assizing Horse-Bread, he telling me there was no such Bread made here.

As soon as I had laid down the Rod, the Corporation begun again their noisie
Complaints against the assizing of that Bread, and then it was left out of
Assize, and they were Encouraged to petition against Me, which they did; but I
soon vindicated my self, having full Authority by the Law for what I had done.
And when this Matter is well considered, perhaps it will be thought fit to
assize that Bread, (as I did,) and also Rye-Bread and Cruchlo, being the
several sorts of Bread for the Laborers, Spinners, and the Poor; who would be
better fed with it, then with Potatoes, could they have it plenty, and at a
cheap rate, viz. at the Rate of Assize according the value of the Corn.

I wish the Bakers had incerted in their Petition some Reasons why that Bread
should not be assized, for till they do so, I will still insist that
Meslin-Bread, (being of Corn so much cheaper then Wheat,) ought to weigh more
then Household, and that the generality of the poor People are much wronged in
being obliged to pay for a Pound of Course Meslin, (as black as Horse-Bread,)
as much as for the best Household. And indeed it is a wrong to the whole
Kingdom; for if Bread, which is the chief Substance for the poor Laborers, and
Spinners, be kept at high rate, they must suffer very much, or get greater
wages; and if so, the Manufactories must raise, which is the very means to
hinder their Sale abroad.

As for the Allegation in their Petition, that they lost 2 s. in a Quarter by
baking at my Assize; that is ridiculous; for all my Assizes are exactly
according to the price of Meslin brought to the Magistrate, with the Samples of
Wheat. And every Body knows, that Meslin is generally sold at a great rate; and
some at a higher rate then some Wheat; because there is little or no Rye in it:
But when the Bakers have it at home, they mix what Quantity of Rye they think
fit, which is a cheaper Corn, and which is not brought in Assize; So that when
the Baker pays 24 s. a Barel for Meslin, and 12 s. for Rye, and mixes it
together, that Quarter cost but 36 s, and by my Assizing, (by the full price of
Meslin,) they were allowed as much as if they had paid 48 s. for the Quarter of
Corn. By which means they got 12 s. a Quarter besides the 6 s. allowed by
Custom for baking a Quarter of Corn.

Therefore I still remain in my first Opinion, that Meslin, being the food of
the Labourer, ought to be assized according to the price of that sort of Corn.
And that the Bread made of all Rye, which is (much cheaper then Meslin,) ought
to be brought under Assize; and also the Bread made of Cruchlo, being a
compound of Beans, Pease, Wheat, and other Grains, which is a strong wholesome
food for Laborers, etc.

And all these sorts of Bread the Magistrate may assize according to Law, and
the Ordinances, before mentioned, which authorizes to Assize as well
Wastel-Bread, as others OF WHAT SORT SOEVER THEY BE.

As to the last Act of Assembly, inviting the Country or Foreign Bakers, to
help the City with Bread, it is no new thing, the same having been done before,
and at a time, that there was not so great a necessity as lately, when all Free
Bakers had agreed together to leave off Baking; and to starve the Inhabitants
or gain their own Will.

It was high time then, for the Government of the City to prevent so great an
Evil, by all means possible and just. And the Bakers cannot justly blame the
Magistrate, (after such second attempt of their Corporation,) for Inviting, and
protecting in the City, such other Bakers, as might supply the Inhabitants with
Bread, not only in that great extremity, but at all other times hereafter if
the Corporation should relaps.

All what was done at that time of need, is both according to Law and the
Custom of the City. The Statute making no difference of Bakers Free or Unfree,
but establishes one Assize only for all Bakers, and for all sorts of Bread in
general: And by Custom there is no other difference between them, but that the
Unfree Bakers cannot open Shop without License from the Government of the City.

This was lately the Case of some Roman Catholic Bakers, who for a while paid
a considerable Quartradge to the Corporation for the Liberty of Baking at the
Freemens Assize. But at last being advised by Council, and the Corporation
having considered the Point seriously, they soon agreed together, and the
former were admitted at Twelve Pence Quartradge, as Mr. Robert Jones the Unfree
Baker declared before the Comittee of the Honorable House of Commons.

But by a certain Custom of this City, the Country or Foreign Bakers were
obliged to bake at 2 s. less allowance in a Quarter of Wheat then the Free
Bakers: That I suppose happened in Queen Elizabeth's Reign; For Edmund Wingate
observes, That there was a Proclamation Issued in her time, that Bakers,
inhabiting in Corporate Towns, (in regard they pay Scot and Lot there,) are
allowed J^^c Shillings in every Quarter of the MIDDLE prized Wheat for their
charge in baking: And Country or Foreign Bakers only 4 Shillings. And there is
an Act of Assembly of this City in the 36th Year of her Reign, which obliges
the Country or Foreign Bakers to give an overplus in Assize.

It remains now to Answer their last Objection, that they are not assized by
the MIDDLE price of Corn; but that all the Corn is calculated together, and
does not fall to the MIDDLE price. Their Error in that proceeds of their
mistake in the Words of the Statute, and want of Knowledge in Arithmetic.

They suppose and affirm, that there is only Three prices of Corn, mentioned
for Assize, viz. First, Second, and Third Price, placing that Word Price for
Sorts; the Statute answers them fully; Bread of Better, Second and Third Sort,
shall be weighed by the MIDDLE price of Wheat.

The Wheat in those Days, and ever since, was divided in three parcels, viz.
All the Best sort in one, the Second in another, and the Worst in another: But
the first sort was not sold all at one rate, nor either of the two other sorts;
but according as they were generally sold, the Report was made. Example:

If the Best was sold, some at 30 s, some at 29 s. 6 d, some at 29 s, the
Report was at 29 s. 6 d; and if the Second sort was sold, some at 25 s, some at
24 s. 6 d, and some at 24 s, the general Price was reported at 24 s. 6 d; and
if the Worst was sold at 20 s, some at 19 s. 6 d, and some at 19 s, the Report
was at 19^^; So that upon Enquiry of the price of First, Second, and Third sort
of Corn, the Price being returned 29 s. 6 d, 24 s. 6 d, and 19 s. 6 d, they
joined altogether to find out the Price of the MIDDLE sort, and the three sums
amounting in all to 73 s. 6 d. they divided by 3, and found in the quotient 24
s. 6 d, which is the Price of the MIDDLE sort of Wheat.

Here in Dublin they have an Assize as just and exact, and I think more to
their advantage; for they are allowed the full value of the price of Corn,
although the Statute says that the Price shall not Rise or Lower in Assize but by
6 d; and they well know, that I never abated them one Half Penny of the just
price of the Corn bought.

The Calculating of all the Corn together falls to the same MIDDLE Center, when
divided in 3 parcells, and each parcel calculated by it self, and then the 3
joined afterward. The Clerk of Assize in Dublin may humor the Bakers in that
particular, and find no alteration: For when all the Corn is entered, and the
Price set down, and sworn before the Lord Mayor, and those who attends the
Sword, let him reckon how many different prices of Corn is sold that Day, and
divide them in three, and call the first parcel Best sort, the second Worse,
and the third Worst sort, and calculate each, and bring them to a certain
Price, and then join the 3 Prices together, and divide them by 3, he will find
in his Quotient the Price of the MIDDLE sort of Corn. And if he calculated all
the whole together, he will find the same. I have tried both ways several
times, and found no difference. I shall Insert here the manner of that Assize
which I made at Newhall on a Market Day for Mr. Cook, the present Clerk of
Assize.

Dublin the 8th of February School.
THree sorts of Corn sold in Dublin Market, viz. Best sort from 27 s. to 30 s,
and 57 Barrels cost 80 l. 7 s, so each Barrel cost -- 28 s. 6 d. Worse sort
from 24 s. 6 d, to 26 s. 6 d. and 177 Barrels cost 225 l. 1 s, therefore each
Barrel cost -- 25 s. 6 d. The Worst from 21 s. to 24 s. the Barrel, and 75
Barrels cost 88 l. 6 s, which is for each Barrel -- 23 s. 6 d.

Now by the Method of our Bakers their Assize should be 29 s. 6 d, because the
second highest Price is so much --

Whereof the MIDDLE Price here, Or the Price of the MIDDLE Corn is but 25 s. 6
d. and so it falls; for if you mix the Three Sums together, they come to 3 l.
17^^, and if you divide that by three, (to find out the MIDDLE Price, the
Quotient will bring 25 s. 6 d, and some thing over, which signifies nothing, in
Assize, because the Statute is positive, that it shall neither Rise nor Lower
but by Six Pence.

Afterward I calculated all the Barrels together; that is to say, I joined 57
of the Best Wheat, 177 of the Worse, and 75 of the Worst, which makes 309: And
I divided the Sum paid for them, being 393 l. 14 s, by the Number of Barrels
and the Quotient brought me 25 s. and 149 parts of 309, which is Six Pence
wanting 5 parts of 149. So that by all the three different ways of assizing I
found the same allowance.

This I suppose, is sufficient to satisfy all Impartial Persons, that no wrong
was ever intended, or done, to the Bakers. Therefore I shall add no more but a
few Words in my own Vindication, and of all my Assizes.

As soon as the time of my Magistracy was ended, some of them, and their
Emissaries, were Impudent enough, to Curse me in all Places, Markets, Streets,
and Alehouses, and even before my face, and in my hearing; but I laughed at
it, looking on them to be mad Men, as some realy are, when they have got a
little too much Liquor.

But finding that it availed them nothing to Curse, they took another Course of
Revenge, and reported, that the Master had given me a Giunea-Cake for doing
nothing. When I heard it at first, I took it as a Joke, remembering that a
Foreign Bakers Wife had told me once, that they could live very well by my
Assize, had not the Master put them to vast Contributions for his Expenses at
Law, it came then to my Thoughts, that perhaps the Master might have charged
something on his Accounts for extraordinary secret Expenses, and applied it to
that use. Therefore I told Mr. William Cocq, who was Master at that time, and
Mr. John Foreman, who was Master then, that something of that kind had been
Reported, and desired them to clear themselves of it: Which accordingly they
did, and went before Mr. Justice Lindon, and swore an Affidavit that they knew
nothing of it, and that they, nor any one else of their Knowledge, had ever
offered any such thing.

But Malice went further, and some of their Revengeful Friends proclaimed at
the Parliament House, that when Corn was at 15 s. the Quarter, I had given the
Bakers an Assize at 35 s. The News was presently brought to me by Mr. Twigg. I
then told him, that such Report was ridiculous, and that no Men of Sense would
believe it; because my Assizes were all given under my Hand to the Master of
the Bakers, signed by Me, as also to Mr. Crook, who printed them all, which
were sufficient to prove the contrary. Besides that, in my whole Year I never
gave so high an Assize as 35 s; and in all that time, but 3 at 15 s, when Corn
was sold at 7 s. 6 d. a Barrel, viz. 15th and 22th February, and 18th May; and
my Assizes then was but at 21 s. with the Allowance.

I gave them all to Mr. Twigg, desired him to do me the Favor to show them to
all the Gentlemen, as he thought might have given credit to such a Malicious,
and False Report; and to challenge the Author of it, to show such an Assize of
mine, to Justify himself, or else to do me that Justice to own his Error, as a
Gentleman ought to have done; but he has been ever since silent, and I leave
the World to judge what he is.

Some EXCEPTIONS Against a TRIAL, Demanded by the BAKERS.
BEing required to make these Three Books of Assize public, I think it will
not he amiss in this juncture of time, (that baking is slighted) for every one
to consult the Statute assiza Panis, to find out whether the Bakers do it upon
good Grounds, or by a Covetous Spirit, to advance their Fortunes the sooner,
and to a higher Degree then is convenient for the ease of the Labouring-Men,
and the Poor, considering that the increase of allowance to the former,
decreases the quantity of Bread that the latter should have.

An increase of allowance is considerate in a City, a Shilling per Barrel
amounting to above 100 l. per Annum, to such as bakes 40 Barrels of Corn
weekly; and if the Bakers could obtain a further allowance of 2 s. per Barrel,
(as they have alleged they had,) it would bring a double profit, and treble to
such as Mr. Cox, who by report bakes 60 Barrels per Week.

I have acknowledged, and do believe, that according to the Statute, and
Proclamations since published in England till the Reign of Queen Elizabeth for
the increase of their allowance from time to time, they may justly expect a
further allowance, at this juncture; that an Ounce of Sterling is worth 5 s. 10
d. and the present Barrel less then the Winchester by one Gallon and 38 Cubical
Inches, and that allowance, I think, may be of 2 s. per quarter.

But this allowance is to be granted by the Chief Governors and Privy-Councel,
and not by the Magistrate singly; for if such Power was divolv'd to him, and
Bakers should happen to be Mayors, or some other selfish Persons, they might
soon enrich that Corporation and oppress the People.

For the vindicating of their leaving off baking, although bound by their Charter,
they do allege that they cannot bake but with Loss, and therefore desires that
a Trial be made of a Quarter of mixed Wheat as they are assized by. I must
acknowledge, I ever was against such Trial; because I do not believe, that any
one, can do it exactly who is not a perfect Baker; and none in England was
admitted to make such Trial, but the Kings Bakers, who durst not favor the
Corporation, for fear, least some of the Trade should discover the fallacy, and
make them loose their places; But here all Bakers are engaged by their own
particular Interest, and Sworn for the Good of their Corporation. What could
other Persons do, that knows neither the Quality of Corn, nor what each Sort
may produce; nor how it must be milled, or fifted, or sorted afterward for the
best Advantage; nor how to prepare the Dough, nor how to bake it. The profit, I
think, must consist in those things, and to know the Quantity of Flower, that
may be abstracted for White particularly, which brings the most profit, and
takes less Weight; and how much for Wheaten; and what of the Remainder may
serve for Household; and what further Advantage may be made by the Bran, either
in selling of it, or grinding it to mix with other courser Bread. I have an
Implicit Belief, that the grand Trial on which the Statute assiza Panis was
grounded, was a true and just Assize, and that therefore the Bakers had then a
sufficient allowance thereby for baking: And have had further allowance to 6 s.
the Quarter since; which was judged to be sufficient when granted. And here we
must observe that the measures of Wheat were calculated by such Weight, as
might enable the Bakers to bake with profit enough, and the Bran over and
above. The Quarter of Wheat Winchester measure was then fixed one with the
other at 544 pounds, 4 ounces 16 penny weight Troy, or 448 pounds
Avoir-du-poids, and all Assize s were calculated accordingly. I heard that the
Bakers desired that a Trial should be made of a Quarter of Wheat of the
Tole-Corne, which is mixed of all sorts, and to bake it all in good Household
Bread. But I believe it was a jest, else it should be named a Fallacy; for by
such a Trial the Bread made would not produce so much as the Corn cost. This
may be easily demonstrated by the Assize inserted in the Statute 51 H. 3. Where
you will find that Household Bread is to weigh in its proportion as much as the
Corn in toto, Example: 3 Quarters of Corn assized at 4 hundred weight a piece
makes 12 hundred in toto, and if the same did cost, viz. the best 30 s. the
middle 20 s. and the last 10 s. and assized by the middle price 20 s. and the
Baker bound to give the like, weight in Household as the Corn weighs, viz. 4
hundred, which at 5 s. comes to the middle price of 20 s. If he be such a fool,
as to mix the whole, and make it all Household, and sell it as the Assize
binds, at the rate of the middle Corn, he cannot get a Farthing for baking,
etc. And therefore such a Trial is ridiculous.

But if the Baker keeps the 3 sorts of Corn unmixt, and draws out of the 1200,
viz. 400 for Household, he has to 20 s. of Bread, and 300 of Wheaten, brings as
much, which makes 40 s. and 200 of White produces the same, as the 400
Household, which makes the first cost, and these 4. 3 and 2 Hundred makes but
900, So that the Baker has 300 Weight of Flower and Bran left to himself for
his Profit, and 6 s. Allowance.

I know they will Answer, that my Proposition is not certain, and that there
cannot be 200 weight of White in the 1200, nor 300 of Wheaten, and therefore
will insist for a Trial, to which I have no further to reply, but that I do
really believe, that it will be as difficult for a private Man, who knows not
the Art of Baking, to make the best of several sorts of Corn, as to another who
never understood Metals, to mix them so as to bring them to several Standards,
for the best Profit, or to judge afterward of their Qualities, when once
allayed according to Art.

And so it is with the Bakers; for when they have sorted their 3 Quarters or
1200 weight of Meal, and placed 200 for White, 300 for Wheaten, and 400 for
Household; If they mix half a Hundred of the Wheaten to the 200 of White, and
the like of the Household to the Wheaten, and as much of the remaining part or
Fine Bran to the Household, who should be judge of this mixture but themselves,
who are the Godfathers of the Bread, and gives it what Name they please; as
some Goldsmiths who have called Sterling a second sort of Silver, allayed with
one fifth part of Copper, although the Sterling is not to bear above the 20th part
of allay. All these Mixtures add allways to the profit of the Bakers.

Therefore I conclude that advantageous Trial for the public Good cannot
reasonably be expected from them, who are Sworn for the Good of their
Corporation, and naturally inclined to procure to themselves and Families, all
the Advantage possible; nor that they should teach in a Day, (and for nothing)
an Art they have labored so long to learn, and discover all their Mysteries at
once, to their disadvantage. But I hope, that after a serious Consideration,
they will seek for their right by the usual Methods that have always been
observed in England and Ireland, and continue their supplying this Great City
with good and wholesome Bread, according to Assize, and as they are bound by
their Charter.

When I published these few Exceptions, I thought they had been sufficient for
to satisfy all Persons, that there was no need at all of a Trial; for it
appears plainly enough by the Statute, and the Allowance granted to the Bakers,
that they are sufficient Gainers. But none having consulted the Statute, and
Mr. Cocq having prevailed for a Trial, and for such a Trial that by baking of a
Quarter of Wheat, the Bread made of it, brought less by 4 s. 6 d, then the Corn
cost, (as they reported.) I think my self obliged to enlarge a little more.

At the time that Mr. Cocq's Trial was made, an Unfree-Baker made another of a
Quarter of Wheat at the same Assize, and made of the Bread seven Shillings six
Pence more, then the Corn cost, which will be proved upon Oath if doubted of,
and therefore no need to allow the Free-Bakers, to make any further Trials.

Mr. Cocq made a great Noise in the Court of King's Bench pretending, that these
few Exceptions were all Erroneous, and that I had wronged the Bakers. Had he
mentioned, in what particular I had answered him there; for I expected their
Thanks, and not their Reproaches, being that they tend generally to the
Advantage of the Corporation.

I made them short, and upon general Heads, not thinking that they would oblige
me to descend to Particulars and to unravel their Disingenious Contrivances,
for attaining their end, by a Trial, being not willing to expose them. But
Master Cocq having made his Challenge so publicly, I shall endeavor to make
good my positive Assertion, That the Bakers are sufficient Gainers, and that a
Trial by them is neither sure nor necessary.

I shall prove the same, first by the Statute it self, and secondly by their
proceeding; Since I made public the Book of Assize by Troy-weight:

Imo. The Statute Assiza Panis fixes the Assize, by a Quarter of Wheat of
Wine-measure, which is short of the full Weight of a Quarter of Corn; the
Statute leaving the overplus to the Baker, as a benefit for baking. This is
explained very clearly in the Statute, as follows. By the Consent of the
whole Realm of England, the Measure of our Lord the King was made, (That is to
say,) that an English Penny called a Sterling, round and without Clipping,
shall weigh 32 Wheat Corns in the Mids of the Ear, and 20 Pence do make an
Ounce, and 12 Ounces one Pound, and 8 Pound do make a Gallon of Wine, and 8
Gallons of Wine do make a London Bushel, which is the eighth part of a Quarter.

It is then plain, That the Measure used for Assize, was the Wine-Measure, but
the Measure by which the Corn is sold, is another, which we call Ale or
Winchester Measure; the difference is, that the Wine-Gallon contains, only 231
Cubical Inches, and the Ale-Gallon or Winchester contained then 282, and
therefore there was 51 Cubical Inches in that Gallon, or 3246 Cubical Inches
more in a Quarter of Wheat by Winchester Measure, then by the London or
Wine-Measure, which is 11 Gallons and a half, and 21 Cubical Inches.

Those who will make the Experience, may weigh a full Quarter of Wheat in the
Market, and try the Difference, adding to it the 2 Gallons and 76 Cubical
Inches taken off, from the former Measure, by the late Act of Parliament.

A TABLE of the Weight and Quantity of the Quarter of Wheat, Wine-Measure,
being the Rule of Assize mentioned in the Statute.
Grains of Corn. Penny Weights. Ounces. Pounds. Wine-Gallons. Bushels. Quarter.
32 1 640 20 1 Pint 7680 240 12 1 Gallon 61440 1920 96 8 1 Bushel 491522 15360
768 64 8 1 Quarter 3932160 122880 6144 512 64 8 1

This Weight being the Money-Weights, of which there are hardly so many in the
whole City, as would weigh a Quarter of Wheat, it must be reduced into
Avoir-du-poids Weight by the Rules of the coequality of both Weights, which you
have here Inserted, and by which you will find that 512 Pounds Troy, is exactly
406 Pounds Avoir-du-poids. And therefore the Assize is calculated as if a
Barrel shoud weigh only 203 Pounds, or 14 Stones and a half, and the Quarter
406 Pounds, or 29 Stones. What it weighs over and above, is a Profit to the
Baker.

That Standard was never altered since, and the Assize was always made by it;
but the Standard of the Corn sold in the Market, was otherwise, as we see by
the Statute made here, 12 Elizabethae, The Bushel for Wheat, Rye, Meslin,
Peaze, and Beans, to contain 16 Ale-Gallons, and the Bushel for Malt, Oats,
and Barley, 20 Ale-Gallons, and the Bushel (or half Barrel) for Bread-Corn to
be received strik'd, without heap, and the Bushel of Malt is to be laid and
pressed down, just with the Brim of the Bushel after the accustomed Manner of
measuring Malt.

These Measures were only established for the County of the City, and County of
Dublin, County of Catherlagh, County of Lowth, the Kings County, County of
Mead, County of Kildare, County of Wexford, County of West-Meath, and the
Queen's County. Therefore the Assize of Dublin could not be a Rule for any
other Parts of the Kingdom; But now it may be so hereafter, there being but one
Measure throughout the Kingdom.

This proves sufficiently, that the Dublin-Bakers cannot be Loosers by the
Assize made here, our Barrel of Corn weighing more then 14 Stones and a half,
which is the Weight of the Barrel of Assize, established by the Statute. And
therefore there is no need of a new Trial.

I shall now Enforce this by proving that according to the Assize established
by the Statute Assiza Panis they gain sufficiently.

That will be found by any of the Assizes, calculated exactly, observing the
Weights of a Quarter of Wheat, which generally weighs, viz. Best 36 Stones,
Worse 34 Stones, and Worst 32 Stones, whereof the MIDDLE is 34 Stones, or 476
Pounds, or 7616 Ounces Avoir-du-poids, which is 6949 Ounces 12 Penny-weight
Troy.

It is indifferent what Assize is chosen for a proof, being all equal, but for
the ease of those, who are not expert in this way of Calculation, and for
preventing Fractions, I shall take the Assize of Bread when Wheat is sold at 27
s. a Quarter, and 6 s. allowance to the Baker, which brings it to 33 s, and
divide a Quarter of Wheat in three Parts, that is to say, that the Baker shall
furnish 9 s. of White Bread, 9 s. of Wheaten, and 9 s. of Household to repay
himself his first cost, and keep all the rest for his charges in baking.

Example:
By the Assize. Corn being at 27 s. the Quarter, and 6 s. allowance for baking,
the Baker is to be assized at 33 s, and according to that Assize: Ounces The
Penny White is to weigh 10 Ounces 5 Penny weight, and the 12 Penny 123 Ounces,
and 9 Loaves of 12 Penny 1107 The Penny Wheaten 15 Ounces 7 Penny and a half,
and the 12 Penny 184 Ounces and a half, and 9 Loaves of 11 Penny 1660 The Penny
Household 20 Ounces and a half, and the 12 Penny 246 Ounces, and 9 Loaves of 12
Penny 2214 4981

By the Weight of Corn they have 6949 Ounces 12 Penny of Wheat, Troy weight;
and they are to deliver for the 27 s. they paid for the Corn, 4981 Ounces and a
half only. Therefore they have 1968 Ounces and 2 Penny remaining for their
charges and profit in baking, which is very near one Third Part, and therefore
no need to allow 'em any further Trial.

And if they be allowed eight Shillings, in stead of six, there will be less
need of it.

I do not mention the great Profit they have by baking Meslin, Rye, and
Crutchlo-Bread, at what Weight they please, because I hope they will be brought
under Assize.

Nor the benefit they have by baking Twice the Quantity of Wheat in Weekdays,
then is sold in Market-Days, where the Price is inhansed by them:

This was proved before the Committee of the Honorable House of Commons: For
all the Corn lodged at Mr. Cossarts, and in the Malt-House at Dolphins-Barn,
was bought for less then 40 s. a Quarter, but the first was baked when the
Assize was at 58 s, and if the other was kept longer, they got more, the Assize
having risen continually since, and indeed the Quantities of Corn has been
multiplied since in that Place and in others; but this may be prevented.

Nor the benefit they have by the overplus in Measure, which they get from the
Countrymen, because it is properly a gift to them.

Nor their Engrossing of Corn in the Country, because they advance Money for
it, and run the hazard of a change.

Yet all these are advantages to the Rich Free-Baker, which the poor Unfree, or
Foreigner has not, and yet gains so sufficiently, that he is content.

Therefore I conclude, that the Free-Bakers must of necessity gain more, and
that no Trial ought to be allowed them.

2do. Considering their Contrivances for obtaining a Trial to be made with the
Assistance of the Master and Wardens of the Corporation. I do not think that it
ought to be allowed them.

As soon as I had laid down the Rod, they prevailed, that Meslin-Bread should
not be assized, which has continued to this Day, and by which means they have
been great Gainers, and therefore had no need to complain or to desire a Trial.

They at the same time contrived to have such an Assize, for Foreigners, (or
Unfree-Bakers,) as could not but destroy them, having no Allowance granted
them, but on the contrary bound to allow 3 Pound weight of Bread in a 12. Penny
Loaf of Household Bread, more then the Freemen, so that they could not bake
without Loosing all their Labor and Charges in baking.

This made several Unfree-Bakers join together, to seek for relief, and at last
the most considerable among them, were admitted by the Corporation to bake at
their Assize. Then they joined together but this severe Assize continuing
afterward from Mich. 1697 to Mich. School, all the poor Unfree-Bakers were
forced to leave off, and some to go away, and others to apply to other sorts of
livelihood, or to serve as Journey-men, and this they endeavored to continue
still, but were prevented, when this was made known to our present Magistrate.

At that juncture of time, they rejected to take the Assize from the
Magistrate, pretending they would bake no longer, and accordingly shut up their
Shops, left off buying of Corn themselves, but yet employed their Millers, and
others to buy for 'em, and baked privately for whom they pleased, and at what
Assize they thought fit. And perhaps would have continued to this Day, had not
some few Persons taken upon them to bake, and prove that they had Profit enough
by baking at the Assize and Allowance, given by the Magistrates. And this seems
to be a sufficient Reason that a Trial should not be granted to be made by them.

Their harrassing at the same time, those few new Bakers, seizing their Bread,
when no Assize was proclaimed by the Magistrate, and Bread only made for the
present Supply, of those they would not serve with Bread, and of a sufficient
Assize for that time.

The 7 Twelf Penny Loaves they restored, wanting but 6 Ounces after being kept
15 Days, proves sufficiently their design of forcing for a subtle Trial to gain
an extraordinary Allowance to the Prejudice of the Poor, and for that Reason
none should be granted to them.

The very Contrivance of making Mr. Cocq a grand Juryman to procure a Trial by
his earnest Solicitations to his Brethren, etc. was sufficient for denying him
such Request.

I must in this place mark, that they had no right at that time to seize any
Bread at all, much less in a House; for no Bread ought to be seized, but what
is exposed for sale in Shops, or in the Market, or such as has been sold for
Bread of Assize, and proves light.

The Magistrate himself, or Grand Juries, cannot in justice seize Bread under
the Weight of Assize, if kept by the Baker, by Reason of a mistake of his
Servants, in making the same too light, and he has (no doubt) Liberty to
acquaint the Magistrate, and the Jury of the Mistake, and to demand Liberty to
sell the same at an Under-rate, according to that of Assize; and such a License
cannot be denied: but if he should sell at a higher Rate, he is inditable by
the Magistrate, and subject to the Pillory.

I could enlarge more for the preventing of the Trial they so earnestly desire,
but I think it is sufficient to say, that when they saw, that the Government,
and the City, were pleased to encourage the Unfree-Bakers, who were beginning
to bake; they of themselves fell to work again, which they would never have
done, had they been so great Loosers, as they pretended, and were sure that
none could bake at the Assize allowed by the Statute, but on the contrary would
have suffered the Unfree-Bakers to go on, and ruin themselves, by baking at
that Assize, to support their Assertion. Therefore I conclude, that there is no
Reason to grant 'em any further Trial.

RULES FOR THE ASSIZE of BREAD; By Sterling-Money, and Troy-Weights. According
to the Statute Assiza Panis. 51 H. 3.
THe Statute takes no Notice of Troy-Weight, the Assize of Bread being
Established according to the current Money of England, which had been Made and
Stamped by some Genilemen called the Sterlings, of the East of England; and for
that reason bear their Name to this day.

It is to be supposed that they knew the Weights called Troy, having Coined all
the Money according to that Standard. But the Coin has been exhausted since,
from time to time; the Ounce of Sterling being risen by Henry the 6th to 2 s.
6d. by Edward the 4th to 40 d. by Henry the 8th to 45 d. and by Queen Elizabeth
to 5 s. which is now the Standard of England; and therefore for keeping the
Assize at the just Standard limited by the Statute, they left off using the
word Sterling, and in stead of a Penny, or a Shilling, or a Pound Sterling,
they called the Penny, a Penny-Weight, and 20 Penny-Weight an Ounce, and 12
Ounces a Pound Troy; and accordingly the Assize of Bread has been made ever
since. The Word Troy-Weight, (in Latin Libra Trojana) imports as much as that
of Sterling, being called by the name of the Trojans who made and used it, in
all that part of Asia the Less, called Phrigia, the Chief City whereof is Troy.
From thence the Europeans took it, and Coined there Money by that Standard. In
France they gave it another Name, calling the Pound a Marc. from the Latin
Marca, and with us a Mark of Money weighing 12 Ounces.

In Italy they call it Libra Romana, and contains the same Weight of 12 Ounces
from the Latin Assis Assipuridium, a Roman Coin, a Pound.

But for the better understanding of the Assize by Sterling-Money, and
Troy-Weight, you have here a Table of the Coequality of Old Sterling-Money, and
Troy-Weight, and the Sterling-Money now Current in England.

A TABLE of the Coequality of Old Standard of Sterling-Money; Troy-Weight; and
the present Standard of Sterling, current in ENGLAND.
Old Standard of Sterling-Money. Troy-Weight. Present Standard of
Sterling-Money. L. sh. D. P. O. D. L. sh. D. 1000 00 00 1000 12000 00 3000 500
00 00 500 6000 00 1500 400 00 00 400 4800 00 1200 300 00 00 300 3600 00 900 200
200 2400 0 600 100 100 1200 0 300 50 50 600 0 150 40 40 280 0 120 30 30 360 0
90 20 20 240 0 60 10 10 120 0 30 5 5 60 0 15 4 4 48 0 12 3 3 36 9 2 2 24 6 1 1
12 3 0 10 00 0 6 1 10 0 0 5 00 0 3 0 15 0 4 0 2 8 0 12 0 0 3 0 1 16 0 9 0 0 2 0
1 04 0 6 0 0 1 12 0 3 0 0 0 5 5 0 1 3 4 4 0 1 0 3 3 0 0 9 2 2 0 0 6 1 1 0 0 3

By this Table it is easy to apprehend, that the Money is three times the
value, of what it was at first; but Troy-Weight remains fixed, and therefore
will be the rule of the following Table of Assize.

The Statute orders the Assize to be made, that when Corn is at 1 s. per
Quarter, the Cocket or White Loaf of a Farthing shall Weigh 7 l. 1 s. Sterling,
Old Standard Money, which is exactly 84 Ounces 12 Penny Weight, as you may see
in the Table.

But at this time it would be in vain to make an Assize by a Farthing Loaf, it
being out of use: And to make one by a Half Penny would but increase this work
and to no purpose, that of a Penny including both,

I shall therefore begin the following Table of Assize, by the Penny White,
which is the rule of Assize; For the other sorts, the Statute ordering that
Wheaten Bread shall Weigh a Cocket and a half, that is, half more then the
White; and the Household two Cockets, that is, twice as much as the White
Cocket. The Statute directs that the Assize shall not change, but by 6 d. in
the Raising or Lowering of a Quarter of Wheat, therefore the Table will follow
accordingly from Six Pence to 200 Six Pences Price.

It also ordained, That when a Quarter of Wheat is sold for 12 d. the Farthing
Loaf of White Cocket shall weigh 7 l. 1 s. which is 84 Ounces 12 Penny Weight;
So that the Half Penny is to weigh 169 Ounces 4 Penny weight; and consequently
the Penny Loaf 338 Ounces 8 Penny weight: But when Corn is sold at 6 d. the
Quarter, then the Penny White ought to weigh twice as much, viz. 676 Ounces 16
Deniers.

For the more ease in Calculating all Assizes, and avoid all Fractions, I
reduced the 676 Ounces 16 Deniers, which is the weight of a Si^^ Penny White
Loaf, into Penny weights, viz. 13536. which being Divided by as many Six Pences
as there is in the Price of a Quarter of Corn, and the allowance to the Bakers,
brings in the Quotient the true weight of a Penny White Bread, which directs
the weight of all the rest. For if the White is to weigh a Pound, the Wheaten
is to weigh a Pound and a half, and the Household two Pounds.

Example.

Suppose the Middle Price of Corn was in Dublin the 7th of July 1694 at 12 s. 3
d. the Barrel, or 24 s. 6. the Quarter, and 6 s. allowed to the Baker, hich
makes 30 s. 6 d. or 61 Six Pences: Divide your 13536 Penny Weight by the 61 Six
Pences, and you will find in the Quotient 221 Penny Weight, and 50 parts of 61
parts of a Penny Weight, which is 11 Ounces 1 Penny Weight, and 55 parts of 61
parts of a Penny Weight; and that is the Weight of a Penny White Loaf, when
Corn, and allowance to the Baker, is at 30 s. 6 d. the Quarter.

Observe that, in the following Tables of Assize by Troy-Weight the Letrer L.
is for a Pound Sterling, sh. for Shillings, d. for Pence, O. for Ounces, P. for
Penny-Weight, Nu. for Numerator, D. for Denominator, which signifies only so
many parts, of so many other parts of a Penny Weight.

The Table of the Assize of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L sh d
O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De O. P. Nu. De. 0 0 6 676 16 0 0 1015 4 0 0 1353 12 0
0 0 1 0 338 8 0 0 507 12 0 0 676 16 0 0 0 1 6 225 12 0 0 338 8 0 0 451 4 0 0 0
2 0 169 4 0 0 253 16 0 0 338 8 0 0 0 2 6 135 7 1 5 203 0 4 5 270 14 2 5 0 3 0
112 16 0 0 169 4 0 0 225 12 0 0 0 3 6 96 13 5 7 145 0 4 7 193 7 3 7 0 4 0 84 12
0 0 126 18 0 0 169 4 0 0 0 4 6 75 4 0 0 112 16 0 0 150 8 0 0 0 5 0 67 13 3 5
101 10 2 5 135 7 1 5 0 5 6 61 10 6 11 92 5 9 11 123 1 1 11 0 6 0 56 8 0 0 84 12
0 0 112 16 0 0 0 6 6 52 1 3 13 78 1 11 13 104 2 6 13 0 7 0 48 6 6 ^ 72 10 2 7
96 13 5 7 0 7 6 45 2 6 15 67 13 9 15 90 4 12 15 0 8 0 42 6 0 0 6^ 9 0 0 84 12 0
0 0 8 6 39 16 4 17 59 14 6 17 79 12 8 17 0 9 0 37 12 0 0 56 8 0 0 75 4 0 0 0 9
6 35 12 8 19 53 8 12 19 71 4 16 19 0 10 0 33 16 4 5 50 15 1 5 67 13 3 5 0 10 6
32 4 12 21 48 6 18 21 64 9 3 21 0 11 0 30 15 3 11 46 2 10 11 61 10 6 11 0 11 6
29 8 12 23 44 2 18 23 58 17 1 23 0 12 0 28 4 0 0 42 6 0 0 56 8 0 0 0 12 6 27 1
11 25 40 12 4 25 54 2 24 25 The Table of the Assize of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L.
sh. d. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. 0 13 0 26 0 8 13 39 0 12 13 52
1 3 13 0 13 6 25 1 9 27 37 12 0 0 50 2 18 27 0 14 0 24 3 3 7 36 5 1 7 43 6 6 7
0 14 6 23 6 22 29 35 0 4 29 46 13 15 29 0 15 0 23 11 3 15 33 16 12 15 45 2 6 15
0 15 6 21 16 20 31 32 14 30 31 43 13 9 31 0 16 0 21 3 0 0 31 14 4 2 46 6 0 0 0
16 6 20 10 6 33 30 15 9 33 41 0 12 33 0 17 0 19 18 2 17 29 17 3 17 39 16 4 17 0
17 6 19 6 20 35 29 0 4 35 38 13 17 35 0 18 0 18 16 0 0 28 4 0 0 37 12 0 0 0 18
6 18 5 31 37 27 8 38 37 36 11 25 37 0 19 0 17 16 4 19 26 14 6 19 35 12 8 19 0
19 6 17 7 3 39 26 0 24 39 34 14 6 39 1 0 0 16 18 2 5 25 7 3 5 33 16 4 5 1 0 6
16 10 6 41 24 15 9 41 33 0 12 41 1 1 0 15 2 6 21 24 3 9 21 32 4 12 21 1 1 6 15
14 34 43 23 12 8 43 31 9 25 43 1 2 0 15 7 7 11 23 1 5 11 30 15 3 11 1 2 6 15 0
36 45 22 11 9 45 30 1 27 45 1 3 0 14 14 6 23 22 1 9 23 29 8 12 23 1 3 6 14 8 0
0 21 12 0 0 28 16 0 0 1 4 0 14 2 0 0 21 3 ^ 0 28 4 0 0 1 4 6 13 16 12 49 20 14
18 49 27 12 24 49 1 5 0 13 10 18 25 20 6 2 25 27 1 11 25 The Table of the
Assize of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L.
sh. d. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. 1 5 6 13 5 21 51 19 18 6 51 26
10 42 51 1 6 0 13 0 4 13 19 10 6 13 26 0 8 13 1 6 6 12 15 21 53 19 3 5 53 25 10
42 52 1 7 0 1 12 10 18 27 18 16 0 27 25 1 9 27 1 7 6 12 6 6 55 18 9 9 55 24 12
12 55 1 8 0 12 1 5 7 18 2 4 7 24 3 3 7 1 8 6 11 17 27 57 17 16 12 57 23 14 54
57 1 9 0 11 13 11 29 17 10 2 29 23 6 22 29 1 9 6 11 9 25 59 17 4 8 59 22 18 50
59 1 10 0 11 5 9 15 16 18 6 15 22 11 3 15 1 10 6 11 1 55 61 16 12 52 61 22 3 49
61 1 11 0 10 18 10 31 16 7 15 31 21 16 20 31 1 11 6 10 14 54 63 16 2 18 63 21 9
45 63 1 12 0 10 11 4 8 15 17 2 8 21 3 0 8 1 12 6 10 8 16 65 15 12 24 65 20 16
32 65 1 13 0 10 5 3 33 15 7 21 33 20 10 6 33 1 13 6 10 2 2 67 15 3 3 67 20 4 4
67 1 14 0 9 19 1 17 14 18 10 17 19 18 2 17 1 14 6 9 16 12 69 14 14 18 69 19 12
24 69 1 15 0 9 13 13 35 14 10 2 35 19 6 26 35 1 15 6 9 10 46 71 14 5 69 71 19 1
21 71 1 16 0 9 8 0 0 14 2 0 0 18 16 0 0 1 16 6 9 5 31 73 13 18 10 73 18 10 62
73 1 17 0 9 2 34 37 13 14 14 37 18 5 31 37 1 17 6 9 0 36 75 13 10 54 75 18 0 72
75 The Table of the Assize of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L.
sh. d. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. 1 18 0 8 18 2 19 13 7 3 19 17
16 4 19 1 18 6 8 15 61 77 13 3 53 77 17 11 45 77 1 19 0 8 13 21 39 13 0 12 39
17 7 3 39 1 19 6 8 11 27 79 12 17 1 79 17 2 54 79 2 0 0 8 9 1 5 12 13 4 5 16 18
2 5 2 0 6 8 7 9 81 12 10 54 81 16 14 18 81 2 1 0 8 5 3 41 12 7 25 41 16 10 6 41
2 1 6 8 3 7 83 12 4 52 83 16 0 14 83 2 2 0 8 1 3 21 12 1 15 21 16 2 6 21 2 2 6
7 19 21 85 11 18 74 85 15 18 42 85 2 3 0 7 17 17 43 11 16 4 43 15 14 34 43 2 3
6 7 15 51 87 11 13 33 87 15 11 15 87 2 4 0 7 13 9 11 11 10 8 11 15 7 7 11 2 4 6
7 12 8 89 11 8 12 89 15 4 16 89 2 5 0 7 10 18 45 11 5 27 45 15 0 36 45 2 5 6 7
8 68 91 11 3 11 91 14 17 45 91 2 6 0 7 7 3 23 11 0 16 23 14 14 6 23 2 6 6 7 5
51 93 10 18 30 93 14 11 9 93 2 7 0 7 4 0 0 10 16 0 0 14 8 0 0 2 7 6 7 2 46 95
10 13 69 95 14 4 92 95 2 8 0 7 1 0 0 10 11 2 0 14 2 0 0 2 8 6 6 19 53 97 10 9
31 97 13 19 9 97 2 9 0 6 18 6 49 10 7 9 49 13 16 12 49 2 9 6 16 16 72 99 10 5 9
99 13 13 45 99 2 10 0 6 15 9 25 10 3 1 25 13 10 18 25 The Table of the Assize
of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L sh d
O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. 2 10 6 6 14 2 101 10 1 3 101 13 8 4
101 2 11 0 6 12 36 51 9 91 3 51 13 5 21 51 2 11 6 6 11 43 103 9 17 13 103 13 2
86 103 2 12 0 6 10 2 13 9 15 3 13 13 0 4 13 2 12 6 6 8 96 105 9 13 39 105 12 17
87 105 2 13 0 6 7 37 53 9 11 29 53 12 15 21 53 2 13 6 6 6 54 107 9 9 81 107 12
13 1 107 2 14 0 6 5 9 27 9 8 0 00 12 10 18 27 2 14 6 6 4 20 109 9 6 30 109 12 8
40 109 2 15 0 6 3 3 55 9 4 32 55 12 6 6 55 2 15 6 6 1 105 111 9 2 102 111 12 3
99 111 2 16 0 6 0 6 7 9 1 2 7 12 1 5 7 2 16 6 5 19 89 113 8 19 77 113 11 19 65
113 2 17 0 5 18 42 57 8 18 6 57 11 17 27 57 2 17 6 5 17 81 115 8 16 64 115 11
15 47 115 2 18 0 5 16 20 29 8 15 1 29 11 13 11 29 2 18 6 5 15 81 117 8 13 63
117 11 11 45 117 2 19 0 5 14 42 59 8 12 4 59 11 9 25 59 2 19 6 5 13 89 119 8 10
74 119 11 7 59 119 3 0 0 5 12 12 15 8 9 3 15 11 5 9 15 3 0 6 5 11 105 121 8 7
9^ 121 11 3 89 121 3 1 0 5 10 58 61 8 6 26 61 11 1 55 61 3 1 6 5 10 6 123 8 5 9
123 11 0 12 123 3 2 0 5 9 5 31 8 3 23 31 10 18 10 31 3 2 6 5 8 36 125 8 2 54
125 10 16 72 125 The Table of the Assize of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L.
sh. d. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. 3 3 0 5 7 27 63 8 1 9 63 10 14
54 63 3 3 6 5 6 74 127 7 19 111 127 10 13 21 127 3 4 0 5 5 6 8 7 18 5 8 10 11 4
8 3 4 6 5 4 120 129 7 17 51 129 10 9 111 129 3 5 0 5 4 8 65 7 16 12 65 10 8 16
65 3 5 6 5 3 43 131 7 14 130 131 10 6 86 131 3 6 0 5 2 18 33 7 13 27 33 10 5 3
33 3 6 6 5 1 103 133 7 12 88 133 10 3 73 133 3 7 0 5 1 1 67 7 11 35 67 10 2 2
67 3 7 6 5 0 36 135 7 10 54 135 10 0 72 135 3 8 0 4 19 9 17 7 9 5 17 9 19 1 17
3 8 6 4 18 110 137 7 8 28 137 9 17 83 137 3 9 0 4 18 6 69 7 7 9 69 9 16 12 69 3
9 6 4 17 53 139 7 6 10 139 9 14 106 139 3 10 0 4 16 24 35 7 5 1 35 9 13 13 35 3
10 6 4 16 0 0 7 4 0 0 9 12 0 0 3 11 0 4 15 23 71 7 2 70 71 9 10 46 71 3 11 6 4
14 94 143 7 1 141 143 9 9 45 143 3 12 0 4 14 0 0 7 1 0 0 9 8 0 0 3 12 6 4 13 51
145 7 0 4 145 9 6 102 145 3 13 0 4 12 52 73 6 19 5 73 9 5 31 73 3 13 6 4 12 12
147 6 18 18 147 9 4 24 147 3 14 0 4 11 17 37 6 17 7 37 9 2 34 37 3 14 6 4 10
126 149 6 16 40 149 9 1 103 149 3 15 0 4 10 18 75 6 15 27 75 9 0 36 75 The
Table of the Assize of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L.
sh. d. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. 3 15 6 4 9 97 151 6 14 70 151
8 19 43 151 3 16 0 4 9 1 19 6 13 11 19 8 18 2 19 3 16 6 4 8 72 153 6 12 103 153
8 16 144 153 3 17 0 4 7 69 77 6 11 65 77 8 15 61 77 3 17 6 4 7 51 155 6 10 154
155 8 14 102 155 3 18 0 4 6 30 39 6 10 6 39 8 13 21 39 3 18 6 4 6 34 157 6 9 51
157 8 12 68 157 3 19 0 4 5 53 79 6 8 40 79 8 11 27 79 3 19 6 4 5 21 159 6 7 111
159 8 10 42 159 4 0 0 4 4 6 10 6 6 9 10 8 9 2 10 4 0 6 4 4 12 161 6 6 18 161 8
8 24 161 4 1 0 4 3 45 81 6 5 27 81 8 7 9 81 4 1 6 4 3 7 163 6 4 92 163 8 6 14
163 4 2 0 4 2 22 41 6 3 33 41 8 5 3 41 4 2 6 4 2 6 165 6 3 9 165 8 4 12 165 4 3
0 4 1 45 83 6 2 26 83 8 3 7 83 4 3 6 4 1 9 167 6 1 97 167 8 2 18 167 4 4 0 4 0
12 21 6 0 18 21 8 1 3 21 4 4 6 4 0 16 169 6 0 24 169 8 0 32 169 4 5 0 3 19 63
85 5 19 37 85 7 19 21 85 4 5 6 3 19 27 171 5 18 126 171 7 18 54 171 4 6 0 3 18
30 43 5 18 2 43 7 17 37 43 4 6 6 3 18 42 173 5 17 63 173 7 16 84 173 4 7 0 3 17
69 87 5 16 60 87 7 15 51 87 4 7 6 3 17 61 175 5 16 4 175 7 14 122 175 The Table
of the Assize of Bread. By Troy-Weight.
Price of a Quarter of Wheat. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L.
sh. d. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. O. P. Nu. De. 4 8 0 3 16 10 11 5 15 4 11 7
13 9 11 4 8 6 3 16 84 177 5 14 126 177 7 12 168 177 4 9 0 3 16 4 89 5 14 6 84 7
12 8 89 4 9 6 3 15 111 179 5 13 77 179 7 11 43 179 4 10 0 3 15 9 45 5 12 36 45
7 10 18 45 4 10 6 3 14 142 181 5 12 32 181 7 9 103 181 4 11 0 3 14 34 91 5 11
51 91 7 8 68 91 4 11 6 3 13 177 183 5 10 174 183 7 7 177 183 4 12 0 3 13 13 23
5 10 8 23 7 7 3 23 4 12 6 3 13 31 185 5 9 139 189 7 6 62 185 4 13 0 3 12 72 93
5 9 15 93 7 5 51 93 4 13 6 3 12 72 187 5 8 108 187 7 4 144 187 4 14 0 3 12 0 0
5 8 0 0 7 4 0 0 4 14 6 3 11 117 189 5 7 81 187 7 3 45 189 4 15 0 3 11 23 95 5 6
82 95 7 2 46 95 4 15 6 3 10 166 191 5 6 58 191 1 1 141 191 4 16 0 3 10 2 4 5 5
3 4 7 1 0 0 4 16 6 3 10 26 193 5 5 39 193 7 0 52 193 4 17 0 3 9 75 97 5 4 64 97
6 19 53 97 4 17 6 3 9 81 195 5 4 24 195 6 18 162 195 4 18 0 3 9 3 49 5 3 29 49
6 18 6 49 4 18 6 3 8 140 197 5 3 13 197 6 17 83 197 4 19 0 3 8 36 99 5 2 54 99
6 16 72 99 4 19 6 3 8 4 199 5 2 6 199 6 16 8 199 5 0 0 3 7 17 25 5 1 13 25 6 15
9 25

RULES FOR THE ASSIZE of BREAD; By Avoir-du-poids-Weights. Calculated by the
Coequality with Troy-Weights, and Sterling Money, to answer the just Weight of
Bread, Established by the Statute Assiza Panis, 51 H. 3.
THis Weight is called by the French Poids du Roy, the Kings Weight, and by the
Normans Avoir-du-poids, which signifies as much as Habere Pondus, to have full
Weight, by others Ligostatica Libra, containing 16 Ounces, and by the Vulgar,
Haber-de-poids. They all agree as to the Pounds and Ounces, but differs in the
Quintals and Drachms. The French reckons their Quintal at 104 Pound, in these
Kingdoms the Quintal general is 112 Pound, and that of Butter, etc. 120 Pound.
Some Divides the Pound in 16 Drachms, others in Eight, and each Dram in 3
Scruples, and a Scruple in 24 Grains, which latter Scrupulus the weight of 24
Grains, the 3d part of a Dram Semidrachma the weight of 36 Grains the half of
a Dram. And Dram the weight of 72 Grains, the Eight part of an Ounce. And
Uncia Unciola, is Interpreted to be the 16th part of a Pound, or 8 Drachms, or
24 Scruples, or 576 Grains.

Therefore the following Tables are Calculated by this Rule, only ladding 1
Grain to the 72, to bring all Weights to a true Coequaity, 73 Ounces Troy being
equal with 80 Avoir-du-poids, as you may see by the following Tables of
Coequality.

The Three TABLES showing the Coequality of Sterling, Troy, and Avoirdupoids
Weights.
By Old Sterling.
Old. Sterling Troy. Avoir Dupoids. Pounds Ounces. Ounces. Drach. Gr. 73. 1000
12000 13150 3 35 500 6000 6575 2 54 400 4800 5260 2 14 300 3600 3945 1 41 200
2400 2630 1 7 100 1200 1315 0 40 50 600 653 4 20 40 480 526 0 16 30 360 594 4
12 20 240 263 0 8 10 120 131 4 4 5 60 65 6 2 4 48 52 4 6 3 36 39 3 45 2 24 26 2
30 1 12 13 1 15 Shill. O. P. With. Ounces. Drach. Gr. 73. 10 6 6 4 44 5 3 3 2 22
4 2 8 2 5 3 3 1 16 1 7 57 2 1 4 1 2 38 1 0 12 0 5 19 Pence. Pen. With. Drach Gr.
73. 5 5 0 2 14 4 4 0 1 55 3 3 0 1 23 2 2 0 0 64 1 1 0 0 32 By Troy-Weight.
Troy Avoir-du-poids. Old Sterling Ounces. Ounces. Drams. Gr. Po. Shill. Pence.
1000 1095 7 9 83 6 8 500 547 7 41 41 13 4 400 438 2 62 33 6 8 300 328 6 10 25 0
0 200 219 1 31 16 13 4 100 109 4 52 8 6 8 50 54 6 26 4 3 4 40 43 6 50 3 6 8 30
32 7 1 2 10 0 20 21 7 25 1 13 4 10 10 7 49 0 16 8 5 5 3 61 0 8 4 4 4 3 5 0 6 8
3 3 2 22 0 5 0 2 2 1 39 0 3 4 1 1 0 56 0 1 8 Pen. W. Dram. Gr. Pence. 10 4 28
10 5 2 14 5 4 1 55 4 3 1 23 3 2 0 64 2 1 0 32 1 By Avoir-du-poids.
Avoir dupoids Troy. Sterling. Ounces. Ounces. P. With. 80 Pounds Shill. Pence.
Grains 1000 912 10 00 76 00 10 0 500 456 5 00 38 00 5 0 400 365 0 00 30 8 4 0
300 273 15 00 22 16 3 0 200 182 10 00 15 4 2 0 100 91 5 00 7 12 1 0 50 45 12 40
3 16 0 2 40 36 10 00 3 00 10 0 30 27 7 40 2 5 7 2 20 18 5 00 1 10 5 0 10 9 2 40
15 2 2 5 4 11 20 7 7 1 4 3 13 00 6 1 0 3 2 14 60 4 6 3 2 1 16 40 3 2 1 0 18 20
1 6 1 Drams. P. With. 80 24 Shill. Pen. Quart. 480 4 9 10 00 9 0 240 3 6 67 12 6
3 180 2 4 45 00 4 2 120 1 2 22 12 2 1 60 S^ri^p. P. With. 80 24 Pen. Quart 480 2
1 41 16 1 2 40 1 0 60 20 0 3 20 Grain. P. With. 80 24 Quart 480 10 30 10 1 250 5
15 5 0 365 4 12 4 0 292 3 9 3 0 219 2 6 2 0 146 1 3 1 0 73

The use of these Tables of Coequality, is chiefly for the finding out the just
equality of Troy, and Avoir-du-poids Weight, to satisfy the Curious that both
Assizes are alike.

It has been proved by the Assize by Troy-Weight, that when a Quarter of Wheat
is sold for 6 d. the Bakers White Penny Loaf is to Weigh 676 Ounces, 16 Penny
Weight, or 13536 Penny Weight, or 323864 Grains Troy. And by these numbers of
Penny Weights or Grains, all Assize may be made without Fractions; by Dividing
those Numbers, by as many Six-Pences, as are in the Price of a Quarter of
Wheat, and allowance to the Baker.

The same method must be observed for the following Assize by Avoir-du-poids:
But first of all, the Weight must be found by the Coequality of both, which may
be done by the first Table Coequality by Troy Weight.

First you must set down the 676 Ounces 16 Penny Weight, as in the Example
following; according to such Numbers as are in the first Column Troy, and may
answer the 676 Ounces 16 Penny Weight, setting down first 500 Ounces, then 100.
50. 20. 5. and 1. and then 10 Penny, 5 Penny, and 1 Penny, as you see here.
Afterward look on the next Column Avoir-du-poids, and place over against each
of the Troy Numbers, that of Avoir-du-poids next to it, as to 500 Ounces Troy,
547 Ounces 7 Drachms, 41 part of a Dram, divided in 73 Grains. To a 100
Ounces Troy, 109 Ounces 4 Drachms 52 Grains. To 50 Ounces Troy, 54 Ounces 6
Drachms 26 Grains. To 20 Ounces Troy, 21 Ounces 7 Drachms 25 Grains. To 5
Ounces Troy, 5 Ounces 3 Drachms 61 Grains. To 1 Ounce Troy, 1 Ounce 56 Grains.
To 10 Penny Weight Troy, 4 Drachms 28 Grains. To 5 Penny Weight Troy, 2 Drachms
14 Grains. And to 1 Penny Weight Troy, 32 Grains Avoir-du-poids, add all these
together, and you will find that 741 Ounces 5 Drachms and 43 Grains
Avoir-du-poids, answers exactly 676 Ounces 16 Penny Weight Troy.

Example.

Troy-Weight. Avoir-du poids. Oun. Dr. Oun. Dr. 73. 500 00 547 7 41 100 00 109
4 52 50 00 54 6 26 20 00 21 7 25 5 00 5 3 61 1 00 1 0 56 0 10 0 4 28 0 05 0 2
14 0 01 0 0 32 676 16 741 5 43

The said 741 Ounces 5 Drachms, being Multiplied by 8, which is the number of
Drachms in an Ounce, brings with the odd 5 Drachms 5933 Drachms, which being
also Multiplied by our 73 Grains (or so many parts of a Dram) (so Divided)
brings 433152 Grains Avoir-du-poids, Coequal with 323864 Troy.

For avoiding all Fractions, and many Rules, take the same Method in this
Assize, as in that by Troy-Weight, Divide the 433132 by the Number of
Six-Pences you find in the Price of a Quarter of Wheat, and allowance to the
Baker, and what you find in the Quotient, will be the Weight of a Penny White
Loaf.

Example.

When Corn is at 6 d. per Quarter, the Penny Loaf is to Weigh as abovesaid
433152 parts of a Dram divided in 73 Grains. Supposing then the Corn to be at
12 s. 3. per Barrel, or 24 s. 6 d. the Quarter, and 6 d. allowance to the
Baker, which makes 30 s. 6 d. or 61 Six-Pences. Divide the 433152 Grains by the
61 Six-Pences, and you will find in the Quotient 710O Grains, and 52 parts. Divide
this by 73 Grains, and you will find in the Quotient, 97 Drachms, 19 Grains, and
52 parts of a Grain. Divide this again by 8 Drachms to make Ounces, and the
Quotient will be 12 Ounces, 1 Dram, 19 Grains, and 52 parts of a Grain, which
is the weight of a Penny White Loaf, when Corn and allowance to the Baker is at
30 s. 6 d. per Quarter, and this is coequal with a 11 Ounces 1 Penny Weight,
and 55 parts of 61 Troy-Weight, which is the Weight of a White Penny Loaf by
that Weight.

Keeping this Method, all other Assizes may be soon Calculated, so that
whosoever will be so curious, as to look after my mistakes, (or that of the
Printer) may ascertain all Assizes in a very short time.

This is necessary for all Magistrates to know, else they may mistake in
Punishing the Bakers, for lack of Weight in their Bread, and the latter take
advantage of the want of knowledge of the former, and Bake under Assize.

A Table of Assize of Bread. By Avoir-du-poids Weight.
L. for Pounds, sh. for Shillings. d. for Pence. Po. for Pounds, Ou. for
Ounces, Dr. for Drachms, each Dram divided in 73 Parts. 8 Drachms to an
Ounce, and 16 Ounces to a Pound. Wheat the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny
Wheaten. Penny Household. L. sh. d. Po. Ou. Dr. 73. Po. Ou. Dr. 73. Po. Ou. Dr.
73. 0 00 6 46 5 5 43 69 8 4 28 92 11 3 13 0 1 0 23 2 6 58 34 12 2 14 46 5 5 43
0 1 6 15 7 1 63 23 2 6 58 30 14 3 53 0 2 0 11 9 3 29 17 5 1 7 23 2 6 58 0 2 6 9
4 2 52 13 14 4 5 18 8 5 31 0 3 0 7 11 4 68 11 9 3 29 15 7 1 63 0 3 6 6 9 7 47 9
14 7 34 13 3 7 21 0 4 0 5 12 5 51 8 11 0 40 11 9 3 29 0 4 6 5 2 3 21 7 11 4 68
10 4 6 42 0 5 0 4 10 1 26 6 15 2 2 9 4 2 52 0 5 6 4 3 3 30 6 5 1 9 8 6 6 60 0 6
0 3 13 6 34 5 12 5 51 7 11 4 68 0 6 6 3 9 0 31 5 5 4 46 7 2 0 62 0 7 0 3 4 7 60
4 15 3 54 6 9 7 47 0 7 6 3 1 3 41 4 10 1 25 6 2 7 9 0 8 0 2 14 2 62 4 5 4 20 5
12 5 51 0 8 6 2 11 5 2 4 1 3 40 5 7 2 4 0 9 0 2 9 1 47 3 13 6 34 5 2 3 21 0 9 6
2 7 0 21 3 10 4 32 4 14 0 42 0 1 0 0 2 5 0 49 3 7 5 1 4 10 1 25 The Table of
the Assize of Bread. By Avoir-du-poids
Wheat the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L. sh. d.
Po. Ou. Dr. 73. Po. Ou. Dr. 73. Po. Ou. Dr. 73. 0 10 6 2 3 2 40 3 4 7 60 4 6 5
7 0 11 0 2 1 5 51 3 2 4 40 4 3 3 29 0 11 6 2 0 1 71 3 0 2 70 4 0 3 69 0 12 0 1
14 7 17 2 14 2 62 3 13 6 34 0 12 6 1 13 5 25 2 12 4 1 3 11 2 50 0 13 0 1 12 4
15 2 10 6 23 3 9 0 30 0 13 6 1 11 3 55 2 9 1 47 3 6 7 38 0 14 0 1 10 3 66 2 7 5
63 3 4 7 59 0 14 6 1 9 4 44 2 6 2 66 3 3 1 15 0 15 0 1 8 5 57 2 5 0 49 3 1 3 41
0 15 6 1 7 7 29 2 3 7 7 2 15 6 59 0 16 0 1 7 1 31 2 ^2 6 10 2 14 2 62 0 16 6 1
6 3 58 2 11 5 51 2 12 7 44 0 17 0 1 5 6 37 2 0 5 56 2 11 5 2 0 17 6 1 5 1 38 1
15 6 21 2 10 3 5 0 18 0 1 4 4 60 1 14 7 17 2 9 1 47 0 18 6 1 4 0 26 1 14 0 40 2
8 0 53 0 19 0 1 3 4 16 1 13 2 24 2 7 0 32 0 19 6 1 3 0 10 1 12 4 15 2 6 0 20 1
0 0 1 2 4 24 1 11 6 37 2 5 0 49 1 0 6 1 2 0 52 1 11 1 6 2 4 1 32 1 1 0 1 1 5 20
1 10 3 66 2 3 2 40 1 1 6 1 1 1 72 1 9 6 71 2 2 3 71 1 2 0 1 0 6 62 1 9 2 20 2 5
5 51 1 2 6 1 0 3 62 1 8 5 57 2 0 7 52 The Table of the Assize of Bread. By
Avoir-du-poids.
Wheat the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L. sh. d.
Po. Ou. Dr. 73. Po. Ou. Dr. 73. Po. Ou. Dr. 73. 1 3 0 1 0 0 72 1 8 1 35 2 0 1
71 1 3 6 0 15 6 18 1 7 5 27 1 15 4 36 1 4 0 0 15 3 45 1 7 1 31 1 14 7 17 1 4 6
0 15 1 6 1 6 5 46 1 14 2 12 1 5 0 0 14 6 49 1 6 2 00 1 13 4 25 1 5 6 0 14 4 25
1 5 6 37 1 13 0 50 1 6 0 0 14 2 7 1 5 3 11 1 12 4 15 1 6 6 0 13 7 69 1 4 7 67 1
11 7 66 1 7 0 0 13 5 64 1 4 4 60 1 11 3 55 1 7 6 0 13 3 64 1 4 1 60 1 10 7 55 1
8 0 0 13 1 69 1 3 6 68 1 10 3 66 1 8 6 0 13 0 7 1 3 4 10 1 10 0 14 1 9 0 0 12 6
22 1 3 1 33 1 9 4 44 1 9 6 0 12 4 41 1 2 6 62 1 9 1 10 1 10 0 0 12 2 65 1 2 4
24 1 8 5 57 1 10 6 0 12 1 19 1 2 1 65 1 8 2 39 1 11 0 0 11 7 51 1 1 7 40 1 7 7
29 1 11 6 0 11 6 13 1 1 5 20 1 7 4 26 1 12 0 0 11 4 52 1 1 3 5 1 7 1 31 1 12 6
0 11 3 20 1 1 0 67 1 6 6 41 1 13 0 0 11 1 65 1 0 6 62 1 6 3 58 1 13 6 0 11 0 40
1 0 4 61 1 6 1 8 1 14 0 0 10 7 18 1 0 2 64 1 5 6 37 1 14 6 0 10 5 72 1 0 0 72 1
5 3 72 1 15 0 0 10 4 55 0 15 7 10 1 5 1 38 1 15 6 0 10 3 41 0 15 5 26 1 4 7 10
1 16 0 0 10 2 30 0 15 3 45 1 4 4 60 The Table of the Assize of Bread. By
Avoir-du-poids Weight
Wheat. the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L. sh.
d. Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. 1 16 6 10 1 20 15 1 67 20 2 41 1 17 0 10
0 13 15 0 20 20 0 26 ^ 17 6 9 7 8 14 6 49 19 6 16 1 18 0 9 6 5 14 5 8 19 4 10 1
18 6 9 5 4 14 3 43 19 2 8 1 19 0 9 4 5 14 2 7 19 0 10 1 19 6 9 3 7 14 0 48 18 6
15 2 0 0 9 2 12 13 7 18 18 4 24 2 0 6 9 1 18 13 5 64 18 2 37 2 1 0 9 0 26 13 4
39 18 0 52 2 1 6 8 7 35 13 3 17 17 6 71 2 2 0 8 6 46 13 1 69 17 5 20 2 2 6 8 5
58 13 0 51 17 3 44 2 3 0 8 4 72 12 7 35 17 1 71 2 3 6 8 4 14 12 6 22 17 0 29 2
4 0 8 3 31 12 5 10 16 6 62 2 4 6 8 2 48 12 4 0 16 5 24 2 5 0 8 1 67 12 2 65 16
3 62 2 5 6 8 1 14 12 1 58 16 2 29 2 6 0 8 0 36 12 0 54 16 0 72 2 6 6 7 7 58 11
7 51 15 7 44 2 7 0 7 7 9 11 6 50 15 6 18 2 7 6 7 6 33 11 5 50 15 4 66 2 8 0 7 5
59 11 4 52 15 3 43 2 8 6 7 5 12 11 3 55 15 2 24 The Table of the Assize of
Bread. By Avoir du-poids Weight.
Wheat the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household L. sh. d.
Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. 2 9 0 7 4 39 11 2 59 15 1 6 2 9 6 7 3 68 11
1 65 14 7 67 2 10 0 7 3 24 11 1 00 14 6 49 2 10 6 7 2 54 11 0 8 14 5 36 2 11 0
7 2 12 10 7 18 14 4 25 2 11 6 7 1 44 10 6 30 14 3 15 2 12 0 7 1 3 10 5 41 14 2
7 2 12 6 7 0 37 10 4 55 14 1 1 2 13 0 6 7 71 10 3 70 13 7 69 2 13 6 6 7 33 10 3
13 13 6 66 2 14 0 6 6 68 10 2 30 13 5 64 2 14 6 6 6 31 10 1 47 13 4 63 2 15 0 6
5 68 10 0 66 13 3 64 2 15 6 6 5 33 10 0 13 13 2 66 2 16 0 6 4 71 9 7 34 13 1 69
2 16 6 6 4 37 9 6 55 13 1 1 2 17 0 6 4 3 9 6 5 13 0 7 2 17 6 6 3 43 9 5 28 12 7
14 2 18 0 6 3 11 9 4 53 12 6 22 2 18 6 6 2 52 9 4 5 12 5 31 2 19 0 6 2 20 9 3
31 12 4 41 2 19 6 6 1 62 9 2 57 12 3 52 3 0 0 6 1 32 9 2 12 12 2 65 3 0 6 6 1 2
9 1 40 12 2 5 3 1 0 6 0 46 9 0 69 12 1 19 The Table of the Assize of Bread. By
Avoir-du-poids Weight.
Wheat the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L. sh. d.
Ou. Dr. 73 Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. 3 1 6 6 0 17 9 0 26 12 0 35 3 2 0 5 7 62 8 7
56 11 7 51 3 2 6 5 7 34 8 7 14 11 6 68 3 3 0 5 7 6 8 6 46 11 6 13 3 3 6 5 6 52
8 6 5 11 5 32 3 4 0 5 6 26 8 5 39 11 4 52 3 4 6 5 5 72 8 4 72 11 3 72 3 5 0 5 5
46 8 4 33 11 3 20 3 5 6 5 5 21 8 3 68 11 2 43 3 6 0 5 4 69 8 3 31 11 1 65 3 6 6
5 4 44 8 0 67 11 1 16 3 7 0 5 4 20 8 2 30 11 0 40 3 7 6 5 3 69 8 1 67 10 7 66 3
8 0 5 3 45 8 1 32 10 7 18 3 8 6 5 3 22 8 0 70 10 6 45 3 9 0 5 2 72 8 0 36 10 5
72 3 9 6 5 2 50 8 0 2 10 5 27 3 10 0 5 2 27 7 7 41 10 4 55 3 10 6 5 2 6 7 7 9
10 4 12 3 11 0 5 1 57 7 6 49 10 3 41 3 11 6 5 1 36 7 6 17 10 2 72 3 12 0 5 1 15
7 5 59 10 2 30 3 12 6 5 0 67 7 5 27 10 1 61 3 13 0 5 0 46 7 4 70 10 1 20 3 13 6
5 0 26 7 4 39 10 0 53 The Table of the Assize of Bread. By
Avoir-du-poids-Weight.
Wheat the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny Household. L. sh. d.
Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. 3 14 0 5 0 6 7 4 10 10 0 13 3 14 6 4 7 60 7
3 53 9 7 47 3 15 0 4 7 40 7 3 24 9 7 8 3 15 6 4 7 21 7 2 68 9 6 43 3 16 0 4 7 2
7 2 40 9 6 5 3 16 6 4 6 57 7 2 12 9 5 41 3 17 0 4 6 38 7 1 57 9 5 4 3 17 6 4 6
20 7 1 30 9 4 41 3 18 0 4 6 2 7 3 3 9 4 5 3 18 6 4 5 57 7 0 50 9 3 42 3 19 0 4
5 40 7 0 24 9 3 7 3 19 6 4 5 23 6 7 71 9 2 46 4 0 0 4 5 6 6 7 45 9 2 12 4 0 6 4
4 62 6 7 20 9 1 51 4 1 0 4 4 45 6 6 68 9 1 18 4 1 6 4 4 29 6 6 44 9 0 58 4 2 0
4 4 13 6 6 19 9 0 26 4 3 0 4 3 54 6 5 45 8 7 35 4 3 6 4 3 38 6 5 21 8 7 4 4 4 0
4 3 23 6 4 71 8 6 46 4 4 6 4 3 8 6 4 48 8 6 16 4 5 0 4 2 65 6 4 25 8 5 58 4 5 6
4 2 51 6 4 3 8 5 29 4 6 0 4 2 36 6 3 54 8 4 72 The Table of the Assize of
Bread. By Avoir du poids Weight.
Wheat the Quarter Price. Penny White. Penny Wheaten. Penny shoushold. L. sh.
d. Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. Ou. Dr. 73. 4 6 6 4 2 21 6 3 32 8 4 43 4 7 0 4 2 7 6
3 11 8 4 14 4 7 6 4 1 66 6 2 62 8 3 59 4 8 0 4 1 52 6 2 41 8 3 31 4 8 6 4 1 38
6 2 20 8 3 3 4 9 0 4 1 24 6 2 00 8 2 48 4 9 6 4 1 10 6 1 52 8 2 21 4 10 0 4 0
70 6 1 32 8 1 67 4 10 6 4 0 57 6 1 12 8 1 41 4 11 0 4 0 43 6 0 65 8 1 14 4 11 6
4 0 30 6 0 46 8 0 61 4 12 0 4 0 18 6 0 27 8 0 36 4 12 6 4 0 5 6 0 8 8 0 00 4 13
0 3 7 65 5 7 62 7 7 58 4 13 6 3 7 53 5 7 43 7 7 33 4 14 0 3 7 41 5 7 25 7 7 9 4
14 6 3 7 28 5 7 6 7 6 57 4 15 0 3 7 16 5 6 61 7 6 33 4 15 6 3 7 4 5 6 43 7 6 9
4 16 0 3 6 66 5 6 26 7 5 59 4 1 66 3 6 54 5 6 8 7 5 35 4 17 0 3 6 42 5 5 64 7 5
12 4 17 6 3 6 31 5 5 46 7 4 62 4 18 0 3 9 19 5 5 29 7 4 39 4 18 6 3 6 8 5 5 13
7 4 17 4 19 0 3 5 70 5 4 69 7 3 68 4 19 6 3 5 59 5 4 62 7 3 46 5 00 0 3 5 48 5
4 36 7 3 24

I have omitted in this Assize by Avoir-du-poids, all the Fractions of a single
Grain, which are all insignificant, there being no Weight in use of the 20. 30.
or 50th part of a Grain. Besides, all the curious Critics may easily supply
that, when they shall take the pains, to Calculate any of the Assizes.

RULES FOR ASSIZING OF White, Wheaten, and Houshold-Bread; BY A Certain
Standard Weight, for each kind of LOAVES. Assized in Money at a certain Price,
according as the Rate of Corn Rises and Falls in the Market. Calculated
exactly, and made Coequal with the Weights, and Prices, prescribed by the
Statute Assiza Panis, 51. H. 3.
THis way of Assizing the Bread, would require but little Calculation, could
the Weight of Corn, and Price, be Regulated at the same time, according to the
value of Current Money, as the Venetians do: For every First day of the Month,
they have an account brought of all the Corn in their Dominions, and according
to the Quantity, they value it at a certain Price, and every Monday they affix
in the Market place the Weight, that the several sorts of Bread ought to Weigh,
and the Price; And if the Bakers do not Conform, and miss in the Weight, the
Discoverer has power to go with the Officer of the Market, to the Bakers House
to Seize all his Bread; the half whereof is for the Informer, the other for the
Poor.

In this Kingdom we are Bound by the Statute, to a certain Weight of a Quarter
of Wheat, and by a certain Weight of the Quantity of Corn, which the Bread must
Weigh, when at such a Price, and also by our Current Money Divided only in
Shillings, or 12 Pences, or 24 Half Pence, or 48 Farthings, which is something
troublesome because of our Assize, which Rises and Falls by odd Numbers and
Fractions, and extends further then the Number of 48 Farthings; therefore we
are necessitated to Divide our Farthing in Four Pieces, which we may call
Deniers; and that may be easily done, and without charge.

The other Assizes begins by a Supposition; when Corn is at 6 d. the
Quarter, a Penny White Roll ought to Weigh so much: But that Supposition is
only for Rule sake, and not to be practiced; because the Bakers since that
Statute, have Six Shillings allowance, and therefore if Corn should ever fall
so low as 6 d. a Quarter, they ought to be Assized as if sold at 6 s. 6 d. as
they are allowed in all Assizes: And therefore a certain proportion of Money
ought to be applied on every Six Pence that a Quarter of Wheat, and allowance
to the Baker, amounts unto, and so exactly that when the Price of Corn Rises or
Falls by 6 d. that of the Standard Bread, may also Rise and Fall accordingly by
equal portions, as it does by the Assize by Troy, and Avoir-du-poids, viz. from
6 d. to 5 l.

The Rule of the Statute is, That a Quarter of Wheat shall be Divided in 8
Bushels, or 64 Wine Gallons, and shall Weigh 512. Pound, or 6144 Ounces, or
122880 Penny Weight, or 3932160 Grains Troy.

I shall therefore take the Number of 64 Gallons for Rule, (which is a full
Quarter) and Divide my Shilling into as many parts, which obliges me to Divide
the Farthing in 4 Deniers, there being but 48 Farthings in a Shilling; and so
having 192 Deniers, the Third Part of which is 64, I fix 3 Quarters of a
Farthing on every Gallon of Corn, which Rising, and Lowering in Price by Six
Pence, shall also Rise and Fall the Price of my Standard, by 3 Quarters on each
Six Pence, which will answer exactly the Assizes by Troy, and Avoir-du-poids.

Example.

Suppose that Corn be sold at 26s. and 6 s. allowance, which makes 32 s. or 64
Six Pences, each Six Pence bearing 3 Quarters, the 64 amounts to 192, which
Divided by 4 brings 48 Farthings which is a Shilling.

Look on the Assize by Troy Weight at 32 s. Price of Corn, and allowance, and
you will find that the Penny White is to Weigh 10 Ounces 11 Penny Weight and
half, so that a 12 Penny Loaf must Weigh 126 Ounces, 18 Pence, or 10 Pound 6
Ounces, 18 Penny Weight. The Wheaten is to weigh half more, and the Household
twice as much: And these are our Three Standards for White, Wheaten, and
Household Bread.

All the Assizes answers this exactly; I shall not trouble the Reader with the
Proof of each; for it would make this Book too Voluminous, and every one may
easily Calcutate them. I shall only Instance few of them without Fractions.

Suppose the Corn and Allowance be Lowred to 8 s. or Sixteen Six Pences, the 16
times 3 Quarters is 48, and 48 Deniers is 12 Farthings, or 3 Pence: Now as 3
Pence is the Fourth Part of 12 Pence, so is 16 the Fourth Part of 64, therefore
this Falls in proportion. On the contrary; supposing the Corn Rises to 40 s.
with the allowance, which is 80 Six Pences, Calculate 80 times 3 Deniers whic
his 240, the Fourth Part makes 60 Farthings or 15 Pence, so that our Standard
Rises one fourth part more then that at 32 s. as also the Price from 32 to 40
s. Rises a fourth part, and so does all other Assizes, from First to Last, as
you see in the Table.

I doubt not but some will say, that although this way of Assizing be the best,
and the most certain, and most useful, that yet it is not practicable, because
we have no such small Money as 3 Quarters of a Farthing. But this difficulty
will be easily removed; for it is very easy, and without any charge to the
King, to make 4 pieces for a Farthing, and to call them Quarters or Deniers.

Such small Money being very near the intrinsic value, and Authorized by the
King, would be pleasing to the People, and would pass as Current as Silver,
both at home and abroad.

I remember that when King Charles the Second, was Petitioned to allow to the
Blew-Boys-Hospital liberty of Coining Half Pences, as an advantage toward that
Foundation; there were those who are still in being, that would have undertaken
to Coin Small Money, one third part heavier then that now Current, and give
some benefit to the Hospital: If the same was allowed, it would be not only an
advantage to that Foundation, but a benefit to the generality of the Poor; for
if in lieu of a Half Penny there were 8 Deniers, or 8 Quarters of a Farthing, he
that has but Two Pence a day to distribute to the Poor, in lieu of helping 4
with Four Half Pence, might distribute his Two Pence to 32 Poor Persons.

There is a Table of Assize of Bread in Money used in London, but it is only
for a Peck Loaf of Household Bread, which is to Weigh always 17 Pound 6 Ounces 1
Dram Avoir-du-poids, and never changes but by the Falling or Rising of the
Quarter of Wheat by 2 s. So that in case an Assize be at 28 s. and Corn Rises
to 28 s. and 6 d. and 29 s. and 29 s. and 6 d. yet the Price never Rises; by
which the Bakers look always 6d. or 1 s. or 18 d. in a Quarter of Wheat; till
the Price comes to an even Sum: This does not answer the Statute, and therefore
ought not to be practiced here, nor can we bind the Bakers to such an Assize.
And on the contrary, if the Price should fall to 27 s. ands 6 d. or 27 s. or 26
s. and 6 d. and the Bakers should contrive to keep it at those odd Prices, they
should be continually Gainers, of as much as the odd Price amounts unto, over
and above the even Shillings Prices: Besides that, if an Unfree Baker was bound
to such Standard, and to convert all in Household, he could not Bake but at a
great Loss.

They have also a Table of Assize by Troy-Weight, wherein they have omitted all
the Assizes by 6 d. and all the Fractions in all other Assizes by Shillings, so
that in case the Baker transgress, his punishment must be Arbitrary, for they
cannot plead the Statute against them, none of their Assizes answering the
Rules prescribed by that Act.

There is another small Assize incerted in a Book of Sir Samuel Morland's
Works, which I believe gave birth to the former; it is Calculated by the Bushel
of Wheat, when at 2 s. and Rises by 3 d. in each Assize, therefore 2 s. answers
16 s. a Quarter, 2 s. 3 d. answers 18 s. a Quarter. 2 s. 6 d. answers and 20 s.
and so on to 9 s. a Bushel, which is 3 l. 12 s. the Quarter; but all Assizes
that falls to One, Two, or Three odd Six Pences he left out, because of the
difficulty of the Fractions.

His First Assize of 2 s. per Bushel requiring Three other Assizes before his
Second at 2 s. 3 d. for all the Assizes must Rise or Fall by 6 d. so that he
should have made all Assizes by 2 s. and the part of a Farthing, 2 s. Farthing
and, and 2 s. 3 Farthings, which is the 16th part of a 6. Penny, as 2 s. a
Bushel is the 16th part of 16 s. a Quarter: The want of those Fractions makes
the Assize useless, and contrary to the Statute, and of the same prejudice as
the former.

Edmund Wingate in his Abridgment of the Statutes mended that mistake in some
measure in his Assize, which begineth by the price of Corn when at 19 s. 6 d.
and observes all along the Assize by odd Six Pences and Shillings, but he
leaves out all the Fractions in his Divisions of the Weight, that the Penny
White Loaf ought to Weigh, which amounts to 24 times as much in the Twelve
Penny Household; which is the Bread that requires the most exact Weight. Besides
there are several Assizes wherein he mistook. I shall mention one for example,
When Corn is at 58 s. 6 d. per Quarter, he Calculates it, That the Penny White
is to Weigh 5 Ounces 14 Penny Weight, whereas it ought to Weigh 5 Ounces 15
Penny Weight, and 81 part of 117, which multipled makes the Assize of the
Twelve Penny Household short by 40 Penny Weight and 72 parts of 117 which is
above 2 Ounces, all his following Assizes are like this; and therefore does not
answer the Statute, and ought not to be followed.

One Powell an English Baker, has also Printed a Book of Assize, in favor of
his Brethren of England, which has been the stumbling Block of several of our
Clerks of Assize here. The Rules he has taken I know not; but as to his
Assertions concerning the Assize for Foreigners they are altogether contrary to
the Statute Assiza Panis; and I really believe intended here on purpose to Ruin
them; for none can Bake by that false Assize, but must loose very considerably:
And if the Magistrates should Authorize it again, as the Free-Bakers desire so
earnestly, then indeed neither the Unfree-Bakers, nor Foreigners, nor Country
Bakers, would be able to live by their Calling: Less then nothing being allowed
for Baking by that false Assize. But the Act of Parliament will relieve them
against such Oppression, if ever the Free-Bakers should prevail again to have
it imposed on those poor People.

The Table of the Assize of Bread in Money, by a certain Standard-Weight.
White Standard 10 Pound 6 Ounces 18 Penny Troy. Wheaten Standard 15 Pound 10
Ounces 7 Penny Troy. Household Standard 21 Pound 1 Ounce 16 Penny Troy. Price of
a Quarter of Wheat and alowance. Price of the great Standard Loaf. Price of a
Quarter of Wheat and alowance. Price of the great Standard Loaf. Price of a
Quarter of Wheat and alowance. Price of the great Standard. Loaf. L. sh. d. sh.
P. F. D. L. sh. d. sh. P. F. D. L. sh. d. sh. P. F. D. 0 0 6 0 0 0 3 0 12 6 0 4
2 3 1 4 6 0 9 0 3 0 1 0 0 0 1 2 0 13 0 0 4 3 2 1 5 0 0 9 1 2 0 1 6 0 0 2 1 0 13
6 0 5 0 1 1 5 6 0 9 2 1 0 2 0 0 0 3 0 0 14 0 0 5 1 0 1 6 0 0 9 3 0 0 2 6 0 0 3
3 0 14 6 0 5 1 3 1 6 6 0 9 3 3 0 3 0 0 1 0 2 0 15 0 0 5 2 2 1 7 0 0 10 0 2 0 3
6 0 1 1 1 0 15 6 0 5 3 1 1 7 6 0 10 1 1 0 4 0 0 1 2 0 0 16 0 0 6 0 0 1 8 0 0 10
2 0 0 4 6 0 1 2 3 0 16 6 0 6 0 3 1 8 6 0 10 2 3 0 5 0 0 2 3 2 0 17 0 0 6 1 2 1
9 0 0 10 3 2 0 5 6 0 2 0 1 0 17 6 0 6 2 1 1 9 6 0 11 0 1 0 6 0 0 2 1 0 0 18 0 0
6 3 0 1 10 0 0 11 1 0 0 6 6 0 2 1 3 0 18 6 0 6 3 3 1 10 6 0 11 1 3 0 7 0 0 2 2
2 0 19 0 0 7 0 2 1 11 0 0 11 2 2 0 7 6 0 2 3 1 0 19 6 0 7 1 1 1 11 6 0 11 3 1 0
8 0 0 3 0 0 1 0 0 0 7 2 0 1 12 0 1 0 0 0 0 8 6 0 3 0 3 1 0 6 0 7 2 3 1 12 6 1 0
0 3 0 9 0 0 3 1 2 1 1 0 0 7 3 2 1 13 0 1 0 1 2 0 9 6 0 3 2 1 1 1 6 0 8 0 2 1 13
6 1 0 2 1 0 10 0 0 3 3 0 1 2 0 0 8 1 0 1 14 0 1 0 3 0 0 10 6 0 3 3 3 1 2 6 0 8
1 3 1 14 6 1 0 3 3 0 11 0 0 4 0 2 1 3 0 0 8 2 2 1 15 0 1 1 0 2 0 11 6 0 4 1 1 1
3 6 0 8 3 1 1 15 6 1 1 1 1 0 12 0 0 4 2 0 1 4 0 0 9 0 0 1 16 0 1 1 2 0 The
Table of the Assize of Bread in Money, by a certain Standard Weight.
White Standard 10 Pound 6 Ounces 18 Penny Troy. Wheaten Standard 15 Pound 10
Ounces 7 Penny Troy. Household Standard 21 Pound 1 Ounce 16 Penny Troy. Price of
a Quarter of Wheat and alowance. Price of the Standard Loaf. Price of a Quarter
of Wheat and alowance. Ptice of the great Standard Loaf. Price of a Quarter of
Wheat and alowance. Price of the great. Standard Loaf. L. sh. d. sh. P. F. D.
L. sh. d. sh. P. F. D. L. sh. d. sh. P. F. D. 1 16 6 1 1 2 3 2 8 6 1 6 0 3 3 0
6 1 10 2 3 1 17 0 1 1 3 2 2 9 0 1 6 1 2 3 1 0 1 10 3 2 1 17 6 1 2 0 1 2 9 6 1 6
2 1 3 1 6 1 11 0 1 1 18 0 1 2 1 0 2 10 0 1 6 3 0 3 2 0 1 11 1 0 1 18 6 1 2 1 3
2 10 6 1 6 3 3 3 2 6 1 11 1 3 1 19 0 1 2 2 2 2 11 0 1 7 0 2 3 3 0 1 11 2 2 1 19
6 1 2 3 1 2 11 6 1 7 1 1 3 3 6 1 11 3 1 2 0 0 1 3 0 0 2 12 0 1 7 2 0 3 4 0 2 0
0 0 2 0 6 1 3 0 3 2 12 6 1 7 2 3 3 4 6 2 0 0 3 2 1 0 1 3 1 2 2 13 0 1 7 3 2 3 5
0 2 0 1 2 2 1 6 1 3 2 1 2 13 6 1 8 0 1 3 5 6 2 0 2 1 2 2 0 1 3 3 0 2 14 0 1 8 1
0 3 6 0 2 0 3 0 2 2 6 1 3 3 3 2 14 6 1 8 1 3 3 6 6 2 0 3 3 2 3 0 1 4 0 2 2 15 0
1 8 2 2 3 7 0 2 1 0 2 2 3 6 1 4 1 1 2 15 6 1 8 3 1 3 7 6 2 1 1 1 2 4 0 1 4 2 0
2 16 0 1 9 0 0 3 8 0 2 1 2 0 2 4 6 1 4 2 3 2 16 6 1 9 0 3 3 8 6 2 1 2 3 2 5 0 1
4 3 2 2 17 0 1 9 1 2 3 9 0 2 1 3 2 2 5 6 1 5 0 1 2 17 6 2 9 2 1 3 9 6 2 2 0 1 2
6 0 1 5 1 0 2 18 0 1 9 3 0 3 10 0 2 2 1 0 2 6 6 1 5 1 3 2 18 6 1 9 3 3 3 10 6 2
2 1 3 2 7 0 5 5 2 2 2 19 0 1 10 0 2 3 11 0 2 2 2 2 2 7 6 1 5 3 1 2 19 6 1 10 1
1 3 11 6 2 2 3 1 2 8 0 1 6 0 0 3 0 0 1 10 2 0 3 12 0 2 3 0 0 The Table of the
Assize of Bread in Money, by a certain Standard Weight.
White Standard 10 Pound 6 Ounces 18 Penny Troy. Wheaten Standard 15 Pound 10
Ounces 7 Penny Troy. Household Standard 21 Pound 1 Ounce 16 Penny Toyr. Price of
a Quarter of Wheat and alowance. Price of great Standard Loaf. Price of a
Quarter of Wheat and alowance. Price of the great Standard Loaf. Price of a
Quarter of Wheat and alowance. Price of the great Standard Loaf. L. sh. d. sh.
P. F. D. L. sh. d. sh. P. F. D. L. sh. d. sh. P. F. D. 3 12 6 2 3 0 3 4 3 0 2 7
0 2 4 13 6 2 11 0 1 3 13 0 2 3 2 2 4 3 6 2 7 1 1 4 14 0 2 11 1 0 3 1 3 6 2 3 2
1 4 4 0 2 7 2 0 4 14 6 2 11 1 3 3 14 0 2 3 3 0 4 4 6 2 7 2 3 4 15 0 2 11 2 2 3
14 6 2 3 3 1 4 5 0 2 7 3 2 4 15 6 3 11 3 1 3 15 0 2 4 0 2 4 5 6 2 8 0 1 4 16 0
3 00 0 0 3 15 6 2 4 1 1 4 6 0 2 8 1 0 4 16 6 3 00 0 3 3 16 0 2 4 2 0 4 6 6 2 8
1 3 4 17 0 3 00 2 2 3 16 6 2 4 2 3 4 7 0 2 8 2 2 4 17 6 3 00 3 1 3 17 0 2 4 3 2
4 7 6 2 8 3 1 4 18 0 3 1 0 0 3 17 6 2 5 0 1 4 8 0 2 9 0 0 4 18 6 3 1 0 3 3 18 0
2 5 1 0 4 8 6 2 9 0 3 4 19 0 3 1 1 2 3 18 6 2 5 1 3 4 9 0 2 9 1 2 4 19 6 3 1 2
1 3 19 0 2 5 2 2 4 9 6 2 9 2 1 5 0 0 3 1 3 0 3 19 6 2 9 3 1 4 10 0 2 9 3 0 4 0
0 2 6 0 0 4 10 6 2 9 3 3 4 0 6 2 6 0 3 4 11 0 2 10 0 2 4 1 0 2 6 1 2 4 11 6 2
10 11 4 1 6 2 6 2 1 4 12 0 2 10 2 0 4 2 0 2 6 3 0 4 12 6 2 10 2 3 4 2 6 2 6 3 3
4 13 0 2 10 3 2

AN ANSWER TO A PETITION of the Corporation of BAKERS. Presented to the LORD
MAYOR, SHERIFFS, COMMONS, and CITIZENS, of the City of Dublin, at Easter
Assembly, 1699.
THE Allegations in the said Petition being all imaginary Suppositions needs no
Answer. All what they seem to request is, that the City would be pleased to
revoke their late grant to Unfree-Bakers, and to allow the Corporation such
Priledges in every respect, as all other Corporations have.

As for the revoking the Act past for the Encouraging the Unfree Bakers (which
they call Foreiners) it cannot consist with the Honor of the City at this
juncture of time, that they have been at vast charges to take Houses, and build
Ovens, and buy all Utencils, wherein they have spent their Stock; and by their
generous care suplied the City with good and wholesome Bread, and prevented the
Famishing of many poor People. Had the Corporation prevented that by
Petitioning in time, before the former had set up by virtue of that Act, they
had no doubt received all the favor they could justly expect. And if they do
Bake, as they say, all good and wholesome Bread, and the Unfree all Currupt,
Unsound, and unwholsom Bread, as the former alleges in their Petition, the
latter need not be destroyed by Act of Assembly, for they will destroy
themselves, for no body will leave off buying good Bread from the skilful Free
Baker, to go to the unskilful Unfree Baker for Corrupt, Unsound and Unwholsom
Bread.

They have joined to their Petition a Paper, the Copy of which follows.

An exact account of two Barrels of Wheat, Baked into Household Bread, according
to the Lord Mayors Assize, by the Grand Jury of the County of the City of
Dublin, February the 10th. School.

l. s. d. Two Barrels of Wheat cost 25 s. 6 d. per Barrel 2 11 00 Barm 0 01 00
Baking 0 01 00 Furrs 0 00 10 Salt and Candels 0 00 11 2 14 9

l. s. d. Product 46 Twelve Penny Loaves according to Assize 2 6 6 To Bushel of
Bran 0 2 0 2 8 6 To Loss in Baking 0 6 3 2 14 9

C Q lb The Wheat Weighed gross 4 1 5 Tole taken out 0 1 4 4 0 1 Bran weighed 0
2 22 Neat Meal 3 1 7

The above Trial being made by the Order of the said Grand Jury, by me the day
above said.

Vin. Bradston.

Several days before this Trial, the Exceptions made against it were Printed,
and delivered to Sir Michael Mitchel Foreman of that Grand Jury, and to Mr.
Thwaits (one of them) who have not Signed the Report, by reasons best known to
themselves; and every body who will read the Exceptions against that Trial,
will easily judge of the Fallacy of it, and the Disingenuity of the Bakers.

This Book explains all the Rules for Baking according to the Statute of
exactly, that I refer the Reader to it. I shall only answer the Tryers by their
very Assize, taking all for granted as to the price, charge, weight of Corn,
Bran, etc. and quantity of Bread made of it according to Assize; which was that
day 12 Ounces and the Penny Household by Avoir-du-poids, the rule of their
Assize in this Trial. According to which the Twelve Penny Loaf ought to weigh
150 Ounces, and the 46 Twelve Penny Loafs 6975 Ounces, or 435 Pound 15 Ounces,
by which I must observe first of all, that their Meal being by their Trial 3
Quintals a Quarter and 7 Pound makes only 371 Pounds, so that it appears that
in Barm, Water, and Salt, the weight of the Bread increases 64 Pound 15 Ounces,
which is a great advantage to the Baker.

Should I enlarge on this matter, it would require as many Sheets as are
already Printed; and what is done answers them sufficiently. I shall only say
that at the same time this Trial was made, an Unfree Baker made another after
the same manner, and got above 7 s. profit, and would have got much more, had
he followed the Rules of Baking according to Assize, that is by first laying
apart part of best Flower for White, 3 for Wheaten, ^ for Household, as appears
by the following Try^^^.

Example.

They own that their Neat Meal and Barm, etc. produced 46 times 150 Ounces,
which is the rule of Assize that day for the Twelve Penny Loaf, and the whole
6975 Ounces. Therefore had they Divided their Meal in Three parts, viz. 2325
Ounces for White, as much for Wheaten, and as much for Household, it would have
produced as follows.

l. s. d. 2325 Ounces Household Bread at 150 Ounces for a Twelve Penny Loaf 15
Loaves 0 15 6 2325 Ounces Wheaten, at^ 12 Ounces for a Twelve Penny Loaf 23
Loaves or 1 3 3 2325 Ounces White, at 75 Ounces for a Twelve Penny Loaf 31
Loaves or 1 11 0 And this had produced in all 3 9 9 And all their Ezpences
amounting but to 2 14 9 They had Gained 0 15 0

This is my Private Answer, having received no order about it, their Petition
being Rejected.

FINIS.

