A Tender Visitation of Love, To both the UNIVERSITIES OXFORD and CAMBRIDGE,
AND To the Jnns of Court and Chancery Even to the Seed of God in you All, for
you to mind, and consider ere it be too late.

From the movings of the Lord, in your Friend

George Bishop.

And I said, Hear I pray you, O Heads of Jacob, And ye Princes of the House of
Israel, is it not for you to know Judgment? LONDON Printed for Robert Wilson,
and are to be sold at his Shop at the Black-spread Eagle and Windmill in
Martins Le Grand and also by Richard Moon Bookseller in Wine-Street in
Bristol. 1660.

A Tender Visitation of Love, to Both the Universities Oxford, and Cambridg,
and to the Inns of Court and Chancerie, etc.
FRIENDS,
THere is something in you all that is Eternal, which nothing but God can
satisfy, which came from God; In the Prosperity or Suffering of which stands
your Welfare or undoing for Ever, for as much as God is with or against you, as
well or ill ye deal with it: And Gods being with or against you, is your
blessedness or Everlasting Destruction.

Now this Eternal thing in you all, is the Soul (God breathed into man the
breath of Life, and man became a living Soul, after the Image of God created he
him in Righteousness, and true Holiness) which being in Death by reason of
Corruption (for, By one man sin entered into the World, and Death by Sin; And
so Death passed over all men, for that all have sinned) and by Death being held
under or in Captivity, by him who has the Power of Death: it is made subject
unto Bondage (for, being Servants of sin, ye are free from Righteousness; And
to whom ye yield your selves Servants to obey, his Servants ye are to whom ye
obey; Whether of sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto Life: And the wages of
sin is Death, but the gift of God is Eternal Life, through Jesus Christ our
Lord) and being held under or made subject to Bondage, it is separate from God,
without Christ, an Alien from the Commonwealth of Israel; A stranger from the
Covenant of promise, havving no hope; And without God in the World.

And this is the State of all men by Nature, and this is your state whilst ye
know not that your Redeemer lives, and that your Redeemer lives ye know not,
whilst ye feel not. Him living in you; And him ye feel not living in you,
whilst ye are in Death, and in Death ye are, whilst Death has power over you.
And Death has power over you, whilst ye are not delivered from the fear of
Death, and from the fear of Death, ye are not delivered, whilst ye are subject
to Bondage (for forasmuch as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood, he
also himself, likewise, took part of the same, that through Death he might
destroy him that had the power of Death, that is the Devil, and deliver them
who through fear of Death, were all their life time, subject unto Bondage) and
subject unto Bondage ye are, whilst sin has dominion over you, (for of whom a
man is overcome, of the same is he brought in Bondage) and, sin ha^ dominion
over you, whilst ye obey it in the lusts thereof, and, sin having dominion over
you, ye are under the Law: And whilst ye are under the Law, ye are under the
curse. And being under the curse, ye are (dying so) most miserable, for, such
shall be turned into Hell, and, out of Hell there is no Redemption: For, Depart
from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.
will the King say to them on his left hand, when he shall come in his Glory,
and all his Holy Angels with him, and shall sit unpo the Throne of his Glory,
and these shall go into everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into Life
Eternal.

Therefore, it concerns you, whilst ye have time, to mind, and consider, ere it
be too late, the things that appertain to your Eternal peace; That so it may be
well with that in every one of you, in the welfare of which does stand your
Blessedness and Prosperity for ever.

Now unto this there is no other way than Christ the Light, the Light of the
World, the true Light that lighteh every man that comes into the World, in
whom was life, and the life, was the Light of men: Who, was in the beginning
with God, who was God, by whom all things were made, and without whom was not
any thing made that was made? The Word, the Word of God; The Word nigh you, in
your mouth, and in your heart, which Moses spoke of saying, This Commandment
(viz. the Book of the Law) which I command thee this Day, It is not hidden from
thee, nor is it far off; It is not in Heaven, that thou should say, who shall
go up for us into Heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear it, and do it?
Neither is it beyond the Sea, that thou should say, who shall go over the
Sea, and bring it to us, that we may hear it and do it? But the Word is very
nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou may do it. And
which Paul Preached when he said, the Righteousness which is of Faith,
speaks on this wise, say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven?
(that is to bring Christ down from above) or, who shall descend into the deep?
(That is, to bring up Christ again from the dead) but, what says it? The Word
is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that is the Word of Faith,
which we Preach; Whose Commission to the Gentiles was, to open their eyes, and
to turn them from darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God,
that they may receive forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are
Sanctified by Faith, which is in me; And for this was he sent, by him who is
the Son of God (who met him in the way) the Savior of the Soul, the Covenant
of Light to the Gentiles, and the glory of his People of Israel.

And this Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates: and the Light of this
Christ, it is in you, which shows you evil, the compass and end of all your
actions, which searches your heart, and tries your reigns, the candle of the
Lord, that searches the inward parts of the belly: which shines in darkness,
but the darkness comprehends it not. And the Dominion of this Christ, it is in
you (the Kingdom of God) which reproves you for sin (the Comforter, when he is
come he shall reprove the World of sin; Now the Lord is that Spirit) who is the
Power of God; the Gospel of Salvation, the Everlasting Gospel, the Law, the
Rule, the measure of all things; That Is over all, that is above all, that
comprehends all; The Supreme, the Higher Power; The Head of Principalities, and
Powers, and of every man, and of the Church, which is his Body, the fullness of
him that fills all in all, which is in God, the Pillar and ground of Truth,
Christ Jesus, the Power of God; And the Wisdom of God; The way of Life, the
Way, the Truth, and the Life; The one Lawgiver, who is able to save, and to
destroy; The man Christ Jesus, the Son to whom the Father has committed all
Judgment, the Judge of all, the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only
wise God; The blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings, and Lord of lords,
who only has Immortality, dwelling in the Light which no man can approach
unto, whom no man has seen, nor can see, to whom be Honor, and Power
Everlasting, Amen. Who is able to save to the uttermost, them that come to God
by him.

For, there is that in every one of you, which never consents to sin, nor was
nor can be overcome by it, which the gates of Hell can never prevail against,
else it should never speak, it should never move against that which is evil,
which gives the Law, the Rule to sin, reproves, checks, Judges and condemns it,
be it never so high, and flowing over, and this is the Kingdom of God; And this
Kingdom of God is within you, it comes not by observation, said Christ even to
the Pharisees, whom he called Serpents, there was that even in them, which
never was so overcome by sin, as to consent to sin, but reproved it, and this
was the Kingdom of God in them; And this Nebuchadnezar came to acknowledge,
after that he was driven out from among men; And had eaten grass with the
Oxen, and his body had been wet with the dew of Heaven, till his hair was grown
like Eagles feathers, and his nails like Birds claws, and seven times had
passed over him, [Sc.] That the most High rules in the Kingdoms of men.

And, there is that in every one of you that limits, that stops, that sets the
bounds to the rovings of your minds, and the outgoings of your thoughts, to
the ends of the Earth, and to the wickedness of man, that it pass not all
bounds, and that brings to consideration, to coolness, to a consistencie of
things in your selves, and to mind God in whom ye live, move, and have your
being, and this is truth, God that made the World, and all things therein,
seeing that he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with
hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing,
seeing that he gives unto all Life, and Breath, and all things, and has made
of one Blood, all Nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of the Earth,
and has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
habitation, that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after
him, though he be not far from any of us, for in him we live, move, and have
our being, for we are his offspring.

And, there is that in every (...) one of you, which seeks to gather you from
your vain and wild immaginations of God, Christ, the Spirit, the holy men of
God, The Scriptures, The things of God, to the beginning, to the Light, the
beginning of the Creation of God, which shows darkness, and the state of man
in the transgression, wherein his foolish heart is darkened, and his mind
alienated from the Life of God, through the ignorance that is in him, because
of the blindness of his heart, in that State, the same is it, in which only ye
can know God, and Christ, and the Spirit; And the Holy men of God, and the
Scriptures, and the things of God, for, the natural man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him, neither can he
know them, because they are Spiritually discerned; And, Where is the wise man?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this World? Has not God made
foolish the wisdom of this World? For, in the wisdom of God it is, that the
World by wisdom knows not God, which he is come to confound, even the wisdom of
the wise, and to bring to naught the understanding of the Prudent; Whom none of
the Princes of this World knew, for if they knew it, they would not have
crucified the Lord of Glory. And this is the principle of God in you all, the
measure of him, which every one of you have received wherein to know God, and,
wherewithal to profit; Of which he will require an account, which is as a grain
of mustard seed, unto which ye all must come, and be guided by, and grow up
into it, if ever ye know the Lord; or, the things of his Kingdom, which
consists in Righteousness, and Peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, or see his
face, or, be made partaker of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light. And this
unto you all is is the word of the Lord, for, he, that came to give the
knowledge of Salvation unto his people, by, the Remission of their sins,
through the tender mercies of God, whereby the dayspring from on high has
visited us; Came, to give light to them that sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of Death, and to guide our feet in the way of peace.

Unto this, therefore, the measure of God in you all, the Principle of God, the
Light which comes from Christ the Savior of the Soul, which witnesses for God,
and against all evil which it shows, yea, the very appearance of it, and
reproves, judges and condemns it, (the same is it which shows you, what ye
should do) which is in you, and ye know that it is so, which leads out of
transgression, to that which was before transgression, the Ordinance of God to
Salvation; Apply your minds whilst ye have time, a little time, heed it,
believe in it, and obey it, whilst the door is yet open, whilst the Lord calls
on you, And his Spirit strives with you; Whose Spirit will not always strive
with man, whilst his Arms are stretched out to gather you; That so ye may come
to know the things that do belong to your Eternal Peace, and that it may be
well with you, as to that in every one of you, which must abide for ever. For,
verily, Friends, the time is short, yea, very short, and the Lord is at hand,
and he is drawing near to judgment, he has long waited to be Gracious, he has
born long, and suffered: His Soul has long been pressed under you, as a cart
is pressed with sheaves, he is even weary with forbearing; Yet, loath he is
that any of you should die, but rather that you should return, and live. And for
this purpose has he (now) visited you, with his tender compassion, Therefore,
hear, that your Souls may live; For, this I testify to you in the name of the
Lord, and as being moved of him, whose word it is, that to those of you, unto
whom his tender visitations have come, and are still rejected, after this your
hour, there is no more, but ye will Eternally be concluded, with the God, whom
ye serve.

And, now, least what I have asserted concerning the Principle of God in you,
which witnesses for God, the Light of Christ which reproves, and, makes
manifest the way to God, the Savior of the Soul, and there is no other; Should
seem strange unto you, or I to be a setter forth of a strange God, of a
Principle, or Principles, strange and foreign to your professions, look, ye
Students of the Law, into your own Books, especially such of them, as are
usually read for the initiating you into the ground, or Principle of the Law,
and see whether they do not speak what I say

For example, look into Christopher de Sancto Germano (commonly called Seyn
German) his Dialogue concerning the foundamental Laws of England, etc. And see,
whether he does not tell you of such a thing in man, as is called Synteresis,
unto which he directs as the ground and bottom of the Law; And of which (Chap.
11.) in answer to this question placed in the head of it. (Sc.) Quid sit
sinteresis? ( what is Synteresis? He thus speaks.

Sinteresis est vis motiva, seu potentia naturalis, animae rationalis, quae
semper est nata figi, in superioribus partibus animae, movens, and Stimulans ad
bonum, and abhorrens malum, and ideo secundam sinteresim, non est errare, neque
peccare, sicut nec circa principium in speculabilibus (that is) Sinteresis is
the living virtue, or power natural of the reasonable Soul, which is born
always to reside in the superior parts of the Soul, moving and pricking unto
God; And abhorring evil, and therefore according to Synteresis, there is
neither sinning nor erring as there is not about the principle in things that
are under speculation. Now, what is that which sins not, but the born of
God? And what is that according unto which one cannot sin, or err, but, the
seed, which remains in him that he cannot sin, because he is born of God? And
what is that which moves and pricks unto good, and abhorrs evil, but, the
principle of God which is therefore placed in man, to bring him unto God?

Again Hanc quoque Synteresim, ideo posuit Deus in homine, ut servetur ordo and
connexio rerum; This Synteresis God therefore has put into man, that the Order
and Connection of things might be preserved. Now what is that which preserves
the Order and Connection of things, but that which upholdeth all things by the
word of his Power? And what is that which upholdeth all things by the Word of
his Power, but that by which the worlds were made?

Moreover, Quae synteresis non potest totaliter extingui, nec etiam in
damnatis; Sed tamen quantum ad actum potest ad tempus impedire, five propter
tenebram obcaecationis, sive propter lasciviam delectationis, sive propter
duritiem obstinationis; Propter tenebram obcaecationis impeditur synteresis, ne
malo remurmuret, pro eo quod malum creditur esse bonum, sicut in haereticis,
qui morientes pro impietate erroris, credunt se mori pro pietate fidei; Propter
lasciviam delectationis, quando, Scilicet, synteresis ita absorbetur, ut
remorsus non habet locum, quia carnales homines tanto impetu delectationis
feruntur, ut ratio non habet locum propter duritiem obstinationis impeditur
etiam sinteresis, ne ad bonum stimulet, sicut in damnatis qui adeo sunt in malo
obstinati ut nunquam possunt ad bonum inclinare, propterea quantum ad illum
actum, quo synteresis stimulat ad bonum, potest in illis damnatis dici
extincta, non tamen extincta simpliciter, quia habet alium usum, scilicet
remurmurationem contra malum paenae quae maxim vigebit in damnatis, unde
synteresis murmurabit in damnatis contra culpam in relatione tantu^ ad poenam.
Et sic synteresis quantu^ adalique^ actu^ impedire potest nunquam, tamen
extincta potest universaliter quantum ad omne actum, and quantum ad omne
tempus. (That is) Which Synteresis cannot totally be extinguished no not in the
damned; But nevertheless, as to act, and time, it may be said to be hindered,
either, by reason of the darkness of blindness, or the wantonness of delight,
or the hardness of obstinacy, by reason of the darkness of blindness
Synteresis may be hindered, that it remurmurates not for that evil which it
believes to be good; As in Heretics, who dying for the impiety of error, do
believe that they die for the piety of Faith* by reason of the wantonness of
delight, when as Synteresis is so absorbed that remorse has no place, because
carnal men are so hurried with the violence of delight, that reason has no
place, by reason of the hardness of obstinacy; Synteresis is also hindered, that
it pricks not unto good, as it is in the damned, who are so hardened in evil,
that they can never incline to good, for which cause, in reference to that act,
by which Synteresis pricks unto good, i^ may be said in the damned to be
extinguished, not simply extinguished, because it has another use, to wit, the
remurmuration against the evil of pain, which greatly lives in the damned, from
whence Synteresis will murmur in the damned against the fault in relation only
to the pain; And so Synteresis in reference to some Act may be said to be
hindered but it can never be Universally extinguished, in reference to every
Act, and as to all time. -- And what is this but the witness of God, which can
never be rased out, though by reason of the blindness of men's minds, and the
hardness of their hearts, and their living in pleasures, it answers not; The
Worm that never dies and the fire that never goes out?

Furthermore, Synteresis etiam est principium, quoad speculativa est quoad
operativa, exemplum de speculativis, ut omne totum est majus sua part,
quodlibet est, vel non est. Exemplum de operativis, ut nullum malum est
faciendum, bonum est prosequendum, and similia, and id^^ Synteresis dicitur a
quibusdam lex rationis, quia principia legis rationis ministrat, quae ei insunt
a natura. (That is) Synteresis is also a principle as to things that appertain
to speculation and operation. Example of things that appertain to Speculation,
as every whole is greater than its part, every thing is or not is example of
things that appertain to operation, as no evil is to be done, good is to be
followed, and such like; And therefore Synteresis is called by some the Law of
Reason, because it Ministers the Principles of the Law of Reason, which are in
it by Nature. And what is the Principle of Seeing and Doing, which comprehends
all things, but that by which all things were made, which Principle must be in
man, or there can be no such thing in man as Seeing and Doing. For a thing is
not, nor can be without its Principle; And what is that which Ministers the
Principles to the Law of Reason, which are in it by Nature, but that which is
the Lord of Nature, viz. the head of every man?

Lastly. Synteresis quoque a quibusdam sic describitur, Synteresis est potentia
nata assentire naturaliter principio practico evidenti ex terminis dictanti, id
est significanti in Universali, aliquid operandum vel fugiendum, and per hoc
quod dicitur potentia, excluditur actus and habitus acquisitus, and dicitur
nata assentire, quia non oporter quod actu assentiat, quia etiam potentia
dicitur Synteresis, dum actu nullum principium apprehendit, and dicitur
naturaliter assentire, id est, statim apprehensis terminis assentire, quia non
requirit probationem, vel discursum ad hoc quod assentiat, sed ex condition
suae naturae, statim apprehensis terminis non potest non assentire, dicitur
etiam (evidenti ex terminis) quia respectu principii eviden^^per experientiam:
Non dicitur Synteresis eo, quod tale Principium apprehensum potest ignorari,
and etiam addit (in universali) ad excludendum Conscientiam, quae est judicium
conclusionis practicae in particulari distantis. That is, Synteresis also, by
some is thus discribed, Synteresis is a Power born to assent naturally to a
practical principle, evident by the terms dictating, that is, signifying in
every thing, something to be done, or something to be avoided; And by this that
it is said -- a Power -- Acquired Act and Habit is excluded; And it is said --
Born to ascent -- Because it need not that it ascent by the Act, in regard that
Synteresis is even called a Power, whilst it apprehends no principle by the
Act, and it is said -- naturally to ascent -- That is presently, the terms
being apprehended, to ascent, because it does not require proof or discussion
unto that, to which it ascents, but out of the condition of its own nature,
presently the terms being apprehended, it cannot but assent. It is also said --
evident by the Terms -- because in respect of the Principle evident by
experience, Synteresis is not said, in it, that such a Principle being
apprehended, it can be ignorant; And it is added -- in every thing -- For the
excluding of Conscience, which is the Judgment of a Practical conclusion,
dictating in the particular. And what is this, but that which sees all things,
not as man, but as they are, and is greater than Conscience? Thus far
Seyngerman in answer to the question Quid sit Synteresis? What is Synteresis?

Now, for the derivation of the Word, do not your Books say, that it is derived
from (...) which, they say, may be called conservatio a conservation from (...)
conservo to conserve or keep together, Unde ea pars animae ( say they) quae
vitiis adversatur, and sese semper immaculatum a vitiis cupit conservare, and
perpetrata malo continuo arguit, Synteresis dicitur; That is, From whence that
part of the soul which is against evil, and always desires to keep it self
unspotted of it, and continually argues against evil perpetrated, is called
Synteresis. And what is that but the Religion which is pure and undefiled
before God, and the Father, which keeps it self unspotted of the World.

Thus much of Synteresis which ye lay as the ground or Principle of the Law,
and the derivation of it, and what it is and signifies.

Now as to LAW.

And for this look again into your Books, and see whether they speak not of
LAW, as they have of Synteresis, and both the same as I have asserted?

For Example. See Bracto^ Lib. 1 Chap (...)


Lex est ( say they) sanctio sancta jubens honesta, prohibens contraria -- Law
is a holy sanction Commanding things honest, forbidding the contrary. -- And,
what is this but the holy Commandment? (...) 1 (...) fol. (...) in^ ^d^hs ^e.


Thus of LAW in its General difinition.

More particularly of LAW, as ye distinguish it into the law of Nature, and the
law of Reason, * your two great foundations of Law, which Nature and Reason ye
call those two great lights which God has set in the firmament of your heart.
And, as to the term LAW.

As to the law of Nature. See, ^ ch his ^ok -- ^ W -- ^ap. 1. ^g 3.


Seyngerman says (and generally your Law Books) lex Naturae est lex Eterna. --
The law of Nature, is the law Eternal. -- And who is the law Eternal, but the
King Immortal?

The Philosophers (ye say) call it -Justitia Originalis- Original Justice, --
now who is Original Justice, but He by whom Kings reign, See, ^ ch his ^ok ^ W,
^ap. 1. ^g. 4.
and Princes decree Justice? * Finch in his Book entitled- LAW -- thus
discribes it -- lex Naturae est ratio summa insita in hominis Natura, quae
jubet ea quae faciendasunt, prohibetque contraria -- (that is) The law of
Nature, is that Sovereign Reason fixed in man's Nature, which commands those
things which are to be done, and forbideth the contrary. -- And what is this,
but the same with the general definition of LAW as aforesaid?

As to the Law of Reason. ^c. ^. 1. de ^g.


Finch says again, Chap. 2. pa. 4. in the words of Tully which he quotes under
that head -- Lex est radius divini luminis, and, recta ratio summi Jovis --
(that is) Law is a beam of Divine Light, and right Reason of the Sover^^gn God.
-- Now, who is the Divine light, but Christ the Light of the World? And what is
the Beam of Divine light, but the light of Christ, that lights every man that
comes into the World? And what is the Beam of the Sovereign God, but the
principle of God? For the Beam is of the same Nature with the Light, and comes
from it and from the Light cannot be separated.

Lastly, as to the Term, or word LAW.

Finch tells ye Chap. ^, page 2. of his Book aforesaid, that the Hebrews c^ll^t
(...) (Thorah) from the Root, (...) (Ja^rah) which is to Teach because it is
the Doctrine of Truth, as (says he) Plato says in in his 9th. Book, (...),
Leges ad hominum Doctrinam ponuntur, -- Laws are for the teaching of men. -- So
that (says he) LAW carries with it, and has* as it were enclosed in the Name
and Nature of it, those three Laws. (...), and Golden Chain of ^all good
learning, Lex veritatis, Lex Justitiae, Lex Sapientiae -- the Law of Truth, the
Law of Justice, the Law of Wisdom; And therefore is not only (...) Scientia,
Science, (which word the Philosophers use whereby to express the Divine
understanding) but (...) Scientificissima, Scientificissimous (or the
superlative efficient of an understanding Divine) Whereupon (says he) Plato
tells us, Plato Lib. 4. ^ Rep: (...).
Nomen menti consentaneum possidet Divina nobis and admirabillia Lex -- Law, a
Name consentaneous, (or agreeable) to the mind ( that is to God faith Finch)
whom the Philosophers call (...) or Men's, the Mind, which is Truth, Wisdom,
and Justice it self) possesses in us Divine, and things most admirable, ^^so
that the Name it self (says he) does show the Author from whence it came; And,
as he says (that is Plato) Qui tanti talem genuere parents? How great are
those parents which have brought forth such a Child? -- Now, who is he that
carries with him, and has (as it were) enclosed in his Name, and nature those
three Laws, and Golden Chain of all good learning (to wit) the law of Truth,
the law of Justice, the law of Wisdom, who therefore is not only Science, but
Scientificissimous, whose Name is agreeable to God, to the mind from whence he
came, who is Truth, Wisdom, and Justice itself, and possesses in us Divine,
and things most Admirable, whose Name shows the Author from whence he came, of
whose Father it may be said, How great is he that has begetten such a Son? But
the Son to whom the Father says, thy Throne O God, is for Ever and Ever, a
Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom; Thou have loved
Righteousness, and hated Iniquity, therefore God, even thy God has anointed
thee with the Oil of gladness above thy fellows. And thou Lord in the
beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the Heavens are the works
of thy Hands, they shall perish but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old
as does a Garment, and as a Vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be
changed, but thou art the same, and thine years shall not fail. The Son on
whose shoulders the Government lies, the word of God which abides for Ever;
The LAW of the Lord which is perfect, converting the Soul, the Testimony of the
Lord which is sure, making wise the simple, the Statutes of the Lord which are
right, rejoicing the Heart; The Commandment of the Lord which is pure
enlightening the eyes: The Fear of the Lord which is clean enduring for ever.
The Judgments of the Lord which are true, and Righteous altogether, more to be
desred than Gold, yea than fine Gold, sweeter also than the Honey or the
Honeycomb? And who is the Doctrine of Truth, but he who is the Teacher of his
People, in whose mouth was the LAW of Truth, and Iniqvity was not found in his
lips? And, who puts Laws (as of Right) for the Teaching of men, but he of whom
Moses ^ruly said unto the Fathers, A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up
unto you of your Brethren like unto me, him shall ye hear in all things
whatsoever he shall say unto You: And it shall come to pass, that every Soul
that will not hear that Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People, The
Man Christ Jesus?

Again, says Finch in the same Chapter and Page; -- Laws are Native or
Positive. Tully in his Oration pro Mitone takes us out this Lesson. -- Est
enim haec non scripta sed nata lex, quam non didicimus, accepimus, legimus,
verum e natura ipsa arripuimus, hausimus, expressimus; ad quam non docti sed
nati, non instituti sed imbuti sumus. -- For this LAW is not written but born,
which we have not learned, received, read, but out of Nature it self have
drawn, sucked and expressed; unto which we are not taught, but born, not
instituted, but endued -- In his first Book de Legibus he (that is Tully) does
again repeat it; -- Constituendi vero juris ab illa Summa Lege Capiamus.
Exordium, quae secu^is omnibus ante nata est, quam Scripta lex ulla. -- That
is, But let us take the Rise of constituting Law from that Sovereign Law, which
is born before all Ages, before any Law was written -- where this Native Law he
(that is Tully) calls the Sovereign Law, as that from which all other Laws do
stream. -- And lastly, says Finch. Native, are those Laws which are in Us of
themselves, and therefore unchangeable and perpetual. -- Now what is that LAW,
that is not Written but Born, which we have not learned, received, read, unto
which we are not taught but born, not instituted but endued, but the law put
into the Mind, and writ in the Heart, not with Ink and Paper, but the Spirit of
the living God, the New Covenant, which the Lord said he would make with the
house of Israel, after those days, even that he would put his Laws into their
Mind, and write them in their Hearts, and that He would be unto them a God, and
that they should be to him a People; and that they should not Teach every Man
his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord, for all should
know him from the least unto the greatest, for that he would be Merciful to
their Unrighteousness, and their Iniquities he would remember no more? And
what is that Nature it self out of which we draw, suck, and express it, but
the Nature by which the Gentiles which had not the Law, did the things
contained in the Law, these having not the Law, were a Law unto themselves;
which showed the work of the Law written in their Hearts, their Consciences
also bearing Witness; The Nature (Divine) the uncircumcision which is by
Nature, which keeps the Righteousness of the Law; which fulfills the Law, by
which is judged he who by the Letter and Circumcision transgresses the Law,
even he who is called a Jew, and rests in the Law, and makes his boast of
God, and knows his Will, and approves the Things that are more excellent,
being instructed out of the Law, and is confident that he himself is a guide to
the blind; a light to them who sit in darkness; an Instructor of the foolish;
a Teacher of Babes; which has the form of Knowledge and Truth in the Law; and
yet through breaking the Law dishonors God; whose Circumcision is made
uncircumcision, but the uncircumcision of the other is counted for
Circumcision: For, he is not a Jew which is one outwardly, neither is that
Circumcision, which is outward in the flesh; but he is a Jew which is one
inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart; in the spirit and not in the
letter, whose praise is not of Men but of God; The Divine Nature of which they
are made partakers, who have escaped the Corruption that is in the World
through lust? And who is the Sovereign Law from whom all other Laws do stream,
which is born before all ages, before any Law was Written; but he who is
without beginning of days, or end of life, who cannot be written? And whose
Laws are Native, or in Us of themselves, and therefore Unchangeable, and
Perpetual, but his who changes not, in whom is no variableness, or shadow of
changing, who is a Priest for eever after the order of Melchisedeck, whose Laws
are like him?

And, indeed, were not some such thing as this laid for the ground, what true
pretense, or color of Reason is there for the Common (or any) Law of England?
seeing, that the Breast of the Judge, or that within him, from whence he
Judges, is the principle thereof, which if it be corrupt, unreasonable and
evil, such must needs be the judgment which proceeds from it, and such is
the judgment which proceeds not from the principle of God; And were there
not such a thing in man, as the principle of God, what Right have any to Rule,
or to what end are Laws, of Right, among men? seeing, that the principle of God
it is only that makes man to differ from the beast that perishes; and as soon
(yea sooner, (if I may so say) because the beast has not that understanding,
for the Devil to work in as unreasonable man) may the Beast be taught to cease
to do evil, and to learn to do well, as man in this state: For, the Ox knows
his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not know, my People
does not consider. And, man bein in honor abides not, he is like the beast
that perish. And wise Agur said of himself, surely I am more brutish than any
man, and have not the understanding of a man, I neither learned wisdom, nor
have the knowledge of the Holy. But such a Principle as this being in man, is
the ground or reason (though it be little known) why there is more or less of
right in the Laws of Nations, and more or less of Obedience unto them, even as
those who govern, or, are under them, have more or less of this, or as this
works more or less, or is in the Laws or them. And the being of this in man is
the reason, why Nations are not utterly destroyed, and mankind rased out from
off the face of the Earth, which the Devil would soon do, could he this get
over, and this is the Kingdom of God in the Children of men, though man
attributes it too much to his wisdom and strength, and gives not the Glory to
God, nor sees his working; And the want of the knowing and working of this in
Rulers and People, is the reason of most of the wars and desolations in the
Earth, but this coming to be known, and to work, the occasions of wars which
make desolate, will cease, and all oppression, and that which preserves the
Creation, by which it was made, which is tender to that which it has made, and
redeems it from the vanity unto which it was made subject, will guide and rule;
And so all things will be brought into their right course and order again as
before the fall, which turned all things out of Order, and inverted the right
course and order of things in which state things stand, till that which was
before the Fall, from which man was driven in the Fall, does rule and guide.
And for the manifestation of this the Creature groaneth, and travelleth in pain
together till now, even for the manifestation of the sons of God, that it may
not be made subject unto vanity; For, the earnest expectation of the Creature
waits for the manifestation of the sons of God, for the Creature was made
subject unto vanity, not willingly, but by reason of him who has subjected the
same in hope, because that the Creature it self also shall be delivered from
the bondage of corruption, into the glorious liberty of the Children of God.
For we know that the whole Creation groaneth, and travelleth in pain together
until now, and not only they but our selves also, which have the first fruits
of the spirit, even we our selves groan within our selves, waiting for the
Adoption, to wit, the Redemption of our Body. And this viz. the bringing of
man back to the Principle of God in him, to lead and guide him, from which he
is gone, is the work which the Lord is now doing in the Earth, and unto which
he has brought thousands already in these Nations, and which he will not slack
his hand till he has finished. The Lord has spoken it, Glory to Him for ever,
who is causing the day to dawn, and the shadows to fly away.

Now, were it so, that man knew and believed in, and obeyed the Principle of
God in him, and grew up therein, and from it gave judgment (which by reason of
the darkness, and ignorance that is in him, he little understands, and believes
less; And, therefore, is often times putting darkness for light, and light for
darkness, bitter things for sweet and sweet for bitter, as he is swayed by
passion and private interest, not knowing the Lord, nor his Principle in him.)
The Common Law would be most excellent, and the Administration thereof
exceeding useful, and most suitable to this People, the benefit of which, as it
is, they would more feel, were the Spirit that Administers it, as simple, and
plain, as were the hearts of them who gave the Presidents. For, as profession
without the life has abounded, so has deceit, which is the reason, why the
present age is more oppressive, and perplexing in the Laws, and more dilatory,
and wrong in the administration of them than were the ages in the deepest time
of darkest Popery, who had less profession, but more simplicity as the things
themselves make manifest. However, the principle of it so far, as in the
Notion, it is grounded upon, and refers to, and is the Principle of God (as I
have showed out of your own Books that so it is) is good and right, and no
other than that of which I have spoken, and unto which I have directed you, as
the way to God. And the Lord has promised that he will restore Judges, as at
the first, and Counselors, as in the beginning, who were such as knew, and
were guided by, and judged from the Principle of God in them; Which does none
iniquity, nor can evil touch it; Which renders to every one his due, and judges
for God: as did Moses and Joshua and Samuel, whom all Israel followed; The
Judgment which proceeds from that pure Principle, being that which only
reaches to the same in every man, and subjecteth unto it, from which when
there was none that judged, it was so that there was no King in Israel; And
when the Children of Israel went from the Judges who judged from it, and said
to Samuel, give us a King to judge us, and nay but we will have a King over us,
that we also may be like all the Nations. The Lord said to Samuel, they have
not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over
them. And the time is at hand wherein this promise shall be fulfilled, after
the hour is over which is coming, which will not hold very long, though it will
be very sharp, but shall end in this, even in Reign of the Seed of God over all
for ever and ever.

Again, Look ye Professors of Divinity into the Schoolmen, and see what they
say, as to the Question (Sc.) where must a man begin? There are many rovings in
man's mind, many immaginations driving up and down, this way, and that way,
where must a man stop? Where must he begin? For he that never begins, can never
come to the end that is certain; And he that goes wrong, the longer he so goes
and the faster, the further he is from his journeys end, and the more is his
sorrow. So that a beginning a man must have, and to that he must come, and it
must be in the Truth too, or it will not be well with him, and there he must
begin, and there he must stop. But where must he begin? At what must he stop?
[Friends, these things are fundamental] do they not say, that when ye come to
Objectum quo sistendum est, when ye are come to the Principle of Seeing, and
knowing, ye must stop there, or, there ye must begin whe^^ ye have found out
that, when ye are come to that? And is, or can this be any other then the Light
of Christ? The beginning of the Creation of God; the measure of Truth, the
Divine Principle, the Eternal Eye in man, which only can perceive the Things
of God, for they are Spiritually discerned, which leads to God to Christ the
Savior of the Soul, who is Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End the
First, and the Last, who is, and who was* and who is to come, the Lord God
Almighty, which is the Door, and administers the entrance into the Kingdom of
God; which is the Principle of seeing and knowing the things of God? And the
reason is plain. For, till a man comes to this, he is lost and blind, and
cannot see ^far off, nor understand the things that appertain to his Eternal
Peace, the things of God, the things that are of the Divine nature. And this
Spiritual man judges all things, but he himself is judged of no man.

Lastly, Look ye Readers of Philosophy, into the Ethics, and tell me whether
their answer to this great Question, (Sc.) What is Truth? Be not this, viz.
Quod sistit intellectum veritas est (that is) that which stays (stops,
limmits, bounds) the understanding (or mind of man) is Truth, which Principle
Paul spoke to in the Philosophers at Athens, when he said, that God had made of
one blood all Nations of men, to dwell on all the face of the earth, and had
determined the times before appointed and the bounds of their habitation that
they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him, and find him,
though he be not far from every one of us, for in him we live, move, and have
our being, etc. of which I have spoken. And the reason of this is manifest, for
man being driven from God in the fall, lost and wandering up and down on the
face of the Earth, that which brings him back again, which puts him to
consider, which stays, which stops him, and bounds his habitation that he may
return to him from whom he is gone, and feel after God, whom he has lost, and
find him whose offspring he is, who is not very far from him, though he be
very far from God, and alienated by reason of wicked works, for in him he
lives, moves, and has his being, must needs be truth.

So, then, unless ye will offer violence to the very principles of your own
professions, to the Scriptures of Truth, and to the witness of God in you all,
ye cannot any longer oppose the Truth of God in you (now) made manifest, for no
new thing have I held forth to you, but that which was in the beginning, and
which (as ye see) is the very bottom, and foundation of your Principles, though
it be ( newly) manifested, even the Mystery which has been hid from ages, and
from generations, but is now made manifest to his Saints, to whom God would
make known, what is the riches of the Glory of this Mystery among the
Gentiles, which is Christ in you, the hope of Glory.

Therefore, my dear friends, be cool and considerate, let Wisdom weigh you, and
discretion hold the balance in your hearts. Be not rash to judge that which ye
know not, and cast not presently away that which ye do not understand, and
which may seem cross to the current of what ye profess, but come to the
Principle of God in you, Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, the true Light
that lights every man that comes into the World, the measure of him in you,
which ye have received. And in and with that try all things, and as ye find
what I say, answering to that Principle in you, so do. And, the God of Peace,
who brought again from the Dead our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the sheep
through the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, show you mercy.

Bristol the 27th. 2d. Month 1660. Geo. Bishop.

THE END.
ERRATA.
Page 4. line 11. read has for having, p. 5. l. 31. blot out of, p. 6. l. 30.
blot out in before one, p. 8. l. 19. read Christopherus for Christopher, l. 33.
r. good for God.


