THE Modern Pharisees: OR A SERMON On the xxiij. of S. MATT. v. 15.

SHOWING The Principles of the present Jesuits, and Puritans, to be of the
same evil influence with the ancient Pharisees; and equally vexatious and
destructive to GOVERNMENT.

By NATH. BISBIE, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1683.

To the Right Worshipful, His ever Honored PATRON, Sir JOHN CORDEL Baronet,
One of His MAJESTY'S Deputy Lieutenants for the County of SUFFOLK.
NOthing has been more severely charged upon the Church of Rome, and the
Proselytes thereof, since the Reformation, than their aversness and
disaffection to Government; the belief whereof has caused many heavy Laws, a
continued jealousy, much slaughter and devastation among them. And the like
has no less severely been charged back by them upon the Reformation; It is
manifest (says the Author of the Protestants Babel) that in all places at
home, as well as abroad, this spirit of Resormation has ever been, and is
seditiously pragmatical and dangerous unto Princes and States; insomuch that
within the space of sixty Years, more Princes have been deposed and persecuted
by Protestants upon the quarrel and difference of Religion, than had been by
the Popes excommunication, or by the attempts and practices of any subjects
Catholic in six hundred years before (and yet our late Martyred Sovereign had
not then been brought unto the block;) Wherefore I thought it worth my while
and my pains to find out the Criminals; for if Christianity in general be
faulty, Princes may well be shie; or if there be not a Religion more Orthodox
and Loyal than other, they may alike be favorable to all, but affected with
none; This I say) made me to single out the present Malefactors of the Age, the
Jesuit (with his Faction) for the Roman; and the Puritan (with his) for the
English Church: who though harmless and innocent by their own account (for all
the late applications to our after murdered Sovereign, were ushered in with, We
your Majesty's most loyal and dutiful Subjects; and the Restoration of our
present King no less congratulated with, We your best and experienced Friends)
yet if I have fixed wrong, or charged either of them unjustly (provided their
own Writings may be the Judges in the case) I am content to undergo their
burden; and when the next Rebellion or Commotion happens, for want of one of
them in it (that justly deserves execution,) to be the man: And if this be
proved, I hope, I shall no longer be blamed, either on the one hand or the
other, for having, or still continuing to call them, Brethren in Iniquity; or
for telling you and others where our danger lies, that Authority may know at
whose Door to Knock, and by their severity and care prevent all future and
growing mischiefs. Sure I am, there is a sort of Evil Doers among us, and if
the Sword that should be a terror to such (the Sword they delight in so much)
be born in vain, we shall all be made a Babel indeed. My prayer therefore shall
be, That at such time, and in such streights, the King may never want Champions
like you to defend him; nor such Champions a reward, whilst Loyalty is to be
accounted a Virtue, and Valor deserves its Trophee.

Your most bounden and respectful Servant, Nath. Bisbie.
Long Melford, Suff. Nov. 5. 1682.
MATT. xxiij. 15. Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye compass
Sea and Land to make one Proselyte, and when he is made, ye make him twofold
more the Child of Hell than your selves.
THE Jewish Writers (who have undertook a representation of that Church in our
Savior's time) tell us, That there were then in it three more prevailing Sects
or Parties; to wit, the Pharisees, the Sadduces, the Essens: As for the
Sadduces, they were men seemingly extreme, and rigorously just, exact in giving
every man his desert and due; called therefore Sadduces from (...) Justitia, as
if that virtue, which had gilded the face of the golden age, were no where so
much to be found as in their Territories, and among their Party: Men (as they
would have their name proclaim them) of equity and conscience; The only just,
punctual, downright dealers of the age; so that if Jew or Gentile would have
justice done them, the Sadducee must be the man. As for the Essens, they were
no less addicted to piety and devotion; called therefore (...) from (...), a
sort of religious and sanctimonious persons, perfect Monks, as the Papists
conceive; giving themselves wholly up to fasting, reading, praying, and many
other such like exercises of austerity and devotion; every way as notorious and
eminent for their piety and prayers, as the Sadduces were for their integrity
and justice. An unnatural cursed divorce wherever it happens! Wherefore the
Pharisee seemingly unites the righteousness of the one to the piety of the
other; and joining both together, not only acts, but infinitely out-does the
Sadducee in his duly admired Justice, and the Essen in his no less applauded
devotion. The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the
Lord are We. You shall find them pale in their fastings, loud and long in their
prayers, open-handed at their charity, great enemies to the Publican for his
extortion and injustice, to the Sinner for his pollution and uncleanness; so
sanctified, so mortified, so every way refined, that Heaven seems not to have a
more glorious Saint, nor Earth so great a Pattern; and yet when thoroughly
inspected and known, the very Rogues and Villains of the age: for they devour
Widows houses, kill the Prophets, oppose Caesar and his Tribute, do a thousand
and a thousand exorbitances more under the color and pretext of religion,
which God and nature, Religion and religious Men abhor, the Sadduces detest,
the Essens cry shame upon; so every way sanctified yet profligated, That the
holy Land has not a more unholy Clan; nor the Serpent therein such another
generation of Vipers. We may know them by the antipathy, that our blessed
Savior had against them, for though there naturally dropped nothing from his
sacred Lips, but words smooth as Oil, (blessings or pardons) yet he never meets
with a Pharisee, but he is still reproving or thundering out his Anathema's
against him; there are no less than eight of them together in this Chapter, and
all directed against that sort of cattle: nay, I do not find that he ever fell
so foul upon any other sort or Sect of Men; and yet I am sure, the Sadduces and
Essens full well deserved it, especially the former; for they were (as Josephus
informs us) of sour and salvage natures, unnatural and unkind one toward
another: nay, they had Principles that led them on to great impieties and
immoralities; for they denied the Immortality of the Soul, the Resurrection of
the Body, future rewards and punishments: and yet though thus actually wicked,
and prone by their Principles to be much more wicked than they were, He
notwithstanding passed them by (innocent as it were in comparison to the other)
and applied his Woes to the Pharisees only, as Men whom he looked upon to be
bipedum nequissimos, the most faulty pieces of Religion throughout the whole
Church of the Jews. Nay, it is worth our observation, that the more fatherly,
still the more faulty; if once professed and arrived unto the degree of being
Scribes, of being (...), Publishers and Teachers of the Law and the Traditions
thereunto belonging; If once missionated, and by virtue of that mission they be
also ordered to be (...), to range and proselyte others, then the Woe comes
double and treble upon them, Woe, Woe, Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees,
Hypocrites, for ye compass Sea and Land to make one proselyte, and when he is
made, ye make him twofold more the child of Hell than your selves.

In the words we have our blessed Savior bitterly inveighing, and severely
reflecting upon the whole Order of the Pharisees, especially upon the
proselyting Party thereof; The only cried up Order by the People, and almost
the only cried down Order by our Savior. Please you to see the reason of his
severity in these two following Instances.

1. They were utter enemies to Caesar and his Government, counting all things
of Religion (though of the remotest concern) too Sacred and Spiritual to come
under his cognizance: Nay, our blessed Savior never seemed more a (...), or
less their Messiah, than when he pleaded for the things of Caesar, and appeared
in the defense of his Prerogative and Government. Josephus (who was himself a
Pharisee, and therefore (without question) a favourer of the party) tells us,
That they were much given to combine and complot for the carrying on of
Antimonarchical, Anticaesarean designs; insomuch, that being urged by the
Emperor to take the Oath of Allegiance (as the rest of the Jews had done) they
peremptorily, to the hazard of their lives and fortunes, opposed it. So
insolent and daring, and withal so busy and affrontive they were grown in King
Herod's days (not only disobedient themselves, but propagating their Principles
of disobedience among their Proselytes and Scholars) that (as the same Author
says, at leastwise Bishop Montague from him) he not only pulled down their
Schools and Seminaries (spoiled them of their Nests and Harbor) but burned many
of them alive, trussed up others, and banished the rest, never looking upon his
Government to be secure, as long as there were such Ecclesiastical
Incendiaries, such religious Boutefeaus in it.

2. They were no less enemies to Christ, and to the Reformation of religion
introduced by him; Religion! 'Twas the shine of Paradise, the glory of Humane
nature, the proper Image of God upon Earth, until the Incarnation of his Son;
This the Heathens by their evil Customs and Doctrines had mightily corrupted,
Moses in a great measure restored, and the Jews wonderfully made happy by such
a restoration, till the Pharisees (those monsters of men) again depraved it,
and by their Superstitious Novelties, and ill devised Traditions, not only
evaded, but evacuated the Primary Rules and more lasting Constitutions of
Divine perfection. It were endless to show how this Order of Men, above all
others in the Jewish Church, had corrupted its purity: Our blessed Savior
(that great Reformer, who was faithful to him that appointed him) every where
chides them for it. You teach (says he) for Doctrines the Traditions of Men;
and again, You transgress the Commandment of God by your Traditions; and again,
You make the Commandments of God of none effect by your Traditions. And this
(no question) was the reason why they were so angry with, so set themselves
against, and so endeavored by all manner of ways to entrap and ensnare him.
Nay, rather than fail through the weakness of their own Party, they will join
hands and interests with the Sadduces, with the Essens, yea with the very
Herodians themselves; whom otherwise they abominated, because they were such
sticklers for, and promoters of the absoluteness and arbitrariness of the Roman
Caesarean power; (Mat. 22. 16.) and yet hail Sadducee, most welcome Herodian,
no Man nor Party amiss, provided they will but join in with them, in support of
their darling Tradition, and obstruct the Holy Jesus in his Reformation.

These were their Principles, but that which aggravates their crime under these
Principles, is,

1. That they (of all in the World besides) would seem to be the only Men for
Religion; which sets forth their cursed Hypocrisy: Woe unto you Scribes,
Pharisees, Hypocrites.

2. That no difficulties whatever could either deter or affright them from
propagating such their Principles; which shows their preposterous Zeal: for
they would compass Sea and Land to make one Proselyte.

3. That wherever they propagated the same, they always instilled such
violence and virulency into the minds of their Proselytes, that they ever made
them much more wicked (far more desperate and daring) than themselves; and this
shows their rancour and their poison: for they made them twofold more the
children of Hell than themselves. Begin we,

1. With their Hypocrisy; which makes the wickedness of their Principles far
more wicked, than otherwise of themselves they would have been; for though none
more turbulent to Government, nor more opposite to Religion, yet none seemed
more religious or peaceable. Who has not heard of their pale looks, their
demure carriage, their affected garb, their composed gate? every way so
singular, as if they designed to be looked upon, and (as the Apostle in another
case phraseth it) to be made a spectacle to the World, to Angels, and to Men.
Thus attired, how do they fast and pray? spending no less than a third of their
time amongst their Books and their Beads; yea, and with what alacrity do they
run to their Spiritual exercises and Corporal austerities? making their Beds
upon Flints and Stones; upon Briars, Bushes, and Thorns, to prevent their rest,
that it be not too long nor too pleasing: But now our Savior (who knew the
inside of the rotten Sepulcher, as well as the outside) tells us, That it was
all to be seen of Men. Hence they would not pray, but in the Streets, and with
a Saints-bell before them; nor give Alms, unless a Trumpet called unto the
Show. Nay, go unto the Sick-man's house, and there you shall have them; Visit
the Widow and the Orphan, and there you shall find them; Search the Hospital
and the Prison, and neither the noisomness of the one, nor the fulsomness of
the other will keep them away; wherever there is need of a charitable Person,
the Pharisee will be there; and (if you will believe him) upon no other
account, than barely for the worth and merit of the action: But then watch him,
and to the Sick-man he is making himself a Legatee; to the Orphan a Guardian;
to the Widow not so much a Confessor as Supervisor; Truth it self assures us,
that under pretense of long prayers, he devoureth Widows houses: Nay, he will rob
the Spittle, and starve his very Parents to enrich the Corban, and advance his
Society. In short, what served others to make them religious, would not serve
the Pharisee; He was all for Majorem Dei gloriam, for that which would most
visibly set out the honor and glory of God in the World; and therefore he did
enlarge his Phylacteries, and make them broader and bigger than other Men; He
multiplied his holy waters and sprinklings, counting it more necessary to
sprinkle himself, than (if he were a-thirst) to drink and live. Nay, if any
thing would set him higher in the esteem of the vulgar than other Men, he would
be sure to be most punctual thereat; witness his tithing of Mint and Cummin,
which (as the learned Hammond observes) was under a dispute, even amongst the
very Lawyers and Casuists themselves, whether it ought to be paid or no. Thus
great, thus universal was his Hypocrisy, and no wonder therefore, if the
Pharisee be no sooner named, but Hypocrisy be clapped upon him; or that the Holy
Jesus should not denounce a Woe against him, without calling him Hypocrite, and
showing him the reason of that Woe. The second thing for which they stand
charged, is,

2. Their preposterous Zeal, for they would compass Sea and Land to make one
Proselyte. Run into the Indies, seek out the remotest corners of the World,
renounce their Friends and Families, endure all the hardships and dangers that
the merciless Seas, or the more merciless Nations could expose them unto; and
all, for the gaining perhaps but of one single Convert. Nay, they were so far
from either balking or starting at the employ, that they would beg the mission,
and strive who should be the first and most forward in it. Now though this
action was altogether praiseworthy, and to be accepted of, even when it
reached but to the (...) to the Proselyte within the Gate, (to the Person that
had his habitation among the Jews) whether he was (...) a stranger by birth and
religion only; or (...) by birth, religion and affection too; yet it was never
so highly esteemed of, nor the Party never seemed so much to merit, as when he
left his native Country to do it. Such an one was magni nominis, ever to be
honored with a red Letter in the Calendar, and to be seated (in the
Resurrection of the Just) next to Hillel and Schamai. And this certainly (if
well designed) had been a most pious, excellent and glorious Work; One of the
Apostles of the Holy Jesus tells us, that he who effects it shall save a Soul
alive, and hide a multitude of sins: But then, as it fell out, it was not so
much to gain them to God and the truth, as to themselves and their Party; not
so much to make them Converts, as Pharisees; not to bring them off from a false
to a true, as from a false to a false; from an Heathenish, Idolatrous, to as
heathenishly superstitious, and more wicked religion. Which in the third place
sets forth,

3. Their rancour and their poison; for as they proselyted, so they ever made
those (whom they proselyted) twice more Children of the Devil than before;
infinitely more rebellious to the Government they lived under, and much more
opposite to the coming and design of the blessed Jesus, in purifying and
reforming the depraved World. As Jews, they were never good, (the whole
Religion of them was prone to be stubborn, rebellious, antichristian) but when
proselyted, they ever grew worse; their temper more sour, their behavior more
ungovernable, their designs more wicked and bloody. And hence, when they
attempted a Persecution upon the Apostles, it is said (Acts 13. 50.) (...), they
animated or inflamed the worshipping (the proselyted) Women against them, as
those who were ever the most zealous and forward in the cause; not altogether,
because they were Women, and of that Sex, (usually the most zealous) but
because newly proselyted, and thereby made a new Sect. And in sooth, so they
would but keep up their zeal (and therewith the Traditions they were taught)
the Pharisees never minded what their lives or practices were, nor how much
they engaged themselves for hell or hellish designs. No, Pereant illi in
ignorantia, superstitione, impietate modo permaneant in Judaismo, let them for
ever perish in their ignorance, superstition, impiety, (yea, Go unto the Devil,
whose Children they are) provided, whilst they are in this World, they will but
adhere unto their Proselytism, and keep close unto the Pharisee, his Faction
and Traditions. The sum of all that we have been laboring for (in short) is
this,

1. That the Jewish Church was at this time in a very degenerate and corrupted
condition, overrun with many ill Doctrines and Superstitious practices;
guided, not by the Eternal verities of Divine revelation, but by the Traditions
and dotages of the self-designing Pharisee.

2. That the one Order of the Hypocritical Pharisees were the only cause, and
the main promoters of this corruption and decay in Religion.

3. That there was no way so ready, or so seisable to purge out its
corruptions, and to bring on a Reformation, and thereby to settle the Church on
a lasting and peaceable foundation, as to root out the Pharisees, and put a
stop to their proselyting Zeal.

And here I should end, were the Jewish the only Church troubled with this sort
of Men; But alas! we shall find the Church of Christ (now in the world, even in
these our days) every way to be as much pestered with them. And in the first
place,

1. Let the Jesuit come unto the Scrutiny; that Man of piety and design, the
fittest Zealot to be an (...), and to act a Part in this Tragedy. For who
seeing Ignatius and his Followers returning from the Holy Land, barefoot and
bare-legg'd, with their Crucifixes in their Hands, their Bible and Breviaries
under their Arms, their Rosaries about their Necks, most pitifully clad, and as
pitifully fed, disciplining themselves as they go, and mumbling over their
Offices (their Pater nosters and Ave Mary's) at every Door they come to, would
not believe, that the Pharisees were again revived? or that there was not (a
new spawn) another Generation of those old Vipers going out into the World,
especially if he considers,

1. The conformity of their Principles to the Pharisees. 2. How adapted and
fitted they be, to reduce those Principles (or worse) if need require, into
action. Consider we,
1. Their Principles; the main and chief whereof is to ruin and extirpate the
Reformation, (with us) the best, for the introducing (their own) the worst of
religions. Religion! it is that they aim at, the religion of the place and
Kingdom that troubles them; A religion consonant to God's Scripture, to the
ancient Writings of the Fathers, to all the Records and Monuments of holy
Church in the best and purest Ages thereof; In Doctrine orthodox, in Worship
pure, in Discipline regular, in Devotion uniform; Asserted by Confessors, dyed
for by Martyrs, adored by Maenials, admired by Foreigners, undermined by none
but the Jesuit and his Masquerade Faction: Were but this out of the way, and
instead thereof a rifraff of their own set up, I am persuaded King and Priest,
Church and State, Nobles and Commons, all might live peaceably, and every day
be blessed by them. Would we but change our Scripture into Legends, our Service
into a Mass Book, our Prayers into Beads, our Sacraments into Shows, our
Priests into Puppets; Would we communicate in one kind, read Prayers in an
unknown Tongue, adore the Pope little less than we do God, preach Purgatory
instead of Repentance, sell Masses for a Groat, bestow Indulgences and
Absolutions to the worst of Men; Would we advise to an adoration of the Host, a
veneration of Images, an Invocation of Saints, and (in short) renounce the
Religion we are of, as we do the Devil and all his works; though instead of
Scripture we set up rotten Tradition, though instead of Faith we preach up
Faction, though instead of Obedience we become guilty of Treason; Nay, should
we murder Princes, and turn false and deceitful to Mankind, yet Euge bone
Serve, all would be well, and we in an instant thought worthy of a better
Kingdom. But as long as we retain the Religion we are of* and not suffer the
Whoredoms of Jezebel, and her Witchcrafts to be among us, there must (there
can) be no peace. eos ut novos Diagoras and Protagoras ex omnibus civitatibus
pelli debere, They ought (says one of them, and no small one neither) to be
driven out of all Cities and Places, as so many Blasphemers of the Gods, as so
many known and professed Atheists; Proposita etiam mercede ei, qui illos
interficeret; yea, and to allow a public reward to him who shall massacre or
kill them. Miles esse debuit nostrae Societatis Pater: It was but meet (says
another of them) that the Founder of our Order should be a Soldier; for as the
Soldier must never desist from oppressing his Enemy, until he has either
conquered or killed him, Ita nostrum est irruere in omnes qui Pontifici Romano
resistunt, illosque tollere and abolere: So must we no less oppose those who
are enemies to our holy Father the Pope, and never leave vexing and prosecuting
them, till we have either reformed or destroyed them. And here two things more
particularly are to be remarked upon this Order of Men, whereby they will
appear to advance fairly to, if not out-go, the Pharisees.

1. That they are under a more especial vow, and by the very constitutions of
their Society obliged to root out all Doctrines which the Pope shall call
Heresies, and all Persons whom he shall think good to declare Heretics. Nay,
it was by virtue of this Oath, and in hopes of this success, that Pope Paul the
III. ever established them into a Society, or that his Successors (the
subsequent Popes) ever permitted them to out-grow their first number, and to
multiply, till (like the Locusts) they may not only cover, but if (need be)
devour the Land. Conteren guessing at them, supposes their number, in the Year
1618. to have been about one hundred and fifty thousand; another since has
counted them to be above two hundred thousand: Among these (says the Author of
the Jesuits life and doctrine) are formed those, who afterward become
religious in Cloisters, Preachers in Pulpits, Pastors in Churches, Captains in
Armies, Judges in Courts; which though not professed as the former, yet are
Jesuits in Voto, and as fitting Janissaries to make Musselmen, as the professed
themselves; by the help and labor of whom, their work (wherever they come)
is expedited and made easy; insomuch, that let the word be but given, and the
Nation in a moment becomes converted (I mean, not so much unto the faith, as)
into flames and ashes.

2. That if they cannot peaceably compass the same, they are to do it by Fire
or Sword, Halter or Poison, never minding the lawfulness of the means, provided
the thing be but done: At first indeed Consiliis, dictis and scriptis, their
attempts are to be peaceable, sober, Christian; The ravening Wolf must put on
Sheeps clothing, and by his Preaching, Disputing, Writing (if it be possible)
bring about his ends; but if in that he cannot prevail, then Advocato seculari
brachio, the Civil Magistrate must be sued unto, and his Axes and his Rods
implored; The Wolf must then lay aside his clothing, and begin to show himself
as he is; and if after this he fail, then Bellis persequendos, and non solum
armis terrendos, sed etiam delendos, exscindendos, tollendos, extirpandos; Then
alas, poor Heretics! Fire and Sword, Bloodshed and War, root and branch;
nothing less than an Irish slaughter or Parisian Massacre; destruction upon
destruction (like that of Amalek) till not one of them be spared. Nay, if the
Magistrate himself oppose, or out of tenderness to his Subjects lives, thinks
not good to comply with them, he must forthwith forfeit his Kingdom, and become
as liable to their cruelty, as the worst of Heretics: Nay, Si justum sit
bellum contra Haereticos, quanto justius contra caput Haereticorum; If it be a
lawful thing to engage in War for the rooting out of Heretics, how much more
lawful must it be to engage against Kings and Princes, who are the Heads of
Heretics, and the Defenders of their faith? This is their doctrine abroad, and
I do not find that the Serpent changes his nature, when he changes his Soil;
No, I would have you know (says Campian in his Letter to Queen Elizabeth) That
we who are of this Society of Jesus, Sanctum foedus iniisse, have every one of
us entered solemnly into Covenant, Machinas vestras superare, to null and
frustrate all your attempts, quamdiu vel unus nostrum supererit, as long as
there is but one of us alive in the World. In short, I may say of these (and
not in the least wrong them) as Judah's adversaries said of Jerusalem (Ezr. 4.
15.) Let the Books of Records be searched, so shall thou find in the same, That
this (City, this) Order of Men, is a most rebellious Order, hurtful unto Kings
and Provinces, and that they have moved Sedition within the same of old time:
Wherefore let the King be certified, that if (this City) this Order of Men be
not pulled down, he shall not long have any portion on this side the River with
us. And thus having given a transient view of the Jesuits Principles, I come
to show,

2. How adapted and fitted they be to reduce these their Principles (or worse)
if need require, into action; and this will presently appear, if we consider,

1. Their avowed Obedience and dependence: Ignatius in his Epistle ad fratres
Lusitanos (which they of the Sodality receive with as much veneration as they
do the Epistles of St. Peter, or St. Paul) thus bespeaketh and obliges his
Brethren; Ab aliis religiosis ordinibus facilius patiamur superari; We are
willing to yield our selves outdone by the Religious of other Societies in
their fastings, watchings, austerities, but for the Virtue of Obedience (and
the perfection of that Virtue) I would have you (who are of the Society of
Jesus) to outdo and outstrip them all. And therefore he allows no
obedience, virtutis nomine dignam, worthy the name of that virtue, or of his
Society, that is not absolute, blind, entire; nor none to be veram germanamque
sobolem, his true and legitimate offspring (though of the Society) but who do
wholly give up themselves, without halting or scrupling, to the will and
commands of their Superiors. Diligenter cavendum, mighty care (says he) is to
be taken, that no Man wrests his Superiors will, but make it his own; or rather
divest himself of his own, that he might be invested with the Divinity of his
Superiors. And as for his Understanding, eam etiam offerat necesse est, he must
also offer up that too, yea and so far forth as to suffer it willingly to be
captivated and led by his Superior: Nay, he must look upon his Superior not as
a Man subject and liable to errors, but as Christ himself, who neither can be
deceived, nor will deceive others; Insomuch that whatsoever his Superior
commands, Ipsius Dei praeceptum esse and voluntatem, He is to account of it, as
if it were the very will and command of God, and without any tergiversation or
excuse, or ever enquiring into the Uprightness or Justice of the cause, with an
heady blindness to betake himself to the accomplishing of it. Nay, Perit
celebris ille obedientiae caecae simplicitas, the simplicity and excellency of
that so blinded, yet much famed Obedience is quite spoiled, if at any time the
Inferior shall but in the least question the commands of his Superior, and
examine whether he has rightfully commanded, or no. And this is the Obedience
that is to be given at all times by all sorts of Persons of the Society; by the
Underling to his immediate Superior, by the Superior to his Rector, by the
Rector to his Provincial, by the Provincial to his General, by the General to
the Pope, the Generalissimo of all their Forces upon Earth: So that if the Pope
do but set them at work (be his design what it will) they must all Arm; the
General must stir up his Provincials, the Provincials their Rectors, the
Rectors all their inferior Officers, and they the rest of the Society, till a
pack of Bloud-hounds be unkennel'd, and all the Beasts of the Forest in danger.
Insomuch, that if the Pope be bloody, zealous, cruel, (as Gregory the Seventh,
as Innocent the Third, as Boniface the Eight, as Julius the Second, or as
Sixtus the Fifth, and as many others may be) If they be resolved to
excommunicate Kings, and raise their Subjects against them (as few of them but
will do, when they have an inviting opportunity) what must become of Kings and
Kingdoms that are Heretical? Can the Prince be secure that has so many
Cutthroats about him, perhaps in his Court, in his Camp, nay, all his
Dominions over? Or can his Subjects be safe (that are marked out as well as he)
whilst they have a sort of Men among them, that upon the least whistle will
run, some to their Knives, others unto their Swords; that will arm themselves
with fraud, treachery, perfidiousness; make underhand Plots, and never give
over (if once set on) till all be destroyed. Certainly if no harm be done, all
must be ascribed to the piety and peaceableness of that one Man at Rome, and
not to these his Agents and Instruments abroad. Add we to this,

2. Their natural and wonted Activity. It is a truth (says the Author of the
life and doctrine of the Jesuits) manifest to all this habitable part of the
world, that there is no Country known to Men, wherein the Society does not
labor for Christ; Nay, let but the Pope send them, and though it be into the
Deserts of Arabia, unto the Mountains of Caucasus, to the most unhospitable or
uninhabitable parts of the world, it is all one; they demur not, but run. And
this is sufficiently apparent from the Vow they make, by which they promise and
are tied to execute, quicquid modernus, aliique Pontifices; whatsoever the
present or future Popes shall command, and in prosecution thereof to go into
all manner of Countries, whether they shall be sent unto Turks, or unto
Infidels, yea even unto those that are commonly called the Indies, or unto any
other Heretics or Schismatics whatsoever, and were their errand at all times
good, or as they pretend ad profectum animarum and fidei propagationem, for the
saving of Souls, and the propagating the Ancient, Catholic (and not purely
Roman) faith, I confess I should admire their Zeal, and applaud their Order.
But since one of them must go with a Dagger in his Hand, another with a Pistol,
a third with a Bole of Poison (most of them with one mischief or other) to
murder the Kings, and Massacre the People, to breed confusions and unhinge
Government, to destroy Religion and plant Idolatry, I cannot but utterly
quarrel and blame their Zeal; and yet no Pharisee ever compassed Sea and Land
like them. No difficulties scare them, no improbabilities amaze them, no
dangers repel them; Tu Regina jube, let but the Pope (He or She) command them,
and away they go with as much alacrity and readiness, as the Evil spirit (1
Kings 22.) to persuade Ahab that he may go up, and fall at Ramoth Gilead; and
there came forth a Spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will persuade
Ahab: and the Lord said, Wherewith? and he answered, I will go, and be a lying
spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets, and accordingly he went. Add hereunto
as a further qualification for their wickedness,

3. Their undaunted and daring audacity; It was the saying of a Bishop, Nullum
animal audacius esse eo quod e cucullo prospiceret, that there was no sort of
Creature more bold and daring than He that looks through an Hood; spoke indeed
of a Monk, but much more applicable to the Jesuit; for if fixed and resolved,
on He will. Tell not him of Axes or of Ropes, of Blocks or of Gallows; The
Leviathan esteems Iron as straw, and Brass as rotten wood; the Arrow cannot
make him flee, Darts are counted as stubble before him; He laugheth at the
shaking of the Spear. Neither cares he much what his errand be; to pull
Cerberus out of Hell, or Lucifer from his Throne: Nay, if for his impieties he
chance to be seized or slain, the Hydra loses not his Head, but instead of one
chopped off, many rise up in the place; or if the unclean spirit happens for a
while to be driven out of the Land, he soon returns again, and with other
Devils worse than himself. The Summer draws on, and the insects will breed,
and a thousand to one (but if need require) cover the Land, as the Lice and
Vermin did Egypt. Danger it is that he courts, for he lives a Jesuit and dies
a Martyr; his Bones are to be enshrined, and (though he do miscarry, yet) he
shall have the honor of his enterprise with a Voluisse sat est. In short,
where the design is so bad, and the Actors in the design so wicked, desperate,
restless, resolute; When nothing is so vile, but what may be commanded, nothing
imposed but what shall be as readily executed, needs must that Nation be
miserable and forlorn where such Locusts as they, not only harbor, but swarm.
And thus have I exposed to your view the first sort of our Modern Pharisees,
the Jesuits; There is another of them still behind, full as turbulent and
dangerous to Government, and as great a supplanter of the blessed Reformation;
yea, and as restless therein as the former; to whom (upon that account) I must
no more than to the former say, God speed. And that is,

2. The Puritan: whereby I intend not the Puritan in life, but the Puritan in
worship; so called from Purus, and that from (...), and from thence (because of
his Separation and Conventicles) originally came the Pharisee. And he is one,

1. That looks upon the Church of England (however Reformed from the errors and
fopperies of the Church of Rome) not to be pure enough to be communicated with
by him; though by her Reformation she be made truly Primitive, Apostolical,
Scriptural. He is one,

2. That judges of his own Purity by no other Rule or Measure, than as he
treads Antipodes, and runs counter to the Order, as well as to the disorder of
the Church of Rome; ever looking upon those who most dissent from her (how
unreasonable soever their dissent be) to be most pure. He is one,

3. That takes all occasions to assert and protest his purity; and in order
thereunto bespatters Kings, confounds Parliaments, roiles all the counsels of
the Land, leaves no stone unturned, no religious villainy unpractised, till he
has made all as disorderly and confused as himself: So that if you look for a
sincere Protestant, as the world now goes, (and as the Plotters doom would have
it) it must not be He, that leads a pure life, that worshippeth the true God
regularly, that studieth obedience to his Superiors (spiritual and temporal);
or that practices the religion for which his Ancestors worthily are accounted
Martyrs: but He that can profess and protest; with words and with Swords; in
affront to Kings, in contempt to Laws, in despite to Government; yea, and the
more daringly, always the better, till they not only ruin the best and purest
Church in the World, but all the Government and Governors thereof. I confess it
is hard at present to give him a proper name; you may as soon find out the
number of the Beast, and tell the significancy of his many heads and horns, as
know what the Legion means, or what denomination he most delights in: yet
Purity is that he boasts of, it was that he was formerly named by, he still
carries on the same design, and therefore if at present he obtains the same
name, I hope he will excuse me; and the rather, because I neither fix upon him
Covenanter, Smectymnuan, Rebel, nor any other such foul (though deserved)
Appellation. This however I would have noted of him, that his dissent,
difformity, disagreement to the Church of England is purely Pharisaism; nothing
but downright Hypocrisy and Pharisaism. And this will evidently enough
appear, if you view him either inside or outside, at home or abroad. View him,

1. As he walks abroad; and here allow him but a Pharisees gate, a Pharisees
look, a Pharisees garb; a few affected phrases, and a little mystical
nonsense, a sour and misshapen face, an uncouth and hideous tone, some
ecstatick and convulsive motions; Let him but show the Legerdemain of his
Throat, his Eyes, his Hands, (these and such other-like feats of apishness and
mummery) the Shibboleth of the Party; and though wise Men blame them, sober Men
pity them, learned Men nauseate them, profane Men deride them, Nature it self
decline them; nay, though God never requires them, nor in his Creation (of
things good) ever designed them; and perhaps an hair Lip, or a cloven Foot may
be as proper for the Man as any of them all: yet allow him (I say) but such
little tricks, such delusory frauds to ensnare and toll in the populacy; and
then we believe (says one of them) that the generality of the Inhabitants of
this Nation are as sound and healthful a part of the Catholic Church, as any
in the World, and by their Profession as eminent a part of the Kingdom of
Christ. Grant them (I say) but these pitiful allowances, for which Schoolboys
are whipped, University-lads hist out of the Schools; and withal suffer them a
separate house, one (like that of the Pharisees) in the corner of the Streets;
a separate Priest, a woeful teaching Scribe of their own; a separate worship,
that (I mean) of a long Cloak, and as long a Prayer (though as impertinent and
Battological as ever Pharisee made) to carry off these their Solecisms and
Singularities; and then their Sanctities are pleased, and the difference
between the Church of England and them (as it was among the Jews) amounts to
no more but this, Stand off, for I am Holyer than thou. View them,

2. More inwardly, as they espouse, and carry on the Principles of the
Pharisees; which are mainly these two.

1. An avowed Disobedience to their Prince; 2. A trusty Opposition to the
Reformation. Begin we,
1. With their disobedience to their Prince; which (as among us) is their
Proprium quarto modo; and as connatural and essential to the Puritan, as ever
it was to the Pharisee or Jesuit. I would be loath to injure them, yet verily
Bellarmin, Sanctarel, Mariana, are not more fulsome in their Tenants, nor more
antiregal, antimonarchical in their Positions, than Knox, Buchanan and
Cartwright of old; or than their offspring of late have been, still are, and
are ever likely to be. If Princes (says one of them, and no small fool among
them neither) exceed their bounds, and do against that, wherefore they should
be obeyed, there is no doubt, but they may be resisted. If I had power (says
another of them, looking upon all the Princes that oppose them, no better than
as Tyrants) I would command them to be transported into some solitary place, or
else to be drowned in the bottom of the Sea, that their evil savor should not
annoy living Men: Nay, I would award recompense to be given for the slaughter
of them, not only of all in general, but of every one in particular, as Men use
to reward them for their pains, which kill Wolves and Bears, and destroy their
young Ones. And after this uneven Copy did most, or all of our late
Incendiaries write. It Is commendable (says one,) lawful (says another) for
Defense of Religion to take up Arms against the King; those (says a third) who
conclude that the Parliament, being Subjects, may not take up Arms against the
King, and that it is Rebellion to resist him, their grounds are sandy, and
their superstructure false. Some tell us, that the Supreme power of the Land is
originally, formally and radically in the Body of the People; So that if Kings
fail in the performance of their duty, the people may supply it, at least in
some cases may do it of themselves: Others, that the whole Sovereignty is
conditionate, fiduciary, and merely in trust from and for the people; insomuch
that if the trust be violated, the power returns unto the people again: Others,
that the King is but one of the three Estates of the Land, and that the two
Houses of Parliament are coordinate with him in the Government; and being
coordinate may act any thing without his consent, especially in case of his
refusal to cooperate, or conform to their desires: And lastly Others, that
Kings are accountable to the people as to their Superiors, and upon their
maladministration, or apostasy from the true Religion (of which they also
must be Judges) are censurable, punishable, and dethronable by them.

All which aforementioned Doctrines and Tenants are the avowed Doctrins of our
Puritans, raised the last Civil Wars, murdered our late Sovereign, and make as
fair steps toward the ruin and overthrow of the present, as any Consult of
Jesuits in the World are able, or likely to do. It were endless to recite the
number and horridness of these Men's sayings and writings, the World it self
being scarce able to contain them: However this (I think) I may lay down for a
great truth (and I am very confident that I fail not in my computation) that
though the Order of the Jesuits has spread it self much further into the World
than the Faction of the Puritans, yet there have been as many Puritans who have
openly and boldly asserted the Doctrine of deteriorating, opposing, deposing
Kings, as ever there were Jesuits: Yea, and have had their Writings (when time
served) as publicly authorized by Cranford, Calamy, Caril, the Generals of
their Faction; as ever the Jesuits had theirs, by Franciscus Borgia, Claudius
Aquaviva, Mutius Vitileschi, the Generals of their Order. Nay, I think the
Jesuits in reason (pardon me if I mistake) ought to be concluded the more safe
of the two; for finding that such like Tenants were a matter of scandal to the
respective Governments where they lived, there was first a prohibition made
anno 1616, afterward a precept of Obedience anno 1626, by which the whole
Order of the Jesuits were obliged, under pain of Damnation, never to write,
dispute, teach or print any thing concerning that matter; And this (says the
Author of the account of the Jesuits Life and Doctrine) is the Precept, which
has stood ever since, and never was infringed by any one Jesuit. I confess, I
believe not the Man in his tale, Credat Judaeus Apella: But this I am sure of,
that the Faction of the Puritans never gave such seeming satisfaction to the
World, as these Men have done; for being urged by the Oxford Act to give credit
to themselves by Oath, that they would never take up Arms against the King, nor
at any time endeavor to alter the Government by Law established in Church or
State, not one in twenty of them would do it. The refusal whereof must
undoubtedly be attributed to one or other of these two Reasons; either,

1. Because the Puritan does really hold it lawful to take up Arms against the
King, as once he has done; or,

2. Because he looks upon himself in conscience bound to endeavor and work an
alteration in the Government; and, if so, then you see the nature of the Man,
what the Puritan is, and what he would have. However (these things considered)
we may wonder, that this sort of Men should ever dare to expect, much less to
challenge any thing of favor from the King, till they have abjured and
renounced their Anticarolin Principles, which as yet they have not, and (for
ought as I can see) never will. Truly (says Mr. Jenkins, that Christi fidelis
servus) I speak no more than what I have often thought and said, The removal of
those burdens that were then upon us, countervails all the Blood and Treasure
shed and spent in these late Distractions; Nor did I as yet ever hear of any
Godly man, that desired (were it possible) to purchase their Friends or Money
again at so dear a rate, as with the return and re-imposal of those
Soul-burthening antichristian Yokes; and if any such there be, I am sure that
desire is no part of their godliness, and I profess my self in that to be none
of the number. Richard Baxter tells us, That he had often searched into his
heart, whether he did lawfully engage in the late War against the King, or not,
or did well to encourage so many thousands to it; and the issue of all his
search (as he boasts) was this, That he cannot yet see that he was mistaken in
the main cause, nor dares he repent of it, nor forbear doing the same, if it
were to do again in the same state of things: Oh seasonable Indemnity! but much
more need of an open and hearty penitency. Wonder we more, that ever they
should have the face and confidence to mouth it against the Jesuit, as they do;
yea, and to count all dastards, nay, Papists, at least popishly affected, that
run not into the same excess of riot with them; since they themselves have
adopted, and do still continue to prosecute the same, if not worse Principles
than the Jesuits (the worst of Jesuits) have done. Quis tulerit Gracchos de
seditione querentes? King James (who certainly knew the temper of the Men, as
well as any Man living) advises his Son (and may the Grandchild observe) in
the words following: Take heed, my Son! to such Puritans, very Pests in the
Church and Commonwealth, breathing nothing but Sedition and Calumny; I protest
before God, that you shall never find with any Highland or Border-thieves
greater ingratitude, and more lies and vile perjuries than with these Fanatic
Spirits; wherefore (for so he proceeds) let not the Principals of them to brook
your Land, if you like to sit at rest upon the Throne. They are secondly (which
bespeaks them downright Pharisees)

2. No less enemies to the Reformation of Religion among us. It has pleased
God through his wonderful Providence to free this Land from the Errors.
Superstitions, Idolatries, Usurpations, Tyranny of the Church of Rome, and in
lieu thereof to establish to us a Religion Primitive, Apostolical, Scriptural.
A Religion that our Forefathers thought good enough to dye for; a Religion that
has all along been valued by their Offspring, as the greatest Legacy that was
ever left them; and has been the means (ever sith-hence) of conveighing
thousands and thousands of them into Heaven: At the first obtaining thereof, it
was generally said to be wrought by the aid and assistance of the Holy Ghost;
The King became a Defender of it, the Parliament a Supporter, the Clergy a
Contriver and most willing Abettor; no Man but thought himself and his
Posterity blessed by it: Nay, it has made us stupor mundi, not only happy at
home, but admired abroad; It has done me good (says the learned Spanhemius)
to look upon the beautiful and comelyface of your English Church; its regular
Devotion, its decent Order, (Patri^gentis vestrae virtus) a privilege and
glory peculiar to your selves alone, and not to be found in such luster in any
other Churches of the Reformation. But alas! it has been her mishap from her
very infancy (like her Lord and Master) to be crucified between two Thieves,
the Jesuit on the one hand, and the Puritan on the other; only whereas one
hours Crucifixion of him made one of the two to relent, and become a Convert;
not an hundred years and more has wrought upon these, or caused any one of the
Factious to leave off their blaspheming and reviling language. My work at
present is with the latter only, and whosoever shall but consider, how in the
Churches infancy they would have stifled her, how in her younger years they
would have supplanted her; how in her elder they would have buried her alive;
how they have murdered the Defender of her Faith, sequestered her Ministers,
turned her Senators out of doors, impoverished her Patriots, decimated and
persecuted her Followers; yea, and at present how they abuse her Friends,
applaud her Enemies, nick name her Proselytes, molest her Governors, by
scandalous Reflections, seditious Petitions, pernicious Libels, Antimonarchical
Clubs, will find reason enough to believe, that there ought to come a Woe upon
them, as much as ever there did upon the Pharisees for their disturbing the
Church of the Jews, and hindering the Reformation that our Blessed Savior was
then working among them. There is one thing further that I must remark upon
them, how that to make themselves the only Protestants of the Land, the old
ones must be laid aside, and on a sudden turned into Papists; Boast not your
selves any more for Queen Elizabeth's Protestants (says the Author of the
Plotters doom) for you are so far from being of that nature, that bate the bare
name, and you have nothing of her Protestants in you; nay, I am persuaded, it
were good for our Church (he means the Conventicles of the Puritans) if you had
not so much as the name neither. The Author of Celeusma (speaking of the
conformable Clergy) tells you plainly, that they are Specie duntaxat
Protestants, and that they do Supparasitare Pelagio, Socino, sed imprimis
Paepae and Papismo: And this of late has been the cry of all or most of the
Faction, in their pursuit after the conformable Clergy of the Church of
England, forgetting all the while, at leastwise willing that it should be
forgotten, that our Religion (as now established) is the very same it was in
Queen Elizabeth's days, that no alteration has been made either in our
Doctrine, Discipline or Worship, only our Discipline somewhat weakened, whereby
such Plotters should have had their doom; That it has ever since those days
been asserted, maintained and defended by the conformable Clergy, and ever most
by the most conformable. That if at any time Protestantism be defied (as the
Israelites were by the Goliath of the Philistines) the Church of England must
find the Champion; Others perhaps may wear the Sword, but the Pen and the
Prison, (to write and to suffer for it) ever did, ever must, and ever will
belong unto them. I have been too tedious, however let this be observed, that
the Jesuitical Society and Puritan Faction began together (much about the same
time, and within a Year or two, one of the other) the one in Geneva, and the
other in Rome; and both to obstruct and baffle the Reformation that then
appeared in the World. And I must confess, that I am much of the same mind with
the blessed Martyr (our late Archbishop) That till the Jesuits are taken from
the Church of Rome, and the peevish Puritan-Preachers out of the Churches of
Great Britain, there never can be any Peace in Christendom.

May Authority therefore (to which they are both alike grievous) rid us of the
one and the other; and I doubt not (which is the thing I desire to see) but
Jerusalem will live in Peace; Her Walls will be Salvation, and her Gates Praise.

FINIS.
PRosecution no Persecution: Or the Difference between Suffering for
Disobedience and Faction, and Suffering for Righteousness, and Christ's Sake;
Truly Discussed and Stated. By Nath. Bisbie, D. D.

Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's Churchyard.


