READER,
THis Pamphlet was torn from me by those who say they cannot rob, because all
is Theirs. They found it where it slept many years forgotten; but they 'waken'd
it, and made false Transcripts. They Exciz'd what they liked not; so mangled
and Reformed, that 'twas no Character of an Assembler, but of Themselves. A
Copy of that Reformling had crept to the Press. I seized and stopped it,
unwilling to father other men's sins. Here therefore you have it (as 'twas first
scribled) without addition of a syllable; I wish I durst say here is nothing
lopt off. but Men and Manners are changed, at least they say so. If yet this
Trifle seem born with Teeth, you know whose hands were knuckle-deep in the
blood of that renowned Chancellor of Oxon (Archbishop LAUD) though when they
cut up that great Martyr, his two greatest Crimes were the two greatest Glories
Great Britain can boast of, St Paul's Church and the Oxford Library. Where you
find no coherence, remember this Paper has suffered Decimation: better Times
have made it worse, and that is no fault of

J. B.

THE Assembly-man; Written in the Year 1647.

(...). (...) i. e.

He seditiously stirr's up men to fight: he will teach others the way whereof
himself is most ignorant; and persuades men to take an Oath, because himself
had sworn it before.

LONDON: Printed for Richard Marriot, and are to be sold at his shop under St.
Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1662/3.

THE Assembly-man.
AN Assembler is part of the States' Chattels: nor Priest, nor Burgess, but a
Participle that shark's upon both. He was chosen, as Sir Nathaniel, because he
knew least of all his Profession: not by the Votes of a whole Diocese, but by
one whole Parliament Man. He has sat four years toward a new Religion, but
in the interim left none at all: as his Masters, the Commons, had a long Debate
whether Candles or no Candles, but all the mean while sat still in the Dark:
And therefore when the Moon quits her old Light, and has acquired no new,
Astronomers say she is in her Synod. Show me such a Picture of Judas as the
Assembler, (a griping, false, Reforming Brother; rail's at Wast spent upon the
Anointed; persecutes most those Hands which Ordein'd him; brings in men with
swords and staves; and all for Money from the Honorable Scribes and
Pharisees:) One Touch more (a Line tied to his Namesake Elder-tree) had made
him Judas Root and Branch. This Assembly at first was a full Century; which
should be reckoned as the Scholiast's Hecatomb, by their Feet, not Heads: or
count them by Scores, for in things without Heads Six-core to go to an Hundred.
They would be a New Septuagint; the Old translated Scripture out of Hebrew into
Greek, these turn it to four shillings a day. And all these Assemblers were
begot in one day, as Hercules's fifty Bastards all in one night. Their first
List was sprinkled with some names of Honor (Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley, Dr.
Hammond, etc.) But these were Divines; too worthy to mix with such scandalous
Ministers, and would not Assemble without the Royal Call. Nay, the first List
had one Archbishop, one Bishop, and an Half, (for Bishop Brownrigg was then but
Elect.) But now their Assembly (as Philosophers think the World) consists of
Atoms; petty small Levites, whose Parts are not perceptible. And yet these
inferior postern Teachers have intoxicated England, (for a man sometimes grow's
drunk by a Glister.) When they all meet, they show Beasts in Africa by
promiscuous coupling engender Monsters. Mr. Seldom. visit's them (as Persians
use) to see wild Asses fight: when the Commons have tired him with their new
Law, these Brethren refresh him with their mad Gospel: They lately were
gravelled 'twixt Jerusalem and Jericho; they knew not the distance 'twixt those
two places; one cried twenty miles, another ten, 'twas concluded seven, for
this reason, that Fish was brought from Jericho to Jerusalem market: Mr Seldom
smiled, and said perhaps the Fish was salt fish, and so stopped their mouths.
Earl Philip goes thither to hear them spend; when he heard them toss their
NATIONAL, PROVINCIAL, CLASSICAL, CONGREGATIONALL; he swore damnably, that a
pack of good Dogs made better Music: His Allusion was proper since the Elder's
Maid had a four-legg'd Husband. To speak truth, this Assembly is the two Houses
Tiring-room, where the Lords and Commons put on their Visards and Masks of
Religion. And their Honors have so sifted the Church, that at last they have
found the Bran of the Clergy. Yet such poor Church-menders must Reform and
shuffle, though they find Church Government may a thousand ways be changed for
the worse, but not one way for the better. They have lately published
ANNOTATIONS on the Bible, where their first Note (on the word CREATE) is a
Libel against Kings for creating of Honors. Their Annotation on Jacob's two
Kids, is, that two Kids are too much for one man's supper: but he had (say they)
but one Kid, and the other made Sauce. They observe upon Herod, what a Tyrant
he was, to kill Infants under two years old, without giving them a legal Trial
that they might speak for themselves. Commonly they follow the Geneva Margin,
as those Seamen who understood not the Compass crept along the Shore. But I
hear they threaten a second Edition, and in the interim thrust forth a paultry
Catechism, which expounds Nine Commandments, and eleven Articles of the Creed.
Of late they are much in love with Chronograms, because (if possible) they are
duller than Anagrams; O how they have torn the poor Bishops names to pick out
the number 666! little dreaming that a whole Bakers dozen of their own Assembly
have that Beastly Number in each of their Names, and that as exactly as their
Solemn League and Covenant consist's of 666 words. But though the Assembler's
Brains are Lead, his Countenance is Brass; for he damned such as held two
Benefices, while himself has four or five, besides his Concubin. Lecture. He is
not against Pluralities, but Dualities; He says it is unlawful to have Two of
his own, though Four of other men's; and observes how the Hebrew word for Life
has no Singular number Yet it is some Relief to a Sequestered Person to see two
Assemblers snarl for his Tithes; for of al^ kind of Beasts none can match an
Assembler bu^ an Assembler. He never enters a Church by the Door, but clambers
up through a Window of Sequestration, or steals in through Vaults and Cellars
by clandestine Contracts with an Expecting Patron. He is most sure no Law can
hurt him, for Laws dyed in England the year before the Assembler was born. The
best way to hold him, is (as our King Richard bound ths King of Cyprus) in
silver chains. He love's to discourse of the new Jerusalem, because her streets
are of fine gold; and yet could like London as well; were Cheapside paved with
the Philosophers stone. Nay, he would say his Prayers with Beads, if he might
have a Set made all of Diamonds: This, this is it which tempts him to such mad
Articles against the Loyal Clergy, whom he dresse's as he would have them
appear; just as the Ballad of Dr. Faustus brings forth the Devil in a Friars
weed. He accused one Minister, for saying the Blessed Virgin was the Mother of
God, ((...), as the Ancients call her.) Another he charged for a common
Drunkard, whom all the Country knows has drunk nothing but Water these six and
twenty years. But the Assembler himself can drink Widows Tears though their
Husbands are not dead. Sure, if Paracelsus's Doctrine were true, (that to eat
creatures alive will perpetuate man's life) the Assembler were immortal, for he
swallows quick Men, Wives, and Children; and devours Lives as well as Livings;
as if he were born in that Pagan Province where None might marry till he had
killed twelve Christians. This makes him kneel to Lieutenant General Cromwell
(as Indians to the Devil;) for he saw how Oliver first threw --, then --, and
can with a wink do as much for --: like Milo in the Olympicks, by practicing on
a Calf grew strong enough for a Bull, and could with ease give a lift to an
Ass. The Great Turk was sending his Ambassador, to congratulate the Assembly's
Proceedings against the Christians; He Ordered them Thanks for Licencing his
Alcoran to be printed in English; but hearing Ottoman Cromwell had talked of
marching to the walls of Constantinople, that Embassy was stopped. The only
difference 'twixt the Assembler and a Turk, is, that one plant's Religion by
the power of the Sword, and the other by the power of the Cymetar. Nay, the
greatest strife in their whole Conventicle, is who shall do worst; for they all
intend to make the Church but a Sepulcher, having not only plundered, but
anatomized all the true Clergy; whose Torment is heightened in being destroyed
by such dull Instruments; as the Prophet Isaiah was sawn to pieces with a
wooden Saw. The Assembler wonder's that the King and his Friends live still in
Hope; he thinks them all in St. Clemens case, drowned with an Anchor tied about
his neck. He has now got power to Visit the Universities; where these blinking
Visitors look on eminent Scholars (as the Blind-man who saw Men like Trees) as
Timber growing within the Root-and-Branch Ordinance. The Assembler has now left
Scholars so poor, they have scarce Rags wherewith to make Paper. A man would
think the Two Houses intend to transport the Universities, since they load
Asses with Colledge-revenues. For though these Assemblers made themselves
Heads, they are rather the Hands of Colleges, for they all are Takers, and
take all. And yet they are such creeping Tyrants, that Scholars are expelled
the two Universities, as the old Thracians, forced from their Country by Ratts
and Mice. So that Learning now is so much advanced, as Arrowsmith's Glasseye
sees more than his Natural. They never admit a good Scholar to a Benefice, for
the Assembly's Balance is the Lake of Sodom, where Iron swims and Feathers
sink. Their Divinity-Disputations are with Women or Laymen; and it is only on
one Question ( Episcopacy) where the Assembler talks all that he and his
friends can say, (though his best medium to prove Presbyters more ancient than
Bishops, is, that Scribes, Pharisees, Priests and Elders were before the
Apostles;) Yet if a Scholar or good Argument come, he flie's them as much as if
they were his Text. This made him curse Dr. Steward, Dr. Laney, and Dr.
Hammond; and had he not had more Brass in his Face then in his Kitchen, he had
hanged himself at Uxbridge, and ended with that Treaty. For he has naught of
Logic, but her clutch'd fist, and rail's at Philosophy as Beggars do at
Gentlemen. He has very bad luck when he deals in Philologie, as one of them
(and that no mean man) who, in his Preface to the Reader, says, that St. Paul
had read Eustathius upon Homer, though the Apostle dyed a thousand years before
Eustathius was born. The Assembler's Diet is strangely different, for he dines
wretchedly on dry Bread at Westminster, four Assemblers for thirteen pence: But
this sharpens and whets him for Supper, where he feeds gratis with his
City-Landlord, to whom he brings a huge Stomach and News; for which crammed
Capons cram him. He screw's into Families where there is some rich Daughter or
Heir; but whoever takes him into their bosom, will dye like Cleopatra. When it
rain's he is Coach'd (a Classis of them together) rolling his Eyes to mark who
beholds him. His shortest things are his Hair and his Cloak. His Hair is cut to
the figure of 3; two high Cliffs run up his Temples, whose Cape of shorn hair
shoot's down his Forehead, with Creeks indented, where his Ears ride at Anchor.
Had this false Prophet been carried with Habbakuk, the Angel had caught fast
hold of his Ears, and led him as he leads his Auditory. His Eyes are part of
his Tithe at Easter, which he boyles at each Sermon. He has two Mouths, his
Nose is one, for he speaks through both. His Hands are not in his Gloves, but
his Gloves in his Hands, for 'twixt Sweatings, that is, Sermons, he handles
little else, except his dear Mammon. His Gown (I mean his Cloak) reache's but
his pockets: when he rides in that Mantle, with a Hood on his shoulders and a
Hat above both, is he not then his own Man of sin with the Triple Crown? you
would swear some honest Carpenter dressed him, and made him the Tunnell of a
Country Chimney. His Doubles and Hose are of dark Blew, a grain deeper than
pure Coventry: but of late he is in Black, since the Loyal Clergy were
persecuted into Colors His two longest things are his Nails and his Prayer.
But the cleanest thing about him is his Pulpit-Cushion, for he still beats the
Dust out of it. To do him right, commonly he wears a pair of good Lungs,
whereby he turns the Church into a Belfry, for his Clapper make's such a Din,
you cannot hear the Cymball for the Tinkling. If his Pulpit be large, he walk's
his Round, and speaks as from a Garrison, (his own Neck is Palizado'd with
Ruff) When he first enters his Prayer before Sermon, he wink's and gasp's, and
gasp's and wink's, as if he prepared to preach in another world: He seems in a
Slumber, then in a Dream; then rumbles awhile; at last he sound's forth, and
then throw's so much Dirt and Nonsense toward Heaven, as he durst not offer
to a Member of Parliament. Now because Scripture bids him not curse the King in
his Thought, he does it in his Pulpit by word of mouth; though Heaven strike
him dumb in the very Act, as it did Hill at Cambridge, who while he prayed,
Depose Him, O Lord, who would depose us, was made the dumb Devil. This (one
would think) should gargle his foul mouth. For his only hope why God should
hear him against the King, is the Devil himself (that great Assembler) was
heard against Job. His whole Prayer is such an irrational Bleating that
(without a Metaphor) it is the Calves of his Lips: And commonly it is larded
with fine new words, as Savingable, Muchly, Christ-Jesusness, etc. and yet he
has the face to preach against Prayer in an unknown Tongue. Sometimes he is
foundered, and then there is such hideous Coughing! But that is very seldom, for
he can glibly run over Nonsense, as an empty Cart trundles down a Hill. When
the King girt round the Earl of Essex at Lestythiell, an Assembler complained
that God had drawn his People into the Wilderness, and told Him, He was bound
in honor to feed them; for, Lord, said he, since thou giv'st them no Meat, we
pray thee, O Lord, to give them no Stomachs. He tore the Liturgy, because,
forsooth, it shackled his Spirit, (he would be a Devil without a circle;) and
now if he see the Book of Common Prayer, the Fire sees it next, as sure as the
Bishops were burned who compiled it. Yet he has mercy on Hopkins and Sternhold,
because their Meeters are sung without Authority (no Statute, Canon, or
Injunction at all;) only, like himself, first crept into private Houses, and
then into Churches. Mr. Rous moved those Meetres might be Sequestered, and his
own new Rithmes to enjoy the Sequestration; but was Refused, because John
Hopkins was as ancient as John Calvin; Besides, when Rous stood forth for his
Trial, Robin Wisdom was found the better Poet. It Is true they have a Directory,
but it is good for nothing but Adoniram, who sold the Original for 400 l. And
the Book must serve both England and Scotland, as the Directory Needle point's
North and South. The Assembler's only Ingenuity is, that he pray's for an ex
tempore Spirit, since his Conscience tell's him he has no Learning. His Prayer
thus ended, he then looked round, to observe the Sex of his Congregation, and
accordingly turn's the Apostle's Men, Fathers, and Brethren into Dear Brethren
and Sisters. For, his usual Auditory is most part Female; and as many Sisters
flock to Him, as at Paris on Saint Margaret's day, when all come to Church that
are or hope to be with child that year. He divides his Text as he did the
Kingdom, make's one part fight against another: or as Burges divides the Dean
of Paul's House, not into Parts, but Tenements, that is, so as 'twill yield
most money. And properly they are Tenements; for each Part must be dwelt upon,
though himself comes near it but once a Quarter; and so his Text is rather Let
out than Divided. Yet sometimes (to show his skill in Keckerman,) he Butcher's
a Text, cut's it (just as the Levite did his Concubine) into many dead Parts,
breaking the Sense and Words all to pieces, and then they are not Divided, but
shattered, like the Splinters of Don Quixot's Lance. If his Text be to the
Occasion, his first Dish is Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver; yet tells not
the People what Pictures those were. His Sermon and Prayer grin at each other,
the one is Presbyterian, the other Independent, for he preaches up the Classes,
yet pray's for the Army. Let his Doctrine and Reason be what they will, his Use
is still to save his Benefice and augment his Lecture. He talks much of Truth,
but abhors Peace, lest it strip him as naked as Truth; and therefore hates a
Personal Treaty, unless with a Sister. He has a rare simpring way of
expression; he call's a Married Couple Saints that enjoy the Mystery; and a man
Drunk, is a Brother full of the Creature. Yet at Wedding Sermons he is very
familiar, and (like that Picture in the Church at Leyden) shows Adam and Eve
without Fig Leaves. At Funerals he gives infallible Signs that the Party is
gone to Heaven; but his chief Mark of a child of God, is to be good to God's
Ministers. And hence it is he call's his Preachment Manna, fitted not to his
Hearers Necessity, but their Palate, for it is to feed Himself, not them. If he
chance to tire, he refreshes himself with the People's Hum, as a Collar of
Bells do cheer up a Pack-horse. It Is no wonder he will preach, but that any will
hear him; (and his constant Auditors do but show the length of their Ears;) For
he is such an (...), that to hear him make's good Scholars sick, but to read
him is death. Yet though you heard him three hours he will ask a fourth, as the
Beggar at Delph craves your Charity because he eats four pound of Bread at a
Meal. 'Twas from his Larum the Watch-makers learned their infinite Skrew. His
Glass and Text are equally handled, that is, once an hour: nay sometimes he
sally's and never returns, and then we should leave him to the Company of
Lorimers, for he must be held with Bit and Bridle. Who ever once has been at
his Church can never doubt the History of Balaam. If he have got any new Tale
or Expression, it is easier to make Stones speak than him to hold his peace. He
hates a Church where there is an Echo, for it robs him of his dear Repetition,
and confounds the Auditory as well as he. But of all Mortals I admire the
Short-handmen, who have the patience to write from his Mouth: had they the art
to shorten it into Sense, they might write his whole Sermon on the back of
their Nail. For his Invention consist's in finding a way to speak Nothing upon
any thing; and were he in the Grand Seigniors power, he would lodge him with
his Mutes; for Nothing and Nothing to purpose are all one. I wonder in
conscience he can preach against Sleeping at his Opium-Sermons. He preaches
indeed both in season and out of season; for he rayl's at Popery, when the Land
is almost lost in Presbytery, and would cry out Fire, Fire, in Noah's Flood.
Yet all this he so act's with his Hands, that in this sense too his Preaching
is a Handicraft. Nor can we complain that Plays are put down while he can
preach, save only his Sermons have worse Sense, and less Truth. But he blew
down the Stage and preached up the Scaffold. And very wisely, lest men should
track him, and find where he pilsers all his best Simile's, (the only thing
wherein he is commendable, St. Paul himself having culled Sentences from
Menander's THAIS, though 'twas his worst, that is, unchaste Comedy.) Sometimes
the Assembler will venture at the Original, and then (with the Translator of
Don Quixot) he mistake's Sobs and Sighs for Eggs and Collops. But commonly (for
want of Greek and Latin) he learns Hebrew, and straight is illuminated; that
is, mad; his Brain is broke by a Brickbat cast from the Tower of Babel. And yet
this empty windy Teacher has Lectur'd a War quite round the Kingdom: he has
found a Circulation of Blood for Destruction (as famous Harvey for
Preservation) of Mankind. 'Twas easy to foresee a great Mortality when Ravens
were heard in all Corporations. For, as Multitude of Froggs presage a
Pestilence, so croaking Lecturers foretold an Assembly. Men come to Church, as
the Great Alexander went to Sacrifice, led by Crows. You have seen a small
Elder-tree grow in Chinks and Clefts of Church-walls; it seems rather a Weed
than a Tree; which, lend it growth, make's a Rent in the Wall, and throw's
down the Church. Is not this the Assembler? grown from Schisms (which himself
begot,) and if permitted, will make the Church but a Floor or Churchyard. Yet,
for all this, he will be called Christ's Munster and Saint, as the Rebels
against King John were the Army of God. Sure when they meet, they cannot but
smile; for the dullest among them needs must know that they all cheat the
people: such gross low Impostors, that we die the death of the Emperor
Claudius, poisoned by Mushromes. The old Heretics had Skill and Learning (some
excuse for a Seduced Church,) Those were Scholars, but these are Assemblers;
whose very Brains (as Manichaeu's skin) are stuffed with Chaff. For they study
little, and preach much, ever sick of a Diabete: nor do they read, but weed
Authors, picking up cheap and refuse Notes, that with Caligula they gather
Cockle-shells, and with Domitian retire into their Study to catch Flies. At
Fasts and Thanksgivings the Assembler is the States' Trumpet; for then he does
not preach, but is blown; proclaims News, very loud, the Trumpet and his
Forehead being both of one metal. (And yet, good Man, he still prays for
Boldness.) He hackney's out his Voice like a Crier; and is a kind of Spiritual
Agitant, receives Orders, and spreads them. In earnest the States cannot want
this Tool, for without him the Saints would scarce Assemble. And if the Zealots
chance to fly out, they are charmed home by this Sounding Brass. There is not
on earth a baser Sycophant; for he ever is chewing some Vote or Ordinance; and
tells the People how savoury it is; like him who licked up the Emperor's
spittle and swore 'twas sweet. Would the two Houses give him Cathedral Lands,
he would prove Lords and Commons to be Jure Divino: but should they offer him
the Self-denying Ordinance, he would justify the Devil and curse them to their
faces, (his Brother Kirk-man did it in Scotland.)' It Is pleasant to observe how
finely they play into each others hands; Marshall procures Thanks to be given
to Sedgwick (for his great pains) Sedgwick obtains as much for Marshall, and so
they all pimp for one another. But yet (to their great comfort be it spoken)
their whole seven-years Sermons at Westminster are now to be sold in
Fetter-lane and Pye-corner. Before a Battle the Assembler ever speaks to the
Soldiers; and the holding up of his hands must be as necessary as Moses's
against the Amalekites: For he prick's them on, tells them that God loves none
but the valiant: but when Bullets fly, Himself runns first, and then cry's All
the sonns of Adam are cowards! Were there any Metempsychosis his Soul would
want a Lodging; no single Beast could fit him, being wise as a Sheep and
innocent as a Wolf. His sole comfort is, he cannot out-sin Hugh Peter's: Sure,
as Satan has possessed the Assembler, so Hugh Peter's has possessed Satan, and
is the Devil's Devil. He alone would fill a whole Herd of Gadarens. He has
sucked Blood ever since he lay in the Butcher's Sheets; and now (like his
Sultan) has a Shambles in his Countenance; so crimson and torrid, you may there
read how St. Lawrence dyed, and think the three children were delivered from
his face. This is St. Hugh, who will Level the Assembler, or the Devil's an
Ass. Yoke these Brethren; and they two couple like a Sadducee and a Pharisee,
or a Turk and a Persian, both Mahumetans. But the Assembler's deepest highest
Abomination, is his Solemn League and Covenant; whereby he strive's to damn or
beggar the whole Kingdom; out-doing the Devil, who only persuades, but the
Assembler force's to perjury or starving. And this (whoever live's to observe
it) will one day sink both him and his Faction: for he and his Oath are so much
one, that were he half-hang'd and let down again, his first word would be
Covenant! Covenant!

But I forget a Character should be brief: (though tedious Length be his best
Character.) Therefore I Will give ye (what He denies the Sequestered Clergy) but
a Fifth Part. For weigh him single, and he has the Pride of three Tyrants, the
Forhead of six Gaolers, and the Fraud of twelve Brokers. Or take him in the
Bunch, and their whole Assembly is a Club of Hypocrites, where six dozen of
Schismatics spend two hours for four shillings apiece.

FINIS.

