An Historical ACCOUNT Of Making the PENAL LAWS By the PAPISTS against the
PROTESTANTS, And by the PROTESTANTS against the PAPISTS WHEREIN The true Ground
and Reason of Making the Laws is given, the PAPISTS most Barbarous Usuage of
the PROTESTANTS here in England, under a Color of Law, set forth; and the
Reformation Vindicated from the Imputation of being Cruel and Bloody, unjustly
cast upon it by those of the Romish Communion.

By Samuel Blackerby, Barrister of Gray's Inn.

Summa est ratio, quae pro Religione facit, Co. 5.14. b. LONDON, Printed for
William Churchill at the Black-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard, and John Weld at
the Crown between the Temple-Gates in Fleet Street, MDCLXXXIX.

Licensed, By Command of the Right Honorable the Earl of Shrewsbury, Principal
Secretary of State.

The 10 th. of May, 1689.

JA. VERNON.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES EARL of MONMOUTH, VISCOUNT MORDANT OF AVILAND,
BARON of RIGATE, ONE of their MAJESTY'S most Honorable PRIVY COUNCIL, And the
FIRST of the LORDS COMMISSIONERS Of their MAJESTY'S TREASURY, etc. This
Historical Account of making these Penal Laws, is most humbly Dedicated by the
Author, His Lordships, Most Humble, and most Obedient Servant.

AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT Of making the Penal Laws, By the Papists against the
Protestants, and by the Protestants against the Papists.
CHAP. I. Rich. II.
BY the Mirror of Justices. f. 152.
Common Law of England the punishment of Heresy was burning the Heretic, by
virtue of the Writ de Haeretico comburendo; Fitz. Nature. Brev. f. 269.
which was first to issue. What was accounted Heresy before the time of Ed.
the 3 d, I shall not enquire. That the Church of Rome has always termed those
Heretics, who have opposed her Innovasions and Corruptions, cannot be denied,
and is sufficient to my purpose. The first of these that apppeared in England,
was John Wickliffe, in the latter end of the Reign of King Ed. the 3 d, in the
year 1371. And therefore there was no occasion for putting the Law in Execution
till his time; but upon his appearance, he Preaching and Teaching several
Doctrines that tended to a Reformation; the Romish Clergy ( fond of their
Diana) presently endeavors to silence him, which they had done, had not the
favor of some great men at that time stopped their proceedings against him; so
that, (notwithstanding their Rage and Malice against him) he at last dyed in
his Bed: But such an Implacable Hatred they bore to his Memory, because he had
begun to dispel those Clouds of Darkness and Ignorance, with which this Church
of England was then overspread, that they Ex actis Consilii Constan.
Procured a Decree of the Synod of Constance, for the taking up his Body and
Bones to be burnt* one and forty years after he was buried, for being an
obstinate Heretic: In obedience to which Decree, the Popish Clergy in the time
of King Richard the 2 d, took up his Bones out of his Grave, and burnt them,
and cast the Ashes into a River. Such Enemies were they then to Christ's
Religion, that they would not suffer the Ashes of this great Luminary to rest,
lest (as they were superstitious enough to think) they should again revive, to
make a further discovery of their Works of Darkness.

In this Trussel's Continuation of Daniel's History of England. fol. 49.
King's Reign execution by Fire was first put in practice within this Realm,
for opposing the Superstition and Idolatry of the Church of Rome.

Before this time there being no Statute to punish the Oppugners of the Romish
Innovasions, and Corruptions in matters of Doctrine and Worship. The Clergy of
the Romish Church, made use of the weakness of R. 2. and prevailed with him to
consent to the owning a supposititious Law, of their own contriving and drawing
up, without the consent of the Commons, Co. Inst. 3. p. fol. 40, 41.
That Commissions should be by the Lord Chancellor made, and directed to
Sheriffs and others, to arrest such as should be certified into the Chancery by
the Bishops and Prelates, to be Preachers of Heresy and notorious Errors,
their Fautors, Maintainers, and Abettors, and to hold them in strong Prison,
until they would justify themselves to the Law of Holy Church. Which Act of
Parliament was the first that was made against them that preached against the
Church of Rome, under the Notion of their being Heretics* who were then called
Wicklivites. The Act it self I have here inserted, as it is Printed in Rastal's
Statutes.

R. 2. Ca. 5. Rast. Stat. f. 140.

The Wicklivites to be imprisoned.


Forasmuch as it is openly known, that there be diverse evil persons within the
Realm, going from County, to County, and from Town, to Town, in certain habits,
under dissimulation of great Holiness, and without the Lycens;e of the
Ordinacies of the places, or other sufficient Authority, Preaching daily, not
only in Churches, and Churchyards; but also in Markets, Fairs, and other open
places, where a great Congregation of people is, diverse Sermons containing
Heresies, and notorious Errors, to the great embleamishing of the Christian
Faith, and destruction of the Laws, and of the estate of Holy Church, to the
great peril of the souls of the people, and of all the Realm of England, as
more plainly is found, and sufficiently proved, before the Reverend Father in
God the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops and other Prelates, Masters
of Divinity, and Doctors of canon and of civil Law, and a great part of the
Clergy of the said Realm, especially assembled for this cause: which persons do
also preach diverse matters of slander, to engender discord and dissension,
betwixt diverse Estates of the said Realm, as well Spiritual as Temporal, in
exciting of the people to the great peril of all the Realm: which Preachers
cited or summoned before the Ordinaries of the places, there to answer of that
whereof they be Impeached, will not obey to their Summons and Commandments; nor
care not for their Monitions nor Censures of the Holy Church, but expressly
despise them: and moreover, by their subtle and ingenious words, do draw the
people to hear their Sermons, and do maintain them in their Errors, by strong
hand and by great Routs: It is ordained and assented in this present
Parliament, that the King's Commissions be made, and directed to the Sheriffs,
and other Ministers of our Sovereign Lord the King, or other sufficient persons
Learned, and according to the Certifications of the Prelates thereof, to be
made in the Chancery from time to time, to arrest all such Preachers, and also
their Fautors, Maintainers and Abettors, and to hold them in Arrest and strong
Prison, till they will justify them according to the Law and Reason of Holy
Church, and the King will and commands, That the Chancellor make such
Commissions at all times, that he by the Prelates or any of them, shall be
certified and thereof required as is aforesaid.

By this Act it appears, that there were then several persons, who would not
submit themselves to the Romish Bishops and Prelates, and the Histories of
those times acquaint us, that they were the Professors of the true Religion,
afterward called Protestants. By Color of this supposed Act, certain persons
that held that Images were not to be worshipped, Co. Inst. 3 d. fol. 40.
and such like Doctrines (which the Protestants now hold) were detained, and
tormented in Prison, till they were compelled before the Masters of Divinity
(as they called themselves) to take an Oath, and did swear to worship Images,
which was against the Moral and Eternal Law of Almighty God. This, these Popish
Bishops and Prelates did, by virtue of this Law; which indeed was none, for it
was only signed by the King at the instance of the Bishops and Prelates, and
never assented to by the Commons; and therefore in the next Parliament, the
Commons preferred a Bill, reciting the said supposed Act, and constantly
affirmed, that they never assented thereunto, and therefore desired, that the
same might be made void, for they protested that it was never their intent to
be justified, and to bind themselves and their Successors to the Prelates more
than their Ancestors had done in times past, whereto the King gave his Royal
Assent, in these words, y pleist au Roy. But in the Proclamation of the Acts of
that Parliament, Co. 12.58. and 3. Inst. f. 41.
which was 6. R. 2. the said Act of 6. R. 2. whereby the said supposed Act of
5. R. 2. was declared to be void, is omitted; and afterward, the said supposed
Act of 5. R. 2. ca. 5. was continually printed, and looked on as a Good Law,
and the said Act of 6. R. 2. was by the Prelates from time to time kept from
the Print. Such pious Frauds have been always practiced by the Popish Clergy,
and always found necessary for the supporting of the credit of that Church.

CHAP. II. Hen. IV.
THe Rage of the Popish Clergy against the Wicklivites, or Professors of the
true Religion, increasing with the increase of the light of the Gospel, and
they fearing that the said contrivance might be detected, to the end that they
might be yet more able effectually (if it were possible) to suppress the truth;
when they had requited R. 2. for granting them that supposed Law, with deposing
him, and assisting H. 4. to usurp the Crown; they in the 2 d. H. 4. apply
themselves to him for a further Law, for the preservation of the Catholic
Faith (as they called it) against Christ's true Religion, (by them miscalled
Heresy) and he in gratitude to them, in assisting him in his coming to the
Crown, granted them a Law to their Hearts content, which follows, as it is
printed in Rastal 's Statutes, in these words.

Whereas it is showed to our Sovereign Lord the King, on the behalf of the
Prelates and Clergy of this Realm of England, in this present Parliament, 2 H.
4. ca. 15. Rast. Stat. f. 180.

By this Law the Professors of the true Religion: were to be burnt as Heretics.


that although the Catholic Faith builded upon Christ, and by his Apostles,
and the holy Church, sufficiently determined, declared, and approved, has been
hitherto, by good, and holy, and most noble Progenitors of our Sovereign Lord
the King, in the said Realm, amongst all the Realms of the World, most devoutly
observed; and the Church of England, by his said most noble Progenitors, and
Ancestors, to the honor of God, and of the whole Realm aforesaid, laudably
endowed, and in her Rights and Liberties sustained, without that, that the same
Faith, or the said Church was hurt, or grievously oppressed, or else perturbed
by any perverse Doctrine, or Wicked, Heretical, or Erroneous Opinions: Yet
nevertheless, diverse false and perverse people, of a certain new Sect, of the
Faith of the Sacraments of the Church, and the Authority of the same, damnably
thinking, and against the Law of God and of the Church, usurping the Office of
Preaching, do perversely and maliciously, in diverse places within the said
Realm, under the color of dissembled Holiness, preach and teach these days
openly and privily, diverse new Doctrines, and wicked, heretical and eronious
Opinions, contrary to the same Faith, and blessed determinations of the Holy
Church. And of such Sect, and wicked Doctrine and Opinions, they make unlawful
Conventicles and Confederacies, they hold and exercise Schools, they make and
write Books, they do wickedly instruct and inform people, and as much as they
may, excite and stir them to Sedition and Insurrection, and makes great strife
and division among the people, and other Enormities horribly to be heard, daily
do perpetrate and commit, in subversion of the said Catholic Faith, and
Doctrine of the Holy Church, in diminution of God's Honor, and also in
destruction of the Estates, Rights, and Liberties of the said Church of
England, by which Sect, and wicked and false Preachings, Doctrines, and
Opinions of the said false and perverse people; not only most greatest peril of
the Souls, but also many other hearts, flanders, and perils, (which God
prohibit) might come to this Realm, unless it be the more plentifully and
speedily helped, by the King's Majesty in this behalf, namely, whereas the
Diocesans of the said Realm, cannot by their Jurisdiction Spiritual, without
aid of the said Royal Majesty, sufficiently correct the said false and perverse
people, nor refrain their malice, because the said false and perverse people,
do go from Diocese to Diocese, and will not appear before the said Diocesans,
but the same Diocesans, and their Jurisdiction Spiritual, and the Keys of the
Church, with the Censures of the same, do utterly contemn and despise, and so
their wicked Preachings, and Doctrines, does from day to day, continue and
exercise, to the hatred of Right and Reason, and utter destruction of Order and
good Rule. Upon which Novelties and Excesses above rehearsed, the Prelates and
Clergy aforesaid, and also the Commons of the said Realm, being in the said
Parliament, praying our Sovereign Lord the King, that his Royal Highness would
vouchsafe in the said Parliament, to provide a convenient Remedy: The same our
Sovereign Lord the King, graciously considering the premises, and also the
laudable steps of his said most noble Progenitors, and Ancestors, for the
conservation of the said Catholic Faith, and sustentation of God's Honor, and
also the safeguard of the Estates, Rights, and Liberties of the said Church of
England, to the laud of God, and merit of our said Sovereign Lord the King, and
prosperity and honor of all the said Realm, and for the eschewing of such
Dissentions, divisions, hurts, slanders and perils in time to come; and that
this wicked Sect, preachings, doctrines and Opinions, should from henceforth
cease and be utterly destroyed, by the assent of the States and other discreet
men of the Realm, being in the said Parliament; has Granted, Established, and
Ordained from henceforth, and firmly to be observed, That none within the said
Realm, or any other Dominions subject to his Royal Majesty, presume to preach
openly or privily, without the Lycense, of the Diocesan of the same place,
first required, and obtained, Curates in their own Churches, and persons
hitherto privileged, and other of* the Cannon Law granted, only except. Nor
that none from henceforth any thing preach, hold, teach or instruct, openly or
privily, or make, or write any Book, contrary to the Catholic Faith, or
determination of the Holy Church, nor of such Sect and wicked Doctrines, and
Opinions, shall make any Conventicles, or in any wise hold or exercise Schools,
and also that none from henceforth, in any wise, favor such preacher, or maker
of any such, and like Conventicles, or holding or exercising of Schools, or
making or writing such Books, or so teaching, informing, or exciting the
people, nor any of them maintain, or any wise sustain, and that all and
singular having such Books or any Writings of such wicked doctrines and
opinions, shall really with effect, deliver or cause to be deliverd, all such
Books and Writings, to the Dyocesan of the same place, within forty days from
the time of the Proclamation of this Ordinance and Statute: And if any person
or persons, of whatsoever kind, estate, or condition, that he or they be, from
henceforth, do attempt against the Royal Ordinance and Statute aforesaid, in
the premises, or in any of them, or such books, in the form aforesaid, do not
deliver; then the Diocesan of the same place, in his Dyocess, such person or
persons in this behalf defamed, or evidently suspected, and every of them, may
by the Authority of the said Ordinance and Statute, cause to be arrested, and
under safe custody in his prisons to be detained, till he or they, of the
Articles laid to him or them, in this behalf, do canonically purge him or
themselves, or else such wicked Sect, Doctrines, Preachings, and Heretical, and
Erroneous Opinions, do abjure, according as the Laws of the Church do require;
so that the said Diocesan by himself, or his Commissaries, do openly and
judiciously proceed against such persons, so arrested, and remaining under his
safe Custody to all effect of the Law, and determine that same business,
according to the Canonical Decrees, within three months after the said arrest,
any lawful impediment, ceasing. And if any person, in any case above expressed,
be before the Diocesan of the place, or his Commissaries, Canonically convict,
then the same Diocesan may do to be kept in his prison, the said person, so
convict for the manner of his default, and after the quality of the offense,
according and as long as to his discretion shall seem expedient, and moreover
to put the same person to the secular Court (except in cases, where he
according to the Canonical Decree ought to be left,) to pay to our Sovereign
Lord the King his pecuniar fine, according as the same fine shall seem
competent to the Diocesan, for the manner and quality of the offense, in which
case the same Diocesan shall be bound to certify the King of the same Fine in
his Exchequer by his Letters Patents, sealed with his seal, to the effect, that
such Fine by the King's Authority may be required, and levied to his use, of
the goods of the same person so convict. And if any person within the said
Realm and Dominion, upon the said wicked preachings, doctrines, opinions,
schools and heretical and erroneous informations, or any of them, be before the
Diocesan of the same place, or his Commissaries, sententially convict, and the
same wicked Sect, preachings, doctrines and opinions, schools, and
informations, do refuse duly to abjure: Or by the Diocesan of the same place,
or his Commissaries, after the abjuration made by the same person pronounced,
fall into relaps, so that according to the holy Canons, he ought to be left to
the secular Court, whereupon credence shall be given to the Diocesan of the
same place, or to his Commissaries in this behalf, then the Sheriff of the
County of the same place, and Mayor and Sheriffs, or Sheriff, or Mayor and
Bailiffs, of the City, Town, and Borough of the same County, next to the same
Diocesan, or the said Commissaries, shall be personally present in preferring
of such sentences, when they by the same Diocesan, or his Commissaries, shall
be required, and they the same persons, and every of them, after such sentence
promulgate, shall receive, and them before the people, in a high place do to be
burnt, that such punishment may strike in fear to the minds of other, whereby
no such wicked Doctrine, and Heretical and Erroneous Opinions, nor their
Authors, and Fautors in the said Realm and Dominions against the Catholic
Faith, Christian Law and Determination of the holy Church, which God prohibit,
be sustained, or in any wise suffered, in which all and singular the premises,
concerning the said Ordinance and Statute, the Sheriffs, Mayors, and Bailiffs,
of the said Counties, Cities, Buroughs and Towns, shall be attending, aiding
and supporting, to the said Diocesans and their Commissaries.

From the Preamble of which Act of Parliament, and the Act it self, I observe
three things. 1 st. That it being soon after the death of Wickliffe, the
persons there mentioned to have had a new Faith, about the Sacraments of the
Church, and the Authority of the same; and that Preached without authority,
that gathered Conventicles, taught Schools, and wrote Books against the
Catholic Faith, with many other heinous aggravations, had been the followers
of Wickliff, and were then of John Huss, and Jerome of Prague, and the rest of
the Reformers from Popery, and were carrying on that Blessed Work, as fast as
they could. 2ly. That the end and Design of this Law, was, That that Sect (as
the Act calls them) their Preachings, Doctrines, and Opinions, should from
thenceforth Cease, and be utterly destroyed. And 3dly. That in order thereunto
by this Statute: The Sheriffs or other Officers, were immediately to proceed,
to the burning of Heretics (i. e.) Protestants, without any Writ or Warrant
from the King; without which Writ (as I observed before,) they could not
proceed to burn any Person; and accordingly they proceed in burning the
Professors of the true Religion, all the Reign of King H. the 4th.

CHAP. III. Hen. V.
IN the beginning of the Reign of King Henry the 5th, (by reason of a pretended
Conspiracy) a more severe Act was made against the Professors of the true
Religion, whom they then called Lollards, by which Act all Officers of State,
Judges, By this Law, the Lollards, or Professors of the true Religion, forfeit
real and personal Estate to the King.
Justices of the Peace, Mayors, Sheriffs, and Bailiffs, were to be sworn when
they took their Employments, to use their whole Power and Diligence, to destroy
all Heresy and Errors, called Lollardies, and to assisst the Ordinaries and
their Commissaries in their Proceedings against them, and that the Lollards
should forfeit all the Lands they held in Fee simple, and their Goods and
Chattels to the King. Which Act, that the Papists may not have the least color
to contradict what I say, I have here inserted, as it is Printed in Rastal, in
these words.

Forasmuch as great Rumors, Congregations, and Insurrections, 2 H. 5.7. Rast.
Stat. 1. pt. fol. 205.

The Magistrates are to take an Oath to suppress the Professors of the true
Religion, then called Lollard.


here in the Realm of England, by diverse of the King's Liege People, as well by
them which were of the Sect of Heresy, commonly called Lollardy, as by others
of their Confederacy, Excitation and Abetment, now of late, were made to the
intent, to adnul, destroy, and subvert the Christian Faith, and the Law of God
and Holy Church, within this same Realm of England, and also to destroy the
same, our Sovereign Lord the King, and all other manner of Estates of the same
Realm of England, as well Spiritual as Temporal, and also all manner of Polity,
and finally the Laws of the Land, the same our Sovereign Lord the King, to the
Honor of God, and in conservation and fortification of the Christian Faith,
and also in salvation of his Royal Estate, and of the Estate, and of the Estate
of all his Realm, willing, against the Malice of such Heretics and Lollards,
to provide a more open remedy and punishment, then has been had and used in
the case heretofore, so that for fear of the same Laws and Punishments, such
Heresies and Lollardries may the rather cease in time to come, by the advice
and assent aforesaid, and at the prayer of the said Commons, has Ordained and
Established: That first, the Chancellor, Treasurer, Justices of the one Bench
and of the other, Justices of the Peace, Sheriffs, Mayors, and Bailiffs of
Cities and Towns, and all other Officers, having governance of People, which
now be, or hereafter for the time shall be, The Oath.
shall make an Oath in taking of their Charges and Occupations, to put their
whole power and diligence, to put out and do to be put out, cease and destroy
all manner of Heresies and Errors, commonly called Lollardries, within the
places where they exercise their offices and occupations, from time to time,
with all their power, and that they assist the Ordinaries and their
Commissaries, and them favor and maintain, as often as they or any of them, to
that shall be required by the same Ordinaries or their Commissaries, so that
when the said Officers and Ministers travel or ride to arrest any Lollard, or
to make assistance at the instance and request of the Ordinaries or their
Commissaries by virtue of this Statute, that the same Ordinaries and
Commissaries shall pay for their costs reasonably, and that the King's
Services, to the which the same Officers be first sworn, be preferred before
all other Statutes for the Liberty of Holy Church, and the Ministers of the
same, and in especial for the Correction and Punishment of the Heretics and
Lollards, before this time made and not repelled, being in their force; and
also, that all Persons convict of Heresy, of what estate, condition or degree,
that they be by the said Ordinaries or other Commissaries, left to the Secular
Power according to the Laws of Holy Church, shall lose and forfeit all their
Lands and Tenements, which they have in fee simple, in the manner as follows,
that is to say, that the King have all the Lands and Tenements, which the said
Convicts have in fee simple, and holden of him immediately as forfeit, and the
other Lords of whom the Lands and Tenements of such Convicts be holden
immediately, after that the King is so seized and answered of the year, the
day, and the waste, have Liberty out of the King's hands, of the Lands and
Tenements aforesaid of them so holden, as has been used in the Case of
Attainder of Felony: Except the Lands and Tenements, which be holden of the
Ordinaries or their Commissaries, before whom any such persons impeached of
Heresy be convict, which Lands and Tenements entirely shall remain to the King
as forfeit. And moreover that all the Goods and Chattels of these person so
convicted, be forfeit to our Sovereign Lord the King. So that no person convict
of Heresy, and left to the Secular power after the Laws of Holy Church, shall
forfeit his Lands before that he be dead, and if any such person so convict be
infeoffed, be it by Fine, by Deed, or without Deed, in Lands or Tenements,
Rents or Services, in Fee or otherwise, or has any other possessions or
Chattels by gift or grant of any person or persons, to another's use then to
the use of such convicts, that the same Lands or Tenements, Rents or Services,
nor such other Possessions nor Chattels, shall be forfeit to our Sovereign Lord
the King in no wise, and moreover that the Justices of the King's Bench, and
Justices of Peace, and Justices of Assize, have full power to enquire of all
them who hold any Errors or Heresies, as Lollards, and which be their
Maintainers, Receivers, Favorers and Sustainers, common Writers of such Books,
as well of their Sermons as of their Schools, Conventicles, Congregations, and
Confederacies, and that this clause be put in Commissions of Justices of the
Peace: And if any persons be indicted of any points aforesaid, the said
Justices shall have power to award against them a Capias, and the Sheriffs
shall be bound to arrest the person or persons so indicted, as soon as he may
them find by him or by his Officers, and forasmuch as the cognizance of
Heresy, Errors and Lollardies, belongs to the Judges of Holy Church, and not
to Secular Judges, such persons indicted, shall be delivered to the Ordinaries
of the place, or to their Commissaries, by Indentures betwixt them to be made,
within ten days after their arrest, or sooner if it may be, thereof to be
acquir or convict by the Laws of Holy Church, in case these persons be not
indicted of another thing whereof the cognizance belongs to the secular
Judges and Officers, in which case after that they be acquit or delivered
before the secular Judges of such things to the secular Judges belonging, they
shall be sent in safeguard to the said Ordinaries or to their Commissaries, and
to them delivered by Indentures, as before, to be acquit or convict of such
Lollardries, Errors or Heresies, as is aforesaid, after the Laws of Holy
Church, and that within the term aforesaid, provided always that the said
Indictments be not taken in Evidence but for Information before the Spiritual
Judges against such persons so indicted, but that the Ordinaries commence their
Process against such persons indicted in the same manner, as though no Indictment
were, having no regard to such Indictments. And if any be Indicted of Heresy,
Error, or Lollardry, and taken by the Sheriff or other Officer, he shall be let
to main prize within the said ten days by good Surety, to whom the said
Sheriffs, or other Officers will answer, so that the said person or persons,
which were so indicted, be ready to be delivered to the said Ordinaries or to
their Commissaries, before the end of the said ten days, if he may by any means
for sickness, and every Ordinary shall have sufficient Commissaries or
Commissary, dwelling in every County, in a place notable; so that if any such
person so indicted be taken, that the said Commissaries or Commissary, may be
warned in the notable place where he dwells, by the Sheriff or his Officers,
to come to the King's Iayl in the same County, there to receive the same
persons so indicted by Indentures as before: And that in the inquest in this
case to be taken, the Sheriffs and other Officers to whom it belongs, shall
do to be Impannel'd good and sufficient persons not suspected nor procured,
that is to say, that every of them which shall be so Empanell'd in such
Inquest, have within the Realm of England an hundred Shillings of Lands,
Tenements, or of Rent by the year, upon pain to lose to the King's use 10 l.
and they which shall be Impannell'd in such Inquests in Wales, every of them
shall have to the value of 40 s. by year, and if any such person be arrested,
be it by the Ordinary or by the King's Officers or Ministers, and escape or
break the prison, before that he be acquit before the Ordinary, the Goods and
Chattels which he had the day of such arrest, shall be forfeit to the King, and
his Lands and Tenements which he had the same day seized also in the King's
hands, the King shall have the profits thereof from the same day until he be
yeilden to the prison from which he escaped, and that the aforesaid Justices
have full power to enquire of all such Escapes, breaking of Prison, and also of
Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels of such persons so indicted, provided
also that if any such person indicted, do not return to the said prison, and
dies not convict, it shall be lawful to his Heirs to enter into the Lands and
Tenements of their Ancestor, without any other pursuit making to the King for
this cause, and that all they which have Liberties and Franchises Royal in
England, as in the County of Chester, the County and Liberty of Durham, and
other like, and also the Lords which have Jurisdiction and Franchises Royal in
Wales, where the King's Writs do not run, have power to execute and put in due
execution these Articles in all points, by them or by their Officers, in like
manner as the Justices and other the King's Officers before declared should do.

By which Act it plainly appears, that the Professors of the true Religion,
were not only to suffer in their own persons by being most inhumanly burnt, but
their very Wives and Children must feel the effects of Popish Cruelty, having
nothing left by this Law, whereby to support their Families.

CHAP. IV. Hen. VIII.
THE three Laws in the precedent Chapters mentioned, were put in severe
Execution, during the Reigns of R. 2. H. 4. H. 5. H. 6. E. 4. R. 3. H. 7. and
to the twenty fifth year of Henry the 8 th. during which time the Whore of
Babylon made her self drunk with the Blood of the Saints; not only halling them
to prison, but burning their Persons, and ruining their whole Families. In
which time diverse were Martyred purely to please and gratify the Popish
Clergy, for whatever they said was Heresy. must be so, upon which Account they
run the Persecution so high, that in 25 H. 8. (about which time the Professors
of the true Religion were first called Protestants) the Parliament began to
consider, That Heresy was no where defined, and made an Act of Parliament, for
the Punishment of Heresy, but by it repealed the Statute of 2 H. 4. ca. 15.
the preamble of which Act does declare.

That the Clergy did upon their suggestions, obtain the said Act, 25 H. 8. ca.
14. Rast. Stat. fo. 537.

By this Law Protestants were to abjere or be burnt.


but that the same did not in any part thereof declare what was Heresy, and
that the word Canonical Sanctions, are so general that it was difficult to
avoid the Penalties of the Act, in case he should be examined upon captious
interrogatories, as the Ordinaries did then use to persons suspect of Heresies,
and that all such proceedings were against the ancient Laws of the Kingdom, and
for those reasons did repeal the said Act of 2 H. 4. ca. 15. and for redress of
Heresy did establish 5 R. 2.5. and 2 H. 5.7. and did enact, that Sheriffs in
their Turns, and Stewards in their Leets, Rapes, and Wapentakes, should have
Authority to enquire of Heretics, and every such Presentment made in any Turn,
Leet, Co. Inst. 2.658.

Bulst. 3.51.


etc. concerning Heretics, should be certified to the Ordinary, and every
person presented, or indicted of any Heresy, or duly accused by two lawful
Witnesses, might be cited, arrested, or taken by an Ordinary, or other of the
King's Subjects, and committed to the Ordinary, to answer in open Court, and
being convict, should abjure his Heresies, and refusing so to do, or falling
into a relapse, should be burnt in an open place for Example of others.

By this Act indeed some part of the Common Law, as to the Trial of the Parties
guilty, seems to be restored, but they could not yet think of parting with the
severity of the Penalties, I mean burning their Persons, and confiscating their
Estates; and that the World might at length know, who were deemed Heretics,
and who not, (for before it was no where defined what Heresy was) in the 31 st
of H. 8. ca. 14. 31 H. 8. ca. 14. Rast. Stat. fol. 652.

By this Law Protestants are made Traitors, Felons, and guilty of a praemunire.


An Act of Parliament was made, called an Act for abolishing of Opinions in
certain Articles concerning Christian Religion, six Articles were agreed on,
and consented to, viz.

1. That in the most Blessed Sacrament of the Altar, by the strength and
efficacy of Christ's mighty word (it being spoken by the Priest) is present
really under the form of Bread and Wine, the natural Body and Blood of our
Savior Jesu Christ, Conceived of the Virgin Mary, and that after the
Consecration, there remains no substance of Bread or Wine, nor any other
substance, but the substance of Christ God and Man.

2. That the Communion in both kinds, is not necessary ad salutem by the Law of
God, to all persons, and that it is to be believed, and not doubted of, but
that in the Flesh under the form of Bread, is the very Blood, and with the
Blood, under the form of Wine, is the very Flesh, as well a part, as though
they were both together.

3. That Priests, after the Order of Priesthood received, may not marry by the
Law of God.

4. That Vows of Chastity, Widdowhood, by Man or Woman, made to God advisedly,
ought to be deserved, by the Law of God, and that it exempts them from other
Liberties of Christian People, which without that they might enjoy.

5. That it is meet, and necessary, that private Masses be continued, and
admitted in the King's English Church, and Congregations, as whereby good
Christian People, ordering themselves accordingly, do receive both Godly and
goodly consolations and benefits, and it is agreeable also to God's Law.

6. That Auricular Confession is expedient, and necessary to be retained and
continued, used and frequented, in the Church of God.

He that by word of Mouth, Writing, Printing, Cyphering, or in any otherwise,
does Publish, Preach, Teach, Say, Affirm, Declare, Dispute, Argue, or hold any
Opinion contrary to the first Article, is by that Act of 31 H. 8. ca. 14.
Declared a Heretic, to suffer Death by burning, and to forfeit his Estate as
in case of High Treason: The public Preaching, and affirming in a Court of
Justice, any thing contrary to the other five Articles, and Marrying after a
vow of Chastity, is declared Felony, without Benefit of Clergy, and to forfeit
as in cases of Felony. And if any Person by Words, Writing, Printing,
Cyphering, or otherwise, publish, declare, or hold Opinion, contrary to the
said five Articles, he forfeits his Goods and Chattels for ever, the Profits of
his Lands, Tenements, and other his real Estate, during his life, his Spiritual
Promotion shall be utterly void, and his body imprisoned, at the King's
Pleasure, for the first offense, and for the second offense to be adjudg'd a
Felon, and suffer and forfeit as a Felon, without Benefit of Clergy. By which
Act it plainly appears, that the denying of Transubstantiation, was by this Law
made High Treason.

The publishing or holding the necessity of Receiving in both kinds, the
lawfulness of Priests Marrying, the unlawfulness of vowing Chastity, of private
Masses, and Auricular Confession, was no less than Felony, or at least a
Praemunire; So that in a word, to be a Protestant, was to be a Traitor, a Felon,
or subject to a Praemunire: And could they have found any punishment inflicted
by our Laws, that is worse, they would (no doubt) have made the Protestants
subject to it, and that, not as Offenders against the Polity of the Civil
State, but purely upon the Account of their Religion.

And therefore, the next thing that is done by these destroyers of Souls as
well as Bodies, is to take away all means of Knowledge (as well as to inhibit
the Promulgation thereof,) upon such severe Penalties; and for that purpose was
the Act of 34 H. 8. ca. 1. made: Whereby,

34 H. 8. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. p. 782. The means of Knowledge in Religion, taken
away by this Act from the Protestants.
All Books of the Old and New Testament in English, being of Tindal's
Translation, or Comprising any matter of Christian Religion, Articles of the
Faith or holy Scripture, contrary to the Doctrine aforesaid, (i. e. the
Doctrine of Popery) and set forth after the year 1540, or then to be set forth
by the King were utterly abolished; no Printer or Bookseller was to utter any
of the aforesaid Books, no person was to play in interlude; sing or rhyme,
contrary to the said Doctrine; no person was to retain any English Books, or
Writings, concerning matter against the Holy and Blessed Sacrament of the
Altar, (i. e. the Mass) or other Books, abolished by the King's Proclamation,
there was to be no annotations, or preambles in Bibles, or New Testaments in
English: The Bible was not to be read in English in any Church, no Women, or
Artificers, Prentices, Iourneymen, Servingmen, of the degrees of Yeomen, or
under Husbandmen, nor Laborers, should read the new Testament in English:
Nothing was to be taught or maintained, contrary to the King's Instructions,
(which were for the suppressing Heresy or Protestantism) and if any Spiritual
person should preach, teach, or maintain any thing contrary to the King's
Instructions, or Determinations made, or to be made, and should be thereof
Convict, he should for his first Offense recant, for the second abjure, and
bear a Faggot, and for his third should be adjudged an Heretic, and be burnt,
and lose all his Goods and Chattels.

And whoever will take the pains to read over Dr. Burnet.
the History of the Reformation, together with Fox.
the Book of Martyrs, (of which Book Dr. Burnet, in his Preface to the first
part of his History of the Reformation, says, that he having compared his Acts
and Monuments with the Records, had never been able to discover any Errors or
Prevarications in them, but the utmost fidelity and exactness,) will find so
many instances of putting all these bloody Laws before mentioned in Execution,
as I persuade my self, that there are some Papists would even blush at, and be
thoroughly ashamed of; and if they have any thing of Humanity in them, must
utterly abhor. But before I can carry on the account of the rest of the Penal
Laws made by the Papists against the Protestants, (the Reformation in King
Edward the 6 th's time, of Glorious Memory, intervening) I shall show how the
Reformers used the Papists in his Reign.

CHAP. V. Ed. VI.
IT may be expected that I should say something of Henry the 8 th's
Reformation: But as to what was done in Henry the 8 th's time, I shall not
trouble the Reader with any thing, because the Reverend and Learned Doctor
Burnet is so far from giving him the Character of good; that he concludes his
first part of the History of the Reformation, Hist. of the Reformation, vol. 1.
p. 362.
with this, (speaking of Henry the 8 th.) I do not deny that he is to be
numbered among the ill Princes, yet I cannot rank him with the worst. Which
Character certainly the preceding account of the Laws made in his time against
the Protestants, does evidence to be very favorable to him.

I shall therefore begin with the Laws made in the Reign of King Edward the 6
th. and the manner of introducing them. King Edward the 6 th coming to the
Crown young, and Cranmer and others designing thoroughly to reform the Church of
England from the Errors and Corruptions that were crept into Her, during the
time she was under the Popish Tyranny: The first step that was set in order to
it, was the visiting the Clergy quite over England, and compiling some
wholesome Homilies, Mild Methods used by King Ed. the 6th. before any Laws made.
to supply the defect of Sermons, by reason of the ignorance of the then
Clergy, and to prevent unnecessary Disputes in the Pulpits: Their Articles and
Injunctions for the Visitation, were to be observed, under the pains of
Excommunication, Sequestration, or Deprivation, not upon the Penalty of being
burnt as a Heretic, or forfeiture either of Lands in fee simple, or Goods or
Chattels, or either, or any of them: This was done before the Parliament was
called.

November the 4 th, 1547. The Parliament met, and the first Act of Parliament
that was made, was an Act against such as should unreverently speak against the
Sacrament of the Altar, and of the receiving thereof under both kinds, which
Act of Parliament, in the Preamble, takes notice:

That the King, minding the Governance and Order of his most loving Subjects, 1
Ed. 6. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. f. 902.

The Administration of the Lords Supper restored and the punishment inflicted
on despisers and neglecters of it, more moderate than what the Papists
inflicted on the Protestants.


to be in most perfect unity and concord in all things, and in especial in the
true Faith and Religion of God, and wishing the same to be brought about with
all Clemency and Mercy on his Highness part toward them, as his most Princely
Serenity and Majesty, has already declared by evident proof, to the intent
that his most loving Subjects provoked by Clemency and Goodness of their Prince
and King, should study rather for love than fear, to do their duties, first to
Almighty God, and then to him and the Commonwealth, nourishing concord and love
amongst themselves; yet considered and perceived, that in a Multitude, all were
not of that sort, that Reason and the Knowledge of their Duty could move them
from Offenses, but many had need of some bridle of fear, and that same were men
most contentious and arrogant, for the most part, or else most dlind and
ignorant: by the means of which sort of men, many things well and godly
instituted, and to the Edification of many were perverted and abused, and
turned to their own and others great loss, and hindrance, and sometime to
extreme destruction, the which does appear in nothing more, or sooner, than in
matters of Religion, and in the great and high Mysteries thereof, and
particularly, instanceth in the most comfortable Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ; and sets forth, that the same was Instituted
by Christ himself, the words of the Institution, and for what end, and then
says, that notwithstanding this, the said Sacrament had been marvelously
abused, by such manner of men before rehearsed, who of wickedness, or else of
ignorance, and want of learning, for certain abuses then-to-fore committed, of
some, in misusing thereof, had condemned in their hearts and speech the whole
thing, and contemptuously depraved, despised, or reviled the same most holy and
blessed Sacrament, and not only disputed and reasoned unreverently and ungodly
of that most high Mystery, but also in their Sermons, Preachings, Readings,
Lectures, Communications, Arguments, Talks, Songs, Plays, or Jests, name or
call it by such vile and unseemly words, as Christian Ears do abhor to hear
rehearsed.

From this preamble, I gather, that the Popish Clergy had been greatly guilty
of defaming the administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, as used
by the Protestants, according to our Savior's Institution, and that this Law
was made to inhibit such defamations, and to effect the same with as much
Clemency and Gentleness, as the nature of the thing and the circumstances of
time would bear, as will appear by what was Enacted for Reformation of such
abuse, which was, That whoever was guilty of the like abuse, after the time in
the Act for that purpose mentioned, should be imprisoned, and make fine and
ransom at the King's Will and Pleasure.

That three Justices of the Peace at least, whereof one to be of the Quorum,
should have power to take Informations and Accusations by the Oaths and
Depositions of two able, honest, and lawful Persons, at the least, and then to
try the party accused, by a Jury at their Quarter Sessions.

From which I observe, First, that the Reformers did not make any Offense,
relating to the Sacrament, high Treason, as the Papists had done denying
Transubstantiation.

2. That they did not leave it to the Clergy, to examine in a Summary way, and
convict, and then deliver the Offender over to the Secular power to be burnt;
but left the Party to be accused by Legal Witnesses, and Tried by a Jury of
Honest and Legal Men, according to the Fundamental Laws of the Kingdom: Nay,

3 dly. They were so far from restraining the party accused of his Liberty,
That it is particularly provided by the said Statute, that they might take Bail
for his appearance. After which it was Enacted, by the same Act (and which I
desire you to take in Doctor Burnet's own words) That it being more agreeable
to Christ's first Institution, and the practice of the Church for five hundred
years after Christ, Hist Reform. pt. 2. p. 41.
that the Sacrament should be given in both the kinds of Bread and Wine, than
in one kind only, it should be commonly given in both kinds, except necessity
did otherwise require; and it being also more agreeable to the first
Institution and the Primitive Practice; that the People should receive with the
Priest, than that the Priest should receive it alone: Therefore the day before
every Sacrament, an Exhortation was to be made to the People, to prepare
themselves for it, in which the benefits and dangers of worthy and unworthy
Receiving, were to be expressed, and the Priests were not without a lawful
Cause, to deny it to any who humbly asked it.

From which I observe, That this Act was made to restore the Administration of
the Lords Supper, to its Ancient and Primitive usage, in both kinds with the
Priest, and that the Priest had not power to refuse giving it to any, without
just ground; and that however here is no Penalty annexed either Spiritual or
Temporal.

Several other Laws were made, in order to carrying on the Reformation, which
inflicted no Penalty upon the Popish Clergy or Layety, but were made for the
well governing the Church of England, as it stood then Reformed, and put it out
of the power of the Papists to hurt them, Rast. Stat. f. 904.
as the 1 E. 6.2. for the Election of Bishops, 1 Ed. 6.12. for repealing 5 R.
2.6. 2 H. 5.7.25 H. 8.14.31 H. 8.14 34 H. 8.1. and 35 H. 8.5. Which were the
severe Laws, that the Popish Bishops and Prelates had obtained against the
Professors of the true Religion, whom they had nicknamed, in derision,
Lollards, Heretics, and Gospellers.

When the Reformation, in Edward the 6 th's time, had restored the right
Administration of the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, they rested for two
years, before they reformed the Liturgy; to the end, they might by degrees, and
with all Acts of Clemency and Kindness, draw the Papists off from their
Innovations, and Corruptions, but finding that would not do, in the 3 d. year
of Ed. 6. An Act for Uniformity of Service and Administration of the Sacraments
throughout the Realm was made and enjoined, upon much milder penalties than any
Laws relating to Religion, that were made by the Papists; for the Excellency of
the Preamble of which Act, and that the truth of the Penalties may appear, I
have inserted both.

23 E. 6. Ca. 1. Rast. Stat. f. 932.

An Act for Uniformity, upon mild Penaltus enjoined.


Whereas long time, there has been had in this Realm of England, and in Wales,
diverse forms of Common Prayer, commonly called the Service of the Church, that
is to say, the use of Sarum, of York, of Bangor, and of Lincoln, and besides
the same, now of late, much more diverse and sundry forms, and fashions have
been used, in the Cathedral and Parish Churches of England and Wales, as well
concerning the Mattens, or Morning Prayer, and the Even-Song, as concerning the
Holy Communion, commonly called the Mass, with diverse and sundry Rites and
Ceremonies, concerning the same, and in the administration of other Sacraments
in the Church, and as the Doers and Executors of the said Rights and
Ceremonies, in other form than of late years they have been used, were pleased
therewith, so others not using the same Rites and Ceremonies, were thereby
greatly offended, and albeit the King's Majesty, with the Advice of his most
entirely beloved Uncle, the Lord Protector, and other of his Highness Council,
has therefore diverse times assayed to stay Innovations, or new Rites
concerning the premises, yet the same has not had such good success, as his
Highness required in that behalf, whereupon his Highness, by the most prudent
advice aforesaid, being pleased to bear with the frailty and weakness of his
Subjects in that behalf, of his great Clemency, has not been only content, to
abstain from punishment of those that have offended in that behalf; for that
his Highness takes, that they did it of a good Zeal, but also to the intent,
an uniform, quiet, and Godly Order, should be had concerning the premises, has
appointed the Archbishop of Canterbury, and certain of the most learned and
Discreet Bishops, and other Learned Men of this Realm, to consider and ponder
the premises, and there upon, having as well eye, and respect to the most
sincere and pure Christian Religion, taught by the Scripture; as to the usages
in the Primitive Church, should draw and make one convenient and meet order,
right, and fashion of Common, and open Prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, to be had and used in his Majesty's Realm of England, and in Wales,
the which at this time by the aid of the Holy Ghost, with one Uniform
Agreement, is of them concluded, set forth, and delivered to his Highness, to
his great comfort and quietness of mind, in a Book entitled, The Book of
Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments, and other Rites and
Ceremonies, after the use of the Church of England.

From which Preamble, I observe, 1 st. That notwithstanding all the endeavors
used by the King and his Council, to stay Innovations, and thoroughly to reform
the Administration of the Sacraments of the Lord's Supper, diverse of his
Subjects would not comply. 2 dly, That their non-complyance, was attributed to
their frailty and weakness: And 3 dly, that his Clemency was such toward them,
that he abstained from punishing them, because he took it, that they did it of
a good Zeal. This Book of Common Prayer being compiled, further to show
tenderness to the Papists, it was Enacted,

That all and singular person and persons, that had offended concerning the
premises, other then such person and persons, as were then in the Tower of
London, or in the Fleet, should be pardoned thereof; and that all and singular
Ministers in any Cathedral or Parish Church, or other place within this Realm
of England, Wales, Callis, and in the Marches of the same, or other the King's
Dominions, should from and after the Feast of Pentecost then next coming, be
bounden to say, and use the Matins, Evensong, celebration of the Lord's Supper,
commonly called the Mass, and Administration of each of the Sacraments, and all
their common and open Prayer, in such Order and Form, as is before mentioned in
the said Book, and none other or otherwise; and it was further Enacted, That if
any manner of Parson, Vicar, or other whatsoever Minister that ought or should
sing, or say Common Prayer, mentioned in the said Book, or Minister the
Sacraments, should after the time therein prefixed, refuse to use the said
Common Prayers, or to Minister the Sacraments, in such Cathedral, or Parish
Church, or other places, as he should, or minister the same in such Order and
Form, as they be mentioned, and set forth in the said Book, or should use,
wilfully and obstinately standing in the same, any other Rite, Ceremony, Order,
Form, or manner of Mass, openly or privily, or Mattins, Evensong,
Administration of the Sacraments, or other open Prayer, then is mentioned, and
set forth in the said Book, (Open Prayer in and throughout this Act, is meant,
that Prayer which is for others to come unto, or heat, either in common
Churches, or private Chapels, or Oratories, commonly called the Service of the
Church,) or should Preach, Declare, or speak any thing in derogation or
depraving of the said Book, or any thing therein contained, or of any part
thereof, and should be thereof lawfully convicted, according to the Laws of
this Realm, by verdict of twelve men, or by his own Confession, or by the
notorious Evidence of the Fact, should lose and forfeit to the King's Highness,
his Heirs and Successors, for his first Offense, the profits of such one of his
Spiritual Benefits, or Promotions, as it shall please the King's Highness to
Assign, or appoint, coming or arising in one whole year next after this
Conviction: And also, should suffer six Months Imprisonment, without Bail or
Mainprize. And should for his second offense suffer a years Imprisonment, and
be deprived ipso facto of all his Spiritual Promotions, and that it should be
lawful to all Patrons, Donors and Grantors of all and singular the same
Spiritual Promotions, to present to the same any other able Clerk, in like
manner and form, as though the Party so offending were dead. And for the third
offense should suffer Imprisonment during his life. And that Lay persons
offending in the premises, should for the first offense, suffer Imprisonment
during six Months without Bail or Mainprize, and for his second offense suffer
Imprsonment during his Life. And it is further thereby Enacted, that if any
person should in any Interludes, Plays, Songs, Rhymes, or by other open words,
declare or speak any thing, in the derogation, depraving, or despising of the
same Book, or of any thing therein contained, or any part thereof, or should by
open Fact, Deed, or by open threatenings compel, or cause, or otherwise procure,
or Maintain any Parson, Vicar, or other Minister, in any Cathedral, or Parish
Church, or Chapel, or in any other place, to sing or to say any common or open
Prayer, or to Minister any Sacrament, otherwise, or in any other manner, or
form, than is mentioned in the said Book, or that by any of the said means,
shall lawfully interrupt, or let any Parson, Vicar or other Minister, in any
Cathedral, or Parish Church, Chapel, or any other place, to sing and say
common and open prayer, or to minister the Sacraments, or any of them, in such
manner and form, as is mentioned in the said Book, they should forfeit to the
King our Sovereign Lord, his Heirs and Successors, ten pounds for the first
offense, and for non-payment, should suffer three months Imprisonment, without
Bail or Mainprize, and for the second offense twenty pounds, and for want of
payment, should suffer six months Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprise, and
for the third offense should forfeit all his Goods and Chattels, and suffer
Imprisonment during his life time.

From which Act it is evident, that all the mild Methods were taken, that could
be thought on, to win over the Papists to the Reformed Religion, for the
Penalties incurred, were not only suspended, but the offender pardoned, after
they had been so long winkt at, and the Penalties upon which Conformity was
enjoined, must be by all considering men adjudged reasonable, to be inflicted
upon those that remained obstinate, after such kind usage, and the rather, for
that it is apparent, they made it their business to compel persons to go to
Mass. One thing I cannot let pass without a remark, That in this, as well as the
Statute of the 1 st of Edward the 6 th, the trial of the offense is to be
according to the Ancient Laws of the Land, by a Jury, and that till then, they
could incur none of the Penalties; so careful were the Reformers for the
Liberties even of Papists.

Hist. Ref. pt. 2. p. 115, 116, 117, 118. B^ker 's Ch on. p. 303, 304.
But notwithstanding all this favor shown to the Papists, in one year they
broke out into open Rebellion in four Counties in England, viz. in Oxfordshire,
Devonshire, Norfolk and Yorkshire. So restless and unquiet are the Popish
party, and such implacable Enemies to the Protestants, that if they be in
power, nothing but destroying them by Law will serve, and if not, then Plots,
Conspiracies, and open Rebellions, are their Methods; Hist. Ref. pt. 2. p. 140.

3 4 E. 6. ca. 5. Rast. Stat. f. 989.

34 E. 6. ca. 10. Images taken away.

Keeble's Stat. f. 676.

Rast. Stat. f. 994.


these four Insurrections, gave just occasion to make that severe Law against
unlawful Assemblies, and rising of the Subjects, that if any to the number of
twelve, should meet together unlawfully for any matter of State, and being
required by any lawful Magistrate, should not disperse themselves, it should be
Treason.

The next Act of Parliament that I shall take notice of, and indeed but just
touch it, is the 3 d. and 4 th of Edward the 6 th. ca. 10. Whereby diverse
Romish Books and Images were abolished and put away, and that without any
punishment of the Papists that used them; but only a Penalty on the Officers,
and Ministers of Justice, who did not put the said Law in Execution.

Thus things stood till the 6 th of Edward the 6 th, and then an Act was made,
for the confirmation of the Liturgy, which takes notice in the Preamble,

5 6 E. 6. ca. 1. Keeh^e 's Stat. f. 676.

Rast. Stat. f. 1009.

The Liturgy confirmed.


That a great number of people in diverse parts of the Realm, following their own
sensuality, and living either without knowledge or due fear of God, did
wilfully and danmably, before Almighty God, abstain, and refuse to come to
their Parish Churches, and other places, where Common Prayer, Administration of
the Sacraments, and Preaching of the Word of God, was used upon Sundaies and
other days, ordained to be holy days, and does thereby Enact, that uniformity
of Prayer, and Administration of Sacraments, shall be used in the Church,
requires Conformity thereunto, and leaves them who come not to Church, to be
punished by the censures of the Church: And Enacts, March. Ref. 93.
That all persons that are present at any other Common Prayer or Sacraments,
for the first offense shall suffer six months Imprisonment, without Bail or
Mainprise, for the second offense a years Imprisonment, and for the third,
Imprisonment during life.

But none to have this inflicted, but they who are legally convicted according
to the Laws of the Land, which cannot be esteemed severe, seeing they were
occasioned by the Treasons and Rebellions of them upon whom they were inflicted.

CHAP. VI. Q. Mary.
HAving shown how kind and merciful King Edward the 6 th was to the Papists all
his Reign, notwithstanding their severe usage of the Protestants in his
Predecessors Reigns, Queen Mary her accession to the Crown, and how she used
the Protestants before she had a Parliament.

35 H. 8. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. f. 835.

Hist. Ref. 2. pt. li. 2. p. 235.


and their Treasons and Rebellions against himself, and the then Established
Government, I shall now give an Account, what usage the Protestants had in the
Reign of his Successor Queen Mary.

Upon the Death of King Edward, the Crown devolved upon Queen Mary, according
to the settlement of it, by 35 H. 8. but she being a Papist, and King Ed. the 6
th, having by his Letters Patents, limited the Crown to the Lady Jane (Daughter
of Frances Duchess of Suffolk) who was a Protestant* the Council Proclaimed
the Lady Jane Queen, which Proclamation sets forth, that the late King had
settled the Crown as aforesaid, and declared, that it should not descend to his
two Sisters, since they were both Illegitimate in the Spiritual Courts, and by
Acts of Parliament, and were only his Sisters by the half blood, who (though it
were granted they had been Legitimate) are not Inheritable by the Law of
England, it was added, that there was also great cause to fear, that the King's
Sisters might marry Strangers, and so change the Laws of the Kingdom, and
subject it to the Tyranny of the Bishops of Rome, and other Foreign Laws; for
these Reasons they were excluded from the Succession, and the said Lady Jane
was Proclaimed Queen as aforesaid, she promising to be most Benign and Gracious
to all her people, to maintain God's Holy Word, and the Laws of the Land,
requiring all the Subjects to obey and acknowledge her. And now all had been
well, and the Reformed Religion was in a likely way to flourish, could the
Protestants have been all of a mind, and the common sort of People been as well
satisfied, as the Council, great part of the Nobility, (and all the Judges but
one) were, in what was done.

But oh the Calamities that divisions bring upon a Kingdom! Suffolk and No folk
's men's kindness to Queen Mary. Hist. Reform. part 2. p. 233.237.

Baker 's Chro. p. 312.


The Earl of Arundel having given Queen Mary notice of the Death of her
Brother, and the design of setting up the Lady Jane, she retires to Framlingham
Castle in the County of Suffolk, whither many from Norfolk and a great body of
Suffolk men, gathered about her, who were notwithstanding all for the
Reformation, they (before they would assist her) desired to know of her,
whether she would alter the Religion set up in King Edward's days, to whom she
gave full assurances, that she would never make any Innovation or Change, but
be contented with the Private Exercise of her own Religion; upon this, they
were all possessed with such a belief of her sincerity, that it made them resolve
to hazard their Lives and Estates in her quarrel. The Earls of Bath and Suffolk
raised Forces and joined with her, so did the sons of the Lord Wharton and
Mordant, Hist. Ref. 2. pt. lib. 2. p. 237, 238, 239, 240, 242, 245.
with many more; the Council raised Forces too, but her numbers increasing
greatly, and she growing very strong, the Council laid down, and submitted, and
the 10 th of July 1553, Proclaimed her Queen, the 3 d of August in the same
year she entered London, and was settled in the Throne without effusion of Blood.

A wonderful Mercy to her! What returns to God Almighty the Author, and to the
Suffolk men the Instruments hereof? Why the first thing was, secret
consultations for the overthrowing the Reformed Religion, and introducing the
Popish; however, there must be something externally done, that may induce
people to believe the contrary; and therefore August the 12 th, the Queen
declares in Council, that although her Conscience was stayed in the matters of
Religion, yet she was resolved not to compel or strain others, otherwise than
as God should put into their hearts a persuasion of that truth she was in, and
this she hoped should be done by the opening his word to them, by Godly,
Learned, and Virtuous Preachers.

And well she kept this Declaration, for the next thing that she did, was to
inhibit all Preaching, so that they were like to be prevailed with by
Preaching, to be of the Queen's Persuasion.

But let us see how the Norfolk and Suffolk men were requited for their
kindness to her, in hazarding their Lives and Estates, (if not their Souls) for
her; why, Queen Mary's Requital.
they of the Protestants, presuming upon what they had merited, Hist. Ref. 2.
pt. lib. 2. p. 246, 247.
and the Queen's promise to them, took the Liberty to Preach, notwithstanding
the Queen's Inhibitions, and she writes to have a strict Execution of her
injunctions, against any that should Preach without License; they upon this
apply themselves to her, to put her in mind of her promise. This was thought
insolent, and she returned no other answer, A Popish Head of a Protestant
Church.
but that they being Members thought to rule her who was their Head, but they
should learn, the Members ought to obey the Head, and not to think to bear rule
over it; and as an instance of it, she ordered one of them, whose name was
Dobb, to stand three days in the Pillory, and afterward the Suffolk men were
the first in her Reign, that tasted of the burning for Heresy. Neither was she
any kinder to Judge Hale, (who was the only Judge of the twelve that declared
for her) for he, in his charge in the Circuit in Kent, requiring an Execution
of the Laws made in King Edward's Days, which were still in force and
unrepealed, was first committed to the Marshalsea, afterward to the Fleet,
where being distracted, attempted to have killed himself with a Penknife, and,
being afterward upon his submission discharged, never came to his Wits, but
drowned himself; from these things it was then said (with a great deal of
truth, The Case of the Bishop of London, Magdalen College, the Judges Holloway
and Powel, and the Officers in the Army in the Reign of James the 2d. Hist.
Ref. part 2. f. 252.

1 Mar. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. f. 1066.

Keble 708. This takes away all Treasons made so by Act of Parliament after 25
E. 3. and restrains it to 25 Ed. 3. this done in favor of the Papists, who
were made Traitors by several Acts of Parliament.


as appears from very late instances) that no merits or services, can secure
any from the cruelties of the Popish Religion.

These things together with Imprisoning diverse of the Protestant Bishops, and
Ministers of Parishes, were done from her entrance in July to October
following, in the which Month she was Crowned, and having before summoned a
Parliament, the same opened the 10 th day of the same Month of October,
(according to Doctor Burnet) but the 5 th of October according to Rastal and
Keeble's Statutes.

In the first Session of this Parliament, a Law was made, to repeal and take
away certain Treasons, Felonies, and Premunires, introduced with a most
specious Preamble; which is this,

Forasmuch as the State of every King, Ruler and Governor of any Realm,
Dominion or Commonalty, stands and consists more assured by the love and
favor of the Subjects, toward their Sovereign Ruler and Governor, then in the
dread and fear of Laws, made with rigorous pains, and extreme punishments, for
not obeying their Sovereign Ruler, and Governors, and Laws also, justly made
for the preservation of the Commonweal, without extreme punishment, or great
Penalty, are more often for the most part obeyed, and kept, then Laws and
Statutes, made with great and extreme punishment, and in special such Laws and
Statutes so made, whereby not only the ignorant and rude unlearned people, but
also learned and expect people minding honesty, are often and many times
trapped, and snared, yea many times for words only, without fault or dred done,
or perpetrated.

The Queens Highness most Excellent Majesty, calling to remembrance, that many
as well honorable as Noble Persons, as others of good Reputation within this
her Graces Realm of England, have of late (for words only, without other
Opinion, Fact, or Deed) suffered shameful death, not accustomed to Nobles, her
Highness therefore of her accustomed Clemency and Mercy, minding to avoid and
put away the occasion and cause of like chances hereafter to ensue, trusting
her loving Subjects will for her Clemency to them showed, love, serve and obey
her Grace the more heartily and faithfully, then for dread or fear of pains of
body, is content and pleased, that the severity of such like extreme dangerous
and painful Laws, shall be abolished, adnulled, and made frustrate and void.

Then Repeals actually all Laws, that made any thing high Treason, but what is
so made by the 25 th of Edward the 3 d, except such as had incurred any guilt,
before the last day of September then last past, or were excepted in her
Highness Pardon, and also repeals all Felonies, and Premunires, made so since
the 1 st of Henry the 8 th.

O Blessed Preamble! O Blessed Law! full of Mercy, full of Kindness! but to
whom? To all her loving Subjects. Who are they? the Protestants? No, by no
means; they are Heretics. To none but those of her own Communion, who must
necessarily have been guilty of the Breach of those Laws, and it was therefore
necessary to repeal them, that they might become serviceable in carrying on
Popish Designs: That the Protestants were not intended, it is plain by the
Exception, and the severe usage of them afterward; to make way for which, in
the Second Session of that Parliament after she had got her 1 Mar. Sess. 2. ca.
1.

Rast. Stat. f. 1067.


Title settled by Act of Parliament; the next thing she aimed at, and obtained,
was an 2 Mar. ca. 2. Rast. Stat. f. 1068.

Keble 709. Queen Mary Recognized in Parliament, and the Laws for the
Reformation repealed.


Act of Repeal of the Laws made in the time of King Edward the sixth, whereby
the Reformation was Established; several whereof that were made with Penalties,
I have before mentioned, viz. 1 E. 6. ca. 1.1 E. 6. ca. 2.2 and 3 E. 6. ca. 1.3
and 4 E. 6. ca. 10.5 and 6 E. 6. ca. 1. Besides those, there were several Laws
necessary for the promoting the Reformation, which were likewise repealed by
the said Act, viz. 2 E. 6.21. for taking away all positive Laws made against
the Marriage of Priests, 3 E. 6.12. made for the ordering of Ecclesiastical
Ministers, 5 E. 6.3. made for the keeping of holy days, and feasting days, and
5 E. 6.12. touching the Marriage of Priests and Legitimation of their Children;
and then Established the Mass Book, and all the Popish Service, and so
Established iniquity by a Law.

Queen Mary having before inhibited Preaching without License (and to be sure
the Protestants must have none) and having Repealed the said Laws, now begins
to think of some effectual way, to promulge the Popish Tenets, and in order to
this, an Act of Parliament was made, against affronting her Priests of the
Romish Church, Entitled however, An Act against offenders of Preachers and
other Ministers in the Church, 1 Mary ca. 3. Rast. Stat. f. 1069.

Keeble 709. Popish Priests must not be disturbed in their preaching.


(i. e.) such as were Licensed by her Highness; which to be sure must be
Popish; to this effect, that none should by any Overt Act, molest or disquiet
any Preachers, because of his Office, or for any Sermon that he might have
Preached, (their Preaching being so ridiculous, that it gave cause of
suspicion, that some would serve them so) nor should any way disturb them, when
they were in any parts of the Divine Offices: Which they had reason to fear,
because the People had been used to a more Decent and Christian way of Worship.
The penalty was three Months Imprisonment.

Queen Mary's third Parliament desires to reconcile the Kingdom to the Sea of
Rome. Hist. Ref. 2 pt. p. 291, 293.
On December the 6 th, the 1 st of Mary, this Parliament was Dissolved, because
the House of Commons was displeased with the Match with Spain.

On the 11 th of November, the 1 st and 2 d of Philip and Mary, the third
Parliament was summoned, without putting in the Title of Supreme Head of the
Church, and met, which Parliament so Summoned, petitioned to be Reconciled to
the Sea of Rome, and Cardinal Pool accepts it, and absolves them, and now they
are ready cut and dried for butchering Work.

1 2 Ph. and Mary, ca. 3. Rast. Stat. 1100. Keble 719.
The first severe Law we meet with, is an Act against Seditious Words, and
Rumors, which confirms 13 E. 1.33. and 2 R. 2.5. touching telling of News, as
if they were resolved (good people) nothing should be done, but what they had
President for. But what does that Law add? Why,

That if any person should be Convicted, or Attainted, for speaking Maliciously
of his own Imaginations, any False, Seditious, and Slanderous News, sayings, or
tales of the King or Queen, (for she was then married to King Philip, The
Protestants must not speak against the King or Queen. Pillory, less of Ears,
striking off band, imprisonment during Life, the punishments inflicted.
) for the first Offense, he was to be set on the Pillory, in some Market Town,
near where the words were spoken, and have both his Ears cut off, unless he
paid 100 l. to the Queen, within a Month after Judgment given, and should be 3
Months Imprisoned. If (...) reported any such News from another, then to stand
in the Pillory and lose one Ear, unless he paid a hundred Marks within a Month,
and should be a Month Imprissoned; and if he should do it by Book, Rhyme,
Ballad, Letter, or Writing, he was to have his Right hand cut off; and for the
second Offense should suffer Imprisonment, during his Life, and forfeit all his
Goods and Chattels.

Is this a Law made by the kind Queen Mary? Who in the preamble to the first
Act of Parliament, made in the first year of her Reign, declared so much
against making Men Offenders for a word, and driving her Subjects to Obedience
by severe Punishments, and Penalties? Yes, it is the very same Queen Mary: But
now the Penal Laws are repealed, and she appears in her Popish Colors; now
Pillory, and cutting off Ears, striking off Hands, and perpetual Imprisonment,
with loss of Goods and Chattels, is better than Heretics deserve, as you will
find by subsequent Laws.

But these Penalties are not all that the poor Protestants must expect from
Popish Rulers, if we look but a little further, even in the same Year, 1 2 Ph.
and Mary ca. 6. Rast. Stat. f. 1103. Keble. 721.

The Laws for Burning the Protestants (as Heretics) revived.


and the proceedings of the same Parliament, we shall find another Law made, to
unbind the Papists hands, that H. 8. had in part Tied up, by 25 H. 8. ca. 14.
and Ed. 6. had bound fast up by 2 Ed. 6.12. which two Acts of Parliament had
Repealed, 5. R. 2.5. Concerning Arresting of Heretical Preachers, 2 H. 4.15.
concerning Repressing of Heresy, and punishing of Heretics, and 2 H. 5.7.
Concerning the enormity of Heresy, and Lollardy, and the suppression thereof;
( by Heresy and Heretics, and Lollardy and Lollards, is always to be
understood, the Professors of the true Religion.) By this Act of Queen Mary the
said Act of 25 H. 8. ca. 14. and 2 Ed. 6.12. are repealed, and those three
Bloody Laws are revived, what those Laws are, you may see at large in the
beginning of this Treatise, only observe this, that least they should not prove
in force, in the Statute of Revivor Printed by Rastal all hree Acts of
Parliament are inserted Verbatim.

And that the World might not think them short in their return to Rome, or that
they were not hearty in it, an Act was made, to Repeal all Laws whatsoever,
that had been made against the Sea of Rome, by which Act is set forth, 1 2 Ph.
and Mary ca. 8. Rast Stat. fol. 1107 Keble. f. 703.

The Kingdom reconciled to the Sea of Rome.

Hist. Reform. part 2. fol. 294.


their former Schism from the Sea of Rome, and their reconciliation to it, upon
which all Acts passed since the 20 th. of H. 8. against that See were
enumerated, and repealed; there it is said, That for the removing of all
Grudges that might arise, they desired, that the following Articles might,
through the Cardinals Intercession, be Established by the Pope's Authority.

1 st. That all Bishoprics, Cathedrals, or Colleges established, might be
confirmed for ever.

2 d. That Marriages made within such Degrees, as are not contrary to the Law
of God, but only to the Laws of the Church, might be confirmed, and the Issues
by them declared Legitimate.

3 d. That all Institutions into Benefices, might be confirmed.

4 th. That all judicial Process might be confirmed. And at last, a Proviso,
that all the Settlements of the Lands of any Bishoprics, Monasteries, or other
Religious Houses, might continue as they were, without any trouble by the
Ecclesiastical Censures, and Laws. So hard a matter is it to dispossess men of
Temporal advantages, when once they are possessed of them; that although this
Parliament would be reconciled to the Sea of Rome, as to Religious Rites, and
persecuting the Protestants, yet they could not be brought to part with the
Church Lands.

By this Parliament another worse Law was made, whereby it was Enacted, that if
any Person should pray, or desire that God would shorten the Queens Days, or
take her out of the Way, or any such Malicious Prayer, 1 2 Ph. and Mary ca. 9.
Rast. Stat. f. 1115. Keble. 731.

Treason to pray against the Queen.


amounting to the same Effect, He, his Procurators, and Abettors, should be
Traitors. I don't find in History, that the Protestants in any of their
Prayers, or otherwise, used any such kind of Expressions against Queen Mary,
and therefore can assign no reason why she should make this Law, unless she was
Conscious to her self, that what Severities she had already acted, what she had
made preparation for, and was further designing, might force such Prayers and
Expressions from the poor Oppressed, and Persecuted Protestants, that what the
Wise Man said, might be verified; Oppression makes a Wise Man mad; and truly
nothing but a Mad Man can be supposed to utter such Expressions, much less make
such Prayers.

I find no more Laws made in her time relating to Religion, and indeed one
would think that the Repeal of the Laws that were made for the Establishing the
Reformation, and the reviving all the Bloody Laws that were made against the
Protestants, together with the additional ones above mentioned, had been
sufficient to have gratified the most Barbarous, Blood-thirsty, and Cruel
Tyrant: But, (O Popery) when will thou be satisfied with Cruelties? Will not
the Blood of Rogers, Hist. Ref. part 2. f. 305. King Philip's dislike of Popish
Guilty.
Hooper, Sanders, and Tailor, spilt by virtue of these Laws satisfy thee? King
Philip it did so far, as that upon the dislike the Nation showed of spilling
the Blood of those four Ministers, he cleared himself of having any hand in it;
and Alphonsus a Franciscan Friar, that was his Confessor, in a Sermon before
him, the 10 th. of February 1655. preached largely against the taking away
peoples Lives for Religion, (which I shall hereafter evince cannot be justly
laid to the Charge of the Protestants) and in plain Terms, inveighed against
the Bishops for doing of it; he said they had not learnt it in Scripture; which
taught Bishops the Spirit of Meekness, to instruct those that opposed them, and
not to burn them for their Consciences. This startled the Bishops, since it was
now plain, that the Spaniards disowned these extreme Courses, and hereupon
there was a stop for several Weeks put to any further severities: But the
Popish Clergy, being once engaged in Blood, have been always observed, to
become the most Brutally cruel of any sort of men, so that it was not easy to
restrain them, and therefore they Resolved rather than the Heretics, ( i. e.
Protestants,) should not be persecuted, to take the Blame avowedly on
themselves.

Queen Mary* encourages the Popish Priests Cruelty to the Protestants.

Hist. Ref. p. 2. f. 242.


And no wonder, when they were countenanced and encouraged in it by the Queen
her self, as is plain from this very instance, that in August after she came to
the Crown, there being a Conference about bringing Popery in again, in what
time, by what means, and to what height; on the one hand Gardener and all his
Party, were for bringing Religion back to what it had been at King Henry's
death, and afterward by slow Degrees, to raise it up to what it had been
before his Breach with the Papacy: But on the other hand, the Queen of her own
Inclination, was much disposed (as another of the same Persuasion lately was,
no doubt) to return immediately to the Union of the Catholic Church, as she
called it; and to evidence it, after a Petition sent to her, Hist. Ref. pt. 2.
fol. 305, 306, 307.
from some beyond Sea, (who were out of her Power) against Persecuting the
Members of Christ, instead of hearkening to it, she was the more enraged by it,
and the Popish Clergy were set on work to write Arguments, to justify the
persecuting of Heretics. Which they accordingly did. This being the Temper of
this Queen, no wonder they proceeded soon after to burn Thomas Tomkins, William
Hunter, Causton, and Highed, William Pigot, Stephen Knight, all Lay men, and
John Lawrence a Priest.

The Clergies way of proceeding against the Protestants.
In all the Popish Bishops proceedings against the Protestants they brought no
Witnesses against them, but did only exhibit Articles against them, according
to the way of those Courts, (and our late High Commission Court) called ex
Officio, and required them to make answer, and upon their Answers, which were
Judged Heretics, they were Condemned, so that all this was singly for their
Consciences, without the pretense of any other matter.

The next that suffered in this way, was Ferrar Bishop of St. David's, and after
him one Rawlins White a Fisherman, and George March a Priest; the next were,
Cardmaker a Prebendary at Bath, John Warn an Upholsterer; the next to him was
one that was burnt as it were in Effigy; the story is so remarkable, I cannot
let it pass. A Felon proceeded against for Heresy, after he was hanged.
One Tooly, being Executed for a Robbery, did at his death say something that
savoured of Heresy, upon which the Council writ to Bonner (which must be at
the Queens Instigation) to inquire into it, and to proceed according to the
Ecclesiastical Laws, he thereupon formed a Process, and cited the dead Body, to
answer the Points objected to him; but he to be sure, neither appearing, nor
answering, was condemned and burnt.

The next that followed, were Thomas Hawk, John Simson, and John Ardly, John
Wats, Nicholas, Chamberlain, Thomas Ormond, and William Bainford, all Laymen.

Then followed Bradford, Ridley, and Latimer, Philpot, Cranmer, and abundance
more, which you may read of, and the full Account of their Martyrdom, in Fox's
Acts and Monuments, the third Part, and more briefly in Dr. Burnet's History of
the Reformation from f. 305. to 340. But notwithstanding all these Instruments
of Cruelty they had framed, they could not be satisfied unless they raised it
to the very height of all Barbarity, that the Church of Rome did ever pretend
to; and that was the setting up the Inquisition here in England; A Commission
extraordinary, for proceeding against the Protestants.

Hist. Ref. pt. 2. fol. 247.


and in February 1557. they had made a good step toward it, for a Commission
was given to diverse Popish Lords, Spiritual and Temporal, and others, which
mentions, that since many false Rumors were published amongst the Subjects, and
many Heretical (i. e. Protestant) Opinions, were also spread among them,
therefore they or any three of them, were to enquire into those, either by
Presentiments, by Witnesses, or any other Politic Way they could Devise, and to
search after all Heresies, the Bringers in, the Sellers, or Readers of all
Heretical Books, they were to Examine and Punish all Misbehaviours, or
negligences in any Church, or Chapel, and to try all Priests, that did not
preach of the Sacrament of the Altar, all Persons that did not hear Mass, or
come to their Parish Church to Service; that would not go in Procession, or did
not take Holy Bread, or Holy Water. And if they found any that did obstinately
persist in such Heresies, they were to put them into the hands of their
Ordinaries, to be proceeded against according to the Laws, giving them full
power to proceed, as their Discretions and Consciences should direct them, and
to use all such means as they could invent, for the searching of the premises,
empowring them also, to call before them such Witnesses, as they pleased, and
to Force them to make Oath of such things, as might discover what they sought
after. This Commission, at large, you may find in the Collection of the
Records, annexed to Dr. Burnet's History of the Reformation, second part, Lib.
2. Number. 33. It shows how high they intended to raise the Persecution, when a
Power of such a Nature, was put into the hands of any three of a number so
selected. Besides this, there were many subordinate Commissions issued out, and
after this a Commission was given to the Archbishop, the Bishop suffragan of
Hull, and diverse others, to the same effect, but with this limitation, that if
any thing appeared to them, so intricate that they could not determine it, they
were to refer it to the Bonner.
Bishop of London and his Colleagues; who had a much larger Commission (and
great reason he should, because they were sure he would spare none that came
before him.) And now all was done that could be devised, for extirpating of
Heresy, except Courts of Inquisition had been set up, which doubtless had been
done, Queen Mary's Death. Fox.
had that Blood-sucking Queen lived a little longer. But it pleased God to take
her away, after she had burnt 72 the first year of her Persecution, 94 the
second, 79 the third, and 39 the last, in all 284, according to Fox. But Dr.
Burnet gives this further Account, Hist. Ref. pt. 2. fol. 364.
that he that writ the Preface to Bishop Ridley's Book, de Carne Domini, who is
supposed to be Grindal, afterward Archbishop of Canterbury, says, that in the
two first years of this Queens Persecution, there were above 800 put to most
cruel kinds of Death for Religion. By which it seems, Fox has come far short
in his account.

I cannot omit the Account that Dr. Burnet gives, of the Method, The Methods of
the Persecution of Protestants in this Reign.
of the Persecutions of this Reign. Says he, At first the Bishops dealt
earnestly with those that were brought before them, to recant; and were ready
at any time to receive them: The Queens Pardon was also sent to them as they
were ready to be tied to the Stake, if they would then turn. But now it was far
otherwise. For in the Council Books there is an Entry made of a Letter, written
the 1st. of August 1558, to Sir Richard Pexhall, Sheriff of Hampshire,
signifying, That the Queen thought it very strange, that he had delayed the
Execution of one Bembridge, Condemned of Heresy, because he had recanted;
Requiring him to Execute it out of hand, and if he still continued in the
Catholic Faith, which he outwardly pretended, he was then to suffer such
Divines as the Bishop of Winchester should appoint, to have access to him for
confirming him in the Faith, and to (...) on him at his Death, that he might
dye God's Servant. And as soon as the Sheriff had thus burnt him, he was to
come to the Council, and answer for his Presumption in deferring it so long.
The matter of Fact was thus: Bembridge being had to the Stake, and the Fire
taking hold of him, he through the violence of it yielded, and cried out, I
recant; upon which, the Sheriff made the Fire to be put out, and Bembridge
signed such a Recantation, as Dr. Seton, who was near him, writ for him: But
for all that, upon this Order of Council, he was burnt; and the Sheriff was put
in the Fleet. So that now it appeared, that it was not so much the Conversion
of those they called Heretics, as their Destruction, that the Bishops desired:
and I think, the Instance of Burning Arch Bishop Cranmer, after he had
recanted, Hist. Ref. pt. 2. fol. 333.
upon the Promise of a Pardon, is as pregnant an instance, as this; which you
may see related by Dr. Burnet Hist. Ref. part 2. fol. 333.

And sure it will be no wonder, that there was such a severe Persecution during
this Reign: Hist. Ref. 2 pt. ^.370, 371.
If it be considered, that the Bishops, besides the other Cannons binding them
to proceed against them they called Heretics; were by the words of the Oath of
Obedience, which they swear to the Pope at their Consecration, engaged to
oppose and persecute the Heretics with all their might; so that their giving
severe Counsels, and the Queens following them, flowed mainly from the
Principles of their Religion; (and can any thinking man imagine they are
altered since?) in which the sowerness of the Queen's Temper, made it the more
easy to persuade her to a compliance to those courses to which her own
inclinations led her, without any such motives.

And now they that can expect any better usage from the Bishops, and Prelates
of the Church of Rome, under a Prince of that persuasion, must, I think, have
forfeited their Reason, and are fitter to converse with Wolves and Tigers, than
men, much less the most refined of them, those who are sincerely of the
Reformed Religion, commonly called Protestants.

My design in being thus long in setting forth the cruel Penal Laws that were
made or revived, and put in Execution in this Reign, was, that the Reader might
compare the Penal Laws in Edward the 6 th's time, with the Penal Laws in Queen
Mary's, and then judge, whether his are not merciful, compared with these,
especially respecting the Execution, there being not one put to Death for
Religion in all King Edward the 6 th's Reign, that so the Moderation of the one
may be admired, and the Cruelty of the other abhorred: And not as any Reason,
why the Penal Laws against the Papists, in Queen Elizabeth's Time, were made
upon such severe Penalties, for I shall show that they were made upon quite
different reasons, than in revenge (as the Papists maliciously suggest) for the
severe usage of the Protestants in this Reign.

CHAP. VII. Q. Eliz.
QUeen Mary dyed the 17 th of November, (Queen Elizabeth's Birthday) Anno
Domini 1558. Whose Death put an end to this severe Persecution. The Parliament
then assembled in the sixth and last year of her Reign, Queen Elizabeth her
Accession is the Crown, and her* r^^^e^^ete calling of a Parliament.

D'Ewes Journal of Q. Eliz. Reign, f. 1. Cambd. Ance^s f. 12. Hist. R. f. 2 pt.
f. 373.


being by her demise Dissolved: The thrice Excellent and Prudent Princess Queen
Elizabeth, according to her Right and Hereditary Title, (says Sir Simon
D'Ewes) true and lawful Heir to the Crown, according to the Act of Succession
of 35 H. 8. (says Cambden) the next and indisputed Heir to the Crown (says
Doctor Burnet) and Heath the then Lord Chancellor so called her) without any
opposition or difficulty, (King Philip being then very happily beyond the
Seas,) succeeded to all the Realms and Dominions of Mary her Sister, excepting
Calais, and those other inestimable places in France, which had been most
dishonourably and vainly lost, in the time and toward the end of the Reign of
the said Queen Mary, and finding also the Innocent Blood of God's Saints,
(Archbishop Cranmer, Bishop Ridley, Bishop Hooper, and the rest) shed for the
Witness of the Truth, to have stained the former Government, with the just
brand and stygma of Persecuting and Tyrannical, and that her Realms and
Dominions were much impoverished, and weakened (as Doctor Burnet in his Letters
has made evident, almost all places abroad are, where Popery is the prevailing
Religion, Popery and Slavery being inseparable Companions) she therefore in the
very entrance of her Reign applied her first are to the restoring of the
Protestant Religion, which she verily persuaded her self was most true, Cambd.
Hist. f. 13.
and consonant to the Sacred Scriptures, and the sincerity of the Primitive
Church, and well considering and foreseeing, that the surest and safest way to
establish the Truth, to abolish all Foreign and Usurpt Authority, to repair the
weaknesses and breaches of her said Realms and Dominions, to strengthen her
Kingdom with Shipping and Munition, and to revive the decayed Trade thereof;
was by the common Advice and Counsel, and with the public Assent* did summon
her first Parliament to begin on Monday the 23 d day of January in the first
year of her Reign. But before I give any Account of what Laws were thereby made
relating to the Papists, I shall

1 st. Show how the Law stood at to the Papists, when she came to the Crown.

2 d. I shall show, that the Protestant Religion was restored by much more
lenil and mild Methods toward the Papists in Queen Elizabeth's time, than the
Popish Religion was introduced by in Queen Mary's.

3 d. I shall make it fully appear, that they gave just occasion for making the
severe Laws against them, that were made in Queen Elizabeth's time, and when in
time the occasion was given and the Laws made, which last thing will run
through the whole thread of the following account.

As to the first, whoever will give himself the trouble, to consult our
Statute, and Law Books, will find How the Laws stood as to the Papists, before
any new ones were made.

25 F. 3. ca. 2.


that long before her Reign, it was Treason to compass or imagine the death of
the King, the Queen, or their Eldest Son and Heir, or to levy War against the
King, or to adhere to the King's Enemies, or to give to them Aid or Comfort:
Rog. Hov. in Hen. 2.

13 R. 2. sta. 2. ca. 2 Co. Inst. 3.100. ca. 36.


That it was Treason and afterward Felony, to bring or send into this Kingdom,
or the King's Power, (which is the same with Dominions) any Summons, Sentence,
or Excommunication against any person, of what Condition soever he be, 16 R. 2
ca. 5.3 Inst. 120, 121 126.12. Co. 37.40. Davis 84.
that he incurred a Praemunire, that purchased Bulls from Rome, and that the
Crown of England (even in the Popish times) was subject to none. Co. Rep. 5. f.
12, 15, 17, 21, 22, 23, 27, 28. and Co. Inst. 3. Ca. 36.
It was of old Treason by the Common Law of the Land, to procure or bring in
any Bull of Excommunication, against any Subject, (much more certainly against
the King or Queen) because it gives way to Foreign Authority: Co. Inst. 3. ca.
67. f. 144.
And by the Laws of England, all Subjects are prohibited to take any Pension
etc. of any Foreign King, Prince, or State, without the King's License, (although
in League with England.)

Thus stood the Laws, when that Glorious Queen (of ever Blessed Memory)
ascended the Throne; and one would have thought, these would have guarded her
against all attempts of the Papists, and it is not unreasonable to believe, that
she her self was of that mind, if we consider,

2 ly, That the Methods taken by Queen Elizabeth, for restoring the Protestant
Religion* were much milder, than those taken by Queen Mary to introduce the
Popish. This will appear by the Laws themselves, of which I come now to give an
account, and of the occasion of their making.

The first is. That which restores to the Crown, 1 Eliz. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. 2.
part. f. 1.

The Crown restored to its Ancient Jurisdiction in causes Ecclesiastical, a
power given to delegate the exercise of it; the Oath of Supremacy, and what
shall be taken for Heresy ascertained.


the Ancient Jurisdiction over the Estate Ecclesiastical and Spiritual, and
abolisheth all Foreign Powers repugnant to the same: Which it does by reviving
the Laws of Henry the 8th against the Sea of Rome, and of Edward the 6th for
the Protestants: Which Laws were repealed by Queen Mary, and Laws for
Convicting and Burning Heretics (i. e. Protestants) in an Arbitrary way
revived; which had been Repealed in Edward the 6th's time. This Law therefore
particularly repeals 5 R. 2.5. 5 H. 4.15. 2 H. 5.7. made against the
Protestants, then called Heretics, and Lollards, and then does abolish Foreign
Jurisdiction, (wherein it is but declarative of the Ancient Laws of the
Kingdom) and annereth Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction to the Crown; and gives a
power of delegating the Exercise of it; establishes the Oath of Supremary (but
in tenderness to the Papists, leaves out Supreme Head of the Church) and
provides that all Ecclesiastical Persons, Temporal Judges, Justices, Mayors, or
other say or temporal Officers, and every other person having her Highness Fee
or Wages, shall take the said Oath, upon the penalty of forfeiting their places
Ecclesiastical or Temporal, upon an obstinate refusal, and disability to hold
the same for the future, the penalty of maliciously maintaining a Foreign
Jurisdiction, is, for the first offense, the loss of Goods and Chattels only,
and if he be not worth 20 l. then over and above the forfeiture of his Goods
and Chattels, he shall suffer twelve Months Imprisonment without Bail or
Mainprize, the second offense is made a praemunire, the third offense high
Treason. This Act declares what shall not, and what shall be Heresy, Hist.
Ref. pt. 2. ib. 3. f. 386.
that no matter of Religion or cause Ecclesiastical within this Act, shall be
Heresy, Schism, or Schismatical Opinion, nor any thing, but what is so
adjudged by the Canonical Scriptures, and the four first general Council, or
other Councils, by the true and genuine sense of the Holy Scriptures, or what
should afterward be declared Heresy by the Parliament, with the consent of
the Convocation.

From which Act. I observe, that although it was a Praemunire before this Law, to
own a Foreign Jurisdiction, as bringing in Bulls does, yet the Queen was
willing to inflict a less punishment, for the first offense, to see if she
could gain upon the Papists by Clemency* and made it not high Treason, till a
conviction of the third offense, and that Conviction to be according to the
Ancient Laws of the Land, (and not in an Arbitrary way) which is much more
mild, than any of the Popish Laws were, neither was this Law put in Execution
against them, till they grew troublesome to the State, as I shall plainly make
appear hereafter.

The next Law was, for the uniformity of Common Prayer, and service in the
Church, and administration of the Sacraments. Whereby 1 Mar. ca. 2. is
repealed, 1 E^iz. ca. 2 Rast. Stat. p. 2 f 5.

An Act of Uniformity

Camd. Annal. fol. 27.


and the last Book of Common Prayer, etc. made in Ed. 6 th. time is
established, with the alteration of some few things.

By which Law it is provided, that spiritual persons that shall use any other
service, or deprave, or speak against the use of that, for the first offense,
being legally Convicted, shall lose the profits of his Benefice for a Year; and
shall suffer six months Imprisonment; for the second Offense, shall be deprived
ipso facto; for the third, not only deprived, but suffer Imprisonment during
his Life; a Lay person offending in the Premises, shall for the first Offense,
suffer Imprisonment for a Year, without Bail or mainprize; and for the second
Offense, shall suffer Imprisonment during Life. Every one that by Enterludes,
Plays, Songs, Rhimes, or other open words, shall speak against any thing in
derogation, depraving, or despising of the same Book, or shall any ways
maintain any person, etc. in using any other Service, etc. or shall hinder, or
interrupt the use of this Book, For the first Offense, shall forfeit 100 Marks,
for the second Offense 400 Marks, and for the third Offense, shall forfeit all
his Goods and Chattels, and suffer Imprisonment during Life; and for non-
payment of the 100 Marks in 6 Weeks after his Conviction, shall suffer six
Months Imprisonment, and for non- payment of the 400 Marks, shall suffer 12
Months Imprisonment, without Bail or Mainprize.

All persons are by this Act required, having no reasonable Excuse, to resort
to their Parish Church, or upon reasonable Let, to some other place, where the
service is used, upon Sundays, and Holy Days, upon the Penalty of punishment,
by the Censures of the Church, and 12 d. for every Default. And for due
Execution of this Act, the Queen, il ^ean trying the Bishops for being guilty
of a Misdemeanor, i^ not complying with a Popish Prince against this Law be
justified?
the Lords Temporal, and all the Commons in that Parliament assembled, did in
God's Name earnestly require, and charge the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, that they should endeavor themselves to the utmost of their
knowledges, that the due and true Execution thereof might he had, throughout
their Diocese, and charges, as they would answer before God, for such Evils and
Plagues, wherewith Almighty God might Justly punish his People, for neglecting
that good and wholesome Law.

All Laws for other Service are hereby made void.

But may the Papists say, Are not imprisonment, Praemunire, and High Treason
very great Penalties? What Greater? To this I answer, That there is not any of
them inflicted for the first Offense; But punishment for the first offense is
still but a pecuniary molct, The Penalty ann^^ed to this Law justified.
and extends to neither Pillory, Loss of Ears, striking off hands, or death,
much less death by Fire and Fagor. The second Offense is restraint of Liberty,
and that but Temporary, except in one single Case, where it is for Life.

The punishment for the first Offense, is no where made a Praemunire* nor
Treason; and it is but in one case, that the Party offending, is made Guilty of
High Treason, and that is upon being Convicted of the third Offense too, and
for that very Off^nce, the Party incurred a Praemunire by the Law before; And if
it be granted me* that it is necessary that some kind of Penalties be annexed,
to enforce obedience to Laws, which certainly cannot be denied, these being
such gradual Penalties, the Papists themselves cannot but own, that they are
reasonable.

5 Eliz. ca. 1 Rast. Stat. pt. 2. f. 39. An Act to exclude the Popes Pretenses
to any Authority here in England. The reasonableness of it, and the Penalties
annexed to it.
The next Act of Parliament, I shall take notice of, is, the Act for the
assurance of the Queens Majesty's Royal Power, over all States, and Subjects
within her Dominions; by which Act it is provided.

That if any person dwelling, inhabiting, or resiant within the Queens
Dominions, should after 1 Apr. 1563* by writing, etc. advisedly, and wittingly
hold, etc. maintain, or defend the Authority, Jurisdiction, or Power of the
Bishop of Rome, or of his See, heretofore usurped within this Realm, being
lawfully Convicted thereof within a Year, should incur a Praemunire for the
first Offense, and High Treason for the Second; the like Penalties are annexed
to the Refusal of the Oath of Supremacy. The reason of the making which Law
appears from the Preamble of the Act, and the History of those times.

The Preamble takes notice, that Hures, Perils, Dishonours, Inconveniences, had
before time befallen the Queens Majesty's Noble Progenitors, Kings of this
Realm, and the whole estate thereof by means of the Jurisdiction of the Sea of
Rome, unjustly claimed, and usurped within this Realm, and the Dominions
thereof, and also takes notice of Dangers the Queen and state was then in, by
the Fa^ters of the said usurped Power, at that time grown to mavelous
outrage, and Licentious Boldness, and therefore it was necessary to have more
sharp restraint, and correction of Laws, then before in the time of the Queens
Majesty's most mild, and merciful Reign had been established.

Hence it plainly appears, that the Parliament thought the Queens Person, and
the Kingdom in great Danger from the Papists, who are all favorers of the
Pope's Authority in England, and if Cambden may be believed, not without
reason, Cambd Annals fol. 58.
for he tells us, That Anno Domini 1562 in France, the Professors of the
Reformed Religion were most grievously afflicted: And that thereupon the
Papists in England muttered many and Great matters in secret talk amongst
Companies, of suppressing in like manner the Protestants in England. And every
one that is acquainted with the History of those times, knows, that at the same
time that these things were bruited about, the Papists here, the Guises in
France, and the Queen of Scots (that restless and unwearied Enemy of the
Protestant Religion) were plotting and Contriving against the Queen, and that
those Plots and Contrivances of the Queen of Scots, were never at an end, till
the Axe put a period to her Life and them together.

And how forward the Priests of the Romish Church, especially of the Order of
Jesuits, are, to assert the Pope's jurisdiction, and bring in and Execute his
Bulls here in England, is well known amongst Protestants. And that this is laid
by the secular Priests themselves to the Charge of the Jesuits, I shall
hereafter make appear. So that certainly it must be owned, that there was very
good reason to make this Law; and as for the Penalties, they were annexed in
terrorem, rather, than with any design to be inflicted to the ruin of them,
against whom the Laws were made, as plainly appears from the History of the
first 12 years of this Queens Reign, during which time, the Persons of the
Papists, The Queens mild usage of the Papists.
(notwithstanding these Laws) remained in the Kingdom quiet, and undisturbed,
till they themselves gave just occasion, for putting these, and the Ancient
Laws of the Kingdom in Execution against them, and making further provision by
the adding new Laws, with more severe Penalties, or rather enforcing the
Execution of the old ones. Foulis Hist. of Romish Treasons. li. 7. cap. 2. fol.
325.

The secular Priests in their important considerations, confess not above 12 in
10 years, and of those 12, some were attainted of Treason. Collections f. 41.
Lord Treasurer Burleigh hasserts the same f. 28. Abr. Bzov. de Romans Pontif. c.
46. p. 621.


We don't read in our English Histories of twelve Papists that suffered Death
in the 10 first Years of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, nor of any that at any time
were executed purely for exercising their Religion: But those of them that have
been executed, have dyed for Treason, and Rebellion; and Mr. Fowlis tells us,
that it is confessed by Bzovius; their Papal Champion, that there was not any
that suffered in Queen Elizabeth's time, but did teach the dangerous doctrine
that the Pope could depose Kings. That the Papists, both Clergy, and Laity,
were used by the Queen, in the Beginning of her Reign, with all the kindness
and even tenderness imaginable, must be believed; if one of the greatest
Statesmen of his Age, and one of the Wisest Persons this Nation ever bred, viz.
The Lord Treasurer Burleigh, who writ in this Queens Reign, can challenge any
Credit; he says thus, Execution for Treason, not for Religion p. 6.7.
And though there are many Subjects known in the Realm, that differ in some
Opinions of Religion from the Church of England, and that do also not forbear
to profess the same; yet in that they do also profess Loyalty and Obedience to
her Majesty, and offer readily in her Majesty's Defense, to impugn and resist
any foreign force, though it should come or be procured from the Pope himself,
none of these sort are for their contrary Opinions in Religion prosecuted, or
charged with any Crimes; or Pains of Treason, nor yet willingly searched in
their Consciences for their contrary Opinions, that savor not of Treason. (
They were not Closetted.)

Dr. Burnet in his Hist. of the Ref. gives much the same Account of the usage
of these Men. pt. 2d. lib. 3. f. 396. Cambd. does so likewise, fol. 28, 29. his
Annals.
And he instances in several, Dr. Heath, Arch- Bishop of York, and Lord
Chancellor of England in Queen Mary's time, who (says he) at the first coming
of her Majesty to the Crown, showing himself a faithful and quiet Subject, was
continued in both the said Offices, though in Religion then manifestly differing,
and yet was he not restrained of his Liberty; nor deprived of his proper Lands
and Goods, but leaving willingly both his Offices, lived in his own House, and
enjoyed all his purchased Lands, during all his natural Life, until by very Age
he departed this World, and then left his House and Living to his Friends. An
Example of gentleness, never matched in Queen Mary's days. The Like did Dr.
Pool, who had been. Bishop of Peterborough, Dr. Tonstall Bishop of Duresme,
these of quiet behavior. There were others he tells us, Dr. White, and Dr.
Oglethorp, the one Bishop of Winchester, the other of Carlisle, and Dr.
Thurlby, and Dr. Watson, one Bishop of Ely, the other of Lincoln, not pressed
with any Capital Pain, though they maintained the Pope's Authority against the
Laws of the Realm. Mr. Fecknam, an Abbot, is also Instanced in. -- Some Deans,
as Dr. Boxall, Dean of Windsor, a Person of great Modesty, and Knowledge; Dr.
Cole, Dean of Paul's, a Person more earnest, than Wise, Dr. Reynolds, Dean of
Exeter, and many such others, having born Office and Dignities in the Church,
and had made profession against the Pope, which they began in Queen Mary's time
to change, yet were they never to this day burdned with Capital pains, nor yet
deprived of any of their Goods or proper Livelyhoods, but only removed from
their Ecclesiastical Offices, which they would not Exercise according to the
Laws. And most of them for a great while were retained in Bishops houses (not
in Cole-holes and Dungeons, as Bonner entertained the Protestants in the Marian
days,) in very civil and courteous manner, without charge to themselves or
their Friends, until the time that the Pope began by his Bulls and Messages to
offer trouble to the Realm, by stirring of Rebellion; about which time, only
some of those aforenamed, being found busier in Matters of State, tending to
stir troubles, than was meet, for the common quiet of the Realm, were removed
to other more private places, not into Smithfield to be burnt, after a
pretended Conviction of Heresy, in an Arbitrary and Illegal manner.

Cambd. Annals, f. 28.
In all England, where there are 9400 Ecclesiastical Promotions, there were
turned out of their Livings, Dignities, and Bishoprics, not above 800 Parsons
of Churches, 50 Prebendaries, 15 Presidents of Colleges, 12 Archdeacons, as
many Deans, 6 Abbots and Abbesses, 14 Bishops.

Baker 's Chron. f. 395.
Until the twentieth year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, the Papists in England
were mercifully connived at; while they solemnized their own Rites, within
their private houses, though that also were against the Laws.

The Priests confess the Queen's mild usage of Papists.

Lord Burleighs Execution for Treason.

The Secular Priests important considerations, and the Jesuits reasons
unreasonable. f. 34.


The Secular Priests themselves, Watson and Bluet, confess in their important
Considerations, (wherein they make the Jesuits Plottings and Treasons to be the
occasion of making and Executing the Penal Laws) That for the first ten years
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; the State of Catholics (i. e. Papists) was
tolerable, and after a sort in some good quietness; such as for their
Consciences, were imprisoned in the beginning of her coming to the Crown, were
very kindly and mercifully used, the state of things then considered* some of
them were appointed to remain with such their Friends, as they themselves made
choice of. Others were placed, some with Bishops, some with Deans, and had
their Diet at their Tables, with such convenient Lodgings and Walks for their
Recreations, as did well content them. They that were in the ordinary Prisons,
had such Liberty and other Commodity, as the places would afford, not
inconvenient for men in their Cases. But that our Brethren of the more fiery
and Jesuitical Humor may not snuff hereat; we have thought it meet to cool
their heat, with some of Master Parsons, and his Fellow Mr. Creswel's more
gentle delays (then are usual with them:) who in one of their Books do confess
as much in effect, as here we have set down, if not more, thus those great
Emperor-like Jesuits, do speak to her Majesty. In the beginning of thy Kingdom,
thou did deal something more gently with Catholics: None were then urged by
thee, or pressed either to thy Sect, or to the denial of their Faith, all
things (indeed) did seem to proceed in a far milder course: no great complaints
were heard of: there were seen no extraordinary contentions or repugnancies;
some there were, that to please and gratify you, went to your Churches, but
when afterward thou did begin to wrong them, etc.

And thus, not only our own Historians, do acquit Queen Elizabeth of all
imputations of Rigor, or cruelty toward the Papists, for the beginning of her
Reign, but even the Secular Priests, not only do it themselves, but have
Printed and published it to all the world, that the Jesuits themselves, Parsons
and Creswel, could not but acknowledge it too.

And when was it that she began to be severe? The Seculars give this answer to
it, surely whenever it was, we our selves (certain Catholics of all sorts)
were the true causes of it: For whilst her Majesty and the State, dealt with
the Catholics as you have heard, Ibid. f. 35. She was presently deprived by
the Pope and the Queen of Scots pretended a title to the Crown.
which was full eleven years, no one Catholic being called in question of his
life, for his Conscience all that time: Consider with us how our profession
proceeded with them. Hist. Council of Trent, f. 410, 411.

The grounds of making 13 Eliz. ca. 2.


Her Highness had scarcely felt the Crown warm upon her head, but it was
challenged from her by some of her Neighbors, as Master Saunders notes. Thus
they themselves confess, but because I am past five years of Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, and am to give the true Reasons of making the rest of the Penal Laws in
Queen Elizabeth's time, I shall proceed to assign the Reasons of making 13
Eliz. ca. 2.

Queen Elizabeth having triumphantly Reigned above 10 years in the Nation, to
the great Joy and comfort of her Subjects, the Romish party, as they had been
all along carrying on private Designs, to disturb her Reign, so in the eleventh
year of her Reign Anno Domini 1568, they more openly appeared, and Thomas
Harding, Nichloas Saunders, and T. P. Divines, busily exercised their Episcopal
Power, received from the Bishop of Rome, of absolving in the Court of
Conscience, Cambd. Annals, lib. 1. f. 107.

In 1568, the Priests exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction under the Sea of
Rome.

Rodolph excites the Queen's Subjects against her.

Cambd. Annals. f. 118. Foulis Hist. lib. 7. ca. 3. p. 330. Udal's Hist. of
Mary Queen of Scotland, p. 119, 169. In 1569. The first Rebellion under the
Earl of Westmerland, fomente^ by Morton the Priest.

Cambd. Annals, f. 133, 134, 135, 136. Collection, f. 9.


all English men which returned to the Bosom of the Church, and of dispensing
also in cases of irregularity, excepting causes arising of wilful Murder, or
brought into a contentious or judicial Court, and also of absolving from
Irregularity in respect of Heresy, so as the persons to be absolved, do
abstain from the Service of the Altar, by the space of three years.

After this, in the same year, Robert Rodolph, a Florentine, who had lived long
time as a Factor in London, was employed by Pius Quintus Bishop of Rome, (for
he durst not send his Nuntio openly) to excite the Papists in England, secretly
against Queen Elizabeth, which he most carefully and closely performed. And
this same Pope writ a Letter to the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland,
which had such success, that the latter end of 1569, a Rebellion of the Papists
broke out in the North, fomented and carried on by one Nicholas Morton, a
Priest, who was sent from the Bishop of Rome, to pronounce Queen Elizabeth to
be an Heretic, and thereby to have forfeited all Dominion and Power. The
Ringleaders of the Rebels, being the Earls of Northumberland, Westmerland, and
Sussex. The Rebels went first to Durham an Episcopal See, where they rent and
trampled under feet, the English Bibles, and Books of Common Prayer, which they
found in Churches, and Celebrated Mass in all places where they came, their
number was six hundred Horse, and four thousand Foot. But this Rebellion was
quickly suppressed, threescore and six petty Constables hanged for a terror at
Durham; amongst whom the men of most note, was one Plomtree a Priest, Simon
Digby, John Fulthorp, Thomas Bishop, and Robert Peneman at York; and at London
some few months after, Christopher and Thomas Norton, and some few elsewhere.

Afterward such of the Rebels as were of best note, were convict of high
Treason, and proscribed, viz. Charles Earl of Westmerland, Thomas Earl of
Northumberland, Anne Countess of Northumberland, Daughter to Henry Earl of
Worcester, Edward Dacres of Morton, John Nevel of Leversedge, John Swinborne,
Thomas Markenfield, Egremond Ratcliff, the Earl of Sussex his Brother,
Christopher Nevil, Richard Norton, of Norton Conyers, Christopher Marmaduke,
and Thomas of the Family of the Nortons, Robert and Michael Tempest, George
Stafford, and about forty more of Noble Birth. These men's Convictions and
Proscriptions, was confirmed in the next Parliament. The rest, which had no
Estates, nor had fled the Land, (as the Earl of Westmerland and several others
did) were pardoned; not taken and hanged like Dogs in Cold-Blood, without
Trial, as many hundreds were in the West in 1685.

The Letter writ by Pope Pius V. to the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmerland, was this, viz.

A Letter of Pope Pius V. to the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, for
encouraging them in the Rebellion against Queen Elizabeth, they were then
engaged in: Being the tenth Letter of the fourth Book of the Epistles of the
said Pope Pius, published at Antwerp, ex officina Plantiniana, by Francis
Gouban, in the year 1640, and now from that Edition Translated into English.
Hish. Acount of the Jesuits Behavior for the first 25 years of Queen Eliz. f.
35.


This Letter refers to lib. 3. cap. 9. of the Life of Pius Quintus, by
Gabutius. See also Caten. p. 115.

To our Beloved Sons, Thomas Earl of Northumberland, and Charles Earl of
Westmerland, in England.
Beloved Sons, Noblemen, Health to you, and Apostolic Benediction.
BY your Letters dated to us, the eighth day of November, (which being brought
to us the eighth of February, we have speedily returned Answer) understanding
more certainly and particularly, the Miseries and Calamities of that most
flourishing Kingdom, not unknown to us before, we were affected with that grief
of mind, wherewith both the Indignity of these Evils which we suffer in you,
and Our Paternal Affection toward both you and other Catholics in that
Kingdom, ought to affect us; for besides that Common Duty of Pastoral Charity,
wherewith we ought to rejoice at the Welfare, or to be grieved at the Calamity
of all the Faithful of Christ, and of every Province in which the Christian
Name is professed, we are affected with an Episcopal prerogative of Love and
Benevolence toward that Kingdom, both because We remember it was heretofore by
the Labor and Industry of our Predecessor, the Blessed Gregory Bishop of Rome,
(next after God Omnipotent) Converted from the Worship of Wood and Stones, to
the Christian Faith; and by fit Men sent thither from him, instituted in
Manners, and in the Catholic Doctrine, and also because it used to exhibit to
the Apostolic See, an excellent Faith and sincerity of Devotion; therefore how
much we grieve and are troubled at these your Evils, and the Evils of that
Kingdom, which you in the same Letters no less Truly than Miserably Lament,
cannot easily be expressed in Words. We grieve that so many and so great
Poisonous Infections of wicked Heresies, and so deadly Wounds of the Christian
Commonwealth, should chiefly happen in the times of Our Pontificate: We are
troubled, because We are Compelled to be Solicitous about the Danger of you and
other Catholics; but yet when We remember the Power of his Prayers, who
entreated for St. Peter, that his Faith might not fail; and who enlarging his
Church in Tribulation, does by so much the more admirably govern it by the
Providence of his secret Council, (...) much the more he sees it tossed by the
Waves of Troubles. We despa^^ not, but what we have heard to have been done in
former times, may also by the Divine assistance, be done in ours. That the
Church which often seems by the prevailing Persecution of Heretics to be
trodden down, may return to its State of Ancient Felicity, (the Lord Conspiring
with her to a good Omen) and may receive increase from that wherein she seemed
to have suffered Loss. For Behold, even now, he that of old things makes new
ones, and of new things old ones, Our Lord Jesus Christ has by you, (Men, Dear
to Us, and Eminent, as well by the Study of Catholic Piety, as by Nobleness of
Birth) determined, peradventure to renew and confirm the Ancient Union of the
Romish Church, with that Kingdom; and therefore has infused into you that
mind, most worthy of the Zeal of your Catholic Faith, that you should attempt
to reduce back that Kingdom (delivered from the most vile Servitude of a Woman's
Lust) to the Ancient Obedience of this Holy Roman See, which Pious and
Religious endeavor of your Minds, We recommend (as is fit) with just Praises
in the Lord, and giving it that Our Blessing, which you desire; We do with the
Benignity which becomes us, receive your Honors flying to the Power and
Protection of us, and of this Holy See, to whose Authority they Subject
themselves; exhorting you in the Lord, and with all possible earnestness of Our
Mind, entreating you to Persevere constantly in this your so exceeding good
will and lawdable Purpose: Being assured that the Omnipotent God, whose Works
are Perfect, and who has excited you to deserve well of the Catholic Faith in
that Kingdom, will be assisting to you. But if in asserting the Catholic
Faith, and Authority of this Holy See; you should suffer Death, and your Blood
be spilt, it would be much better for the Confession of God, to fly by the
Compendium of a Glorious Death to Life Eternal, than living Basely and
Ignominiously, to serve the Lust of an Impotent Woman, with the Loss of your
Souls. For think not, Beloved Sons in Christ, that those Catholic Bishops, or
Princes of that Kingdom whom you name, are ill dealt with, who because they
would not forsake the Profession of the Catholic Faith, are either Imprisoned,
or undeservedly affected with other Punishments, for the Constancy of these
Men, which is even now confirmed by a new Example (as we conceive) of the
Blessed Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, no man can sufficiently commend, as
it deserves. This same Constancy, you also imitating; be of a Courageous and
Constant mind, and desist not from the Enterprise by any Threats or
denunciation of Danger. For God in whom you ought to repose your Trust, who did
cast the Chariot and Army of Pharaoh into the Sea, is able to break the
Strength and Power of his Adversaries; so that by you, the Primitive Religion
and Ancient dignity of that Realm may be restored, which that it may be
Compassed, we shall not only help you in performing with those Christian
Princes whom you would, those Offices which you desire, but also in
Contributing at present, that Sum of Money, which according to our Ability, in
answer to your Request, We can supply you with, as you shall more clearly and
fully understand by our Beloved Son Robert Rodolphus, We being also ready to
endeavor hereafter to contribute a Greater Sum than the Imbecility of Our
Power will bear, and with a ready and cheerful Mind to help your Pious
Endeavor, with all our Estate and Power, which We can in the Lord.

Given at Rome at St. Peter's, under the Fishers Ring, the twentieth Day of
February, 1570. In the fifth year of our Pontificate.

The Character the Lord Treasurer Burleigh gives this Charles Earl of
Westmerland, is, That he was a person utterly wasted by Looseness of Life,
Execution for Treason, Collection. p. 2.
and by God's punishment, even in the time of his Rebellion, bereaved of his
Children, that should have succeeded him in the Earldom, he says, his Body was
eaten with Ulcers of Lewd Causes, that no Enemy he had could wish him a Viler
Punishment. This was one of Pope Pius Quintus his Sons.

No sooner was this Rebellion thus happily suppressed, and so much mercy shown,
The second Rebellion was in the same year, and be^ded by Leonard Dacres.

Cambd Annals, fol. 136, 137.


but another breaks out at Naworth in Cumberland, headed by Leonard Dacres,
second Son to William Lord Dacres, of Gillesland, in order to deliver the Queen
of Scots, who was then in Custody; but the Lord Hunsdon, with the Old Garrison
Soldiers of Berwick, engaging him at the little River Gelt, after very many of
the said Leonard Dacre's Men were slain, he left the Victory to the Lord
Hunsdon, and withdrew himself to the next part of Scotland, from whence,
shortly after, he Crossed the Seas into the Low Countries, and dyed a poor Man
at Lovain. The Queen by public Proclamation, pardoned the Multitude whom he
had excited to Rebellion. The third Rebellion was in Ireland in the same Year;
beaded by the Botelers.

Cambd. Annals. f. 137.

The Reason of these Rebellions was Pope Pius Quintus his Bull.

Camb. Annals, fol. 145.

Baker's Chro. fol. 34.

Foulis li. 7. ca. 2. fol. 325.

Collection, f. 3. Pope Pius Quintus his Bull.

Cambd. Annals, fol. 146. Fowlis. 331.




And as the Papists gave Queen Elizabeth these disturbances here in England; so
they were not wanting in Embroiling of Ireland: So ungrateful were they for all
the favor and kindness, that she had from time to time shown them. Edmond and
Peter Boteler, the Earl of Ormond's Brethren, engaged themselves with the
Bishop of Rome, and the Spaniard, for maintaining the Popish Religion, and
outing Queen Elizabeth of her Kingdom of Ireland. But their Brother the Earl of
Ormond quenched this Flame, by persuading his Brethren to submit themselves,
who by that means saved their Lives.

And no wonder it is, that the Papists thus Rebel against Queen Elizabeth; when
Pius Quintus, Bishop of Rome, who had from the time he came to the Sea, been
continually plotting against her, had the year before by his Bull declaratory,
without any previous admonition, or Citation, excommunicated her, and did
afterward cause the same to be openly published, and set up upon the Gates of
the Bishop of Londons Palace, in these words.

A Sentence Declaratory of our Holy Lord Pope Pius Quintus, against Elizabeth
Queen of England, and the Heretics adhering unto her, wherein also all her
Subjects are declared to be absolved from the Oath of Allegiance, and whatever
other Duty they owe unto her: And those that from henceforth shall obey her,
are involved in the same Curse or Anathema.
Pius, Bishop, Servant to God's Servants, for a future Memorial of the matter.

He that reigns on high, to whom is given all Power in Heaven and in Earth,
has Committed his one, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, out of which
there is no Salvation, to one alone upon Earth, namely, To Peter the Chief of
the Apostles, and to Peter's Successor, the Bishop of Rome, to be by him
governed with plenary Authority. Him alone has he made Prince over all People,
and all Kingdoms, to pluck up, destroy, scatter, consume, plant, and build;
that he may preserve his faithful People, (knit together with the band of
Charity) in the Unity of the Spirit, and present them spotless and unblamable
to their Savior. In discharge of which Function, we, who are by God's Goodness
so called to the Government of the aforesaid Church, do spare no pains,
laboring with all earnestness, that unity and the Catholic Religion, (which
the Author thereof has for the trial of his Childrens Faith, and for our
amendment suffered to be tossed with so great Afflictions) might be preserved
sincere. But the number of the ungodly has gotten such power, that there is
now no place in the whole world left, which they have not assayed to corrupt
with their most wicked Doctrines, and amongst others, Elizabeth the pretended
Queen of England, the Servant of Wickedness, lends thereunto her helping
hand, with whom, as in a Sanctuary, the most pernicious persons have found a
refuge. This very Woman having seized on the Kingdom, and monstrously usurped
the place of Supreme Head of the Church in all England, and the chief Authority
and Jurisdiction thereof; has again reduced the said Kingdom into a miserable
and ruinous condition, which was so lately reclaimed to the Catholic Faith and
a thriving Condition.

For having by strong hand prohibited the exercise of the true Religion, which
Mary the lawful Queen of Famous Memory, had by the help of this See restored,
after it had been formerly overthrown by Henry the Eighth, a Revolter
therefrom, and following and embracing the Errors of Heretics, she has
changed the Royal Council, consisting of the English Nobility, and filled it up
with obscure Men, being Heretics; suppressed the Embracers of the Catholic
Faith; Constituted lewd Preachers and Ministers of Impiety; Abolished the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Prayers, Fastings, choice of Meats, unmarried Life, and
the Catholic Rites and Ceremonies; commanded Books to be read through the
whole Realm, containing manifest Heresy, and appointed Impious Rites and
Institutions, by her self entertained and observed according to the Prescript
of Calvin, to be likewise observed by her Subjects; presumed to eject Bishops,
Parsons of Churches, and other Catholic Priests, out of their Churches and
Benefices, and to bestow them and other Church Livings upon Heretics, and to
determine of Church Causes; prohibited the Prelates, Clergy, and People, to
acknowledge the Church of Rome, or obey the Precepts or Canonical Sanctions
thereof; compelled most of them to condescend to her wicked Laws, and to abjure
the Authority and Obedience of the Bishop of Rome, and to acknowledge her to be
sole Lady in Temporal and Spiritual Matters, and this by Oath; imposed
Penalties and Punishments upon those which obeyed not, and exacted them of
those which persevered in the Unity of the Faith, and their Obedience
aforesaid; cast the Catholic Prelates and Rectours of Churches into Prison,
where many of them, being worn out with long languishing and sorrow, miserably
ended their Lives: All which things being so manifest and notorious to all
Nations, and by the serious Testimony of very many so substantially proved,
that there is no place at all left for excuse, defense or evasion: We seeing
that Impiety and Wicked Actions are multiplied one upon another, as also that
the Persecution of the Faithful and Affliction for Religion grows every day
heavier and heavier, through the instigation and by means of the said
Elizabeth, and since we understand her Heart to be so hardened and obdurate,
that she has not only contemned the Godly Requests and Admonitions of
Catholic Princes, concerning her cure and Conversion, but also has not so
much as suffered the N^ncio's of this See to cross the Seas for this purpose
into England, are constrained of necessity to betake our selves to the Weapons
of Justice against her, being heartily grieved and sorry that we are compelled
thus to punish one, to whose Ancestors the whole State of Christendom has been
so much beholden. Being therefore supported with his Authority whose pleasure
it was to place us (though unable for so great a burden) in this Supreme Throne
of Justice, we do, out of the fullness of our Apostolic Power, declare, the
aforesaid Elizabeth, as being an Heretic and a favourer of Heretics, and her
adherents in the matters aforesaid, to have incurred the Sentence of
Excommunication, and to be cut off from the unity of the body of Christ. And
moreover we do declare her to be deprived of her pretended Title to the Kingdom
aforesaid, and of all Dominion, Dignity, and Privilege whatsoever; and also
the Nobility, Subjects, and People of the said Kingdom, and all others who have
in any sort sworn unto her, to be for ever absolved from any such Oath, and all
manner of Duty of Dominion, Allegiance and Obedience: and we also do by
Authority of these Presents absolve them, and do deprive the said Elizabeth of
her pretended Title to the Kingdom, and all other things before named. And we
do command and charge all and every the Noblemen, Subjects, People, and others
aforesaid, that they presume not to obey her, or her Orders, Mandates and Laws:
And those which shall do the contrary, we do include them in the like Sentence
of Anathema. And because it would be a difficult matter, to convey these
Presents to all places wheresoever it shall be needful; Our Will is, that the
Copies thereof under a Public Notaries hand, and Sealed with the Seal of an
Ecclesiastical Prelate, or of his Court, shall carry altogether the same credit
with all men, judicially, and extrajudicially, as these Presents should do, if
they were exhibited or showed.

Given at Rome at St. Peter's in the year of the Incarnation of our Lord 1569,
the fifth of the Calends of March, and of our Popedom the fifth year. Cae.
Glorierius.

One Felton hung up this Bill upon the Bishop of London's Palace Gates, Cambd.
Annals, f. 148. Fowlis Hist. lib 2. ca. 3. f. 327. Collections, f. 24 Felton
hanged as a Traitor for publishing the Bull.
and scorning to seek an escape, boldly vindicates the Pope, and himself, in
what was done, defying the Queen and her Authority, for which he was Arraigned,
Condemned, and Hanged, near the same place in St. Paul's Churchyard.

Now for any thus to contemn, and villifie his Sovereign, null her Authority,
renounce his Allegiance, and so far to submit himself to a Foreign
Jurisdiction, even in Temporalities, as to declare his own Sovereign deprived
and deposed from her Kingdom, what punishment this man incurred, let the Reader
Judge, provided he will also consider, That had a Protestant thus renounced his
Obedience in Queen Mary's days, the party must have dyed for it; and those who
commend Felton, would have called the other Traitors; and yet Felton did it to
procure a National Rebellion.

Besides this, in the beginning of the 13 th year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, The 4 th Rebellion was in Ireland, begun in the beginning of 13
Eliz. by Conogher O Brien, Earl of Twomond. Cambd. Annals, f. 153.
in Ireland, Conogher O Brien Earl of Twomond, closely contrived a Rebellion,
which, just as it was ready to break forth, was by mere chance blown over; and
Thomas Steukley an Englishman, a Ruffian, a notorious Spendthrift, and a
notable vaporer, (who having consumed his Estate, fled over into Ireland) after
he had first vomited forth most undeserved disgraces against his Princess, to
whom he was extraordinarily bounden, soon after slipped out of Ireland into
Italy, to Pius V. Bishop of Rome, where incredible it is, into how great grace
and favor he wrought himself, by his Flatteries with that old man, who
breathed after the destruction of Queen Elizabeth.

This Steukley (says the Lord Treasurer Burleigh) was a defamed person almost
through all Christendom, and a faithless Beast, rather than a Man, Collections,
f. 2, 3
fleeing first out of England for notable Piracies, and out of Ireland for
Treacheries not pardonable, and that he and the said Charles Nevil Earl of
Westmerland, were the Ringleaders of the rest of the Rebels; the one for
England, the other for Ireland: But notwithstanding the notorious evil and
wicked Lives of these and others their confederates, void of all Christian
Religion, it liked the Bishop of Rome, as in favor of their Treasons, to
animate them to take Arms against their lawful Queen, to invade her Realm with
Foreign Forces, to pursue all her good Subjects and their Native Country, with
Fire and Sword, for maintenance whereof, the Bull aforesaid had proceeded.

And the Pope, the Guises, the King of Spain, Contrivances by the Pope, the
King of Spain, the Guises, and the Queen of Scots, against Queen Elizabeth and
the Protestant Religion. Fowlis, p. 330, 331.

Cambd. Annals, lib. 2. f. 154.


and the rest of the confederates against the Queen and the Protestant
Religion, the better to carry on their designs, did soon after Queen Elizabeth
came to the Crown, set up a Title thereto in the Queen of Scots, as aforesaid,
which was one principal cause that there were so many Plots and Conspiracies
during her Reign, though none gave her any great trouble, till about the 10 th or
11 th year of her Reign.

It appears by Letters from the Pope to the Queen of Scots, written in the year
1571. 13 Eliz. that there was a design on Foot to introduce Popery and to
subvert the Protestant Religion here in England, which Letter was delivered by
Ridolpho the Florentine, before mentioned, his means to the Queen of Scots: And
Ridolpho by his own particular Letters to the Queen of Scots, desired her to
acquaint the Duke of Norfolk and her Friends with the Design, but there being
at that time a Treaty begun, in order to her being restored to her Kingdom of
Scotland, whereof she was at that time dispossessed, she deferred answering the
Letter; but the Treaty afterward coming to nothing, she privately sent a large
commentary or draught of her Counsels and Affairs to the Duke of Norfolk before
mentioned, written in Ciphers, known only to them two; as also other Letters to
be conveyed by Ridolpho to the Pope and the Spaniard; Camd. Hist. lib. 2. fol.
157. Baker's Chron. f. 344.
Ridolpho greatly pressed the Duke to enter into the Confederacy, and as an
encouragement, affirmed, That the Pope, so that the Catholic (i. e. the
Popish) Religion might be promoted, would bear the charge of the whole War, and
that he had to that purpose laid down Some Writers say 150000. Crowns.
an hundred thousand Crowns the last year, when the Bull was Published, whereof
twelve thousand, he the said Ridolpho had distributed amongst the English
Fugitives. He promised that the Spaniard would supply him with 4000 Horse, and
6000 Foot, which might be sent over to Harwich (near whereunto the Duke had
many Potent Adherents) and that most commodiously, and without suspicion, in
the beginning of Summer, when the Duke of Medina Caeli was to come with a
strong Fleet into the Netherlands. And concluded, that such Caution might be
used, that the Duke might be cleared from all Suspicion of affecting the Crown,
and the Queen of England safely might be provided for, so as she would Embrace
or tolerate the Romish Religion, and give her assent to the Queen of Scots
Marriage with the Duke Which Conspiracy the Duke at that time refused to enter
into, Cambd. Annals, p. 158. Baker Chron. fol. 844.

Camb. Annals. li. 2. fol. 162.


notwithstanding Ridolphus plausible reasoning, as he did also a Proposition
made to him from Ross, by Barker, of surprising the Queen at unawares, and
interrupting the Parliament, which was then sitting.

The Commentary of the Queen of Scots before mentioned, being afterward
discovered, there the Design appearing, I have inserted what Cambden says she
therein discoursed, viz. That the French approved of the Conference begun with
the Scots, and yet propounded the Marriage of the Duke of Anjou with Queen
Elizabeth, and that to no other end, but that they might have the better
pretense to deny the aid promised for her Restitution. That the same French
privately opposed her Marriage with Don John of Austria, and highly favored
that with Norfolk, in hatred to the Spaniards. That the Duke of Alva did so far
condemn the Design, for sending back the Queen of Scots into Scotland, that he
thought it to be attended with the utter undoing of the Queen, and the
overthrow of the Catholic Religion in Britain; for the Queen being returned
into Scotland, must of necessity either undergo the danger of being besieged,
or else hazard a Battle with the Rebels, who with the help of the English,
would soon get her into their power, before any foreign Forces could come to
her assistance. Seeing then she could not be safe in Scotland, and from France
there was swall hope, that being embroiled with Wars within it self, he thought
it her best Course to fly to the Spaniards help, who had proffered her Marriage
with Don John of Austria (which, notwithstanding she would refuse, having given
her Faith that the Popish Religion in Britain, should be restored by Norfolk:)
as also that her Son should be forthwith conveyed out of Scotland, and sent
into Spain; for so he would be kept in safety, and instructed in the Romish
Religion, from his very Childhood, and withal all pretenses would be taken from
the Scots, who Cloaked their Rebellion under his Name. That to solicit these
matters, and to procure foreign assistance, Ridolph was to be sent away
presently, who was to have private directions, in any Case to conceal these
things from the French.

When the Council had received this Commentary, and the Letters before
mentioned, Camb. Annals, p. 163

Baker's Chron. fol. 344.

Camb. p. 166. Fewlis Hist. li. 7. ca. 3. p. 326. 13 Eliz. ca. 1.


as likewise other Letters sent from the Bishop of Rome, and one Barker being
apprehended, had made a full Confession, the Duke of Norfolk was committed to
the Tower, together with Bannister, the Dukes Counselor at Law, the Earls of
Arundel, and South-hampton, the Lord Lumley, the Lord Cobham, and Thomas his
Brother; Henry Piercy, Louder, Powel, Goodyear, and others, who every one of
them, even the Duke himself confessed the matter. The Iniquity of these times,
and the Love of the Estates of England, (which were then assembled at
Westminster) toward their Prince and Country, occasioned the making an Act of
Parliament, whereby certain Offenses were made Treason.

Rast. Stat. pt. 2. fol. 136.

To bold that the Laws and Statutes cannot li^^^ the Crown, and bind the
Succession, Treason during the ^ucc^s Life, and a Praemunire ever after.


The Preamble of this Act, takes notice, that it was thought the Laws and
Statutes of this Realm then in force, were not sufficient for the preservation
of the Queens person, which ought to be provided for, and by the Neglecting
whereof, the Government might be subverted. And therefore it was Enacted, and
provided, according to the Tenor of former Laws, that if any should attempt the
Destructeon, or personal Hurt of the Queen, or raise War, or excite others to
War against Her; if any Man should affirm that she is not, nor ought of right
to be deemed Queen of this Realm, but that the Kingdom is more justly due to
another, or should pronounce her to be an Heretic, Schismatic, or Infidel, or
should usurp the Right and Title of the Kingdom, during her Life, or affirm,
that any other has right to the Crown, or that the Laws and Statutes cannot
limit, and determine the Right of the Crown, and the Succession thereof, Every
such person should be guilty of High Treason during the Queens Life, and that
after her Death, if any person held the Doctrine that the Laws and Statutes
cannot limit and determine the Right of the Crown and the Succession thereof,
he should incur a Praemunire. That if any Man during the Queens Life, should by
any Book written, or printed expressly maintain, that any person is, or ought to
be Heir, or Successor to the Queen, except the same be the Natural Issue of her
Body, or should wilfully publish, print, or utter any Books, or Writings to
that effect, he, and his Abettors, should for the first Offense, suffer
Imprisonment for a Year, and forfeit the one half of his Goods, and for the
second Offense, incur the Penalty of a Praemunire.

I confess that Keble says in his Collection of Statutes, that this Act of
Parliament is expired, but what ground he has for it, appears not any where
that I can find, Keble. Stat. fol. 827.
either in our History, or Law Books; so that I take it, for so much as was to
continue after her death, it is in force still, not being repealed by any
subsequent Statute; and therefore certainly, who ever holds that Doctrine; that
the Right of the Crown, and the succession thereof, cannot be limited, and
determined by the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, incurs a Praemunire.

There was also another Act of Parliament made in the same Session, the which
is entitled, an Act against the bringing in, and putting in execution of
Bulls, writings, or Instruments, and other Superstitions from the Sea of Rome.

The Preamble of which Statute, recites the Stat. of 5 Eliz. ca. 1. 13 Eliz.
ca. 2. Rast. Stat. pt. 2 fol. 138.

Against bringing in Bulls, etc. from Rome; and reconciling, and being
reconciled to the Sea of Rome.


Touching the Abolishing of the Authority of the Bishop, and See of Rome; and
setts out, That yet nevertheless, diverse Seditious, and evil disposed People,
minding not only to bring this Realm, and the Imperial Crown thereof, (being in
very deed of it self most free) into the Thraldom, and subjection of that
Foreign, usurped, and unlawful Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence, and Authority,
claimed by the said See of Rome; but also to estrange the Minds, and Hearts of
sundry of her Majesty's Subjects, from their Dutiful Obedience, and raise and
stir Sedition, and Rebellion within this Realm, to the disturbance of the most
happy peace thereof, have lately procured and obtained to themselves, from the
said Bishop of Rome and his said See; diverse Bulls, and Writings. And sets
forth the effect of the said Bull herein before particularly set forth; and
that by color of the said Bulls, and Writings, the said wicked Persons very
secretly, and most seditiously, in such parts of this Realm, where the People
for want of Instruction, were most weak, simple, and ignorant, and thereby,
furthest from the good understanding of their Duty toward God, and the Queen,
had by their Lewd and subtle Practices, and Persuasions, so far wrought, that
sundry persons had been reconciled to the said usurpt Authority of the Sea of
Rome, and did take Absolution at the hands of the said naughty and subtle
Practicers; whereby there was grown great disobedience, and boldness in many,
not only to withdraw, and absent themselves from all Divine Service; but also
did think themselves discharged from all Obedience, Duty, and Allegiance to her
Majesty, that thereupon most wicked and unnatural Rebellion had ensued, and to
the further danger of this Realm, was likely to be renewed, if the ungodly
attempts in that behalf, were not by severity of Laws restrained and bridled:
This Law therefore provides, that they who by Bulls, or other Instruments of
the Bishop of Rome; should reconcile any person to the Church of Rome, and
those also who should be so reconciled, should incur the Penalty of High
Treason. That those who should relieve such as did so reconcile Men, or should
bring into England any Agnus Dei's, or any Crosses, Pictures, Beads, or such
like vain and superstitious Things, Consecrated by the Bishop of Rome, should
undergo the Penalty of a Praemunire: That they who should not discover such as
did so reconcile, should be guilty of Misprision of Treason.

From the precedent History of Fact, and the Preamble of these two Acts of
Parliament, and the Acts themselves, I observe three things.

1 st. That the Kingdom of England is in it self a Free State; exempt from all
Foreign Jurisdiction whatever, by the Common Law of this Kingdom.

2 dly. That there had been deep Designs on foot, before the making of these
Acts of Parliament, for the inslaving this Kingdom to the Bishop and See of
Rome, subverting the Protestant Religion, and introducing Popery; and in order
thereunto, there were several Plots laid to destroy the person of the Queen.

3 dly. That these were all laid and carried on by the Pope, and some Papists
that were the Queens own Subjects, and others their adherents, and therefore
certainly it must be granted that it was very necessary at that time to make
these Laws against the Papists.

And that it was but reasonable to make them, The Secular Priests own the
Reasonableness of making these Laws.

Collection of several Treatises concerning the reasons and occasions of the
Penal-Laws. The 1st. printed in 1583. the second in 1601. the third in 1662.
and all reprinted in 1688. fol. 36.


even the Secular Priests themselves have owned in their important
Considerations. They confess that Pius V. did practice her Majesty's
subversion; that Ridolpho was sent hither by the Pope (under Color of
Merchandise) to solicit a Rebellion; That Pius V. moved the King of Spain to
Join in this exploit; That the Bull was devised purposely to further the
intended Rebellion, for depriving her Majesty from her Kingdom; That the Pope
and King of Spain assigned the Duke of Norfolk to be head of this Rebellion;
That the Pope gave order to Ridolpho, to take 150000 Crowns to set forwards
this Attempt. That some of this money was sent to Scotland, and some delivered
to the Duke; That King Philip, at the Pope's Instance, determined to send the
Duke of Alva into England, with all his forces out of the Low Countries, to
assist the Duke of Norfolk; which they confess in this manner. That these
things their Adversaries the Protestants Charged on them as true, and that they
were in hand whilst her Majesty dealt so mercifully with them, and therefore
asked them how they could excuse these designs so Unchristian, so unpriestly,
so Treacherous, and so unprince-like? To which they answer, that when they
first heard the aforementioned particulars, they did not believe them, but
would have laid their Lives they had been false; but when they saw them printed
in the Life of Pius V, they appeal to God, they were amazed, Collection. f. 37
and say, they can say no more, but that his Holiness was misinformed, and
indirectly drawn to these courses. They confess, that there being several
persons in Prison, when the Rebellion in the North before mentioned brake
forth, that it was known that the Pope had Excommunicated the Queen, that there
followed a great restraint of the Prisoners, but none of them were put to death
upon that occasion; the Sword being then only drawn against such Catholics, as
had risen up actually into open Rebellion, wherein, say they, we cannot see
what her Majesty did, that any Prince in Christendom, in such a case, would not
have done, and confess these things to have been the occasion of making 13
Eliz. ca. 2. against bringing in Bulls etc. thus they express themselves,
Collection. f. 38.
we cannot but confess, as reasonable men, that the State had great Reasons to
make some Laws against us, except they should have shown themselves careless
for the continuance of it, but be the Law, as any would have it, never so
extreme, yet surely it must be granted, that the occasions of it were most
outrageous, and likewise that the Execution of it was not so Tragical, as many
have since written and reported of it; for whatsoever was done against us,
either upon the pretense of that Law, or of any other, would never we think
have been attempted, had not diverse other preposterous occasions, besides the
Causes of that Law, daily fallen out amongst us, which procured matters to be
urged more severely against us. And afterward they accuse Saunders the Jesuit
for writing a Book in 1572, de visibili Monarchia, and therein justifying the
Excommunicating the Queen, and the said Rebellion in the North, and do
themselves own, that the persons that suffered upon that account, were
Arraigned, Condemned, and Executed, by the Ancient Laws of the Country, for
High Treason.

As to the Acts themselves, It is not to be denied, but they are very severe,
yet not severe enough to deter the Papists from carrying on their designs
against the Queen, and the Protestant Religion, as I shall by and by make
appear; but before I do that, let us a little enquire, Story 's Plot. Cambd.
Hist. li 2. fol 168. Dyer. 13 Eliz. fol. 298.

Baker 's Chron. fol. 343.

The Duke of Norfolk executed.


what proceedings there were upon these Laws after they were thus made.

In the year 1571, it is true, one John Story Doctor in Laws, one of the Duke of
Alva's Servants, an Englishman, and a Papist, was Executed; but it was for High
Treason, ( not Religion) for having conspired the Queen's Death, cursed her
daily in his Grace at Meals, and showing the Duke of Alva's Secretary the way
to Invade England, to put Ireland into Rebellion, and to excite the Scots to
break into England all at once.

The Duke of Norfolk was also Tried, Convicted, and Executed, and after his
Condemnation, and before his Execution, one Barney and Mather were Executed,
for conspiring with one Herle, to make away some of the Council, and to deliver
the Duke out of Prison.

14 Eliz. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. p. 2. fol. 188.
Diverse other Conspiracies and Practices there were, for delivering the Duke,
which occasioned a Parliament, and the Parliaments making two Acts. One, that
those who should surprise, demolish, or burn any of the Queen's Forts, should
be guilty of Felony: And that those who should hold the same by Force against
the Queen, burn her Ships, or stop up her Havens, should be guilty of High
Treason. Another against such as should conspire or practice the enlargement of
any Prisoner committed for High Treason, which as it is Printed by Rastal, is
as follows,

14 Eliz. ca. 2. Rast Stat. pt 2. f. 188

Against Consp^ring to deliver any imprisoned for Treason.


Forasmuch as great danger may ensue to the Queens Majesty's person, and great
trouble to the State of the Realm, by unlawful Conspiracies, Devises and
Imaginations, to enlarge and set at Liberty such persons as be, or shall be
committed to any Prison, Guard or Custody, for any Treason touching the Royal
Person of our said Sovereign Lady, against which Devices, Conspiracies and
Imaginations, sufficient remedy by the Laws of this Realm, has not been
heretofore had nor provided, unless the same Conspiracies, Imaginations and
Devises, were Executed and brought to effect. Be it therefore Enacted by our
said Sovereign Lady the Queen, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament Assembled, and by the Authority of the same,
that if any person or persons, at any time after the end of this present
Session of Parliament, shall imagine, conspire, devise, invent, or go about
unlawfully or maliciously, to enlarge or set at liberty any person or persons
committed or to be committed to any prison, guard, or custody, by her Highness
special Commandment, for any Treason or suspicion of Treason, concerning the
person of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, before any indictment of such
person so sought or intended to be set at large or liberty, as is aforesaid,
and the same conspiracies, imaginations, devices or inventions, shall by
express words, writing or other matter, or act, expressly or manifestly set
forth, utter or declare, that then every person so offending, shall incur the
penalty and forfeiture of Misprision of Treason, and that all and every Offense
and Offenses to be committed and done, as is aforesaid, shall be deemed and
taken for Misprision of Treason.

And be it also Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons at any time after the end of this present Session of Parliament shall
imagine, conspire, devise, invent, or go about, unlawfully and maliciously, to
enlarge or set at liberty, any person or persons, committed or to be committed
to any prison, guard or custody, being or which hereafter shall be induced of
any Treason in any wise, concerning the Person of our said Sovereign Lady the
Queen, and the same conspiracies, imaginations, devises, or inventions, shall
by express words, writing or other matter or act, expressly or manifestly set
forth, utter or declare, that then every such person so offending, shall be
deemed and adjudged a Felon, and suffer, lose, and forfeit, as in cases of
Felony, by the due course of the Laws of this Realm.

And be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or
persons at any time, after the end of this present Session of Parliament, shall
imagine, conspire, devise, invent, or go about unlawfully and maliciously, to
enlarge or set at liberty, any person or persons, being committed to any
prison, guard or Custody, after the same person or persons is, or shall be
attainted or convicted of any Treason in any wise concerning the Royal Person
of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, and the same conspiracies, imaginations,
devices or inventions, shall by express words, written matter, or act, as is
aforesaid, set forth, utter or declare, that then every person so offending,
shall be deemed and adjudged an High Traitor, and shall suffer, lose, and
forfeit, as in cases of High Treason by the Laws and Statutes of this Realm:
This Act was to endure during the Queen's Majesty's Life only.

In the year 1572, Camb. Annals fol. 188.

Baker's Chron. f. 347.


the Earl of Northumberland was also Executed for his Treason in the Northern
Rebellion before mentioned. But I find, that although several Persons were
apprehended for offending against 13 Eliz 2. which was made against bringing in
Bulls, Agnus Dei, etc. as private Tokens of Papal Obedience, and against
reconciling any to the Sea of Rome, yet not one was Executed till 1577, which
was almost twenty years after the Queen's Accession to the Crown.

The first that was convicted upon this Law, was one Cuthbert Main, a Priest,
Cambd. Annals, f. 224, 225
who being an obstinate Maintainer of the Pope's Power against his Princess,
was put to Death at St. Stephens Fane, commonly called Launston in Cornwel, and
one Trugion a Gentleman, that had harbored him, was turned out of his Estate,
and condemned in perpetual Imprisonment; and after him Hanse and Nelson, and
one Sherwood, all for maintaining that the Queen was a Schismatic and Heretic
and ought to be Deposed, so that from the time of making 13 Eliz. ca. 2. in
1571, to this year of 1577, fair and calm weather shone upon the Papists in
England, who, by a merciful connivance, served God according to their own way
of Worship, in their private Houses, in a manner without any Punishment, although
it were prohibited by the Law, by which a pecuniary Mulct was to be inflicted
on them; neither did the Queen in all this time offer violence to their
Consciences, nor was she easily to be induced to believe any thing amiss of the
people, much less to inflict punishments upon them, for differing in Opinion;
being wont to say, That she could believe nothing of her people, which Parents
would not believe of their Children.

And was not this Clemency and Kindness sufficient to prevail with the Papists,
to leave off their Plots and Contrivances against her and the Protestant
Religion? Were not these Laws severe enough to keep them within the bounds of
their Duty? Will neither Love allure them to Obedience, nor threatenings upon so
severe penalties, as the loss of Life and Estate, deter them from offending?
one might reasonably have expected it. Steukly 's Plot. Cambd. Annals f. 230.

Baker 's Chron. f. 354.


But instead thereof in 1578, for Invading Ireland and England both at once,
and deposing of Q. Elizabeth, (who was the strongest Bulwark of the Reformed
Religion) both the Spaniard, and Gregory the thirteenth Bishop of Rome, entered
into a Confederacy, at and by the instigation of one Thomas Steukly, a
Fugitive, herein before mentioned, but that design by the Providence of God
being defeated,

In the year 1579, one James Fitz-Morris, a Fugitive, raised a Rebellion in
Ireland, Fitz-Morris his Plot.

Camb. Annals, f. 336.


the same James, who had not long before been in a Rebellion, and was upon his
submission (having most religiously vowed his Fidelity and Obedience to the
Queen) pardoned. He having (at the earnest solicitations of Saunders, an
English Priest, and Allen an Irish one, both of them Doctors in Divinity)
gotten a little Money of the Pope; the Authority of a Legate granted to
Saunders; a consecrated Banner, and Letters of recommendation to the Spaniard;
went to Spain, and thence into Ireland; where he landed the first day of July,
with those two Romish Priests, three Ships, and a small body of men, who were
all soon dispersed, and Fitz Morris slain.

There is one story, relating to this Rebellion, that for the Cruelty of it, I
cannot let pass: As soon as the Lord Deputy had certain intelligence of
Fitz-Morris his being landed, he commanded the Earl of Desmond, and his
Brothers jointly, by Henry Davil an English Gentleman, and a stout Soldier,
and very familiar with the Desmonds, that they should forthwith assault the
Fort; which when they shifted off, as a thing full of Danger, Davil departed,
in order to obey the Deputy's Commands, and John Desmond followed after him; at
Trally, a small Town, he overtook him at his Inn, and in the dead of the night,
having corrupted his Host, broke into his Chamber, with certain Cutthroats,
having their Swords drawn, where Davil slept securely, with Arthur Carter,
Lieutenant to the Marshal of Munster, a stout old Soldier; but being awakened
with the noise, when he saw John Desmond in the Chamber with his Sword drawn,
he raised himself up, saying, what is the matter my Son? ( for so he was wont
familiarly to call him.) I will no longer be thy Son, (says he) nor shall thou
be my Father, thou shall dye; and therewithal they slew both him and Carter
that lay with him, stabbing them in many places, after that Davil's Lackey, by
interposing his naked body, had done the best he could, for a while, to defend
his Master, and had received some wounds; then he slew all Davil's Servants,
one after another, who were lodged here and there in several Chambers, and so
returning all begored with Blood, he boasted amongst the Spaniards of the
Murder: And let this (said he) be a pledge to you of my faithfulness toward
you, and the They were then engaged in a Conspiracy for the Subversion of the
Protestant Religion.

Desmond carries on the Rebellion.

Camb. Annals, f. 238, 239, 240.

Baker's Chron. f. 355.


Cause you are engaged in. This Fact Sounders commended as a sweet Sacrifice in
the sight of God. This may be a warning to all Protestants, how they enter into
any familiar Friendship with Papists, or trust them, seeing when they butcher
them they think they do God good Service, and offer up their Blood to him as an
acceptable Sacrifice, and seeing, that it is their avowed Principle, that no
Faith is to be kept with Heretics, as they esteem Protestants of all
persuasions to be.

This Rebellion ended not with John Fitz-Morris; but was, after his death,
carried on by John Desmond, and notwithstanding the Earl of Desmond had
promised Drury, then Lord Deputy, his fidelity and obedience to the Queen, and
bound himself by Oath, that both himself in person, and his would serve her
against the Rebels, yet he afterward pulled off his Vizzard, and openly went
over to the Rebels, and the Lord Deputy dying and the Council of Ireland having
made Sir William Pelham Justicer of Ireland, he admonished the Earl of Desmond*
and demanded the delivery up of Saunders, the Foreign Soldiers, and the
Castles of Carigo Foil and Asketten, but he refusing, was Proclaimed a
Traitor, and guilty of High Treason, for having dealt with Foreign Princes for
the Conquest and Destruction of his Native Country, relieved Saunders and James
Fitz-Morris Rebels, harbored the Spaniards which escaped out of the Fort at
Smerwick hanged up diverse faithful Subjects, displayed the Pope's Banner
against the Queen, and brought Foreigners into the Realm: And then the Lord
Justicer committed the prosecution of the whole War to Ormond, which he
prosecuted so vigorously, that this Desmond and his Brethren were forced to
lurk and hide their heads* yet they added so much Popish Impudence to their
former base Treachery and Perfidiousness, that they signified to the Lord
Justicer in a long Letter* that they had undertaken the protection of the
Catholic Faith ( i. e. Popery) in Ireland, and that by Authority from the
Bishop of Rome and direction of the Catholic King ( i. e. the King of Spain)
and therefore they do kindly advise him to join with them in so pious and
meritorious a Cause, for the Salvation of his own Soul? O horrid Impiety! To
make the committing Treason, Rebellion, Murder, Rapine, and all manner of
Cruelties, to be the direct way to Heaven.

Camb. Annals, f. 241, and 256. Another Conspiracy in Ireland, for the
destruction of the Protestant Religion.
Arthur Lord Gray, in the year 1580, being made Lord Deputy of Ireland, after a
great deal of blood spilt, happily suppressed that Rebellion, which he had no
sooner done, but another dangerous Conspiracy was detected and crushed in the
Bud, for diverse of Noble Families in Lemster, most of them descended of English
Blood, partly out of Affection to the Romish Religion, and partly out of hatred
against the new English, had conspired together, to surprise the Lord Deputy
with his Household, to take the Castle of Dublin at unawares (where all the
Provision for War lay) and to put the English in Ireland every man to the
Sword: And so close they were in carrying on their Conspiracy, that they never
conferred or discoursed about it more than two and two together But amongst so
many that were privy to it, it came at last to light, and was by the Execution
of a few timely prevented.

Colleges framed abroad, f^r breeding up Seminary Priests to be sent hither to
alienate the hearts of the Queens Subjects from her.

Camb. Annals. f. 244, 245. Baker's Chron. f. 356.


These Plots and Conspiracies not answering the Designs of the Papists: To the
intent that they might the more effectually carry on their Treasons and
Conspiracies for the future, in order to the Extirpation of the Protestant
Religion out of the Queen's Dominions, and the introducing Popery in its room:
They thought it very necessary, to alienate the Hearts of the Queen's Subjects
from her, by the secret and crafty insinuations of Priests and Jesuits and that
they might be furnished with enough for that end, even of the Queens own
Subjects, certain English Priests who had fled into the Netherlands for their
Treasons committed here by the procurement of the Romish Party, formed
themselves into a Collegiate Form of Government at Doway, and to these the Pope
allowed a yearly Pension: But Tumults arising in the Low Countries and the
English Fugitives being commanded by the King of Spain's Deputies to depart
from thence, other the like Colleges for the training up of the English Youth,
were erected; one at Rheimes by the Guises and another at Rome by Pope Gregory
the 13 th, which always afforded new supplies of Priests for England when the
old ones failed, whose business it was privately to spread the Seeds of Popery
here amongst us: From whence the Colleges had the name of Seminaries, and they
called Seminary Priests, who were bred up in them: In these Seminaries, amongst
other disputations it was concluded, that the Pope has such fullness of Power
by Divine Right, over the whole Christian World, both in Ecclesiastical and
Secular Matters, that by virtue thereof, it is lawful for him to Excommunicate
Kings, absolve their Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, and to deprive them
of their Kingdoms.

Out of these Seminaries, were sent forth into diverse parts of England, and
Ireland, at first, a few young men, and afterward more, according as they grew
up, who were entered over-hastily into holy Orders, and instructed in the above
mentioned Principles. They pretended only to administer the Sacraments of the
Romish Religion, and to preach to Papists; but the Queen and her Council soon
found, that they were sent over, underhand, to seduce the Subjects from their
Allegiance, and Obedience due to their Prince; to oblige them by
reconciliation, to perform the Pope's Command, to stir up intestine Rebellions,
under the Seal of Confession, and flatly to execute the Sentence of Pius V.
against the Queen; to the end, that Way might be made for the Pope, and the
Spaniard, who had designed the Conquest of England.

To these Seminaries, were sent daily out of England by the Papists, in
contempt and dispight of the Laws, great numbers of Boys, and young Men of all
sorts, and admitted into the same, making a Vow to return into England; Others
also crept secretly from thence into the Land, and more were daily expected
with the Jesuits, who at that time came first into England. This occasioned the
Queen to issue out a Proclamation. Camb. Annals, f. 245.

Collection, f. 42.


That whosovever had any Children, Wards, Kinsmen, or other Relations, in the
parts beyond the Seas, should after 10 days give in their Names to the
Ordinary, and within four Months call them home again, and when they were
returned, should forthwith give notice of the same to the said Ordinary. That
they should not directly, or indirectly supply such as refused to return with
any Money. That no man should entertain in his House, or harbor any Priests
sent forth from the aforesaid Seminaries, or Jesuits, or cherish and relieve
them, and that whoever did to the contrary, should be accounted a favourer of
Rebels, and Seditious Persons, and proceeded against according to the Laws of
the Land.

Camb. Annals, f. 246.
Before such time as this was proclaimed, the Papists pretended, that they were
sensible too late of the Inconveniences by the said Bull; and that they were
ill pleased, that ever it came forth: A defense of the same written by the said
Nicholas Sanders, they cunningly suppressed, and prohibited the Question
concerning the power of the Bishop of Rome in Excommunicating, and Deposing of
Princes, to be publicly disputed: Which notwithstanding, brake forth every day
hotter and hotter amongst them.

Robert Parsons also and Edmund Campian Englishmen, and of the Society of
Jesus, being now ready to come over to advance the Romish affairs in England,
obtained Power from Gregory the Thirteenth Bishop of Rome, for moderating that
severe Bull, Parsons and Campian sent into England by the Pope, to promote the
Popish interest here.

The Faculties themselves are Printed verbatim in English and Latin, by the L.
Burligh, in his Examination for Treason. Col. f. 12, and 13. And by Foulis in
his History, f. 337.

The Character of Parsons and Campian, Cambd. An. f. 246. Bakers Chron. f. 356.


and that in these words: Let there be humbly prayed of our most Holy Lord (
who is generally the most wicked of the whole Court of Cardinals) an
Explanation of the Bull Declaratory, set forth by Pius the V. against Elizabeth
and her adherents ( to give her the Title of Queen after she was
excommunicated, would have been to disown their own Doctrine of the Lawfulness
to depose and kill Princes) which Bull, the Catholics ( i. e. the Romish Rebels
and Traitors) do desire, may be understood in this manner, that it may always
bind Her, and the Heretics (i. e. the Protestants and their Protestants Queen)
but in no way the Catholics as matters now stand (for they were wise enough to
carry on their Cruel Designs, and knew well enough that whatever Cruelties they
used they should be commended for it, whether they had any orders for it or
not) but only hereafter when public Execution of the said Bull may be had (
they doubted not of effecting their enterprise for washing their hands in the
Blood of the Protestants); these Graces aforesaid, the Bishop has granted to
Father Robert Parsons, and Edmund Campian, who are now to take their Journey
into England, the Fourteenth day of April, 1580. in the Presence of Father
Oliver Manarcus Assistant.

This Parsons was of Somersetshire, a violent, fierce natured Man, and of
rough behavior, Campian was a Londoner, of a sweet disposition, and a well
pollish'd Man, both of them were, by Education Oxford Men, and known there to
Cambden himself, as he avers; Campian being of St. John's College, bare the
Office of Proctor of the University, in the Year 1568. and being made Deacon,
made a show of the Protestant Religion, he withdrew himself out of England,
(they can turn themselves into all shapes, to carry on their Barbarous and
Cruel Conspiracies against the Protestants, and the true Religion which they
profess: Modern Instances of this we have not a few.) Parsons was of Balliol
College, wherein he openly professed the Protestant Religion, until he was for
his loose carriage Expelled with disgrace, and went over to the Papists, (and
it has been observed by many, and that very truly, that they who go over from
the Protestant to the Popish Religion, are generally Men of very vicious and
loose Lives:) These two coming privately into England, Traveled up and down
the Country, and to Popish Gentlemen's Houses, Covertly, and in the disguised
Habits, sometimes of Soldiers, sometimes of Gentlemen, sometimes of Ministers
of the Word, and sometimes of Apparitors, diligently performing what they had
in Charge, both in word and writing: Parsons who was Constituted Superior,
being a Man of a Seditious and Turbulent Spirit, and Armed with a Confident
Boldness, tampered so far with the Papists about deposing the Queen, that some
of them ( Cambden says, he speaks upon their own Credit,) thought to have
delivered them into the Magistrates hands; Campian the more modest, yet by a
written Paper, Challenged the Ministers of the English Church to a Disputation,
and published a Neat well-pen'd Book in Latin, called, Ten Reasons in Defense
of the Doctrine of the Church of Rome: And Parsons put out another virulent
Book in English against Clark, who had soberly written against Campian's
Challenge; but to Campian's Reasons, Whitaker gave a solid Answer. Campian
himself was taken a Year after, and put to the Rack, and afterward being
brought forth to Dispute, he scarcely answered the expectation raised of him.

Neither wanted there others also of the Popish Faction ( for Religion was then
grown into faction as it was very lately here in England) who Labored Tooth
and Nail at Rome, and elsewhere in Princes Courts, to raise War against their
own Country: Yea, they published also in Print, that the Bishop of Rome and the
Spaniard had Conspired together, to Conquer England; and expose it for a Spoil
and Prey. And this they did on purpose to give Courage to their own Party, and
to terrify others from their Allegiance to their Prince and Country. This
forced a Manifesto from the Queen, Camb. Annals, f. 247.
wherein (after acknowledgment of the goodness of God toward her;) She
declares, that she had attempted nothing against any Prince, but for
preservation of her own Kingdom; nor had she Invaded the Provinces of any
other, tho she had been sundry times thereunto both provoked by Injuries, and
invited by Opportunities, that if any Prince go about to attempt ought against
her, she doubts not but to be able (by the Blessing of God) to defend her
People, and to that purpose she had Mustered her Forces, both by Sea, and Land,
and had them now in readiness against any Hostile Invasion; her faithful
Subjects she Exhorts, to continue immovable in their Allegiance and Duty
toward God and their Prince, the Minister of God, (not their absolute Supreme
Lord, to dispose of them and theirs according to will and pleasure,) the rest
who had shaken off their Love to their Country, and their Obedience to their
Prince, she commands to carry themselves modestly and peaceably, and not
provoke the severity of Justice against themselves, for she would no longer be
so imprudent, as by sparing the Bad, to prove cruel to her self and her good
Subjects.

By this Manifesto all Men may see how tender and compassionate the Queen was
to her worst Subjects, even them who had renounced their Allegiance to her, and
very hardly was she brought to put the Laws in Execution against them, although
they so justly deserved it, of which take the following account from Mr.
Cambden.

Camb. Annals f. 270.
The Queen, to take away the fear which had possessed many Minds, that Religion
would be altered, and Popery tolerated, being overcome by importunate
Entreaties, permitted, ( not furiously Commanded, as if she thirsted after
Blood) That Edmund Campian aforesaid, of the Society of Jesus, Ralph Sherwin,
Luke Kirby and Alexander Briant, Priests, should be Arraigned; who being
Indicted upon the Act for Treason made 25 Ed. 3. and charged to have compassed
and imagined the destruction of the Queen and Realm, to have adhered to the
Bishop of Rome, the Queens Enemy, to have come into England to disturb the
Peace and Quiet of the Realm, and to have raised forces to that end, were
condemned to dye; and persisting obstinately to defend the Popes Authority
against the Queen, were Executed; And not for professing the Popish Religion,
or exercising it barely, as some of the Romanists and a few ignorant
Protestants pretend: For Campian, after he was condemned, being asked first,
whether Queen Elizabeth were a true and lawful Queen? refused to answer, then
whether he would take part with the Queen, or the Pope if he should send Forces
against the Queen? he openly professed, and testified under his hand, that he
would stand for the Pope. Afterward some others also were Executed for the
same Reasons, whereas in full ten Years time after the Northern Rebellion, But
five Papists put to death in ten Years.
there had been no more then five Papists put to death.

But such now were the times, that the Queen ( who never was of opinion that
Men's Consciences were to be forced) complained many times, that she was driven
of necessity, to take these Courses, unless she would suffer the ruin of her
self and her Subjects, upon some Men's pretense of Conscience and the Catholic
Religion ( i. e. the Abbey Lands and a Cardinals Cap) yet for the greater part
of these silly Priests, she did not at all believe them guilty of Plotting the
destruction of their Country; but their Superiors were they, she held, Camb.
Annals f. 271.

Lord Burleigh says the same thing, Collection. f. 28.


to be the Instruments of this villainy; for these inferior Emissaries committed
the full and free disposure of themselves, to their, Superiors: And when those
of the Superiors that were then and afterward taken, were asked, whether by
the Authority of the Bull of Pius V. Bishop of Rome, the Subjects were so
absolved from their Oath of Allegiance toward the Queen, that they might take
up Arms against her? whether they thought her to be a lawful Queen? whether
they would subscribe to Saunders and Bristow's opinion, concerning the
Authority of that Bull? whether, if the Bishop of Rome should wage War against
the Queen, they would join with her or him? they answered, some of them so
ambiguously, some so resolutely, and some by prevarication or silence shifted
off the matter, in such a manner, that diverse ingenious Papists (which are rare
to find in that Age) began to suspect they fostered some treacherous
disloyalty; and John Bishop, a Man otherwise devoted to the Bishop of Rome,
wrote against them, and solidly proved, that that Constitution obtruded under
the Name of the Lateran Council, upon which the whole Authority of absolving
Subjects from their Allegiance, and deposing Princes is founded, is no other,
then a Decree of Innocent the III. and was never admitted in England; yea that
the said Council was no Council at all, nor was it at all there decreed by the
Fathers. But of the Priests themselves, owning all this I shall give a further
account hereafter.

Camb. Annals. f. 272.
Suspicions were daily increased, by the great number of Priests, creeping more
and more into England, who privately felt the Minds of Men, spread abroad, that
Princes Excommunicate were to be deposed (notwithstanding their former
prohibition of Preaching that Doctrine) and whispered in Corners, The Popish
Terets spread abroad.
that such Princes as professed not the Romish Religion had forfeited their
Regal Title and Authority; that those who had taken holy Orders, were by a
certain Ecclesiastical privilege, exempted from all jurisdiction of Princes;
and not bound by their Laws; nor ought they to reverence, or regard their
Majesty, that the Bishop of Rome has supreme Authority, and absolute Power
over the whole World, yea in Temporal Matters; that the Magistrates of England
were no lawful Magistrates; and therefore not to be accounted for Magistrates;
yea, that whatsoever was done by the Queens authority, since the time the Bull
declaratory of Pius V. was published against her, was by the Laws of God and
Man, altogether void; and to be esteemed as of no validity; and some of them
were not ashamed to own, that they were returned into England with no other
intent, then by reconciling Men at Confession, to absolve every one
particularly from all his Oaths of Allegiance and Obedience to the Queen, just
as the said Bull did absolve them all at once, and in general. And this seemed
the easier to be effected, because they promised withal absolution, from all
Mortal sins; and the safer, because it was pronounced more closely, and under
the Seal of Confession.

On the 16th day of January 1580. The Parliament, Sir Simon D' Ewes his Journal
of the House of Commons. p. 266.
being the time to which the same had been Prorogued, and the 25th day of
January Sr. Walter Mildmay made an excellent Speech, a great part of which,
because it will give a confirmation, to what has been before said, and evince
the reasonableness of the Law, that was made in that Session of Parliament,
against the Papists, I have here inserted, as it is in Sir Simon D. Ewes his
Journal, published by Paul Bows Esquire.

The Principle Cause of our Assembly here, Sir Walter Mildmay 's Speech.

Sir Simon D' Ewes. f. 284.


being to consult of Matters that do concern the Realm, I have thought good
with your Patience, to remember you of such things, as for the weight and
necessity of them, I take to be worthy of your consideration, wherein I mean to
note unto you, what I have conceived; first of the present state we be in, next
of the Dangers we may justly be in doubt of; And lastly, what provision ought
to be made in time to prevent or resist them; these showed as briefly as the
Matter will suffer, I leave to your Judgment to proceed further as you shall
find it Expedient.

That our most Gracious Queen, did at her first Entry loosen us from the Yoke
of Rome, and did Restore unto this Realm the most pure and holy Religion of the
Gospel, which for a time was overshaddowed with Popery, is known of all the
World, and felt of us to our singular Comfort. But from hence as from the Root,
has sprung that implacable Malice of the Pope, and his Confederates against
her, whereby they have and do not seek only to trouble, but if they could, to
bring the Realm again into a Thraldom; the rather for that, they hold this as a
firm and settled opinion, that England is the only settled Monarchy that most
does maintain and countenance Religion, being the chief Sanctuary for the
afflicted Members of the Church, that fly thither from the Tyranny of Rome, as
Men being in danger of Shipwreck, do from a raging and tempestuous Sea to a
calm and quiet Haven. This being so, what has not the Pope assayed to annoy
the Queen and her State, thereby as he thinks to remove this great obstacle,
that stands between him and the overflowing of the World again Popery, for
the proof whereof these may suffice.

The Northern Rebellion stirred up by the Pope, and the Quarrel for Popery.
Note, These things were spoke soon after they happened whilst they were fresh
in memory.


The Maintenance sithence of those Rebels and other Fugitives.

The Publishing of a most Impudent, Blasphemous and Malicious Bull against our
most rightful Queen.

The Invasion into Ireland by James, Fitz Morris, with the obstinacy of some
English Rebels.

The raising of a dangerous Rebellion in Ireland, by the Earl of Desmond and
others, intending thereby to make a general Revolt of all the whole Realm.

The late Invasion of Strangers into Ireland, and their fortifying it.

The Pope turned thus the Venom of his Curses, the Pens of his malicious
Parasites into Men of War and Weapons, to win that by force, which otherwise he
could not do. And though all these are said to be done by the Pope, and in his
Name; yet who sees not, that they be maintained under hand by some Princes his
Confederates? And if any Man be in doubt of that, let him but note from whence
the last Invasion into Ireland came, of what Country the Ships, and of what
Nation the most part of the Soldiers were, and by direction of whose Ministers
they received their Victuals and Furniture.

For the Pope of himself at this present is far unable to make War upon any
Prince of that Estate which Her Majesty is of; having lost as you know many
years by the Preaching of the Gospel, those infinite Revenues, which he was
wont to have out of England, Scotland, Germany, Switzerland, Denmark and
others, and now out of France and the Low Countries, so as we are to think that
his Name only is used, and all or the most part of the Charge born by others.

The Queen nevertheless, by the Almighty Power of God, stands fast, maugre
the Pope and all his Friends; having hitherto resisted all Attempts against
her, to her great Honor and their Shame, as the Rebellion in the North
suppressed without Effusion of Blood, wherein her Majesty may say as Caesar
did, Veni, Vidi, Vici, as expedite and as honorable was the Victory that God
did give her, by the Diligence and Valor of those Noble Men that had the
conducting thereof. The enterprise of James Fitz Morris defeated and himself
slain.

The Italians pulled out by the Ears at Smirwick in Ireland, and cut in pieces,
by the notable Service of a Noble Captain, and valiant Soldiers.

Neither these nor any other Threatenings or Fears of Danger, has or does make
her to stagger or relent in the Cause of Religion, but like a constant
Christian Princess, she still holds fast the Profession of the Gospel, that
has so long upholden her, and made us to live in Peace, twenty two years and
more under her most gracious Government, free from those Troubles that our
Neighbors have felt; so as this now seems to be our present State, a
Blessed, Peaceable, and happy Time, for the which we are most bound to God, and
to pray unto him for the continuance thereof.

But yet notwithstanding, seeing our Enemies sleep not, it behooves us not to
be careless, as tho all were past, but rather to think that there is but a
piece of the Storm over, and that the greater part of the Tempest remains
behind, and is like to fall upon us, by the Malice of the Pope, the most
capital Enemy of the Queen and of this State, the Determinations of the
Councils of Trent, and the Combinations of the Pope with other Monarchies and
Princes devoted unto Rome, assuring our selves, That if their Powers be
answerable to their Wills, this Realm shall find at their Hands, all the
Miseries and Extremities that they can bring upon it. And though by the late
good Success, which God has given in Ireland, these lewd and malicious
Enterprises seem for a time to be as it were at a stand; yet let us be assured,
that neither their Attempts upon Ireland, neither the Mischief intended against
England, will cease thus; but if they find us negligent, they will be ready
with greater Forces then have been yet seen. The certain Determination which
the Pope and his combined Friends have to root out the Religion of the Gospel
in all Places, and to begin here as their greatest Impediment, is Cause
sufficient to make us the more vigilant, and to have a wary Eye to their Doings
and Proceedings, how smoothly soever they speak or dissemble their Friendships
for the time, for let us think surely, that they have joined Hands together
against us, and if they can, they will procure the Sparks of the Flames that
have been so terrible in other Countries, to fly over into England, and to
kindle as great a Fire here. And as the Pope by open Hostility, as you see,
has showed himself against her Majesty, so the better to answer in time the
Purposes that he has set down in the mean Season, till they may come to
Ripeness, he has and does by secret Practices within the Realm, leaving
nothing unprovided, emboldning many undutiful Subjects to stand fast in their
Disobedience to her Majesty and her Laws. For albeit, the pure Religion of the
Gospel has had a free Course, and has been freely preached now many Years
within this Realm, by the Protection of Her Majesty's most Christian
Government; yet such have been the Practices of the Pope and his secret
Ministers, as the obstinate and stiff-necked Papist is so far from being
reformed, as he has gotten Stomach to go backward, and to show his
Disobedience, not only in arrogant Words, but also in contemptuous Deeds.

To confirm them herein, and to increase their Number, you see how the Pope
has and does comfort their hollow, Hearts with Absolutions, Dispensations,
Reconciliations, and such other things of Rome. You see how lately he has sent
hither a sort of Hypocrites, naming themselves Jesuits, a Rabble of Vagrant
Friars, newly sprung up, and running through the World, to trouble the Church
of God; whose principal Errand, is by creeping into the Houses of Men of
Behavior and Reputation, not only to corrupt the Realm with false Doctrine,
but also under that Pretense, to stir up Sedition, to the Peril of Her Majesty
and her good Subjects. How these Practices of the Pope have wrought in the
disobedient Subjects of this Land, is both evident and lamentable to consider;
for such Impressions has the Estimation of the Popes Authority made in them,
as not only those, which from the Beginning have refused to obey, but many,
yea, very many of these, who diverse years together, did yield and conform
themselves in their open Accounts, since the Decrees of that unholy Council of
Trent, and since the publishing and denouncing of that Blasphemous Bull against
Her Majesty, and since those secret Absolutions and Reconciliations, and the
swarming hither of a number of Popish Priests, and Monkish Jesuits, have, and
do utterly refuse to be of our Church, or to resort unto our Preaching and
Prayers. The sequel whereof must needs prove dangerous to the whole State of
the Commonwealth.

By this you see what Cause we have justly to doubt great Mischief threatened to
this Realm, and therewith you may easily see also, how far the preventing and
withstanding of the same, it behooveth her Majesty, not only to provide in
time, sufficient Laws for the continuing of this Peaceable Government, but also
to be ready with Forces to repress all Attempts that may be enterprised, either
by Enemies abroad, or by evil Subjects at home.

What Difference there is between the Popes Persecuting Church, and this The
Church of England.
Mild Church of the Gospel, has been seen in all Ages, and especially in the
late Government, compared with the merciful time of Her Majesty's Reign. The
Continuance of which Clemency, is also to be wished, so far as may stand with
Gods Honor, and the Safety of the Realm. But when by long proof, we find that
this favorable and gentle Manner of Dealing with the Disobeyers and Contemners
of Religion, to win them by fair Means, if it were possible, has done no good,
but has bred in them a more arrogant and contemptuous Spirit, so as they have
not only presumed to disobey the Laws and Orders of the Realm, but also to
accept from Rome secret Absolutions, Reconciliations and such like; and that by
the Hands of lewd Runnagates, Priests and Jesuits, harboring and entertaining
them even in their Houses, thereby showing an Obedience to the Pope, by their
Directions; also nourishing and training up their Children and Kinsfolks, not
only at home, but also abroad in the Seminaries of Popery; Now, I say, it is
time for us to look more narrowly and strictly to them, least as they be
corrupt, so they prove dangerous Members to many born within the Entrails of
our Commonwealth.

And seeing that the Lenity of the Time, and the Mildness of the Laws
heretofore made, are no small Cause of their arrogant Disobedience, it is
necessary that we make a Provision of Laws, more strict, and more severe, to
constrain them to yield their open Obedience, at the least, to her Majesty, in
Causes of Religion, and not to live as they lift, to the perilous Example of
others, and to the encouraging of their own evil affected Minds; but if they
will needs submit themselves to the Benedictions of the Pope, they may feel how
little his Curses can hurt us, and how little his Blessings can save them from
that Punishment, which we are able to lay upon them; letting them also find,
how dangerous it shall be for them to deal with the Pope, or any thing of his,
or with those Romish Priests and Jesuits; and therewith, also how perilous it
shall be for those Seditious Runnagates to enter into the Land, to draw away
from Her Majesty that Obedience, which by the Laws of God and Man, are due unto
her.

This then is one of the Provisions which we ought to take care of in this
Council, whereby we may both enjoy still that happy Peace we live in, and the
Pope take the less Boldness to trouble us, by any Favor he shall find here.

Therefore, seeing the Malice of the Pope and his Confederates are so notorious
unto us, and seeing the Dangers be so great, so evident, and so imminent, and
seeing that Preparations to withstand them, cannot be made without support of
the Realm, and seeing that our Duty to God, our Queen and Country, and the
Necessity that hangs upon our own Safeguards, be reason sufficient to
persuade us; let us think upon these Matters as the Weight of them deserves,
and so provide in time, both by Laws to restrain and correct the evil affected
Subjects, and by Provision of that which shall be requisite for the
Maintenance of Forces, as our Enemies finding our Minds so willing, and our
Hands so ready, to keep in order our Country, and to furnish her Majesty with
all that shall be necessary, may either be discouraged to attempt any thing
against us, or if they do, they may find such Resistance, as shall bring
Confusion to themselves, Honor to our most Gracious Queen, and Safety to all
of us.

Mr. Norton seconding the Motion, it was referred to a Committee to prepare
Bills.

And that Session there was an Act of Parliament made, that is entitled, 23
Eliz. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. 2. part f. 243.
An Act to retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due Obedience; which
Act recites, That, where since the making of the 13th. of the Queen, Ca. 2.
diverse evil affected Persons have promised, contrary to the meaning of the said
Statutes, by other means then by Bulls, or Instruments written or printed, to
withdraw diverse the Queens Majesty's Subjects from their natural Obedience to
Her Majesty, and to obey the usurped Authority of Rome, and in respect of the
same, to persuade great Numbers to withdraw their due Obedience to Her
Majesty's Laws, established for the due Service of Almighty God.

It is thereby enacted, that they should be guilty of High Treason, Treason in
Reconciler and Reconciled to the Church of Rome.
who should diswade the Subjects from their Obedience to their Prince, and from
the Religion established in England, or should reconcile them to the Church of
Rome; as also those who should be diswaded or reconciled; those also who should
say Mass, were to be fined 200 Marks, and to suffer Imprisonment for a Year, or
longer, if they paid not the Money; they who should be wittingly and willingly
present at Mass, were to be fined 100 Marks, and to suffer Imprisonment
likewise for a Year; and they who refused to frequent Divine Service, are to
forfeit 20 Pounds a Month: but there must in every Case a legal Conviction
precede.

From the History of the Papists Conspiracies, and the Queens Carriage toward
them, during these last ten Years, whereof I have given an Account, I cannot
but observe.

1. That the Papists are a most perverse and disingenuous Generation of Men,
who never have lived, ( nor is it to be believed ever will) in Obedience to any
Prince who is not of their own Religion.

2. That, notwithstanding their many Treasons and Rebellions in England and
Ireland against Queen Elizabeth, yet, in ten years time, there were not above
five executed upon any of the Penal Laws made against them; and that she was
hardly prevailed upon to execute any of them, although for the most apparent
Treason; and would not have yielded, but that it appeared necessary, for the
Preservation of her self, her Protestant Subjects, and the Protestant Religion.

3. That therefore the Penal Laws were not made so much with design to offend
the Papists, as to defend the Queen and her Government from the Treasons,
Rebellions, Outrages and Violences every where committed by the Papists,
stirred up and egged on by the Seminary Priests, Jesuits, and sent hither for
that very Purpose.

4. That notwithstanding all their Plots and Contrivances, there was no
restraint upon their exercising their Religion in their own private Families;
nor no Prohibitions of saying or hearing Mass, till this last Act of Parliament
was made; which was extorted from the State by their horrid Abuse of their
former Liberty.

So that he that denies the Reasonableness of those Penal Laws against Papists,
must (one would think) offer Violence to his own Reason.

But yet least the Papists should object, and any weak Protestant think, with
too great Color of Reason, that these Facts are the Relation of Protestant
Historians, who will be sure to write all things with the greatest
plausibleness and show of Reason and Justice on their own side, and will be
sure to blacken and villifie the Papists as much as they are able, although
they have never so little reason so to do.

I shall, to back what I have related from our own Historians, and to convince
all mankind that it is true, subjoyn what the Seeular Priests themselves, in
their important Considerations have owned, was the true ground and reason of
making this Act of Parliament, of 23 Eliz. Cap. 1. and because the Papists
shall not say I belly, mis-construe or misrepresent them, take it in their own
Words.

Col. f. 39. The Secular Priests Confession.

Of the Pope the Spaniard and Duke of Norfolk's Plot.

Steukley's Plot.


Furthermore, about the coming out of the said Book of Mr. Saunders, (they had
been in the Paragraph before complaining of Mr. Saunders his Writing a Book, De
visibili Monarchia, whereby he justified the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus, and the
Rebellion in the North, and many other such like things) the whole Plots before
mentioned of the Pope, and the King of Spain, with the Duke of Norfolk, for the
Disinheritance of her Majesty, and other intended Mischiefs, fell out to be
fully disclosed; afterward, within some four or five years, it was also
commonly known to the Realm, what Attempts were in hand by Mr. Steukley
(assisted with Mr. Saunders, and other Catholics, both English, Irish and
Italians) for an Enterprise by force in Ireland, under a pretense to advance
the Catholic Religion, which for that time (through some Defect) succeeding
not, the Pope himself, The Popes Invading Ireland in 1579.
in the Year 1579. (abused still by false Pretenses) did set forward that
Course, and sending thither certain Forces, Mr. Saunders (too much Jesuited)
did thrust himself in Person into that Action, as a chief Ringleader, and to
persuade the Catholics, when he should come into Ireland, to join with the
Popes said Forces, for the better assisting certain Rebels, then in Arms
against their Sovereign. Now whilst these Practices were in hand in Ireland,
The Queen Excommunicated by Gregory 13th.
Gregory the Thirteenth renews the said Bull of Pius Quintus, and denounces
her Majesty to be excommunicated, with Intimations of all other particulars in
the former Bull mentioned, which was procured (we doubt not) by Surreptions,
the false Jesuits (our Countrymen) daring to attempt any thing, by untrue
Suggestions, and any lewd Surmises that may serve their turns. This Stratagem
accomplished, and ground laid, whereupon they imagined to work great Matters:
these good Fathers (as the Devil would have it) came into England, and intruded
themselves into our Harvest, being the Men in our Consciences (we mean both
them and others of that Society, with some of their Adherents) who have been
the chief Instruments of all the Mischiefs that have been intended against her
Majesty, since the beginning of her Reign, and of the Miseries which we, or any
other Catholics, have upon these Occasions sustained. Their first repair
hither, was Anno 1580. when the Realm of Ireland was in great Combustion,
Parsons and Campians coming into England in 1580.
and then they entered ( viz. Mr. Campian the Subject, and Mr. Parsons the
Provincial) like a Tempest, with sundry such great Brags and Challenges, as
diverse of the gravest Clergy then living in England (Dr. Watson, Bishop of
Lincoln, and others) did greatly dislike them, and plainly foretold, that (as
things then stood) their Proceedings after that fashion, would certainly urge
the State to make some sharp Laws, which should not only touch them, but
likewise all others, both Priests and Catholics, upon their Arrival; and after
these brags, Mr. Parsons presently fell to his Jesuitical Courses; and so
be-laboured both himself and others in matters of State, how he might set her
Majesty's Crown upon another Head (as appears by a letter of his own to a
certain Earl,) that the Catholics themselves threatened to deliver him into the
hands of the Civil Magistrate, except he desisted from such kind of practices.

In these tumultuous and rebellious proceedings by sundry Catholics, both in
England and Ireland, it could not be expected, but that the Queen and the State
would be greatly incensed with indignation against us. We had (some of us)
greatly approved the said Rebellion, highly extolled the Rebels, and pitifully
bewailed their Ruin and Overthrow. Many of our affections were knit to the
Spaniards; and for our Obedience to the Pope, we all do profess it. The
attempts both of the Pope and Spaniard failing in England; his Holiness as a
temporal Prince, The Popes Banner displayed in Ireland to depose the Queen.
displayed his Banner in Ireland. This Plot was to deprive Her Highness first
from that Kingdom (if they could) and then by degrees to depose her from this.
In all these Plots, none were more forward then many of us that were Priests:
The Layity, if we had opposed our selves to these designments, would out of
doubt) have been overruled by us. How many of our Calling were addicted to
these Courses the State knew not. In which Case (the premises discreetly
considered) there is no King, or Prince in the World, disgusting the Sea of
Rome; and having either force or Metal in him, The Queen Vindicated and
commended.
that would have endured us, if possible he could have been revenged, but
rather (as we think) have utterly rooted us out of his Territories, as
Traitors, and Rebels both to him and his Country. And therefore we may rejoice
unfeignedly, that God has blessed this Kingdom with so gracious and merciful a
Sovereign, who has not dealt, in this sort with us. Assuredly if she were a
Catholic, she might be accounted the Mirror of the World; but as she is, both
we and all other Catholics, her natural Subjects, deserve no longer to live,
then we hereafter shall Honor her from our Hearts, obey her in all things (so
far as possibly we may) pray for her Prosperous Reign and long Life, and to our
Powers, defend and Protect, both her and our Country against any whatsoever,
that shall by force of Arms attempt to damnifie either of them; for in the said
Garboils, and very undutiful Proceedings; how has her Highness dealt with us?
From the time of the said Rebellion and Parliament; The Papists themselves
confess not above twelve Executed in ten years.
there were few above twelve, that in ten Years, had been Executed for their
Consciences (as we hold) although our Adversaries say for Treason, and of those
twelve, some parhaps can hardly be drawn within our Account, having been
tainted with matters of Rebellion. The most of the said number were Seminary
Priests, who if they had come over with the like intents, that some others have
done, might very worthily have been used as they were: But in our Consciences;
nay, some of us do know it, that they were far from those Seditious humors;
being Men that intended nothing else then simply the good of our Country; and
the Conversion of Souls. Marry, to say the Truth, as we have Confessed before,
how could either her Majesty or the State, know so much. They had great Cause,
as politic Persons, to suspect the worst.

Besides to the further Honor of Her Majesty we may not Omit, that the States
of the whole Realm Assembled in Parliament, Anno 1576. Were pleased to pass us
over, and made no Laws at that time against us: The Ancient Prisoners that had
been restrained more narrowly in the Year 1570. were (notwithstanding the said
Enterprises in Ireland) again restored to their former Liberty, to continue
with their Friends as they had done before; such as were not suspected to have
been Dealers or Abettors, in the said Treasonable Accounts, were used with that
humanity, which could not well be expected. But when the Jesuits were come, and
that the State had notice of the said Excommunication, there was then within a
while great alteration; for such were the Jesuits proceedings, and with so
great boldness, as tho all had been theirs, and that the State should presently
have been changed.

Her Majesty had seen what followed in her Kingdom upon the first
Excommunication, and was therefore in all worldly Policy to prevent the like by
the second. The Jealousy also of the State was much increased by Mr. Sherwin's
answer upon his Examination, The Jesuits indirect answering of plain Questions.
above Eight Months before the Apprehension of Mr. Campian: For being asked,
whether the Queen was his lawful Sovereign, notwithstanding any Sentence of the
Popes? he prayed that no such Question might be demanded of him, and would not
further thereunto Answer. Two or three other Questions much to the like effect,
were likewise propounded unto him, which he also refused to Answer. Matters now
sorting on this fashion, there was a greater restraint of Catholics, then at
any time before, many both Priests and Gentlemen were sent into the Isle of
Ely, and other places, there to be more safely kept and looked unto.

The Queen's Proclamation upon the coming over of the Jesuits and Seminary
Priests. This is a Mistake, for the Law made by this Parliament was 23. Eliz.
Cap. 1. that made it Treason in converter and converted to the Church of Rome,
and the Law here mentioned is 27. Eliz. Cap. 2.
In January following, 1581. (according to the general Computation) a
Proclamation was made for the Calling home of Her Majesty's Subjects beyond the
Seas, (such especially as were trained up in the Seminaries) pretending that
they Learned little there, but disloyalty; and that none after that time should
harbor or relieve them, with sundry other Points of hard intendment toward us.
The same Month also a Parliament ensued; wherein a Law was made agreeable in
effect to the said Proclamation: But with a more severe punishment annexed, for
it was a Penalty of Death, for any Jesuit or Seminary Priest to repair into
England, and for any to receive or entertain them, which fell out according to
Bishop Watsons former Speeches or prediction, what mischiefs the Jesuits would
bring upon us* We could here as well as some others have done, show our dislike
with some bitterness of the said Law and Penalty. But to what purpose should we
do so? It had been a good Point of Wisdom in two of three Persons, that have
taken that course to have been silent, and rather to have thought by gentleness
and sweet Carriage of themselves, to have prevented the more sharp Execution of
that Law; then by exclaiming against it, when it was too late; to have provoked
the State to a greater severity against us. And to confess something to our
disadvantage, and to excuse the said Parliament. If all the Seminary Priests
then in England, or which should after that tim^ have come hither, had been of
Mr. Morton, and Mr. Saunders his mind before mentioned (when the first
Excommunication came out) or of Mr. Saunders his second resolution (being then
in Arms against Her Majesty in Ireland) or of Mr. Parsons* The Parliament
excused.
Traitorous disposition both to our Queen and Country: The said Laws (no doubt)
had carried with them a far greater show of Justice. But that was the Error of
the State; and yet not altogether (for ought they knew) improbable, those times
being so full of many dangerous designments and Jesuitical practices.

In this Year, also diverse other things fell out unhappily toward us poor
Priests, and other the graver sort of Catholics, who had all of us single
Hearts, and disliked (no man more) all such factious enterprises: For
notwithstanding the said Proclamation and Law, Heywoods Practices.
Mr. Heywood a Jesuit came then into England, and took so much upon him, that
Father Parsons fell out exceedingly with him, and a great trouble grew amongst
Catholics, by their Brablings and Quarrels. A Synod was held by him the said
Mr. Heywood, and sundry Ancient Customs were therein Abrogated, to the offense
of very many. Campian answered as Sherwin did.
These Courses being understood (after a sort) by the State; the Catholics and
Priests in Norfolk felt the smart of it. This Summer, also in July, Mr. Campian
and other Priests were apprehended, whose Answers upon their Examinations,
agreeing in effect with Mr. Sherwins before mentioned, did greatly incense the
State, for, amongst other Questions that were propounded unto them, this being
one, viz. if the Pope do by his Bull, or Sentence pronounce, Her Majesty to be
deprived, and no Lawful Queen, The Question propounded to Campian and others.
and her Subjects to be discharged of their Allegiance and Obedience unto Her;
and after the Pope or any other by his Appointment and Authority do Invade this
Realm, which part would you take, or which part ought a good Subject of England
to take? some Answered, that when the Case should happen, they would then take
Council, what were best for them to do: Another, that when that Case should
happen, he would Answer and not before: Another, that for the present he was
not resolved, what to do in such a Case: Another, that when the Case happens,
then he will Answer: Another, that if such deprivation and Invasion should be
made, for any Matter of his Faith, he thinks he were then bound, to take part
with the Pope.

Now, what King in the World, being in doubt to be invaded by his Enemies, and
fearing that some of his own Subjects were by indirect means drawn, rather to
adhere to them then to himself, would not make the best Trial of them he could
for his better satisfaction, whom he might trust to? In which Trial, if he
found any, that either should make doubtful Answers, or peremptorily affirm,
that (as the Case stood betwixt him and his Enemies) they would leave him their
Prince and take part with them; might he not justly repute them for Traitors,
and deal with them accordingly; sure we are, that no King or Prince in
Christendom, would like or tolerate any such Subjects within their Dominions,
if possibly they could be rid of them.

Thus much the secular Priests themselves Confess; and certainly then, it is not
to be denied, but they own all the Treasons and Villainies that the Protestants
charge upon the Papists, only they would fain excuse themselves, and the grave
sort of Catholics from having any hand in them; And at the same time, they
justify the State in their procedure against them; because they have a Color
of reason to believe them all alike, and know not but they are so.

But may the Papists say, tho the States might have reason, to make it a
Capital offense, to reconcile any of the Subjects of England to the Sea of
Rome, yet it seems hard, to make a Man a Traitor, for staying in, or if a Man
be out, returning to his Native Country; which 27 th Eliz. cap. 2. does, which
Objections will be sufficiciently answered, by the following Account of their
Practices in the Queens Dominions, from the twenty third year of her Reign to
the twenty seventh.

The Papists had Writ so much against the Queen, and other Excommunicate
Princes, that diverse, who had the Popes power in Esteem, were perfectly drawn
from their obedience; and, amongst others, in the Year 1583 one Somervil,
Somervils Conspiracy. Camb. Annals. f. 289.

Foulis Hist. l. 7. cap. 4. f. 338. Bakers Chron. f. 361.


who went to the Queens Court, and breathing nothing but Blood, against the
Protestants, furiously set upon one or two, by the way, with his drawn Sword,
and being apprehended, Confessed that he designed to have killed the Queen with
his own hands.

One Edward Arden, Somervil's Wives Father, his own Wife, Somervil's Wife, and
one Hall a Priest, were Arraigned, and Condemned for this Conspiracy. Somervil
was three days after found strangled in Prison; Arden was hanged and Quartered:
But so merciful was the Queen, that she spared the Women, and the Priest. This
unfortunate Gentleman Somervil was drawn into all this, by the cunning of a
Priest, and cast by his Evidence, says Mr. Cambden.

In the Year 1584. Francis Throgmorton eldest Son of John Throgmorton, a
Justice of Peace in Cheshire, Francis Throgmorton's Conspiracy.

Camb. Annals. f. 294.298. Bakers Chron. f. 362.


was Clapped up, for being in a Conspiracy, to bring in an Army of Foreigners,
and Deposing the Queen. And no sooner was he Committed to Custody, and had
Confessed some things; But Thomas Lord Paget, and Charles Arundel a Courtier,
who joined with him in the Conspiracy, privily fled the Land, and withdrew
themselves into France: And Mendoza the Spanish Ambassador (who was likewise
engaged in the same Design) being greatly reprehended for it, secretly Crossed
the Seas into France.

Throgmorton Confessed the Fact, and afterward denied it, and after that, cast
himself upon the Queen's Mercy, and in writing Confessed the same again at
large; But at the Gallows, pretended to deny it again, he being executed, and
the others fled, that Conspiracy came to nothing.

Soon after this, there was a further Discovery of the design of the Pope, the
Spaniard, Camb. Annals. f. 299. Foulis Hist. l. 7. cap. 5. f. 345.

The Earl of Arundel and Northumberland were engaged. Camb. Annals. f. 310,
311. there you will see the design was for delivering the Queen of Scots for
the Conquering of England, and the destruction of the Protestant Religion.


and the Guises, for invading England, which was Discovered in this manner. One
Chreighton a Scotch-man, of the Society of Jesus, passing into Scotland, and
being taken by some Netherland Pirates, tore certain Papers in pieces, the torn
pieces being thrown over board, were by the Wind, blown back again, and fell by
chance into the Ship, not without a Miracle, as Chreighton himself said, and
Sir Willam Wade the Clerk of the Council, by putting together these torn pieces
of Paper, with much pains, and singular Dexterity, discovered the Design.

Their spite was all at the Queen; and the better to procure her ruin, Martins
Book against the Queen.

Foulis Hist. l. 7. cap. 4. f. 338.


there was a little Book composed, and called a Treatise of Schism, which
amongst other things exhorted the Women at Court to Act the same against the
Queen, as Judith had done, with Commendation against Holosernes. The Author of
this pernicious Pamphlet was one Gregory Martin, formerly of St. John's College
in Oxford, and Contemporary with Campian. The Duke of Norfolk made him Tutor to
his eldest Son, and indeed his Learning was noted, being a good Linguist, and
one who had read much, but in his writing he was very passionate, and so
sometimes inconsiderate.

One Carter Prints Martins Book. Concertat. Eccles. Cathol. Angl. part. 2. f.
127. etc. Ruston de Schism. Angl. l. 3.
William Carter, who had formerly been Amanuensis to Dr. Harpesfield ( one of
Bishop Bonners Creatures,) and was now the chief Printer for the Romanists,
keeping two Presses at their Devotion, gets this Book commended by Allen, and
Prints above a thousand, for which he is tried, confesses the Printing it,
vindicateth all is contained in it, is condemned and executed, and has the
Honor to be registered amongst their Martyrs.

By reason of these Treasons before mentioned, as also upon occasion of Rumors
from all parts, that great Dangers were at hand, and threatened to prevent the
wicked Designs, The Subjects of England Associate.
and Treacherous Practices of the Papists, and to provide for the Queens
safety, upon which the Welfare both of the Realm and Religion depended, many
Men of all Degrees and Conditions throughout England, by Leicesters means, and
out of their own public Care and Love, whilst they stood not in Fear of her,
but were full of Fear for her, bound themselves in an Association by mutual
Vows, Subscriptions, and Seals, to prosecute to the Death, as far as lay in
their Power, all those that should Attempt any thing against the Queen.

Upon which, the Parliament meeting on Monday 23 d. Day of November, 27 El. A
Bill was in this Sessions brought into the House of Commons, for Provision to
be made for the Surety of the Queens Majesty's Royal Person, and the
continuance of the Realm in peace, and for confirming the said Association.

There was also, in this Session of Parliament, another Bill brought into the
House of Commons, against Jesuits, Seminary Priests and other disobedient
Persons; and one William Parrey, by Nation, a Welshman, born of obscure
Parentage, and of mean Estate, by Title, a Doctor of the Law, (though but
indifferently Learned) a Man exceeding proud; Camb. Annals f. 305.

D' Ewes his Journal f. 340, 341, 342.

Bakers Cron. f. 364.

Parry's contempt to the House of Commons.


when this Bill was read the third time, (which was December. the 17th 1584. and
with little or no Argument passed the House) in very violent Terms, spoke
directly against the whole Bill, standing up for the Jesuits, and pleading that
the said Law svoured of Treasons, was full of blood, danger, despair and
terror, or dread to the English Subjects of this Realm, but refused to give his
Reasons to the House, or any other but the Queen; for which he was committed to
the Sergeants Custody, till the House considered of his Crime; and being called
in again, and he persisting in his contempt: It was resolved, that for that he
did speak to the Bill, and gave his Neggative voice so directly and
undutifully, and in contempt of the House, would not show his Reasons for the
same, being against the ancient Orders and Usage of that High Court, and not
for that he said he would show them only to be discovered to her Majesty, he
should be committed to the Sergeants Ward, till the Matter should be farther
Examined. On the 18th of December the Queen sent a Message to the House,
approving and commending what they had done in this matter, and letting them
know, that Doctor Parry had been examined, and made a discovery, partly to the
satisfaction of her Majesty, and therefore desired, that upon his humble
submission, and acknowledgement of his fault, he might be dispensed with, which
was accordingly done. But Feb. the 18th (being in the Tower for Treason) was
disabled from being longer a Member of the House of Commons.

Parry's Treasonable Conspiracy for taking away the Queens Life.

Camb. Annals. f. 306.

Foulis Hist. l. 7. ca. 4. f. 338. D' Ewes Journal. f. 350.


This very Parry, when he got to be Parliament man was a Papist, and afterward
accused by Edmond Nevil (who claimed the Inheritance of Charles Nevil, [late
Earl of Westmorland, one of the Ringleaders in the forementioned Plot in the
North, who a little before ended his Life, in a Miserable Exile,] and the Title
of Lord Latimer as next Heir Male) to have been engaged in a secret design, for
taking away the Queens Life.

This Parry had been pardoned formerly by the Queen of a Burglary and Assault,
for which he was Tried and Condemned, and to requite her, enters into a
Conspiracy to take away her Life; which he being resolved to do, and being then
beyond Seas, comes forthwith for London, and the better to get access to the
Queen, and credit with her, resolves to discover, how he had been persuaded to
kill her, which he does at White Hall as cunningly as he can. The Queen gave
him the hearing, and began to put some confidence in him; He afterward
engages the said Mr. Nevel in the design, who declared himself convinced of
the lawfulness and braveness of the Action; so they both swear, in Parry's
Lodgings, Secrecy, to kill her; yet all this while, Parry carried it so fair
with the Queen, that She not only thought him a trusty Loyal Subject, but
intended him a liberal Pension or Allowance.

Foulis Hist. l. 7. c. 4. f. 141.
Whilst he thus gets esteem with the Queen, and at the same time contrives her
death, Nevil resolves to discover all, does so, and is examined by Leicester,
and Sir Christopher Hatton; the Queen wonders at the juggle and contrivance;
but had it kept secreet: And the better to find out the Plot, Parry is sent for
by Secretary Walsingham to his house, there to see if he would any way confess
this, who had showed himself soreedy on his own head, to discover the Foreign
de-signs against her Majesty.

The Secretary entertains him kindly, telling him that the Queen had appointed
him to deal with him, in a Matter that highly concerned her Majesty, knowing
him to be one, who bore an extraordinary devotion to her; the Matter was, the
Queen had been advertized, that there was some Plot in hand against her own
Person, wherewith she thought, he could not but be made acquainted; considering
the great trust that some of her greatest Enemies reposed in him: of this, she
desired to understand his knowledge, and whether he himself might not at some
time, or other have let slip some suspicious words, not with any real design
against her, but to discover the intentions of others.

Parry (strongly confiding in Nevil) earnestly denied it again and again, with
several Protestations, that he was neither party nor privy to any such motion
or enterprise, Walsingham dealt fairly with him, telling him that there was a
Gentleman, and his friend, who would prove the contrary to his Face; yet Parry
denies all ( true Popish impudence) though probably had he confessed ( and these
were hints enough) and, accused Nevil, at his first asking, he might have saved
himself; and in this his great cunning was overseen.

Parry thus obstinate in his denials, is not, permitted to go home, but lodged
that Night at Mr. Secretry Walsinghams House in London: This put him in a peck
of troubles, fills his Head full of suspicions; and having consulted with, his
Pillow, the next Morning he desired to speak with Mr. Secretary, which granted,
he confesses that now he called to remembrance, that he once had Speech with
one Nevil, concerning a Point of Doctrine, contained in one of Dr. Allen's
Books; wherein it was maintained that it was lawful to take away the Life of a
Prince, to benefit the Roman Religion, but denied that he spoke any thing of
the Queen.

That Night he was Examined in Leicesters House before several, but still he
denied all; whereupon Nevel was brought before him, who punctually justified
every circumstance before his Face, yet the other, as formerly, denied all;
however he is sent to the Tower, where perceiving the exactness of the Proof
against him, he freely and of his own accord, confessed all, which Confession
take as the same is related by Cambden in these words.

In the Year (says he) 1570. I was Sworn one of the Queens Servants, and
continued entirely devoted to her Majesty, till the Year 1580. at which time I
came into danger of loosing my Life with great disgrace, Parry's Confession.

Camb. Annals. f. 306.


(for he had broken into Hugh Hares Chamber, in whose debt he was, and had
wounded him, for which he was by the Law Condemned, but had his Life saved by
the Queens gracious Pardon) from that time, I continued troubled in my Mind,
and having procured a License, to withdraw my self into France, not with any
intentions to return hither again, for I had devoted my self to the Catholic
Religion. At Paris I was reconciled to the Church of Rome, at Venice I had
conference with Benedict Palmio, a Jesuit, concerning the destressed Catholics
in England; and I gave him some hints that I had found out a way to relieve
them, if the Pope or any Learned Divines would justify it to be lawful; Palmio
extolled this as a Pious design, and me he recommended to the Popes Nuncio at
Venice, whose Name was Campeius; and Campeius recommended me to the Pope: I
besought by Letters, that I might come to Rome, with a safe Conduct; Letters of
safe Conduct were sent me from the Cardinal of Como, but not large enough,
afterward others were sent me more large and full, but then was I returned to
Paris, there I lighted upon Morgan, who told me that it was expected by diverse,
that I should do some notable Service for God and the Catholic Church; I
answered, that I was ready to kill the greatest Subject in England; but (said
he) why not the Queen her self; and this said I, might easily be done, if it
might appear to be lawful, for Watts a Priest with whom I had conference about
it, (concealing persons Names) affirmed flatly, it was not lawful (and
Chreighton also, a Scottish Jesuit, avouched the same, Teaching, that evil was
not to be done that good might come of it; that God was better pleased with
Adverbs then Nouns, and approved what was well done and lawfully, then what was
otherwise good; and that many Souls were not to be redeemed with the
destruction of any one, without the Express command of God) notwithstanding I
having engaged my self, both by Letters and Promises, whilst I was in Italy,
thought it an heinious sin to give over my enterprise, in case the Pope should
approve it by his Letters, and grant me a plenary Pardon; which I begged of
him, by Letters I sent to him by Ragozonio, his Nuncio in France; who highly
commended my design, and sent my Letters to Rome, being returned into England,
I procured access to the Queen, to whom after all Bystanders were removed, I
discovered the whole Conspiracy, how be it, cloaked with the best Art I could,
she heard me without being daunted, I departed not without being terrified; and
cannot now forget what she then said; That no Catholic should be called in
Question merely for Religion, or the Popes Supremacy, so that they showed
themselves good Subjects: In the mean time, whilst I was a daily Suitor in the
Court, for the Mastership of St. Catharines, I received Letters from the
Cardinal of Como, wherein my enterprise was commended, and my self absolved in
the Popes Name. These Letters I imparted to the Queen, what effect they wrought
with her I know not; to me they certainly added Courage, and took away all
scruples; yet was I not minded to offer her any violence, if she could by any
means be persuaded to deal more favorably with the Catholics. And therefore
least I should commit the Murder, I laid away my Dagger still, as often as I
had access to her; when I seriously considered her, and her truly Royal
virtues, I was distracted with doubtful thoughts, for my Vows were recorded in
Heaven, my Letters and Promises amongst Men; these things I often pondered with
an unquiet Mind, I was never much beholden to her for any thing; my Life indeed
she once Pardoned me; but to have taken it away upon that occasion, had been
cruel and tyrannical; hereupon, I departed from Court much unsatisfied with my
condition: I lighted upon Dr. Allens Book against the Justice of Britain,
where he taught, That Princes Excommunicate for Heresy, were to be deprived of
Kingdom and Life; which Book did strongly encourage me, to prosecute my
attempt. This Book I read to Nevil (whom I sometimes invited to my Table) six
whole Months before he accused me; afterward he came to me and said, let us
venture upon somewhat, since we can get nothing from the Queen, and he
propounded several things about the delivery of the Queen of Scots: But I have
(said I) a greater business in my Mind, and of more advantage for the Catholic
Church. The next day he came and swore upon the Bible, that he would conceal,
and constantly pursue any thing that should be for the good of the Catholic
Religion, and I swear the like, we then resolved with ten more Men to set upon
the Queen, as she rode abroad to take the Air, and to kill her: All which Nevil
concealed till now. But having heard, that the Earl of Westmorland was dead,
whose Estate he has already swallowed in hopes, he presently brake his Oath,
and accused me of these things.

Cardinal Como's Letter to Parry.

Foulis Hist. lib. 7. cap. 3. f. 393.


The Letter also, in that Confession mentioned to be writ from Cardinal Como to
him, as the same is related by Fowlis, follows.
SIR,
HIS Holiness has seen your Letter of the first, with the Certificate
enclosed, and cannot but commend the good disposition and resolution which you
write to hold, toward the Service and common good; wherein his Holiness does
exhort you to persevere, and to bring to effect that which you have promised.

And that you may be the more assisted by that good Spirit, which has moved
you thereunto; his Holiness grants unto you his Blessing, plenary Indulgence
and Remission of all your sins, according as you have desired; assuring you,
that besides the merit which you shall receive for so doing in Heaven, his
Holiness will farther make himself Debtor, to acknowledge your deservings in the
best manner that he can; and the more, because you use the greater modesty, in
not pretending any thing or reward.

Put therefore to effect your holy and honorable purposes, and regard your
health. And to conclude, I offer my self to you heartily, and desire you all
good and happy success,

At your Service N. Card. Di. Como.
Rome January 30th 1584.

All this he confessed before the Lord Hunsdon, Sir Christopher Hatton, and Sir
Francis Walsingham, all three of the Privy Council; he acknowledged his Fault,
and begged Pardon for the same, by his Letters to the Queen, to Burleigh and
Leicester.

His LETTER to the Queen, as Foulis relates it, was as follows. Parry's
Letter to Queen Elizabeth, Foulis Hist. lib. 7. cap. 4. f. 341.

YOUR Majesty may see, by my voluntary Confession, the dangerous Fruits of a
discontented Mind, and how constantly I pursued my first conceived Purpose in
Venice, for the Relief of the afflicted Catholics, continued it in Lions, and
resolved in Paris to put it in adventure, for the Restitution of England, to
the ancient Obedience of the Sea Apostolic.

You may see withal, how it is commended, allowed and warranted, in Conscience,
Divinity and Policy, by the Pope and some great Divines, though it be true, or
likely, that most of our English Divines (loss practiced in Matters of this
weight) do utterly mislike and condemn it.

The enterprise is prevented, and Conspiracy discovered, by an honorable
Gentleman my Kinsman, and late familiar Friend, Mr. Edmond Nevil, Privy, and by
solemn Oath (taken upon the Bible) Party to the Matter; whereof I am heartily
glad, but more sorry in my very Soul, that ever I conceived or intended it, how
commendable and meritorious soever I thought it; God shame him, and forgive me,
who would not now (before God) attempt it (if I had Liberty and Opportunity to
do it) to gain your Kingdom. I beseech Christ, that my Death and Example may as
well satisfy your Majesty and the World, as it shall glad and content me.

The Queen of Scotland is your Prisoner, let her be honorably entreated, but
yet surely guarded.

The French King is French, you know it well enough, you will find him occupied
when he should do you Good, he will not loose a Pilgrimage to save you a Crown.

I have no more to say at this time, but that with my Heart and Soul, I do now
honor and love you, am inwardly sorry for my Offense, and ready to make you
amends by my Death and Patience. Discharge me a Culpa, but not a Paena, good
Lady.

And so farewell, most Gracious, and the best Natured and Qualified Queen that
ever lived in England.

From the Tower, the14th. of Feb. 1584. William Parry.


Some short time after, he was arraigned at the Kings-Bench-Bar in
Westminster Hall, Parry's Arraignment and Confession.
and confessed himself Guilty, and when his Confession was recorded, and
Judgment demanded against him, Hatton thought it necessary, for the
Satisfaction of the Multitude that were present, that his Crime should be
clearly and fully represented out of his own Confession; which Parry
acknowledged to be voluntary, and prayed the Judges that he might read it
Himself. But the Clerk of the Crown read both it, and also Cardinal Como's
Letter, and Parry's own to the Queen, to Burleigh, and to Leicester, which he
confessed to be the very Letters themselves; yet did he deny that ever he was
resolved to Kill the Queen. Being now commanded to speak, if he had any thing
to say, why Judgment should not be given against him; he answered perplexedly,
as if he were troubled in Conscience for the foul Fact he had undertaken: I see
I must die, because I have not been constant to my self. Being willed to
declare more plainly what he meant ( My Blood, said he, be amongst you.)
Sentence of Death being pronounced, he, in a Fury, cited the Queen to the
Judgment Seat of God. He was executed in the Palace-Yard: he said he was never
fully resolved in his Mind, to take away the Queens Life; and then died,
without, in the least, commending himself to God. So let all the Enemies of
Jesus Christ and his Gospel perish.

These Plots and Conspiracies produced the said two Acts before mentioned; the
one for Provision to be made for the Security of the Queens Majesty's Person,
and the Continuance of the Realm in Peace; by which, the said Association was
confirmed. The other Act against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, who would ground
any Villainous Plots and Designs upon the Bull of Pius Quintus. The former of
which Acts of Parliament, follows in these Words, as it is in Rastal.

27 Eliz. cap. 1. Rast. Stat. 2. part. f. 283.
An Act for Provision to be made for the Surety of the Queens Majesty's most
Royal Person, and the Continuance of the Realm in Peace.
Treason in any Successor, or other for them, to take away the Queens Life. And
in case it happens, to be tried, notwithstanding the Succession; and their
Issues utterly excluded from the Crown.
FOrasmuch as the good Felicity and Comfort of the whole State of this Realm,
consists (only, next under God) in the Surety and Preservation of the Queens
most excellent Majesty. And for that it has manifestly appeared, that sundry
wicked Plots and Means have of late been devised and laid, as well in foreign
Parts beyond the Seas, as also within this Realm, to the great endangering of
Her Highness most Royal Person, and to the utter Ruin of the whole
Commonwealth, if by Gods merciful Providence, the same had not been revealed;
therefore, for the preventing of such great Perils, as might hereafter
otherwise grow, by the like detestable and devilish Practices, at the humble
Suit, and earnest Petition and Desire of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
the Commons in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the
same Parliament.

Be it enacted and ordained, if at any time after the end of this present
Session of Parliament, an open Invasion or Rebellion shall be had or made into,
or within any of Her Majesty's Realms or Dominions, or any Act attempted,
tending to the Hurt of Her Majesty's most Royal Person, by, of, or for any
Person that shall, or may pretend any Title to the Crown of this Realm, after
Her Majestis Decease; or if any thing shall be composed, or imagined, tending
to the Hurt of Her Majesty's Royal Person, by any Person, or with the Privity
of any Person, that shall, or may pretend Title to the Crown of this Realm.
That then, by Her Majesty's Commission, under Her Great Seal, the Lords and
others of Her Highnesses Privy Council, and such other Lords of Parliament, to
be named by Her Majesty, as with the same Privy Council, shall make up the
Number of twenty four at the least; having with them, for their Assistance in
that behalf, such of the Judges of the Court of Records at Westminster, as Her
Highness shall for that purpose assign and appoint; or that more part of the
same Council, Lords and Judges, shall, by virtue of this Act, have Authority to
examine all and every the Offenders aforesaid, and all Circumstances thereof,
and thereupon, to give Sentence or Judgment, as upon good Proof the Matter
shall appear unto them; and that after such Sentence or Judgment given, and
Declaration thereof made and published by Her Majesty's Proclamation, under the
Great Seal of England, all Persons, against whom such Sentence or Judgment
shall be so given and published, shall be excluded and disabled for ever, to
have or claim, or to pretend to have or claim the Crown of this Realm, or any
of Her Majesty's Dominions, any former Law or Statute whatsoever to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And that thereupon all Her Highnesses Subjects shall, and may, lawfully, by
virtue of this Act, and Her Majesty's Directions in that Behalf, by all
forcible and possible Means, pursue to Death, every such wicked Person, by
whom, or by whose Means, Assend, or Privity, any such Invasion or Rebellion
shall be in form aforesaid denounced to have been made, or such wicked Acts
attempted, or other thing compassed or imagined against Her Majesty's Person,
and all their Aidors, Comfortors and Abettors.

And if any such detestable Act shall be executed against Her Highnesses most
Royal Person, whereby Her Majesty's Life shall be taken away (which God of his
Mercy forbid) that then every such Person, by, of, or for whom, any such Act
shall be executed, and their Issues being any wise assenting, or privy to the
same, shall, by virtue of this Act, be excluded, and disabled for ever, to have
or claim, or to pretend to have or claim the said Crown of this Realm, or of
any other Her Highnesses Dominions, any former Law or Statute whatsoever to the
contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

And all the Subjects of this Realm, and all other Her Majesty's Dominions,
shall, and may lawfully, by virtue of this Act, by all forcible and possible
Means, pursue to Death, every such wicked Person, by whom, or by whose Means,
any such detestable Fact, shall be in form hereafter expressed, denounced to
have been committed, and also their Issues being any way assenting and privy to
the same, and all their Aidors, Comfortors and Abettors in that Behalf. And to
the end that the Intention of this Law may be effectually executed, if her
Majesty's Life shall be taken away by any violent, or unnatural means (which
God defend.)

Be it further enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, That the Lords and others,
Commissioners to try such Traitors, in case the Queen should be killed.
which shall be of Her Majesty's Privy Council, at the time of such her
Decease, or the more part of the same Council joining unto them, for their
better Assistance; five other Earls, and seven other Lords of Parliament at the
least (foreseeing that none of the said Earls, Lords, or Council, be known to
be Persons that may make any Title to the Crown) those Persons which were Chief
Justices of either Bench, Master of the Rolls, and Chief Baron of the
Exchequer, at the time of Her Majesty's Death, or in Default of the said
Justices, Master of the Rolls, and Chief Baron, some other of those which were
Justices of some of the Courts of Record at Westminster, at the time of Her
Highnesses Decease, to supply their Places, or any twenty four or more of them,
whereof eight to be Lords of Parliament, not being of the Privy Council, shall,
to the utmost of their Power and Skill, examine the Cause and Manner of such
Her Majesty's Death, and what Persons shall be any way Guilty thereof, and all
Circumstances concerning the same, according to the true meaning of this Act;
and thereupon, shall, by open Proclamation, publish the same; and without any
delay, with all forcible and possible means, prosecute to Death, all such as
shall be found to be Offenders therein, and all their Aidors and Abettors. And
for the doing thereof, and for the withstanding and suppressing of all such
Power and Forces as shall any way be levied or stirred, in disturbance of the
due Execution of this Law, shall, by virtue of this Act, have Power and
Authority, not only to raise and use such Forces as shall in that Behalf be
needful and convenient, but also to use all other Means and things possible and
necessary for the maintenance of the same Forces, and prosecution of the said
Offenders; and if any such Power and Force shall be levied or stirred, in
disturbance of the due Execution of this Law, by any Person that shall or may
pretend any Title to the Crown of this Realm, whereby this Law may not in all
things be fully executed, according to the Effect and true Meaning of the same:
That then, every Person, shall, by virtue of this Act, be therefore excluded
and disabled for ever, to have or claim, or to pretend to have or claim the
Crown of this Realm, or of any other Her Highnesses Dominions, any former Law
or Statute whatsoever to the contrary notwithstanding.

And be it farther enacted, by the Authority aforesaid, that all and every she
Subjects of all Her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, shall, to the utmost of
their Power, aid and assist the said Council, and all other the Lords, and
other Persons to be adjoined unto them for assistance, as is aforesaid, in all
things to be done and executed, according to the Effect and Intention of this
Law; and that no Subject of this Realm shall in any wise be impeached in Body,
Land, or Goods, at any time hereafter, for any thing to be done or executed,
according to the Tenor of this Law, any Law or Statute heretofore made to the
contrary, in any wise notwithstanding.

And whereas of late, many of Her Majesty's good and faithful Subjects, have,
in the Name of God, and with the Testimony of a good Conscience, by one uniform
manner of Writing, under their Hand and Seals, and by several others
voluntarily taken, joined themselves together in one Bond and Association, to
withstand and revenge, to the uttermost, all such malicious Actions and
Attempts against Her Majesty's most Royal Person; now for the explaining of all
such Ambiguities and Questions, which otherwise might happen to grow, by reason
of any sinister or wrong Construction or Interpretation, to be made or
inferred, of, or upon the Words or Meaning thereof.

Be it declared and enacted, by the Authority of this present Parliament, The
Association approved and confirmed.
that the said Association, and every Article and Sentence therein contained,
as well concerning the disallowing, extending or disabling of any Persons, that
may or shall pretend any Title to come to the Crown of this Realm, and also for
the pursuing and taking Revenge of any Person, for any such wicked Act or
Attempt, as is mentioned in the same Association, shall, and ought to be in all
things expounded and adjudged, according to the true Intent and Meaning of this
Act, not otherwise, nor against any other Person or Persons.

The latter of the said two Acts of Parliament, is entitled, An Act against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and such other like disobedient Persons. The
Preamble runs thus.
27 Eliz. cap. 2. Rast. Stat. 2. part. f. 285.

Treason for Priests and Jesuits to come into England: Harboring them Felony,
etc.


WHereas diverse Persons, called or professed Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and
other Priests, which have been, and from time to time are made in the Parts
beyond the Seas, by, or according to the Order and Rites of the Romish Church,
have, of late years, come in, and been sent, and daily do come and are sent
into this Realm of England, and other the Queens Majesty's Dominions, on
purpose (as it has appeared, as well by sundry of their own Examinations and
Confessions, as by diverse other manifest Means and Proofs) not only to withdraw
Her Highnesses Subjects from their due Obedience to Her Majesty, but also to
stir up and move Sedition, Rebellion and open Hostility, within the same Her
Highnesses Realms and Dominions, to the great indangering of the Safety of her
most Royal Person, and to the utter Ruin, Desolation and Overthrow of the
whole Realm, if the same be not the sooner, by some good Means, foreseen and
prevented.

For reformation whereof, it is enacted, That all Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
and other Priests whatsoever, Ordained within or without the Queens Dominions,
by virtue of the Popes Authority, should depart within forty Days, That those
who should afterward return into the Kingdom, should be guilty of
High Treason. That he who should wittingly and willingly Harbor, Relieve and
Maintain them, should be guilty of Felony; that those who were brought up in
Seminaries, if they returned not within six Months after Notice given, and
submitted not themselves to the Queen before a Bishop, or two Justices, should
be guilty of High Treason, and if any, so submitting themselves, should within
ten years approach the Queens Court, or come within ten Miles thereof, their
Submission should be void: That those who should, by any Means whatsoever, send
or convey over any Money to Students in such Seminaries, should incur the
Penalty of a Praemunire: That if any of the Peers of the Realm, that is, Dukes,
Marquisses, Earls, Viscounts, or Barons of Parliament, should offend against
these Laws, he should be brought to his Trial by his Peers. That if any should
know of any such Jesuits, or other Priests above said, lurking within the
Realm, and should not discover them within twelve Days, he should be Fined and
Imprisoned at the Queens Pleasure. That if any Man should be suspected to be a
Jesuit or Priest, as aforesaid, and not submit himself to Examination, he
should for his Contempt, be imprisoned till he did submit himself. That he who
should send his Children, or any others, to Seminaries and Colleges of the
Popish Profession, should be fined in an hundred Pounds of English Money, and
that those who were so sent thither, should not succeed as Heirs, nor enjoy any
Estates, which should any way fall to them; the like for all such as should not
return home from the said Seminaries within a year, unless they did conform
themselves to the Church of England: That if the Wardens or Officers of the
Ports, should permit any others, besides Seamen and Merchants, to cross the
Seas, without License of the Queen, or six Privy Counselors, they should be
put out of their Places, and the Masters of such Ships as carried them, should
forfeit their Ships and Goods, and suffer Imprisonment for a whole Year.

Reflections upon the foregoing Plots, Treasons and Acts of Parliament
occasioned by them.
From which said Plots, Conspiracies and Treasons, and the said Acts of
Parliament occasioned by the same, I observe these things amongst many others
observable.

1. That there are no Villainies that can be imagined so bad, but the Romish
Clergy, even the Pope himself, will tell you is lawful to be Committed, to
carry on the interest of that Religion; and instruments enough are to be found,
amongst Men of that Communion, to undertake the Committing thereof, one
instance whereof we have in this Parry, who did not only think it lawful, but
undertook it, to murder his own Lawful Sovereign, and had Authority so to do
from the Pope himself; and that he might sit in the House of Commons, must
needs be Guilty of a Wilful Perjury; for by 13. Eliz. cap. 2. none could sit in
that House, but he who first had taken the Oath of Supremacy, and that he did
sit there is plain from the History, and tho it does not appear that he had a
Dispensation for it, yet it is not to be doubted but that he was sure of a
Pardon, in case he had not a Dispensation.

2. That the Protestants (in those days) thought it not only lawful, but their
Duty to Associate for the preservation of their Prince, and of their Religion,
and having so done, they were so far from being blamed by the Parliament, that
the Parliament did esteem it not only as a Lawful, but a Commendable Act, and
added their Sanction, to confirm what before they judged Lawful.

3. That the Parliament in the 27 th. Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign, were so
far from questioning, their own power of determining and limiting the Crown,
and the Succession thereof, that they did not only think it in their Power, but
reduced it into Act too, to make the Successor Guilty of High Treason, that
should imbrue His or Her hands in the Blood of the Predecessor: and hereby
altered the Law, 1. H. 7.4. Fitz. Abr. tit. Parl. 3. Bro. Abr. tit. Parl. 37.
Plowd. 238. b.
that the Accession to the Crown purges the Treason; because all Persons named
in Acts of Parliament, (even the King himself) are bound by such Acts of
Parliament, wherein they are named, they being no ways alterable; but by the
same power (not Persons) that made them.

4. That the severity of the Laws hitherto made, did not actually deter the
Papists from Plotting and Conspiring the Death of the Queen, and the subverting
the Protestant Religion; Nor was it likely to be effected, so long as the
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other Priests were tolerated here, for it has
been observed by some, with a great deal of Truth, that there was never yet a
Plot against the Government, but the Popish Priests had their share in it. It
was therefore thought necessary to follow the example of Swedeland, the State
of Venice and other Countries, who have banished the Jesuits, and wisely to
carry it a little further, and banish Priests too they being such Disturbers of
the State; which was accordingly done by 27. Eliz. cap. 2.

But least the Papists should again object against the Authorities I cite for
the History of the Fact, I shall here insert the very Words of their Secular
Priests in their important Considerations, whereby the truth of the Fact is
Confessed, the Words are these.

About the time of the overthrow of the Popes Forces in Ireland, The Secular
Priests confess the truth of all the foregoing Account.

Collect. f. 44. The Popes Plot with King of Spain and Duke of Guise. Mendoza.


his Holiness (by the false instigation of the Jesuits) plotted with the King
of Spain, for the assistance of the Duke of Guise, to enterprise upon the
sudden, a very desperate design against Her Majesty: and for the Delivery and
advancement to the Crown of the Queen of Scotland. For the better asserting
whereof Mendoza the Jesuit, and Ledger for the King of Spain in England, set on
work (a worthy Gentleman otherwise) one Mr. Francis Throckmorton and diverse
others. And whilst the same was Contriving (as afterward Mr. Throckmorton
himself Confessed 1584) the Jesuitical humor had so possessed the hearts of
sundry Catholics; as we do unfeignedly rue in our hearts the remembrance of it,
and are greatly ashamed that any Person so intitl'd should ever have been so
extremely bewitched: Two Gentlemen about that time also, viz. Anno 1583. Mr.
Arden and Mr. Somervil were convicted by the Laws of the Realm, Throgmortons
Confession you have Printed, Camb. Annal. l. 3. f. 297. Arden and Somervil.

Dr. Parry. Earl of Northumberland.


for having purposed and contrived how they might have laid violent hands upon
Her Majesty's sacred Person. Mr. Somervils Confession therein was so notorious,
as it may not be either quallified or denied. And Dr. Parry the same Year was
plotting with Jesuits, how he might have effected the like Villainy: How the
worthy Earl of Northumberland was about this time brought into the said Plot by
the Duke of Guise (then still in hand) we will pretermit. Mr. Parsons, that was
Actor in it, could tell the Story very roundly at Rome, it wrought the Earls
overthrow in 1585, which may justly be ascribed to the Jesuitical Practices of
the Jesuit Mendoza, and others of that Crew. They mentioned several other
Treasons, which I shall not here take Notice of, but reserve them till I come
to give the further Account of their Treasons, and only set down the Conclusion
of this Paragraph. These things (say they) we would not have touched, had they
not been known in effect to this part of the World, and that we thought it our
Duties to show our own dislike of them, and to clear Her Majesty (so far as we
may) from such imputations of more then barbarous Cruelty toward us, as the
Jesuits in their Writings have cast by Heaps upon her: They themselves (as we
still think in our Consciences, and before God) having been, from time to time,
the very Causes of all the Calamities which any of us have endured in England,
since Her Majesty's Reign; which we do not write simply to excuse Her Highness,
although we must Confess we can be contented to endure much, rather then to seek
her Dishonor: but for that we think few Princes living, being persuaded in
Religion as Her Majesty is, and so provoked as she has been; would have dealt
more mildly with such their Subjects (all Circumstances considered) then she
has done with us.

Let us now see what reason can be given for making the rest of the Penal Laws,
that were made against the Papists in this Queens Reign.

The Earl of Arund. tried and fined only. Camb. Annals. f. 330.

He was in 1589. tried for high Treason, and Condemned, but the Queen spared
him Camb. Annals. f. 424.429.


The first thing I meet with remarkable, after the making these Laws
forementioned, is the fining the Earl of Arundel 5000 pounds in 586. for
holding Correspondence with Allen and Parsons the Jesuit, the Queens Enemies
for that publicly in writing, he had questioned the Justice of the Kingdom,
and that he had intentions of departing the Realm without License. The Earl
protesting his obedience to the Queen, and his Love to his Country, modestly
excused himself by his Love to the Catholic Religion, and his ignorance of the
Law, Confessed his fault and submitted.

In the Gifford, Savage, Ballard and others Plot to kill the Q. Camb. Annals.
f. 336. Foulis Hist. l. 7. cap. 5. sec. 1. f. 343. Bakers Chron. f. 367.
same year, a very dangerous Conspiracy was discovered against Queen Elizabeth,
in the English Seminary at Rheimes, there were some who were so bigoted to the
Popish Religion, that they thought the Pope could by his Authority, do any
thing, and that the aforementioned Bull of Pius Quintus, for deposing the Queen
was dictated by the Holy Ghost, and thought it a Meritorious Act to take away
her Life, and doubted not of a Canonisation, as Martyrs, if they fell in the
Attempt. William Gifford Doctor in Divinity, Gilbert Gifford, and one Hodgson
Priests did so infuse this treasonable Doctrine into the mind of one John
Savage, a Bastard as was reported, that he readily Vowed to kill the Queen.

One Ballard, an English Priest at Rheimes, bestirs himself in England and
Scotland for carrying on the Design, and for that purpose, prepares Disciples,
then goes into France, and treats with Mendoza before named, Charles Paget and
others, about invading of England, judging they could never have a fairer
opportunity, then at that Juncture of time, forasmuch as the Pope, the
Spaniard, the Duke of Guise, and the Prince of Parma, were all resolved to set
upon England, thereby to divert the War from the Netherlands: Having delivered
the Message there he returns for England to promote the design here, gets to
London, where in a Soldiers habit, under the false Name of Captain Fescue he
agitates the Plot.

Babington and diverse other Gentlemen engaged in this design of taking off the
Queen.
At London he discovered this Affair to one Mr. Anthony Babington of Dethick in
Derbyshire, a young Gentleman greatly addicted to the Romish Religion, and who
had in France Commenced an Acquaintance with the Bishop of Glascow, the Queen
of Scots Ambassador, and one Thomas Morgan an English Fugitive, and a busy
Agent for her. Babington at first, was of opinion, that as long as the Queen
lived, an Invasion would signify little or nothing, but when he understood,
that Savage had undertaken to remove that Obstacle by killing her, altered his
opinion; but was for joining five more to Savage, to make sure of the Matter:
Which being agreed on, they set forward the design of the Invasion. The design
was by Babington imparted to the Queen of Scots, and she was to reward the
Heroical Actors in this barbarous Attempt, or else their Posterities, in Case
they perished in it. And he was Commanded to pass his word to the six Gentlemen
and the rest, concerning their reward for their Service. In this Conspiracy
were engaged, diverse Gentlemen who were very Zealous for Popery. Edward
Windsor, Brother to the Lord Windsor, Thomas Salisbury of a Knights Family in
Denbeighshire, Charles Tilney of an ancient Family, who was then but lately
reconciled to the Romish Church, Chideock Tichburn of Southampton, Edward
Abbington whose Father had been the Queens under Treasurer, Robert Gage of
Surry, John Travers, and John Charnock of Lancashire, John Jones, whose Father
was Yeoman of the Wardrobe to Queen Mary, Savage before named, Barnwel of a
noble Family in Ireland, and Henry Dun Clark in the Office of first Fruits and
Tenths, and one Polley.

To every of these Gentlemen was a Part in this Conspiracy assigned, and all
things went according to their hearts desire, as they thought. Nothing
perplexed Babington, But his Fears of being failed in the Foreign Aid, that was
promised him, therefore to make sure of it, he resolved himself to go over into
France, and to that purpose to send Ballard privately before, for whom by his
Money, under a Counterfeit name, he procured a License to Travel. And that
there might not be the least Suspicion of himself, he insinuated into Secretary
Walsingham, by means of Polley, and earnestly besought him to procure him a
License from the Queen to travel into France, promising her to do her
extraordinary good Service, in pumping out, and discovering the secret designs
of the Fugitives in behalf of the Queen of Scots, The Plot discovered.
but, as we say, forewarned forearmed, he being a faithful and cunning
Secretary, by his Spies had discovered all, and informed the Queen, and
therefore only commended Babingtons pretended design, and made him fair
Promises, and so from time to time delayed him. The chief instrument in
discovering this Plot, was one Gilbert Gifford, (who lurked in England under
the Name of Lauson in mind Salvage of his Oath) but had informed the Secretary
what he was, and to what purpose sent into England.

This having gone on for some time, Ballard apprehended.
the Queen apprehending there might be great danger in letting it proceed
further, ordered Ballard to be apprehended who was seized on before he was
aware in Babingtons House, just as he was setting out for France, Babington and
some others of the Confederates, being jealous the design was discovered, hid
themselves in St. John's Wood near London. Notice being given of their
withdrawing, they are proclaimed Traitors, at last are found, and seized on,
and the rest of their fellow Rebels, fourteen of whom were executed in
September 1586. in St. Giles in the Fields, where they used to mere, and
consult about their intended murdering of the Queen, and invading the Kingdom.

Mary Queen of Scots having been at the bottom in all these designs, The Queen
of Scots at the bottom. Came. Annals. from f. 33, to f. 35. D' Ewes Journal. f.
392, 393, 395, 400, 401, 405, 408.

A Commission Issued for trying Mary Queen of Scots grounded on 27 Eliz. Cap. 1.

Camb. An. l. 3. f. 347.


and there being no probability of the Kingdoms continuing in the safe and
secure exercise of the Protestant Religion, under their Protestant Queen, so
long* as she was in being: The Papists being assured by her, that in case she
had the Crown, she would introduce Popery; Queen Elizabeth was advised to try
her for Treason, which she was with great difficulty prevailed to do, and
Issued out a Commission grounded upon 27 Eliz. Cap. 1. herein before set forth.
The Commissioners appointed to Try her, were these, viz: John Archbishop of
Whitgift Bakers Chron. f. 369.
Canturbury, Sir Tho. Bromley Knight. Chancellor of England, William Lord Burleigh
Treasurer of England, William Lord Marquess of Winchester, Edward Earl of
Oxford great Chamberlain of England, George Earl of Shrewsbury Earl Marshal;
Henry Earl of Kent, Henry Earl of Darby, William Earl of Worcester, Edmund Earl
of Rutland, Ambrose Earl of Warwick Master of the Ordinance, Henry Earl of
Pembrook; Robert Earl of Leicester Master of the Horse, Henry Earl of Lincoln,
Anthony Vicount Mountague, Charles Lord Howard Lord High Admiral of England,
Henry Lord of Hunsdon Lord Chamberlain, Henry Lord Abergavenny, Edward Lord
Zouch, Edward Lord Morley, William Lord Cobham, Lord Warden of the Cinque
Ports, Edward Lord Stafford, Arthur Lord Gray of Wilton, John Lord Lumley, John
Lord Stourton, William Lord Saunders, Lewis Lord Mordant, John Lord St. John of
Bletnesho, Thomas Lord Buckhurst, Henry Lord Compton, Henry Lord Cheney, Sir
Francis Knolles Knight. Controller of the Household, Sir Christopher Hatton
Vice-Chamberlain, Sir Francis Walsingham Secretary, William Davison Esquire Sir
Ralph Sadleir Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, Sir Walter Mildmay
Chancellor of the Exchequer, Sir Amias Pawlet Captain of the Isle of Jersey,
John Woolly Esquire Secretary for the Latin Tongue, Sir Christopher Wray Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas, Sir Edward Anderson Chief Justice of the Bench,
Sir Roger Manwood Chief Baron, Sir Thomas Gaudy and William Periam Judges.

The substance of their Commission was this, The substance of the Commission.
Cambd. Annals, f. 348.
after the recital of 27. Eliz. Cap. 1. thus it follows.

Whereas since the end of the Session of Parliament, viz. since the first day
of June, in ^^e 27 th. Year of our Reign, diverse things have been compassed and
imagined ^^nding to the hurt of our Royal Person, as well by Mary Daughter and
Heir of James the Fifth King of Scots, and commonly called Queen of Scots, and
Dowager of France, pretending a Title to the Crown of this Realm of England,
(...) by diverse other Persons, cum scientia (in English with the Privity) of
the said Mary, as we are given to understand: And whereas we do intend and
resolve that the aforesaid Act shall be, in all and every part thereof duly and
effectually put into Execution according to the Tenor of the same, and that
all offenses abovesaid, in the Act abovesaid mentioned as before is said, and
the circumstances* of the same, shall be examined and Sentence or Judgment
thereupon given according to the Tenor and Effect of the said Act, to you and
the greater part of you, we do gi^e full and absolute Power, License and
Authority according to the Tenor of the said Act, to examine all and singular
Matters, composed and imagined, tending to she hurt of our Royal Person, as
well by the aforesaid Mary as by any other Person or Persons whatsoever, cum
scientia (in English with the Privity) of the said Mary, and all circumstance
of the same, and all other offenses whatsoever abovesaid. In the Act abovesaid
(as before is said) mentioned, and all circumstances of the same, and of every
of them; and thereupon according to the Tenor of the Act aforesaid, to give
Sentence or Judgment; as upon good proof the Matter shall appear unto you: And
therefore we command you that you do at such certain days and places, which you
or the greater part of you, shall for that purpose set and agree upon,
diligently proceed upon the premises in form aforesaid, etc.

Mary Queen of Scots Tried. Camb. Annals f. 361.
The Commissioners met at Fotheringay Castle the 11 th. of October, 1586. and
Tried Mary Queen of Scots, the substance of the Trial you may see in Cambdens
Annals from Page 344, to 361. as he took the same out of the Commentaries and
Memorials of Edward Barker, principlal Register to the Queen, Thomas Wheeler
public Notary, Register of the Audience of Canturbury, and other persons of
Credit which were there present.

On the 25 th of October all the Commissioners met at the Star Chamber at
Westminster (to which place they had adjourned,) except the Earls of Shrewsbury
and Warwick; which were both of them sick, at that time Sentence was
pronounced, which Sentence was this. The Sentence.
By their unanimous assents and consents they do pronounce and deliver, this
their Sentence and Judgment, at the day and place last above mentioned; and
say, that since the conclusion of the aforesaid Session of Parliament, in the
Commission aforesaid specified; namely since the first day of June, in the 27
th. Year aforesaid, and before the date of the said Commission, diverse Marters
have been compassed and imagined within this Realm of England, by Anthony
Babington and others, with the Privity of the said Mary pretending a Title to
the Crown of this Realm of England; tending to the hurt, death and destruction
of the Royal Person of our said Lady the Queen: And also that since the
aforesaid first day of June, in the 27 th. Year aforesaid, and before the date
of the Commission aforesaid; the aforesaid Mary, pretending a Title to the
Crown of this Realm of England, has compassed and imagined within this Realm
of England, diverse Matters tending to the hurt, death, and destruction of the
Royal Person of our Sovereign Lady the Queen, contrary to the form of the
Statute in the Commission aforesaid specified.

The Parliament.

29. Eliz. Cap. 1. Rast. Stat. 2. Part. f. 334.


The twenty ninth of October following, the Parliament met, and the first Act
they made, was an Act for the confirmation of the Proscription of Thomas late
Lord Paget, Charles Paget, Francis Englefeild, Francis Throckmorton, William
Shelley, Anthony Babington, Thomas Salisbury, Edward Jones, Edward Abbington,
Charles Tilney, Chidiock Tichbourn, Robert Barnwell, John Charnock and John
Travers. The Preamble of which Act of Parliament strengthening the Credit of
the former History, I have here incerted.

An Act of Parliament for proscribing Babington and the Rest.
In most humble wise, beseeches your Royal Majesty; the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and all other your most Loving and Obedient Subjects, the Commons of
this your most High Court of Parliament Assembled: That where Thomas Paget late
Lord Paget late of Drayton in the County of Middlesex, Francis Englefeild late
of London Knight. Charles Paget late of London Esquire Francis Throckmorton late of
London Esquire William Shelley late of Clapham, in the County of Sussex Esquire Anthony
Babington late of Dethick in the County of Derby Esquire Thomas Salisbury late of
Lleweny in the County of Denbygh Esquire Edward Jones late of Cadogan in the same
County of Denbygh Esquire, Edward Abbington late of Henlippe in the County of
Worcester Esquire Charles Tilney late of ^^ndon Esquire Chidiock Tichbourn late of
Port-Chester in the County of Southampton Esquire Robert Barnwell late of London
Gent. John Charnock late of London Gent. and John Travers late of Prescot in
the County of Lancaster Gent. Having no fear of God before their Eyes, have
most falsely and Treacherously committed, perpetrated and done many unnatural
detestable and abominable Treasons, to the most fearful peril and danger of the
destruction of your most Royal Person, and to the utter loss, disherison, and
destruction of this your Highnesses Realm of England; if God of his infinite
goodness had not in due time revealed and given knowledge to your Highness of
their Traiterous intent, of and for the which said Treasons being manifestly
and plainly proved; the said Traitors and Offenders before named, have been
lawfully indicted, and some of them have been, and are, lawfully and by due
process Outlawed, and thereby justly attainted, and some other by Trial of the
Country and their own confessions, and judgment thereupon given lawfully and
justly convicted, and attainted, according to the Laws of this your Realm; as
by the Records of their several attainders more plainly it does, and may,
appear, and for the which several Offenses, some of the same Offenders have
suffered pains of Death according to their demerits.

And then the Parliament Confirms their attainder, and confiscates their Lands
and Tenements, Goods and Chattels.

The next thing this Parliament did, was by their Votes to approve, The Trial
and Condemnation of Mary Queen of Scots approved, and Her Execution desired by
the Parliament, and their Reasons for it. D' Ewes Journal, 392, 393, 395, 400,
401, 405, 408. Camb. Annal. l. 3. f. 363.
and confirm the Sentence given against the Queen of Scots, and desired it
might be published; the Reasons whereof were delivered in diverse Speeches made
in the House of Commons upon this occasion, and which are to be seen in Sir
Simon D' Ewes his Journal at large. They were drawn from the dangers that
threatened Religion, the Queens Person, and the Realm by means of Mary Queen of
Scots who having been bred up in the Popish Religion, and sworn a confederate
in the Holy League for the extirpation of the Protestant Religion, had now for
a long time Arrogated unto her self, the Title of Queen of England while the
Queen lived, whom as being excommunicate, she held it lawful to do mischief to,
(as far as lay in her Power) and to take away her life, a thing meritorious:
One who had over-thrown, and ruined sundry flourishing Families in the Kingdom,
and cherished all the Treasonable designs and Rebellions in England, to spare
her therefore, were nothing else but to spoil the People, who would take
impunity in this Case much to heart, and would not think themselves discharged
of their Oath of Association, unless she were punished according to her
deserts, and lastly they called to her remembrance, how fearful the examples of
Gods vengeance were upon King Saul for sparing Agag, and upon King Ahab for
sparing the Life of Benhaddad.

These Reasons were strongly enforced by a Petition presented by the Parliament
to the Queen: and by her answer it appears, what a great straight she was in,
D' Ewes Journal, f. 400.

Queen Eliz. in a great straight.

Camb. Annal. f. 363, 364, 365.


between her Natural inclinations to mercy backed with the consideration of the
near Relation the Queen of Scots stood in to her, and the danger her Person and
the Protestant Religion were in, sufficiently evidenced by an Oath which she
her self said she had seen, wherein some had bound themselves to kill her
within a Month. By which, she said, she saw her Subjects danger in her Person,
which she would be careful to prevent; she told them she had not forgot the
Association, they had entered into for her safety, which was a thing she never
so much as thought of, till a great number of Hands and Seals to it were shown
her, that it had laid a perpetual tie and obligation upon her, to bear them a
singular good Will and Love: That she had no greater comfort then in the
Commonwealths respect and affection toward her, and promised them that
whatsoever the best of Subjects might expect at the hands of the best Princes,
they might expect from her to be performed to the full.

After this she sent to the Lords by the Chancellor, and to the Commons by
their Speaker Puckering, to enter anew into the consideration of this Matter, A
message from Qu. Eliz. to the Parliament. Camb. Annal. l. 3. f. 365.
and to find out a more pleasing expedient, whereby both the Queen of Scots
Life might be spared, and her own security provided for.

They Concur again in their former Opinion for these Reasons; The Parliament
Concur in their former Opinion, their Reasons for it.
the Queens safety (they said) could no ways be secured so long as the Queen of
Scots lived, unless she should either seriously repent, and acknowledge her
offense; or were kept with a closer or stricter Guard, and sufficient security
given by Bond, or Oath for her good Demeanor, or delivered Hostages, or else
departed the Realm. They proved by invincible Reasons, that neither by
expectation of Reformation in the disposition of the Queen of Scots (if the
Queens Majesty should spare her Life.) Nor yet by safer or stronger Garding of
her Person, nor by her promise upon word, or Oath, D' Ewes Journal, f. 405.
nor by the Hostages of other Princes or Allies, nor by her Banishment, nor by
the revocation of the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus, nor yet by the Bond or Word of
a Prince, or of any or all the Princes her Allies, nor by any other way or
means whatsoever, other then by the speedy Execution to Death of the said
Scottish Queen, the safety or continuance of the true Religion, of the most
Royal Person of the Queens Majesty, and all the peaceable State of this Realm,
could in any ways be provided for and Established. As for her repentance they
were out of all hopes of it, considering that she had so ill requited the Queen
who had saved her Life; yet would not acknowledge her fault, as for a surer
Guard, stricter Custody, Bonds, Oaths and Hostages, they esteemed them all as
nothing worth, because if the Queens Life were once taken away, all these would
presently vanish, and if she should depart the Realm they feared least she
should presently take up Arms, and Invade the same, therefore they pressed hard
that the Sentence might be put in Execution, because as it were injustice to
deny Execution of the Law to any one of her Subjects, that should demand it; so
much more to the whole Body of her People of England, unanimously and with one
Voice humbly and Instantly suing for the same.

The Answer to this Speech will, I hope, give the Reader great satisfaction, as
to Queen Elizabeth's proceedure in this weighty concern; and therefore I have
here inserted it verbatim, as I find it in Cambden, which is as follows:

The Queens Speech in Answer to the Parliaments Reasons.

Camb. Annal. f. 366.


Very unpleasing is that way where the setting out Progress and Journeys end,
yield nothing but trouble and vexation. I have this day been in greater
conflict with my self then ever I was in all my Life; whether I should speak or
hold my peace? If I should speak and not complain, I shall dissemble, if I
should be silent; all your Labor and Pains taken were in vain; and if I should
complain, it might seem a strange and unusual thing. Yet I confess, that my
hearty desire was, that some other means might have been devised to provide for
your security and my own safety, then this which is now propounded: So that I
cannot but complain, tho not of you; yet to you, since I perceive by your
Petition, that my safety depends wholly upon the ruin of another. If there be
any that think I have spun out the time on purpose to get commendation by a
seeming show of Clemency; they do me wrong undeservedly, as he knows, who is
the searcher of the most secret thoughts of the Heart; or if there be any that
are persuaded, the Commissioners durst pronounce no other Sentence, for fear
they should displease me, or seem to fail of their Care for my preservation,
they do but wrong me with such injurious conceits; for either those whom I have
put in Trust, have failed of their Duties; or else they acquainted the
Commissioners in my Name, that my will and pleasure was, that every one should
act freely according to his Conscience; and what they thought not fit to be
made public, that they should communicate to me in private. It was of my
favorable inclination toward her, that I desired some other way might be
found out to prevent this mischief. But since it is now resolved, that my
security is desperate without her death, I find a great reluctance and trouble
within me, that I, who have, in my time, pardoned so many Rebels, wincked at so
many Treasons, or neglected them by silence, should now seem to show my self
cruel toward so great a Princess.

I have since I came to the Government of this Realm, seen many defamatory
Libels and Pamphlets against me, Queen Elizabeth foresaw she should be
reflected upon for this Action, but by the Papists only. She could not suspect
the Protestants would judge hereby of her, or censure her.
taxing me to be a Tyrant, wellfaret he Writers hearts; I believe their meaning
was to tell me News; and News indeed it was to me to be branded with the note
of Tyranny, I would it were as great news to hear of their wickedness and
impieties. But what is it which they will not venture to write now, when they
shall hear that I have given my consent, that the Executioners hands should be
embrewed in the Blood of my nearest Kinswoman? But so far am I from cruelty,
that though it were to save my own Life; I would not offer her the least
violence: Neither have I been so careful how to prolong mine own Life, as how
to preserve both hers and mine: which that it is now impossible to do, I am
heartily troubled; I am not so void of sense and judgment; as not to see mine
own danger before mine Eyes; nor so indiscreet as to sharpen a Sword to cut my
own Throat; nor so egregiously careless, as not to provide for the safty of
mine own Life. This I consider with my self; that many a Man would hazard his
own Life; to save the Life of a Princess; but I am not of their opinion, these
things have I many times thought upon seriously with my self.

But since so many have both written and spoken against me, give me leave I
pray you, to say somewhat in mine own defense, that ye may see what manner of
Woman I am, for whose safety and preservation you have taken such extraordinary
care, wherein as I do with a most thankful heart discern and read your great
vigilance; so I am sure, I shall never requite it, had I as many lives as all
you together.

When first I took the Scepter into my hand, I was not unmindful of God the
giver, and therefore I began my Reign with securing his Service, and the
Religion I have been both born-in, bred in, and I trust shall dye in: And
though I was not ignorant how many dangers I should meet withal at home for my
altering Religion, and how many great Princes abroad of a contrary Profession,
would in that respect bear an Hostile mind toward me; yet was I no whit,
dismayed thereat, knowing that God, whom alone I eyed and respected, would
defend both me and my Cause. Hence it is, that so many Treacheries and
Conspiracies have been attempted against me, that I might well admire to find
my self alive at this present day, were it not that Gods holy hand has still
protected me beyond all Expectations. Next, to the end I might make the better
progress in the Art of Ruling well; I had long and serious Consultations with
my self, what things were most worthy and becoming Kings to do, and I found it
absolutely necessary that they should be completely furnished with those prime
Capital Virtues, Justice, Temperance, Prudence and Magnanimity: Of the two
latter I will not boast my self, my Sex does not permit it, they are proper to
Men; but for the two former and less rough, I dare say (and that without
ostentation) I never made a difference of Persons, but high and low had equally
right done them; I never preferred any for favor, whom I thought not fit and
worthy; I never was forward to believe Storys at the first telling; nor was I
so rash as to suffer my Judgment to be forestalled with prejudice before I had
heard the Cause. I will not say but many reports might happily be brought me
too much in favor of the one side or the other: for a good and wary Prince may
sometimes be bought and sold, whilst we cannot hear all our selves; yet this I
dare say boldly, my Judgment (as far as I could understand the Case) ever went
with truth. And as Alcibiades advised his friend, not to give any answer till
he had run over the Letters of the whole Alphabet, so have I never used rash
and sudden resolutions in any thing.

And therefore as touching your Councils and Consultations, I acknowledge them
to have been with such care and Providence, and so advantageous, for the
preservation of my Life, and to proceed from hearts so sincere and devoted to
me, that I shall endeavor what lies in my power, to give you cause to think
your pains not ill bestowed, and strive to show my self worthy of such
Subjects.

And now for your Petition, I desire you for the present to content your
selves, with an answer without answer; your Judgment I condemn not, neither do
I mislike your reason, but I must desire you to excuse those thoughtful doubts
and cares, which as yet perplex my Mind; and so rest satisfied with the
profession of my thankful esteem of your affections, and the answer I have
given, if you take it for any answer at all; if I should say I will not do what
you request, I might say perhaps more than I intend; and if I should say I
would do it, I might plunge my self into as bad inconveniences as you
endeavor to persuade me from: which I am confident your wisdom and discretions
would not that I should, if you consider the circumstances of place, time, and
the manner and conditions of Men.

In December 1586. the Parliament was prorogued says Cambden, D' Ewes Jour. f.
407.
Adjourned (says D' Ewes) to the 15th of February, and thence ajourned to the
22 of February, and soon after, notice was given to the Queen of Scots of her
Sentence, which she received joyfully, and seemed to Triumph that she was taken
for an instrument for introducing Popery. But a Bishop and Dean of the Church
of England, Queen of Scots carriage to a Bishop and Dean of the Church of
England.

Camb. Annals f. 308.


being commended to her, to fit her for Death, she rejected them, and sharply
taxed the English Nation, saying that the English, had many times put their own
Kings to death, no marvel therefore if they now also showed their cruelty upon
her, who was issued from the Blood of their Kings.

After her Sentence was published (before any Warrant for her Execution) People
vented their several Opinions, some for it, some against it, I shall Wave all
but the then French Ambassadors Reasons on the behalf of the Queen of Scots,
and the Answer to those Reasons, as they are related by Cambden, as follows.

That it very much concerned the most Christian King of France, and all other
Kings, The French Ambassadors Reasons against executing the Queen of Scots.
Camb. Annals f. 374.
that a Queen, a free and absolute Princess, should not be put to death.

That the Queens safety would not be more endangered by the death of Queen
Mary, then it would be by her Life: That if she were delivered out of Prison,
she could probably attempt nothing against the Queen, being now in a sickly
condition and having but a short time to live.

That although she had laid claim to the Crown of England, she was not to be
blamed for it, but it was wholly to be imputed to her young and tender Years,
and to bad Counselors.

That she came at first a supplicant into England, and therefore having been
unjustly detained, she was now at length to be either ransomed, or mercifully
dealt withal. Moreover, that an absolute Prince was not to be called in
question, which made Tully, say, So unsual a thing it is for a King to be put
to death, for any Crime, that before this time, it was never so much as heard
of,

That if she were Innocent, she were not to be punished; if Guilty she was to
be spared; for this would turn to far greater honor and advantage, and would
be recorded eternally, as an example of the English Clemency. That the story of
Porsenna in this Case was to be remembered, who snatched the right hand of
Mutius Scaevola out of the Fire, and set him at Liberty, though he had
Conspired his Death.

That it was a prime Rule and Precept for well Governing, to be sparing of
Blood; that Blood cries for Blood: That to use the extremity of rigor
toward her, could not but seem a cruel and bloody Part.

That the French King would do his best to repel and frustrate the Attemps of
all Men whatsoever, who should offer violence to the Queen: and that the
Guises, the Queen of Scots near Kinsmen, would engage themselves to do the like
by Oath and Covenant under their hands, who in Case she should be put to death,
would take it very hardly and happily not leave her unrevenged.

Lastly, they required she might not be proceeded against according to so
rigorous, and extraordinary a Sentence: Otherwise the French King, could not
but take very great displeasure thereat, howsoever other Princes should hap to
resent it.

The Answer to those Reasons.
To these Reasons Answer was made from Point to Point as follows.

That the Queen of England trusted, the most Christian King of France would
have no less a regard and respect for her, then he had for the Queen of Scots,
who had practiced the destruction of an Innocent Princess, her near Kinswoman,
and a Confederate with the French King. That it was expedient and necessary for
Kings and Commonwealths, that wicked attempts (especially against Princes)
should not go unpunished.

That the English, which acknowledged the Sovereign Authority of Queen
Elizabeth only in England, could not acknowledge two Supreme free and absolute
Princes in England at one time, or account any other whomsoever, equal to her
in England as long as she lived. Neither indeed did they see, how the Queen of
Scots, and her Son who at present Reigns, can be reputed both at one time for
Supreme and Absolute Princes.

Whether the Queens safety would be exposed to greater danger upon her being
Executed, depended upon future Accidents and Contingences; the Estates of
England, upon serious deliberations of the Matter, thought otherwise there
would never be occasions wanting for bad attempts, especially when the Matter
was now come to that pass, that the one had no hope of safety, unless the other
were ruined: and this saying they might call to Mind aut ego illam, aut illa
me, either I must take away her Life, or she will take away mine. The shorter
the time to come of her Life was, the sooner and more eagerly would the
Conspirators hasten the Queens danger.

That the Title which she claimed to the Crown of England, she would not yet
renounce, and therefore she was with good reason detained in Prison, and so to
be detained (though she came a Supplicant into England) till she had renounced
the same, and the Crimes which she had committed since she was Prisoner, she
ought to suffer for, whatever were the Cause of her first casting into Prison.

That the Queen had formerly most Graciously spared her Life, when by unanimous
consent of the Estates, she was Condemned for a Rebellion raised, about an
intended Marriage between her and the Duke of Norfolk: and to spare her again,
were but unadvised and cruel pity; that no man was ignorant of that saying of
the Lawyers. A Man offending in another Territory, and there found, is
punished in the Place of his Offense, without regard of his Dignity, Honor or
Privilege: And that this was both justifiable by the Laws of England, and by
the Examples of Licinius, Robert King of Scicily, Bernard King of Italy,
Couradine, Elizabeth Queen of Hungary, Joan Queen of Naples, and Dejotants; for
whom Tully pleading, said, it was no unjust thing that a King should be found
Guilty, and put to Death, though it were not usual: For thus the words run,
which I speak first touching a Kings forfeiture of Life and Estate, which thing
though it be not unjust, especially when thy Life is in danger from him, yet is
it so unsual, etc.

That she ought to be punished, having been found Guilty upon a just and legal
Trial; considering that what is just, the same is honest, and what is honest,
is also profitable and Expedient.

That the Story of Porsenna suited not with the present Case, unless a Man
should imagine a numerous Combinations of men to have laid wait for the Queens
Life, and should thereupon persuade her to let the Queen of Scots at Liberty
without any hurt, out of a fear of them, with some regard to her own honor,
but none to her safety, as Porsenna discharged Mutius, after he had affirmed
that three hundred like himself had Conspired and vowed his death: Moreover,
Mutius attempted this against Porsenna, in a just and declared War; and when
Mutius was let go, Porsenna verily persuaded himself that all the danger was
over; but the Case here is quite otherwise.

That Blood indeed is to be spared, but it must be inoncent Blood, this God
has commanded. True it is indeed, that the voice of innocent Blood cries for
Blood; and this can France both before and since the Massacre at Paris, well
witness and testify.

That Death that is justly inflicted cannot seem Bloody; as is neither Physic
prapared duly, and as it ought to be, esteemed violent.

That howsoever the Guises, the Queen of Scots Kinsmen, might take the Matter,
yet it highly concerned the Queen, to regard rather the safety of her self, the
Nobility and People of England (upon whose love and affection she wholly
depended) then the displeasure of any whomsoever.

That the Matter was come to that pass, that what was said of old concerning
two Princes, Couradine of Sicily, and Charles of Anjou, might now be spoken of
two Queens, it might now be truly said, the Death of Mary is the Life of
Elizabeth, and the Life of Mary the Death of Elizabeth.

That the French King or the Guises promises could not secure the Queen and
Realm, much less make satisfaction for her Life, if she should be made away.

That the French King could neither discover nor hinder secret Plots against
himself at home, much less was he like to hinder those against the Queen of
England: For Treason is plotted in secret, and therefore hard to be prevented,
if the fact were once committed, what would it avail to claim their Promises?
how should an incomparable Prince's death be made amends for? and in so sad and
woeful a Confusion of all things, what Remedy could be found for the languishing
Commonwealth?

That the Obligations and Oaths of the Guises were of small value, who judged
it Meritorious to kill the Bishop of Rome's Adversaries, and could easily
procure Dispensations for their Oaths, and what Englishman, if Queen Elizabeth
were slain, and the Queen of Scots, of the house of Guise, advanced to the
Crown, durst accuse them of the Murder? and if any should accuse them; could
they thereby make her alive again?

And the Ambassadors in calling this a rigorous and extraordinary Sentence,
have spoken rashly and unadvisedly (for as much as they have neither seen
Process nor Proofs) and have more sharply then is fitting, taxed the Estates of
the Realm of England, choice Men for their Nobility, Virtue, Prudence, and
Piety: Yea, they have very inconsiderately uttered such Words in the French
Kings Name, as if they meant by threats to terrify the Queen, and the Estates
of the Land. The Englishmen use not to be terrified by the French-mens threats
from taking Courses to secure their own Tranquillity, when they, in the mean
time, could direct them no proper way to avoid the instant and threatening
Dangers.

The Answer to these Reasons not leaving the French Ambassador Room for a
Reply, from Words he was resolved to fall to Blows, and that he might save one
Queens Life, enters into a Plot to take away another. A Plot by the French
Ambassador, to take away the Queens Life. Camb. Annal. f. 377.

Stafford engaged in it, but refused it, and proposed one Moody who undertook
it.


And in order to this, he at first more closely tampers with one William
Stafford, a young Gentleman whose Mother and Brother were Servants to the
Queen, the former of the Queens Bed Chamber, the Latter Ambassador in France,
and afterward more plainly and openly by Trappy his Secretary, who promised
him if he would effect it, not only great Glory and vast Riches, but special
favor with the Pope, the Duke of Guise, and all the Papists. Stafford refused
to do it himself, but recommended one Moody, who undertook the Matter; and as
to the Manner, propounded to do it, either by Poison, or by a bag of Gunpowder
of twenty pounds weight to be conveyed under her Bed, and secretly fired: But
soon after Stafford discovered the whole, Trappy was taken and Confessed the
Matter, the Ambassador was sent for and rebuked, but he insisted, that he being
an Ambassador, was not bound to make any Discovery to any but his Master.

Camb. Annal. f. 379.

Bakers Chron. f. 371.

The Queen privately signed a Warrant to execute the Queen of Scots and
delivered the same to Davison.

Camb. Annal. f. 387, 389, 383.

Bakers Chron. f. 371.

Davison Acquaints the Council with it. The Council execute her before the
Queen knew it. Queen Elizabeth Resents it. Camb. Annal. f. 388.

Bakers Chron. f. 372.


At this time there were diverse Rumors, and terrifying Reports spread over
England, viz. that the Spanish Fleet was already arrived at Milford Haven; that
the Scots were broken into England; that the Duke of Guise was Landed in Sussex
with a strong Army; that the Queen of Scots was escaped out of Prison, and had
raised an Army; that the Northern Parts were up in Rebellion; that there was a
new Conspiracy on foot to kill the Queen, and set the City of London on Fire:
These Reports hastened on the Queens signing a Warrant for the Execution of the
Queen of Scots; to do which, she being by her Courtiers, as before she had been
by the Parliament, pressed, both by Reasons, and also by Examples; did command
a Warrant to be drawn up for her Execution; which Command she delivered in
Writing to Davison, one of her Secretaries, but commanded him to acquaint no
Man therewith. But the next Day, having changed her Mind, she commanded
Davison, by William Killigrew, that the Warrant should not be drawn. He came
presently to the Queen, and told her that it was drawn and under the Seal
already, whereat she was greatly moved; but notwithstanding, he acquainted the
Council with it, and they believing that the Queen commanded it should be
Executed, without any delay, sent down, and had it done on the 8 th. Day of
February, 1586.

As soon as the Report was brought to Queen Elizabeth's Ears ( who little
thought of such a thing) that the Queen of Scots was put to Death, she heard it
with great Indignation; her Countenance altered, her Speech faltered and failed
her, and through excessive Sorrow, she stood in a manner astonished, insomuch,
as she gave her self over to passionate Grief, putting her self into mourning
Habit, and shed abundance of Tears. Her Council she sharply rebuked, and
commanded them out of her Sight, causing them to be Examined. Davison she
commanded to appear, and be tried in the Star Chamber; A great fine in those
days.
Her Council she forgave, but Davison was tried, fined a thousand Pounds, and
imprisoned during the Queens pleasure.

Yorks Plot. Camb. Annal. f. 397.

Foulis Hist. l. 7. cap. 7. f. 356.

Bakers Chron. f. 373.


After the Queen of Scots was executed, the first piece of Treasonable Practice
of the Papists, I meet with is, that of York, who drew Stanley to betray
Deventer, a strong and wealthy Place, to the Spaniards contrary to Oath
solemnly taken to Leicester, and to satisfy his Conscience against the
imputations of Treason, he pretended, that he had restored that place to the
true Lord and Owner, which had been kept from him by Rebels, and being a rank
Papists, he soon after sent for Papists to instruct his Regiment, consisting of
thirteen hundred English and Irish, in the Popish Religion; giving out, that
this should be a Seminary Regiment of Soldiers to defend the Romish Religion
by their Swords, as the Seminary Priests did by their Writings: And for this
purpose, Allen who was not long after made Cardinal, not only dispatched Priests
to him with all expedition, but set forth a Book also wherein, according to
Pius Quintus his Bull against Queen Elizabeth, he both commended the Treason,
and excited others to the like perfidiousness, as if they were neither bound to
serve nor obey an Excommunicate Queen.

And now let us see what the Parliament are doing after the Death of the Queen
of Scots; That great Root of Rebellion and Treason, even in their opinion.

At the meeting of the Parliament 22 d. of February, to which the same was
adjourned, the Queen acquainted them by Sr. Christopher Hatton, that the Nation
was in great danger, and what the danger was, you will find laid down in an
excellent Speech, The Parliament met 22d. Feb. 28, 29. Eliz.
made in the House of Commons by the said Sr. Christopher Hatton, which I have
here inserted, that you may see that though the Queen of Scots was dead, yet the
Papists were not: but as active against the Queen, and the Protestant Religion
as ever. The Speech take, as it is set down in Sr. Simon D' Ewes his journal
which is as follows.

That it was Her Majesty's pleasure to have dangers disclosed, and to have the
House know that she thanked God for the Goodness of the House, Sr. Christopher
Hattons Speech D'Ewes journal f. 408.
that she wished the Session (mistaken for Meeting) to be short, that Men of
Government, might go home for matter of Government, Hospitality and Defense,
and to take another time for making of Laws, saving such as be now of
necessity.

The dangers which Her Majesty means, proceed of ancient Malice, and are to
be prepared for, and God called for Aid.

The Principal Heads of the Dangers.
The Catholics abroad, the Pope, the King of Spain, the Princes of the League,
the Papists at home and their Ministers.

The Principal Root hereof:
The Council of Trent which agreed to extirpate Christian Religion (which they
term Heresy) whereunto diverse Princes assented, and bound themselves in solemn
Manner.

Pope Pius Quintus sent his Excommunication against Her Majesty. Dr. Mourton
and Mendoza a Spanish Ambassador bestirred them, a Northren Rebellion was bred,
the Pope and the rest Practiced for the Scottish Queen, and she being
acquainted proceeds by her means.

Pope Paulus the thirteenth proceeds and sends Jesuits and Seminaries to
England and Ireland, and they proceed to inveagle the the Subjects, and
dissuade them from obedience. Viska begins a Rebellion in Ireland, James
Fitz Morris furthereth the Execution thereof. Doctor Saunders and Desmond stir
new Rebellion there, and wrote into England, etc. Parry was moved to kill Her
Majesty, and persuaded it was Meritorious.

Pope Sixtus the fifth imitateth the other Popes, to execute their former
Devices, and writes to the Cardinal of Lorain and Guise; that he will
overthrow the Gospel (which Mr. Vice Chamberlain honorably termed the glorious
Gospel) and therefore moved them to join with the Princes of the League, and to
practice to win the King of Scots, and to set up the Scottish Queen in England,
and make his reckoning of the Cantons that were Popish, the Switzers, the Duke
of Savoy, they Duke of Ferara, King of Spain, and King of France: A chief
Instrument to work this was one Carew, called also Father Henry.

He was sent into Germany, and over Italy and France, wrote to the Scottish
Queen, that the Powers will join to overthrow England, and make known the
effect of his Labor to the Pope. Invasion should have been made into England
and Ireland the last year, and not like to be unattempted this year.

The Pope Excommunicateth the King of Navar; the Pope accounts not of Popish
Preaching and persuasions that way; But nevertheless moves all to use the
Word, and for maintenance thereof spares his Treasure otherwise, and
withdraws maintenance from Jesuits, Seminaries; and diverse other Letters
were found with the Scottish Queen, which prove all these to be true. If we
serve Almighty God in sincerity of Heart, we need not to fear. It is to be
remembered that the King of Spain sought to recover some part of his Fathers
Credit, by using our Treasure and Force to get St. Quintines; but he soon made
his advantage of it, and regarded not our Territories in France: But suffered
the loss of Calice and all our Territories; and after the Death of Queen Mary
what he could. Her Majesty sought for his Good Will, sending the Lord
Mountague, the Lord Cobham, Sr. Thomas Chamberlain Knight, Mr. Maun and others,
and they were but hardly used, some of them were offered great indignity, and
Mr. Mauns Son forced by strength to do a kind of Penance. He comforted the
Queens Enemies, he gives Color of Wars, he Charge the Queen that her
Subjects have aided his Rebels in the Low Countries, with the countenancing
Mounsieur with many at Cambray, with sending her Nobility with him into the Low
Countries, with the Actions of Sr. Francis Drake, with assistance of the Low
Countries.

Of the purpose of the Combined Princes.
Their show is to deal with the King of Navar to extirpate him, but their drift
is to ruinate Religion not only there, but to set upon, and to work the ruin of
it here also. Wherein the King of Spain and Guise are now very busy. Their
Malice is the more for the executing the Scottish Queen^: But their hope is the
less. The King of Spain his Designments are to invade England and Ireland.

His Preparations.
Three hundred sixty Sail of Spain. Eighty Galleys from Venice and Genoua, one
Galliass with six hundred armed Men, from the Duke of Florence. Twelve thousand
Men maintained by Italy and the Pope. Six thousand by the Spanish Clergy,
twelve thousand by his Nobility and Gentlemen of Spain: It is reported that ten
thousand of these be Horsemen, I think it not all true, but something there is.

We must look to the Papists at home and abroad. It has touched us in the
Blood of the Nobility, and the Blood of many Subjects.

They practice to frame Subjects against all Duty, and bring in Doctrine of
Lawfulness and Merit to kill the Queen, and have sent their Instruments abroad
to that purpose.

Notwithstanding things stood thus, yet the Parliament having made so many
Laws, thought convenient, to make but one Law this Session against the Papists,
which was not made Provisory of any new Remedy against them, but to enforce the
Execution only of a former Law. It is entitled, An Act for the more speedy and
due Execution of certain Branches of the Stat. 23. Eliz. entitled, An Act to
retain the Queens Majesty's Subjects in their due obedience.

29. Eliz. cap. 6, Rast. Stat. 2. Part. f. 338. An Act to enforce the Execution
of 23. Eliz.
By which Act, For the avoiding all Frauds and Delays, in hinderance of the
Execution of the said Act, it is provided; that certain assurances made by
Papists shall be void against the Queen: That the Conviction shall be at the
Kings Bench, or at the Assizes or general Goal Delivery; and certified into the
Exchequer: The twenty pounds a month for not going to Church is to be paid into
the Exchequer every Easter and Michaelmas Term; In default of Payment the Queen
may take all the Goods, and two parts of the Lands and Leases of the Offenders.
The indictment sufficient, tho it mentions not the Parties being within the
Realm: Upon Proclamation made, if the party renders not his Body, he stands
Convicted, no forfeiture, if the party submits, or dies. Assurances made bona
fide not to be impeached, nor Lands for Life, or in the Wives right, after the
Offenders Death.

Thus did the Plots and Conspiracies of the Papists, from time to time, force
the State to make either New Laws against them, or else Laws for the more
effectual executing the old; for the truth of the Plots and Conspiracies before
mentioned, I shall here insert the very words of the Secular Priests in their
important Considerations as hereunto follows, The Secular Priests Confession
of the Plots beforementioned. Collect. f. 45. Babingtons Plot.
We might add the notable Treasons of Mr. Anthony Babington, and his Accomplices
in the Year 1586. Which were so apparent as we were greatly abashed at the
shameless Boldness, of a young Jesuit; who to excuse the said Traitors and
qualify their offenses, presumed in a kind of supplication to Her Majesty to
ascribe the Plotting of all that mischief to Mr. Secretary Walfingham, the
Treachery also of Sr. William Stanley, the year following 1587. in falsifying
his Faith to Her Majesty, and in betraying the trust Committed unto him by the
Earl of Leicester, who had given him the honorable Title of Knighthood, as it
was greatly prejudicial to us, that were Catholics at home, Stanley's Treason.
so was the defense of that Disloyalty (made by a Allen before named.
worthy Man, but by the persuasions, as they think of Parsons) greatly disliked
of many both Wise and Learned. And especially it was wondered at a while, until
the Drift thereof appeared more manifestly in the year 1588) that the said
worthy Person laid down this for a ground, in justifying the said Stanley. viz.
that in all Wars which may happen for Religion, every Catholic Man is bound in
Conscience, to employ his Person and Force, by the Popes Direction, viz. how,
for, when, and where, either at home or abroad, he may and must break with his
Temporal Sovereign.

Let us now see what was further doing by the Pope and the Papists, against the
Protestant Queen, and the Protestant Religion in England, in the Year 1588, and
we shall doubtless see very good reason for making the Statute of 35 Eliz. Ca.
2. which was the last Law that was made against them in Queen Elizabeth's time.

The Pope, some Religious Persons in Spain, and several English Fugitives, The
Pope plotting again. Camb. Annal. f. 402. Baker's Chron. f. 374.
had called back the Spaniard to his former Designs for the Conquest of
England, which had been interrupted by the Portugal Wars; earnestly exhorting
him, that seeing God had given him Success in laying Portugal, and the
East Indies to his Dominions, he would do something which should be acceptable
to God, and becoming the Grandeur and Majesty of the Catholic King, that
nothing could be more, then the propagating and enlarging the Church of God,
which could not be more gloriously, nor more meritoriously done, then by the
Conquest of England, re-planting the Roman Catholic Religion, and abolishing
Heresy there. They suggested, that this War would be just, because it was
necessary, as also because it was for the Maintenance of Christ's Religion; in
regard, That the Queen of England being excommunicate, persisted contumaciously
against the Church of Rome, supported his Rebels in the Netherlands, annoyed
the Spaniards by continual Depredations, suppressed and sacked his Towns in
Spain and America, and had very lately put the Queen of Scots to Death,
violating thereby the Majesty of all Kings: That it would be no less profitable
than just, for so he should add to his Empire those three Kingdoms, quell the
Rebellion in the Low Countries, secure his Voyages to the Indies, without the
Expense of Convoys. To prove this, they suggested, that the Spanish Navy did
far exceed the English in Number, Largeness of Ships, and Strength, especially
considering the Addition of the Portugal Fleet; that England had no Forts nor
defenses, that it was unprovided of Commanders, Soldiers, Cavalry and
Munition, bare of Wealth and Friends; that there were many Papists who would
presently join with him; that so great was the Strength of Spain, and so
unmatchable their Valor, that none durst oppose them; and confidently assured
themselves of Victory; That this Opportunity was offered by God himself, a
Peace being then concluded with the Turk, and the French embroiled in a Civil
War: That the Conquest of England would be far easier than the Netherlands, in
respect the Cut from Spain to England was much more short and convenient, than
from Spain to the Netherlands. That in order to the Conquest of the
Netherlands, it was necessary, first to conquer England, and that England being
once conquered, the Low Countries must of necessity be subdued.

The Spanish King being persuaded to believe all this, resolves on the Attempt,
The Contrivance of the Spanish Invasion. Camb. Annal. f. 403, 404.
and the next thing considered, was, in what Way, and Means, to effect it. And
the Method agreed on, was, to do it with a well-provided Army from Spain and
the Low Countries, to be landed by a powerful Navy at the Thames Mouth, in
order to surprise the City of London, by a sudden Assault; this being resolved
on, the Preparation was made, which was so great throughout all Spain, Italy,
and Scicily, that the Spaniards themselves were amazed at it, and named it the
Invincible Armada. Their Cause, the Armada and Army, they recommended to the
Pope, and to the Prayers of the Catholics, to God and the Saints, and set forth
a Book in Print for a Terror, wherein the whole Preparation was set down.

The Prince of Parma also in the Netherlands, by the Spanish Kings Command,
built Ships, and many Flat-bottomed Boats, and other great Preparations in the
Sea Towns of Flanders, he had an Army of an hundred and three Companies of
Foot, and four thousand Horse; amongst which were one thousand English
Fugitives, who of all others, were least esteemed; neither was Sir William
Stanley before named.
Stanley, who had the Command of them, nor others who offered their Service and
Council once heard; but for their unnaturalness to their Country, they were
debarred from all access, and (as most inauspicious Persons) worthily, and with
Detestation rejected.

The Spanish Navy, in the whole, consisted of one hundred and thirty Ships,
whereof Galliasses and Galleons seventy two, in which were Soldiers nineteen
thousand two hundred and ninety, Camb. Annal. f. 410. Baker's Chron. f. 374.
The Number of the Armada.
Mariners, eight thousand three hundred and fifty, Gally Slaves, two thousand
and eighty, great Ordinance, two thousand six hundred and thirty; for the
greater Holiness of their Action, twelve of their Ships were called the twelve
Apostles; the chief Commanders were Don Alphonso, Duke of Medina, and John
Recalde a great Seaman.

Sixtus Quintus Curses Queen Elizabeth. Foulis Hist. li. 7. ca. 6. f. 350.
Camb. Annals, f. 410.
Sixtus Quintus the Pope, that he might not seem to be wanting in so good a
Cause, did not only assist with his Ant. Cicarella in vita Sexti V.

Allen sent into the Netherlands to carry on the Design.


Treasure, but his Papal Curse to boot; whereby he excommunicated the Queen,
dethroned her, absolved her Subjects from all Allegiance, and published his
Croisado in Print, as it were against Turks and Infidels; wherein, out of the
Treasure of the Church, he granted plenary Indulgences to all that gave their
Help and Assistance with this goodly Stuff. William Allen, (a little before
made a Cardinal) an Englishman, and an old Traitor to the Queen, was sent into
the Netherlands, the better to encourage the English Romanists to Rebellion;
Allen pulls out his Papal Tool, which he forgeth into a Pamphlet in the English
Language, which he prints at Antwerp, calling it,

The Declaration of the Sentence of Sixtus Quintus.

Their Methods.
And as a farther Interpretation of the Papal Intent, and the better to engage
the English to Rebellion, he joins a second Part to it, called,

An Admonition to the Nobility and People of England.

And that the Reader may better understand the Honesty of the Paper, take the
Sum of it thus.

Em. Meteram. Hist. Belg. lib. 15. p. 473, 474. Sam. Purchase. Pilgrims. vol. 4.
l. 10. c. 11. p. 1895, 1896.
It begins with Calling the Queens Government impious and unjust; her self an
Usurper, Obstinate and Impenitent, and so no good to be expected, unless she be
deprived.

Therefore Pope Sixtus Quintus, moved by his own and his Predecessors Zeal, and
the vehement Desire of some principal Englishmen, has used great Diligence
with diverse Princes, especially with the Spanish King, to use all his Force,
that she might be turned out of her Dominions, and her Adherents punished: And
all this for good Reasons.

Because she is an Heretic, Schismatic, is excommunicated by former Popes, is
Contumacious, Disobedient to the Roman Bishop, and has taken to her self the
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the No such thing.
Souls of Men.

Because she has, against all Law and Right, usurped the Kingdom; seeing none
(forsooth) must be Monarchs of England, but by the Leave and Consent of the
Pope.

Because she has committed many Injuries, Extortions, and other Wrongs against
her Subjects.

Because she has stirred up Sedition and Rebellion between the Inhabitans of
Neighboring Countries.

Because she has entertained What did the Pope and Spaniard do?
Fugitives and Rebels of other Nations.

Because she sent and procured the A Slanderous Untruth.
Turk to invade Christendom.

Because she persecuted the English Romanists, Cut of the And very justly, as
appears by the Relation before given.
Queen of Scots, and abolished the Roman Religion.

Because she has rejected and excluded the Ancient Nobility, and promoted to
Honor obscure People, A damned Lie.
and also uses Tyranny.

Wherefore, seeing these Offenses, some of them rendering her incapable of the
Kingdom, others unworthy to live; His Holiness, by the Power of God and the
Apostles, renews the Censure of Pius V. and Gregory XIII. against her,
excommunicates and deprives her of all Royal Dignity, Titles, Rites and
Pretenses to England and Ireland; declares her illegitimate, and Usurper of the
Kingdom, and absolves all her Subjects from their Obedience and Oaths of
Allegiance due to her.

So he commands all, under Pain and Penalty of Gods Wrath, to yield her no
Obedience, Aid or Favor whatsoever; but to employ all their Power against her,
and to Join themselves with the Spanish Forces, who will not hurt the Nation,
nor alter their Laws nor Privileges, only punish the wicked Protestants he
means.
Heretics.

Therefore by these Presents we declare, that it is not only Lawful, but
Commendable to lay Hands on the said Usurper, and other her Adherents, and for
so doing, they shall be well rewarded.

And lastly, to all these Roman Assistants, is liberally granted a Plenary
Indulgence, and Remission of all their Sins.

The Queen, to defend her self, set forth a good Fleet of Ships, Queen
Elizabeth's Preparation to defend her self.

Camb. Annal. f. 405.


under the Command of Charles Lord Howard of Effingham, Lord High Admiral, and
Drake Vice Admiral; she prepared two Armies, one of one thousand Horse and
twenty two thousand Foot, under the Command of the Earl of Leicester. The other
of thirty four thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, under the Command of the
Lord Hunsdon. And the Nation being jealous of the Papists, the Queen was
persuaded to commit diverse to Wisbich Castle, but could not be prevailed upon
to execute any one, not so much as a Priest, notwithstanding the severe Laws
then in being against them, and this great Preparation made against her, for
the Conquering of England, and the bringing in of Popery.

The Papists seeing such Preparations made by the Queen, A Trick of the
Spaniards.

Camb. Annals. l. 3. f. 407, 408, 409, 410.


set on foot a Treaty for Peace, and in February Commissioners went into
Flanders, and the 12 th. of April, 1588, the Spanish Commissioners met the
English near Ostend, and the Treaty was carried on by the Spanrards, with
design (if possible) to make England secure, and so to surprise them; for they
dallied with the English, till the Spanish Fleet was come upon the Coast of
England, and the Thundering of the Ordinance was heard from the Sea.

The 21 st. of May, 1588. the Spanish Fleet set sail out of Tayo, The Spanish
Fleet at first dispersed by Tempest. Camb. An. from 411. to 418.

The Fleets engage.

The Spaniard beaten.


and was totally scattered and dispersed by a very great Tempest; but being come
together again, the 12 th. of July, the whole Fleet set Sail again, and the 21
st. both Fleets engaged, and after four several Sea Fights (the First, the 21
st. the Second, the 23 d. the Third, the 25 th. and the Last, on the 27 th. or
28 th. of July) thy Spanish Fleet, the last Day of the same Month, was driven
Northwards, and machischeir Escape by Flight. This great Armada, which had been
three Years in Rigg^^g and Preparing, with infinite Expense, was within a
Months space, four times fought with, and at the last overthrown, with the
Slaughter of many Men, not an Hundred of the English being missing, and but one
Ship lost; and after it had been driven round about all Britain, by Scotland,
the Orcades and Ireland, grievously tossed, and very much distressed, impaired
and mangled by Storms and Wrecks, and endured all manner of Miseries, at length
returned Home with Shame and Disgrace. The Prince of Parma never joined them,
for which he was sufficiently reviled by the Spaniards.

As for Cardinal Allen, he was born in Lancashire, of good Parentage, Foulis
Hist. l. 7. cap. 6. f. 351, 352.

Camb. Annals. f. 490.

Bakers Chron. f. 381.


was bred up at Oxford in Oriel College, where he was Proctor; was prefered to
a Cannonship in York. In Queen Elizabeth's Days he quitted England, became a
Pensioner to the Spaniard; to carry on whose Designs against his Queen and
Country, he was very industrious; for which Service, Sixtus V. created him a
Cardinal 1587. and he died at Rome 1594. Oct. 16. He has told us himself who
were the chief Promoters of this Invasion, as Mr. Foulis tells us, and quotes
for it, Quodlibets, Page 40, 41, 57. his own Words, as he relates it, are these.

The King of Spain, at length, as well by his Holiness's Authority and
Exhortations, as by his own unspeakable Zeal and Piety, moved also not a little
by my humble and continual Suit, together with the afflicted and banished
Catholics of our Nation, of all and every Degree, who have been by his special
Compassion, and Regal Munificency, principally supported in this our long
Exile, has condescended at last, to take upon him this so holy and glorious an
Act, etc.

And then proceeds to encourage, nay, and threaten too, the English to take up
Arms against their Queen, and to join with the Spaniards and other Invaders. --
If you will avoid the Popes, the Kings and other Princes high Indignation; let
no Man, of what Degree soever, obey, abet, aid, defend, or acknowledge her,
etc. -- Adding -- That otherwise they should incur the Angels Curse and
Malediction, and be as deeply excommunicated as any, because that in taking her
part, they should fight against God, against their Lawful King How comes
Philip to be lawful King of England.
against their Country, and notwithstanding withstanding all they should do,
they should but defend her bootless, to their own present Destruction and
eternal Shame.

What Mr. Foulis relates out of Clark a Secular Priest, is so remarkable with
relation to this Invasion, that I cannot omit it, says he, and quotes his
Author.

As for the Jesuits, you shall hear what C. W. A Reply to Father Parson's
Libel, f. 64, 65.
Clark the Priest says, who with Watson, suffered afterward for Treason
against King James.

First, It is most certain, that all the World had very admirable Expectance of
that Army, and the Jesuits more than any.

Secondly, It is plain by the Cardinals Book (if They would hint to us, as if
Parsons were the Compiler of the Admonition; but its certain that Allen was the
Author of it, and Parsons with the other Romanists confess Allen to be the
Author.
it were his) written as a Preparative to that Account, that he was made
Cardinal on purpose for that Exploit, and to have been sent hither presently
upon the Spaniards Conquest. But Father Parsons says, that he labored to set
forward, at that time, the Cardinals Preferment (if you will believe him) which
makes it evident, a primo ad ultimum, that Father Parsons was a Dealer in that
Account.

Thirdly, It is certain, that the Jesuits in Rome were great with the Spanish
Ambassador Ledger there, and had great recourse unto him, when the Matter was on
foot, does not this then urge them to be Concurrers thereunto?

Fourthly, It is likewise most certain, that the English Jesuits in Rome,
appropriated certain Palaces in London to themselves, to fall unto their Lots
(when the Matter was in handling) to wit, Burghley-House, Bridewel, and
another, which I have forgot, making themselves cock sure of their already
devoured Prey. This all the Students that lived in the Viz. The English
College at Rome.
College at that time will witness with ^e, now would I demand of you, what
reasons they might have to be their own Carve^ (...) if they had not some
Interest in that Affair?

Fifthly, We know that they were more forward in Rome concerning this Matter,
than the Cardinal or any other; insomuch, as, at the first News of the
Spaniards coming down into the narrow Seas, they would have had Te Deum sung in
the College for joy of Victory, if the Cardinal had not stayed it.

And to conclude, Does not the posting of Father Parsons into Spain, presently
after the Overthrow of this Army, for further dealing with the Spaniard for the
time to come, and his better information in English Affairs; and Father Holt
posting into the Low Countries, for the like Purpose, to keep the Spaniard
still in hope of future times, that this Mishap might not withdraw him from
ever enterprizing the like afterward, show, that they were Dealers in the
former? Doubtless all these Circumstances cannot but sufficiently prove it,
that they were, in the Judgment of wise Men.

Foulis Hist. l. 7. cap. 7. f. 354.
This Grand Invasion of the Spaniards, so contrived and carried on by the Pope,
Spaniard, English Fugities, Priests and Jesuits, being ruined and brought to
naught, England might now afford it self some ease, her Enemies not being able
on a sudden to recruit their great Losses, this Defeat in a manner breaking
their Back, and cracking the Credit of Philip. But as by degrees he recovered,
so by the Instigation of the English Fugitives, was he persuaded to carry on
the same ill Will toward the Queen of England; Camb. Annals f. 457.

Bakers Chron. f. 379.


the first step that is set, is to send over English Priests, who crept every
day privately into England in great Numbers, from the Seminaries of Rome,
France and Spain (for the Spaniard had lately founded a Seminary for the
English at Validolid) who labored to draw the Subjects from their Obedience to
the Queen, and to unite them to the Spaniards Party, which being discovered,
the Queen put out a Proclamation, that none should harbor any man whatsoever,
but upon Enquiry first made who he was, whether he came to Prayers in the
Church, upon what Means he lived, where he dwelt the Year before, and other
like Circumstances, that they who could not answer these Interrogatories,
should be sent to Commissioners appointed in every Shire, least the
Commonwealth should receive any Damage.

Notwithstanding this Proclamation, and the severity of the Laws, one Hesket,
who was set on by Sir William Stanley before named, undertook to persuade
Ferdinand Lord Strange (who a little after by the Death of his Father Henry,
Heskets Plot to depose the Queen and set up the Lord Strange.

Fowlis Hist. l. 7. c. 7. f. 354. Camb. Annals l. 4. f. 477.


became Earl of Darby) to depose the Queen, and take upon him the Title of the
Crown, making pedegrees for him, drawing his pretended right from Mary his
great Grandmother, Daughter to Henry the 7 th. And for a better encouragement,
they gave him large promises of assistance of Men, and Money from the Spaniard,
but withal threatening him with assured destruction, unless he would undertake
the design, and conceal it, but the Earl, far contrary to their expectation,
discovers Hesket, who confessing all, is executed.

This failing we have another more dangerous, Lopez his Treason against Queen
Eliz. Camb. Annals l. 4. f. 484. Fowlis l. 7. c. 7. f. 354. Bakers Chron. f.
381.
set on by persons of the highest Rank, but it seems not unworthy the basest
Action, of whom any Religion might be justly ashamed.

As a Prologue to this, we may understand, that Don Sebastian the forward King
of Portugal, having ruined himself in the Affrican Expedition, and his great
Uncle Cardinal Henry succeeding him in the Kingdoms, and Dying unmarried,
several made claim to the Portugal Crown. Amongst the rest, Don Antonio, Prior
of Crato, natural Son to Lewis Brother to Henry. To him, being a Portuguese,
many of the People bare an affection; so that at last, the rest let their
Titles sleep, and the quarrel only remained between Philip the II. of Spain,
and this Antonio. But Philip having the longest Sword, under the Conduct of
Alva, wan the Kingdom; so that Antonio was forced to flee for refuge to our
Queen Elizabeth, who afforded him some assistance and favor; by which means
and protection, many Portuguese Ship't themselves for England, where they were
received as friends, with all respect and honor. Amongst the rest was Roderigo
Lopez a Jewish Physician, whom the Queen entertained in her own Service, making
him Physician to her Household; and Stephano Ferreira de Gama, with Emanuel
Loisie. These three were enticed by the Spaniard to undertake the Murder of
the Queen, for which they were promised great rewards, but Lopez was to be the
main instrument.

Lopez confessed that of late years he had been allured to do service secretly
to the King of Spain, which he did by means of one Manuel Andrada a Portugal,
Lopez his Confession.
an Agitator under Don Bernardino Mendoza, the Spanish Ambassador in France.

2. That the said Andrada brought him from Christophero de Mora (a Portuguese
but a great favorite of King Philips and an especial instrument for reducing
Portugal under the Spanish Crown) a Rich Jewel an encouragement from Philip
himself.

3. That he was informed of the King of Spains hopes of him, not only by
Andrada, but by Roderique Marquis a Portuguese also, but employed by the
Spaniard on such wicked designs.

4. That he the said Lopez did assent to these wicked Councels.

5. That he did secretly advertise the Spaniards diverse times of such affairs
of the Queens as he could learn.

6. That he did also assent to take away the Queens Life by Poison, upon a
reward promised him of 50000 Crowns.

7. That he sent Andrada to confer with Count Fuentez about it.

8. That he directed Stephano Ferreira de Gama, to write Letters to Stephano
Iberra, that he would undertake, as he had promised, to destroy the Queen by
Poison, provided that he might have the said 50000 Crowns.

9. That he sent these Letters by one Gomez Davilla a Portugal, that the reason
why the Murder was not Executed according to promise was, because he perceived
the delivery of the 50000 Crowns deferred, tho promised him from day to day.

That to take away this delay of the Execution, Count Fuentez, by the King of
Spains Order, did sign and deliver Bills of Exchange for the said Money. A
Nunnery founded with the very Money that was given to Poison Queen Eliz. Tho
Robinsons Anatomy of the Nunnery of Lisborn. p. 9.
This Money, or part of it, for security to Lopez was delivered to the Custody
of the English Nuns, then at Roan in France; which Money [the Plot failing and
Lopez Executed] was given to the said Nuns, who carried it with them to Lisbon
in Portugal, where they settled themselves in a Nunnery as appears by their
Register Book.


These Plots and Conspiracies against the Queens Person, and for the
Extirpating Heresy (as they called the Protestant Religion) moved the Queen to
call a Parliament, which she did in the thirty fifth Year of her Reign, A
Parliament called to secure the Queens Person and the Protestant Religion
against the Plots and Conspiracies of the Papists.
and recommended the preservation of her Person, and the Protestant Religion to
them, that they would put her into a posture of defending her self, and these
Kingdoms against any further attempts that might be made by the Pope, the
Spaniard, or any other, which was done by giving her large supplies, and making
an additional Act to the many that had been before made against the Papists;
which is Entitled, an Act for restraining of Popish recusants, to some certain
places of abode. The preamble runs thus: For the better discovering, and
avoiding all Traitorous and most dangerous conspiracies, and attempts, as are
daily devised, and practiced against our most Gracious Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty, 35. Eliz. c. 2. Rast. Stat. part. 2. f. 399. Papists not to
remove above 5 miles from the place of their abode.
and the happy State of this Commonweal; by sundry wicked and seditious
Persons, who terming themselves Catholics, and being indeed Spies and
Intelligencers, not only for her Majesty's Foreign Enemies, but also for
Rebellious and Traiterous Subjects, Born within her Highnesses Realms and
Dominions, and hiding their most detestable and divelish purposes, under a
false pretext of Religion and Conscience, do secretly wander, and shift, from
place to place, within this Realm, to corrupt and seduce her Majesty's
Subjects, and to stir them to Sedition and Rebellion.

Then it is enacted, that every Papist Convict, dwelling or having a place of
abode; should repair to such his dwelling house, or place of abode, and not
remove above five miles from thence, upon the penalty of forfeiting his Goods
and Chattels absolutely, and his Lands, Tenements and Hereditaments, and his
Annuities during his Life, and they that have none are to repair to the places
where they were Born, or where their Father or Mother should be living upon the
same penalty.

Popish Coppy-holders convict to forfeit their Coppy-hold to the Lord, if he be
not a Papist, if he be a Papist, then to the Queen.

Papists shall notify their coming, within Twenty days after their coming, and
present themselves, and deliver their true Names in writing to the Minister, or
Curate and Constable, etc. which is to be certified to the Sessions, and
Enrolled there.

All Persons, not being Feme Covert, and not having Free hold Lands of twenty
Marks per annum above all charges, or Goods and Chattels above the vallue of
Forty Pounds: If they do not obey this Act by repairing to their places of
abode, etc. shall abjure the Realm, and the abjuration shall be entered on
Record and certified: Refusing to abjure, or after abjuration, not going away
within the time appointed, is made Felony. A Jesuit Seminary, or Massing
Priest, refusing to Answer directly, whether he be so or no, shall be
imprisoned till he do make Answer: There is a saving in the Act to Persons
Licensed, or Commanded by the Kings Process, or bound to yield their Persons to
the Sheriff: Upon open submission, the offender is to be discharged, the
submission to be entered into a Book by the Minister; he that relapseth, shall
be in the same condition he was before such submission: Married Women are bound
by this Act save in the Case of abjuration.

Cullens Treason.

Foulis Hist. l. 7. c. 7. f. 356.


At the same time that Lopez was dealing withal about the Queens Murder, the
Papists to make more sure, persuaded one Patrick Cullen an Irishman, and a
Fencer, to commit the same Villainy against her Royal Person: In this Treason
Stanley was very active, who with Sherwood and Holt, two Jesuits, confirmed him
in the lawfulness of the action, giving him thirty Pounds toward his Journey
into England (being then in the Low Countries,) but he was taken, confessed
all, and is Executed.

York and Williams Conspiracy to kill the Queen. Fouils Hist. l. 7. c. 7. f.
356. Camb. Annals f. 495. Bakers Chron. 382. Their Confession.
The English fugitives beyond Seas, persuaded one Edmund York and one Richard
Williams with others to kill the Queen: And this wicked Treason was agitated
the same time, that Lopez and Cullen were consulting about theirs: But these
Traitors were also seized on, and suffered: The truth of which Conspiracy
appears from their own confession, which take as follows.

1. They confessed, that for an encouragement; Hugh Owen (a noted Traitor) at
Bruxells, had an assignation subscribed by Ibara, the Spanish Secretary, of
40000 Crowns to be given them, if they would kill the Queen.

2. That the said assignation was delivered to Holt the Jesuit, who showed also
the same to York, and produced the Sacrament and kissed it, swearing that he
would pay the said Moneys when the Murder was committed.

3. That Stanley did earnestly persuade York to undertake it, animating him
with the example of his Uncle Rowland.

4. That to forward the Plot, there were several consultations: Holt the Jesuit
sitting as President.

5. That Holt said, if the design failed, they would then employ no more
English, but Strangers.

6. That at these Consultations, there used several to be present; as Thomas
Throgmorton, Charles Paget, Hugh Owen, Dr. William Gifford, the finisher of
Calvino Turcissimus of whose Treasons we have heard formerly, Dr. Thomas
Worthington the chief promoter of the Doway Bill, adding some notes to it: He
also turned Bristowes Motives into Latin, and in his Old Age, turned Jesuit at
Rome.

7. It was also confessed, that there were designed to come into England, to
attempt her Death; one Tipping an Englishman, one Edmund Garret at Ensign, with
a Walloon, and a Burgundian.

8. That one Young had undertaken a Treasonable action too.

9. It was also confessed, that these three, York, Williams and Young,
determined at their coming to England, to have put themselves into the Service
of some great Noblemen of the Queens Council, thereby to have free access to
the Court, and every one of them to seek their opportunities.

10. That Williams, through zeal to the Cause, had wished his Sword in the
Queens Gutts.

11. That they had vowed, come what will of it, to be the Death of Her: And how
furious and abominable James Arthur the Irish Jesuit and others were in this
parricide; Antilogia, c. 8. f. 116, to 121.
Dr. Robert Abbot (a little after Bishop of Salisbury) has abundantly from
their Confessions, confuted the impudent Andraeas Endaemon-Joannes and
satisfied all Foreigners.

There were three Brothers of Norfolk all Jesuits, viz. Henry, Michael and
Richard Walpools, Robert Abbot, Antilog. f. 122, 123.
Walpool a Jesuit meets with one William Squire in Spain, and procures him,
Walpools Conspiracy with Squire against the Queens Life.
as an Heretic, to be put into the Inquisition, where with afflictions and
fair Speeches, he drew him to be a Zealous Romanist.

This done, he persuades him to kill the Queen; commends the Action to him as
pious and meritorious, offers him large promises, and at last Squire is fully
persuaded, and undertakes the Murder. At this, the Jesuit Walpool rejoices,
hugs and encourages him, binds him by several Oaths, under pain of Damnation
to be secret, and perform his promises, and not to fear Death: for, said he,
What does it profit a Man to gain the whole World, and loose his own Soul?
Assuring him, if he did but once doubt of the lawfulness and justness of the
Action, that mistrust would be enough to Damn him, such a sin being seldom
pardoned.

This said, he embraces him, then throwing his left Arm about Squires Neck; so
hugging him with his right hand, he makes the sign of the Cross upon Squires
Forehead; thus Blessing him, God Bless thee my Son, and strengthen thee, be of
good Cheer; I will pawn my Soul for thine, and thou shall always have the
benefit of my Prayers; and whither thou live or dyest, thou shall enjoy a
full pardon and remission of all thy Sns. And another time thus encourages
him: There is one thing necessary, which if thou prefer before all other
things, and do fulfill it, I have my desire, and thou shall be a glorious
Saint in Heaven.

Squire thus divelishly resolved, gets into England, goes to Greenwich, where
the Court then was, watches opportunity; and being informed that the Queen was
to Ride abroad, goes to her Horse, holds him according to his place; and
cunningly puts strong Poison upon the pumel of the Saddle; yet saying with a
loud Voice, as she mounted, God save the Queen. But such was the providence;
that her Majesty, neither in getting up, riding, or going down, once touched
the Pumel; yet he doubted not, but that in time it would work the intended
ruin, fully persuaded the Queen had laid her hands on it.

Of this Poison, being great expectation amongst some, and seeing no signs of
any such effect, they became incensed against Squire, thinking that he had left
them and the Cause in the lurch, and merely deluded them: Thus jealous and
enraged, a revenge is resolved on, and Squire cunningly accused of some design
against the Queen, Squire, upon the noise, is Examined, and wondering how any
thing should be known against him, yet suspecting Walpool his confession, and
believing all was fully discovered, freely confesses all as above is said; so,
as a Traitor, is Condemned and Executed. I shall close my account of the
History of making the Penal Laws in this Queens Reign, with the words of the
secular Priests in their important considerations relating to what the Papists
did, and writ, from 1588 to the end of her Reign; whereby they justyfie the
Queen, and lay blame on the Jesuits.

But now we are come to the Year 1588. and to that most Bloody attempt, not
only against Her Majesty and our common Enemies, but against our selves, all
Catholics: The Secular Priests confess all the matters before related to be
true. Collection, f. 46.
Nay, against this flourishing Kingdom and our Native Country. The Memory of
which attempt will be (as we trust) an ever-lasting monument of Jesuitical
Treason and Cruelty.

Then reckoning up the Treasons from 1580. to 1590. Let us consider, say they,
how we our selves all this while have been dealt with, such or us as remained
in Prison at Wisbich, (and were committed thither, 1580. and others not long
after committed also thither, Collect. f. 94.
to the number of about thirty three or thirty four) continued still in the
several times of all the said most wicked designments as we were before, and we
were never brought into any trouble for them, but lived there Colledge-like,
without any want, and in good reputation with our Neighbors that were
Catholics about us. It is true, that toward the number of 50. (as our Memory
serves us) Priests and Catholics of all sorts, within the Compass of the said
ten Years were put to Death; we say, upon our knowledges (concerning the most
of them) for their Consciences; but our Adversaries (as they think) do still
affirm for Treason: Such Priests as in their Examination were found any thing
moderate, were not so hardly proceeded with insomuch as 55. (to our
remembrance) that by the Laws (we acknowledge) might have been put to Death,
Camb. says 70. Annals f. 295.
were in one Year, viz. 1585. (what time great Mischiefs were in hand) spared
from that extremity, and only banished: which fact, howsoever some have written
of it; the Parties themselves accounted it for a great benefit, and so would
they also have done (we doubt not of it) if they had been of that number.
Whereas therefore Mr. Parsons (as we think) exclaimeth in a Pamphlet set out
shortly after; saying, where are now the Old Tyrants of the World: Nero,
Decius, Dioclesian, Maxentius and the rest of the great Persecutors of the
Christians? Where is Genserick and Henricus with their Arian Heretics alluding
to the State. Here we think both him and diverse others that have written to the
same effect, very greatly to blame. Sure we are, that the general Cause of
Religion, for the which both we and they contend (as often we have said) gets
no good but hurt by it; and contrary to the Old saying (be he never so bad, yet
let him have Justice,) tho some hard Courses have been taken by the State
against us, yet has it not by many degrees been so extreme as the Jesuits and
that Crew have falsely written and reported of it (nor indeed as they deserved.)

Afterward they inveigh against the Spanish Invasion, against Parsons for a
Book he writ, and against him and Creswel, for another they writ, they go on
thus: Whilst the said Invasion was thus talked of, and in preparation in Spain,
a shorter course was thought of, Heskets Plot.
it might have had success. Mr. Hesket was set on by the Jesuits, 1592. or
thereabouts with Father Parsons consent or knowledge, to have stirred up the
Earl of Darby to Rebellion against Her Highness.

Cullen.
Not long after good Father Holt and others with him, persuaded an Irishman one
Patrick Collen (as he himself confessed) to attempt the laying his violent and
villainous hands upon Her Majesty. Shortly after in the Year 1593. that Notable
Stratagem was Plotted (the whole State knows by whom) for Dr. Lopez the
Queens Physician to have Poisoned her, Lopez.
for the which he was Executed the Year after. This wicked designment being
thus prevented by Gods providence, the said Traitorous Jesuit, York and
Williams.
Holt and others did allure and animate one York and Williams, to have
accomplished that with their Bloody hands, that the other purposed to have done
with his Poison; we mean Her Majesty's destruction. Hereunto we might add the
late Villainous attempt 1599. of Edward Squire animated and drawn thereto (as he
confessed) by Wallpool that pernicious Jesuit. Walpool.
But we must turn again to Father Parsons, whose turnings and doublings are
such as would trouble a right good Hound to Trace him. For in the mean time,
that the said Traitors one after another, were Plotting and Studying how best
they might compass Her Majesty's Death; they cared not how nor by what means,
he the said Father Parsons so prevailed with the King, as he attempted twice in
two sundry Years, his new Invasion, meaning to have proceeded therein, The
Spaniard designed a Second Invasion.
not with such great preparation as he did at the first, but only to have begun
the same, by taking some Port Westward. Toward which he came so far onward as
Silley with his Fleet. At both which times, God who still has fought for her
Majesty and this Realm; did notably prevent him, by such Winds and Tempests, as
the most of his Ships and Men perished in the Sea as they were coming
hitherward.

Furthermore, the said good Father in the midst of all the said Traiterous
enterprises both at home and abroad, (devised and set forward by him and his
Companions) was ploding amongst his Papers, and playing the herald; how, if
all his said wicked designments failed, he might at the last Entitle the King
of Spain, and consequently the Infanta his Daughter to the Crown and Kingdom of
England. To which purpose he framed, and after published a Book, wherewith he
acquainted the Students in those Seminaries in Spain, and Labored nothing
more, then to have their subscriptions to the said Infanta's Title, therein
promissing unto her their present Allegiance, as unto their lawful Sovereign;
and that when they should be sent into their Country, they should persuade the
Catholics there to do the like, without any further Expectation of the Queen of
Englands Death. As Mr. Charles Paget affirms in his Book against Parsons.

They confess in these words: That the Jesuitical designments beyond the Seas,
Collect. 53, 54.
together with certain Rebellions and Traitorous attempts of some Catholics at
home, have been the cause of such Calamities and troubles as have happened to
us far less (we think) then any Prince living in Her Majesty's Case, and so
provoked, would have inflicted upon us. And after they tell us, that diverse of
their Communion have owned so much. I shall conclude this Reign with these
words of theirs which fully justify the making the Laws that were made in it.

We are fully persuaded in our Consciences; and as Men, besides our Learning,
Collect. 55, 56 57.
who have some experience, that if the Catholics had never sought, by indirect
means, to have vexed Her Majesty with their designments against her Crown; if
the Pope and King of Spain had never plotted with the Duke of Norfolk: If the
Rebels in the North, had never been heard of; if the Bull of Pius the V. had
never been known; if the said Rebellion had never been justified: If neither
Steukly nor the Pope had attempted any thing against Ireland, if Gregory the
Thirteenth had not renewed the said Excommunication, if the Jesuits had never
come into England, if the Pope and the King of Spain had not practiced with the
Duke of Guise for his attempt against Her Majesty, if Parsons and the rest of
the Jesuits, with other our Countrymen beyond Seas, had never been agents in
these Traitorous and Bloody designments of Throckmorton, Parry, Collen, York,
Willians, Squire and such like, if they had not by their Treatises and writings
endeavored to defame their Sovereign and their own Country, laboring to have
many of their Books Translated into diverse Languages, thereby to show more
their own disloyalty: if Cardinal Allen and Parsons had not published the
Renovation of the said Bull by Sixtus Quintus; if thereunto they had not added
their scurrillous and unmanly Admonition, or rather most Profane Libel against
Her Majesty; if they had not sought by false persuasions, and ungodly Arguments
to have allured the Hearts of Catholics from their Allegiance, if the Pope had
never been urged by them to have thrust the Kingdom of Spain into that
Barbarous Action against the Realm, if they themselves with the rest of that
generation, had not labored greatly with the said King for the Conquest and
Invasion of this Land by the Spaniards, who are known to be the cruelest
Tyrants that live upon the Earth: If in all their Proceedings, they had not
from time to time depraved, irritated and provoked both Her Majesty and the
State, with these and other such like their ungodly and unchristian practices:
But on the contrary, if the Popes from time to time had sought her Majesty, by
kind Offices and gentle Persuasions, never ceasing the prosecution of those and
suchlike courses of humanity and gentleness, if the Catholics and Priests
beyond the Seas had labored continually the furtherance of those most
Priest-like and Divine allurements, and had framed their own proceedings in all
their words and writings accordingly, if we at home, all of us, both Priests
and People, had possessed our Souls in meekness and humility, honored Her
Majesty, born with the infirmity of the State, suffered all things, and dealt
as true Catholic Priests: If all of us (we say) had thus done, most assuredly
the State would have loved us, or at least born with us; where there is one
Catholic, there would have been ten: There had been no Speeches amongst us, of
Racks and Tortures, nor any cause to have used them; for none were ever vexed
that way simply, for that he was either Priest or Catholic, but because they
were suspected to have had their hands in some of the said most Traitorous
designments: None of Her Majesty's Enemies durst so really have attempted her
State and Kingdom; we had been in better friendship with those that seek now
most to oppose themselves against us, and to all Men (as we are persuaded.)
Bonus odor Christi odor vitae ad vitam. Whereas by following the said new
violent Spirits, quasi turbae impellentes parietem, we are become, odor Mortis
ad mortem, non solum iis qui pereunt, sed etiam iis qui salvi fiunt. And
therefore let us all turn over the Leaf, and take another course, then hitherto
we have done.

CHAP. VIII. K. Ja. I.
AND now a Man might reasonably suppose, that after the first Plottings of the
Papists with the Guises, the French King, and the Pope, on behalf, and by the
instigation of the Queen of Scots; after Harding, Saunders, and S. P. busily
exercising their Episcopal Power in England, in 1568; after Ridolph's exciting
Queen Elizabeth's Subjects to Rebellion, sent hither by Pope Pius Quintus for
that purpose; after the Rebellion in the North fomented by Morton, sent hither
by the same Pope, to that end, headed by the Earls of Northumberland and
Westmorland, who were encouraged thereto by a Letter from the same Pope; After
Dacres his Rebellion in Cumberland; after the Earl of Ormonds Brethren, the
Bo^telers Rebellion in Ireland; after Pope Pius Quintus his Bull, declaring the
Queen Excommunicate and her Subjects absolved from their Allegiance, after the
Earl of Twomonds Rebellion in Ireland; after Storys Treason; ^ir Edward Coke
Attorney General to King James ^e First, in o^ening the fact ^f the
Gun-Powder-Plot, at ^he Trial of ^arnet the Je^ite, mentions ^^ese Treasons and
Conspira^es. The Rela^tion of the ^ryal was Prin^^d Anno ^606. which ^eing
taken ne^ce of whilst things were ^resh in memo^y, gives the ^reatest
confir^ation to the truth of them.
after the Spaniards, the Pope and the Guises contrivances to kill the Queen,
and set up Mary Queen of Scots, and introduce Popery; after I say, these things
had occasioned the making the 13 Eliz. cap. 12; And after Stukelys Plot to
invade Ireland and England at once; After Fitz Morris his Rebellion in Ireland,
carried on after his Death by Desmond; after another conspiracy in Ireland for
the destruction of the Protestant Relligion; after the erecting Seminarys
abroad, for the educating and bringing up Priests to be sent hither to alienate
the Hearts of the Subject from their Sovereign, and the Actual sending of
Campian, Parsons and others into England for that purpose, who were detected in
their attempts to compass such their wicked designs, and Executed for Treason;
after I say these things had raised a greater jealousy of the Papists in the
State, and caused them to make the 23 El. cap. 1. And after Somervills
Conspiracy to kill the Queen; after Francis Throgmortons Conspiracy to depose
the Queen by Foreign Force; after a further design of the Pope, the Spaniard
and the Guises for invading England, in order to destroy the Protestant
Religion; after Parry's Treason, all which Conspiracies and Treasons extorted
from the State the 27 Eliz. cap. 1. and 2. after Gilford, Savage, Babington and
others design to kill the Queen, and set up Mary Queen of Scots, who was at the
Bottom of this design her self, and promised to reward the Actors in it, for
which she was Tried, Condemned and Executed; after Staffords Conspiracy and
Yorks Plot; which Treasons occasioned the making the 29 Eliz. cap. 6. and after
the Pope, and the Spaniards design in 1588. to invade England, and thereby
destroy the Protestant Religion, with its defender by a Force, by them called,
the Invincible Armada, and this begun and carried on by English Priests and
Lay-Papists; after Heskets Plot to depose the Queen and set up the Lord
Strange; After Cullens Conspiracy to murder the Queen; after Lopez his
Conspiracy to poison the Queen, for which the Spaniard was to pay 50000 Crowns;
which Treasons did (as it were) compel the State to make the 35 Eliz. cap. 2.
for confining Papists with in five Miles of their dwelling; I say, after all
these Plots, Conspiracies, Treasons and open Rebellions, invented, begun, and
carried on by the Papists, and all with so little Success, and after their own
Confession of the whole to be true, and their own advice to turn over a new
Leaf; a man might reasonably suppose, that they should have ceased any further
Attempts by Treason, Rebellion, Plot, or Conspiracy to introduce the Popish
Religion into England: But such is the inveterate Malice, and implacable Hatred
of the Pope, and all that are of the Communion of the Church of Rome (if I may
call it a Church) that even before the peaceable James the First of England,
and the Sixth of Scotland, was placed upon the Throne by the unanimous consent
of all the Protestant Subjects of England, as (appears by the Act of
Recognition made in the first year of his Reign) there were several Plots for
the taking away his Life; and in one Plot, even Watson and Clark (two secular
Priests of the Romish Church, the former whereof joined with Bluet the Secular
Priest, in writing the Impot^nt considerations before mentioned, wherein they
acknowledge all the Plots, Conspiracies, Treasons and Rebellions before
mentioned, to have been committed by Papists, but insinuate it to be done by
the instigation of the Jesuits,) are found in a Plot against the said King
James, and Executed for it; but before I mention any thing of that Plot, I
shall give a short Account of what designs were on foot, against the said King
James his Life, before his accession to the Crown.

Queen Elizabeth being old and weak (and as they thought, The Papists plot
against James the First, before his coming to the Crown.
could not live long) the Papists thought it needless to make any more attempts
against her person, least her death should anticipate their quickest Designs:
But she and the Kingdom having their Eye upon the said King James, being a
Protestant, to succeed her, their main drift was to prevent him, if possible,
from succeeding Queen Elizabeth.

In order to this in the Year 1601. there was one Francis Mowbray, Mowbray's
Plot against King James the First.

Fowlis Hist. li. 10. cap. 1. f. 498.


Son to the Lord Barnbowegal, who had lived some while in the Infanta's Court
at Brussels, he they say undertook to take this rub out of the way, by killing
the King, to which purpose he went for Scotland, but took England in his way.
At London one Daniel an Italian Fencing Master, discovers the Plot to the
Queen; she seized them, and sent them into Scotland: Mowbray supposed Guilty,
is cast into Edinburgh Castle; whence thinking one Night to escape out of a
Window by his Bed sheets, they proved too short, and he fell upon the Rocks and
so dyed, his Body was hanged for sometime, then quartered, 1601.
and set upon the Gates, and several places of the City.

This Design failing, another is in hand in Italy, A design to poison King
James the First.
Ferdinando I. the Grand Duke of Tuscany, by the intercepting some Letters,
discovers a Plot to poison the said King James. The Duke, by what reasons
induced, is not material, but it is conjectured, in hopes to convert him, (
rather pervert him) to the Romish Religion, resolved to discover and prevent
it. At this time one Mr. Henry Wotton sojourned in Florence, 1602.
and was well acquainted with Seigniour Vietta, the Dukes Secretary; upon whose
Commendations Wotton is pitched on to be the Messenger. The Letters and
excellent Antidotes against Poison (such as were not then known in Scotland)
were delivered to him, who disguised under an Italian Garb and Name of Octavio
Baldi, hastes into Scotland, comes to the King, discovers himself and the
Conspiracy, and after some stay returns to Florence, he was afterward
Knighted by King James.

As the Popes are never without Designs for promoting some of their Nephews,
The Pope designs to exclude King James the First.
so Clement the VIII. the then Pope, in these Designs against the said King
James his succeeding Queen Elizabeth was not wanting, intending the Crown of
England for some of his friends, and perceiving that some in England (English
Papists to be sure) were tampering to promote the Interest of the Lady
Arabella, in this case he thought it best to deal warily; he was very desirous
that the Duke of Parma should wear the Crown of England, but finding that this
was not feasible, by reason Arabella's Interest was too strong for him, he
steers another course, and thinks of Cardinal Farnese, who being unmarried,
might take to Wife Arabella, and so unite Forces and Interests to carry the
Crown. To carry on this design, it was advised that all the Romanists in
England should unite, that their Cause might not suffer by any dissentions
about this Succession amongst themselves ( a good Caution may hence be given to
all Protestants in England, that they do not divide upon their present
Majesty's King William and Queen Mary's accession to the Crown; (who under God)
are the preservers of the Protestant Religion amongst us; for vis unita
fortior; and nothing but division can hurt us) to promote this union the Romish
Clergy, who then had and still have a great awe and authority over the Layety,
were exhorted by the Pope to be all of a Mind, as to this Succession, and to
press it home upon the Layety, that so the Layety might not be divided. To
which purpose it was concluded, that there should be an Arch Priest, who should
have a Jurisdiction over the rest, who are to ^it according to his Rules and
Directions, and in these designs Father Parsons (who was not yet advanced
according to his merit) was a main stickler and contriver, the Pope also had
drawn up some Bulls, and sent to his Nuncio in the Netherlands to Divulge and
spread them abroad at convenient times, wherein he declared, that not any,
though never so near in blood, should after Queen Elizabeth's death be admitted
to the Crown, but such an one as would not only tolerate the Roman Religion,
but would swear to promote and resettle it; and that in the mean time, Cardinal
Farnese might, in this Island, have the greatest vogue, the Pope made him
Protector of England ( as Pope Pius V. had before made Mary Queen of Scots,
Queen of England to carry on the same design) as he was of other Countries; Nay
rather then fail, the same Pope had formerly exhorted the French and Spaniards
to unite, invade England and divide it between them, nor did they neglect to
instigate the Family of the Pools to have a Right.

Diverse other Attempts were made by Winton, Desmond, and other Priests and
Jesuits to exclude King James the First, but all proved abortive, as did the
Treasons plotted against him, after his Accessions to the Throne.

Queen Elizabeth's death Camb, Annals f. 651.

Bakers Chron. f. 403.


On the 24th of March 1603. the Virgin Queen Elizabeth, of every Glorious
Memory, exchanged her corruptible for an incorruptible Crown, after she had
Reigned Forty four Years and Four Months, and in the Seventieth Year of her
Age, of whom her Successor gave this Character, that she was one, who in wisdom
and felicity of Government, surpassed all the Princes since the days of
Augustus.

King James the First Proclaimed. Camb. Annals f. 661. Bakers Chron. f. 403.

A Conspiracy against him.


She being dead, some few hours after King James was Proclaimed King of England
the First, of Scotland the Sixth, and no sooner is he set upon his Throne; even
before he could well get the Crown upon his Head, but we find a Plot laid
against his Life; for though the Papists could not keep him from the Throne,
they were resolved (if possible) that he should not sit long there. This Plot I
must confess is ( prima facie) of a strange Complexion; but when it is well
viewed, if we look upon the Majority of the Persons concerned, we shall find
them to be Romish Priests and Lay Papists, and therefore, if a thing may take
its denomination from the greater part, this may sure, and we may safely call
it a Popish Conspiracy, for although some Protestants were inveigled into it;
Yet they were the smaller number, and at that time under a discontent, Bakers
Chron. f. 404. VVilsons History of Great Britain f 4.
which oftentimes carries Men beyond the Principles of their Religion, and to
do things contrary to the Rules of right Reason. Whither their discontent was
well grounded or not, is not my purpose to enquire; but taking it for granted
they were Malcontents, I shall now give an account of who were Actors in this
Design, and what the Design it self was.

The Names of the Conspirators. Fowlis Hist. li. 10. cap. 1. f. 499. VVilsons
Hist. f. 4. Bakers Chron. f. 404.
The main Actors in this Conspiracy were William Watson and Clark, who had both
writ against the Jesuits for their Treasons and Conspiracies, Sir Griffin
Markham, Count Aremberg, Ambassador from the Arch Duke of Austria, Matthew de
Lawrency a Merchant but an Instrument employed by Aremberg, all zealous
Papists, Sir Edward Parham a Papist, Bartholomew Roskesby, and Anthony Coply,
Papists, Henry Brook Lord Cobham, and George Brook his Brother, who seemed to
be Protestants, Thomas Lord Gray of Wilton a Protestant then called a Puritan,
and Sir Walter Raleigh a Statesman and Soldier, and Fowlis says, troubled
with no more Religion, than would serve his interest and tur^

The design it self Fowlis Hist. li. 10. ca. 1. f. 499, 500. Bakers Chron. f.
405. VVilsons Hist. f. 4.
The design was, to set the Crown on the Head of the Lady Arabella; or to seize
on the King, and make him grant their desires and a Pardon, to raise a
Rebellion and alter Religion and Government, and in order thereunto, to procure
aid and assistance from Foreign Princes, to turn out of the Court such as they
disliked, and to place themselves in Offices, Watson was to have been Lord
Chancellor, George Brook Lord Treasurer, Sir Griffith Markham Secretary of
State, Lord Gray Master of the Horse, and Earl Marshal of England, for the more
secure carrying on these designs Watson drew up an Oath of Secrecy, which they
all took. But all is discovered, they are Apprehended, Examined and Tried in
November 1604 at their Trial they insisted, that this could not be Treason,
because the King was not then Crowned, but this Plea was soon overruled, and
they legally Convicted of the Treason, and Watson, Clark and George Brook were
Executed, the rest finding Mercy; the King being loath to soil his Throne with
Blood, and therefore spilt no more then was absolutely necessary. The Lord Gray
dyed in the Tower, the last of that Line. Said to lose his Life to gratify
Gondamor, Bakers Chron. f. 516. Wilson f. 115, 116, 117.
Raleigh was beheaded in 1618. The rest were discharged of Imprisonment, but
dyed miserably poor. Markham and some others abroad; but Cobham (as we Osborns
Traditional Memoires of King James p. 12.
are told) in a Room ascended by a Ladder at a Poor Woman's house in the
Minories (formerly his Landress) dyed rather of Hunger than a Natural disease.

This Conspiracy gave occasion for the Kings looking about him, and taking such
measures, as might secure his Person and Government against such attemps for
the future; and perceiving that swarms of Priests came every day over from the
Foreign Seminarys, he suspected some mischief was a hatching; and therefore
issued out his Royal Proclamation against Jesuits, which I find related by
Wilson in these Words.

Having (after some time spent in settling the politic Affairs of this Realm)
of late bestowed no small Labor in Composing certain Differences we found
among our Clergy, about Rites and Ceremonies heretofore established in this
Church of England, King James 1st. his Proclamation against Jesuits. Wilsons
Hist. f. 9.
and reduced the same to such an Order or Form, as we doubt not but every
Spirit, that is led only with Piety, and not with Humor, should be therein
satisfied: it appears unto us in debating these Matters, that a greater
Contagion to our Religion, then could proceed from these light Differences, was
imminent, by Persons, common Enemies to them both; Namely, the great numbers of
Priests, both Seminaries and Jesuits, abounding in this Realm, as well of such
as were here before our coming to the Crown, as of such as have resorted hither
since, using their Functions and Professions with greater Liberty then
heretofore they durst have done, Partly upon a vain Confidence of some
Innovation in Matters of Religion, to be done by us, which we never intended
nor gave any Man cause to suspect; and Partly, from the assurance of our
general Pardon, granted according to the Custom of our Progenitors, at our
Coronation, for Offenses past in the Days of the late Queen, which Pardons many
of the said Priests have procured under our Great Seal, and holding themselves
thereby free from Danger of the Laws, do with great Audacity Exercise all
Offices of their Profession, both saying Masses, and persuading our Subjects
from the Religion established, reconciling them to the Church of Rome, and by
Consequence seducing them, from their Duty and Obedience to us, wherefore we
hold our selves obliged both in Conscience and Wisdom, to use all good means to
keep our Subjects from being affected with superstitious Opinions, which are
not only pernicious to their own Souls, but the ready way to corrupt their Duty
and Allegiance, which cannot be any way so safely performed, as by keeping from
them the Instruments of that infection, which are Priests of all sorts,
ordained in Foreign parts, by Authority prohibited by the Laws of the Land,
concerning whom, we have thought fit to publish unto all our Subjects, this
open Declaration of our Pleasure, etc. Willing and Commanding, all manner of
Jesuits, Seminaries and other public Priests, having Ordination from any
Authority by the Laws of this Realm prohibited, to take notice that Our
Pleasure is, that they do before the nineteenth of March next depart forth of
Our Realm and Dominions. And to that purpose it shall be Lawful for all
Officers of our Ports, to suffer the said Priests to depart into foreign parts,
between this and the said nineteenth Day of March; admonishing and assuring all
such Jusuits, Seminaries and Priests, of what sort soever, that if any of them
after the said time be taken within this or any of our Dominions, or departing
now upon this our Pleasure signified, shall hereafter return into this our
Realm, or any of our Dominions again, they shall be left to the Penalty of the
Laws here, being in force concerning them, without hope of any Favor or
Remission from us, etc. Which though perhaps it may appear to some a great
Severity toward that sort of Our Subjects: Yet doubt we not when it shall be
be considered with indifferent Judgment, what Cause has moved us to this
Providence all Men will justify us therein; for to whom is it unknown, into
what peril our Person was like to be drawn, and our Realm into Confusion, not
many Months since by Conspiracy: First conceived by Persons of that sort. Which
when other Princes shall duly observe, we assure our selves they will no way
conceive, that, this Alteration proceeds from any Change of Disposition, but
out of Providence to prevent the Perils otherwise inevitable, considering their
absolute Submission to foreign Jurisdiction at their first taking Orders, does
leave so conditional an Authority to Kings over their Subjects, as the same
Power by which they were made, may dispense at Pleasure, with the strictest
bond of Loyalty and Love, between a King and his People.

Among which foreign Powers, though we acknowledge our self personally so much
beholden to the now Bishop of Rome for his kind Offices, and private temporal
Carriages toward us, in many things; as we shall be ever ready to requite the
same, toward him (as Bishop of Rome, in state and condition of a Secular
Prince) yet when we consider and observe the Course and Claim of that See; We
have no reason to imagine that Princes of our Religion and Profession, can
expect any assurance long to continue, unless it might be asserted by Mediation
of other Christian Princes, that some good Course might be taken (by a general
Council free and Lawfully called) to pluck up those Roots of Dangers and
Jealousies, which arise about Religion, as well between Prince and Prince, as
between them and their Subjects, and to make it manifest, that no States or
Potentates, either has or can Challenge power to dispose of Earthly Kingdoms
or Monarchies, or to dispense with Subjects obedience to their natural
Sovereign: In which charitable Account, there will be no Prince living, that
will be readier then we shall be to concur, even to the utmost of our Power,
not only out of particular Disposition, to live peaceably with all States and
Princes of Christendom; but because such a settled Amity might (by an union in
Religion) be established amongst Christian Princes, as might enable us all to
resist the common Enemy. Given at our Palace at Westminster the 22 d. Day of
February, in the first Year of our Reign, etc.

This Proclamation I thought fit to insert, because by it, it appears that King
James himself was of opinion; that the before mentioned Conspiracy was
conceived by the Popish Priests, however they prevailed upon some of the
Protestant Profession to join with them in Midwiving it into the World, and
therefore may truly be called Popish.

By the Kings issuing out this Proclamation, the heat and hopes of the Jesuits,
and their Correspondents were somewhat allayed, but it made way for more dark
and secret Contrivances, which they afterward put into Practice, and I shall
give a full Account of. But before I do that, I shall give you King James the
First his Opinion of the Papists, both Laics and Clericks, as he himself
delivered it in his first Speech to his first Parliament in 1603. Take it in
his own Words as related by Wilson.

King James his Speech against Papists Wilson f. 19.
For the Papists, I must put a difference betwixt my own private Profession of
my Salvation, and my politic Government of the Realm for the weal and
quietness thereof. As for my own Profession, you have me your Head now among
You, of the same Religion that the Body is of, as I am no stranger to you in
Blood, no more am I a stranger to you in Faith, or in Matters concerning the
House of God. And although this my Profession be according to my Education,
wherein (I thank God,) I sucked the Milk of Gods truth, with the Milk of my
Nurse, yet I do here protest unto you, that I would never (for such a Conceit
of Constancy, or other prejudicate Opinion) have so firmly kept my first
Profession, if I had not found it agreeable to all Reason, and to the Rule of
my Conscience: But I was never violent, nor unreasonable in my Profession; I
acknowledge the Roman Church to be our Mother Church; although defiled with some
Infirmities and Corruptions, as the Jews were, before they Crucified Christ.
And as I am no Enemy to the Life of a sick Man, because I would have his Body
purged of ill Humors; no more am I an Enemy to their Church, because I would
have them reform their Errors, not wishing the down-throwing of the Temple, but
that it might be purged and cleaned from Corruption: Otherwise how can they
wish us to enter, if their House be not first made clean? But as I would be
lother to dispense in the least point of mine own Conscience, for any Worldly
respect, then the foolishest Precisian of them all: So would I be as sorry to
streighten the politic Government of the Bodies and Minds of all my Subjects
to my private Opinions: Nay, my Mind was ever so free from Persecution, or
inthralling of my Subjects in Matters of Conscience, King James his Mildness to
Papists.
as I hope those of that Profession within this Kingdom have a proof since my
Coming, that I was so far from increasing their Burdens with Rhehoboam, as I
have so much as either time, occasion or Law could permit, lightened them. And
even now at this time, have I been careful to revise and consider deeply upon
the Laws made against them, that some Overture might be made to the present
Parliament, for clearing these Laws, by reason, (which is the Soul of the Law)
in Case they have been in times past, further, or more rigorously extended by
Judges, then the meaning of the Law was, or might tend to the hurt as well of
the innocent, as of the guilty Persons. And as to the Persons of my Subjects
which are of that Profession, I must divide them into two ranks Clericks and
Laics, for the Laics I ever thought them far more excuseable then the other
sort, because their Religion contains such an ignorant, doubtful and
implicit kind of Faith grounded upon their Church, that except they do
generally believe whatsoever their Teachers please to affirm, they cannot be
thought guilty of these particular points of Heresies, and Corruptions, which
their Teachers so wilfully profess. And again I must subdivide the Laick into
two Ranks, which are either quiet and well minded Men, peaceable Subjects, who
either being old, retain their first Drunk in Liquor, upon a certain
Shamefacedness to be thought Curious, or Changeable: Or being young Men through
evil Education, have been Nursed and brought up upon such Venom, instead of
wholesome Nutriment; and this sort of People I would be sorry to punish their
Bodies for the Error of their Minds, the Reformation whereof must only come of
God, and the true Spirit. But the other Rank of Laics, who either through
Curiosity, Affectation of Novelty, or Coffeehouse, have changed their Coats,
only to be Factious, stirers of Sedition, and perturbers of the Commonwealth,
this gives a ground to me (the Magistrate) to take better heed to their
Proceedings, and to correct their Obstinacy.

But for the Clericks, I must directly say and affirm, that as long as they
maintain one special point of their Doctrine, and another of their Practice,
they are no way sufferable to remain in this Kingdom, the point of Doctrine is,
that Arrogant and Ambitious Supremacy of their Head the Pope, whereby he not
only Claims to be spiritual Head of all Christians, but also to have an
Emperial Civil power over all Kings and Emperors, Dethroning and Crowning
Princes with his Foot as pleases him, and dispensing and disposing of all
Kingdoms and Empires at his Appetite. The other point which they observe, in
continual Practice, is the Assassinates and Murders of Kings: Thinking it no
sin, but rather a Matter of Salvation, to do all Acts of Rebellion, and
Hostility against their natural Sovereign Lord, if he be once Cursed, his
Subjects discharged* of their Fidelity, and his Kingdom given a prey, by that
three Crowned Monarch, or rather Monster their Head. And in this point I have
no occasion to speak further here, saving that I could wish from my Heart, It
would please God to make me one of the Members of such a general Christian
Union in Religion, as (laying Wilfulness aside on both hands) we might meet in
the midst, which is the Center, and perfection of all things. For if they would
leave and be ashamed of such new and gross Corruptions of theirs, as themselves
cannot maintain, nor deny to be worthy of Reformation, I would for my own part
be content to meet them in the mid way, so that all Novelties might be
renounced on either side: For as my Faith is the true Ancient and Apostolic
Faith, grounded upon the express word of God; so will I ever yield all
reverence to Antiquity, in the points of Ecclesiastical Policy: And by that
means shall I ever, with Gods Grace, keep my self from either being an Heretic
in Faith, or Shismatick in Matters of Policy.

But of one thing would I have the Papists of this Land to be admonished, that
they presume not so much upon my Lenity (because I would be loath to be thought
a Persecutor) as thereupon to think it lawful for them, daily to increase their
number and strength in this Kingdom; whereby if not in my time, at least in the
time of my Posterity, they may be in hope to erect their Religion again. No, As
they were very lately.
let them assure themselves, that as I am a Friend to their Persons, if they be
good Subjects; so am I a vowed Enemy, and do denounce Mortal War to their
Errors; And as I would be sorry to be driven, by their ill Behavior, from the
Protection and Conservation of their Bodies and Lives; so I will never cease,
as far as I can, Suffering the increase of Popery called by Jam. 1. a betraying
England and Scotland.
to tread down their Errors, and wrong Opinions. For I could not permit the
increase and growing of their Religion, without betraying my self, and my own
Conscience, and this whole Island, as well the part I am come from, as the part
I remain in, in betraying their Liberties, and reducing them to the former
slavish Yoke, which both had cast off before I came among them, as also the
Liberty of the Crown in my Posterity, which I should leave again under a new
Slavery, being left free to me by my Predecessors. And therefore I would wish
all good Subjects, that are deceived with this Corruption, if they find any
beginnings in themselves, of Knowledge, and Love to the truth, to foster the
same by all lawful Means, and to beware of quenching the Spirit that works
within them. And if they can find as yet no Motion tending that way, to be
studious to read and confer with Learned men, and to use all such means as may
further their resolutions; assuring them, that as long as they are
disconformable in Religion to us, they cannot be but half my Subjects, be able
to do but half service, and I shall want the best half of them, which is their
Souls. After which, the Parliament considering the said Proclamation and
Speech, and that notwithstanding, the Jesuits, and Seminary Priests flockt
over in great numbers into England, made an Act of Parliament; entitled, 1
Jac. cap. 4. Rast. Stat. 2. part. f. 550.
An Act for the due Execution of the Statutes against Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, Recusants, etc. By which it is Enacted,

THat all Statutes made against Jesuits, Priests and Recusants should be put
in due Execution, but conforming himself, should be discharged. If the Heir of
Papists be a Protestant, An Act for putting the Laws against Papists in
Execution, and for punishing the Heirs of Papists.
he shall be discharged of all the Penalties, Charges and Encumbrances
happening upon Him or Her, in respect, or by reason of any of His or Her
Ancestors Recusancy: But if the Heir of a Papist shall happen to be within the
Age of sixteen Years, at the time of the Death of his Ancestor, and shall after
such Age be or become a Papist, such Heir shall not be freed of the Penalty,
etc. Unless He or She Conforms; that the two parts of a Papists Lands shall go
toward the satisfaction of the twenty pounds per Month forfeiture, and after
his Death shall remain in the Kings hands until the Arrears be satisfied, that
none shall send or cause to be sent, any Person to any College, Seminary, or
house of Jesuits, Priests or any other Papist, Popish Order, Professing or
Calling whatsoever, upon the Penalty of a hundred Pound forfeiture; they that
go or are sent, are disabled to inherit, purchase, take, have, or enjoy, any
Estate whatever real or personal; and all Estates or Terms, conveyed to their
Use or in Trust for them are thereby made void and null. That no Woman or Child
under the Age of 21 Years shall go beyond Seas, without License of the King, or
of six of the Privy Council, first had under their hands, the Officer of the
Port that suffers such to pass, forfeits his Office and all his Goods and
Chattels, the Owner of the Ship, his Ship and Tackle, and the Master and
Mariners their Goods, and shall suffer twelve Months imprisonment without
Bayl, or Main prize. Keeping School contrary to the Act, forty Shillings
forfeiture.

The Gunpowder-Treason in 1604.
King James having by his Proclamation before the Parliament met, and in his
Speech at the opening of the Parliament, thus freely declared against the
Papists, especially the Priests and Jesuits, and the Parliament having made
the said Law against them, and they dispairing of any Tolleration in Matters of
Religion, which they had Petitioned for, now to their old Work of Plotting
again, and a Plot they laid, they did I say? It was of that Nature, that it is
next to incredible, that such a Complicated Villainy, should ever enter into the
heart of Man, qua Rational, much more, qua Christian; but one would rather
think, it had been the product of a Consult in Hell, amongst the Devils
themselves, and (if degrees of wickedness can be allowed to be there) amongst
the worst of Devils too.

The Plot it self Foulis Hist. l. 10. cap. 2. f. 507. Wilsons Hist. f. 28.

Bakers Chron. f. 507.

The Actors in it.


The Plot was this, with one blow to destroy King, Queen, Prince, Nobles and
Commons who were not Papists, this is designed to be effected, by blowing up
the Parliament House, when the King and Parliament were sitting, and killing
those of them who were not in the House.

The Persons concerned in this Plot were Robert Catesby, the Contriver hereof,
Henry Garnet, John Gerrard, Oswald Tesmond, and other Jesuits, the Advisers
thereto, Thomas Piercy, Robert Winter, John Grant, Ambrose Rookwood, John
Wright, Francis Tresham, Sir Everard Digby, Guy Fauks, Robert Keys, Thomas
Bates and others, Assistants in carrying it on.

To carry on this Design when it was laid, first an Oath of Secrecy was
compiled, and afterward the Conspirators took the same, and not only so, but
Garnet confessed them, and they afterward received the Sacraments, to bind them
to the greater Secrecy; the Oath was this.

You shall swear by the Blessed Trinity, and by the Sacrament you now purpose
to receive never to disclose directly or indirectly, The Oath of Secrecy.
by Word or Circumstance, the Matter that shall be proposed to you to keep
Secret, nor desist from the Execution thereof till the rest shall give you
leave.

After this was done, every Man betakes himself to the part assigned him, some
to provide Money, other Materials, and others a place to lay the Materials in:
The place pitched upon for placing the Materials in, was, Cellars under the
Parliament House, which Thomas Piercy had hired for that purpose, the Materials
were thirty six Barrels of Gunpowder, provided in Flanders, carried into the
Cellar from Lambeth in the Night, covered over with Wood, and Coals, and all
provided at the Charge of the English Sr. Everard Digby 1500 l. Mr. Francis
Tresham 2000. l. Piercy 4000 l. besides others.
Papists, who promised themselves, the extirpating this Northren Heresy, (as
they called it) and introducing in its Room, Popish Superstition and Idolatry,
as we call it, and the Divines of our Church have proved it to be, to the
Conviction of all (...), who will not Wilfully shut their eyes against the
Light.

Things being thus prepared, they looked upon the King, and Prince ( Henry) as
already made a Sacrifice, to atone the Sea of Rome for the revolt that England
had made from her; and Percy had undertaken for the slaying the Duke of York (
Charles the First) that there might be no ingredient, in the Sacrifice, wanting
to make it acceptable; but because it was thought necessary, for a Color to
their Bloody designs, to preserve the Succession, the Lady Elizabeth must be
spared, and made Queen; Foulis Hist. l. 10. cap. 2. f. 507.
and the Odium of blowing up the Parliament cast upon the Puritans. They
designed the Accomplishment of this unparalled Cruelty on the 5 th. of
November 1604. when the King and both Houses of Parliament were to meet, and
that very day they appointed a great Hunting Match at Dunsmore Heath, near
Comb, the Lord Harringtons House in Warwickshire, where the Lady Elizabeth was,
upon which pretense, diverse Papists were to meet well Armed, in order to seize
and secure her, with intention to marry her to a Papist, and by that means to
introduce Popery.

To carry on their Design of fixing this Plot upon the Puritans, Foulis Hist.
l. 10. cap. 2. f. 508.
they framed a Proclamation, which they got printed, and ready for publishing
upon the Sign given, which they suppressed, and burnt upon the Discovery, though
some of them by chance came to light, and were seen and read by Dr. Parker,
Dean of Lincoln, Sir William Ellis, Recorder of the said City, and others. And
that they might gain the greater Credit with the People in this Contrivance,
Keys (Brother-in-Law to Mr. Pickering) had a few days before, either borrowed
or bought the Swift-horse (well known in London and thereabouts) of Mr.
Pickering of Tich March Grove in Northamptonshire (a noted Puritan) whom they
also designed to kill; upon which Faux (having fired the Match and Touch-wood
leading to the Train) was to escape, as they bore him in Hand. But (O Horrid
Impiety!) their Design was to kill him (as soon as he had imbrued his Hands in
so much Innocent Blood) just as he was to mount the Horse, as being Pickerings
Man, which the People would easily believe, seeing the Horse was so well known
to them, and the Multitude once persuaded of this, would be more facile to join
with them, under notion of doing Justice upon such supposed Traitors and
Wretches.

They also consulted how to keep the Romish Lords from going that Day to
Parliament, the better to strengthen their Cause, by their Preservation. But in
the height of all their Hopes and Expectations, a Discovery is made, thus, The
Manner of the Discovery.
some of them, supposed by Monteagle, to be Piercy (but Bishop Answer to Sir
Anthony VVeldon's Court of King James. p. 73. M. S.
Goodman says it was Tresham who writ the Letter) having a great Affection to
the said Lord Monteagle (Son and Heir to the Lord Morley) had a mind to
preserve him from the intended Slaughter. So one Evening, a Letter Sealed is
delivered in the Street (the Strand) by an unknown Fellow, to one of the Lords
Footmen, charging him to deliver it with Care to his Lord. Monteagle opens it,
finds it without Date and Subscription, writ with a very bad Hand, and in a
Style he knew not what to make of. The Letter was this.

My Lord,
OVT of the Love I bear to some of your Friends, I have a care of your
Preservation; Foulis Hist. l. 10. cap. 2. f. 508. Wilson's Hist. f. 30.
therefore I would advise you, as you tender your Life, to devise some Excuse
to shift off your Attendance this Parliament, for God and Man have concurred to
punish the Wickedness of this time.

And think not slightly of this Advertisment, but retire your self into your
Country, where you may expect the Event in Safety; for though there be no
Appearance of any stir, yet, I say, they shall receive a terrible Blow this
Parliament, and yet they not see who hurts them.

This Council is not to be contemned, because it may do you good, and can do
you no harm, for the Danger is past, as soon as you have burned this Letter,
and I hope God will give you the Grace to make good use of it; to whose Holy
Protection I commend you.


Monteagle wondered at the Letter and its Delivery, and thinking it might relate
to some Mischief, thought it his Duty to make it known; so away he goes to
White Hall, shows it to the Earl of Salisbury, then Secretary of State, who
tells some other of the Privy Council of it, and the King being returned from
his Hunting at Royston, they delivered it to him.

His Majesty having seriously considered it, and all other Circumstances,
concluded, that it might relate to some Design to blow up the Parliament; and
in this Jealousy, ordered the Rooms and Vaults about the House to be searched,
which was done the Night before the Session, when in the aforesaid Cellar,
under the Lords House, were found the Barrels of Powder, and at the Door,
standing Guido Faux booted and Spurred, with a large dark Lanthorn (now to be
seen in Oxford Library) with Matches, Tinder-Box, and other Materials for his
Design.

Faux was presently carried to Court and examined, where he appeared sturdy and
scornful, maintaining the Design to be lawful; that James was not his King,
because an Heretic; was sorry that the Plot failed, and that he had not blown
up the House, with himself and those that were sent to search; affirming, that
God would have had the Plot concealed, but it was the Devil who revealed it; at
last, Faux himself confessed all that he knew of the Treasons. Thus far
discovered, the King suspecting some Commotions or Risings, sent with all speed
to prevent them by timely Notice, by Lepton and others. This was that Mr. John
Lepton of Yorkshire, who rid so often betwixt London and York in one Week, viz.
in May 1606, who though he won his Wager, yet was a Looser, never getting his
Winnings.

Piercy Wright, etc. who now lurked about London to expect the fatal Blow,
informed of the Discovery, takes Horse, making what haste they can to their
Companions, appointed to be at the Rendezvous on Dunsmore; in brief, according
to their Abilities, they run into open Rebellion, but to their own Destruction.
The high Sheriffs, with other Magistrates and Loyal Subjects, so hunting them,
that they were either all dispersed, slain or taken, and the Chief of them
afterward condemned and executed.

Proceedings against Garnet and his Confederates; printed by Robert Barker,
Printe^ to the Kings most excellent Majesty, 1606. to prevent untrue and
incoherent Reports and Relations of their Trials, as the Epistle to the Book
informs us.
And for the Confirmation of the Truth of these things, I shall here insert the
Heads of Sir Edward Coke's Speech, at the Trial of Robert Winter, and diverse
others for their Treason, in Westminster Hall, before the Earl of Nottingham,
the Earl of Suffolk, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Devonshire, the Earl of
Northampton, the Earl of Salisbury, the Lord Chief Justice of England, the Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Peter Warburton Knight, one of the Justices
of the Court of Common Pleas, Lords Commissioners for that purpose.

On the 27 th. of January 1605. were arraigned upon one Indictment, Robert
Winter Esquire Thomas Winter Gent. Guy Fawks Gent. John Garnet Esquire Ambrose Rookwood
Esquire Robert Keys Gent. and Thomas Bates; upon another Indictment, Sir Everard
Digby. At the Trial of Winter and the rest, upon the first Indictment, The
Heads of the Speech of Sir Edward Coke, at the Trial of some of the
Conspirators.
Sir Edward Coke, than Attorney General, made a very long and learned Speech,
wherein he first answered the Clamor that the Papists and their Adherents had
then made, because they were not sooner tried. Then he opened the Hainousness
of the Crime in all the Aggravating Circumstances of it. He said, that as the
Powder Treason was of its self prodigious and unnatural, so was it in its
Conception and Birth most monstrous, as arising out of the dead Ashes of former
Treasons; and then takes notice of very many, if not all the Treasons before
mentioned; I think in this Speech, and the Speech he made at Garnets Trial,
all, I am sure the most, are taken in. He then considered the Powder Plot it
self, with regard to the Persons by whom the same was conspired: And they were
Clergy and Laity of the Roman Communion. The Laity, Gentlemen of good Houses,
of excellent Parts, however most perniciously seduced, abused, corrupted and
Jesuited, of very competent Fortunes and Estates. It being then said, that
there was never a Religious Man in the Action; says he, in answer, I never yet
knew a Treason without a Romish Priest, and names, as engaged in this, Henry
Garnet, alias Wally, the Superior of the Jesuits, Legier here in England;
Father Creswel, Legier Jesuit in Spain; Father Baldwin, Legier in Flanders, as
Parsons at Rome, besides their Cursory Men, as Gerrard, Oswald, Tesmond, alias
Greenway, Hamond and Hall; then he opened the Doctrines and Practices of the
Jesuits and other Priests of the Romish Church, which he proves from Simanca,
Creswels, Philopater and other Books. Then he considered the Persons against
whom this Treason was conspired; the King, the Queen, the Royal Issue Male, the
most honorable and prudent Counselors, and all the true hearted and worthy
Nobles, all the Reverend and Learned Bishops, all the Grave Judges, and Sages
of the Law, all the principal Knights, Citizens and Burgeesss of Parliament,
the Flower of the whole Realm. Then he considered, that this was designed,
notwithstanding the King had used so great Lenity toward the Papists, that by
the space of a whole Year and four Months, he took no Penalties of them due
upon the Statutes; and besides this, diverse of the Papists were greatly
preferred. Then he considered the House of Parliament, which they pretended
they chose, because there the Penal Laws were made against them; which he
answered, by briefly showing what Laws were made against them, and that their
own Treasons were the true Grounds of making them. Then he considered the End
of this Conspiracy, which was to bring a final and fatal Confusion upon the
State, and this is to be effected by damnable Means, by mineing, by thirty six
Barrels of Powder, having Crows of Iron, Stone and Wood laid upon the Barrels,
to have made the Breach the greater. Then he considered the Secrecy of the
Contrivance and Carriage of this Treason, in three Respects; the first, that
Catesby had Recommendation for a Regiment of Horse in the Low Countries, that
under that Pretense, he might furnish this Treason with Horse without
Suspicion. The Second was, the Oath before mentioned. The Third, the Sacrament.
He then took notice of the admirable Discovery of this Treason, and proceeded
to make nine several Observations upon the whole, which were these: First, The
Mine had never been discovered, had not the Cellar been hired. 2. The Kings
Directing the Search to be made there, from those dark Words, A Terrible Blow.
3. Catesby, Rookwood and Grants, their narrow Escapes, having a few Days before
they were taken, been in very great Danger of being blown up by Gunpowder. 4.
Gunpowder was the Invention of a Friar. 5. Binham was sent to the Pope, to
give notice of this Blow, and to crave his Direction and Aid. 6.
Notwithstanding their rising in open Rebellion, and giving out, that the
Catholics Throats would be cut, not one Man came in to take their Parts, but
their own Company. 7. The Sheriff immediately suppressed them. 8. The Discovery
was made a few hours before it was to have been put in Execution. 9. That there
never was any Protestant Minister in any Treason and Murder that had been then
attempted within the Realm. Then he compared this Plot with that of Raleigh and
Watson and Clark. 1. They had both one end. 2. Both to be effected by Popish
and discontented Persons, Priests and Laymen. 3. They all played at Hazard,
the Priests were at the By, Raleigh at the Main, but these in at all, purposing
to destroy King, Issue, whole State. 4. All obliged by the same Oath and
Sacrament. 5. The same Proclamation (after the Fact) for Reformation of Abuses.
6. The like Army provided for Invading. 7. The same Pension of Crows promised.
8. The Agreeing of the Times, which was when the Constable of Spain was coming
hither, which was intended a Color to the Invasion, that it might not be
suspected.

After Sir Edward Coke had ended his Speech, The Evidence against the Traitors.
the Examinations of Winter and the rest, subscribed by themselves, were shown
particularly to every one of them, and acknowledged by them to be their own,
and true; and in their Examinations, every one had confessed the Treason, which
Confessions were afterward openly and distinctly read; by which it appeared,
that Bates was resolved for what he undertook in this Powder Treason, being
therein warranted by the Jesuits. Also that Hamond the Jesuit, the 7 th. of
November, after the Discovery, confessed and absolved them. The Confessions of
Watson and Clark, Seminary Priests, upon their Apprehension, was also taken
notice of, who affirmed, that there was some Treason intended by the Jesuits,
and then in hand.

After the reading their several Examinations, Confessions, Their Conviction,
Condemnation, and Execution.
and voluntary Declarations, as well of themselves, as of some of their dead
Confederates, they were all found guilty, and having nothing to say for
themselves, were comdemned and executed.

Sir Everad Digby having likewise confessed the same, was found guilty,
condemned, and executed for the same Treason.

Garnets Arraignment, Trial and Confeson. Proceedings printed in 1606. Foulis
l. 10. c. 2. f. 514, 517.
Henry Garnet, Superior of the Jesuits in England, was arraigned and tried for
the same Treason, on Friday the 28 th. of March 1606. at Guild Hall in London,
before Sir Leonard Holiday Lord Mayor, the Earl of Nottingham, the Earl of
Suffolk, the Earl of Worcester, the Earl of Northampton, the Earl of Salisbury,
the Lord Chief Justice of England, the Lord Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir
Christopher Yelverton Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices of the King's Bench,
Lords Commissioners for that purpose. He was a grand Agitator in this Plot, and
did himself at last confess thus much, That Catesby had told him of the Plot,
but not by way of Confession; that Greenwel had told him of this, not as a
Fault ( for how could they do so, that approved it as meritorious) but as a
thing that he had Intelligence of, and told it him by way of Consultation; that
Catesby and Greenwel came together to him to be resolved; that Tesmond and he
had Conference of the Particulars of the Powder Treason in Essex; that Greenwel
asked him who should be Protector? Garnet said, that was to be deferred till
the Blow was past; that he ought to have revealed it to the King; that nothing
deterred him from the Discovery so much, as his Unwillingness to betray
Catesby; that he had greatly sinned against God, the King and the Kingdom, in
not revealing it, of whom he heartily begged Pardon and Forgiveness.

Garnet Condemned and Executed. Foulis Hist. lib. 10. cap. 2. f. 514.
Proceedings.
And for this Treason he was condemned, and after his Condemnation, he himself
said, That the Sentence was justly passed on him. The third of May following,
he was executed at the West End of St. Paul's Churchyard, where he appeared in
a troubled and amazed Condition, still prying and peeping about for a Pardon,
although Henry Montague, Recorder of the City, pitying his Perplexedness,
assured him there would be none granted. And thus died this Garnet, after he
had confirmed the Matters contained in the Confessions of them that had been
before executed, by this Confession of his own.

And that none that are willing to receive Truth, as it is, which ingenuous Men
always are, may remain in doubt, take the true reason of his Confession from
himself at Foulis relates it.

The reason of Garnets Confession. Foulis Hist. lib. 10. cap. 2. f. 515.
The Jesuits being not a little offended, that he should any way confess himself
guilty which with some might be a Blot, both to himself and their Order;
Garnet, to vindicate himself to them, and to show the Folly of denying any
longer, thus writes to them -- What should I do? First of all, the rest of the
Confederates have accused me. Secondly, Catesby always made use of my Authority
amongst them, whereby most of them were persuaded to have a good Opinion of the
Enterprise; so that all knew I was in it. Thirdly, two (set on purpose) heard
me discourse the whole business with Oldcorn, and tell him how I thought to
answer all Objections. Fourthly, My Letters writ with the Juice of Orange to
Mrs. Anne, Anne Vaux.
are (I know not how) fallen into their Hands, whereby I plainly enough
discovered my Knowledge of it. Whence I gather, that the Jesuits did
sufficiently tamper with him to conceal his Guilt, and that he would have
concealed it if he could; and all that have writ in Justification of him, are
sufficiently answered by his own Confession; and the four Reasons above
mentioned, that induced him thereunto, to which add his further Confession --
That he had often vowed, both by Words and Writings, to the Lay Conspirators,
that he would never discover or betray any of them; and his acknowledging his
Offense, wishing it were in his Power to undo that which was done, and that if
the whole World were his, he would willingly give it to quit himself from the
Guilt of Treason, which now troubled his Conscience. Moreover, he himself owned
in a Letter to Mrs Anne Vaux, That he was sorry he could not die for Religion,
but for Treasons. These Instances are, certainly, sufficient to convince any
unbyassed Reader; but to put the Matter out of doubt and (if it be possible) to
convince even the Papists. Thuanus himself, one of their own Communion,
Privy-Councellor to the French King, and President of the Supreme Senate of
that Kingdom, was so fully convinced of the Truth of this Conspiracy, and that
all the Conspirators before named were engaged in it, that he writ a most
ingenuous Narrative of the whole in Latin, which was in the year 1674.
faithfully rendered into English, and printed; where the Papists that do not
understand Latin, may, if they please, receive ample Satisfaction.

So detestable, it seems, this Conspiracy was to some of the English College
at Rome, that being informed of the Discovery of this Plot, sixteen of them
(abhorring such juggling and bloody Designs) forsook the College, slipped into
France, Translation of Thuanus, f. 1.
and thence some of them came into England and turned Protestants. But nothing
will convince some Papists, for notwithstanding all the Confessions aforesaid,
and Convictions, Foulis Hist. l. 10. cap. 2. f. 510.
and Executions upon those Confessions, there are not a few, who would persuade
the World to believe, that all this was but a mear Cheat, a Trick of Salisbury,
the then Secretary. And Foulis says, he once heard a Story very gravely told,
that one lurking under the Council Table, concealed by the long Carper, heard
much of the Contrivance; a Tale so absurd and ridiculous, that after what has
been already said, to endeavor to confute it, would argue more impertinence
then they were guilty of, who broached the Story.

This Conspiracy being discovered in so wonderful a manner, and the Deliverance
attended with so many amazing Circumstances, the Parliament took the same into
their Consideration, and in the first place, made a Law for keeping an
Anniversary Day of Thanksgiving on the Fifth of November, and enacted the same
Law should be read in the Churches publicly upon the same Day, and then made
an Act for the Attainder of the Offenders. Which Acts of Parliament, because
they yet strengthen and confirm the Truth of the said Conspiracy (and that they
do so, must be confessed, unless Men will fly in the Face of that Parliament.) I
have here inserted, as I find the same in Rastal's Statutes.

The First is Entitled, An Act for public Thanksgiving to Almighty God every
Year, on the Fifth Day of November.
FOrasmuch as Almighty God has in all Ages showed his Power and Mercy, 3 Jac.
1. ca. 1. Rast. Stat. 2. Part. f. 588. The Act for keeping the Fifth of
November yearly, as a Day of Thanksgiving.
in the Miraculous and Gracious Deliverance of his Church, and in the
Protection of Religious Kings and States, and that no Nation of the Earth has
been blessed with greated Benefits than this Kingdom now enjoys, having the
true and free Profession of the Gospel, under our most gracious Sovereign Lord
King James, the most Great, Learned and Religious King that ever reigned
therein, enriched with a most hopeful and plentiful Progeny, proceeding out of
his Royal Loins, promising Continuance of this Happiness and Profession to all
Posterity; and the which, many malignant and devilish Papists, Jesuits and
Seminary Priests, much envying and fearing, conspired most horribly, when the
Kings most excellent Majesty, the Queen, the Prince, and all the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, should have been assembled in the upper
House of Parliament, upon the fifth Day of November, in the Year of our Lord
1605. suddenly to have blown up the said whole House with Gunpowder, an
Invention so inhuman, barbarous and cruel, as the like was never before heard
of, and was (as some of the principal Conspirators thereof confess) purposely
devised and concluded to be done in the said House; that where sundry necessary
and religious Laws, for preservation of the Church and State, were made, which
they falsely and slanderously term cruel Laws, enacted against them and their
Religion, both Place and Persons should be all destroyed, and blown up at once,
which would have turned to the utter Ruin of this whole Kingdom, had it not
pleased Almighty God, by inspiring the Kings most excellent Majesty with a
Divine Spirit, to interpret some dark Phrases of a Letter showed to His
Majesty, above and beyond all ordinary Construction, thereby miraculously
discovering this hidden Treason, not many Hours before she appointed time for
the Execution thereof; therefore the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and all His Majesty's faithful and loving Subjects, do
justly acknowledge this great and infinite Blessing to have proceeded merely
from God, his great Merry, and to his most Holy Name, do ascribe all the
Honor, Glory and Praise. And to the end this unfeigned Thankfulness may never
be forgotten, but be in a perpetual Remembrance, that all Ages to come may
yield Praises to his Divine Majesty for the same, and have in Memory, This
joyful Day of Deliverance.

Be it therefore enacted, by the Kings most excellent Majesty, the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present Parliament assembled,
and by the Authority of the same, that all and Angular Ministers, in every
Cathedral and Parish Church, or other usual Place for Common Prayer, within
this Realm of England, and the Dominions of the same, shall always, upon the
fifth Day of November, say Morning-prayer, and give unto Almighty God Thanks
for this most happy Deliverance; and that all and every Person and Persons,
inhabiting within this Realm of England, and the Dominions of the same, shall
always upon that Day, diligently and faithfully resort to the Parish Church or
Chapel accustomed, or to some usual Church or Chapel, where the said
Morning-prayer, Preaching, or other Service of God shall be used, and then and
there to abide orderly and soberly during the time of the the said Prayers,
Preaching, or other Service of God there to be used and ministered.

And because all and every Person may be put in mind of this Duty, and be the
better prepared to the said Holy Service; be it enacted by Authority aforesaid,
that every Minister shall give Warning to his Parishioners, publicly in the
Church at Morning-prayer, the Sunday before every such fifth Day of November,
for the due Observation of the said Day. And that after Morning-prayer or
Preaching upon the said fifth Day of November, they read publicly, distinctly
and plainly, this present Act.

The Second, is entitled, An Act for the Attainder of diverse Offenders, in the
late most barbarous, monstrous, detestable and damnable Treasons. The Preamble
of which Act runs thus.
3 Jac. 1. ca. 2. Rast. Stat 2. part. f. 589 An Act for the Attainder of the
Conspirators.
IN most humble manner, beseeching your most excellent Majesty, your most Loyal,
Faithful and true Hearted Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the
Commons in this present Parliament assembled; That whereas Arthur Creswel
Jesuit, who at the time of his Profession to be a Jesuit, took upon him the
Name of Joseph Creswel, Oswald Tesmond Jesuit, and Thomas VVinter, late of
Huddington, in the County of Worcester, Gent. the last Day of June, in the
four and fortieth Year of the late Queen Elizabeth, of famous Memory, at
Valedolide, within the Kingdom of Spain, and at diverse other days within the
same four and fortieth Year of the said late Queen, at Valedolide aforesaid,
and elsewhere, within the same Kingdom of Spain, by the Means, Procurement and
Privity of Robert Catesby, late of Ashby, in the County of Northampton Esquire
Francis Tresham, late of Rushton, in the said County of Northampton Esquire and
Henry Garnet Jesuit (assuming upon him to be Superior of the Jesuits, within
this Ream of England) and others, being all natural born Subjects of this
Realm; did Traitorously, and against the Duty of their Allegiance, move and
incite Philip, then, and yet King of Spain, then being at open Enmity and
Hostility with the said late Queen, with Force to invade this Kingdom of
England, and to join with the Papists and discontented Persons wi^^in this
Realm of England, to depose and overthrow the same late Queen, of and (...) her
Crown, and of, and from all Her Royal Estate, Title and Dignity, and to
suppress and abolish the true Religion of Almighty God, truly and sincerely
professed within this Kingdom, and to restore the Superstitious Romish Religion
within the same, and to bring this Ancient, Famous and most renowned Kingdom to
utter Ruin and miserable Captivity, under Foreign Power; and for that the
greatest Impediment unto the same Invasion, would be the want of Help of good
Horses, the said Thomas VVinter, the rather to encourage the said King
thereunto, was to offer unto the same King, on the Behalf of the Papists of
England, to give him Assistance presently, upon the Landing of his Forces, with
one thousand five hundred, or two thousand Horses; and that for their better
accomplishing thereof, he should move the said King to furnish the Papists of
England with a good Sum of Money, partly to be employed to provide and furnish
the Horses, and partly in Pensions, to be employed upon some such as were to be
prepared for that Service; all which, the said Thomas VVinter did relate to the
said King of Spain, who ( the said Kingdoms of England and Spain, then standing
in Hostility) took that Offer in very good part, saying, that he would respect
and account of the Catholics of England (meaning the Papists) as of his own
Castilians; and thereupon agreed, that he would make Invasion, and set foot in
England about the Spring then next following, and would, by way of Exchange,
send over unto the Papists of England, one hundred thousand Crowns, to be paid
at two several Days agreed upon; all which particulars are extant, in the
Confession of some of the chief Offenders; at which time sundry Papists of
England did extraordinarily furnish themselves, by the traitorous and wicked
Persuasions and Means of sundry Jesuits, both with Horse and Armor.

But before these things could be effected, Almighty God called the said late
Queen to his mercy: Immediately after whose decease, that is to say, in the
same Month of March, wherein she departed out of this World; Christopher Wright
late of London Gentleman, was employed by the said Robert Catesby, Francis
Tresham, Henry Garnet, and others into Spain, to Negotiate with the said King
of Spain, by the means of the said Creswel, the Jesuit and others to proceed in
that Invasion, which the said Thomas Winter, had before Negotiated with him:
And afterward on the two and Twentyeth day of June, in the first Year of your
Majesty's Reign, over this Realm of England. Sir William Stanley Knight. Hugh Owen
Esquire William Baldwin Jesuit and others, did by and with the Traitorous
procurement and consent of the Offenders aforesaid, from and out of Handers in
the parts beyond the Seas, under the Government of the Archduke: Traitorously
employ and send Guy Fauks sat of London Genelman, unto the said King of Spain,
to Negotiate with him on the behalf of the said Papists of England, for
Invasion to be had against this Realm of England, to the same effect as was
committed to the said Christopher Wright as is aforesaid: And the said Guy
Fauks and Christopher Wright, though they had all the furtherance of the said
Creswel the Jesuit that he could give, yet finding no such entertainment with
the said King, who (as by the sequel appears) grew into detestation with the
said Propositions and Negotiations, as they expected or desired: But being
wholly disappointed of all their hopes concerning that Matter, the said Robert
Catesby, and diverse other Persons within this Realm, did send over the said
Thomas Winter into the said Country of Flanders, to procure the said Guy Fauks,
a Natural Born Subject of this Realm, and yet a most Traitorous, desperate and
cloudy minded Person, then serving as a Soldier in the Low Countries, to come
over into this Realm; and by and with the Traitorous conspiracy and consent of
the said Henry Garnet, Oswald Tesmond, John Garrard and other Jesuits, and
Thomas Pearcy late of London Esquire John Wright late of London Gent. the said
Christopher Wright, Francis Tresham, Robert Winter late of Huddington aforesaid
Esquire John Grant late of Norbrook in the County of Warwick Esquire Ambrose Rookwood
late of Staningfeild in the County of Suffolk Esquire Everard Digby late of
Gorehurst in the County of Buckingham Knight. Robert Keys late of London Gentlman,
and Thomas Bates late of London Yeoman, to undertake the Execution of the most
wicked Barbarous execrable and abominable Treason that ever could enter into
the Heart of the most wicked Man, by blowing up with Gunpowder the House of
Parliament at such time as your most excellent Majesty, and your dearest
Consort the Queen, and the most Noble Prince Henry, together with the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, the Judges of the Realm, and the Knights, Citizens and
Burgesses of Parliament should be in said Parliament House Assembled, (for
which most Traitorous and Barbarous purpose there were secretly laid in a Vault
or Cellar under the Parliament House, Thirty six Barrels of Gunpowder or
thereabouts) to the utter overthrow and subversion of the whole State of this
flourishing and renouned Kingdom. If God of his infinite Mercy had not most
Miraculously by your Majesty's blessed direction Discovered the same, in
finding out the said Barrels of Gunpowder in the said Vault or Cellar, but few
hours before the time appointed for the Execution thereof: All which most
Heinous, Horrid and Damnable Treasons, are most manifest and apparent by the
voluntary confession and acknowledgments of the Offenders themselves: Of which
most Barbarous, Bloody and detestable Treason, for Conspiring and preparing to
blow up the Parliament House with Gunpowder, The said Robert Winter, Thomas
Winter, Guy Fauks, Robert Keys, Ambrose Rookwood, John Grant and Thomas Bates
have been lately indicted, and during this present Sessions of Parliament
Arraigned, convicted by Verdict and thereupon attainted. And the said Sir
Everard Digby Knight. has likewise been indicted, and during this present Sessions
of Parliament Convicted and Attainted by his own confession of Record upon his
Arraignment according to the Laws of this your Majesty's Realm; as by the
Records of their several Indictments and Attainders it does and may more
plainly appear and for the which Offenses the said Sir Everard Digby, Robert
Winter, Thomas Winter, Guy Fauks, Ambrose Rookwood, John Grant, Robert Keys
and Thomas Bates, have suffered pains of Death according to their demerits: And
the said Robert Catesby, Thomas Piercy, John Wright, and Cristopher Wright,
were Slain in open Rebellion by them and others the said most wicked Traitors
moved and stirred within diverse Parts and Counties of this Realm, shortly after
the Discovery of their most detestable and Damnable Treason, in Conspiring and
preparing to blow up the said Parliament House as aforesaid, and the said Hugh
Owen does (of purpose and for fear of condign punishment according to his
demerit,) reside and keep himself beyond the Seas, by means whereof he cannot
in respect of such his voluntary absence be Arraigned and publicly by due
Trial of Law upon apparent Testimony and proof against him, be proceeded with
for such his heinous and abominable Treasons, and the said Francis Tresham
being one of the said most detestable Traitors, and being apprehended and
imprisoned in the Tower of London, having by sundry his Examinations confessed
himself a principal Traitor, in all the said most abominable Treasons, Dyed in
the Tower during the time of his said imprisonment and before he could be
Indicted of the said Treasons.

They therefore desired that the King, of his blessed care and disposition, to
and for the continuance of Gods true Religion and Service, and for that
preservation and safety of his Person, the Queen, the Prince, and the rest of
the Royal Progeny, and for the entire Love and Affection, that his Majesty had
always thent^fore born, and did then bear to the Commonwealth and safety of
this Realm of England (to the end that all others might then after fear to
enter into any cogitation to attempt the like Barbarous and detestable
Treasons, that the Convictions and Attainder of the said Robert Winter, Thomas
Winter, Guy Fauks, Ambrose Rookwood, John Grant, Robert Keys, Thomas Bates
and Sir Everard Digby might be confirmed; which was confirmed by Authority of
Parliament accordingly, and then it was Enacted, that as well the said Robert
Winter, Thomas Winter, Guy Fauks, Ambrose Rookwood, John Grant, Robert Keys,
Thomas Bates and Sir Everard Digby, as also the said Robert Catesby, Thomas
Piercy, John Wright, Hugh Owen, and Francis Tresham should be attainted of High
Treason and forfeit as in Cases of High Treason according to their several and
respective Convictions and Attainders.

When the Parliament had thus first acknowledged Gods goodness in this
deliverance, and made the said Act of Attainder. The consideration of the
Treachery and Villainy of this Gun-Powder-Plot, undertaken under the pretense of
maintaining and restoreing Popery, engaged the State to consult the
preservation of the Government and the Protestant Religion, and considering the
furious Zeal and wicked Principles of the Papists in affirming the lawfulness
of deposing and killing all Heretical Kings; and such they esteem all
Protestant Kings to be, that the Pope had Power to deprive Temporal Princes,
absolve Subjects from their Obedience; and suchlike Villainous Positions, with
the many wicked Practices against the Crown and Life of Queen Elizabeth and
King James.

Upon these and such like considerations, after several serious deliberations,
and consultations in Parliament to prevent the like mischiefs; they thought fit
to draw up a solemn Oath, whereby every one should Abjure such Treasonable
Doctrines and Swear for the future to behave themselves as became good
Subjects, which Oath was this.

The Oath of Allegiance.
Anno Tertio Jacobi primi, Foulis Hist. l. 10. c. 2. f. 522.
I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, Testify and Declare in
my Conscience before God and the World, that our Sovereign Lord King -- is
Lawful and is Rightful King of this Realm, and of all other his Majesty's
Dominions and Countries.

And that the Pope; neither of himself, nor by any Authority of the Church or
See of Rome, or by any other means, with any other, has any Power or Authority
to depose the King.

Or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms or Dominions.

Or to Authorize any Foreign Prince to Invade or annoy him or his Countries.

Or to discharge any of his Subjects, of their Allegiance and Obedience to His
Majesty.

Or to give License or leave to any of them to bear Arms, raise troubles, etc.

Or to offer any Violence or Hurt to his Majesty's Royal Person, or Government;
or to any of his Majesty's Subjects within his Majesty's Dominions.

As also I do swear from my Heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration or
Sentence of Excommunication or Deprivation made or granted, or to be made or
granted by the Pope or his Successors, or by any Authority derived, or
pretended to be derived from him or his See, against the said King, his Heirs
or Successors; or any Absolution of the said Subjects from their Obedience: I
will bare Faith and true Allegiance unto his Majesty, his Heirs and Successors.

And him and them will defend to the utmost of my Power against all
Conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, which shall be made against his or their
Persons, their Crown and Dignity, by Reason or Color of any such Sentence or
Declaration, or otherwise.

And will do my best endeavor to disclose and make known unto His Majesty, his
Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies which I shall
know, or hear of, to be against him or any of them.

And I do further Swear, that I do from my Heart Abhor, Detest and Abjure, as
Impious and Heretical this damnable Doctrine and Position that Princes which be
Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be Deposed or Murdered by their
Subjects, or any other whatsoever.

And I do believe, and in Conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope or any
Person whatsoever has Power to Absolve me of this Oath or any part thereof,

Which I acknowledge by good and full Authority to be Lawfully Ministered unto
me.

And do Renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the Contrary.

And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and Swear
according to the express Words by me spoken, according to the plain and common
sense and understanding of the same words; without any Equivocation or Mental
Evasion, or Secret Reservation whatsoever.

And I do make this Recognition and acknowledgment heartily, willingly, and
truly, upon the true Faith of a Christian,

So help me God. A. B.

Unto which Oath so taken, the said Person shall subscribe His, or Her Name, or
Mark.

The Papists looked upon the Cecil.
Earl of Salisbury (principal Secretary of State) to be the chief promoter of
the Oath of Allegiance; and therefore used all their endeavors to deter him
from Prosecuting it, thinking that if they could take him off, these
Parliamentary transactions would fall to the ground, they therefore sent the
following Letter to him, viz.

My Lord,
Whereas the late unapproveable and must wicked design, The Papists threatening
Letter to the Earl of Salibury, Foulis Hist. l. 10. c. 3. f. 521.
for destroying of his Majesty, the Prince and Nobility, with many other of
worth and quality (attempted through the undertaking Spirits of some more fiery
and turbulent, then Zealous and dispassionate Catholics) has made the general
State of our Catholic Cause, so scandalous in the Eye of such, whose corrupted
Judgments are not able to fan away and sever the fault of the Professor, from
the profession its self as that who now is found to be of that Religion, is
persuaded at least in mind, to allow (tho God knows as much abhoring as any
Puritan whatsoever) the said former most inhumane and Barbarous project.

And, whereas some of His Majesty's Council (but especially your Lordship, as
being known to be, as the Philosopher terms it, a Primus Motor in such
uncharitable proceedings) are determined (as it is feared) by taking advantage
of so foul a scandal, to root out all the Memory of Catholic Religion, either
by sudden Banishment, Massacre, Imprisonment, or some such unsupportable
vexations and pressures; and perhaps by decreeing in this next Parliament, some
more cruel and horrible Laws against Catholics, then already are made.

In regard of the premises, there are some good Men, Good men and Roman
Catholics,
who through their earnest desire for the continuing the Catholic Religion, and
for saving many Souls both of this present, and of all future posterity, are
resolved to prevent so great a mischief, tho with a full assurance aforehand of
the loss of their dearest Lives.

You are therefore hereby to be admonished, May Murder Privy Councillors.
that at this present there are Five who have severally undertaken your Death,
and have vowed the performance thereof, by taking already the Blessed
Sacrament, if you continue your daily Plotting of so Tragical Stratagems
against Recusants.

It is ordered, that none of these Five knows who the other Four be; for the
better preventing the discovery of the rest, if so any one by attempting, and
not performing, should be apprehended.

It is also already agreed who shall first attempt it by shot, and so, who in
order shall follow.

In accomplishing of it there is expected no other than assurance of Death; yet
it will willingly be embraced, for the preventing of those general Calamities,
which by this your transcendent Authority and Grace with His Majesty, are
threatened unto us.

And indeed the difficulties herein are more easily to be digested, since Two
of the intended attempters, are in that weak estate of Body, that they cannot
live above three or four Months.

The other Three are so distressed in themselves and their Friends, as that
their present griefs (for being only Recusants) do much dull all aprehensions
of Death.

None is to be blamed (in the true censuring of Matters) for the undertaking
hereof; Nor are they to be blamed for it.
for we protest before God, we have no other means left us in the World, since
it is manifest that you serve but as a Match to give Fire unto his Majesty (to
whom the worst that we wish, is, that he may be as great a Saint in Heaven, as
he is King on Earth) for intending all mischiefs against the poor distressed
Catholics.

Thus giving your Lordship this charitable admonition, the which may perhaps be
necessary hereafter for some others your inferiors, (at least in grace and
favor) if so they run on in their former inhumane and unchristian rage against
us, I cease; putting you in mind, For it is true and Spiritual Resolution.
that where once True and Spiritual Resolution is, there (notwithstanding all
dangers whatsoever) the weak may take sufficient revenge of the great,

Your Lordships well admonishing Friends, etc. A. B. C. etc.
It may be your Lordship will take this but as some forged Letter of some
Puritans, thereby to incense you more against Recusants.

But we protest upon our Salvation it is not so: Neither can any thing in
humane likelihood prevent the effecting thereof, but the change of your Course
toward Recusants.




This Letter at the beginning affords fair, seeming to detest the
Gun-Powder-Plot, (as Watson did the Popish Treasons in Queen Elizabeth's time,
and was hanged for Treason in the beginning of the Reign of King James) but
little credit is to be given to what they say, if it be considered, that the
very design of it is to apoligize for Murder; and that they therein assert,
that although they Murder Privy Counselors; yet the Murderers may be good
men, nor are they to be blamed for it, for it is a true and spiritual
resolution. What influence this Letter had the sequel will evince, for the said
Oath was immediately confirmed by Act of Parliament, and the Papists enjoined
to take it, in the Circumstances, and upon the Penalties in the Act for that
purpose mentioned: the sum and substance of which Act follows; it is
Entitled, An Act for the better discovering and repressing of Popish Recusants.
The Preamble of the Act runs thus.

3. Jac. 1. c. 4. Rast, Stat. f. 591. Papists must receive the Sacrament and
take the Oath of Allegiance, etc. upon pecuniary mulcts if neglected.
FOrasmuch as it is found by daily Experience, that many His Majesty's
Subjects, that adhere in their hearts to the Popish Religion, by the infection
drawn from thence, and by the Wicked and Divelish Council of Jesuits,
Seminaries, and other like Persons, dangerous to the Church and State, are so
far perverted in the point of their Loyalty and due Allegiance to the Kings
Majesty, and the Crown of England, as they are ready to entertain and Execute
any Treasonable Conspiracies and Practices, as evidently appears by that more
then barbarous and horrible Attempt to have blown up with Gunpowder, the King,
Queen, Prince, Lords and Commons in the House of Parliament Assembled, tending
to the utter Subversion of the whole State, lately undertaken by the
instigation of Jesuits and Seminaries, and in Advancement of their Religion, by
their Scholars Taught and Instructed by them to that purpose, which Attempt by
the only goodness of Almighty God, was discovered and defeated: And where
diverse Persons Popishly affected, do nevertheless, the better to cover and hide
their false Hearts, and with the more safety to attend the opportunity to
execute their mischievous Designs, repair sometimes to Church to escape the
Penalty of the Laws in that behalf provided.

Then, for the better discovery of such Persons and their Evil affections to
the Kings Majesty and to the State of the Realm, to the end that being known
their Evil Purposes might be the better prevented. It was enacted, that every
Papist that Conforms shall Yearly receive the Sacrament, upon twenty pounds
Forfeiture upon the first Years neglect, forty pounds the second, sixty pounds
the third, and so forwards, sixty pounds Yearly, until he or she shall have
received it. That Papists, their Children of Nine Years, and Servants, shall be
once a Year presented at the general or Quarter Sessions; Which presentiments
are to be recorded at the Sessions. That the Justices of Assize and Goal
Delivery, and Justices of Peace shall hear and determine the Offense. That
Proclamation shall be made at the Assizes or Sessions, for the Offender to
render his body to the Sheriff, Bailiff or Keeper of the Goal of the Liberty
before the next Assizes or Sessions, etc. And if the Offender does not, he
stands Convicted; and forfeits twenty pounds a Month for every Month contained
in the Indictment whereon he his Convicted. That every Conviction shall be
certified into the Exchequer, that the King may refuse twenty pounds a Month
and take two parts of the Papists Lands, save their Mansion House. That the
Kings two parts shall not be Leased to Papists. Noblemen and Noblewomen are
excepted.
That the Oath of Allegiance, shall be tendered to all Persons of the Age of
Eighteen Years or above Convicted or Indicted for Recusancy, for not going to
Church, for not receiving the Sacrament, or that pass through any Country,
Shire or Liberty, and unknown.

Who refuse taking this Oath incur a Praemunire except Women covert, who are to
be Committed to the Common Goal, without Bail or Mainprize, till they take the
Oath. No Indictment or other Proceedings against the Papists shall be
discharged or reversed for default of Form, but Conformity discharges all
Proceedings whatever. Felony in any that go beyond Seas to serve any Foreign
Prince, etc. or being there shall voluntarily serve such Prince, not first
having taken the Oath. Felony in any Gentleman, or Person of higher Degree, or
any that is or has born Office in Camp, Army or Company of Soldiers, to go
beyond the Seas voluntarily to serve a Foreign Prince, or shall voluntarily
serve any Prince unless he first enters into Bond to the King (not to the use
of the King) Conditioned, not to be reconciled to Rome, nor to enter into any
Plot, against the King or Government. But after Knowledge thereof to Reveal the
same, the Bond to be taken and the Ooth Administered by the Customer and
Controuler of every Port, Haven or Creek or one of them; Which Bond and Oath
are to be certifyed into the Exchequer once a Year upon Penalty of five pounds
for every Bond and twenty pounds for every Oath not certifyed. Treason in
Reconciler and Reconciled to the Church of Rome.
All Persons reconciling and reconciled to the Sea of Rome are Traitors. Every
Person that Maintains, Retains, Relieves, Keeps or Harbors in his, or their
House, any Servant, Sojourner or Stranger that absents from Church for a Month,
forfeits ten pounds, the same Forfeiture for Retaining or Keeping in his, her,
or their Service, Fee, or Livery, any such Person or Persons. Father, Mother,
Wards, and Persons Committed by Authority are excepted. Sheriffs and other
Officers may break open Doors to Apprehend Papists Excommunicate. No Forfeiture
for the Wives Offense. The Lords of the Privy Council, or any six of them,
whereof the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer or the principal Secretary, to be
one, are empowered to Administer the said Oaths before mentioned to any Noble
Man or Noble Woman above the Age of Eighteen Years; refusing to take them, they
incur a Praemunire. In the Cinque Ports the Lord Warden of the Cinque Ports are
to take the said Bond and Oaths.

What cause there was for the compiling this Oath, and imposing it upon the
Papists, King James himself tells us in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance,
take it in his own words.

But now having sacrificed (if I may say so) to the Manes of my late
Predecessor Queen Elizabeth (whose Government and Moderation he vindicates,) I
may next with St. Paul justly vindicate my own fame from those innumerable
calumnies spread against me, This King declares his favourableness toward the
Papists, and their ingratitude to him. Apol. p. 18, 19, 20.
in testifying the truth of my behavior toward the Papists: wherein I may
truly affirm that whatsoever was her just and merciful Government over the
Papists in her time, my Government over them since, has so far exceeded hers,
in mercy and clemency, as not only the Papists themselves grew to that height
of pride, in confidence of my mildness, as they did directly expect, and
assuredly promise to themselves Liberty of Conscience, and equality with other
of my Subjects, in all things, but even a number of the best and faithfullest
of my said Subjects, were cast in great fear and amazement of my Course and
Proceedings, ever Prognosticating, and justly suspecting, that sour Fruit to
come of it, which showed it self clearly in the Powder Treason.

How many did I honor with Knighthood, of known and open Recusants? how
indifferently did I give audience and access to both sides, bestowing equally
all Favors and Honors on both Professions? How free and continual access had
all ranks and degrees of Papists in my Court and Company? and above all how
frankly and freely did I free Recusants of their ordinary payments?

Besides, it is evident what strait order was given out of my mouth to the
Judge; to spare Execution of all Priests (notwithstanding their Conviction)
joining thereunto a Gracious Proclamation, whereby all Priests that were at
Liberty, and not taken, might go out of the Country by such a day, my general
Pardon having been extended to all Priests in Prison, whereupon they were set
at Liberty, as good Subjects, and all convicted Priests that were taken after,
sent over, and set at Liberty there. But Time and Paper will fail me to make
ebnumeration of the benefits and favors that I bestowed, in general, and
particular, upon Papists, in recounting whereof, every scrape of my Pen would
serve but for a blot of the Popes ingratitude and injustice, in meeting me with
so hard a measure for the same.

Yet notwithstanding all this Mildness and Clemency exercised toward them by
the King, he himself in his Monotory Preface to all Christian Monarchs, tells
us, That,

Monotory Preface p. 6, 7, 8, 9.
The never-enough wondered at, and abhorred Powder Treason ( though the
Repetition thereof grieveth, I know, the gentle hearted Jesuit The same
Parsons that I have before taken notice of, and who had the good luck all this
while to escape the Gollows.
Parsons) This Treason, I say, being not only intended against me and my
posterity, but even against the whole House of Parliament, plotted only by
Papists, and they only led thereto by a preposterous zeal for the advancement
of their Religion; some of them continuing so obstinate, that even at their
death they would not acknowledge their fault; but in their last words
immediately before the expiring of their breath, refused to condemn themselves,
and crave pardon for their deed, except the Romish Church should first condemn
it.

And soon after, it being discovered, that a great number of my Popish Subjects
of all Ranks and Sexes both Men and Women, as well within as without the
Country, had a confused Notion, and an obscure knowledge, that some great thing
was to be done in that Parliament for the weal of the Church, although for
secrecys cause they were not acquainted with the particulars, certain Forms of
Prayer having likewise been set down and used for the good success of the great
Errand.

Adding hereunto that diverse times, and from diverse Priests, the Arch Traitors
themselves received the Sacrament for confirmation of their heart and
observation of Secrecy.

Some of the principal Jesuits likewise, being found Guilty of the
foreknowledge of the Treason it self, of which number some fled from their
Trial, others were apprehended (as holy Garnet himself and Oldcorn were) and
justly Executed upon their own plain Confession of Guilt.

If this Treason now clad with these circumstances, did not minister a just
occasion to that Parliament House, whom they thought to have destroyed,
courageously and zealously at their next sitting down, to use all means of
Trial, whether any more of that mind, were yet left in the Country; I leave it
to you (i.e. the Emperors, Kings and Princes) to judge, whom God has appointed
his highest Deputy Judges upon Earth; And amongst other things for this
purpose, this Oath of Allegiance, so unjustly impugned, was then devised and
enacted.

And in case any sharper Laws were then made against the Papists that were not
obedient to the former Laws of the Country, if ye will consider the time, place
and persons, it will be thought no wonder, seeing that occasion did so justly
exasperate them to make severer Laws then otherwise they would have done.

The Time I say, being the very next sitting of the Parliament, after the
Discovery of that abominable Treason.

The Place being the same where they should all have been blown up, and so
bringing it freshly into their Memory again.

The Persons being those very Parliament Men whom they thought to have
destroyed.

And yet so far has both my Heart and Government been from any bitterness, as
almost never one of those sharp additions to the former Laws, have ever yet
been put in Execution.

And that ye may yet know further for the more convincing these Libellers of
wilful Malice, who impudently affirm, that this Oath of Allegiance was devised
for deceiving and intrapping of Papists in point of Conscience.

The truth is, that the Lower House of Parliament at the first framing of this
Oath, made it contain, that the Pope had no Power to Excommunicateme, which I
caused them to reform, only making it to conclude, That no Excommunication of
the Popes can warrant my Subjects to practice against my Person or State;
denying the deposition of Kings to be in the Popes lawful Power. As indeed I
take any such Temporal violence to be far without the Limits of such a
spiritual Censure as Excommunication is.

So careful was I that nothing should be contained in this Oath, except the
profession of Natural Allegiance, and Civil and Temporal obedience, with a
Promise to resist all contrary uncivil violence.

This Oath now grounded upon so great and just occasion, set forth in so
reasonable Terms, and ordained only for making a true distinction between
Papists of quiet dispotion, and in all other things good Subjects, and other
Papists, such as in their hearts, maintained the like violent bloody Maxims
that the Powder Traitor, did.

And here I cannot but take notice, that the very design of the Oath of
Allegiance was to make a distinction between Papists, of unquiet and turbulent,
and of quiet and peaceable Minds, and had not, in its original, any influence
upon the Protestants, nor did at the time of making, concern them, and that
after Protestants were enjoined to take it, the same was intended to no other
purpose then to difference them from Papists, and therefore the taking the new
Oaths to their present Majesty's, cannot but be well consistent with the former
Oath of Allegiance, especially if it be considered that the late King is
himself a Papist.
So that it is evident King James thought, the said Plots, Treasons,
Conspiracies and other unbecoming and undutiful words and practices was ground
sufficient to make the said Law.

And doubtless, The Powder Treason justifies the State in making another Act of
Parliament the same Session, Entitled, An Act to prevent and avoid danger which
may grow by Popish Recusants. The preamble of which Act making it further to
appear, that the Powder Treason was the occasion of making this Law, I shall
here insert the Preamble verbatim, and then the substance of the Act.

WHereas diverse Jesuits, 3 Jac. 1. ca. 5. Rast Stat. f. 597.

Papists banished the Court and the City of London upon a pecuniary Mulct.


Seminaries and Popish Priests daily do withdraw many of his Majesty's Subjects
from their true Service of Almighty God and the Religion established within
this Realm to the Romish Religion, and from their Loyal obedience to his
Majesty, and have of late scretly persuaded diverse Recusants and Papists, and
encouraged and embol^ned them to commit most damnable Treasons; tending to the
overthrow of Gods true Religion, the destruction of his Majesty and his Royal
Issue; and* the overthrow of the whole State and Commonwealth, if God of his
Goodness and Mercy had not within few hours before the intended time of the
Execution thereof, revealed and disclosed the same: wherefore to discover and
prevent such secret and damnable Conspiracies and Treasons, as hereafter may be
put in use by such evil disposed Persons, if remedy be not therefore provided.

Then the Law provides, That the discoverer of Jesuits or Priests, or
harbourers of them, shall have the third Part of all that is recovered against
them, so as the same exceeds not One hundred and Fifty Pounds, and Fifty Pounds
only where it exceeds the sum of One hundred and Fifty Pounds. No Papist shall
come to Court upon the Penalty of a Hundred Pounds for every default. Papists
not to come into London nor ten Miles compass of the same, upon forfeiture of
One hundred Pounds. Papists confined to their Houses or Places of above and not
to remove above five Miles from thence, Not to Travel without License, how
License to be obtained.
and no License to be given to enable them to the contrary, but such as are
prescribed by this Act; His Majesty, Three of the Privy Council, Four Justices
of the Peace, with the Privity may License and assent of the Bishop,
Lieutenant, or Deputy Lieutenant under Hand and Seal; the cause of removing
must be inserted in the Warant, and Oath made of the truth of it. Papists
disabled from Practicing as Lawyers Common or Civil, etc.
All Papists convict, are disabled from practicing, as a Counsel, Clark,
Attorney or Solicitor, Advocate, or Proctor, as Physician using the Trade of
an Apothecary, from being Judge, Minister, Clark, or Steward of or in any
Court, or keeping any Court, or being Town Clark or other Minister or Officer
in any Court, from bearing any Office or Charge, as Captain, Lieutenant,
Corporal, Sergeant, Ancient Bearer, or other Officer in Camp, Troop, Band, or
Company of Soldiers, from being Captain, Master, Governor, or bearing any
Office or Charge, A Man having a Wife a Papist Convict is disabled from
exercising any public Office or Charge.

Feme Covert Convict looses part of her Jointure, etc.


of or in any Ship, Castle or Fortress; and forfeits one hundred pounds for
every* Offense besides the disability. No Popish Recusant Convict, nor any
having a Wife being a Popish Recusant, Convict, shall exercise any public
Office or Charge, in the Commonwealth, but are utterly disabled Feme Covert
Convict looses two parts of her Ioynture and Dower, is disable^ from being
Executrix or Administratrix to her Husband, and to have any Part of his Goods
or Chattels: A Popish Recusant Convict is disabled as an Excommunicate Person;
But notwithstanding it he may sue for or concerning only such of his or her
Lands, etc. or the issues thereof, which are not to be seized or taken into the
Kings Hands, his Heirs or Successors, by force of any Law, for or concerning
his, or her Recusancy or any part thereof. Every Man that is a Papist covict,
Marrying contrary to the Orders of the Church of England, is disabled from
being Tenant by the courtesy if any Lands, etc. of his Wives; and if she has
no Lands forfeits a hundred Pounds, a Woman Papist convict so marrying is
disabled to Claim Dower, Papists must Marry according to the usage of the
Church of England. Papists must Bapt. according to the usage of the Church of
England.

Their Children must not be sent beyond Seas. Papists shall not present to
Livings.

Popish Books inhibited. Papists to be disarmed.


Ioynture, and Widows Estate, and Franck Bank in customary Lands. Papists must
baptize their Children, according to the Rites of the Church of England upon a
hundred Pounds penalty, twenty Pounds forfeiture for not burying according to
the Rites of the Church of England. Children sent beyond Seas without Lycense
are disinherited and disabled to take any Lands or Personalty, by Gift,
Conveyance, Descent, Devise or otherwise, till they take the Oath of
Allegiance; a hundred Pound penalty for sending them: Soldiers, Mariners,
Merchants, their Apprentices or Factors excepted. Popish Recusants convict are
disabled to dispose of any of their Ecclesiastical Livings, but the Chancellor
and Scholars of Oxford and Cambridge have the right of Presentation,
Nomination, etc. but none to be presented, who has a Benefice with cure of
Souls. Papists are disablede from being Executors, Administrators, Guardians.
No Person to bring from beyond Sea, Print, Sell, or Buy any Popish Primers,
Ladies Psalters, etc. upon the Penalty of Forty shillings for every such Book,
two Justices of Peace within their Jurisdiction, Bailiffs and chief Officers of
Cities and Towns may search for popish Books, and what are found they may burn,
Papists Armor shall be seized, other then what is Judged by the Justices,
absolutely necessary for the defense of their Houses: If they refuse to permit
a Search to delivet Armor, or Munition when it is found, they forfeit the Armor
and Munition, and are to suffer three Months imprisonment, without Bayl or
Main-prize, they must maintain their Armor, notwithstanding it be taken away;
Ecclesiastical Censures are saved.

Vid. Roger Widdringtons Theological Disputation, Epist. Dedicat. to Pope Paul
5. S. 6.
No sooner was this Oath and these Acts of Parliament made and published, but
the Romish Priests fall a Caballing, Consulting what they and their Friends
ought to do, in this Case. Of these, George Blackwell was Chief, his Title ran
thus George, Blackwell by the Grace of God, and the Ordinance of the Sea
Apostolic, Archpriest of England. He and several other Priests agreed the
Oath was Lawful, and might with a safe Conscience be taken by Papists: But this
was opposed by certain Jesuits and some other Priests, which begot a great
Feud and Contest amongst their own Party. The Pope and his Assistants were
against taking the Oath, as if it were enough to overthrow their whole
Religion, and out thunders the Pope a Breve, Right, or Wrong, expressly
Commanding the English not to take the said Oath, upon any Account whatsoever;
part of which Breve is Printed in Foulis in English and Latin; which take as
it is there.

The Popes 1st. Bull against taking the Oath of Allegiance. Foulis Hist. l. 10.
cap. 3. f. 927.
Dilecti filli, Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
MAgno Animi maerore nos semper affecerunt tribulationes and calamitates, quas
pro retinenda Catholica fide jugitur sustinvistis. Sed cum intelligamus omnia
hoc tempore magis exacerbari, afflictio nostra mirum in modum aucta est, etc.

-- Non potestis absque evidentissima gravissimaque divini honoris injuria,
obligare vos juramento; quod fimiliter maximo cum cordis nostri dolor
audivimus propositum vobis fuisse Prestandum, Here was inserted the Oath it
self.
infra scripti Tenoris, viz. Ego A. B. etc.

Quae cum ita sint, vbis, ex verbis ipsis perspicuum esse debet, quod bujusmodi
juramentum, salva fide Catholica, and salute animarum vestrarum perstari non
potest, cum multa contineat, quae fidei and saluti aperte adversantur,
propterea admonemus vos, ut ab hoc atque similibus juramentis prestandis omnino
caveatis, quod quidem eo acrius exigemus a vobis, quia experti vestrae fidei
constantiam, quae tanquam aurum in furnace, perpetuae tribulationis igne
probatum est. Procomperto habemus, vos alacri a^imo subituros esse quaecunque
atrociora tormenta, ac mortem denique ipsam constanter appetituros, potius quam
Dei Majestatem ulla in re taedatis, etc.

-- Precipimus vobis, ut illarum Litterarum verba ad amussim servetis, and
simpliciter prout sonant and jacent, accipitis and intelligatis, sublata omni
facultate illa aliter interpretandi, etc.

Datum Romae apud Sanct. Marcum sub Annulo Piscatoris X. Kalend. October. 1606.
Pontificatus nostri Anno Secundo.
Dearly beloved Sons, Greeting and Apostolical Benediction.
THe Tribulations and Calamities which you have continually sustained for the
keeping of the Catholic Faith, has always afflicted us with great Grief of
mind, but forasmuch as we understand that at this time all things are more
grievous; our affliction hereby is wonderfully increased, etc.

-- You cannot without most evident and grievous wronging of Gods honor, bind
your selves by the Oath, which in like manner we have heard with very great
Grief of heart, is admitted unto you of the Tenor following, viz. I A. B. etc.

Which things since they are thus, it must evidently appear to you, that such
an Oath cannot be taken without wrong to the Catholic Faith and the Salvation
of your Souls, seeing it contains many things plainly contrary to Faith and
Salvation, wherefore we admonish you, that you do utterly abstain from taking
this and the like Oaths. Which thing we the more earnestly require of you,
because we have experience of the Constancy of your Faith, which is tried like
Gold in the Fire of perpetual Tribulation; we do well know that you will
cheerfully undergo all kind of cruel Torments whatsoever, yea, and constantly
endure Death it self, rather then you will in any thing offend the Majesty of
God, etc.

We Command you that you do exactly observe the words of those Letters, and
that you take and understand them simply as they Sound, and as they Lie, all
Power to interpret otherwise, being taken away, etc.

Dated at Rome at St. Marks, under the Signet of the Fisher, the 22 d. of
September. 1606. the 2 d. Year of our Popedom.
This Breve was presently sent into England notwithstanding it was High Treason
to bring it,) but diverse of the Papists having then taken the Oath, were
unwilling to believe, that the Pope himself sent it, but that it was Foulis f.
527.
Surreptitiously procured without the Popes knowledge; whereupon the Pope, (to
let them know, that though the Pope might die, yet the Bloody and barbarous
Tenets and Doctrines of the Popedom were as lasting as the Popedom it self;) to
satisfy those who doubted of the Reality of the former, he sent another into
England, which follows as Foulis relates it.

Dilecti filii Salutem and Apostolicam Benedictionem.
REnunciatum est nobis, reperiri non nullos apud vos, qui, cum satis
Declaraverimus per literas nostras Anno superiore X. Kalend. October. in forma
Brevis datas, vos tuta Conscientia prestare non posse juramentum, quod, a vobis
tunc exigebatur, and praeterea triste preceperimus, ne ullo modo illud
praestaretis.

Nunc dicere audent, hujusmodi literas de prohibitione juramenti non ex amini
nostri Sententia, nostraque propria voluntate scriptas fuisse; sed potius
aliorum intuitio atque industria: eaque de causa idem persuadere nituntur,
mandata nostra dictis literis non esse attendenda.

Perturbavit sane no^ hic Nuncius, eoque magis, quia experti obedientiam
vestram (filii nostri unice dilecti) qui, ut hinc Sanctae sedi obediretis,
opes, Facultates, dignitatem, libertatem, vitam denique ipsam, pie and generose
nihili fecistis; nunquam suspicati essemus, potuissevocari apud vos in dubium
fidem Literarum nostrarum Apostolicarum, ut hoc pretextu, vos ex mandatis
nostris eximeretis.

Verum Agnoscimus versutiem atque Fraudem adversarii humanae salutis, eisque
potius, quam vestrae voluntati, tribuimus hanc renitentiam.

Ea propter iterum ad vos scribere decrevimus, ac denuo vobis significare,
Literas nostras Apostolicas Anno preterito X. Kalend. October. datas de
prohibitione juramentis, non solum motu proprio, and ex certa nostra scientia;
verum etiam post longam and gravem deliberationem de omnibus quae in illis
continenter, adhibitam, fuisse scriptas, and ob id teneri vos, illas omnino
observare, omni interpretatione secus suadente rejecta.

Haec autem est mera, pura, integraque voluntas nostra, qui de vestra salute
soliciti, semper cogitamus ea, quae magis vobis expediunt. Et ut Cogitationes
and Consilia nostra illuminet is, aquo Christiano gregi Custodiendo nostra fuit
proposita humilitas indefinenter oramus: quem etiam jugiter precamur, ut in
vobis filiis nostris summopere dilectis, fidem, constantiam, mutuamque inter
vos Charitatem, and pacem augeat. Quibus omnibus cum omni Charitatis affectu
peramanter Benedicimus.

Datum Romae apud Sanct. Marcum, sub Annulo Priscatoris X. Kalend. September.
1607. Pontificatus nostri Anno tertio. Petrus Stroza.
Dearly Beloved Sons, Greeting and Apostolical Benediction.
IT is reported unto us, The Popes 2d. Bull against taking the Oath of
Allegiance. Foulis l. 10. cap. 3. f. 528.
that there are found certain amongst you (who) when as we have sufficiently
declared by ous Letters, Dated the last year on the 22 d. of September, in the
form of a Breve, that ye cannot with safe Conscience take the Oath which was
then required of you, and when as we have further straightly Commanded you, that
by no means you should take it.

Yet there are some (I say) among you, who dare now affirm, that such Letters
concerning the forbidding of the Oath, were not written of our own accord, or
of our own proper Will. But rather for the respect, and at the instigation of
other Men; and for that cause the same Men go about to persuade you, that our
Commands in the said Letter are not to be regarded.

Truly this News did trouble us, and that so much the more, because having had
experience of your obedience (most dearly beloved Sons) who to the end you
might obey this holy See, have Godlily and Valiantly contemned your Riches,
Wealth, Honor, Liberty, yea and Life it self: We should never have suspected,
that the truth of our Apostolical Letters could once be called in question
amongst you, that by this Pretense you might exempt your selves from our
Commandments.

But we do perceive herein the subtilty and craft of the Enemy of Man's
Salvation, and we do attribute this your backwardness rather to him, then to
your own Will.

And for this cause we have thought good to write the second time unto you, and
to signify unto you again, that our Apostolical Letters, dated the last year
on the 22 d. of September concerning the Prohibition of the Oath, were written
not only upon our proper motion, and of our certain knowledge; but also after
long and weighty Deliberation used concerning all those things, which are
contained in them: And that for that cause you are bound fully to observe them,
rejecting all interpretation persuading to the contrary.

And this is our mere, pure and perfect Will; who being always careful of your
Salvation, do always mind those things which are most profitable unto you. And
we do pray without ceasing, that he who has appointed to our Lowliness the
keeping of the flock of Christ, would enlighten our thoughts and counsels; whom
we do also continually beseech, that he would increase in you (our most beloved
Sons) Faith, Constancy, with mutual Charity, and Peace, one to another. All
whom we most Lovingly bless with all Charitable affection.

Dated at Rome at St. Marks under the Signet of the Fisher the 23 d. of Aug.
1607. the third year of our Popedom. Peter Stroza.
After this some Letters passed, between Father Blackwell who was for taking
the Oath, and Cardinal Bellarmine who writ against it, but Bellarmine could not
convince Blackwell. The Pope therefore appointed Mr. George Birket to be
Archpriest, and sent him a Breve to forbid the taking of the Oath, and to
deprive all Priests of their Facultion, that should take it, part of which
follows as Foulis relates it,

-- Tibique injungimus and mandamus, ac specialem facultatem ad hoc tribuimus,
ut Authoritate nostra omnes and singulos Sacerdotes Anglos, qui quoddam
juramentum (in quo multa continentur, quae fidei atque saluti Animarum aperte
adversantur) perstiterunt: vel ad loca, ad quae Heretici ad eorum superstitiosa
Ministeria peragenda convenire solent, consulto accesserunt, aut qui talia
licite fieri posse docuerunt, and docent, admonere cures, ut ab hujusmodi
erroribus resipiscant and abstineant.

Quod si intra Tempus (extra judici aliter tamen) arbitrio tuo illis
praefigendum, hoc facere distulerint, seu aliquis illorum distulerit, illos seu
illum facultatibus and Privilegis omnibus ab Apostolica sede seu illius
Authoritate a quocunque alio illis vel cuivis illorum concessis, eadem
Authoritate prives ac privates esse declares, etc.

Datum Romae apud S. Petram, sub Annulo Priscator. Die 1. Feb. 1608.
Pontificatus nostri Anno tertio.
And we enjoin and Command you, and for this we give you special faculty, The
3d. Bull against taking the Oath of Allegiance.

Foulis Hist. l. 10. cap. 3. f. 530.


that by our Authority you take Care to admonish all and every English Priest,
who have taken a certain Oath (wherein many things are contained, which are
manifestly against Faith and the Salvation of Souls) or do willingly repair to
such places, where the Heretics used to meet to celebrate their superstitious
Services or Worship; or have taught and do teach that such things may Lawfully
be done, that they may repent, and abstain such from Errors.

And if within the time ( extra judici aliter notwithstanding) by you, as you
think fit to be appointed unto them, they or any one of them shall defer to
obey this; That then you by the same Authority do, deprive or declare them or
him to be deprived of all Faculties and Privileges granted them or any of them
from the Sea Apostolic, or by her Authority from any other whatsoever, etc.

Dated at Rome at St. Peter's, etc. 1. Feb 1608.
Birket upon the Receipt of this Breve, draws up and sends abroad this
admonishing Letter.

To all the Reverend Secular Priests of ENGLAND.
Most Dearly beloved Brethren,
WHereas I have always desired to live without molesting or offending others,
Birkets Letter to the Popish Clergy against taking the Oath and going to Church.

Foulis Hist. l. 10. cap. 3. f. 530.


it cannot be but a wonderful corosive Sorrow and Grief unto me, that against
mine own inclination, I am forced (as you have seen by the Breve it self) to
prescribe a certain time for such as do find themselves to have been contrary
to the Points, which are touched in the said Breve; concerning the Oath, and
going to Church, that they may thereby return and conform themselves, to the
Doctrine declared by his Holiness, both in this, and the other former Breves.

And therefore now by this Present, do give notice unto you all, that the time
which I prefix and prescribe for that purpose, is the space of two Months, next
ensuing after the knowledge of this Admonition. Within which time, such as
shall forbear to take, or allow any more the Oath, or going to Church, I shall
most willingly accept their doing therein.

Yet signifying unto you withal, that such as do not within the time prescribed
give this Satisfaction, I must (tho much against my Will) for fulfilling his
Holinesses Commandments deprive them, and denounce them to be deprived of all
their Faculties and Privileges granted by the Sea Apostolic, or by any other
Authority thereof unto them, or to any of them, and so by this Present do
denounce, hoping, that there is no Man, will be so wilful, or disobedient, to
his Holinesses Order, but will conform himself as becomes an obedient Child of
the Catholic Church. And so most heartily wishing this Conformity in us all,
and that we may Live and Labor together, Unanimes in Domo Domini, I pray God
give us the Grace to effect that, in our Actions, whereunto we are by our Order
and Profession obliged,

Your Servant in Christ George Birket, Archpriest of England and Protonotary
Apostolical.
This 2d. of May, 1608.

There was by reason of these Bulls -- great Writing against the Lawfulness of
Papists taking the Oath. And it cannot be, but all of them who writ against it,
make this their Foundation; That it takes away the Popes power of depriving
Kings, and absolving Subjects from their Allegiance: So that certainly, it was
high time for the State to take care of the safety of their Religion, and their
Prince, the Defender thereof. The Parliament therefore in the Seventh Year of
King James the First, that they might know who were Friends to a Foreign power
(and consequently Enemies to the established Government) made an Act of
Parliament, Entitled,

An Act for Administering the Oath of Allegiance, and Reformation of married
Women, Recusants. Which is the last Law I find made in this Kings Reign,
relating to the Papists The Preamble runs thus,
7. Jac. 1. cap. 6. Rast. Stat. 2. part. f. 666. For taking the Oath of
Allegiby Protestants, as well as by Papists. And Feme Courts Papists to
Penalties.
Whereas by a Statute made in the third Year of your Majesty's Reign,
entitled, An Act for the better discovering and repressing of Popish
Recusants, The form of an Oath to be ministered and given to certain Persons, in
the same Act mentioned, is limited and prescribed, tending only to the
Declaration of such Duty, as every true and well affected Subject, not only by
Bond of Allegiance, but also by the Commandment of Almighty God, ought to bear
to your Majesty, your Heirs and Successors, which Oath such as are infected
with Popish Superstition, do oppugn with many false and unsound Arguments, the
just defense whereof your Majesty has heretofore undertaken, and worthily
performed, to the great Contentment of all your Loving Subjects,
notwithstanding the Gain-sayings of contentious Adversaries. And to show how
greatly your Loyal Subjects, do approve the said Oath, they prostrate
themselves at your Majesty's feet, beseeching your Majesty, that the same Oath
may be Administered to all your Subjects: To which end we do with all humbleness
beseech your Highness, that it may be Enacted.

And then, To show how greatly they approved the said Oath, they desired it
might be Administered to all the Subjects of England; and accordingly it was
Enacted, That it should be taken by all Persons above the Age of eighteen
Years. The penalty for the refus^ing upon tender is Imprisonment without Bayl
or Main-prize, and disability to execute any place of Judicature, to bear any
other Office, to use or Practice the Common or Civil Law, Physic or
Surgery, the Art of an Apothecary, or any Liberal Science for His or Her
gain.

By this Act, a married Woman that is a Papist convict, if she does not within
three Months after Conviction conform, shall be committed to Prison without
Bayl or Main-prize, unless her Husband will pay ten Pounds a Mouth for the
Wives offense, or the third part of all his Lands. etc. for so long time as she
remaining a Papist convict, shall continue out of Prison, during which time
(and no longer) she may be at Liberty.

The Penal Laws in this Reign justified.
And certainly Watson and Clarks Plot, the Gunpowder Treason, and the restless
endeavors of the Pope and the Jesuits, by his sending and their bringing over
Bulls to alienate the Kings Subjects from their Allegiance, will highly
justify the State in making these Laws against the Papists, that were made in
this Kings Reign: And the more reasonable will they appear to be, if it be
considered, that, we do not find, that he ever Executed one Person, Priest,
Jesuit or other for Religion, but all Died for Treason, even Garnet himself was
sorry that he could not Dye for Religion, his guilt of Treason being so
notorious. And therefore these Plots, Conspiracies, and Treasons, carry in the
Face of them the greatest ingratitude imaginable.

The King in the Tenth Year of his Reign being affrighted with Henry the Fourth
of France, his being Stabbed by Ravilliac, ventures upon a Proclamation, King
James his last Proclamation against the Jesuits. Wilsons Hist. f. 51, 52.
strictly commanding all Jesuits, and Priests out of the Kingdom, and all
Recusants to their own Houses, not to come within ten Miles of the Court; and
secures all the rest of his Subjects to him, by an universal taking of the Oath
of Allegiance, which the Parliament both Lords and Commons (then sitting) began
and the rest of the People followed.

Wilsons Hist. f. 25.
Soon after this Parliament was Dissolved and Prince Henry was created Prince of
Wales, after which the Kings first Treaty for disposal of any of his Children
was, by his Leiger Ambassador in Spain, with that King, for the Lady Elizabeth,
Wilsons Hist. f. 91. Rushw. Col. 1: part. f. 1.
and afterward another Treaty was set on foot for Prince Henry with a Daughter
of Spain. What Religion the Spaniard was of, is well known, and what effect the
Crown of England Matching into Popish Families abroad has had, is more to be
lamented, then remembered, any other ways, then to avoid the like mischiefs for
the future.

In the 12 th. Year of his Reign, there were a generation about the Court,
Camb. f. 77. A Parliament called and dissolved, because they complained of
grievances and particularly of the increase of Papists.
that undertook for the calling such a Parliament as the King would have, these
were Men that presumed, they had friends in every County and Borough, who (by
their power among the People) could make Election of such Men for Knights and
Burgesses, as should comply solely with the Kings desire; and Somerset was the
head and chief of these undertakers, but these projects against the
Fundamentals of the English Government proved an abortive; for the Parliament
meeting, such Faces appeared there, as was no ways pleasing to the Court, who
instead of contributing to the Kings wants, lay open his wastes, especially upon
the Scots, with whom they desire a share of Favor.

The Bread (by our Savior's Rule) properly belongs to the Children of the
Kingdom, and they beseech his Majesty to stop the Current of future access of
that Nation to make residence here, having enough to eat up their own Crumbs,
they enquire into the Causes of the unexpected increase of Popish Recusants
since the Gunpowder Plot, the detestation whereof (they thought) should have
utterly extinguished them, and they attribute it to the admission of Popish
Nobility into his Councels; the silencing of many watchful and dilligent
Ministers, the diverse Treaties his Majesty had entertained, not only for the
Marriage of Prince Henry, but for Prince Charles with the Daughters of Popish
Princes, which disheartened the Protestant and encouraged the Papist; they laid
open with these many other miscarriages in Government, the King desirous to
conceal these Matters dissolves the Parliament and Committed to the Tower and
other Prisons, such as were most active for the common good, and who can deny
but that this must needs give encouragement to the Papists?

In the 15 th. Year of his Reign he put out a Book to Tolerate Sports on the
Lords Days; this Book came out with a Command, injoyning all Ministers to read
it to their Parishoners, and to approve of it, A Book of Sports obtruded.
and those that did not were brought before the High Commission, Imprisoned,
and Suspended. This was a contrivance of the Papists and their adherents, to
trap the most Conscientious Men of the Church of England (who were in all other
matters exactly conformable) and to lay them aside; and good reason the Papists
had for this, because no Nation will ever receive their innovations in Matters
of Religion, where there is a Sound, Orthodox, Learned and Pious Clergy.
Wilsons Hist. f. 105.
Wilson says, that some of the Ministers that were Suspended said, that they
would Preach the Gospel in a Fools Coat rather then be silent for a Surplis;
and the Conjuring of them with the Cross in Baptism and the Circle of the Ring
in Marriage, could not make a well composed Reason, and a sound Conscience then
start at it: But when so frighful an Aparition as the Dancing Book appeared,
some of the Ministers left all for fear, others by force, they were so
terrified by it.

This I have set down in Willsons own words, because it appears by this that
the Men that were suspended, were proceeded against not for Puritanism, or
Nonconformity to the discipline of the Church of England, but for non-complying
with things obtruded on them, by right down Papists, or those (who whether they
saw it or no I cannot tell) were carrying on the Popish designs.

The King having all along had a design of Matching his Son Rushw. Col. 1.
part. f. 11.
either to Spain or France, it is no wonder that the Priests and Jesuits swarm
here; and much less a wonder, that they endeavor to promote their own
Religion, for if they will do it, when the Edge of Justice is sharpened against
them, much more when he that should make use of the Sword, is so merciful,
(that let them do what they will) he will not, or so fearful, he dares not,
strike. As Prophanness by reason of the Book of Sports, crept in by their
means, so did Idolotry and Superstition; for their was now more enmity against
Ministers of the Gospel then Popish Priests, and no wonder; for let a Peoples
Morals be once thoroughly debauched, and 'twill not be very difficult to make
them outwardly of what Religion you will.

The Jesuits Juggling with the Boy of Bilson.

Wilsons Hist. f. 107.


The Popish Priests and Jesuits, having now more liberty then they had had for
above fifty Years, resolve to make much of their time, and because they cannot
much boast of real holiness, pretended Miracles must recommend them to the
People; for this purpose the Boy of Bilson was set up by them (as he himself
afterward confessed,) to Act the part of one possessed with a Devil, and they were
to come and disposes him, that so it might appear, how much Gods Power was
expressed in their weakness, and to difference the truth and holiness betwixt the
Catholic Religion, and the Heresy professed among Protestants; such Godly cheats
are they always making use of, to deceive the Hearts of the simple. This Boy
Bishop Morton discovered to be an imposture, and when he had made the
discovery, and the Boy found he was detected, he confessed the whole Matter to be
thus.

That he was enticed to one Mr. Giffords House in Staffordshire, where there
were four Romish Priests, who gave him Money and many fair words, promising him
great matters if he would be conformable to their instructions. In three days
time they had taught him to practice his tricks so well, that they ventured him
home to his Fathers, to exercise them publicly. He came home in a very
distracted manner to his Parents amazement, and in a short time the thing was
noised, and a great deal of Company coming to see him, his Parents got Money by
it, which was an encouragement to him to persist; so that when the Priests came
to disposes him, he would not be disposest; but went on, and (as they had
instructed him) accused a poor Old Woman of Witchcraft, for which she was
Tried, and Condemned, and had been Executed, had it not been for Bishop Morton
detecting this imposture; The whole story you may read at large in Wilson from
f. 106. to 111.

Wilsons Hist. f. 130.
Henry Earl of Northumberland, who was Sentenced in the Star Chamber Thirty
Thousand Pounds, and Imprisoned in the Tower for harboring in his House the
aforenamed Thomas Piercy his Kinsman, who was one of the Plotters of the
Gunpowder-Treason, was in the Seaventeenth Year of this Kings Reign, set at
liberty.

The Spaniards gives the overture of the Match. Rushw. Col. part. 1. f. 4.
The King having had thoughts of a Match for Prince Charles with France; and the
Duke of Savoy having been before him, and prevailed for his Son the Prince of
Piedmount: The Spaniard giving the overture of a Match, King James embraces
it, and Articles of Religion between the King of England and Spain were agreed
on, which were these, etc.

Articles of Religion agreed upon between the Kings of England and Spain.
That the Popes Dispensation be first obtained by mere Act of the King of Spain.

That the Children of this Marriage be not constrained in Matters of Religion,
nor their Title prejudiced in case they prove Catholics.

That the Infanta's Family, being Strangers may be Catholics, and shall have a
decent place appointed for all Divine Service, according to the use of the
Church of Rome; and the Ecclesiastics and Religious Persons may wear their own
proper Habits.

That the Marriage shall be Celebrated in Spain by a Procurator, according to
the instructions of the Council of Trent, and after the Infanta's Arival in
England, such a Solemnation shall be used, as may make the Marriage valid,
according to the Laws of this Kingdom.

That she shall have a competent number of Chaplains and a Confesser, being
Strangers, one whereof shall have Power to Govern the Family in Religious
Matters.

But none of the People of England but were averse to this Match, except the
Papists, whose interest indeed it was to carry it on.

After the Bohemians had chosen the Count Palatine King of Bohemia, he craved
advice of his Father in Law King James touching the acceptance of that Royal
dignity. But before he could receive his advice, he was prevailed upon to
accept it, Count Palatine chose King of Bohemia. Wilsons Hist. f. 132.

Rushw. Col. 1. part. f. 12.


because the emergency of the Cause would admit of no delay, and afterward
sent to King James to excuse it.

When this important business of the Count Palatines accepting the Crown of
Bohemia was related in the Kings Council; to evince of what advantage it was to
the Protestant Cause: I shall here insert Archbishop Abbots Letter to Sir
Robert Nauton, the Kings Secretary, the Archbishops infirmities not permitting
him at that time to attend the Council.

That God has set up this Prince, his Majesty's Son in Law, Archbishop
Abbot's Letter touching the Count Palatines accepting the Crown of Bohemia.
as a mark of Honor throughout all Christendom, to propagate the Gospel, to
help the oppressed, that for his own part, he dares not but to give advice to
follow where God Leads, apprehending the Work of God in this and that of
Hungary, that by Piece, and Piece the Kings of the Earth that gave their Power
to the Beasts, shall leave the Whore and make her desolate, that he was
satisfied in Conscience the Bohemians had just cause to reject that Bloody Man,
who had taken a course to make that Kingdom not Elective, in taking it by the
donation of another, the slighting of the Viscount Doncaster in his embassage,
gave cause of just displeasure and indignation, therefore let not a Noble Son
be forsaken for their sakes, who regard nothing but their own ends, our
striking in will comfort the Bohemians, Honor the Palsgrave, strengthen the
Princes of the Union, draw on the United Provinces, stir up the King of Denmark
and the Palatines two Uncles, the Prince of Orange and the Duke of Bovillon,
together with Termoville a rich Prince in France to cast in their shares. The
Parliament is the Old and honorable way for raising of Money, and all that may
be spared is to be returned this way, and perhaps God provided the Jewels that
were laid up in the Tower by the Mother, for the preservation of the Daughter,
who like a Noble Princess has professed, that she will not leave her self one
Jewel, rather then not maintain so Religious and Righteous a Cause, certainly
if countenance be given to this Action, many brave Spirits will offer
themselves, therefore let all our Spirits be gathered up to animate this
business, that the World may take notice, that we are awake when God calls.

By this Letter it plainly appears, that it was the Archbishops Opinion, that
it tended much to the promoting the Reformation, that the Count Palatine should
accept the Crown of Bohemia, and the Crown of England should stand by him in
it; and whoever reads the most impartial writers of those times will find, that
the Spanish Match, which was then a foot, and Popish Councels at home, was the
true Cause of the loss of the Palatinate, and the ruin of that Protestant
Prince; and how could things be expected otherwise, so long as Gondamor, had so
far the ascendant of the King, that when the Earl of Essex solicited the King
(after the War was begun) to send more Forces, Gondamor obstructed it, whatever
he desired was done, and few or none were well respected at Court but Spanish
Wilsons 144. Rushw. 1. part f. 18. vide. the private instructions to the
Spanish Ambassador sent into England.
Pentioners (under whom the Papists flourished.) After the Palatinate was lost,
the King outwardly seemed willing to assist toward the Recovery of it; and
therefore proposes it first to the Privy Council, and afterward called a
Parliament which was to meet the thirteenth of January, in the 18 th. Year of
his Reign, proposing to himself that the People for regaining the Palatinate,
would open their Purses, which he might make use of, and that a good agreement
Between him and his People, would induce his Brother of Spain to be more
Active, and so he should have supply from the one, and dispatch from the other,
i. e. Money and the Spanish Match, were the ends he aimed at, let the Palatinate
Sink or Swim, 'twas no matter.

This the Jesuits and Seminary Priests knew well enough, and therefore they,
Wilsons Hist. f. 151.
rangeing up and down like Spirits let loose, did not now, as formerly, creep
into Corners, using close and cunning Artifices, but practiced them openly,
having admission to our Counselors of State. And when Secretaries and such as
manage the intimate Councels of Kings, are Jesuits, and Clients to the Pope,
there can be no tendency of affection to a contrary Religion, or Policy. Yet
these were the Men that carried all before them at Court: And the Protestant
interest must needs flourish under such Ministers of State; especially if it be
considered; that England was not only Manned with Jesuits (all Power now failing
to oppose them) but the Women also began to practice the Trade, Women
Jesuitrices.
calling themselves Jesuitrices: This Order was first set on foot in Flanders,
by Mrs. Ward and Mrs. Twitty, two English Gentlewomen, who Clothed themselves
in Ignatian Habit, and were Countenanced and Supported by Father Gerrard Rector
of the English College at Liege, with Father Flack and Father More. Their
design was to Preach the Popish Doctrine to their own Sex in England, ( i. e.
to Alienate their Hearts from their Sovereign, if he be not of their Religion,
or will not at least connive at it;) to engage them in Plots, Conspiracies and
Treasons, for the destroying Heretical, i. e. Protestant Kings, and Heresy,
that is, Protestantism, that they do, or should defend.

This project took so (as any thing does that tends to promoting Mother Church)
that in a short time this Mrs. Ward, by the Popes indulgence (who will indulge
any thing that tends to destroy, what he calls Heresy) became the Mother
General, of no less then two Hundred English Damsels of good Birth and
Quallity, whom she sent abroad to Preach.

This Story and many other Jesuitical exploits, are more particularly related
in Wadsworths Spanish Pilgrim, to which I refer the Reader.

The Parliament meet. Wilsons Hist. f. 193. Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 23.
On the 30 th. of January, 1620. the Parliament met, according to the Summons,
and notwithstanding the King's smooth Speech to them, they petitioned him for
the due Execution of the Laws against Jesuits, Seminary Priests and Papists,
which evidences that there was either none, or at least a very slender
Execution of those Laws.

They rip up Grievances.
They rip up many Grievances that the People had groaned under, during the
Intervals of Parliament, by Monopoly, Patents and otherwise, punished the great
Managers of them with exemplary Punishments; and to make the Redress of these
Grievances pass the more easily with the King, they gave him two Subsidies,
which was very acceptable to him.

The Parliament adjourned without taking care of the Palatinate or Protestant
Religion. Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 35.

Wilsons Hist. f. 164.


He having got this Supply, when the Parliament had sat about four Months, he,
sent them word by the Lord Treasurer, that he would have them adjourn, as being
more expedient than a Prorogation; that he had redressed Corruption in Courts
of Justice, by his Proclamation, called in the Patents of Inns, of Osteries,
and of Gold and Silver Thread, and cherished the Bill against Informers and
Monopolies; but not a word of Care taken to recover the Palatinate, or putting
the Laws in execution against the Papists.

The Commons take it amiss, which the King resents, and on the fourth of June
1621. in the ninteenth Year of his Reign; Wilson says till February.
he declared for an Adjournment till November following, and that he will in
the mean time, of his own Authority, redress Grievances.

The House of Commons, immediately before this Recess, taking to heart the
Miseries of the Palatinate, and knowing how much the Protestant Religion was
concerned in it, resolved, that the drawing back in so good a Cause, should not
be charged on their Slackness, and therefore made the Declaration following,
with an universal Consent.

The Commons Declaration touching the Palatinate. Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 36.
Wilsons Hist. f. 164.
THE Commons assembled in Parliament, taking into most serious Consideration,
the present State of the Kings Children abroad, and general afflicted Estate of
the true Professors of the same Christian Religion, professed by the Church of
England, in foreign Parts, and being touched with a true Sense and
Fellow-feeling of their Distresses, as Members of the same Body, do, with
unanimous Consent, in the Name of themselves and the whole Body of the Kingdom
(whom they represent) declare unto His most Excellent Majesty, and to the whole
World, their hearty Grief and Sorrow for the same; and do not only join with
them in their humble and devout Prayers to Almighty God, to protect his true
Church, and to avert the Dangers now threatened; but also with one Heart and
Voice, do solemnly protest, That if His Majesty's pious Endeavors by Treaty,
to procure their Peace and Safety, shall not take that good Effect, which is
desired in Treaty (wherefore they humbly beseech His Majesty, not to suffer any
longer Delay) that then upon Signification of His Majesty's Pleasure in
Parliament, they shall be ready, to the utmost of their Powers, both with their
Lives and Fortunes, to assist him so, as that by the Divine Help of Almighty
God (which is never wanting unto those who, in his Fear, shall undertake the
Defense of his own Cause) he may be able to do that with his Sword, which by a
peaceable Course shall not be effected.

Soon after this, the King was plied from Spain and Rome, The King plied for
Favor to Papists.
to enlarge his Favors to Popish Recusants, and it could not be otherwise
expected, so long as there was any thoughts of so near an Alliance between
Spain and England.

The Parliament met again the twentieth of November, The Parliament meet.
and because the House of Commons found, that though the King declared for War,
he pursued Peace, and resolved to close with Spain. They resolved to try the
Kings Spirit by the following Petition and Remonstrance, wherein they laid open
the Distempers of those Times, with their Causes and Cures.

The Causes they told him were these: The Vigilance and Ambition of the Pope, A
Remonstrance by the Parliament against Popery. Wilson f. 167. Rushw. Coll. 1
pt. f. 40.
and his Son the Spanish Prince: The Devilish Doctrines of the Romish Church:
The distressed Estate of the Protestants abroad: The disasterous Accidents to
his The Count Palatines Family.
Children abroad: The strange Confederacy of the Popish Princes, to subvert the
Protestant Religion here: The great Armies raised by the Spaniard. The Papists
Expectations of the Spanish Match: Foreign Princes interposing for Favor to
Papists here: The Papists open Resort to Foreign Ambassadors: Their Concourse
to London, and their Conventicles there: The Education of their Children in
Seminaries: The Grants of their Forfeitures to Persons, who take little or
nothing of them: The printing Popish Books: The Swarms of Priests and Jesuits:
(The common Incendiaries of all Christendom) dispersed in all parts of the
Kingdom.

The growing Mischiefs to Church and State, they told him were these: The
Popish Religion is incompatable with ours, and draws with it an unavoidable
Dependence on Foreign Princes. It opens a wide Gap for Popularity, to any who
shall draw too great a Party; We have lately seen the Truth of this verified,
when the Papists from Connivance, actually got a Toleration, and that with an
Equality, and had got the Superiority, and subverted our Religion, had not God
in his Providence interposed.
it has a restless Spirit, and will strive by these Gradations. If it get but
a Connivance, it will press for a Toleration; if that should be obtained, they
must have an Equality; from thence they will aspire to Superiority, and will
never rest till they get a Subversion of the true Religion.

The Remedies proposed were: That the King would take his Sword into his Hand;
that he would therewith assist the Protestants abroad, not to rest upon a War
in these Parts only, but give a Diversion otherwise: That this War might be
against him, that had maintained the War in the Palatinate: That he would put
the Laws in Execution against the Papists: That the Charles the First.
Prince might be married to a Protestant: That the Children of the Nobility and
Gentry beyond Seas, might be called home: That Papists Children, and their
Children, whose Wives were Papists, might be educated by Protestant
Schoolmasters and Teachers: That the King would revoak all former Licenses for
Youth to travel beyond Sea, and grant no more after. That all former Grants of
Papists Lands might be avoided, if by Law they could, and no such Grants made
afterwads.

The Commons had no small reason to take notice of the State of the Protestant
Interest abroad: seeing besides the great Wound made in Germany, Protestants
persecuted abroad. Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 43.
and the Cruelties of the prevailing House of Austria, the Protestants in
France, were almost ruined by Lewis the Thirteenth, and yet notwithstanding,
the King understanding they were preparing the above mentioned Remonstrance,
writ a Letter to Sir Thomas Richardson, Speaker of the House of Commons,
December the 3 d. 1621.

Wherein he let him know, He heard, to his Grief, that his Absence (being sick)
had emboldned some fiery and popular Spirits of the House, to argue and debate
Matters far above their Reach and Capacity, The King is angry at the
Remonstrance, and writes to the Speaker to prevent it. Rush. Coll. Ibid.
tending to his Dishonor, and Breach of Prerogative Royal. Therefore commanded
him to make known to the House, that none should presume to meddle with any
thing concerning his Government, or deep Matters of State; and particularly,
that they should not deal with his dearest Sons Match with the Daughter of
Spain, or any other his Friends and Confederates: That except they did reform
it before it came to his Hands, he would not hear nor answer it.

Another Remonstrance. Rush. Coll. 1 pt. f. 44.
And he was as good as his Word, as will appear afterward; for upon the Receipt
of this Letter, the House drew up another Remonstrance, with the greatest
Submission imaginable; wherein they lay the Ground of their former
Remonstrance, upon the deplorable Estate of his own Children in the Palatinate,
and the apparent Danger, and almost unavoidable Ruin of the Protestants, and
the Protestant Religion at Home and abroad, evidenced by Transactions, an
Account whereof, they had received from his Majesty himself, by three Honorable
Lords, and tackt their former Remonstrance to the latter, and so presented
them; but the former he rejected utterly, and gave a long Answer to the latter,
but granted nothing whereof they complained; as may be seen by the Answer it
self, printed in Wilson, f. 178. and Rushworth f. 46. In the said Answer, he
discovered his great Concern for the Spanish Match, and his Backwardness to
proceed against Papists, however the same is blended by specious Pretenses of
the Necessity of showing Favor to the Papists here, to procure the gentle
Usage of the Protestants abroad. VVilson's Hist. f. 188. Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. 53,
54* 55.

The Parliament dissolved.


He denied in his Answer, the Rights and Privileges of the Commons to be their
Birthright; they protest them so to be; he tears the Protest out of the
Journal Book of the House of Commons, and the sixth of January, 1621. by
Proclamation, dissolves the Parliament. And whether that were the way to
recover the Palatinate, or secure the Protestant Religion at home or abroad;
needs no great Sagacity to determine.

Papists discharged from Imprisonment. VVilson's Hist. f. 195. Rushw. Coll. 1
pt. f. 62, 63.
In the twentieth Year of this Kings Reign, the Prisons were opened, Priests and
Jesuits walked about at Noon. And Gondamore (who did what he pleased) vaunts of
four thousand Papists that his Intercession had released; either to make his
Service the more acceptable to his Master, or to let him see how willing the
King was to do any thing to advance that Match, which they never intended. The
King was not so nice, but that he could stay for Car. Bandino, Car. Lode. visio.
a Dispensation from Rome. To expedite which, he wrote to some of the most
active Cardinals there, and received Answers from them full of alluring Hopes.
And that he might give some more public Testimony of his Indulgence to the
Papists (the mortal Enemies of the Protestants) he commanded Doctor Williams,
Bishop of Lincoln, then Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, to pass Writs
under the Great Seal, to require the Judges of every Circuit, to enlarge all
such Papists as were imprisoned for Recusancy, accordingly the Writs were
issued forth under the Great Seal, and the Lord Keeper wrote to the Judges on
this manner, which Letter, take Verbatim, as printed in Wilson.

The Lord Keeper Williams his Letter to the Judges, in Favor of the Papists.
VVilson's Hist. f. 196.
AFter my hearty Commendations to you, His Majesty having resolved (out of deep
Reasons of State, and in Expectation of like Correspondence from Foreign
Princes, to the Professors of our Religion) to grant some Grace and Connivance
to the imprisoned Papists of this Kingdom; has commanded me to pass some Writs
under the Broad Seal to that purpose; requiring the Judges of every Circuit, to
enlarge the said Prisoners, according to the Tenor and Effect of the same. I am
to give you to understand (from His Majesty) how His Majesty's Royal Pleasure
is, that upon receipt of these Writs, you shall make no Niceness or Difficulty
to extend that His Princely Favor to all such Papists, as you shall find
Prisoners in the Goals of your Circuits, for any Church Recusancy whatsoever,
or refusing the Oath of Supremacy, or dispersing Popish Books, or hearing,
saying of Mass, or any other Point of Recusancy, which does touch or concern
Religion only, and not Matter of State,

And so I bid you farewell, Your Loving Friend, Jo. Lincoln.
Westminster Coll. 2. Aug. 1622.

In order to the Match with Spain, the King agreed to such Articles of
Religion, The Spanish Match, the Nature of the Articles.

Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 66, 67.


as were Satisfactory in the Judgment of the learnedest and greatest Clergy of
Spain: That they declared their Opinion, that upon the Offer of such
Conditions, the Pope ought not to withold the Dispensation, and the Pope
himself was satisfied, that he had in a manner, done already all that was
desired.

No wonder then, that the Papists were quiet here in England, and not engaged
in Plots and Contrivances against the Kings Person; for the Reason is plain,
the whole Substance of the Spanish Treaty, was a Plot for ruining the
Palatinate, and thereby weakening, in order to destroy, the Protestant Interest
abroad; which they effected, by feeding the King with the Hopes of that Match,
and thereby diverting him from taking the Parliaments Advice, in order to
recover the Palatinate; You may read the whole Story in Wilson and Rushworth.
and when they had brought their Designs about, and the Palatinate was
irretrievably lost, they broke off the Match, and left the King and Prince in
the Lurch. Right Popish Juggling.

After this Treaty was dissolved, the King thinks of a Match with France, The
French Match.

Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 114. A Parliament called.


and the Lord Kensington was sent Ambassadot into France, to feel the Pulse of
that Court touching it, and gives an Account that it would be accepted; soon
after which, a Parliament was called, to meet the twelfth of February, in the
21 st. year of this King, 1623. and now the King is of the Mind to take the
Parliaments Advice about his Sons Match, as he told them, and is grieved for
the Increase of Popery (if after all the foregoing Passages, it be to be
believed) and promises a great deal, and porforms never a whit. And here I
cannot omit what Wilson says, speaking of this Parliaments Petition against
Papists, and the Kings Answer, both which he has printed at large, f. 272.273,
274, 275. to which I refer the Reader: If the King, says he, had seriously and
really considered the very last Clause of this Petition, wherein the Glory of
God, and the Safety of his Kingdoms so much consisted, as the Parliament wisely
express and foresee, and which the King says, is the best Advice in the World,
and which he promised so faithfully to observe in the next Treaty of Marriage
for his Son, it might perhaps have kept the Crown upon the head of his
Posterity. But when Princes break with the People, A good Caution for all
Christian Princes and States.
in those Promises that concern the Honor of God, God will let their People
break with them, to their Ruin and Dishonor: And this Maxim holds in all
Powers, whether Kingdoms or Commonwealths, as they are established by Justice,
so the Justice of Religion, which tends most to the Glory of God, is
principally to be observed.

The Parliament followed the Chase close, The Parliament displaceth Papists.
and bolted out diverse of the Nobility and Gentry of Eminency, popishly
affected, that had earthed themselves in Places of high Trust and Power in the
Kingdom, as if they meant to undermine the Nation. Their Names, Wilson says,
were these.

Francis Earl of Rutland, the Duke of Buckinghams Wives Father; Sir Thomas
Compton, Their Names. VVilson's Hist. f. 276.
that was married to the Dukes Mother, and the Countess her self, who was the
Cynosure they all steered by; the Earl of Castle-haven, the Lord Herbert after
Earl of Worcester, the Lord Viscount Colchester after Earl of Rivers, the Lord
Peter, the Lord Morley, the Lord Windsor, the Lord Eure, the Lord Wotton, the
Lord Teinham, the Lord Scroop, who was Lord President of the North (and which
they omitted, the Earl of Northampton, Lord President of Wales, who married his
Children to Papists, and permitted them to be bred up in Popery) Sir William
Courtney, Sir Thomas Brudnell, Sir Thomas Somerset, Sir Gilbert Ireland, Sir
Francis Stonners, Sir Anthony Brown, Sir Francis Howard, Sir William Powel, Sir
Francis Lacon, Sir Lewis Lewkner, Sir William Awbury, Sir John Gage, Sir John
Shelly, Sir Henry Carvell, Sir Thomas Wiseman, Sir Thomas Ge^rard, Sir John
Filpot, Sir Thomas Russel, Sir Henry Beddingfield, Sir William Wrey, Sir John
Counwey, Sir Charles Jones, Sir Ralph Conyers, Sir Thomas Lamplough, Sir Thomas
Savage, Sir William Mosely, Sir Hugh Beston, Sir Thomas Riddall, Sir Marmaduke
Nivell, Sir John Townesend, Sir William Norris, Sir Philip Knevet, Sir John
Tasborough, Sir William Selbie, Sir Richard Titehborn, Sir John Hall, Sir
George Perkins, Sir Thomas Penrodduck, Sir Nicholas Saunders, Knights, besides
several Esquires popishly addicted, either in their own Persons, or by means of
their Wives, too tedious to be expressed here; and these were dispersed and
seated in every County, who were not only in Office and Commission, but had
Countenance from Court, by which they grew up and flourished, so that their
Exuberancy hindered the Growth of any Goodness or Piety, their Malice pleased to
drop upon.

Soon after which, the Parliament was adjourned, after they had made thirty
five public Acts, and seventy three private ones, but nothing was done with
relation to the Papists.

Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 154, 155.

Wilson f. 277. says, the King desired this Match above all Earthly Blessings.


The King admiring the Alliance of mighty Kings, though of a contrary Religion,
desired the Match with France unmeasurably (notwithstanding his Promise to the
Parliament) which the French perceived; and though they were very forward
before, yet now abated of that Forwardness: And whereas they were at first very
modest in their Demands, in favor of the Papists, yet now enlarged those
Demands, and strained the King to the Concession of such Immunities, as he had
promised the Parliament he would never grant. In August 1624. this Match was
concluded, and in November the Articles were sworn unto by King James, Prince
Charles, and the French King; the Articles concerning Religion, were not much
short of those for the Spanish Match.

Papists encouraged by the Treaty with France.

Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 154.


The Papists formerly daunted by the Breach of the Spanish Match, were now again
revived by the Marriage Treaty with France. And at this time, upon the Death of
William, titular Bishop of Calcedon, most of the English Secular Priests did
petition the Pope, that another Bishop might be sent over into England, there
to ordain Priests, give Confirmation, and exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction.
Among others, Matthew Killison and Richard Smith were presented.

And though the Regulars were opposite to the Seculars in this Matter, yet
those of the Order of St. Benedict joined with the Seculars, and Rudesin Barlo,
the President of the English Benedictines of Doway, wrote a Letter in their
Behalf, at the Congregation at Rome, named of the Propagation of the Faith.
Dated the 12 th. of December 1624.

In which Letter was this Passage: That there were above sixty Benedictine
Monks in England; and that it is not to be doubted (said he) (for that it is
already seen, the good Success under the first Bishop) that another Bishop
being constituted, there would be more joyful Fruits within two Years, in the
English Mission, than hitherto has been for sixty years now lapsed.

But not long after the Episcopal party of the Romish Church prevailing, Pope
Urban the VIII. created Richard Smith Bishop of Calcedon, and sent him into
England with Episcopal Authority over the Priests within the English Dominions.

The Close of this Kings Reign.

Rushw. Coll. f. 155.


And now I am come to the Close of this Kings Reign, for after he had
(notwithstanding all his connivance at the Papists, out of either Ambition or
Cowardice) recommended the Protection of the Church of England to the then
Prince of Wales, Charles the First; advised him to love his Wife, but not her
Religion; and exhorted him to take special care of his Grandchildren, the
Children of the Elector Palatine, by his Daughter, and to employ the Power he
left him, to restablish him in the Estate and Dignitys of his Father on the
27th of March in the Twenty third Year of his Reign he gave up the Ghost.

From what Account I have given of Matters relating to the making the Penal
Laws, and the Reasons of not putting them in Execution in this Kings Reign, I
gather these things,

1. That there is no heed to be taken to any promises made, Advice given nor
Oaths taken by Papists, for if the Interest of the Popish Religion Intervenes,
the Promises, Advice, yea even the Oaths themselves, must give way, and it is
Meritorious too.

2. That when it is to serve the Popish Interest, they are allowed to deny the
plainest truths, although confessed by Men in Articulo Mortis, at the very point
of Death.

3. That whenever they are detected of any Conspiracy or Treason, they
immediately set their Wits to work, to throw the odium of it upon some sort of
Protestants or other, nay sometimes they make it an essential part of the
Conspiracy it self.

4. That when they found themselves lost as to more private Conspiracies, they
involved Christendom in War, to destroy the Protestant Interest, upon the
Color of the Elector Palatines having Usurped the Crown of Bohemia
notwithstanding he was legally Elected; and made use of the Cowardice of King
James to carry on that Design.

5. That they want not Arts to deceive even Protestants themselves, if they
look not narrowly to them; so much can they transform themselves into the
likeness of Truth.

6. That the loss of the Palatinate, the differences between King James the
first and his Parliaments, the Spanish Treaty, and at last the completing the
French Match, were all carried on by Popish Intregues and to serve the Popes
turn.

Certainly then, there was good reason for the making the Penal Laws in this
Kings Reign, and the Parliament are greatly justified in pressing an Execution
of them, which had it been granted, a Man may with good reason believe all the
Civil Wars in the succeeding Reign had been prevented.

And this might lead me to show the share the Popish Party had in the
beginning, managing and carrying on that unhappy and ever to be lamented War;
but my design being only to show the reasonableness of making the Penal Laws
against the Papists, and there being but one Law made against them in this
unfortunate Princes Reign, I shall only give the grounds of making that Law,
and pass on to the Reign of his Son King Charles the Second.

CHAP. IX. K. Chapter I.
King Charles. 1. His Accession to the Crown. Bakers Chron. f. 451. Rushw.
Coll. 1 Pt. f. 165* 167, 170.
KIng James the First being dead, King Charles the First was immdiately
Proclaimed, he buried his Father the 7th of May 1625. The 13th of June in the
same Year. the Match between him and the French Kings daughter was consummated
here in England. A Chapel at Sommerset House was built for the Queen and her
Family, with conveniences thereunto adjoining for Capuchin Friars, who were
therein placed, and had permission to walk abroad in their Religious Habits:
Thence forwards greater multitudes of Seminary, Priests and Jesuits repaired
into England out of foreign Parts, then before.

The Parliament meet.
The 18th day of June the Parliament opened; they after the usual Proceedings at
the first sitting down, Petitioned the King concerning Religion and against
Papists; he by his Answer gave them assurance of his real performance of what
they desired in every particular.

Papists Pardoned contrary to promise. Rushw. Coll. 1 Pt. f. 280.
But notwithstanding this, soon after, his Majesty granted a Pardon to one
Alexander Baker a Jesuit and unto ten other Papists, which was gotten (as
there was information given) by the importunity of some Foreign Ambassador, and
passed by immediate Warrant, and was recommended by the Principal Secretary of
State, without the payment of the ordinary Fees. And diverse Copys of Letters,
and other Papers, found by two Justices of Peace, in the House of one Mary
Estmonds in Dorsetshire, were stifled by the Secretarys means. The Commons upon
these passages made observations, First, that the Pardon was dated the very
next day after his Answer to their Petition, Secondly, That the Pardon
dispensed with several Laws as 21. and 27. Eliz. and 3. Jac. provided to keep
the Subjects in due obedience, Thirdly, That the Pardon was signed by the
Principal Secretary of State. The Commons therefore declared, that these
actings tended to the prejudice of true Religion, his Majesty's dishonor, the
discountenancing of Ministers of Justice, the grief of the good People; the
animating of the Popish Party, who by such Examples grew more proud and
insolent, and to the discouragement of the High Court of Parliament. The
Petition concerning Religion and the Kings Answer take, as they are printed in
Rushworths Collection, First Part f. 281.

To the King's Most Excellent Majesty.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
IT being infallibly true, that nothing can more establish the Throne, and
assure the Peace and Prosperity of the People, then the unity and sincerity of
Religion; we your most humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal, and Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and hold themselves
bound in Conscience and Duty to represent the same to your Sacred Majesty,
together with the dangerous consequences of the increase of Popery in this
Land, and what we conceive to be the principal cause thereof, and what may be
the Remedies.

The Dangers appear in these Particulars.
1. In their desperate ends, being both the Subversion of the Church and State;
and the restlessness of their Spirits to attain these ends, the Doctrine of
their Teachers and Leaders, persuading them that therein they do God good
Service. 2. Their evident and strict dependency upon such Foreign Princes, as
no way affect the good of your Majesty and this State. 3. The opening a way of
popularity to the Ambition of any, who shall adventure to make himself head of
so great a Party.
The Principal Cause of the increase of Papists.
1. The want of the due Execution of the Laws against Jesuits, Seminary
Priests, and Popish Recusants; occasioned partly by the Connivency of the
State, partly by defects in the Laws themselves, and partly by the manifold
abuse of Officers. 2. The interposing of Foreign Princes by their Ambassadors,
and Agents in favor of them. 3. Their great Concourse to the City and frequent
Conferences and Conventicles there. 4. The open and usual resort to the House
and Chapels of Foreign Ambassadors. 5. the Education of their Children, in
Seminaries and Houses of their Religion in Foreign Parts, which of late has
been greatly multiplied and enlarged for the entertaining of the English. 6.
That in some places of your Realm your People be not sufficiently Instructed in
the Knowledge of the true Religion. 7. The Licentious Printing and Dispersing
of Popish and Seditious Books. 8. The Employment of Men ill affected in
Religion in Places of Government, who do, shall, or may Countenance the Popish
Party.
The Remedies against this Outrageous and dangerous Disease, we conceive to be
these ensuing. 1. That the Youth of this Realm be carefully Educated by careful
and Religious Schoolmasters, and they to be enjoined to Catechize and Instruct
their Scholars, in their Grounds and Principles of true Religion. And whereas
by many Complaints from diverse Parts of the Kingdom it does plainly appear,
That sundry Popish Scholars dissembling their Religion, have craftily crept in
and obtained the Places of Teaching in diverse Counties, and thereby infected
and perverted their Scholars, and so fitted them to be. Transported to the
Popish Seminaries beyond the Seas, that therefore there be great care in choice
and admitting Schoolmasters, and that the Ordinaries make diligent enquiries of
their Demeanours, and proceed to the removing of such as shall be faulty or
justly suspected.

His Majesty's Answer.
THis is well allowed of, and for the better performance of what is desired,
Letters shall be Written to the two Archbishops, and from them, Letters to go
to all the Ordinaries of their several Provinces to see this done; the several
Ordinaries to give account of their doings herein, to the Archbishops
respectively, and they to give account to his Majesty of their Proceedings
herein.

2. That the Ancient Discipline of the Universities be restored, being the
famous Nurseries of Literature and Virtue.

Answ. This is approved by his Majesty, and the Chancellor of each University
shall be required to cause due Execution of it.

3. That special care be taken to enlarge the Word of God through all the Parts
of your Majesty's Dominions, as being the most powerful means for planting of
true Religion and rooting out of the Contrary: to which end, among other
things, let it please your Majesty to Advice your Bishops, by fatherly
entreaty, and tender usage, to reduce to the peaceable and orderly Service of
the Church, such able Ministers as have been formerly silenced, that there may
be a profitable use of their Ministry in these needful and dangerous times, and
that Non-residencies, Pluralities, and Commendams may be moderated, where we
cannot forbear most humbly to thank your Majesty for diminishing the Number of
your own Chaplains; not doubting of the like Princely care for the well
bestowing of the rest of your benefices, both to the Comfort of the People, and
the encouragement of the Universities, being full of grave and able Ministers
unfurnished of livings.

Answ. This his Majesty likes well, so as it be applied to such Ministers as
are peaceable, orderly and Conformable to the Church Government. For Pluralties
and Non-residencies they are now so moderated, that the Arch Bishops affirm
there be now no dispensations for Pluralities granted; nor no Man now is
allowed above two benefices, and those not above thirty Miles distant, and for
avoiding Non-residence, the Cannon in that case provided shall be duly put in
Execution. For Commendams they shall be sparingly granted, only in such case
where the exility and smalness of the Bishopprick requires, also his Majesty
will cause that the Benefices belonging to him shall be well bestowed, and for
the better propagating of Religion, his Majesty recommendeth to the House of
Parliament, that care may be taken and provision made, that every Parish shall
allow a Competent Maintenannce for an able Minister; and that the owners of
Parsonages Impropriate would allow to the Vicars and Ministers, Curates, in
Villages and places belonging to their Parsonage, sufficient stipend and
allowance for Preaching Ministers.

4. That there may be stricct provision against Transporting of English
Children to the Seminaries beyond the Seas, and for the recalling of them who
are already there placed, and for the Punishment of such your Subjects as are
maintainers of those Seminaries, or of the Scholars; considering that besides
the seducing of your People, great sums of Money are yearly expended upon them
to the impoverishing of this Kingdom.

Answ. The Law in this Case shall be put in Execution: and further there shall
be Letters written to the Lord Treasure, and also to the Lord Admiral, that all
the Ports of this Realm, and the Creeks and Members thereof be strictly kept,
and strait searches made to this end: A Proclamation shall be to recall both the
Children of Noblemen and the Children of any other Men, and they to return by a
day; also maintainers of Seminaries of Scholars there, shall be punished
according to Law.

5. That no Popish Recusant be permitted to come within the Court, unless your
Majesty be pleased to call him upon special occasion, agreeable to the Statue
of 3. Jac. and whereas your Majesty for the preventing of apparent mischiefs
both to your Majesty and the State; has in your Princely wisdom, taken order
that none of your natural born Subjects, not professing the true Religion as by
Law established, be admitted into the Service of your Royal Consort the Queen,
we give your Majesty most humble thanks, and desire that your order herein may
be observed.

Answ. If his Majesty shall find, or be informed of any concourse of Recusants
to the Court, the Law shall be strictly followed: And his Majesty is pleased,
that by a Proclamation, the British and Irish Subjects shall be put in the
same Case; and as his Majesty has provided in his Treaty with France, so his
purpose is to keep it, that none of his Subjects shall be admitted into his
Service, or into the Service of his Royal Consort the Queen, that are Popish
Recusants.

6. That all the Laws now standing in force against Jesuits, Seminary Priests,
and others having taken Orders by Authority, derived from the Sea of Rome, be
put in due Execution, and to the intent they may not pretend to be surprised,
that a speedy and certain day be prefixed by your Majesty's Proclamation for
their departure out of this Realm, and all other your Dominions, and not to
return upon the severest Penalties of the Laws, now in force against them, and
that all your Majesty's Subjects may be thereby admonished not to receive,
comfort, entertain or conceal any of them upon the Penalties, which may be
lawfully inflicted: and that all such Papists, Jesuits and Recusants, who are
and shall be imprisoned for Recusancy, or any other cause, may be so strictly
restrained, as that none shall have conference with them, thereby to avoid the
Contagion of their corrupt Religion: and that no Man that shall be suspected of
Popery, be suffered to be a Keeper of any of his Majesty's Prisons.

Answ. The Law in this case shall be put in Execution, and a Proclamation shall
be to the effect desired; and such restraint shall be made as is desired, and
no Man that is justly suspected of Popery, shall be suffered to be a Keeper of
any of his Majesty's Prisons.

7. That your Majesty be pleased to take such order as to your Princely Wisdom
shall be expedient, that no natural born Subject, or strange Bishops, nor any
other by Authorty from the Sea of Rome; confer any Ecclesiastical function
whatsoever, toward or upon your Majesty's natural Subjects within your
Dominions.

Answ. This is fit to be ordered according as is provided, and it shall be so
published by Proclamation.

8. That your Majesty's learned Council may receive Order and Commandment to
consider of all former Grants of Recusants Lands, that such of them may be
avoided, as are made to the Recusants use or interest, out of which the
Recusant receives any benefit, which are either void, or voidable by the Law.

Answ. The King will give Order to his learned Council to consider of the
Grants, and will do according as is desired.

9. That your Majesty will be likewise pleased strictly to command all your
Judges and Ministers of Justice Ecclesiastical and Temporal, to see the Laws of
this Realm against Popish Recusants, to be duly executed; and namely that the
censure of Excommunication be declared and certified against them; and that
they be not absolved upon public satisfaction by yielding to Conformity.

Answ. His Majestys leaves the Laws to their course, and will order in the
point of Excommunication as is desired.

10. That your Majesty will be pleased to remove from Places of Authority and
Government, all such Persons as are either Popish Recusants, or according to
direction of former Acts of State, to be justly suspected.

Answ. 'This his Majesty thinks fit and will give order for it.

11. That present order be taken for disarming all Popish Recusants, legally
convicted, or justly suspected, according to the Laws in that behalf, and the
Orders taken by his late Majesty's Privy Council upon reason of State.

Answ. The Laws and Acts in this Case shall be followed and put in due
Execution.

12. That your Majesty be also pleased in respect of the great resort of
Recusants, to and about London, to command forthwith upon pain of your
indignation, and severe Execution of the Laws, that they retire themselves to
their several Countries there to remain confined, within five Miles of their
Places.

Answ. 'For this the Laws in Force shall be forthwith Executed.

13. And whereas your Majesty has strictly commanded and taken Order, that
none of the natural born Subjects repair to the hearing of Masses, or other
Supersttious Services at the Chapels or Houses of foreign Ambassadors, or in
any other places whatsoever; we give your Majesty most humble thanks and desire
that your Order and Commandment therein may be continued and observed, and that
the offenders herein may be punished according to the Laws.

Answ. The King gives consent thereto, and will see that observed, which herein
has been commanded by him.

14. That all such insolences, as any that are Popishly affected, have lately
Committed or shall hereafter commit, to the dishonor of our Religion, or to
the wrong of the true Professors thereof be exemplarily Punished.

Answ. 'This shall be done as is desired.

15. That the Statute of 1 Eliz. for the payment of twelve pence every Sunday,
by such as shall be absent from Divine Service in the Church, without a lawful
excuse, may be put in due Execution, the rather for that the penalty by Law is
given to the Poor, and therefore not to be dispensed withal.

Answ. It is fit that this Statute be Executed and the Penalties shall not be
dispensed withal.

16. Lastly, that your Majesty would be pleased to extend your princely care
also over the Kingdom of Ireland that the like courses may be there taken for
the restoring and establishing of true Religion there.

Answ. His Majesty's Cares are, and shall be extended over the Kingdom of
Ireland, and he will do all that a Religious King should do, for the restoring
and establishing of true Religion there.

And thus (Most Gracious Sovereign) according to our duty and zeal to God and
Religion, to your Majesty and your safety, to the Church and Commonwealth, and
their Peace and Prosperity, we have made a Faithful Declaration of the present
Estate, the Causes and Remedies of this increasing disease of Popery, Humbly
offering the same to your Princely care and wisdom. The Answer of your
Majesty's Father, our Late Sovereign of Famous Memory, upon the like Petition
did give us great comfort of Reformation, but your Majesty's most Gracious
Promises made in that kind, do give us confidence and assurance of the
continual performance thereof, in which comfort and confidence reposing our
selves, we most Humbly pray for your Majesty's long continuance in all Princely
felicity.

Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. 191.
The 10 th of August the King sends to the Commons to have a present supply, and
promises to let them meet again in Winter, and redress their greivances then;
they insist to have both go on together, The Parliament dissolved.
but withal make a most submisive Declaration of their affection and duty to
him. Which, notwithstanding he by Commission 12 August 1625. dissolved them.

Rushw. Coll. 1. pt. f. 191.192.
The King soon after issued out a Proclamation to call home Papists Children,
and soon after Disarmed the Papists, but as this was pleasing, so his Letter
soon after sent to the Leivetenants for the loan of Money upon Privy Seals and
other things of the like kind were as distastful to the People.

A Parliament called, Papists proceeded against.
But these Courses not having the wished for success, and the King being pressed
with his own necessities, summoned a Parliament to meet in February; and
enjoined the Archbishops and Bishops in both Provinces to proceed by
Examination, and other Church censures with the utmost severity against the
Papists, and those more especially who were Popishly affected, and did
encourage and advance the growth of Popery; and issued out a Proclamation to
confine Convicted Papists to their dwelling Houses or within five Miles thereof.

On Candlemas Day he was Crowned, and at the time of his Coronation took the
Coronation Oath in manner following.

Sir, (says the Archbishop) will you grant and keep, K. Charles 1. Crowned.

The Coronation Oath, Rushw. Coll. 1. part f. 200.

Archbishop.


and by your Oath confirm to the People of England, the Laws and Customs to
them granted by the Kings of England, your Lawful and Religious Predecessors,
and namely, the Laws, Customs and Franchises granted to the Clergy, by the
Glorious King St. Edward, your Predecessor, according to the Laws of God, the
true Profession of the Gospel established in this Kingdom, agreeable to the
Prerogative of the Kings thereof, and the ancient Customs of the Realm.

I Grant and Promise to keep them,

Sir, Will you keep Peace and Godly Agreement (according to your Power) both to
God, The Kings Answer.
the Holy Church, the Clergy and the People.

I Will keep it.

Sir, Will you (to your Power) cause Law, Justice and Discretion to Mercy and
Truth to be executed to your Judgment.

I Will.

Sir, Will you grant to hold and keep the Laws and Rightful Customs, which the
Commonalty of this your Kingdom have, and will you defend and uphold them to
the Honor of God, so much as in you lies.

I Grant and promise so to do,

Then one of the Bishops read this passage to the King.

Our Lord and King, we beseech you to Pardon and to Grant, and to preserve unto
us, and to the Churches committed to your Charge, all Canonical Privildges, and
do Law and Justice, and that you would protect and defend us, as every good
King to his Kingdom ought to be a Protector and Defender of the Bishops and the
Churches under their Government.

The King Answers.
With a willing and devout Heart, I Promise and Grant my Pardon, and that I
will preserve and maintain to you, and the Churches committed to your Charge
all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice; and that I will be your
Protector and Defender to my Power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his Kingdom in right ought to protect and defend the Bishops and
Churches under their Government.

Then the King arose and was led to the Communion Table, where he takes a
solemn Oath in sight of all the People, to observe all the Promises, and laying
his hand upon the Bible said,

The things which I have here Promised, I shall perform and keep; So help me
God, and the Contents of this Book.

The sixth Day of February the Parliament met, The Parliament meets.
Papists are prohibited from going to Mass at Ambassadors Houses, the Judges
are ordered to put the Laws in Execution againsts Papists, which
notwithstanding the Committee of Grievances reported to the Commons House:
That, one general evil was, the increase and countenancing of Papists.

The Marshal of Middlesex meeting with resistance in seizing of Romish Priests
Goods, and complaining of the matter, the then Archbishop writ to Mr. Attorney
General on behalf of the Priests, which Letter was as follows,

Good Mr. Attorney.
I thank you for acquainting me what was done, Yesterday at the Clinck: But I
am of opinion, The Archbishops Letter on behalf of the Priests.

Rushw. Coll. 1. part f. 243.


that if you had curiously enquired upon the Gentleman, who gave the
Information, you should have found him to be a Disciple of the Jesuits, for
they do nothing but put Tricks on these poor Men, who do live more miserable
Lives, then if they were in the Inquisition in many parts beyond the Seas. By
taking the Oath of Allegiance, and writing in defense of it, and opening some
points of high consequence, they have so displeased the Pope, that if by any
cunning they could catch them, they are sure to be burnt or strangled for it,
and once there was a Plot to have taken Preston, By this Letter it appears how
unwilling the Government was to be in any sort cruel even the Priests; and yet
how ungrateful are the Papists to this Day.
as he passed the Thames, and to have shipped him into a bigger Vessel, and so
to have transported him into Flanders, there to have made a Martyr of him; in
respect of these things King James always gave his Protection to Preston and
Warrington as may be easily showed. Cannon is an old Man well affected to the
cause, but medleth not with any Factions or Seditions, as far as I can learn,
they complain their Books were taken from them, and a Crucifix of Gold with
some other things, which I hope are not carried out of the House, but may be
restored again unto them; for it is in vain to think, that Priests will be
without their Beads or Pictures, Models of their Saints; and it is not
improbable, that before a Crucifix they do often say their Prayers.

I leave the things to your best Consideration, and hope that this deed of
yours, together with my word will restrain them for giving offense hereafter,
if so be that lately they did give any. I heartily commend me unto you, and so
rest,

Your very Loving Friend G. Canterbury


The Parliament Petition the King against Papists. Rushw. Coll. 1. part f. 391.
In this Parliament the Commons Petitioned the King to remove the Papists, or
justly suspected out of Places of Government, Authority and Trust, and named
them of the Nobility and Gentry, to the number of sixty one, who were got into
such Offices, and prayed they might be displaced. The Petition and Names take
as follows.

To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
The Parliaments Petition against Papists, with the names of the Persons, who
were crept into Offices notwithstanding the severity of the Laws against them.
YOur Majesty's most Obedient and Loyal Subjects, the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, do with great Comfort remember the many Testimonies which
your Majesty has given of your sincerity and Zeal of the true Religion,
established in this Kingdom, and in your particular gracious Answer to both
Houses of Parliament at Oxford, upon their Petition concerning the Causes and
Remedies of the increase of Popery; that your Majesty thought fit and would
give Order to remove from all places of Authority and Government, all such
Persons as are either Popish Recusants, or according to direction, of former
Acts of State justly to be suspected; which was then presented as a great and
principal Cause of that Mischief. But not having received so full Redress
herein, as may conduce to the peace of this Church, and Safety of this regal
State, they hold it their Duty once more to resort to your Sacred Majesty,
humbly to inform you, that upon Examination they find the Persons under written
to be either Recusants, Papists, or justly suspected according to the former
Acts of State, who now do, or since the sitting of the Parliament did remain in
places of Government and Authority, and trust in your several Counties of this
your Realm of England, and Dominion of Wales.

The Right honorable Francis Earl of Rutland, Lieutenant of the County of
Lincoln, Rutland, Northamton, Nottingham, and a Commissioner of the Peace, and
of Oyer and Terminer in the County of York, and Justice of Oyer from Trent
Northwards, His Lordship is presented to be a Popish Recusant, and to have
affronted all the Commissioners of the Peace within the North Riding of
Yorkshire, by sending a License under his Hand and Seal unto his Tenant Thomas
Fisher, dwelling in his Lordships Manor of Hemsley in the said North Riding of
the said County of York, to keep an Alehouse; soon after he was, by an Order
made at the Quarter Sessions, discharged from keeping an Alehouse, because he
was a Popish Convict Recusant, and to have procured a Popish Schoolmaster,
namely Roger Conyers to teach Scholars within the said Manor of Hemsley, that
formerly had his License to teach Scholars taken from him, for teaching
Scholars that were the Children of popish Recusants; and because he suffered
these Children to be absent themselves from the Church, whilst they were his
Scholars: For which the said Conyers was formerly complained of in Parliament.

The Right Honorable Vicount Dunbar Deputy Justice in Oyer to the Earl of
Rutland, from Trent Northward, and a Commissioner of Sewers, and a Deputy
Lieutenant within the East Riding of Yorkshire: His Lordship is presented to
be a popish Recusant, and his Indictment removed into the King's Bench; and his
Wife, Mother, and the greatest part of his Family are popish Recusants, and
some of them Convicted.

William Lord Eure, in Commission for the Sewers in the East Riding, a Convict,
Popish Recusant: Henry Lord Abergaveeny, John Lord Tenham, Edward Lord Wotton,
in Commission for Sewers, justly suspected for Popery: Henry Lord Morley
Commissioner for Sewers in Com. Lanc. himself suspected, and his Wife a
Recusant: John Lord Mordant Commissioner of the Peace, Sewers, and Subsidy in
Com. Northampton.

John Lord St. John of Basing, Captain of Lidley Castle in Southampton,
indicted for a Popish Recusant.

Em. Lord Scroop Lord President of His Majesty's Council in the North, Lord
Lieutenant of the County and City of York; and Comd. Eborac. and villae
Kingston super Hull, presented the last time, and continuing still to give
Suspicion of his ill affection in Religion.

1. By never coming to the Cathedral Church upon those days, wherein former
Presidents have been accustomed.

2. By never receiving the Sacrament upon Common days, as other Presidents were
accustomed, but publicly departing out of the Church, with his Servants, upon
those days, when the rest of the Council, Lord Mayor and Aldermen do receive.

3. By never or very seldom repairing to the Fasts, but often publicly riding
abroad with his Hawks on those days.

4. By causing such as are known to be firm on those days in the Religion
Established, to be left out of Commission; which is instanced in Henry Alured
Esquire by his Lordships procurement, put out of the Commission of Sewers; or else
from keeping them from Executing their places, which is instanced in Dr. Hudson
Doctor in Divinity, to whom his Lordship has refused to give the Oath, being
appointed.

5. By putting diverse other ill-affected Persons in Commission of the Council
of Oyer and Terminer, and of the Sewers, and in other places of Trust, contrary
to His Majesty's Gracious Answer to the late Parliament.

6. In October last 1625. being certified of diverse Spanish Ships of War upon
the Coasts of Sch^^borough, his Lordship went thither, and took with him the
Lord Dunbar, Sir Thomas Metham and William Alford, and lay at the House of the
Lord Eury, whom he knew to be a convict Recusant, and did notwithstanding
refuse to disarm him, although he had received Letters from the Lords of the
Council to that effect. And did likewise refuse to show the Commissioners who
were to be employed for disarming of Popish Recusants, the Original Letters of
the Privy Council, or to deliver them any Copies, as they desired, and as his
Predecessors in that place were wont to do.

7. By giving Order to the Lord Dunbar, Sir William Wetham and Sir William
Alford, to view the Forts and store of Munition in the Town of Kingston upon
Hull, who made one Kerton a convict Recusant, and suspected to be a Priest,
their Clerk in that Service.

8. By denying to accept a Plea, tendered according to the Law, by Sir William
Hilliard Defendant, against Isabel Simpson Plantiff, in an Action of Trover,
that she was a convict Popish Recusant, and forcing him to pay Costs.

9. By the great increase of Recusants since his Lordships coming to that
Government in January, 1619. It appearing by the Record of the Sessions that
there are in the East Riding only one Thousand six Hundred and Seventy more
convicted then were before, which is conceived to be an effect of his favor
and countenance toward them.

William Langdale Esquire convicted of Popish Recusancy; Jordan Metham, Henry Holm,
Michael Partington, Esquires; George Creswel, Thomas Danby, Commissioners of
the Sewers, and put in Commission by procurement of the Lord Scroop, Lord
President of the North, and who have all Popish Recusants to their Wives; Ralph
Bridgman a Non-Communicant.

Nicholas Girlington, whose Wife comes seldom to Church; Sir Marmaduke Wycel
Knight and Baronet, presented the last Parliament, his Wife being a convict
Popish Recusant, and still continuing so.

Sir Thomas Metham Knight, Deputy-Lieutenant, made by the Lord Scroop in
Commission of the Council of the North, and of Oyer and Terminer, and other
Commissions of Trust; all by procurement of the said Lord president since the
Kings Answer; never known to have received the Communion; his two only
Daughters brought up to be Popish, and one of them lately Married to Thomas
Doleman Esquire a Popish Recusant.

Anthony Vicount Mountague, in Commission of the Sewers in Com. Sussex, his
Lordship a Recusant Papist.

Sir William Wray Knight, Deputy-Lieutenant, Colonel to a Regiment, his Wife a
Recusant: Sir Edward Musgrave, Sir Thomas Lampleigh Justices of Peace and
Quorum, Sir Thomas Savage Deputy-Lieutenant and Justice of Peace, his Wife and
Children Recusants, Sir Edward Egerton a Non-Communicant.

Thomas Savage Esquire a Deputy-Lieutenant, a Recusant, and his Wife Indicted and
presented; William Whimore Commissioner of the Subsidy, his Daughter and many
of his Servants Recusants. Sir William Massy Commissioner for the Subsidy, his
Lady Indicted for Recusancy, and his Children Papists: Sir William Courtney
Knight, Vice-Warden of the Stannery, and Deputy-Lieutenant, a Popish Recusant.

Sir Thomas Ridley Knight, Justice of the Peace, his Wife a Popish Recusant,
and Eldest Son.

Sir Ralph Conyers Knight Justice of Peace, his Wife a Popish Recusant.

James Lawson Esquire a Justice of Peace, and one of the Captains of the
Trained-Bands, his Children Popish Recusants: and Servants Non-Communicants.

Sir John Shelley Knight and Baronet, a Recusant. William Scot Esquire a Recusant.

John Finch Esquire not convicted, but comes not to Church, in Commission of the
Sewers.

These are all Convicted Recusants, or suspected of Popery.
Sir William Mullineux Deputy-Lieutenant and Justice of Peace, his Wife a
Recusant, Sir Richard Houghton Knight Deputy-Lieutenant, his Wife and some of
his Daughters Recusants. Sir William Norris Captain of the General Forces and
Justice of Peace, a Recusant: Sir Gilbert Ireland Justice of Peace, a Recusant;
James Anderton Esquire Justice of Peace, and one of his Majesty's Receivers, his
Wife a Non-Communicant, his Son and Heir, a great Recusant, and himself
suspected.

Edward Rigby Esquire Clerk of the Crown, Justice of Peace, himself a good
Communicant, but his Wife and Daughters Popish Recusants.

Edward Creswel Esquire Justice of Peace, his Wife a Popish Recusant.

John Parker Gentleman, Muster Master for the County suspected for a Popish
Recusant.

George Ireland Esquire Justice of Peace, his Wife a Popish Recusant.

John Preston Esquire Bow-bearer for his Majesty in Westmoreland Forest, a
Recusant.

Thomas Covil Esquire Jailer, Justice of the Peace and Quorum, his Daughter a
Recusant Married.

Sir Cutbbert Halsal Justice of Peace, his Wife a Recusant.

Richard Sherburn Esquire Justice of Peace, himself Non-resident, his Wife and Son
Recusants.

Sir George Hennage Knight, Sir Francis Metcalf Knight, Robert Thorold Esquire
Anthony Munson Esquire William Dallison Esquire in Commission of the Sewers; and are
justly suspected for Popish Recusants.

Sir Henry Spiller Knight, in Commission for Middlesex and Westminster, and
Deputy-Lieutenant: Valentine Saunders Esquire one of the Six Clerks, both which are
justly suspected to be ill-affected in Religion according to the Acts of State.

Charles Jones Knight Deputy-Lieutenant and Justice of Peace, George Milburne
Esquire Justice of Peace, Edward Morgan Esquire their Wives are all Popish Recusants.

William Jones Deputy-Lieutinant, Justice of Peace, his Wife suspected to be a
Popish Recusant.

John Vaugban Captain of the Horse suspected for Recusancy.

Benedict Hall receiver and Steward of the Duchy of Lancaster, he and his Wife
are Popish Recusants.

Sir Thomas Brudenel Knight and Baronet, Deputy Lieutenant, a Popish Recusant.

Cutbbert Heron Esquire now Sheriff of Northumberland Justice of Peace, his Wife a
Recusant.

Sir William Selby Junior Knight Justice of Peace, his Wife a Recusant.

Sir John Canning Knight, Justice of Peace, his Wife a suspected Recusant.

Sir Ephraim Widdrington Knight, Justice of Peace, suspected to be a Recusant.

Sir Thomas Ridall Knight Justice of Peace, his Wife and Eldest Son are
Recusants.

John Widdrington Esquire who came out of the same County before his Majesty's
Proclamation was Published, and is now at London attending the Council Table by
Commandment, and yet not dismissed.

Sir Robert Pierpotnt Justice of Peace, his Wife a Recusant.

Sir Anthony Brown Knight Justice of Peace, thought to be a Recusant, but not
convict.

Sir Henry Beddingfeild Knight, Deputy-Lieutenant and Justice in Oyer and
Terminer, and in Commission of Sewers Justice of Peace and Captain of a Foot
Company, his Wife nor any of his Children, as is informed, come to the Church.

Thomas Sayer Captain of the Horse, his Wife comes not to Church.

Sir William Yelverton Baronet and Justice of Peace, not suspect himself, but
his Eldest Son, and one of his Daughters are known Recusants.

Sir Henry Minne Knight Justice of Peace and Quorum, neither he, his Wife or
Daughters can be known to have received the Communion, and have been presented
at the Sessions for Nonconformity.

Robert Warren Clerk, a Justice of Peace, justly suspected, and that for these
Reasons.

1. He being in trust for one Ratcliff of Bury, Deceased, for the Education of
his Son; he took him from the School at Twelve years Old and sent him beyond
the Seas to be brought up there, in a Popish Seminary, where he has remained
six or seven years, as was generally Reported.

2. One of his Parishioners doubted in some points of Religion, being Sick, and
desired to be satisfied by him, who confirmed him in the Religion of the Church
of Rome, which he told to his Brothers before his Death, who are ready to
affirm the same, but this was diverse years since.

3. There being Letters directed to four Knights of that County to call the
Ministers and other Officers before them, and to cause them to present all such
as absented themselves from the Church, and were Popishly affected, he was
desired to present those within his Parish Church of Welford, which he
accordingly did, but left out at the least one half. And being asked why he did
so? He Answered, that he was no Informer: And being asked of some particulas,
whether they come to the Church or not, his Answer was, they did not. And why
then did he not present them? He said, they might be Anabaptists or Brownists,
and would not present them, and this certified by three Members of the House.

4. He having a Brother dwelling in Sudbury that was presented for not coming
to the Church; he came to one of the Ministers, and told him that he took it
ill they presented his Brother: Who Answered, he did not; but if he had known
of it, he would; whereupon he replied, he was glad he had a Brother of any
Religion.

5. One of his Parish named Fage, having Intelligence that there was one of the
said Parish that could inform of a private Place where Arms were in the
Recusants House in the Parish, came to some of the Deputy Lieutenants in
Commission for a Warrant to bring the same in form before them, to be examined
concerning the same* And the said Fage delivered the Warrant to the Constable;
he carried him before the said M. Warren, who rated the said Fage for that he
did not come to him first, telling him, that he was a factious Fellow, and laid
him by the Heels for two hours; which the said Fage is ready to affirm.

Sir Benjamin Tichburn Knight and Baronet, Justice of Oyer and Terminer,
Justice of Peace and Deputy-Lieutenant, and in Commission for the Subsidy; his
Wife, Children and Servants Indicted for Popish Recusancy.

Sir Richard Tichburn Knight Justice of the Peace, his Wife presented the last
Sessions for having absented her self from the Church for the space of two
Months.

Sir Henry Compton Knight Deputy-Lieutenant, Justice of Peace and Commissioners
for the Sewers.

Sir John Shelley Knight and Baronet himself and his Lady Recusants.

Sir John Gage Knight and Baronet a Papist Recusant.

Sir John Guldeford Knight their Ladies come not to Church.

Sir Edward Francis Knight their Ladies come not to Church.

Sir Garret Kempe Knight, some of his Children come not to Church.

Edward Gage Esquire a Recusant Papist Comissioner of the Sewers.

Thomas Middlemore comes not to Church Comissioner of the Sewers.

James Rolls, William Scot, Commissioners of Sewers, both Recusants Papists.
Robert Spiller comes not to Church.

Sir Henry Guilford in Commission for Piracies and for the Sewers: And John
Thatcher Esquire Commissioner for the Sewers, they are either Persons convicted or
justly suspected.

Sir Richard Sandford Knight, Richard Brewthwait Esquire Gawen Brewthwait Esquire their
Wives are Recusants.

Sir William Aubrey Knight, Justice of Peace, a Recusant.

Rees Williams Justice of Peace, his Wife a convict Recusant, and his Children
Popishly bred, as is informed.

Sir John Coney Knight, a Justice of Peace, and Deputy-Lieutenant, his Wife a
Popish Recusant.

Morgan Voyl Esquire Justice of Peace, his Wife presented for not coming to Church,
but whether she is Popish-Recusant is not known.

John Warren Captain of the Trained-Bands, one of his Sons suspected to be
Popishly affected.

Wherefore they humbly beseech your Majesty not to suffer your loving Subjects
to continue any longer discouraged by the apparent sense of that increase both
in Number and Power, which by the Favor and Countenance of such like
ill-affected Governors accreweth to the Popish Party: but that according to
your own wisdom, goodness and Piety (whereof they rest assured) you will be
graciouslly pleased to command that answer of your Majesty's to be effectually
observed, and the Parties abovenamed and all such others to be put out of such
Commissions and Places of Authority wherein they now are in your Majesty's
Realm of England, contrary to the Acts and Laws of States in that behalf.

The Parliament Dissolved upon the Duke of Buckinghams Account. Another
Parliament Summoned.
But the Parliament pressing hard upon the Duke of Buckingham, the 15 th. of
June, 1626. they were Dissolved before any Answer was given to this Petition;
and soon after a Commission Issued to compound with Papists for their
Forfeitures.

A Parliament was Summoned to meet the 17 th. of March, 1627. and a little
before this Parliament Assembled, a Society of Papists were taken in
Clerkenwel; diverse of them were Jesuits, and the House wherein they were taken
was designed to be a College of that Order.

Amongst their Papers was found a Copy of this Letter written to their Father
Rector at Bruxells, discovering their designs upon this State, and their
judgment of the temper thereof, with a conjecture of the success of the ensuing
Parliament; which Letter, because it contains Matter that justifies the making
of the Law that was made against the Papists in this Sessions of Parliament, as
I find it Printed in Rushworth, f. 474. I have here inserted.

A Letter from a Jesuit concerning the ensuing PARLIAMENT.
Father Rector,
LET not the damp of astonishment seize upon your Ardent and Zealous Soul, A
Letter from a Jesuit concerning the ensuing Parliament, Rushw. Coll. 1. pt. f.
474.
in apprehending the sudden and unexpected calling of a Parliament: We have
not opposed but rather furthered it; so that we hope as much in this Parliament
as ever we feared any in Queen Elizabeth's days.

You must know the Council is engaged to assist the King by way of Prerogative,
in Case the Parliament any way should fail. You shall see this Parliament will
resemble the Pelican, which takes a pleasure to dig out with her Beak her own
Bowels.

The Election of Knights and Burgesses has been in such confusion of apparent
faction, as that which we were wont to procure heretofore with much Art and
Industry (when the Spanish Match was in Treaty) now breaks out naturally as a
botch or boil and spews out its own Rankor and Venom.

You remember how that famous and immortal Statesman the Connt of Gondomar fed
King James his fancy and Rocked him asleep with the soft sweet sound of Peace,
to keep up the Spanish Treaty; likewise we were much bound to some Statesmen of
our own Country, for gaining time by procuring the most advantageous Cessation
of Arms in the Palatinate and advancing the Honor and integrity of the Spanish
Nation, and villifying the Hollanders; remonstrating to King James that the
State was most ungrateful both to his Predecessor Queen Elizabeth, and his
Sacred Majesty; that the States were more obnoxious then the Turk, and
perpetually injured his Majesty's Loving Subjects in the East Indies, and
likewise they have usurped from his Majesty the Regality and unvaluable profit
of the narrow Seas, in fishing upon the English Coasts, etc.

This great Statesman had but one principal means to further their great and
good designs, which was to set on King James that none but the Puritan Faction,
which plotted nothing but Anarchy and his Confusion were averse to this most
happy Union. We Steered on the same Course, and have made great use of this
Anarchical Election, and have prejudicated and anticipated the great one, that
none but the Kings Enemies, and his, are chosen of this Parliament, etc.

We have now many Strings to our Bow, and have strongly Fortified our Faction,
and have added two Bulwarks more: For when King James lived (you know) he was
very violent against Arminianism, and interrupted (with his pestilent Wit and
Learning) our strong designs in Holland, and was a great Friend to that Old
Rebel and Heretic the Prince of Orange. Now we have planted that Sovereign
drug Arminianism, which we hope will purge the Protestants from their Heresy;
and it Flourishes and bears Fruit in due Season.

The Materials which build up our Bulwark, are the Projectors and Beggars of
all Ranks and Qualities, howsoever both these Factions cooperate to destroy
the Parliament, and to introduce a new Species and Form of Government, which is
Oliargchy.

Those serve as direct Mediums and Instruments to our End, which is the
Universal Catholic Monarchy. Our Foundation must be Mutation, and Mutation
will cause a Relaxation, which will serve as so many violent Diseases, as the
Stone, Gout, etc. to the speedy Distraction of our perpetual and insufferable
Anguish of Body, which is worse than Death it self.

We proceed now by Council and mature Deliberation, how, and when to work upon
the Dukes Jealousy and Revenge, and in this we give the Honor to those which
merit it, which are the Church Catholics.

There is another Matter of Consequence, which we take much into our
Consideration and Tender care, which is to stave off Puritans, that they hang
not in the Dukes Ears, they are impudent subtle People.

And it is to be feared, least they should negotiate a Reconciliation between
the Duke and the Parliament at Oxford and Westminster; but now we assure our
Selves, we have so handled the Matter, that both Duke and Parliament are
irreconcilable.

For the better prevention of the Puritans, the Arminians have already locked up
the Dukes Ears, and we have those of our own Religion which stand continually
at the Dukes Chamber, to see who goes in and out; we cannot be too circumspect
and careful, in this Regard.

I cannot choose but laugh, to see how some of our Coat have accoutred
themselves; you would scarce know them if you saw them; and it is admirable, how
in Speech and Gesture they act the Puritans. The Cambridge Scholars, to their
woeful Experience, shall see we can act the Puritan a little better than they
have done the Jesuits: They have abused our sacred Patron, St. Ignatius in
jest, but we will make them smart for it in earnest. I hope you will excuse my
merry Digression, for I confess unto you, I am at this time transported with
Joy, to see how happily all Instruments and Means, as well great as less,
cooperate unto our Purposes.

But to return unto the main Fabric, our Foundation is Arminianism. The
Arminians and Projectors, as it appears in the Premises, affect Mutation, this
we second, and enforce by probable Arguments; in the first place, we take into
Consideration, the Kings Honor and present Necessity, and we show how the King
may free himself of his Word, as Lewis the Eleventh did, and for his great
Splendour and Luster, he may raise a vast Revenue, and not be beholden to his
Subjects, which is by way of Imposition and Excise, then our Church Catholics
proceed, to show the Means how to settle this Excise, which must be by a
mercenary Army of Horse and Foot. For the Horse, we have made that sure, they
shall be Foreigners and Germans, who will eat up the Kings Revenues, and spoil
the Country wherever they come, though they should be well paid; what Havoc
will they make there, when they get no Pay, or are not duly paid? they will do
more Mischief then we hope the Army will do.

We are provident and careful that this mercenary Army, of two thousand Horse,
and twenty thousand Foot, shall be taken on and in Pay before the Excise be
settled. In forming the Excise, the Country is most likely to rise: If the
Mercenary Army subjugate the Country, then the Soldiers and Projectors shall
be paid out of the Confiscations; if the Country be too hard for the Soldiers,
then they must consequently mutiny, which is equally advantageous unto us, our
superlative Design, is to work, the Protestants, as well as the Catholics, to
welcome in a Conqueror, and that is by this Means: We hope instantly to
dissolve Trades, and hinder the building of Shipping, in devising probable
Designs, and putting on the State upon Expeditions, as that of Cadiz was, in
taking away the Merchant Ships, so that they may not easily catch and light
upon the West India Fleet, etc.


This produced a Fast, and a Petition from the Parliament to the King, against
the Papist; which Petition, and the Kings Answer, are as follows.

The Parliaments Petition to the King, and the Kings Answer, all relating to
the Papists.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
Rushw. Coll. 1 pt. f. 516.
WE Your most Loyal and Obedient Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in Parliament assembled, having, to our singular Comfort, obtained Your
Majesty's Pious and Gracious Assent for a public Fast, to appease the Wrath of
Almighty God kindled against us, and to prevent those grievous Judgments which
God does apparently press upon us, do, in all Humility, present unto Your
Sacred Majesty, all possible thanks for the same: And because the public and
visible Sins of the Kingdom, are the undoubted Causes of those visible Evils
that are fallen upon us, amongst which Sins (as is apparent by the Word of God)
Idolatry and Superstition are the most heinous and crying Sins: To the end that
we may constantly hope for the Blessing of God to descend upon this our public
Humiliation, by abandoning those Sins which do make a Wall of Separation
betwixt God and Us.

1. Article.
WE most humbly and ardently beg at the Hands of Your most Sacred Majesty, that
Your Majesty will be pleased to give continual Life and Motion to all those
Laws that stand in force against Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and all that have
taken Orders by Authority of the Sea of Rome, by exacting a more due and
serious Execution of the same; amongst which Number, those that have highly
abused Your Mejesties Clemency, by returning into the Kingdom after their
Banishment, contrary to Your Highness's express Proclamation; We humbly desire
may be left to the Severity of Your Laws, without admitting of any Mediation or
Intercession for them; and that such of Your Majesty's unsound and ill-affected
Subjects, as do receive, harbor, or conceal any of their viperous Generation,
may, without delay, suffer such Penalties and Punishments, as the Laws justly
impose upon them.

His Majesty's ANSWER unto the First ARTICLE of this PETITION.
TO the first Point His Majesty answers, that he will, according to your
Desire, give both Live and Motion to the Laws that stand in force against
Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and all that have taken Orders by Authority of the Sea of Rome: and to that end, His Majesty will give strict Orders to all His
Ministers, for the Discovering and Apprehending of them, and so leave them,
being apprehended, to the Trial of the Law. And in case, after Trial, there
shall be Cause to respite Execution of any of them, yet they shall be committed
(according to the Example of the best Times) to the Castle of Wisbich, and
there be safely kept from exercising their Functions, or spreading their
Superstitious and Dangerous Doctrine, and the Receivers and Abettors, they
shall be left to the Law.

THat Your Majesty would be pleased to command a surer and straight Watch to be
kept in and over Your Majesty's Ports and Havens, 2. Article.
and to commit the Care and Charge of Searching of Ships, for the Discovery and
Apprehension, as well of Jesuits and Seminary Priests, brought in, as of
Children and young Students sent over beyond the Seas, to suck in the Poison of
Rebellion and Superstition, unto Men of approved Fidelity and Religion; and
such as shall be convicted, to have connived or combined in the bringing in the
one, or conveying of the other, that the Laws may pass upon them with speedy
Execution.

His Majesty's ANSWER to the Second ARTICLE.
TO the second Article, His Majesty grants all that is in this Article; and
to this end, will give order to the Lord Treasurer, Lord Admiral, and Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports, that in their several Places, they be careful to
see this Article fully executed, giving strict Charge to all such as have Place
and Authority under them, to use all Diligence therein. And His Majesty
requires them, and all other His Officers and Ministers, to have a vigilant
Eye upon such as dwell in dangerous Places of Advantage or Opportunity, for
receiving or transporting of any such as are here mentioned: And His Majesty
will take it for good Service, if any will give Knowledge of any such as have
connived or combined, or shall Connive or Combine, as is mentioned in this
Article, that Justice may be strictly done upon them.

THat considering those dreadful Dangers (never to be forgotten) which did
involve Your Majesty's Sacred Person, 3. Article.
and the whole representative Body of Your Majesty's Kingdom, plotted and
framed by the free and common Access of Popish Recusants to the City of London,
and to Your Majesty's Court; Your Majesty would be graciously pleased to give
speedy Command for the present putting in practice, those Laws that prohibit
all Popish Recusants to come to the Court, or within ten Miles of the City of
London; as also those Laws that confine them to the Distance of five Miles from
their dwelling Houses; and that such bypast Licenses, not warranted by Law, as
have been granted unto them, for their Repair to the City of London, may be
discharged and annulled.

His Majesty's ANSWER to the Third ARTICLE.
TO the third, His Majesty will take order to restrain the Recourse of
Recusants to the Court, and also for the other Points of this Article, His
Majesty is well pleased that the Laws be duly executed, and that all unlawful
Licenses be annulled and discharged.

4. Article.
THat whereas it is more than probably conceived, that infinite Sums of Money
have within this two or three Years last past, been extracted out of the
Recusants within the Kingdom, by Color of Composition, and a small Proportion
of the same returned into Your Majesty's Coffers, not only to the sudden
enriching of private Persons, but to the emboldning of Romish Recusants to
entertain Massing Priests into their private Houses, mimick Rites of their
gross Superstition, without fear of Control; amounting (as by their daily
Practice and Ostentation we may conceive) to the Nature of a concealed
Toleration; Your Majesty would be graciously pleased to entertain this
Particular more nearly into your Princely Wisdom and Consideration, and to
dissolve this Mystery of Iniquity, patched up of colorable Leases, Contracts
and Preconveyances, being but Masks on the one part of Fraud, to deceive Your
Majesty and States, on the other part, for private Men to accomplish their
corrupt Ends.

His Majesty's ANSWER to the Fourth ARTICLE.
TO the fourth Article, His Majesty is most willing to punish for the time
past, and prevent for the future, any of the Deceits and Abuses mentioned in
this Article, and will account it a good Service in any that will inform
himself, his Privy Council, Officers of his Revenue, Judges or learned Council,
of any thing that may reveal this Mystery of Iniquity; and His Majesty does
strictly command every one of them, to whom such Information shall be brought,
that they suffer not the same to dye, but do their utmost Endeavor to effect a
clear Discovery, and bring the Offenders to Punishment; and to the intent no
concealed Toleration may be effected* His Majesty leaves the Laws to their
Course.

5. Article.
THat as the Persons of Ambassadors from Foreign Princes, and their Houses, be
free for the Exercises of their own Religion, so their Houses may not be made
free Chapels and Sanctuaries unto Your Majesty's Subjects popishly affected,
to hear Mass, and to participate in all other Rites and Ceremonies, of that
Superstition, to the great Offense of Almighty God, and Scandal of Your
Majesty's People, loyally and religiously affected: that either the Concourse
of Recusants to such Places may be restrained, or at least such a vigilant
Watch set upon them, at their return from those Places, as they may be
apprehended and severely proceeded withal, Vt qui palam in Luce peccant in Luce
puniantur.

His Majesty's ANSWER to the Fifth ARTICLE.
TO the fifth, His Majesty is well pleased to prohibit and restrain their
coming, and Resort to the Houses of Ambassadors, and will command a vigilant
Watch to be set for their taking and punishing, as is desired.

THat no place of Authority and Command within any the Counties of this Your
Majesty's Kingdom, or any Ships of Your Majesty's, 6. Article.
or which shall be employed in Your Majesty's Service, be committed to Popish
Recusants, or to Non-communicants, by the Space of a Year past, or to any such
Persons, as according to Direction of former Acts of State are justly to be
suspected, as the Place and Authority of Lords Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Justices of the Peace or Captains, or other Officers or Ministers mentioned in
the Statute, made in the third Year of the Reign of Your Father of Blessed
Memory; and that such as by Connivance have crept into such Places, may, by
Your Majesty's Royal Command, be discharged of the same.

His Majesty's ANSWER to the Sixth ARTICLE.
TO the Sixth, His Majesty is persuaded, that this Article is already observed
with good Care; nevertheless, for the avoiding (as much as may be) all Errors
and escapes in that kind; His Majesty will give Charge to the Lord Keeper, that
at the next Term, he call unto him all the Judges, and take Information from
them of the State of their several Circuits, if any such (as are mentioned in
this Article) be in the Commission of the Peace, that due Reformation be made
thereof, and will likewise give Order to the Lord Admiral, and such other, to
whom it shall appertain, to make diligent Inquiry, and certificate to His
Majesty, if any such be in place of Authority and Command in His Ships or
Service.

THat all Your Majesty's Judges, Justices and Ministers of Justice, unto whose
Care and Trust, Execution (which is the Life of Your Majesty's Laws) is
committed, may, 7. Article.
by Your Majesty's Proclamation, not only be commanded to put in speedy
Execution, those Laws which stand in force against Jesuits, Seminary Priests
and Popish Recusants; but that Your Majesty would be further pleased to command
the said Judges and Justices of Assize, to give a true and strict Account of
their Proceedings at their Returns out of their Circuits, unto the Lord Keeper,
by the Lord Keeper to be presented unto Your Majesty.

His Majesty's ANSWER to the Seventh ARTICLE.
TO the seventh, His Majesty does fully grant it.

8. Article.
AND for a fair and clear Eradication of all Popery for the future, and for the
breeding and nursing up of a Holy Generation, and a peculiar People, sanctified
unto the true Worship of Almighty God, that until a Provisional Law be made for
the Training and Educating of the Children of Popish Recusants, in the Grounds
and Principles of our Holy Religion, which we perceive will be of more Power
and Force to unite Your People unto You in fastness of Love, Religion and Loyal
Obedience, then all Pecuniary Mulcts and Penalties that can possibly be
devised; Your Majesty would be pleased to take it into Your Princely Care and
Consideration, these our humble. Petitions, proceeding from Hearts and
Affections Loyally and Religiously devoted to God and Your Majesty's Service,
and to the Safety of Your Majesty's Sacred Person, we most zealously present to
Your Princely Wisdom, craving Your Majesty's cheerful and gracious Approbation.

His Majesty's ANSWER to the Eighth ARTICLE.
TO the eighth, His Majesty does well approve it, as a Matter of necessary
Consideration, and the Parliament now sitting, he recommendeth to both Houses,
the Preparation of a fitting Law to that effect. And His Majesty does further
declare, that the Mildness that has been used toward those of the Popish
Religion, has been upon Hope, that Foreign Princes thereby might be induced to
use Moderation toward their Subjects of the Reformed Religion; but not finding
that good Effect which was expected, His Majesty resolves, unless he shall
very speedily see better Fruits, to add a further degree of Severity, to that
which in that Petition is desired.

The Parliament, after this, made a Law against the Papists, Entitled, An Act
to restrain the Passing or Sending of any to be Popishly bred beyond the Seas.
The Substance whereof take as follows: That,
3 Car. 1. ca, 2. Keebles Stat. f. 1098. By this Law Papists are prohibited
sending their Children or others beyond Seas, to be instructed in the Popish
Religion.
FOrasmuch as diverse ill affected Persons to the true Religion within this
Realm, had sent their Children into Foreign Parts to be bred up in Popery,
notwithstanding the Restraint of it by 1 Jac. 1. It was enacted, That that Law
should be put in Execution; and further, that if any Person or Persons, being
Subjects, should pass over, or go, convey, or send, or cause to be sent or
conveyed, any Children, or other Person beyond Seas, to the Intent and Purpose
to enter into, or be resident or trained up in any Priory, Abbey, Nunnery,
Popish University, College or School, or Houses of Jesuits, Priests, or in any
Private Popish Family, and shall be there, by any Jesuit, Seminary Priest,
Friar, Monk, or other Popish Person instructed, persuaded or strengthened in the
Popish Religion in any sort to profess the same; or should convey or send, or
cause to be conveyed, or sent any sum or other thing toward the maintenance of
any already gone or sent under any Pretense of Charity, or otherwise, etc. is
disabled to sue, to be Commitee of any Ward, or Executor or Administrator; is
not capable of any Legacy or Deed of Gift, or to bear any Office within the
Realm; forfeits all his Goods and Chattels, forfeits his Lands and other real
Estate for his Life. In case of Conformity, these Penalties are not to be
incurred; and in case the Lands have been seized, they shall be restored.

And now I think, I may appeal to the Reader himself, whether there was not
ground enough for the making this Law, if there had been nothing more done in
this Kings Reign, then the Writing the Letter before mentioned, which makes so
full a Discovery of a Design they were driving on, of subverting our Religion,
and introducing their own. And if it be considered, that there is no Penalty
annexed to this Law, that relates to the Loss of Life, Member or Liberty, it
cannot be thought severe, after such continued and restless Endeavors of that
Party for our Destruction, and bringing us back to our former Bondage, under a
foreign Yoke.

And let the Share they had in blowing up the Differences between King Charles
I. and his Parliaments, which at last ended in the late unnatural Civil War,
and in a Temporary Destruction of our Monarchy be considered; that after
Charles the First was beheaded, Charles The Second.
they attempted the Perverting of his Sons, when in Exile, to the Idolatry and
Superstition of the Romish Church: And that they at last prevailed effectually,
with one at least, to go over to their Communion; and that it was known to the
Parliament in the twenty fifth Year of the Reign of Charles the Second, that he
was so reconciled. Let, I say, these things be considered, and it cannot be
thought hard that that Law passed the Parliament the Substance of which I have
here inserted. It is entitled,

An Act for preventing Dangers which may happen from Popish Recusants.
WHereby, for preventing Dangers which might happen from Popish Recusants, 25.
Ca. 2. ca. 2. Papists made incapable of any Place or Office of Profit or Trust
in the Kingdom.
and quieting the Minds of His Majesty's good Subjects, it was enacted, That
all and every Person and Persons, as well Peers as Commoners, that should bear
any Offices or Places of Trust, or that received any Sallery from His Majesty,
or any his Predecessors, or were in the Service or Employment of his Highness
the Duke of Yo^k. being within the City of London, or thirty Miles distant from
the same, should take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy in the Court of
Chancery or King's Bench, before the end of Trinity Term then next following, or
at the Quarter Sessions for the Place where they should reside, and should
likewise receive the Sacrament according to the Usage of the Church of England,
at or before the first Day of August 1673. that all Persons who should be
admitted into any Office or Place as aforesaid, after the first Day of Easter
Term, to take the said Oaths, either in the said Courts, or in the Quarter
Session for the County, where he or they should reside, and receive the
Sacrament within three months after their Admittance to such Office, etc. And
should deliver a Certificate into the Court, where he takes the said Oaths, of
the receiving the Sacrament: That whosoever should refuse to take the said
Oaths, should be adjudged incapable of any other Office, and if after his
Refusal he shall exercise any Office, he shall not prosecute any Suit in Law,
Equity, or be Guardian to any Child, or Executor or Administrator of any
Person, or be capable of any Deed or Gift, or to bear any Office, and shall
forfeit five hundred Pounds to whomsoever will sue for the same in any of His
Majesty's Courts, where no Protection or Wager of Law should lie. That the
Names of all such Persons as should take the said Oaths, be in the Courts of
Chancery and King's Bench, and Quarter Sessions enrolled, with the Time of
taking the same, in Rolls for that purpose, and that none should pay above the
Sum of twelve Pence to any Officer for their Entry of the taking the said
Oaths. That no Person, not bred up in the Popish Religion by his Parents,
should breed up, or suffer his Children to be bred up in the Popish Religion,
under Penalty of being disabled from bearing any Office or Places of Trust, and
all such Children so brought up and educated, shall be disabled from bearing
any such Off^ces until they be reconciled to the Church of England, take the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and receive the Sacrament. And that all
Persons, taking the said Oaths, shall, at the taking the same, subscribe the
Declaration following.

I A. B. do declare, that I do believe that there is no Transubstantiation in
the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper or in the Elements of Bread and Wine* at or
after the Consecration thereof by any Person whatsoever: And of this
Subscription, a Register to be kept, as of taking the Oaths: this Act not to
extend to prejudice the Peerage of the Realm, or take away Creation or Bills of
Impost, or any Salary for Life or Years, granted for sufficient Consideration,
nor to make void any Estates of Inheritance, not being Offices, or to make void
any Pension granted to any Person instrumental in preserving the King at
Worcester, that all Persons refusing to take the Oaths, having Offices of
Inheritance, must appoint Deputies to take the said Oaths, and subscribe the
said Declaration, that all Peers may take the Oath in Parliament, if the
Parliament be sitting within the time for doing thereof. No married Woman, or
Person under the Age of eighteen Years, or being beyond the Seas, or found to
be Non Compos Mentis, shall, by Virtue of this Act, lose or forfeit his or her
Office, (other then such married Women, during the Life of her Husband only)
for any Neglect of taking the Oaths, so as the respective Persons within four
Months after the Death of the Husband, coming to the Age of eighteen Years,
returning into this Kingdom, and becoming of sound Mind, shall take the said
Oaths in manner as is thereby appointed, provided that any Person, who by his
or her Neglect or Refusal, according to this Act, should lose or forfeit any
Office, might be capable, by a new Grant of the said Office, or of any other,
and to have and hold the same again, such Person taking the said Oaths, and
doing all other things required by this Act, so as such Office be not granted
to, and actually enjoyed by some other Person at the time of the re-granting
thereof. This Act not to extend to Commission Officers in the Navy, if they
subscribe the Declaration. This Act not to extend to prejudice the Earl of
Bristol and his Lady in the Pensions granted to them. Likewise not to extend to
Constables, Tything-men, Churchwardens, or other like private inferior
Officers.

Before this Act of Parliament was made, the Papists were engaged in a most
Horrid Plot against the Protestant Religion, and the Parliament having now made
this Act, whereby the Papists are excluded from all Places of Profit and Trust;
it is not hard to believe that their Malice was thereby greatly heightened, and
their Rage very much increased against the Protestants; and their Actings put
it beyond doubt that it was so. For this Act passed in the Year 1673. and then
it is we find them deeply engaged in contriving our Destruction; and so
inhumane were they, that notwithstanding the late King Charles the Second's
Kindness to them, yet, unless he would fully comply with them in the butchering
his Protestant Subjects, extirpating the Protestant Religion (which they called
a Coleman's Trial, p. 69.
Pestilent Heresy) and the introducing of the Romish Superstition and
Idolatry, he must be taken out of the way, to make room for one that would.

I confess, I have met with very many that have owned the Dis-believing of any
such Design, but when I seriously reflect upon the Letters that were produced
against Mr. Coleman, and owned by himself to be his; when I consider the
Evidence that was given by all the Witnesses that proved the Horrid and
Treasonable Popish Plot, that was discovered in 1678. and the Agreement that
there is in the Substance of the thing (although there may be some Variations
as to Circumstances) when I consider the Witnesses were Strangers to one
another, that did so agree in their Testimony, and that the Discovery was so
sudden, and the Witnesses came in so quick one after another, after the
Discovery, that it is not to be presumed there could be any Subornation; when I
consider the Credit they had with the King himself, and with four Parliaments;
when I consider the great Attempts notwithstanding, to take the Odium off the
Papists, and cast it upon the Protestants; when I consider the unwearied Pains
taken by the Papists, and some that are much worse, because they espoused their
Cause under a Protestant Vizar, to lay the Murder of Sir Edmond-Bury-Godfrey
at the Protestants Door, and to wipe off the Stain thereof from the Papists;
when I consider the Methods that were taken in the late King James the Seconds
his Reign, so exactly pursuant to what was designed, in case Charles the Second
had fallen (as was contrived) Either by Shooting, Poison or Stobing.
the first of which Methods was, by granting a general The Declaration for
Liberty of Conscience, Designed to be published, in case the Popish Plot had
then taken effect, you may find printed in Coleman's Trial, p. 58.
Liberty of Conscience, and thereby deluding diverse Protestants to serve a
Popish Interest, although against their Wills; it is to me matter of Amazement,
that there should remain the least doubt of the Truth of that Plot, in the
Minds of any that are really Protestants; especially when I consider that there
wanted nothing in the late King James's Reign, but a Parliament to take off the
Penal Laws and Tests, to bring that Popish Plot to the highest Perfection that
the Papists ever designed, and what Endeavors there were to obtain that, is
sufficiently known.

To run through the whole Series of that Popish Plot, would be to draw out this
Account of the Grounds of making the Penal Laws to a Length beyond what its
Design can warrant, which is the public Good, and therefore as a Confirmation
of the Truth of that Plot, and to refresh the Memory of those, who perhaps are
willing to forget it, I shall here only insert Coleman's Letters, as you will
find them printed in his Trial, and also Bedloes Depositions, as they were
taken before, and printed by Sir Francis North, then Lord Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, and afterward made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, for
the good Services he had done the Crown. Coleman's Letters are as follows.

Mr. Coleman's First Letter.
SInce Father St. German has been so kind to me, Coleman 's Trial, p. 44.
as to recommend me to your Reverence so advantagiously, as to encourage you to
accept of my Correspondency; I will own to him, that he has done me a Favor
without consulting me, greater than I could have been capable of if he had
advised with me, because I could not then have had the Confidence to have
permitted him to ask it on my Behalf. And I am so sensible of the Honor you
are pleased to do me, that though I cannot deserve it, yet to show at least the
Sense I have of it, I will deal as freely and openly with you this first time,
as if I had had the Honor of your Acquaintance all my Life. And shall make no
Apology for so doing, but only tell you, that I know your Character perfectly
well, though I am not so happy as to know your Person; and that I have an
Opportunity of putting this Letter into the Hands of Father St. Germans Nephew
(for whose Integrity and Prudence he has undertaken) without any sort of Hazard.

In order then Sir, to the plainness I profess, I will tell you what has
formerly passed between your Reverences Predecessor, Father Ferryer and my
self. About three Years ago, when the King my Master sent a Troop of Horse
Guards into his most Christian Majesty's Service, under the Command of my Lord
Durass, he sent with it an Officer, called Sir William Throckmorton, with whom
I had a particular Intimacy, and who had then very newly embraced the Catholic
Religion; to him did I constantly write, and by him address my self to Father
Farryer. The first thing of great Importance, I presumed to offer him (not to
trouble you with lesser Matters, or what passed here before, and immediately
after the fatal Revolution of the Kings Declaration for Liberty of Conscience
(to which we owe all our Miseries and Hazards) was in July, August and
September, 1673. when I constantly inculcated the great Danger the Catholic
Religion, and his most Christian Majesty's Interest would be in at our next
Sessions of Parliament, which was then to be in October following; at which I
plainly foresaw, that the King my Master would be forced to something in
prejudice to his Alliance with France. Which I saw so evidently and
particularly, that we should make Peace with Holland; that I urged all the
Arguments I could, which to me were Demonstrations, to convince your Court of
that Mischief, and pressed all I could to persuade his most Christian Majesty
to use his utmost Endeavor to prevent that Session of our Parliament, and
proposed Expedients how to do it: But was answered so often and so positively,
that his most Christian Majesty was so well assured by his Ambassador here, our
Ambassador there, the Lord Arlington, and even the King himself, that he had no
such Apprehensions at all, but was fully satisfied to the contrary, and looked
upon what I offered as a very zealous Mistake; that I was forced to give over
arguing, though not believing as I did, but confidently appealed to Time and
Success to prove who took their Measures rightest. When it happened what I
foresaw came to pass; the good Father was a little surprised to see all the
great Men mistaken, and a little one in the Right, and was pleased by Sir
William Throckmorton, to desire the Continuance of my Correspondence, which I
was mighty willing to comply with, knowing the Interest of our King, and in a
more particular manner, of my more immediate Master, the James the Second.
Duke, and his most Christian Majesty, to be so inseparably united, that it was
impossible to divide them, without destroying them all. Upon this I showed that
our Parliament, in the Circumstances it was, managed by the timorous Councels
of our Ministers, who then governed, would never be useful either to England,
France, or Catholic Religion; but that we should as certainly be forced from
our Neutrality at their next Meeting, as we had been from our active Alliance
with France the last Year: That a Peace, in the Circumstances we were in, was
much more to be desired than the Continuance of the War; and that the
Dissolution of our Parliament would certainly procure a Peace: For that the
Confederates did more depend upon the Power they had in our Parliament than
upon any thing else in the World: And were more encouraged from them to the
continuing of the War: So that if they were Dissolved, their measures would be
all broken, and they consequently in a manner necessitated to a Peace.

The good Father minding this Discourse somewhat more then the Court of France
thought fit to do my former, urged it so home to the King, that his Majesty was
pleased to give him Orders to signify to his R. H. my Master, that his Majesty
was fully satisfied of his R. H's. good intention toward him, that he esteemed
both their Interests, but as one and the same: That my Lord Arlington and the
Parliament were both to be looked upon as very unuseful to their Interest. That
if his R. H. would endeavor to dissolve this Parliament, his most Christian
Majesty would assist him with his Power and Purse to have a new one, as should
be for their purpose. This and a great many more Expressions of kindness and
confidence, Father Ferryer was pleased to Communicate to Sir William
Throckmorton, and commanded them to send them to His Royal Hhighness, and
withal to beg his Royal Highness to propose to his most Christian Majesty, what
he thought necessary for his own Concern, and the advantage of Religon, and his
Majesty would certainly do all he could to advance both or either of them. This
Sir William Throckmorton sent to me by an Express, who left Paris the Second of
June 1674. Stilo novo. I no sooner had it, but I Communicated it to his R. H.
To which his R. H. commanded me to Answer as I did on the twenty ninth of the
same Month, That his R. H. was very sensible of his most Christian Majesty's
Friendship, and that he would Labor to cultivate it with all the good Offices
he was capable of doing for His Majesty: That he was fully convinced that their
Interests were both one: That my Lord Arlington and the Parliament were not
only unuseful, but very dangerous both to England and France: That therefore it
was necessary, that they should do all they could to dissolve it. And that his
R. H's. opinion was, that if his most Christian Majesty would write his
thoughts freely to the King of England upon this Subject, and make the same
proffer to his Majesty of his Purse to dissolve this Parliament, which he had
made to his R. H. to Call another, he did believe it very possible for him to
succeed with the Assistance we should be able to give him here: And that if
this Parliament were dissolved, there would be no great difficulty of getting a
new one, which would be more useful. The Constitutions of our Parliaments being
such, that a new one can never hurt the Crown, nor an old one do it good.

His R. H. being pleased to own these Propositions which were but only General,
I thought it reasonable to be more particular, and come closer to the Point, we
might go the faster about the work, and come to some issue before the time was
too far spent.

I laid this for my Maxim: The dissolving of our Parliament will certainly
procure a Peace: Which Proposition was granted by every Body I conversed
withal; even by Monsieur Rouvigny himself, with whom I took Liberty of
conversing so far, but durst not say any thing of the Intelligence I had with
Father Ferryer. Next, that a Sum of Money certain, would certainly procure a
Dissolution; this some doubted; but I am sure I never did: For I knew perfectly
well, that the King had frequent Disputes with himself at that time, whether he
should dissolve or continue them: And he several times declared that the
Arguments were so strong on both sides, that he could not tell to which to
incline; but was carried at last to the continuance of them by this one
Argument; if I try them once more, they may possibly give me Money; if they do,
I have gained my Point: If they do not, I can dissolve them then, and be where
I am now: So that I have a possibility at least of getting Money for their
continuance, against nothing on the other side. But if we could have turned
this Argument, and said, Sir, their Dissolution will certainly procure you
Money, when you have only a bare possibility of getting any by their
continuance, and have shown how far that bare possibility was from being a
Foundation to build any reasonable hope upon, which I am sure His Majesty was
sensible of: And how much 300000 Pounds Sterling certain (which was the Sum we
proposed) was better than a bare possibility (without any reason to hope that,
that could ever be Compassed) of having half so much more (which was the most
he designed to ask) upon some vile dishonorable Terms; and a thousand other
hazards; which he had great reason to be afraid of; if I say, we had had Power
to have argued this, I am most Confidently assured, we could have Compassed it,
for Logic in our Court built upon Money, has more powerful Charms than any
other sort of reasoning. But to secure his most Christian Majesty from any
hazard, as to that Point I proposed His Majesty should offer that Sum upon that
Condition, and if the Condition were not performed, the Money should never be
due; If it were, and that a Peace would certainly follow thereupon (which no
Body doubted) His Majesty would gain his Ends, and save all the vast Expenses
of the next Campaign, by which he could not hope to better his Condition, or
put himself into more advantageous Circumstances of Treaty then he was then in:
But might very probably be in a much worse, considering the mighty opposition
he was like to meet with, and the uncertain Chances of War. But admitting that
His Majesty could by his great Strength and Conduct maintain himself in as good
a Condition to Treat the next Year, as he was then in (which was as much as
could then reasonably be hoped for) he should have saved by this Proposal, as
much as all the Men, he must needs lose, and all the Charges he should be in a
Year, would be valued to amount to more than 300000 Pounds Sterling, and so
much more in Case his Condition should decay, as it should be worse than it was
when this was made: And the Condition of his R. H. and of the Catholic
Religion here (which depends very much upon the success of his most Christian
Majesty) delivered from a great wany frights and real hazards, Father Ferryer
seemed to be very sensible of the benefit, all Parties would gain by this
Proposal. But yet it was unfortunately delayed by an unhappy and tedious Fit of
Sickness, which kept him so long from the King in the France Comte, and made
him so unable to wait on His Majesty after he did return to Paris. But so soon
as he could compass it, he was pleased to acquaint His Majesty with it, and
wrote to the Duke himself; and did me the Honor to write unto me also the 15
th. of September. 1674. and sent his Letter by Sir William Throckmorton, who came
Express upon that Errand. In these Letters he gave his R. H. fresh assurance of
his most Christian Majesty's Friendship, and of his Zeal and readiness to
comply with every thing his R. H. had or should think fit to propose in favor
of Religion, or the business of Money. And that he commanded Monsieur Rouvigny
as to the latter, to Treat and deal with his R. H. and to receive and observe
his Orders and Directions, but desired that he might not at all be concerned as
to the former, but that his R. H. would cause what Proposition he should think
fit to be made about Religion to be offered, either to Father Ferryer, or
Monsieur Pompone.

These Letters came to us about the middle of September, and his R. H. expected
daily, when Monsieur Rouvigny should speak to him about the Subject of that
Letter: But he took no notice at all of any thing till the 29 th. of September,
the evening before the King and the Duke went to Newmarket for a Fortnight, and
then only said that he had Commands from his Master to give his R. H. the most
firm assurance of his Friendship imaginable, or something to that purpose,
making his R. H. a general Complement, but made no mention of any particular
Orders, relating to Father Ferryer's Letter. The Duke wondering at this
Proceeding, and being obliged to stay a good part of October at Newmarket, and
soon after his coming back, hearing of the Death of Father Ferryer, he gave
over all other further prosecuting of the former Project. But I believe, I saw
Monsieur Rouvigny's Policy all along, who was willing to save his Masters Money
upon assurance, that we would do all we could to stave off the Parliament for
our own sakes, that we would struggle as hard without Money as with it. And we
having by that time upon our own Interest, prevailed to get the Parliament
Prorogued to the 13 th. of April, he thought that Prorogation being to a day so
high in the Spring, would put the Confederates so far beyond their measures, as
that it might procure a Peace, and be as useful to France as a Dissolution.
Upon these Reasons, I suppose he went. I had several Discourses with him and
did so far open my self, to him as to say, I could wish his Master would give
us, leave to offer to our Master 300000 Pounds for the Dissolution of the
Parliament. And showed him that a Peace would most certainly follow a
Dissolution (which he agreed with me in) and that we desired not the Money from
his Master to excite our Wills, or to make us more industrious to use our
utmost Powers to procure a Dissolution, but to strengthen our Power and Credit
with the King, and to render us more capable to succeed with his Majesty, as
most certainly we should have done, had we been fortified with such an Argument.

To this purpose, I pressed Monsieur Pompone frequently by Sir William
Throckmorton, who returned hence again into France, on the 10 th. of November,
the Day our Parliament should have met, but was Prorogued. Monsieur Pompone (as
I was informed by Sir William) did seem to approve the thing: But yet had two
Objections against it: First, that the Sum proposed was great, and could be
very ill spared in the Circumstances his most Christian Majesty was in. To
which we answered, That if by his Expending that Sum he could procure a
Dissolution of our Parliament, and thereby a Peace, which every Body agreed
would necessarily follow: His most Christian Majesty would gain his Ends, and
save five or ten times a greater Sum, and so be a good Husband by his Expense:
And if we did not procure a Dissolution, he should not be at that Expense at
all: For that we desired him only to promise upon that Condition, which we were
content to be obliged to perform first. The second Objection was, the Duke did
not move, nor appear in it himself. To that we answered, That he did not indeed
to Monsieur Pompone, because he had found so ill an effect of the Negotiation
with Father Ferryer when it came into Monsieur Rouvigny's hands: But that he
had concerned himself in it to Father Ferryer.

Yet I continued to prosecute and press the Dissolution of the Parliament,
detesting all Prorogations as only so much loss of time, and a means of
strengthening all those, who depend upon it in opposition to the Crown, the
interest of France, and Catholic Religion, in the Opinion they had taken, that
our King durst not part with his Parliament, apprehending that another would be
much worse. Second, that he could not live long without a Parliament, therefore
they must suddenly meet: The longer he kept them off, the greater his necessity
would grow, and consequently their Power to make him do what they listed, would
increase accordingly. And therefore, if they could but maintain themselves a
while, the Day would certainly come in a short time, in which they should be
able to work their Wills. Such Discourses as these kept the Confederates, and
our Malcontents in heart, and made them weather on the War in spite of all
our Prorogations. Therefore I pressed (as I have said) a Dissolution until
February last, when our Circumstances were so totally Changed, that we were
forced to change our Councels too, and be as much for the Parliaments sitting,
as we were before against it.

Our Change was thus; before that time the Lord Arlington was the only Minister
in Credit, who thought himself out of all danger of the Parliament: He having,
been accused before them, and justified, and therefore was Zealous for their
Sitting: And to increase his Reputation with them, and to become a perfect
Favorite, he sets, himself all he could to Persecute the Catholic Religion
and to oppose the French. To show his Zeal against the first, he revived some
old dormant Orders, for prohibiting Roman Catholics to appear before the King,
and put them in Execution at his first coming into his Office of Lord
Chamberlain: And to make sure work with the Second as he thought, prevailed
with the King to give him, and the Earl of Ossery (who married two Sisters of
Mine Here Odyke's) leave to go over into Holland with the said Here, to make
a Visit as they pretended to their Relations. But indeed and in truth, to
propose the Lady Mary (eldest Daughter of his Royal H.) as a Match for the
Prince of Orange; not only without the Consent, but against the good liking of
his R. H. Insomuch that the Lord Arlington's Creatures were forced to excuse
him with a Distinction, that the said Lady was not to be looked upon as the
Dukes Daughter, but as the Kings, and a Child of the State was, and so the
Dukes Consent not much to be considered in the disposal of her, but only the
interest of State. By this he intended to render himself the Darling of
Parliament and Protestants, who looked upon themselves as secured in their
Religion by such an Alliance, and designed further to draw us into a close
Conjunction with Holland and the Enemies of France. The Lord Arlington set
forth upon this Errand the 10 th. of November, 1674 and returned not till the 6
th. of January following. During his absence the Lord Treasurer; Lord Keeper,
and the Duke of Lauderdale, who were the only Ministers of any considerable
Credit with the King, and who all pretended to be entirely united to the Duke,
declaimed loudly, and with great violence against the said Lord, and his
Actions in Holland: And did hope in his absence to have totally supplanted him,
and to have routed him out of the Kings favor. And after that, thought they
might easily enough have dealt with the Parliament. But none of them had
Courage enough to speak against the Parliament, till they could get rid of him:
For fear they should not succeed, and that the Parliament would Sit in spite
of them, and come to hear that they had used their endeavors against it. Which
would have been so unpardonable a Crime with our Omnipotent Parliament, that no
Power could have been able to have saved them from Punishment. But they finding
at his Return that they could not prevail against him, by such Means and Arts
as they had then tried, resolved upon new Councels: Which were, to outrun him
in his own Course: Which accordingly they undertook, and became as fierce
Apostles, and as Zealous for Protestant Religion, and against Popery, as ever
my Lord Arlington had been before them, and in pursuance thereof persuaded the
King to issue out those severe Orders, and Proclamations against Catholics,
which came out in February last: By which they did as much as in them lay to
extirpate all Catholics, and Catholic Religion out of the Kingdom. Which
Councels were in my poor Opinion so detestable, being levelled (as they must
needs be) so directly against the Duke by People which he had advanced, and who
had professed so much Duty and Service to him, that we were put upon new
thoughts, how to save his R. H. now from the deceits and snares of those Men,
upon whom we formerly depended. We saw well enough, that their Design was to
make themselves as grateful as they could to the Parliament if it must Sit;
they thinking nothing so acceptable to them, as the Persecution of Popery: And
yet they were so obnoxious to the Parliaments displeasure in General, that they
would have been glad of any Expedient to have kept it off: Though they durst
not engage against it openly themselves; but thought this Device of theirs
might serve for their purposes; hoping the Duke would be so alarmed at their
Proceedings, and by his being left by every Body, that he would be much more
afraid of the Parliament than ever; and would use his utmost power to prevent
its Sitting: Which they doubted not but he would endeavor: And they were ready
enough to work underhand too for him (for their own sakes, not his) in order
thereunto, but durst not appear openly: And to encourage the Duke the more to
endeavor the Dissolution of the Parliament, their Creatures used to say up and
down, That this Rigor against the Catholics was in favor of the Duke, and to
make a Dissolution of the Parliament more easy (which they knew he coveted) by
obviating one great Objection which was commonly made against it, which was,
That if the Parliament should be Dissolved, it would be said, That it was done
in favor of Popery: Which Clamor they had prevented before hand, by the
Severity they had used against it.

As Soon as we saw these Tricks put upon us, we plainly saw what Men we had to
deal withal, and what we had to trust to, if we were wholly at their mercy: But
yet durst not seem so dissatisfyed as really we were, but rather magnified the
Contrivance as a Device of great Cunning and Skill. All this we did purely, to
hold them in a belief, that we would endeavor to dissolve the Parliament, and
that they might rely upon his R. H. for that which we knew they longed for, and
were afraid they might do some other way, if they discovered, that we were
resolved we would not. At length when he saw the Sessions secured, we declared,
that we were for the Parliaments meeting, as indeed we were, from the moment we
saw our selves handled by all the Kings Ministers at such a Rate, that we had
reason to believe they would Sacrifice France, Religion and his R. H. too, to
their own Interest, if occasion served: And that they were led to believe, that
that was the only way they had to save themselves at that time. For we saw no
Expedient fit to stop them in their Carreer of Persecution, and those other
destructive Councels, but the Parliament: Which had set it self a long time to
dislike every thing the Ministers had done, and had appeared violently against
Popery, whilst the Court seemed to favor it: And therefore we were Confident,
that the Ministers having turned their Faces, the Parliament would do so too,
and still be against them: And be as little for Persecution then as they had
been for Popery before. This I undertook to manage for the Duke and the King
of France's interest: And assured Monsieur Rouvigny (which I am sure he will
testify, if occasion serves) that that Sessions should do neither of them any
hurt: For that I was sure I had Power enough to prevent mischief: though I
durst not engage for any good they would do: Because I had but very few
Assistances to carry on the Work; and wanted those Helps which others had, of
making Friends. The Dutch and Spaniard spared no Pains, or expense of Money to
animate as many as they could against France: Our Lord Treasurer, Lord Keeper,
all the Bishops, and such as called themselves Old Cavaliers (who were all then
as one Man) were not less industrious against Popery, and had the Purse at
their Girdle too: Which is an excellent Instrument to gain Friends with, and
all united against the Duke as Patron both of France and Catholic Religion. To
deal with all this Force, we had no Money but what came from a few private
hands: And those so mean ones too, that I dare venture to say, that I spent
more my particular self out of my own Fortune, and upon my single Credit, then
all the whole Body of Catholics in England besides: Which was so
inconsiderable in Comparison of what our Adversaries commanded, and we verily
believe did bestow in making their Party, that it is not worth mentioning. Yet
notwithstanding all this we saw, that by the help of the Non-conformists as
Presbyterians, Independants, and other Sects (who were as much afraid of
Persecution as our selves) and of the Enemies of the Ministers, and
particularly of the Treasurer, who by that time had supplanted the Earl of
Arlington, and was grown sole Manager of all Affairs himself, we sheuld be very
able to prevent what they designed against us, and so render the Sessions
ineffectual to their Ends, though we might not be able to Compass our own:
Which were, to make some brisk step in favor of his R. H. to show the King
that his Majesty's Affairs in Parliament were not obstructed by reason of any
Aversion they had to his R. H. Person, or Apprehensions they had of him or his
Religion: But from Faction and Ambition in some, and from a real
Dissatisfaction in others, that we have not had such Fruits and good Effects of
of those great Sums of Money which have been formerly given, as was expected.
If we could then have made but one such step, the King would certainly have
restored his R. H. to all his Commissions: Upon which he would have been much
greater than ever yet he was in his whole Life, or could probably ever have
been by any other Course in the World, than what he had taken of becoming
Catholic etc. And we were so very near gaining this Point, that I did humbly
beg his R. H to give me leave to put the Parliament upon making an Address to
the King, that His Majesty would be pleased to put the Fleet into the hands of
his R H. as the only Person likely to give a good Account of so important a
Charge as that was to the Kingdom, and showed his R. H. such Reasons to
persuade him that we could carry it, that he agreed with me in it, that he
believed we could. Yet others telling him, how great a damage it would be to
him, if he should miss in such an undertaking (which for my part I could not
then see, nor do I yet) he was prevailed upon not to venture, though he was
persuaded he could carry it. I did Communicate this Design of mine to Monsieur
Rouvigny, who agreed with me, that it would be the greatest advantage
imaginable to his Master, to have the Dukes Power and Credit so far advanced as
this would certainly do, if we could Compass it: I showed him all the
Difficulty we were like to meet with, and what Helps we should have: But that
we should want one very material one; Money to carry on the Work as we ought:
And therefore I do Confess, I did shamefully beg his Masters help, and would
willingly have been in everlasting Disgrace with all the World, if I had not
with that Assistance of twenty thousand Pounds sterling, (which perhaps is not
the tenth part of what was spent on the other side) made it evident to the Duke
that he could not have missed it. Monsieur Rouvigny used to tell me, that if he
could be sure of succeeding in that Design, his Master would give a very much
larger Sum: But that he was not in a Condition to throw away Money upon
uncertainties. I answered, That nothing of that Nature could be so infallibly
sure, as not to be subject to some Possibilities of failing; but that I durst
venture to undertake to make it evident, that there was as great an assurance
of succeeding in it as any Husbandman can have of a Crop in Harvest, who sowes
his Gound in its due Season, and yet it would be counted a very imprudent piece
of wariness in any body to scruple the ventring so much seed in its proper
time, because it is possible* it may be totally lost, and no benefit of it
found in Harvest. He that minds the Winds and the Rains at that rate, shall
neither Sow nor Reap. I take our Case to be much the same as it was the last
Sessions. If we can advance the Dukes Interest one step forward, we shall put
him out of the step of Chance for ever: For he makes such a Figure already that
cautious Men do not care to Act against him, not always without him, because
they do not see that he is much out-power'd by his Enemies. Yet is he not at
such a pitch as to be quite out of danger, or free from Opposition. But if he
could gain any considerable new addition of Power, all would come over to him
as to the only stedy Center of our Government, and no body would contend with
him further. Then would Catholics be at rest, and his most Christian Majesty's
Interest secured with us in England beyond all Apprehensions whatsoever.

In Order to this, we have two great designs to attempt this next Sessions.
First that which we were about before, viz. To put the Parliament upon making
it their humble request to the King that the Fleet may be put into his R. H 's.
care. Secondly, to get an Act for general Liberty of Conscience. If we carry
these two, or either of them, we shall in effect, do what we list afterward:
And truly we think we do not undertake these great points very unreasonably,
but that we have good Cards for our Game: Not but that we expect great
opposition, and have great reason to beg all the Assistance we can possibly
get; and therefore if his most Christian Majesty would stand by us a little in
this Conjuncture and help us with such a Sum as 20000 l. Sterling (which is no
very great Matter to Venture upon such an undertaking as this) I would be
content to be Sacrificed to the utmost Malice of my Enemies, if I did not
succeed. I have proposed this, several times to Monsieur Rouvigny, who seemed
always of my Opinion; and has often told me that he has writ into France upon
this Subject, and has desired me to do the like. But I know not whether he will
be as Zealous in that point as a Catholic would be; because our prevailing in
these things would give the greatest blow to the Protestant Religion here, that
ever it received since its Birth, which perhaps he would not be very glad to
see; especially when he believes there is another way of doing his Masters
business well enough without it: Which is by a Dissolution of the Parliament,
upon which I know he mightily depends, and concludes that if that comes to be
Dissolved, it will be as much as he needs care for, proceeding perhaps upon the
same manner of Discourse, which he had this time twelve Months. But with
submission to his better Judgment; I do think that our Case is extremely much
altered to what it was, in relation to a Dissolution, for then the Body of our
Governing Ministers (all but the Earl of Arlington) were entirely United to the
Duke and would have governed his way, if they had been free from all fear and
control, as they had been if the Parliament had been removed.

But they having since that time engaged in quite different Councels, and
Embarkt themselves and Interests upon other Bottoms, having declared themselves
against Popery, etc. To dissolve the Parliament simply and without any other
step made, will be to leave them to Govern what way they list, which we have
reason to suspect, will be to the prejudice of France and the Catholic
Religion. And their late Declarations and Actions have Demonstrated to us that
they take that for the most popular way for themselves, and likliest to keep
them in absolute Power. Whereas if the Duke should once get above them (after
the Tricks they have played with him) they are not sure he will totally forget
the usage, he has had at their hands. Therefore it imports us now to advance
our Interest a little further by some such Project as I have named, before we
dissolve the Parliament: Or else perhaps we shall but change Masters (a
Parliament for Ministers) and continue still in the same Slavery and Bondage as
before. But one such step as I have proposed, being well made, we may safely
see them Dissolved, and not fear the Ministers; but shall be Established and
stand firm without any Opposition; for every body will then come over to us and
worship the Rising Sun.

I have here given you the History of three years, as short as I could, though
I am afraid it will seem very long and troublesome to your Reverence, among
the multitude of affairs you are concerned in. I have also shown you the
present State of our Case, which may (by Gods providence and good Conduct) be
made of such advantage to Gods Church, that for my part I can scarce believe my
self awake, or the thing real, when I think on a Prince in such an Age as we
live in, converted to such a degree of Zeal and Piety as not to regard any
thing in the World in comparison of God The bringing in Idolatry and
Superstition, the invading of Liberty and Property, and the inslaving the
Nation.
Almighties Glory, the Salvation of his own Soul, and the Conversion of our
poor Kingdom: Which has been a long time oppressed and miserably harrast with
Heresy and Schism. I doubt not but your Reverence will consider our Case, and
take it to heart, and afford us what help you can, both with the King of
Heaven, by your Holy Prayers and with his most Christian Majesty, by that great
Credit which you most justly have with him. And if ever his Majesty's affairs
(or your own) can ever want the Service of so inconsiderable a Creature as my
self, you shall never find any Body readier to Obey your Commands, or
faithfuller in the Execution of them to the best of his power, than

Your Most Humble and Obedient Servant. Coleman's


Coleman's Second Letter.
The Copy of the Letter Written to Monsieur Le Chese the French Kings
Confessor, which Mr. Coleman confessed, he himself wrote and Counterfeited in
the Dukes Name.
^oleman's ^ryal, p. 66.
THe second of June last past, his most Christian Majesty offered me most
generously his Friendship, and the use of his Purse, to the Assistance against
the Designs of my Enemies and his, and protested unto me, that his interest,
and mine were so closely linked together, that those that oppose the one should
be looked upon as Enemies to the other; and told me moreover, his Opinion of my
Lord Arlington, and the Parliament which is, that he is of Opinion, that
neither the one nor the other is in his Interest or mine: And thereupon he
desired me to make such propositions as I should think fit in this conjuncture.

All was transacted by the means of Father Ferrier, who made use of Sir William
Throgmorton, who is an honest Man, and of truth, who was then at Paris, and
has held correspondence with Coleman, one of my Family, in whom I have great
confidence.

I was much satisfied to see his most Christian Majesty altogether of my
Opinion, so I made him Answer the 29 th. of June, by the same means he made use
of to write to me, that is by Coleman, who addressed himself to Father Ferrier
(by the Forementioned Knight) and entirely agreed to his most Christian Majesty
as well to what had respect to the Union of our Interest, as the unusefulness
of my Lord Arlington and the Parliament in order to the Service of the King my
Brother, and his most Christian Majesty; and that it was necessary to make use
of our joint and utmost Credits to prevent the success of those evil designs,
resolved on by the Lord Arlington and the Parliament, against his most
Christian Majesty and my self, which of my side I promise really to perform, of
which, since that time, I have given reasonable good proof.

Moreover, I made some proposals, which I thought necessary to bring to pass
what we were obliged to undertake, assuring him, that nothing could so firmly
establish our Interest with the King my Brother, as that very same offer of the
help of his Purse, by which means I had much reason to hope I should be enabled
to persuade to this Dissolving of the Parliament, and to make void the designs
of my Lord Arlington, who works incessantly to advance the Interest of the
Prince of Orange and the Hollanders, and to lessen that of the King your
Master, notwithstanding all the protestations he has made to this hour to
render him Service.

But as that which was proposed was at a stand by reason of the sickness of
Father Ferrier, so our affairs succeeded not according to our designs, only
Father Ferrier wrote to me, the 15 th. of the last Month, that he had
Communicated those propositions to his most Christian Majesty, and that they
had been very well liked of; but as they contained things that had regard to
the Catholic Religion, and to the offer and use of his Purse, he gave me to
understand he did not desire I should Treat with Monsieur Rouvigny upon the
first, but as to the last, and had the same time acquainted me, that Monsieur
Rouvigny had order to grant me whatsoever the conjuncture of our affairs did
require; and have expected the effects of it to this very hour: But nothing
being done in it, and seeing on the other hand that my Lord Arlington and
several others endeavored by a thousand deceits to break the good Intelligence
which is between the King my Brother, his most Christian Majesty, and my self,
to the end they might deceive us all three, I have thought fit to advertise you
of all that is past, and desire of you your assistance and friendship to
prevent the Rogueries of those, who have no other design then to betray the
concerns of France and England, and who by their pretended Service, are the
occasion they succeed not.

As to any thing more I refer you to Sir William Throgmorton and Coleman, whom
I have commanded to give an Account of the whole State of our affair, and of
the true condition of England, with many others, and principally my Lord
Arlington's endeavors to represent to you quite otherwise then it is.

The two first I mentioned to you are firm to my interest, so that you may
Treat with them without any apprehension.


Coleman's Third Letter.
SIR,
I Sent your Reverence a tedious long Letter on our 29 th of September,
Coleman's Trial, p. 68.
to inform you of the Progress of affairs for these two or three last years. I
having now again the opportunity of a very sure hand to conveigh this by, I
have sent you a Cipher, because our Parliament now drawing on, I may possibly
have occasion to send you something, which you may be willing enough to know,
and may be necessary for us that you should, when we may want the convenience
of a Messenger: When any thing occurs of more concern other than which may not
be fit to be trusted even to a Cipher alone; I will, to make such a thing more
secure write in Limon between the lines of a Letter, which shall have nothing
in it visible, but what I care not who sees, but dried by a warm Fire, shall
discover what is written; so that if the Letter comes to your hands and upon
drying it any thing appears, more then did before, you may be sure no Body has
seen it by the way. I will not trouble you with that way of writing, but upon
special occasions, and then I will give you a hint to direct you to look for
it, by concluding my visible Letter with something of Fire or Burning, by which
mark you may please to know, that there is something underneath, and how my
Letter is to be used to find it out.

We have hear a mighty Work upon our Hands, no less then the Conversion of
three Kingdoms and by that perhaps the utter subduing of a Pestileat Heresy,
which has domineered over great part of this Nothern World a long time, there
were never such hopes of success since the Death of our Queen Mary, as now in
our days when God has given us a Prince, who is become, may I say a Miracle,
zealous of being the Author and Instrument of so glorious a Work; but the
opposition we are sure to meet with, is also alike to be great. So that it
imports us to get all the Aid and Assistance we can, for the Harvest is great,
and the Laborers but few, that which we rely upon most next to God Almighty's
providence, and the favor of my Master the Duke, is the mighty mind of his
most Christian Majesty, whose generous Soul inclines him to great undertakings,
which being managed by your Reverence's exemplary Piety and Prudence, will
certainly make him look upon this as most suitable to himself, and best
becoming his Power and thoughts, so that I hope you will pardon me if I be very
troublesome to you upon this occasion, from whom I expect the greatest help we
can hope for; I must confess, I think his Christian Majesty's Temporal Interest
is so much attracted to that of his R. H. (which can never be considerable, but
upon the growth and advancement of the Catholic Religion) that his Ministers
cannot give him better advice, even in a Politic Sense, abstracting from the
considerations of the next World, that of our Blessed Lord, to seek first the
Kingdom of Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof, that all other things may be
added unto him: That I know his most Christian Majesty has more powerful
motives suggested to him by his own devotion, and your Reverences zeal for Gods
Glory, to engage him to afford us the best help he can in our present
circumstances, but we are a little unhappy in this, that we cannot press his
Majesty by his present Minister here upon these latter Arguments (which are
most strong) but only upon the first, Mr. Rouvigny's sense and ours differing
very much upon them, though we agree perfectly upon the rest. And indeed,
though he be a very able Man as to his Masters Service in things where Religion
is not concerned, yet I believe it were much more happy (considering the
posture he is now in) and his temper were of such a sort, that we might deal
clearly with him throughout, and not be forced to stop short in a discourse of
Consequence, and leave the most material part out, because we know it will
shock his particular Opinion; and so perhaps meet with dislike and Opposition,
though never so necessary to the main concern. I am afraid we shall find too
much reason for this Complaint in this next Session of Parliament, for had we
had one here from his most Christian Majesty, who had taken the whole business
to Heart, and who would have represented the State of our Case truly as it is,
to his Master; I do not doubt but his most Christian Majesty would have engaged
himself further in the affair then at present I fear he has done, and by his
approbation have given such Councels as have been offered to his R. H. by those
few Catholics, who have access to him, and who are bent to serve him and
advance the Catholic Religion with all their might, and might have more Credit
with his R. H. then I fear they have found, and have assisted them also with
his Purse as far as 10000. Crowns or some such Sum (which to him is very
inconsiderable but would have been to them of greater use than can be imagined)
toward gaining others to help them, or at least not to oppose them. If we had
been so happy as to have had his most Christian Majesty with us to this Degree;
I would have answered with my Life for such success this Sessions, as would
have put the Interest of the Catholic Religion, his R. H. and his most
Christian Majesty out of all Danger for the time to come. But wanting those
helps of recommending those necessary Councels, which have been given his Royal
Highness in such manner as to make him think them worth his accepting, and fit
to Govern himself by, and of those advantages which a little Money well managed
would have gained us; I am afraid we shall not be much better at the end of
this Sessions then we are now; I pray God we do not loose ground. By my next,
which will be er'e long, I shall be able to tell your Reverence more
particularly what we are like to expect.

In the mean time I most humbly beg your Holy Prayers for all our undertakings,
and that you will be pleased to Honor me so far, as to esteem me what I am
entirely and without any reserve.


The Examination of Capt. William Bedlow, taken upon Oath before the Lord Chief
Justice North at Bristol, on Monday the 16th of August, 1680.
Bedlows Examination before the then Lord Chief Justice North taken immediately
before his death.
THe Examinant says, that the Duke of York has been so far engaged in the
Plot, as he has seen by Letters in Cardinal Barbarines's Secretarys Study,
that no part has been proved against any Man already, that has suffered, but
that to the full those Letters have made him guilty of it; all but what tended
to the Kings death. And at Rome I asked Father Anderton and Father Lodge, two
Jesuits, what would the Duke do with his Brother when he was King, and they
answered me, they would find a means for that: they would give him no trouble
about it. Then I told them; I believed the Duke loved his Brother so well; he
would suffer no violence to be done to him: they said, no; if the Duke could be
brought to that, as he had been Religiously to every thing else, they might do
their work: their other business was ready; and they might do it presently. But
they knew they could not bring him to that point: but they would take care for
that themselves, they had not begun with him, to leave him in such scruples as
that. But they would set him in his Throne, and there he should reign blindfold
three or four days, According to the old Game the Protestants must hear the
odium of the Papists villainies.
for they had settled some, they should pitch the action upon, should clear
their Party. And then he should fly upon them with the Sword of Revenge. And
this Examinant does further adds, that the Queen is not, to this Examinants
knowledge, nor by any thing that he could ever find out, any way concerned in
the Murder of the King: But barely by her Letters consenting and promising to
contribute what Money she could, to the introducing the Catholic Religion, nay,
'twas a great while and it made her weep, before she could be brought to that.

The Narrative of Sir Francis North, Lord Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, at
the Council Board.
AT my first coming to Mr. Rumsey's House, where I was to Lodge at Bristol,
upon Monday the 16th day of August in the Afternoon, being the first day of the
Assizes, Sir John Knight came to me, and said, That Mr. Bedlow lay dangerously
ill of a Fever, and had little hopes of Life, and desired that I would give him
a Visit, that he might impart something of great consequence to me before his
death. I told him I would give him a Visit that Night after Supper, about Nine
a Clock, if I might be satisfied of two things, first that there was no
infection in his distemper; Secondly, that the time would not be inconvenient,
but he might discourse to me without prejudice to his Condition. After a little
while, two Physicians came to me, and assured me, that there was no danger of
Infection, and that the time I had appointed would be most proper; for commonly
he took his repose in the Afternoon, and at nine a Clock, he would, in all
probability, be refreshed, and fit to Discourse with me: thereupon I declared
my resolution of going, and desired the company of the two Sheriffs, and my
Brother Roger North, and appointed my Marshal William Janes to go with me to
him. As we were upon the way, Mr. Crossman, a Minister in that City, told me
Mr. Bedlow had desired him to come with me to him. I said it was very well, and
I should be glad of his Company, whereupon we went altogether; and being come
into the Room where Mr. Bedlow lay, I saluted him, and said, I was extreme
sorry to find him so ill; I came to visit him upon his own desires, I did
imagine he had something to impart to me as a Privy Counselor, and therefore
if he thought fit, the Company might withdraw. He told me that needed not yet,
for he had much to say, which was proper for the Company to hear, and having
saluted the Sheriffs, and Mr. Crossman, he discoursed to this purpose.

That he looked upon himself, as a dying man, and found within himself that he
could not last long, but must shortly appear before the Lord of Hosts, to give
an account of all his actions: and because many Persons had made it their
business to baffle and deride the Plot, he did, for the satisfaction of the
World, there declare upon the Faith of a dying Man, and as he hoped for
Salvation, that whatever he had testified concerning the Plot, was true. And
that he had wronged no Man by his Testimony, but had testified rather under
that over what was truth. That he had nothing lay upon his Conscience upon that
account. That he should appear cheerfully before the Lord of Hosts, which he
did verily believe he must do in a short time. He said, he had many Witnesses
to produce, who would make the Plot as clear as the Sun, and he had other
things to discover, which were of great importance to the King and the Country.
Hereupon he making some pause, I told him, the Plot was so evidently made out,
that no reasonable Man, no Protestant, I was sure, could doubt of the Truth of
it, but he ought not to have concealed any thing that concerned the King so
highly, he ought to discover his whole knowledge in Matters of Treason, that
Traitors may be apprehended and secured; who otherwise may have opportunity to
execute their Treasonable Designs. To this he replied, that much of that which
he had not discovered, was to coroborate his former Testimony; that he had
concealed nothing that was necessary to the Kings preservation. That he thought
it not fit to accuse more Persons, till he had ended with those whom he had
already accused: He expressed great grief and trouble at the the Condition of
this poor King and Country (so he termed them) whom he knew, at that time, to
be in eminent Danger from the Jesuits, who had resolved the Kings death; and
he was sure they would spare him no longer then he continued to be kind to
them; he said, he was privy to their Consultations at Salamanca and Valadolid,
where they used to observe the favorable Conjuncture they had to introduce
their Religion into England, which consisted in their having a Head, he must be
set up what ever came of it, and if they let slip that opportunity, they should
never have such another, for without a Head they could do nothing, he said
further, he knew the wickedness and resolution of the Jesuits, they stuck at
nothing to compass their own ends, they had attempted to poison him, but he had
escaped.

When he had finished this Discourse (which lasted about a quarter of an hour)
I asked him if the Company should not withdraw, and he said yes, and ordered
his Nurses to go out, and only his Wife to stay to tend him. And thereupon all
went out saving Mrs. Bedlow and my self, and my Servant William Janes; then I
told him, I thought it convenient, that what he should then say unto me, should
be upon Oath; he replied, that it was necessary it should be so; and called for
a Bible, but my Servant having brought a Book with him, administered the Oath to
him, and laying his Paper upon a Chair by the Bedside, writ down his
Deposition as he delivered it.

When Mr. Bedlow had concluded and said, That was all he had to inform me of, I
took the Paper, and read it over distinctly to him and he approved it, and
signed it laying the Paper upon a Pillow.

I thought it not fit, considering his Condition to perplex him with Questions,
but took his Information as he offered it, and held no discourse with him, when
the Company was withdrawn, but concerning the true setting down his
Depositions, and when he seemed to be weary, to mind him of taking Cordials,
which his Wife reached to him as he desired them.

The next day Mr. Bedlow's Brother came to me, and told me that his Brother
desired a Copy of the Deposition he made before me. But I told him, I had well
considered it, and could not give him a Copy without the Kings leave. But I
would move the King in it, and if he gave leave I would take care to send one
to him. And Mr. Bedlow's Brother then told me, That it was his Brothers desire,
that I should represent to his Majesty his Condition and that his Sickness was
very chargable, and move his Majesty on his behalf for some supply of Money for
his Subsistence, which I promised to do.

This is all that I can recollect of what passed upon this Occasion, and is in
substance true, but the very Words, or the Order, I cannot positively remember.

Francis North.

To the Right Honorable Sir Lyonel Jenkins One of His Majesty's Principal
Secretaries of State.
SIR,
I Always intended to write from hence, to pay my thanks for the whole Circuit
which was much more pleasant, by your Favor of holding Correspondence with me.
But now I have business of some Importance, for as I soon as I came to this
City, I received a Message from Mr. Bedlow by Sir John Knight, that he, being
very ill, and in the Judgment of Physicians, in great danger of Death, had some
business of great moment to impart to me. I knowing the Man, and the Season,
would not refuse the pains to give him a Visit: and being satisfied by
Physicians that there was no Contagious quality in his Distemper, (though I did
not much fear it) I went well accompanied, and in the presence of the Company
he declared, that what he had said relating to the Plot was true; and be being
a dying Man had nothing lay upon his Conscience upon that score. The greatest
trouble he had, was the danger the King (whom he loved above all things) was in
from the Papists at this time, who would attempt his Life as soon as ever he
should cease to be kind to them: and many other expressions of this kind. After
this I asked, if he had any thing to impart to me in private, he told me he
had, and having made the Company withdraw, all but my Clark, I took the
enclosed Examination upon Oath, you may imagine I was not curious to perplex
him with Questions; I took it just as he delivered it, of what signification it
will be, I leave to wiser Men, I think my duty is to send it to you, that you
may inform his Majesty of the truth. I shall wait upon you at Windsor upon
Sunday next, to receive your further Commands,

Your most humble and faithful Servant, Francis North.


And now the Truth of this is thus confirmed by as strong Testimony as can well
be given, the first part of it, premeditated Letters of one of the Conspirators
themselves, nay the chiefest, those Letters owned and acknowledeged by him to
be his own Writing, and he afterward fairly tried, legally convicted and
condemned, and afterward justly executed for the Treason; The other, verba
morientis, which have always weight, unless they be dilivered Men who, it is
known, think it meritorious to dye with a falsehood in their Mouth, when it is
to serve the interest of the Church whereof they profess to dye Members; I say,
the Truth of this being thus apparent, there certainly needs no other ground,
or reason to be given for the making the 30. Car. 2. ca. 1. for excluding
Papists from sitting in either House of Parliament, especially if it be
considered, how much they, by being at Court, and sitting in Parliament in the
precedent Reigns had interrupted the Protestants in the measures they designed
to take for their own preservation; which things were examined into upon the
discovery of this Plot, and therefore it appeared absolutely necessary to
exclude them both the Court and the Parliament.

The Preamble of the Act and the Substance of the Enacting Part, take as
follows.

FOR, as much as diverse good Laws have been made for preventing the increase
and danger of Popery in this Kingdom, which have not had the desired effects,
30. Car. c. 1. An Act for excluding the Papists the Parliament.
by reason of the free access which Popish Recusants have had to his Majesty's
Court, and by reason of the Liberty, which of late some of the Recusants have
had and taken, to sit and vote in Parliament. Wherefore for the safety of his
Majesty's Royal Person and Government, It was Enacted, that from the first day
of December 1678. No Member of the House of Peers or Commons should vote or sit
in either House after the Speaker was chose, till every such Peer or Member had
first taken the several Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and made, subscribed
and credibly repeated the Declaration following.

I A. B. do solemnly and sincerely in the presence of God profess, testify and
declare, that I do believe that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there is
not any Transubstantiation of the Elements of the Bread and Wine, into the Body
and Blood of Christ, at or after the Consecration thereof by any Person
whatsoever, and that the Invocation or Adoration of the Virgin Mary, or any
other Saint, and the Sacrifice of the Mass, as they are now used in the Church
of Rome, are Superstitious and Idolatrous. And I do solemnly in the presence of
God, profess, testify and declare, that I do make this Declaration and every
part thereof, in the plain and ordinary sense of the Words read unto me, as
they are commonly understood by English Protestants, without any evasion,
equivocation or mental reservation whatsoever, and without any dispensation
already granted me for this purpose by the Pope, or any other Authority or
Person whatsoever, or without any hope of any such dispensation from any Person
or Authority whatsoever, or without thinking that I am, or can be, acquitted
before God or Man or absolved of this Declaration, or any Part thereof,
although the Pope or any other Person or Persons, or Power whatsoever, should
dispense with or annul the same, or declare that it was null and void from the
beginning.

The same Oaths and Declarations to be made in every succeeding Parliament in
full House, that all members of Parliament not swearing and declaring as
aforesaid, and Popish Recusants convict, are forbidden the Kings and Queens
presence, That if any Member of the House of Peers or Commons, do any thing
contrary to this Act, or shall offend in any of the Cases aforesaid, such
Member should be thenceforth judged a Popish Recusant Convict, and should be
disabled to hold or execute any Office in any of his Majesty's Dominions, and
likewise to sit and ^ote in either House of Parliament, or make his Proxy in
the House of Peers, or in prosecute any suit in Law or Equity, or to be
Guardian to a Child, or Executor or Administrator to any Person, and incapable
of any Legacy, Deed or Gift, and should fofeit for every willful offense
against this Act the sum of Five hundred Pounds to be recovered by whomsoever
would sue for the same, and to be prosecuted in any of his Majesty's Courts,
where no Essoin, Protection or Wager of Law should lie, that either House of
Parliament may cause any of their Members to swear and subscribe as aforesaid,
and upon their sitting without taking the same, they should be adjudged
disabled in Law to all intents whatsoever, to sit or vote in the said Houses
during that Parliament. That the Places of Members of the House of Commons
disabled to vote should be void, and new Writs issue out for new Elections,
that the King and Queens sworn Servants should swear as aforesaid, and
subscribe the Declaration, and that if after refusal of the same, they presumed
to come into their Majesty's presence, they should be disabled to hold any
place, and incur the Penalties aforesaid. Nothing contained in this Act to
relate to the Subjects of the King of Portugal being in the Queen Dowagers
service, not exceeding the number of eighteen at one time. That during the
taking the Oaths all proceedings in Parliament should cease, and the Oaths,
etc. and Names of the Persons who should take them, should be entered in
Parchment Rolls, and for every such entry not above the sum of Twelve pence to
be paid. This Act not to extend to such who come into the King or Queens
presence, being Licensed by six Privy-Counsellors, upon some urgent occasion
therein to be expressed, and such License not to exceed Ten days at a time, and
not above Thirty days in a Year: That all offenders against this Act, that
shall take the said Oaths, etc. shall be discharged and freed from all
Penalties and Incapacities incurred thereby, but such freedom and discharge not
to extend to restore any such person to any office or place filled upon
voidance by this Act, nor to any other Officer till after the Expiration of one
Year from taking the said Oath, etc. nor to discarge the said forfeiture of
Five hundred Pounds as aforesaid, nothing in this Act to extend to the then
Duke of York.

Thus I have given an Historical Account of the making of these Laws, and of
the Laws themselves; and as they were highly reasonable in their Making; so
certainly it is as highly reasonable to continue them, if the attemps of the
Popish party under King James the Second be duly weighed: which were carried so
far, that the Protestant Religion had been inevitably destroyed with the
Professors thereof, had not we been redeemed out of their hands by the Conduct
and Valor of his present Majesty, to whom (under God) we owe our Deliverance;
and therefore can never sufficiently express our gratitude. He has given
sufficient Testimony of his Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and therefore it
is reasonable to believe, that he will readily concur to the Making any Laws,
that shall be thought fit to preserve it, I know of but one; and that is
Castration, of all Priests and Jesuits when ever they are found here, and
breeding up the Children of Papists in the Protestant Religion. Which I humbly
offer to the Consideration of the Parliament, for I believe this will terrify
them more than Gallows or Galleys.

And how necessary it is for this Kingdom, to rid themselves of this Vermin
every one sees, but they that are either Papists, or so blinded, with hopes or
expectations of the late Kings return, that they neither can nor will see.

And now, methinks I hear some of the Church of England tell me; I have shown
the reasonableness of the Laws against the Papists, but have not said one word
in vindication of the Laws against the Dissenters, who have been as violent
against the Church of England as ever the Papists were, and the Laws against
them are equally as just.

To this I give this Answer, that I ways alwas of Opinion, that the differences
between the Church of England and the Dissenters, have been made and carried on
by the Papists. And I wish there were not too much truth in it, that the
Papists influenced the Counsels when the Laws were made against the Dissenters:
I am sure a very Learned Pen Dr. Sherlock.
of the Church England owned the putting them in severe Execution the last
seven or eight years to have proceeded from Popish Councils. And I doubt not
but the severe usage of the Church of England by the Dissenters, when in Power,
was promoted by the same Party. Since therefore the Papists can transform
themselves into all shapes to promote differences amongst Protestants; in order
to their Ruin; it cannot certainly but be honest Policy, for the Protestants,
in order to the preservation of the whole, to unite against them as the common
Enemy. And therefore as we, who are Lawyers, never love to go to Law,
especially with one another; so the Protestants in England, under the
denomination of the Church of England, and Dissenter, being now pretty even as
to severities on both hands, let them no more quarrel, but shake hands and be
friends, which will tend more to the preservation of the true Religion amongst
us than all the Laws that can be made.

FINIS.

