THE BISHOPS MITTIMVS to go to Bedlam.

Upon their accusation of high Treason by the Parliament for making their
petition and protestation to his Majesty against the proceedings of the same.

Wherein is showed the principal causes of their distraction and the evil
effects of this their distemper Anno. 1641.

With a charg to the Master VVarders, and Keepers of the prison for to use
their best means to recover their wits again.

LONDON, Printed for I.W. in the year 1641.

THE Bishops Mittimus for Bedlam Anno. twenty nine of December.
THe Bishops have verified the common Proverb, to much money makes men mad,
and to much ease and security joined with plenty and society is the first
Original of pride, avarice, Luxvrie and laciviousnesse, and being replenished
almuch with these foul defects, nay enormities; as with wealth, they have now
no longer place for virtue, piety, and godliness to reside with them, and
having by this means forsaken the paths of righteousness, Justice and
uprightness, thereby provoking divine Justice, to leave them to themselves and
their own inventions, they join themselves to the Devil, become his
instruments to commit all manner of wickedness, and villainy, to practice
Tyranny over Gods heritage as they are Governors to Innovate religion, as they
are teachers to usurp Temporal Jurisdiction to themselves, over the persons,
lives and estates of the Kings good Subjects, their function and offices being
only spiritual by this their power in there unlawful Courts of Inquisition,
high Commission I would have said (Camera Stellate) ordinaries and other their
Courts of oppression) to prosecute good men by finding imprisoning Banishment
under his Majesty's name, (so presumptions is pride, to set forth laws of
their own devising, Books of liberty, and unlawful, and vicious sporting on
the Lords day, increasing thereby Prophannesse, swearing, drunkenness,
whoredom and adultery, heinous, and crying Synues, that his Majesty's people
being left thus to themselves and laid open as it were to all suggestions and
temptations of the devil, as may be the readier, and willinger to join with
them, their governors, instructors and teachers; to act any design against
the Religion, and laws of this Kingdom, to admit of Idolatry, Superstition,
and Romish Ceremonies to join with Antichrist the Pope, the original and
first beginning thereof. And when thus the hearts of licivious, and pernicious
people be thus framed to their desires, then dare they presume to attempt the
seducing of his Majesty in his Religion, to take dislike in some things
therein, that it is not so glorious in outward appearance, as the Church of
Rome, not decked with such ornaments, not attended with such grave and learned
Bishops, not so powerful, not having both the Magistrate and Ministers
authority, as well the sword of justice, as of the word and spirit of God (we
are altogether spiritual) not so many necessary ceremonies, as bowing
cringing, creeping, standing up at Gloria patri kneeling at the receiving the
encharist, whereby we give more reverence, and holy respect to Christ and our
religion, hereby inducing his Majesty to give first a toleration of the Romish
religion.

Secondly, to admit of certain ceremonies indifferent to be used before named.

Thirdly to join with the Church of Rome, that it is a true Church, does not
err in fundamental points of doctrine, that the Pope is not Antichrist, and
the like which they have attained. They now labor with his Majesty's counsel,
to draw them likewise to favor their defignes, or the most of them, and those
they cannot to procure their removeall, or by undue means; compel their
assent to their practices, having now prevailed thus far, and all things
succeed according to their desires, then devise they how to draw to their part
the judges of the land, to that purpose they call in question their proceedings
in their several courts, for their granting so many Prohibitions, to hinder
troublesome and vexations suite in their illegal courts, having prevailed in
this, they propound questions of the Kings prerogative, in leavying ship money,
raising of illegal taxes on the Kings good Subjects, to enrich their own
coffers, under pretense of releiving the Kings necessity; for money, who I
persuade my self have had very little thereof, now England being the most part
thereof, at their beck, and perceiving these their practices are against the
fundamental laws of the land, against religion established in this Kingdom
against the rights and very being of Parliaments, and fearing if ever a
Parliament should be called they should for these things be questioned, they
endeavor to prevent the same.

1. By endeavoring to innovate religion in Scotland, which being rejected
more, the King by Proclamations, and edicts to command their obedience to the
Bishops which yet refused, and covenanted against procure actual war, to be
leavyed against that Kingdom, whereby this Kingdom being busily employed in
that design, the state thereof may not have leisure to think of a Parliament.

2. By procureing the Judges to give forth their opinions the shipp money is
inherent and inseparable from the Crown, and may be levied with out
parliament, that the King by his prerogative made leavie and raise taxes
without a parliament, That the opinion of the Judges is more validity then an
Act of Parliament and the like.

3. To Command Animate and encourage the inferior Clergy to preach altogether
of the power and Prerogative of the King the weakness and vnnecessarines of
parliaments, the sacrednes and Power of Bishops both Ecclesiastical and Civil
that they are the head of the Church and not the King and such like.

4. To induce the Nobillitie and great officers and Counselors of state to
persuade the King that he may by force of Arms leavie taxes on his Subjects,
if they refuse to pay the same with out Parliament and that Acts made by a
Council of state is more bindeing to the subject then an act of Parliament,
that the present necessity of the King required a more speedy aid then by
Parliament could be afforded and the like.

And this they having acted their tragedy in this Kingdom thus far and by
the providence and mercy of God hindered for any further Proseeding in their
desperate and rash stratagems it come now to show the causes of their
distraction, the signs of their distraction and then set down their Mittimus
to Bedlam,

1. The first cause of their distraction, I conceave was the calling of the
Parliament. 12. Caroli which raised in them some distemper but it having not
such predominance in their brains then as since their policy prevailed and
caused the dissolution of that Parliament.

2. At the Kings goeing to the North being at York diverse peticions being
delivered to his M^jestie by the nobillitie by the City of London and many
Counties of this Kingdom which produced the calling of another Parliament
which began 3; Nouembris. Anno Domini. 1641. This might be the second cause of
their distraction.

3. The quick and sudden accusing and prosecution of the Leivetennant of
Ireland their Chiefest Councellor and defense, and his execution following
thereupon not withstanding all their practices and plotts did Agravate some
what their distemper.

4. The accusation and Impeachment of high Treason their Primnum Mobile, the
first mover and beginner of all their mischeivous designs. The Archbishop of
Canterbury Aggravated more their distraction.

5. The Parliaments proceedings against scandalous Ministers and delingnents in
the Clergy iucreased still their distemper.

6. The Parliament calling in question the proseedings of the late Convocation
wherein they were chief Agitators condemning the Cannons by them there made
voted the members of that Synod in a Preminire, for holding the same made them
all most out of their wits.

7. The several Charges of the Parliament against them selves perticularly of
all those crimes and many more I have before mentioned voted againsted their
sitting in the upper house of Parliament and their vots in the same together
with the daily meetings of the Citizens with petitions and Cryeinge against
Bishops made them altogether madd.

And thus much of their causes of distraction, I come now to give you a sign
or two of their ffrencie by their desperate actions since their bistemper.

1. First their obstinate opposinge the proseedings of the house of Commons
against relinquents and setting Religion which had they been well in their
wits they would never have done.

2. And secondly their desperate attempt against the whole state of the Kingdom
by their petition to his Majesty and protestation against them.

The Mittimus.
Whereas I am given to understand to my great grief and sorrow that the
reverent Fathers in God the Lord Archbishop of York etc. are by strange
Casualities become altogether distracted and distempered in their wits so
sarr as they are not to be governed by any ordinary means or brought again to
their senses by any Act or perswation whatsoever which is a great disturbance
and greivance to all their friends and allyances but causes in and about the
Court great troubles and distempers requiring present prove^tion for fear that
greater inconvenience does follow there upon, It is thought fit and commanded
that the Masters Warders and Keepers of the Prison ordained for the
entertainment of distracted and frantic persons do take into their Custody
the persons of the said Archbishop of York etc. and use means for the
restoring of them to their former understanding, as shall be requisite.

Fare you well given under our hand and seal this 29. of December 1641.
FINIS.

