CABALA, OR AN Impartial Account OF THE NON-CONFORMISTS Private Designs,
Actings and Ways.

From August 24. 1662. to December 25. in the same Year.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, MDCLXIII.

THE CABBULA, OR AN HISTORY OF THE NON-CONFORMISTS. From Aug. 24. 1662. to this
present May, 1663.
April 6. 1663. At a Close-Committee of the well-affected and ejected Ministers.
It was Ordered,

THat whereas Baronius has written Martirologies for the Christians under the
first ten Persecutions; and whereas Bonsarchius has written a Catalogue of
such faithful Witnesses as suffered for the Testimony of Jesus, as has
Illyricus, etc. Whereas the persecuted Waldenses, Bohemians, and other faithful
ones, have their history: And whereas Mr. Fox that good man has written the
sufferings of such as held the Word of God patiently under that great Trial in
Queen Mary's days; and worthy Mr. Clark has added to that a famous
Martirology of those, such as suffered since in France, Ireland, and England,
especially of sundry eminent men that suffered under the late Bishops, as we do
now; and that eminent Patriot Mr. Prynne has taken great pains to publish his
own and his Brethrens sufferings in those elaborate pieces, whereof the one is
called the Tyranny of Lordly Prelacy; and the other is called Canterburies Doom
for the promotion of the Holy Cause, the advancement of the Gospel, the
strengthening of the hand of those that are weak, the convincing of
gainsayers; Mr. Clark, Mr. Vicars, and Mr. P. be desired to exercise their
gift of History, in a faithful relation of what has happened among them that
are faithful, from the 24 day of August, 1662. to this present time.

G. Griffith, Ph. Nie, Jo. Goodwyn, Ri. Venning,

in the name of the whole Committee.

An additional Order April 6. in the afternoon by the same Committee.

Whereas Josephus has given several rules for a true Historian, as that he
should conceal no truth out of fear, nor utter no falsehood out of favor: It is
ordered, 1. That our Historians be wholly guided by Mr. Poole, Mr. Addersley,
Mr. Brooks, and the rest of the Committee for that purpose appointed, and that
they vary nothing from the sense of the Brethren. 2. That an officious Lie may
be allowable for the advancement of the Holy Cause. 3. That the infirmities of
some weak Brethren under this great Trial, may be passed by with that charity
that covers a multitude. 4. That the Books of Wonders, the antipathy of
Lordly Prelacy, the holy Martyrs, the century of scandalous Ministers, Wilsous
History, blood crying under the Altar, and all those godly books that carried
on the cause twenty years ago, be consulted by the Historians. 5. That when
there is an holy Cheat to be expressed, let it be told in Scripture phrase, let
the Cause of God be expressed in the Word of God. 6. That Mr. Clark be sent to
the Baudy Courts to search Records, and see what Brethren and Sisters have done
penance this last year of persecution. 7. That the heathenish names of months,
days, etc: be reformed throughout the History.

T. Goodwyn, Jo. Brice, W. Bridges, Ed. North.



The twentieth of the sixth month commonly called August, it was ordered, That
there should be Letters sent to the Churches, and the several Pastors thereof,
to encourage them to be steadfast and unmovable, that they be not soon shaken
in mind, or troubled, neither by word, nor by letter; and that Mr. Mantou, Mr.
Jacomb, Mr. Poole, and Mr. Lie, draw that Letter.

The 21 of the sixth month, commonly called August, the foresaid Letter was
read by Adoniram Bifield to this effect:

Brethren, and Beloved in the Lord,
IT was much upon our spirit to have settled a Communion between us and the
Churches of Christ through out the Land, especially against the time of
Persecution that is now approaching, and as an earnest of that Communion, we
unanimously agreed upon these Letters, whereby you are given to understand,
that our good L. H. C. our Lord A. R. S. H. M. at Court, whom we waited upon,
with your great sense of their favor to, and care of the Holy Cause, and the
twenty thousand pound you presented them with, and our good Brother the E. N.
together with our good friends the Catholics, have persuaded us that it was
our interest to give way to the Act of Uniformity in Parliament, where our
opposition did but exasperate our Adversaries to a greater severity then they
were inclined to, and stand against it every man of us in our places, that we
and the world may know our strength and power, not doubting but that our
considerable number and interest, which will appear by the public and general
dissent to that Uniformity enjoined, may gain us an indulgence that will vacate
and make void all former Laws; and being confident of his Majesty's promise
from Breda for Liberty to tender Consciences, and withal of that clemency and
mercy which we wrought upon in his Father, not forgetting that we can make it
appear to his Majesty that there are not Miuisters to supply our places: and in
the mean time, in our Petition for peace, and our account of the accommodation
endeavored at the Savoy, we shall satisfy the people that offered all that we
can for Peace and Liberty, to exercise our Ministry for the salvation of their
souls, and that if we be torn away from our Beloved Flocks, its long of
unreasonable men: By these and other attempts, we doubt not but to prevail with
his Majesty and his Council to dispense with the said Act, and with the
Parliament in the next Session of it (by that time we have incensed the Gentry
and Commonalty against the Bishops) to grant such an Indulgence as may in
effect repeal it: Therefore Brethren, as we pray the God of all Grace to
settle, strengthen, and establish you, so we beseech you to stand fast in the
Faith, and not to be moved from the hope of the Gospel, to be faithful to your
principles, and steadfast in your Covenant: Cast not away your confidence which
has great recompense of reward, for ye have need of patience; for yet a little
while, and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry; now the just shall
live by Faith, but if any man draw back, our souls shall have no pleasure in
him: But we are not of them that draw back to Perdition. Brethren farewell in
the Lord.

Copia Vera. Ja. Robotham, Adoniram Bifield.



The 22 of the sixth month by the people called August, it was ordered, That
Mr. Lewis, Mr. Bifield, Mr. Hickman, Mr. Evans, Mr. Eilis, Mr. Conyers, be sent
with these Letters as Messengers to the several Churches, with instructions how
to settle that correspondence and communion that may maintain a good
understanding during the time of persecution: As

1. That there be an account taken in each County of all the faithful Ministers
that can suffer rather then sin, what their abilities are, how useful they may
be in the present exigent, according to their several capacities and interests,
what their charge is, and of what value their livings are out of which they
have been ejected.

2. That there be an account taken of the well-affected Gentry, Nobility, and
Commonalty, whose hearts the Lord may open to lay out themselves in the Cause
of God, and of the sums they are ready to contribute toward the relief of his
faithful servants in the work of the Ministry, which account is to be returned
to a Grand Committee for that purpose appointed in London.

3. That there be Treasurers and Receivers in the respective Counties,
consisting in each County of two suffering Ministers, and three well-affected
Gentlemen to dispose of the foresaid charitable Contributions so gathered, as
they shall judge most necessary and advantageous to the advancement of the
Common Cause, and that there be Commissioners of Inspection that may look into
their Qualifications, who may claim the benefit of the said benevolence and
contribution.

The 2^ of the sixth month,

It was ordered. That Mr. Calamy, Mr. Case, Mr. Bates, Mr. Spurstow, Mr. Gough,
etc. do meet to morrow about the twelve thousand pound gathered among the
Brethren, to gratify the Right Honorable and the well-affected, who own the
Cause of God in Court and Parliament, and that it should not be called a bribe,
but the humble acknowledgement that the people of God make to the Honorable
personages that stand in the breach at such a time as this, and that Mr.
Cradocker, Mr. Jackson, and Mr. Brice, do look into Newmans Concordance for
three or four opposite Texts of Scripture wherewith this money may be savingly
delivered. And it is further ordered, upon Mr. Spurstows motion, that Act. 12.
20. be one of those Texts consulted: And Herod was highly displeased with the
men of Tire and Sidon, but they came with one accord to him, having made
Blastus the Kings Chamberlain their friend: And upon Master Jenkins his motion,
Act. 24. 2, 3, 4. was ordered to be another, Seeing that by thee we enjoy great
quietness, and that very worthy deeds are done unto this Nation by thy
providence, we accept always, and in all places, most Noble Faelix, with all
thankfulness; notwithstanding, that we be not further tedious unto thee, well
may thee accept of this.

The 23 of the sixth month.

It was agreed upon, that a List of those thousands that must now lie down in
heart breaking sorrow upon the removal of their faithful Guides, be prepared
for his Majesty's view, that he may see the strength of our party, and may be
convinced that the people of God is his greatest strength.

The 22 of the same month,

It was agreed upon, that would be for the advancement of the Cause, if they
would take the occasion of some farewell Sermons to promote it, provided, that
those discourses should be very quickening: And 1. That Master Lie was to bid
them beware of Episcopal Divines, Vid. Lie Sermon.
of Ceremonies of Popery, and to weep a quarter of an hour: 2. That Mr. Jenkins
persuade the people that any place is as holy as the Vid. Jenkins farewell Sermon.
Church, and that two or three met together in a private house, might do as
well as a thousand in the public Congregation. 3. That Mr. Caryl being to
expound that place in the Revelation about them that walked with the Lamb in
white, should take that occasion to speak against Surplices. 4. That Mr. Watson
may give twenty Rules which may be his Congregations Directory, and among other
Rules this may be one; That seeing they cannot have their Ministers, they may
yet read their books; so that if they cannot preach, they may yet live by
writing. 5. That Mr. Case do cry two hours together next Lords day for the
abominations of Service Book, Altar-worship, Lordly Prelacy, etc.

The same day it was Enacted, That some well-affected Stationers do gather all
the Farewell Sermons in City and Country to one volum, and that they scatter
them throughout the Nation for the propagation of the Gospel, the Cause will
not be a little promoted by the dying words of the faithful Pastors; and
because the twelve Apostles are painted before the Bible, though we otherwise
allow of no Images, yet it may be very convenient that twelve Reverend persons
heads may be set before the Sermons; and though Mr. Serman urged, that their
heads set there would give occasion to the profane, to compare them to the
Traitors heads at London Bridge, or to that row of heads set before that
profane book called Montelion last year, yet it was voted unanimously, that
they were not so fearful as not to dare show their heads, they were ready to
die, as well as to be reproached for the Truth: But when it was urged, that Mr.
Loves head might be amongst them, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Case, and Mr. Jenkins, stood
up, and voted it down as ominous.

The 23 of the sixth month, heathenishly called August, there was an offer
made by several well-affected Citizens of Mr. Seamans, and other Congregations
that were ready to oppose that Mass book, commonly called the Service Book, but
it was overruled, that those Eminent persons be excused that service, and be
reserved for more honorable service, and that the work of the day be carried on
by the Apprentices, who with such success helped the Lord against the Mighty in
the beginning of the wars, that sure the presence of the Lord was still amongst
them; whereupon Mr. Greenhil held forth upon those words of the eighth Psalm
(Out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength, because
of thine enemies, that thou might still the Enemy and the Avenger:) Out of
Mr. Meads Diatriba, three quarters of an hour by Shrewsbury-clock, as Sir John
Falstaff speaks, in the third of Edward the fourth and the fifteenth.

It was offered by Mr. Jenkins, that the Lord had often forsaken the Prentices,
as in 48. with Colonel Brown and Massey, and in 59. in Hewsons business: to
which Mr. Caryl replied, that it might be, their strength might fail them when
they raised tumults against their brethren, and the servants of God: but if you
mark it, said he, the text says, the enemy and the avenger.

The same day in the afternoon was brought in by Mr. Gurnall, Mr. Ford, etc.
and other Latitude men, the humble Petition of several young men, that had not
taken the Covenant, for leave to conform as their Reverend Fathers had done
before the Wars: Whereupon Mr. Case rose up in a great fury, and said, If Baal
be God serve him, if God be God serve him.

But Mr. Owen and Mr. Caryl, More moderation becomes you, you know conscience
is a very large thing, and you know not how far it may reach.

Says old Mr. Jackson, Brethren, it is necessary that there be some seed-plots
laid for the next Generation: Had not the Lord left us a remnant among the old
Conformists, we had been as Sodom, and we had been like unto Gomorrah: We know
not but that these young men may live under the Government to cast it off as we
have done; they may be through Reformers. Brother Calamy, brother Ash, had not
we become all things to all men we had gained none: In the Episcopal times we
were Episcopal, that we might gain the Episcopal men; in the Presbyterian times
we were Presbyterians, that we might gain and rule over the Presbyters; and in
the times of Anarchy we were moderate, that we might gain them that pretended
to moderation.

You shall see, says Tho. Goodwyn, the power of Godliness root up and swallow
all Forms; you shall see the Formalities and Ceremonies of the Prelatists flee
and vanish before the Spirit, the life and the power that is hid in a few
faithful ones: You know the Church is sometimes compared to an Oak, whose
substance is in her; i. e. whose heart and pith is found, though its outside
may seem to fade and decay: the outside of Professors may look dead, formal,
and ceremonious, by compliance in the outward Dispensati^ns with the Laws of
the place they live in, yet the root of the matter may be in them; there may be
that inward spirit and life, that upon opportunity may devour all form and
ceremony.

Verily (says Mr. Wild) I think these young men may be dispensed with upon the
same terms that Pope Sextus Quintus dispensed with the Catholics here in
England, in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign (mi fili da mihi cor tuum)
O ye young man, ye may give the Prelatists your hands, but give us your hearts.

Brethren (says Philip Nie) it is necessary we leave some in the Ministry, i.
e. to make a division among the ministry and the people: that the people may
have honest men to follow, under which pretense they may leave the Church of
England and Ministers.

It were very well, Mr. Meriton did conform at Martins in the Field, to
propagate the truth at the Court among the choicest Nobility and Gentry.

Mr. Venning has done a great deal of service at Olaves, which one Maggot may
undo, unless young Meriton (notwithstanding he has prayed, and cried, and
preached against these times) succeed him, and hold those people in play with
his short Sententia pueriles, Jingles, and quibbles.

It were well, Mr. Glendon, Parker, Phillips, etc. did conform, that they may
go to law, quarrel with, and vex all the Episcopal men in England.

Mr. West would do well to stay in, to instruct all the young men of his
acquaintance, that are turned out of Oxford, to follow the Lord fully, and to
be faithful to the end.

Mr. Bucke my Lord Bradshaw's Chaplain, and Mr. Hibbard, having been faithful
upon all occasions, I think, may be trusted with the Common Prayer.

But says honest Doctor Bates, how can they in conscience read the
Common Prayer.

Alas said Mr: Nie, that may be done by Readers and Curates, and when they are
enjoined to read it, they may read it as they do Briess, or some other
impertinent things in the Church: And it will be no mean service to our Cause
to have the service-booking by the slight reading of it.

Mr. Lie said, that in vain do we provide for one or two places, when all the
rest were taken up by Episcopal Divines.

Mr. Manton replied, never fear that, you know the Episcopal Divines will
preach but once a day, and if the good people will have an Afternoon-Lecture,
they must pay for it, and therefore in reason they must choose, and you know
they will be directed by us in their choice, so that the Afternoon and
Weekly-Lectures shall be as effectually and powerfully performed as formerly.

But the wicked will call that engrossing of Lectures, says Mr. Dolittle, as
Pluralities.

Yea, says Mr. Greenhill, Mr. Griffith, that one man of six places, and Mr.
Manton that had eight places at once, God sees no iniquity in Jacob, he
observes no perverseness in Israel: these are the spots of Gods children: We
ask only against Pluralities of Parsonages, a man may have as many Lectures as
they say Doctor Downs has Lectures and Coracies, and they say he has twelve;
or as Mr. Hardy has Preferments, and they say he has nine; or as Doctor Pory,
who has, as is reported of him (how truly, let others answer for it) sixteen
places at least.

Verily and in good sooth, say both Mr. Meritons, we desire no more then three
Lectures apiece, with our Parsonages, and a private Living in the Country that
no body hears of.

Committee. Take you no further care, all the Lectures in Town shall be
furnished with confiding and well-affected persons.

25. of the 6th month, 1663.

It was agreed upon, That now his Majesty saw the inclination of the people by
the late tumults, he should be petitioned in the behalf of the faithful
Ministers to this effect.

May it please your most excellent Majesty,
WHereas we are many, and our party very considerable for their Interest with
God and Men, as you would enjoy peace and tranquillity in your Kingdoms, or
any quist in your Throne, we must entreat you to let us do what we please, and
to set no Law or Government over us, for we cannot endure them; and upon
condition we have what we desire, your Petitioners shall pray for you.

Ed. Calamy, Laz Seaman, W. Spurstow, Mattth. Newcomen, Jo. Brice, Jo. Owen,
Tho. Goodwyn, H. Wilkinson, W. Cooper.



The first of the seventh month.

Upon the Report of his Majesty's resolved Answer, it was agreed upon, that the
monthly Fast be revived, and that at each Fast there be six appointed to carry
on the work of the day, whereof the first is to confess their apostasy to the
Royal Party, who they knew would deceive them and their folly in trusting in
the arm of flesh, viz. my Lord Monk, my Lord Chamberlain, my Lord Chancellor,
etc.

2. The second is to pour out Supplications to God to turn the Kings heart, and
to overthrow the counsels of the men of this generation.

3. The third is to pray for a blessing upon the several Councels, that are
managed for the advancement of Religion, and the good old Cause.

4. The fourth is to be wail the neglect of the many opportunities put into
their hands to make all sure, and to entreat the Lord to trust them with the
Sword once more, and to unite all those that fear the Lord into one body
against the common Enemy, that now prevails.

5. The fifth is, to strengthen the weak against Popery.

6. The sixth is, to gather up all the Intelligence, and thence to observe such
providence as tend toward a deliverance; especially that of wonders, miracles,
apparitions, and conjunctions, that portend so much alteration in the Christian
world.

At the same time it was ordered, That there should not meet above twenty at a
time in a meeting; therefore Mr. Jacomb was very much blamed for entertaining
above two hundred the other day at the Countess of Exeters; and that the
number met, have their table laid ready, that if any surprise them, they may
say, they only go to dinner or supper: and it was thought convenient, that
there were a Boy ready to read a Chapter, that if they be interrupted they may
give out, a man cannot read a Chapter in his house as the times go now, but
they are in danger of being called in question about it.

About this time Mr. Baxter moved, that seeing he and others were silenced,
their soul-saving Works might be immediately reprinted, viz. Smectymnuus, Lex
Rex, Holy Commonwealth, Antica Valieryme, with most of Milton and Mr. Goodwyn's
Papers, and all the Sermons preached upon public Fasts and Thanksgiving-dayes,
before the long Parliament, and other Parliaments, from the year 1640. to the
year 1658. together with Mr. Cartwrights writings, and all the godly Books
published in Queen Elizabeth and King James his time; and because Doctor
Hammond, Doctor Tailor, Doctor Heylin, Bishop Nicholson, Bishop Gauden, have
written so much of late of Episcopacy and Liturgy, it were to be wished, that
Doctor Owen were entreated from this Committee, to write a Discourse of
Liturgies, when they were first composed, and when imposed, which may be
privately conveyed from hand to hand, for the strengthening of the Brethren in
that point: and that Mr. Caryl should write another Treatise of Separation: But
least Mr. Caryl should state the business of Separation so, that he should set
up Independancy, i. e. a separation as well from Presbytery as from Episcopacy,
Mr. Crofton may be entreated to state the case so, as that the Ministry
withdraw from their Ministry under Bishops, though the people ought not to
withdraw from their duty under them; that though the Minister do not read the
Liturgy, yet the people may hear it; and that the people ought not to divide
from the Church for any corruptions, though the Ministers may.

Mr. Jacomb, that this motion was very seasonable, because our adversaries
observations, and our own experience taught us, that by the same reasons that
we persuaded the people to avoid communion with the Church of England formerly,
the Sectaries persuaded them to avoid communion with us; and therefore we must
by all means hold the people to the Church under the Bishops, that they may
hold to it under us; we must leave the Church, least Presbytery be swallowed up
of Episcopacy; the people must not leave the Church, least Presbytery be
brought to nothing by Independency.

September 5:

It was put to the question by Mr. Seamor, Whether the good people should hear
those Ministers that were sent them by the Bishop? Whereupon Mr. Baxter stood
up and said, It was dangerous to teach the people to forsake the public
Assemblies. Why says Mr. Brooks, why should they hear the Antichristian
Clergy? Nay, replied Mr. Baxter, if we teach the people to leave the Episcopal
Ministers because they are Antichristian; the Sectaries may easily persuade
them to leave us because we are Antichristian. Nay, said Doctor Manton, we need
not trouble our selves about that, there be many honest and sober men in the
City, there is confiding Mr. Hibbard, sweet Mr. Meriton and his Reader at
Islington, honest Mr. Buck and his Lecturer at etc. Nich. Acon, precious Mr.
Neast, and many more, yea all the Lectures, and places to be bestowed by the
people, are to be filled up with hopeful young men.

The seventh of the seventh month.

There was Addresses from the City Dames to the Reverend the Commit of
faithful Ministers, congratulating their steadfastness in the Cause and
Covenant, with a Resolution to stand by them with their lives and fortunes, and
an assurance of their kindness for them as formerly, provided they held forth
to them Liberty of Conscience, to do what they list in spite of their
Husbands, who pretend to be Kings in their Families, as they take Liberty of
Conscience to do what they will in spite of King and Parliament; withal
offering, whether they have any design to which they may be instrumental, in
persuading their Husbands, which they praise the Lord they have done hitherto
very inccessfully, as Eve, the Mother of all the Living, did her Husband Adam,
and the zealous Women have done in all ages; and particularly, whether they
should persuade their Husbands to pay Baals Priests no Tyths?

To this Address it was ordered, that Mr. Venning should reply, out of his
Epistle to that Lady, to which he dedicates Mr. Stongs Works; and Mr. Watson,
out of his Epistles to the Baroness of Tilbury, and the Countess of Clare.
And likewise it was ordered, that they should be styled, the honorable Women
that were stirred up, as it is written in the 19. of the Acts, and that this
passage should be inserted into the Answer, viz. That wherever the Gospel was
preached this which they had done should be spoken of throughout the world:
Which Reply being perused and drawn up with these Greetings; Greet Prissilla
and Aquila, our helpers in Christ Jesus, Romans 6. 13. Greet many who bestows
much labor on us. Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa, who labor in the Lord. Salute
the beloved Persis, which labored much in the Lord, ver. 6. 12. Salute one
another with an holy kiss, ver. 16. All the Saints salute you. Whereupon the
holy Sisters deputed Mrs. Winstanley, Mrs. Gayre, Mrs. Fouke, Mrs. Allen, Mrs.
Underwood, to invite the Reverend Men to enjoy the Creature at a Banquet at
Gains mine Host in Gracious-street, as it is written Romans 16.

As to the matter of Tithes, Mr. Baxter went over the sheet he writ three or
four years ago, for the Ministry and the whole Committee pleaded for the divine
right of it, and concluded it very dangerous to insinuate to the people that
they may withdraw their Tyths at their pleasure, upon the least dislike of
their Minister, for as Mr. Glendon, Mr. Case, Mr. Sheffield, Mr. Crofton,
observed very well, it may be our turn next; and who knows what a day may
bring forth? it may be our own case. Yet it was agreed, that the Sisters should
send in their Husbands on that day seven-night. When they came, and by
agreement all the old were burned, and new agreed upon to be showed the new
Incumbents; with which if they rest satisfied they have not half their dues,
and so cannot live; if they will not be satisfied, but endeavor to restore the
Church to her just rights, they shall be wearied out with Suits of Law
maintained by common stock, (for Acts 2. 44. as it is written, those that
believe are together, and have all things in common) and withal shall be
publicly loaded with the sad aspersions of covetousness and contention.

Hereupon, upon Mr. Neast, Mr. Raworth, and Meriton's Reader, that preaches
now at Islington, and many more good men's motion, it was agreed by the
confiding Citizens, and the well-affected Ministers, that new tables of duty
should be drawn, for the use of the respective well-affected Parishes.

Whereupon the ninth of the seventh month this ensuing table was presented,
and approved.

1. For every Funeral-Sermon to the godly and well-affected Ministers, shall be
gven by the Master or Dame, 5 li. with a Gown, Mourning; if the party can
afford it: (for so it is written the Israelites robbed the Egyptians.)

2. To a formal Prelatical man, an Angel in clipped half-Crowns, with a pair of
Sheepskin-Gloves, sent by the meanest Servant, for his good will, that a
precious man may preach or speak.

3. For every Burial without Common Prayer, twenty shillings,

4. For a Burial with Common Prayer, a shilling, and a box of Sweetmeats.

5. For a baptizing without the superstitious sign of the Cross, and without
Godfathers, and Godmothers, an Angel, with Gloves and Sweetmeats, and an
invitation to the Gossipping.

6. For the usual Baptism a shilling.

7. For being buried at Mr. Neasts, Mr. Raworths, Mr. Meritons, or at Laurence
Jury, especially near the Pulpit, ten pound.

8. To the Lecturers of St. Antholines, for giving the Lord thanks for the
Sisters great deliverance in childbirth, in a Prayer of a quarter of an hour
long after Sermon, to save the charge of that they commonly called Churching,
five shillings a piece, and that the rather, that godly women may not against
their consciences be compelled to come to Church.

9. To every moderate man, who is willing to comply with such tender
consciences as can sit, but cannot kneel at the Communion of Christ's body and
blood; as likewise to every tender and sober man, who for the ease of tender
consciences does not require them to come up to the Popish Rails, but wait upon
them in their own Protestant seats, a gratuity of an Angel, instead of that
superstitious stipend, by the people called, Easter-offering.

10. For every Communion at an holy Meeting, administered according to the
Directory, a gathering, not less then twenty pound, as it is written, Act. 2.
45. And they sold their possessions and goods, and parted them to all men, as
every man had need, and they brake bread from house to house.

11. For a Brotherly visiting of those who lay under any affliction in body or
mind, especially if according as it is, any send for the Elders, and they spend
an hour or two with them out of Mr. Baxters directions, for the settling of a
troubled Conscience, his Saints Rest, the Last Enemy, the bruised Reed, the
Souls Conflict, the Godly Man's Ark, Crumbs of Comfort, learn to live, and learn
to die: The four last things, Boltons direction for comfort, with some
heartbreaking, Ah me! ah Lord! and a prayer, according to the Directory picked
out of Wilkins gift of Prayer, an Angel and a Peasant to the Ministers Wife;
but if the formal Priest of the Parish will needs trouble the Brethren or
Sisters, let them have a glass of Wine, and a pipe of Tobacco, and a grinning
God-buy-a good Sir.

12. Although Matrimony be a civil Contract which a Brother and a Sister may
make between themselves and the Lord (as Sister Edwards and Brother Williams
took one another word the other day) yet because we judge it convenient that
every solemn action of our lives should be performed with prayer, and a
blessing therefore for every Marriage performed, according to the Directory,
without a Ring twenty shillings, and a fringed pair of Gloves, with an
invitation to crave a blessing upon the Wedding Dinner, otherwise only two
shillings.

The twelfth of the same month, the Citizens and their Wives made an humble
Address to the Committee, to explain the word well-affected in the Table of
Duties, and who are the well-affected Ministers; whereupon, by Order of the
Committee, Mr. Lie explained that particular thus: Beloved, a well-affected
Minister is one that in conscience was called to the Ministry by the Elders,
but in prudence was since called by the Bishops, who uses indeed the last Call
and Ordination, but relieth wholly on the first, who indeed complieth with the
public Injuction of the Church, yet professes they are a burden and a grief
to him.

Secondly: Beloved, a well-affected person, is he that being weary of reading
Common prayer, prevails with the Brethren to hire a Reader for that tedious
work, and then preaches and prays himself three hours by Shrewsbury Clock.

Thirdly: Beloved, he that savours of your former faithful Minister, and are
endued with their spirit; and to that purpose preach those Notes they have
taken from them; as honest Mr. Cave, who preaches and prays as like Mr.
Meriton, under whom he read, as if he had his Note: Ah! make much of those
Elisha's, that have the Spirit of your Elijah's that are taken from you.

Mr. Allen, verily we have many gracious persons that are not defiled with the
white Surplices, nor abridge the Liberty of their Conscience by a Superstitious
Girdle, that bow not the knee to Baal, that visit our sick after the Directory,
baptize our Children by the Spirit, and bury our dead by the gift of Preaching;
that will offer something for the present Government in public, but make
amends for all in some holy and private conferences about the good Old Cause;
these are a precious Remnant left us, for whom we are bound to bless the Lord.

Sister Priscilla; verily Mr. Lewis, Mr. Cave, Mr. Neast, etc. do preach up the
comfortable Doctrine of Assurance, the Soul-saving Doctrine of Christ in
Believers, the heart-supporting truth of the in-dwelling of the Spirit, which
are great refreshings to us, who can hear nothing elsewhere but good works,
repentance, obedience, and other legal doctrines of men unacquainted with the
sweet Mysteries of the Gospel.

The seven of the seventh month;

Mr. Neast moved, That it might be one character of a well-affected person,
that he can improve a godly Sermon, and havea piece for it at his own Church,
an Angel at a Lecture, five pound for it at a Funeral Sermon, and a Collation
at a godly Meeting.

A good woman of Islington the same day petitioned, that their godly Minister
might pass for well-affected, seeing he had no Humane Learning, no
superstitious Hebrew, Greek or Latin, but savoured so much of precious Master
Gurnalls, sweet Mr. Jenkins, holy Mr. Ambrose, etc. that as she said, you could
scarce discern his Sermons from their works.

The tenth of the seventh month:

That since all men that are settled are tied from such edifying discourses, as
may promote the good Old Cause by their subscriptions to the utter quenching of
the Spirit, it is ordered; that forty or fifty young and unsuspected persons be
maintained by the Brethren, and be at liberty to go up and down, and hint such
things as may promote the Cause of God; and that they, together with other
Latitude men, repair to Mr. Edmund Calamy, or to the President of the
Provincial Assembly for the time being, for such instructions that may be
thought necessary from time to time; insomuch as September 12. Mr. Nie in the
behalf of the well-affected moved, we have but one door of hope open before,
viz. the choice of faithful Lecturers, it might please the Committee to draw up
some characters whereby the well affected might be guided in their choice of
these Lecturers; whereupon these following Characters were agreed upon: 1. That
he have a mortified countenance, The character of a Lecturer.
with a black Cap, and a white one under it. 2. That he go in Quirpo. 3. That
he be turned out of another man's Fellowship, or Living. 4. That he prays
extempore three quarters of an hour before Sermon, and half an hour after, and
mention neither King nor Bishop directly in neither, and sometimes without the
Lords Prayer. 5. That he use four ab Lords, and hus in it a time. 6. That he
preach moderation, bewail the sins of the times, and threaten Antichrist, and
tell them of what is done abroad, but the good man is sorry for it; that he
press inward sincerity when the Law calls for outward conformity; that he say,
keep holy the Sabbath Day, when the Church says, observe Holy Days. 7. That
he deliver the flowings of milk and honey; that he pour out refreshing
comforts, when carnal men preach moral honesty, universal obedience, and good
works. 8. That he have a Certificate from Mr. Calamy, Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Case,
Mr. Seaman: That he is a confiding person, fearing God, ill-affected, to the
present Government. 9. That he comply not with the Minister of the place, but
if occasion be, he set up his Interest against him: and that what the Minister
of the place will not do he may, for the case of tender consciences.

September 13.

Notice being given at a Provincial meeting of the well-affected, that St.
Antholines Lectures were to be chosen at the time superstitiously called
Michaelmas, and that the high Priest of London had a design to furnish it with
men whom the ignorant call Orthodox and peaceable, and upon mature
consideration, that those Lecturers were the seed-plots of the good old Cause:
It was ordered, that all the honest men that are left should be picked up to
stand for those places, that the holy Sisters may have still in a morning some
saving truth, which may, after their Caudle, lie next their heart; and that by
the opportunity of those Exercises, Saints may be propagated from generation to
generation, and by Gods blessing on a morning Exercise, Babes of grace may be
multiplied; for Tantlyns is beyond Tunbridge, and Morning-meetings beyond Epsum
waters: but because the hard Laws of this Land tie men to read the Word of God,
to pray unto God, and to praise him before they make their own Sermons, It was
ordered, that some poor Readers should be picked up, who might excuse them that
toil, that they may be reserved wholly for their own Exercises. The same day is
being taken into consideration, whether the faithful should be present at the
reading of the Service: It was ordered, that they might hear the Common Prayer,
provided they did think according to the Directory: Brethren, said Mr. Calamy,
I shall say to you in that case as the Pope did in the same case in Queen
Elizabeth's days, You may be present, you may hear, but Son, give me thy heart.

But says Mr. Case, That you may be distinguished from the profane, and the
precious be separated from the vile, use the liberty of your gesture, and where
the Church says stand, sit ye down for the ease of tender consciences; where
it says kneel, stand, that you may not be brought into subjection to any man;
and least your thoughts should be entangled with the abominations of the
wicked, while they are at their Porridge, feed you on the Crumbs of Comfort, or
Milk for Babes, or The best Wine left until last; or you may sleep, and say
with the Spouse, I sleep, but my heart waketh, till you are awakened by a
soul-searching, and sinner-rousing Sermon.

Truly, said Mr. Jenkins, it is safer staying at door, or at home, until you
hear the good man in the Pulpit; for what communion has light with darkness?
what comparison is there between a soul-suing Sermon, and a formal and dead
prayer?

September 15.

There was a Committee appointed to take the names of the faithful Pastors, who
suffered for their Consciences throughout England, Scotland, and Ireland, and
withal of all the well-affected, who are ready to contribute for their
subsistence, that we may understand the Interest of the good people of this
Land, and withal how many confiding persons could keep a Minister in their
houses, to instruct them and their Tenants, and confirm them in the faith. From
which Committee there was this Report brought in a while after, That London
would contribute 4563 l. 10 s. 5 d yearly, besides, that several would
entertain the respective ejected Ministers at their own tables.

Besides, that it was reported from the close Committee, That the holy
Sisterhood would raise among themselves, without their Husbands knowledge; 1251
l. 3 s. 4 d. besides other tokens of their love and kindness. And withal
there was read an Order of the same close Committee, That in the time of
exigence and distress, all the holy Maids and faithful Widows should marry the
faithful Brethren now under persecution, forasmuch as the Apostles in the same
condition, led about Sisters for their Wives.

R. Venning, H. Hurst, T. Harrison. Will. Allen, Jo. Godolphin, Chr. Pack, P.
Barebone.



The same day the several persons were named, who were to bring in the Country
Contributions, with the names of their respective suffering Ministers; with
their conditions, and effectual Certificates concerning both; and for the more
effectual carrying on of the work, It was ordered, that two noble Patriots in
each County be desired to assist the foresaid Ministers, for the maintenance
and support of the Cause.

September 18.

It was taken into consideration, that all Buroughs, Cities, and Corporations,
which have been hitherto supplied by men of honest principles be looked after,
and that such moderate men as have a License from Mr. Baxter, Mr. Calamy, Dr.
Manton, and Mr. Burgess, to conply, may from time to time be put in those
places; for which Mr. Jenkins offered two Reasons: 1. it is very expedient, for
so we are sure to command the choice of honest Parliament men; for wherever we
are, we must preside in that case, as zealous Mr. Fouke at Reading, discreet
Mr. Boules at York, public spirited Mr. Baxter in Worcestershire, and you
know the Burgesses and Citizens are for the major part of the House of Commons,
and an honest majority among the Commons, with a moderate House of Lords, may
be healing of our breaches, and restorers of paths.

Let me add, said Mr. Boules, that Towns, Cities, and Corporations, being well
affected, have the greatest advantage of fellowship, communion, and
correspondence with themselves and the adjacent neighbourhoods.

2. Says Mr. Jenkins, beloved, the settlement of well-affected men in Towns,
Cities, and Corporations, is very easy, for considering the great pains that
must be taken there, and the little stipend that is legally settled there, the
Orthodox, as they call them, will not look after those places, but our good
Friends, you know, can labor in the Word and Doctrine, and withal get more by
the benevolence of the well-affected then is settled upon any by the Law of the
Land, the Rulers Wives, and honorable Women administering unto them of their
substance; this was the way that was taken by the first Reformers in 39, and 40
of blessed memory.

The same day came an Express by Mr. Bagshaw from Ireland, concerning their
resolution there to promote a Reformation, according to the Covenant, and a
government bottomed upon English Interest, as to which great affair they did
not doubt of their brethren in England and Scotland concurrence with them, with
their advice, interest, money and correspondence in all other necessary
particulars; particularly whether they should admit of those foreign supplies,
offered them for the relief of Ireland, by a Letter from Rome to this effect

X. X. X.
Dearly beloved in one common cause,
IT is no little grief to us, to hear how you are relapsed to your former state
of slavery and bondage, and that your great design of Liberty of Conscience,
wherein you had our prayers, and best assistance, failed you, to the great
grief of many of our and your way, who are like now to feel one common
persecution, and we may say, in one common cause, viz. the power of the
Magistrate in religious causes, or over religious persons, which we and you
equally deny: if you have any remainder of your former courage and nobleness,
and if you entertain any honorable thoughts for your rescue, and you may think
we or our Allies may serve you, impart the same, we entreat you, to Seignior
Bellarini, a person of ability and faithfulness, whom we entrust with full
power to treat with you in that particular.

X. X. Fr. d. Gomora S. S. C. Ec. S. P. R.


Verily, said Mr. Jackson, I see so little hope of success, so few Arms, so
little money, so few friends, that I am not clear in it that they have a call
from God to this work at this time; and in good sooth I always thought some
hope of success the only call of God.

Nay said Mr. Watson, it is not the good success we must look to, but the good
Cause.

However said Mr. Baxter, a good cause cannot be managed successfully by ill
means: Do you not know that Popish assistance blasted all the late Kings
undertakings? what communion has Christ with Belial?

Verily says Mr. Rutherford, we may make use of the wicked, as the Israelites
did of the Gibeonites, to how wood and to draw water for the Cause; Esau may
serve Jacob: besides that, they indeed of Rome are well affected to our cause,
we are for Liberty of Conscience, so are they, we would restrain the overgreat
power of Kings, so would they; they would have the Kings accountable for their
actions, so would we; they are for an Irish Interest, we are for an English
one, both is one, the privilege of the subject, the interest of the People:
Whereupon it was left to the Irish Commissioners discretion, whether they would
treat with the Seignior any further or no.

And it was further thought fit, that the plot should be discovered, and that
impertinent thing, my friend Bagshaw, should be secured; for indeed the whole
design looked only like a trepan upon the holy Cause, and a surprise upon the
brethren.

September 21.

This day was a full Assembly, it being a day of fasting and humiliation, and
seeking the Lord, for a right way in the present distress and exigence. Mr.
Nigh, Dr. Goodwyn, Mr. Th. Owen praying, Mr. Slater, Mr. Griffith, and Mr.
Seaman preaching.

Hereupon it was the day following considered, where lay the treasure and trade
of the Nation, and a Committee to that purpose appointed; having taken a view
of both, returned this account, viz. That of thirteen millions and a half,
which is supposed the current stock and treasure of the Nation, we are masters
of seven millions and a half and above, which being taken up and carried to
foreign parts, must stop the trade here, and engage this sinful Nation in
need, discontent and trouble: And withal it was offered by the same Committee,
that they that had any Interest in Ireland, would repair thither, or resign it
to such active and public spirits, as were qualified for the management of a
common Interest: And withal it was offered, that there might be at least a
present accommodation of all the persecuted Interests, and that (all
differences apart) all be owned as brethren, that are spirited for an English
and a Christian Liberty.

The same Committee offered, that an Envoy be dispatched to Mounsieur Coirt, to
expedite the bargain of Dunkirk, and in case the Christian King should think it
too dear, to assure him, that there are some Christian friends here, that will
advance 45620 li. provided they may have Liberty of Conscience there, in case
of persecution here; and to that purpose they added, That our honorable Friend
should promote the said bargain at Court.

Not long after, Dr. Manton and Dr. Jacomb reported, that they had it from some
very good Christian Friends, that it pleased God (upon the news of Liberty of
Trade and Religion allowed by the most Christian King of France) to move the
Kings heart (which is in Gods hand as a River of water) to think of a gracious
Declaration, about Liberty of Religion and Trade: Whereupon the thanks of the
Assembly was returned to the Committee, for transportion of tender Consciences
to Dunkirk, New England, Amsterdam, etc. And the fifth of November was observed
as a Thanksgiving-day, for a door of hope opened in his Majesty's gracious
Inclination. When Mr. Fouler enlarged upon this subject; And the fear of them
came upon all the people. And Dr. Goodwyn upon this, And be reproved Kings for
their sakes, saying, Touch not mine anointed ones, i. e. as he well opened it,
my people. And Dr. Owen on this, Stand fast in the Liberty wherewith Christ
has made you free. Dr. Jacomb scrupled that the fifth of November should be a
Thanksgiving-day for toleration of Popery, and all other Religions. You are
very dark, says Dr. Owen, as to the language of the present Dispensation,
which seems to speak nothinglesse, then a most absolute deliverance from
Antichristian slavery. Yes said Mr. Brooks, Old things are passed away, and all
things are become new. It may be, says Mr. Caryl, this was done, that we may
say no more, the Lord lives, which delivered us from the usurpation of Rome,
but the Lord lives, which has delivered us from tyranny and oppression of our
own Laws. Really, said Mr. Bates, we have great respects and kindness from my
Lord Digly, and as we are beholding to him for that passage of his against this
Church, which we quoted from his Letter to Sir K. Digby in the latter end of
our jus divinum ministerii, so we are obliged to him for the excellent Reasons
for Christian Liberty, he has offered in our behalf and our brethren the
Catholics, not long ago in a very solemn Assembly.

A while after it was judged convenient, that some persons of integrity that
attend at Court, should look into the bottom of that affair, and see whether
Indulgence was likely to go on: Whereupon Mr. Seaman and Dr. Goodwyn offered
this, viz. That there was no way better to try the Kings pronenesse to
indulgence, then to make use of their Christian friends aforehand at some holy
meeting, or if that were not public enough, at one of those many Churches that
are at our disposal. And immediately Mr. Calamy was ordered, to watch an
opportunity at Aldermanbury, and go up and preach, Very fit this, agreed upon
by the whole company, for either the King would wink at it, and then we are
sure he has a kindness for us, and the world may think that we are
considerable in his eyes, and that we have overruled the Law, or it may be he
punishes it, however we have honorable Friends, that shall bring Mr. Calamy
off, and it may be five hundred pounds in his way. Well said Mr. Brice, we have
a price put into our hands, the Lord give us hearts to use it; let us redeem
the time, that hour, Mr. Calamy had need be well spent. Mr. Calamy, Mr. Caryl,
Mr. Lie, withdrew to consider what subject he should preach upon; and they
reported, that none was more seasonable then this, either Ichabod the glory is
departed, or The Ark is departed. Whereupon Mr. Calamy was desired to insist on
all the hints of fears, jealousies, and surmizes, which had already possessed
the people concerning the departure of the Gospel. And it was ordered, that
since notice should be given of this extraordinary mercy, and that Mr. Calamy,
being thanked by the City for his great paint, should be desired to print and
publish his Sermon for the common good.

And in the mean time let us promote a strict Act for regulation of Printing,
that no Orthodox books, as they call them, be published but with much
difficulty as may be wrought upon by money, that as soon as we understand the
method of the Law, we may understand the method of affronting the Law.

September 24.

It being represented to the Reverend the Committee of ejected Ministers, that
there are so few honest men left that the people are at a loss is to public
meetings; It was ordered, that there should be twenty or thirty young men to
supply by turns some careless Episcopal men's Pulpits, to keep the root of the
matter in the good people; and that there be Messengers to invite the good
people to these soul-searching Sermons from Dan to Beersheba; that the same
course be taken as to Lectures, that may be preached upon week-dayes,
especially at Aldermanbury, Allhallows-Breadstreet, and Laurence-Jury; and
likewise as to Fun^ral Sermons, which the well-affected must take care, that
they be preached by none but the honest men.

About this time, notice being sent from honorable friends, that the Bishops
resolved upon their respective Visitations, it was ordered, that the platform
of Government offered at, agreed upon in London, Cambridge, and Northampton, by
Mr. Cartwright, Mr. Travers, Mr. ^^all, etc. and other discount enarced
Ministers in Queen Elizabeth's time, and petitioned for by the thousands of
Israel in King James his time, and offered to the Parliament by the Assembly of
Di^ines in King Charles his time, should be drawn up and agreed to, and
immediately exercised in opposition to that Antichristian way of Bishop: but
the brethren of the Congregation always making some difficulty of submitting to
the Pattern in the Mount: it was agreed however for the present, that two
Elders grave and apt to teach should be designed for each County, to confirm
the brethren, and as Barnabas, to exhort them to cleave to the Lord with full
purpose of heart; and to that end it was thought fit, that the discourse
concerning Liturgies, and their Imposition, Mr. Case and Mr. Crofton of the
Covenant, Baines and Ames against Ceremonies, together with the Province of
Londons discourse about Presbytery, be reprinted to be bestowed by them in
their respective charges, together with the books of Miracles, Mr. Brooks's
Gods Consolations for Saints in affliction, and Mr. Alliband's Nubecula est and
cit^ transibit, The Ministers Case; for said Mr. Watson, when they may not hear
us they may read us, when they have not us they may have our books.

At the same time it was resolved among the brethren of the baptized way, That
Mr. Jessey and Mr. Knowles should go and visit their friends, and edify the
respective members of their Congregation all over England, with Letters of
salutation from the [Friends in London, thus directed, Jer. Ives, etc. a
Servant of God, and of the Lord Jesus Christ, to the twelve Tribes which are
scattered abroad, greeting.

It was reported on the 24th, of the seventh month, to the Provincial
Assembly, then seeking the Lord by fasting and prayer, that the union among
them of the Congregational way was now finished, and that a great design was
going on; whereupon Mr. Case pressed, that they should be unanimous, now Gebul,
and Ammon, and Amaleck, the Philistines, with them of Tire were joined
together; And not long after there was an overture of accommodation between
them, upon the terms of the Covenant; only some other time was reserved for
explaining the words, Herefie and Schism: As to the Design on foot, it was
judged unlikely, that so unconsiderable a part of the Nation could do any good;
and therefore answer was made by the members of the Assembly to the brethren of
the Congregational way, that they would wait upon providence, i. e. see if
their undertakings prospered, if not, they would disown it; for (as one said
very well) experience had taught them the method of overturning this
Government; and that method is this, to keep the City, and get a major part in
Parliament; this Government must be insensibly overturned by possessing the
major part of the people with such discourses as most accommodates their
thoughts and consciences.

Therefore seeing there was no likelihood of dissolving this Parliament, it was
offered, that the vacancies by death in Parliament should be observed, and that
the people be prepared upon all these occasions to make a choice according to
the Lords mind, of men ^earing God, and loving and tender toward his people,
and well affected to the good old Cause; for which purpose it was judged
expedient to improve the spreading discontent about Chimney-money and other
Impositions, for which we are much engaged to the discretion and faithfulness
of our good Friends, who observing the necessities former times have run the
Government into, promoted these unusual supplies, at once to oblige his Majesty
to our party for our care of his Revenue, and to enrage the people against the
Parliament for their profuseness of their money and neglect of their interest,
suggesting the danger of a French government, or a Norman slavery, whereby the
Nobility and Gentry shall withdraw their necks, and leave the poor Commonalty
to the charge and slavery of subjection; with which a groan or two must be
interposed touching the Ark, tender Consciences, and the Gospel in the purity
of it, and how all good people that have an interest therein should be affected
therewith; it being the great interest of the good people to keep the thoughts
of the departure of the Gospel warm upon the spirits and consciences of
believers, conscience being the strongest tie upon reasonable souls in the
world.

It was withal agreed, that two active persons should observe all the failings
of State, and report them to a Committee appointed to improve and agravate
them, as might most conduce to the good old Cause, especially by engaging the
people in conscience against the government, and in passion against the
Governors, and in contempt against both, and keep this worm upon their hearts,
that the cause is Gods.

The fourth of the eighth month.

It being represented that there was some miscarriage in Mr. Carly's meeting,
so that the persecutors had them before Governor, and imprisoned them. It was
agreed. 1. Hereafter that there should be no private meeting of the brethren
upon any time of public meetings. 2. That not above twelve should meet
together. 3. That their meetings should be in Dining-rooms, where the Tables
should be set so, that if any body came they were only there refreshing
themselves with the good creature. 4. That the meetings should be as often as
may be in some Officers house, who by his place may not be suspected, and if
discovered, may lay it upon his Wife. 5. That at most meetings there may be a
Sacrament, which may be an obligation to secrecy and faithfulness. 6. That the
meeting consist of these exercises: 1. That there be an account of all
transactions since the last meeting. 2. That there be a prayer poured forth
suitable to the dispensation. 3. That a Scripture may be opened that may speak
to the present providence. 4. That every brother may open his doubt and scruple
to be resolved by the brethren if it be possible, if not, to be reserved for
the great Congregation. 5. That after due refreshment of our selves we forget
not the afflictions of Joseph, but send portions to the poor distressed
Ministers and people; for it was very well observed by Mr. Seaman, that the
King and Church have lost most of their friends by neglecting to make a
competent provision for them; for it is Interest, says he, that governs the
world; the greatest prop to our Cause was our care of disposing places and
Delinquents Lands to the well affected, where by a hundred thousand families
were engaged to live and die with us.

October 17.

A bill was brought in of some well-affected persons, that would go through all
the Qualifications to be prescribed by King or Parliament to promote the honest
Interest in their several capacities, as Common Counsel men, and other Officers
of the City; provided always, that upon any scruple they repair to Father
Calamy, and father Clarke, to be resolved; and the bill was brought to be
registered to father Clarke, that in his next Volume of Martyrology he may
record them as the great Patriots of their Country, friends to the holy Cause,
and restorers of paths to dwell in.

But said Deputy Ash, What if all Officers for the ensuing year must renounce
the Covenant?

Alas, says Mr. Nigh, have not we all renounced it long ago? have not we all
taken the Engagement, and was not the Engagement a renunciation of the
Covenant? Beloved, did not the long Parliament, the famous long Parliament,
that were I am sure at the making of the Covenant, and knew sure as well as
anybody how far it did bind us, lay it aside as an Almanac out of date: an
beloved said he, you must do more for the Cause then renounce a Covenant that
has been this many a day out of date.

October 17.

It was moved by some well affected Citizens that did lie liable to the
Bishops, that some confiding Lawyers were consulted about their power, whether
in all cases they might not escape them by appealing to the Common Law, where
the whole Cause will fall to the ground for want of prosecutors: and how far
Church wardens might act without the necessity of taking an Oath; and what
power they had in Vestries and other Parish matters without their Minister,
that they might understand what advantages they have in their places, for
promoting the discountenanced Interest of the Lord and his servants, and whore
a man might get in with some Officers, under whose wings they may safely serve
their Friends and the good old Cause.

The same day Mr. Baxter offered seventeen Considerations touching the
convenience of More-fields, Islington, Hackney, etc. for habitations to the
ejected Ministers, and withal produced the history of Philip Nerius father of
the Oratorians among whom it was agreed, that the zealous Christians should
meet a-dayes in St. Jeromes Oratory, and there a religious meeting should be
held after this manner: first silence being made, they began with Prayer, and
one of the brothers read some pious Lessons, at the reading of which the Father
used to interpose upon occasion, explaining more fully, enlarging and
vehemently inculcating on the minds of the Auditors the things read, continuing
his discourse sometimes a whole hour (to the great satisfaction of the hearers)
dialogue-wise, asking some of the company their opinions of such a thing;
afterward by his appointment one of them went up into the Desk raised upon
steps, and made an Oration without flourish or varnish of Language, composed
out of the approved and choice lives of Saints, sacred Writ, and sentences of
holy Fathers: he that succeeded him discoursed after the same manner, but on a
differing matter: then followed the third, who related some part of the Church
story in the order of its several ages; every of these had his half hour
allotted to him, and performed all with mavelous delight and approbation;
then singing some Hymn, and going to prayers again, the company broke up.
Which way, together with some additions of his own, suitable to the present
occasion, he offered to their consideration.

The eighteenth of the eighth month.

A confiding Lawyer brought word, that notwithstanding the Act for Uniformity,
there was Liberty left yet for the suffering brethren, to undertake the most
advantageous employment to them and their Cause, viz. teaching of School, which
(said he) may be done thus; an inconsiderate person that has conformed may be
hired to take care of a School in a brothers house, and the brother under the
notion of boarding may instruct them himself in all parts of learning and
godliness: All applanded this motion, not only as a present provision for their
persons, but a likely advantage to their Cause: Which if we cannot, said Mr.
Nie, promote in our time, yet by this means it may be restored in the next
generation; they that are Masters of the children in this age, may be Masters
of the men in the next.

Having given order for translating the Farewell-Sermons into Dutch, for the
propagation of the Gospel among the reformed Churches, and the keeping up of
the dying cause in the world; and settled their correspondence among the
neighbors abroad and at home, and established the way of supply for money and
other occasions, the Collectors, Treasurers, Registers, and all other Officers,
and having disposed the several Brethren to their respective charges of
confirming, confuting, and comforting, throughout the Churches, they broke up,
and adjourned until the twenty five of December, which is appointed to be a day
of fasting and humiliation, and of seeking the Lord in the behalf of his
distressed Cause and Servants, and particularly, for that there is not the same
spirit among us now that was in the beginning of these times: Where are our
Vines, our Hists, our Marshals, our Strongs, our Bowls, our Loves, our Jeanes,
our Prophets? where are they our Fathers, do they live for ever? It being
ordered beforehand, that Mr. Needham, Mr. Ascham, Mr. Can, Mr. Walker, have
their liberty to invent and publish such things as may amuse the people as to
the right state of things, and improve our Cause and Interest, and that they
watch all public transaction, that if any thing fall out amiss, they may make
the best of it to the good people, to keep up their hearts these desponding
times; however that fears and jealousies be continued, and decay of Trade: for
as a Brother held forth out of my Lord of St. Albanes, So many overthrown
estates, so many votes for troubles, and if poverty and a broken estate in the
better sort, be joined with a want and necessity in the mean people, the danger
is great and eminent) and they may work a secret contempt of the Government,
which may leaven the whole mass of the people to undermine it privately, while
providence denies the means of overthrowing it publicly: but let all this be
done with that privacy that may tempt the Magistrates to security; to which
purpose there may be report of other matters published, to divert their care
from the main danger: And withal let there be some disputes and excuses upon
mandates and directions, as an essay how far we may presume, but this must be
done only by men of interest and power with the honorable and the
well-affected. To this purpose it was well advised, that they who are to
observe things take notice of the ambitious, the covetous, the discontented,
the needy, and the obnoxious, and that they secure their dangers, gratify
their passions, and promise a relief to their necessities by an hope of
alteration, to wit, they may be desired to contribute, to whom may be joined
the credulous and the weak. And withal it was offered, that a solemn Vow be
taken to quicken them in their undertakings, and unite them in the Cause, and
to keep the Covenant warm on their hearts, which should be promoted by
Correspondents in Scotland and Ireland; and the people must be dealt with as if
the last appeal and Supreme Authority were in them, and if there falls out any
thing for the best, that the Honorable make use of it, to export some favor
and indulgence from the Supreme Power, as they call it. In the mean time let
scandals be improved, and disorders occasioned, and grievances agravated; let
Messages be intercepted, Letters counterfeited, Designs be discovered, and it
will go hard if we cannot fish out something in these troubled waters. These
were only the offers of a close Committee, whereof Ludlow was Chairman, the
Assembly it was thought knew nothing of it: at last, after they had dispatched
some Letters to the Exiles at Geneva, they rose and disposed of themselves to
their several Provinces: particularly, Mr. Crofton is to take care that the
Presbyterian Arguments against the Bishops be such, as may not be of force for
the Factious against the Presbyterians. Mr. Baxter is to go and think of more
Arguments and Disputations against Church Government. Mr. Case is to say long
Graces, and to weep bitterly for the Daughter of my people. Mr. Caryl is to
enlarge upon Job in these times of patience and persecution. Mr. Bates, Mr.
Manton, and Mr. Jacombe, are to wait upon the Honorable that are well
affected. Mr. Calamy is once a quarter to appear in Aldermanbury Desk, and
there shake his head at the times, and tremble for fear of the Ark, and to
satisfy young men how far they may conform for the service of the Cause. Mr.
Watson is ^o enlarge his Discourse of Comforts in persecution, as Mr. Brooks
his Good Wine till last; and Mr. Watson is to publish his Sermons against
Popery. Neast, Cave, Raworth and Lewis are to Lecture it: Lie, Wilkinson,
Venning, are to bring up youth in the way wherein they should walk, and they
will not depart from it in their age.

The ninth day of the ninth month.

A Welsh Curate, or a Son of the Church of England, that goes in Welch-frize
and a russet Cloak, ycliped Lewis, a soul-saving-searching-awakening Usurer,
Broker, Briber, and Monopolist of Livings and Lectures, a Servant of Jesus
Christ in the work of the Gospel, holding forth at the Meeting Place of
Allhallowes in the Wall, and Pastor of a Church there, was called before the
Reverend the Committee of ejected Ministers, where Mr. Calamy, being in the
Chair, told him of several misdemeanors, whereby he was a scandal to their
Cause: Particularly, that under pretense of the promise made to them to reserve
his Pulpit for any well-affected Brethren not conforming, who would take pains
to confirm the Disciples, and to establish them in the faith, he had admitted
Fifth-monarchy men, Anabaptists, and others to his Pulpit, to the great
disparagement of the holy Cause, which may be thought to countenance those
Factions and ways. Whereunto the Anabaptist, Independent-Presbyterian Son of
the Church replied; That 1. he desired to become all things to all men. 2. That
though the Brethren of the baptized way differed from us in some points, yet
they heartily agree in the main, viz. zealous opposition of the tyranny,
superstition, and profaneness of these times, which he understood to be the
present Interest. 3. That because no body would hear him before these times, he
must now please every body to gain a Congregation. Mr. Calamy urged against him
further, that he being appointed to look out all opportunities of employment,
and so bring in his destituted brethren to his Church, allowing them what he
gained abroad, only reserving two shillling in ten for his own pains, he
snatched up all that was to be got in Town, and employed his brethren, but
allowed them little or nothing. He replied, that he knew not how soon he should
be out of all, for the High Priest of London threatened him every day; and he
desired to be excused if he lay in something against an evil day. Another of
the Committee urged against him the forty pounds it cost him in the Maids
business, where he was caught in Shoreditch. To which he replied, that the
spirit was willing, but the flesh was weak; his heart was right, he intended to
propagate the Gospel. When they told him he should marry and not burn; he
answered, I suppose that it is good for the present distress, I say, it is good
so to be. After complaint of several misdemeanors, the Curate tells them, that
if they would anger him any more he would be Episcopal, for says he, I was an
Anabaptist, and they being too busy with me, I turned Independent; the
Independent troubled me in Wales, I came to London, and was Presbyterian, and
if you will not let me alone, I will even turn, and be a Son of the Church.
Whereupon Mr. Manton said, we should not narrow our Interest, nor offend the
brethren, besides, Mr. Lewis is the most thorow-paced Nonconformist in Town.

And if it please you, said Lewis, I shall offer you twelve things for the
propagation of the good old Cause which I do.

1. I read little or no Common Prayer.

2. I not use the Surplice.

3. I preach Mr. Jenkins, Mr. Watsons, Mr. Gurnal, Mr. Manton, and others
Works, so that while I preach they are not silenced.

4. I am in the morning at a Church, and in the afternoon at a Meeting.

5. At a Lecture I pray an hour, and preach two hours, wherein I hint many
things effectually for the good old Cause.

6. Where I do one office at Church according to the Common Prayer, I do five
at home by the Directory, especially in visiting the sick, and baptizing the
faithful children.

7. Upon the 30. January and May 29. I hold a private Fast, and have no Sermon
at Church, unless it be a Sermon at night for preparation to the Sacrament, or
so, for I observe that custom still.

8. I watch every vacancy in Town by sickness, absence, and I bring in either
my self, or some well-affected brother to that place, whereby, as the Scripture
says, we take no small advantage.

9. I keep two Registers, one for children baptized according to the Directory,
which I have at home, and the other for children baptized according to the
Common Prayer that I have at Church; one for people I marry without license,
whereof I have married many of our dear Brethren and Sisters, the other for one
or two in a year I marry with a license, which license I keep to show for any
body that is married.

10. I bring in all the Intelligence that is stirring among the Episcopal
Divines, as they call them, who take me for one of themselves, and accordingly
admit me to their Lectures and Meetings.

11. I have a convenient Chamber for private Meetings and affairs at Sion
College, where I can do no little service.

12. I receive to my Church all such tender Consciences as cannot keep their
own Churches, being enjoined reverence, and order, and decency, as they call
it; and I let them do what they will, for I tell them, if the heart be right
all is well; if they will keep on their hats they may, if they will receive the
Communion fitting they may, which is a great ease to good men.

13. Whereas there is nothing but bitterness abroad, and railing, and
reflecting upon the late times, I offer now and then a word of comfort in that
particular, intimating the good of the late Cause, the holiness of the people
engaged in it, with a word of being faithful to the Covenant.

Upon this the Committee dismissed him, and wished him to walk circumspectly,
and be wise as a Serpent.

God save the King.
FINIS.

