THE Assembly-man;

Written by Sir John Birkenhead; in the Year 1647.

THEOPHPAST. arakt ig per PEPIEPGIAS. D(...). i.e.

He seditiously stirs up men to fight: he will teach others the way whereof
himself is most ignorant; and persuades men to take an Oath, because himself
had sworn it before. LONDON, Printed for W. Davis, Anno Dom. 1681/2.

READER,
THis Pamphlet was torn from me by those who say they cannot rob, because all
is theirs. They found it where it slept many years forgotten; but they 'waken'd
it, and made false Transcripts. They Exciz'd what they liked not; so mangled
and Reformed, that 'twas no Character of an Assembler, but of themselves. A
Copy of that Reformling had crept to the Press. I seized and stopped it,
unwilling to Father other men's sins. Here therefore you have it (as 'twas first
scribled) without addition of a syllable; I wish I durst say here is nothing
lopt off. But men and manners are changed, at least they say so. If yet this
trifle seem born with teeth, you know whose hands were knuckle-deep in the
blood of that renouned Chancellor of Oxon (Archbishop LAUD) though when they
cut up that great Martyr, his two greatest Crimes were the two greatest Glories
Great Britain can boast of, St. Paul's Church and the Oxford Library. Where you
find no coherence, remember this Paper has suffered Decimation: Better times
have made it worse, and that is no fault of.

J. Berkenhead.

THE Assembly-man.
AN Assembler is part of the State,' Chattels: nor Priest, nor Burgess, but a
Participle that shark's upon both. He was chosen, as Sir Nathaniel, because he
knew least of all his Profession: not by the Votes of a Whole Diocese, but by
one whole Parliament Man. He has sat four years toward a new Religion, but
in the interim left none at all: as his Masters, the Commons had along Debate
whether Canales or no Candles, but all the mean while sat still in the Dark:
And therefore when the Moon quits her old Light, and has acquired no new,
Astronomeres say she is in her Synodes, Show me such a Picture of Judas as the
Assembler, (a griping, false, Reforming Brother; rail's at Waste spent upon the
Anointed; persecutes most those Hands which Ordained him; brings in men with
swords and states; and all for Money from the Honorable Scribes and
Pharisees:) One Touch more (a Line tied to his Namesake Elder-tree) had made
him Judas, Root and Branch. This Assembly at first was a full Century; which
should be reckoned as the Scholiast's Hecatomb, by their Feet, not Heads: or
count them by Scores, for in things without Heads Six-score go to an Hnndred.
They would be a New Septuagint; the Old translated Scripture out of Heberw into
Greek, these turn in to four shillings a day. And and these Assemblers were
begot in one day, as Hercules's fifty Bastards all in one night. Their first
List was sprinkled with some names of Honor, (Dr. Sanderson, Dr. Morley-Dr.
Hammond, ande,) But these were Divines; too worthy to mix with such scandalous
Ministers, and would not Assemble without the Royal Call. Nay, the first List
had one Archbishop, one Bishop, and an Half, (for Bishop Brownrigg was then but
Elect.) But now their Assembly (as Philosophers think the World) consists of
Atoms; petty small Levites, whose Parts are not perceptible. And yet these
inferior postern Teachers have intoxicated England (for a man sometimes grow's
drunk by a Glister.) When they all meet, they show Beasts in Asrick by
promiscuous coupling engender Monsters. Mr. Seldom visit's them (as Persians
use) to see wild Asses fight: when the Commons have tired him with their new
Law, these Brethren refresh him with their mad Gospel: They lately were
gravelled 'twixt Jerusalem and Jerico; they knew not the distance 'twixt those
two places; one cried twenty miles, another ten, 'twas concluded seven, for
this reason, that Fish was brought from Jericho to Jerusalem market: Mr Seldom
smiled and said perhaps the Fish, was salt Fish and so stopped their mouths.
Earl Philip goes thither to hear them spend; when he heard them toss their
National, Provincial, Classical, Congregational; he swore damnably, that a pack
of good Dogs made better Music: His Allusion was porper, since the Elder's
Maid had a four-legg'd Husband. To speak truth, this Assembly is the two Houses
Tiring-room where the Lords and the Commons put on their Visards and Masks of
Religion. And their Honors have so sifted the Church, that at last they have
found the Bran of the Clergy. Yet such poor Church-menders must Reform and
shuffle: though they find Church Government may a thousand ways be changed for
the worse, but not one way for the better. These have lately published
Annotations on the Bible, where their first Note (on the word CREATE) is a
Libel against Kings for creating of Honors. Their Annotation on Jacob's two
Kids, is, that two Kids are too much for one man's supper: but he had (say
they) but one Kid and the other made Sauce. They observe upon Herod, what a
Tyrant he was, to kill Infants under two years old, without giving them legal
Trial, that they might speak for themselves. Commonly they follow the Geneva
Margin, as those Seamen who understood not the Compass crept a long the Shore.
But I hear they threaten a second Edition, and in the interim thrust forth a
paultry Catechism, which expounds Nine Commandments, and Eleven Articles of
the Creed. Of late they are much in love with Chronograms, because (if
possible) they are duller than Anagrams; O how they have torn the poor Bishops
names to pick out the number 666! little dreaming that a whole Bakers dozen of
their own Assembly have that beastly number in each of their Names, and that as
exactly as their Solemn League and Covenant consist's of 666 words. But though
the Assembler's Brains are Lead, his Countenance is Brass; for he damned such
as held two benefices, while himself has four or five, besides his Concubine
Lecture. He is not against Pluralities, but Dualities; He says it is unlawful
to have two of his own, though four of other men's; and observes how the Hebrew
word for Life has no singular number. Yet it is some relief to a sequestered
person to see two Assemblers snarl for his Tithes; for of all kind of Beasts
none can match an Assembler but an Assembler. He never enters a Church by the
Door, but clambers up through a Window of Sequestration, or steals in through
Vaults and Cellars by Clandestine Contracts with an Expecting Patron. He is
most sure no Law can hurt him, for Laws dyed in England the year before the
Assembler was born. The best way to hold him, is (as our King Richard bound the
King of Cyprus) in silver chains. He loves to discourse of the New Jerusalem,
because her streets are of fine Gold; and yet could like London as well, were
Cheapside paved with the Philosopher's stone. Nay, he would say his Prayers
with Beads, if he might have a Set made of all Diamonds: This, this is it which
tempts him to such mad Articles against the Loyal Clergy, whom he dresses as he
would have them appear; just as the Ballad of Dr. Faustus brings forth the
Devil in a Friars weed. He accused one Minister, for saying the blessed Virgin
was the Mother of God, ((...), as the Ancients call her.) Another he charged
for a common Drunkard, whom all the Country knows has drunk nothing but Water
these 26 years. But the Assembler himself can drink Widows Tears though their
husbands are not dead. Sure, if Paracelsus's Doctrine were true, (that to cat
creatures alive will perpetuate man's life) the Assembler were imortal, for he
swallows quick Men, Wives, and Children; and devours Lives as well as Livings;
as if he were born in that Pagan Province where None might marry till he had
Killed twelve Christians. This makes him kneel to Lieutenant General Cromwell
(as Indians to the Devil;) for he saw how Oliver first threw --, then -- and
can with a wink do as much for --: Like Milo in the Olympicks, by practicing on
a Calf grew strong enough for a Bull, and could with case give a lift to an
Ass. The great Turk was sending his Ambassador, to congratulate the Assemblies
Proceedings against the Christians; He Ordered them Thanks for Licencing his
Alcoran to be printed in English; but hearing Ottoman Cromwell had talked of
marching to the Walls of Constantinople, that Embassy was stopped. The only
difference 'twixt the Assembler and a Turk, is, that one plants Religion by the
power of the Sword, and the other by the power of the Cymeter. Nay, the
greatest strife in their whole Conventicle, is who shall do worst; for they all
intend to make the Church but a Sepulcher, having not only Plundered but
Anatomized all the true Clergy; whose torment is hight'ned in being destroyed
by such dull instruments; as the Prophet Isaiah was sawn to pieces with a
wooden Saw. The Assembler wonders that the King and his Friends live still in
hope; he thinks them all in St. Clemens's case, drowned with an Anchor tied
about his neck. He has now got power to visit the Universities; where these
blinking Visitors look on eminent Scholars (as the Blind-man who saw men like
Trees) as Timber growing within the Root-and-Branch Ordinance. The Assembler
has now left Scholars so poor, they have scarce Rags wherewith to make Paper. A
man would think the Two houses intend to transport the Universities, since they
load Asses with Colledge-Revenues. For though these Assemblers made themselves
Heads, they are rather Hands of Colleges, for they all are takers, and take
all. And yet they are such creeping Tyrants, that Scholars are Expelled the two
Universities, as the old Thracians, fore'd from their Country by Rats and
Mice. So that Learning now is so much advanced, as Arrowsmith's Glass-eye sees
more then his natural. They never admit a good scholar to a Benefice, for the
Assemblies Balance is the Lake of Sodom, where Iron swims and Feathers sink.
Their Divinity-Disputations are with Women or Laymen; and it is only on one
Question ( Episcopacy) where the Assembler talks all that he and his friends
can say, (though his best medium to prove Presbyters more ancient than Bishops,
is, that Scribes, Pharisees, Priests and Elders where before the Apostels;) Yet
if a Scholar or good Argument come, he flies them as much as if they were his
Text. This made him curse Dr. Steward, Dr. Laney and Dr. Hammond, and had he
not had more Brass in his Face than in his Kitchen, he had hanged himself at
Vxbridge, and ended with that Treaty. For he has naught of Logic, but her
clutch'd sist, and rail's at Philosophy as Beggars do at Gentlemen. He has very
bad luck when he deals in Philologie, as one of them (and that no mean man) who
in his preface to the Reader, says, that St. Paul had read Eustathius upon
Homer, though the Apostle dyed a thousand years before Eustathius was born. The
Assembers Diet is strangely different, for he dines wretchedly on dry Bread at
Westminster; four Assemblers for 13 pence: But this sharpens and What Is him for
supper, where he feeds gratis with his City-Landlord, to whom he brings a huge
Stomach and News; for which Crammed Capons cram him. He screws into Families
where is some rich Daughter or Heir; but whoever takes him into their bosom,
will dye like Cleopatra. When it rains he is Coach'd (a Classis of them
together) rouling his Eyes to mark who beholds him. His shortest things are his
hair and his Cloack. His hair is cut to the figure of 3; two high Cliffs run up
his Temples, whose Cap of shorn hair shoots down his Forehead, with Creeks
indented, where his Ears ride at Anchor. Had this false Prophet been carried
with Habbakuk, the Angel had caught fast hold of his Ears, and led him as he
leads his Auditory. His Eyes are part of his Tithe at Easter, which he boyles
at each Sermon. He has two Mouths, his Nose is one, for he speaks through both.
His hands are not in his Gloves but his Gloves in his Hands, for 'cwixt
sweatings that is, Sermons, he handles little else, except his dear Mammon. His
Gown (I mean his Cloak) reaches but his pockets: when he rides in that mantle,
with a Hood on his shoulders and a hat above both, is he not then his own Man
of sin with the Triple Crown? you would swear some honest Carpenter dressed
him, and made him the Tunnel of a Country Chimney. His Doublet and Hose are of
dark Blew, a grain deeper than pure Coventry: but of late he is in Black, since
the Loyal Clergy were persecuted into Colors. His two lo gest things are his
Nayls and his Prayer. But the cleanest thing about him is his Pulpit-Cushion,
for he still beats the Dust out of it. To do him right. commonly he wears a
pair of good Lungs, whereby he turns the Church into a Belfry, for his Clapper
makes such a Din, you cannot hear the Cymball for the Tinkling. If his pulpit
be large he walks his Round, and speaks as from a Garrison, (his own Neck is
Palizado'd with a Ruff) When he first enters his prayer before Sermon, he
winks and gasps, and gasps and winks, as if he prepared to preach in another
world, He seems in a slumber, then in a Dream; then rumbles a while; at last
sounds forth, and then throws so much Dirt and Nonsense toward Heaven, as he
durst not offer to a Member of Parliament. Now because Scripture bids him not
curse the King in his thought, he does it in his Pulpit by word of mouth;
though heaven strike him Dumb in the very Act, as it did Hill at Cambridge, who
while he prayed, Depose Him, O Lord, who would depose us, was made the dumb
Devil. This (one would think) should gargle his foul mouth. For his only hope
why God should hear him against the King, is the Devil himself (that great
Assembler) was heard against Job. His whole prayer is such an irrational
Bleating, that (without a Metaphor) it is the Calves of his Lips: And commonly
it is larded with fine new words, as Savingable, Muchly, Christ-Jesusnes, etc.
and yet he has the face to preach against Prayer in an unknown Tongue.
Sometimes he is foundered, and then there is such hideous Coughing: But that is
very seldom, for he can glibly run over Nonsense, as an empty Cart trundles
down a Hill. When the King girt round the Earl of Essex at Lestythiell, an
Assembler complained that God had drawn his People into the Wilderness, and
told Him, He was bound in honor to feed them; for, Lord, said he, since, thou
give them no Meat, we pray thee, O Lord, to give them no Stomachs. He tore
the Liturgy, because, forsooth, it shackled his Spirit, (he would be a Devil
without a circle;) and now if he see the Book of Common Prayer, the fire sees
it next, as sure as the Bishops were burned who compiled it. Yet he has mercy
on Hopkins and Sternhold, because their Meeters are sung without Authority (no
Statute, Canon, or Injunction at all;) only like himself, first crept into
private houses; and then into Churches. Mr. Rous moved those Meeters might be
sequestered, and his own new Rithmes to enjoy the sequestration; but was refused
because John Hopkins was as ancient as John Calvin; Besides, when Rous stood
forth for his Trial, Robin Wisdom was found the better Poet. It Is true, they
have a Directory, but it is good for nothing but Adoniram, who sold the Original
for 400 l. And the Book must serve both England and Scotland as the Directory
Needle point's North and South. The Assembler's only ingenuity is, that he
prays for an ex tempore Spirit, since his Conscience tells him he has no
Learning. His prayer thus ended, he then looks round, to observe the Sex of his
Congregation, and accordingly turns the Apostle's Men, Fathers, and Brethren,
into Dear Brethren and Sisters. For, his usual Auditory is most-part Female;
and as many Sisters flock to him, as at Paris on Saint Margarets day, when all
come to Church that are, or hope to be with child that year. He divides his
Text as he did the Kingdom, makes one part fight against another: or as Burges
divides the Dean of Paul's House, not into parts, but Tenements, that is, so as
'twill yield most money. And properly they are Tenements, for each part must be
dwelt upon, though himself comes near it but once a quarter; and so his Text is
rather let out than Divided. Yet sometimes (to show his skill in Keckermen,) he
Butchers a Text, cuts it (just as the Levite did his Concubine) into many dead
parts, breaking the sense and words all to pieces, and then they are not
divided, but shattered like the Splinters of Don Quixot's Lance. If his Text be
to the occasion, his first Dish is Apples of Gold, in Pictures of Silver; yet
tells not the People what Pictures those were. His Sermon and prayer grin at
each other, the one is Presbyterian, the other Independent, for he preaches up
the Classes, yet prays for the Army. Let his Doctrine and Reason be what they
will, his Use is still to save his Benefice and augment his Lecture. He talks
much of Truth, but abhorrs Peace, lest it strip him as naked as Truth; and
therefore hates a personal Treaty, unless with a Sister. He has a rare
simpering way of expressions he calls a Married Couple Saints that enjoy the
mystery; and a man Drunk, is a Brother full of the Creature. Yet at Wedding
Sermors he is very familiar, and (like that Picture in the Church at Leyden)
shows Adam and Eve without Figleaves. At Funerals he gives infallible Signs
that the Party is gone to Heaven, but his chief Mark of a child of God, is to
be good to God's Ministers. And hence it is he calls his Preachment Manna,
fitted not to his hearers Necessity, but their Palate; for it is to feed himself,
not them. If he chance to tire, he refreshes himself with the Peoples Hum, as a
Collar of Bells to cheer up a Pack-horse. It Is no wonder he will preach, but that
any will hear him, (and his constant Auditors do but show the length of their
Ears;) For he is such an' A (...), that to hear him makes good Scholars sick,
but to read him is death. Yet though you heard him three hours he will ask a
fourth, as the Beggar at Delph craves your Charity because he cats four pound
of Bread at a Meal. 'Twas from his Larum the Watch-makers learned their
infinite Skrew. His Glass and Text are equaly handled, that is, once an hour:
nay sometimes be sally's and never returns, and then we should leave him to the
Company of Lorimers, for he must be held with Bit and Bridle. Who ever once has
been at his Church can never doubt the History of Balaam. If he have got any
new Tale or Expression, it is easier to make stones speak than him to hold his
peace. He hates a Church where there is an Echo, for it Robs him of his dear
Repetition, and confounds the Auditory as well as he. But of all Mortals I
admire the Short-hand-men, who have the patience to write from his Mouth: had
they the art to shorten it into Sense, they might write his whole Sermon on the
back of their Nail. For his Invention consists in finding a way to speak
nothing upon any thing; and were he in the Grand Seignior's power, he would
lodge him with his Mutes; for Nothing and Nothing to purpose are all one. I
wonder in conscience he can preach against Sleeping at his Opium-Sermons. He
preaches indeed both in season and out of season; for he rayl's at Popery; when
the Land is almost lost in Presbytery; and would cry out Fire, Fire, in Noah's
Flood. Yet all this he so acts with his Hands, that in this sense too his
Preaching is an Handicraft. Nor can we complain that Plays are put down while
he can preach; save only his Sermons have worse sense and less truth. But he
blew down the Stage and preached up the Scaffold. And very wisely, lest men
should track him, and find where he pilfers all his best Simile's, (the only
thing wherein he is commendable, St Paul himself having culled Sentences from
Menander's Thais, though 'twas his worst, that is, unchaste Comedy.) Sometimes
the Assembler will venture at the Original, and then (with the translator of
Don Quixot) he mistakes Sobs and Sighs for Eggs and Collops. But commonly (for
want of Greek and Latin) he learns Hebrew, and straight is illuminated; that
is, mad: his Brain is broke by a Brickbat cast from the Tower of Babel. And yet
this empty windy Teacher has Lectur'd a War quite round the Kingdom: he has
found a Circulation of blood for Destruction (as famous Harvey for
Preservation) of Mankind. 'Twas easy to foresee a great Mortality, when Ravens
were heard in all Corporations. For, as Multitude of Froggs presage a
Pestilence, so croaking Lecturers foretold an Assembly. Men come to Church, as
the Great Alexander went to Sacrifice, led by Crows. You have seen a small
Eldertree grow in chinks and clefts of Church-walls, it seems rather a Weed
than a Tree; which, lend it growth, makes a Rent in the Wall, and throws down
the Church. Is not this the Assembler? grown from Schisms (which himself
begot,) and if permitted, will make the Church but a Floor or Churchyard. Yet,
for all this, he will be called Christ's Minister and Saint, as the Rebels
against King John were the Army of God. Sure when they meet they cannot but
smile; for the dullest amongst them needs must know that they all cheat the
people; such gross, low impostors, that we die the death of the Emperor
Claudius, poisoned by Mushromes. The old Heretics had Skill and Learning (some
excuse for a Seduced Church; those were Scholars, but these Assemblers; whose
very Brains (as Manichaeus's skin) are stuffed with Chaff. For they study
little, and preach much, ever sick of a Diabetes: nor do they read, but weed
Authors, picking up cheap and refuse Notes, that with Caligula they gather
Cockle-shells, and with Domitian retire into their Study to catch Flies. At
Fasts and Thank sgivings the Assembler is the State's Trumpet; for then he does
not preach, but is blown; proclaims News very loud, the Trumpet and his
Forehead being both of one Metal. (And yet, good man, he still prays for
Boldness.) He hackneys out his Voice like a Crier; and is a kind of Spiritual
Agitant, receives Orders, and spreads them. In earnest the States cannot want
this Tool, for without him the Saints would scarce Assemble. And if the Zealots
chance to fly out, they are charmed home by this Sounding Brass. There is not
on earth a baser Sycophant; for he ever is chewing some Vote or Ordinance; and
tells the People how savoury it is; like him who licked up the Emperor's
spittle and swore 'twas sweet. Would the two Houses give him Cathedral Lands,
he would prove Lords and Commons to be Jure Divino: but should they offer him
the Self-denying-Ordinance, he would justify the Devil and curse them to their
faces, (his Brother Kirk-man did it in Scotland.) It Is pleasant to observe how
finely they play into each others hands; Marshall procures thanks to be given
to Sedgwick (for his great pains) Sedgwick obtains as much for Marshall, and so
they all pimp for one another. But yet (to their great comfort be it spoken)
their whole seven years Sermons at Westminster are now to be sold in
Fetter-lane and Pyecorner. Before a Battall the Assembler ever speaks to the
Soldiers; and the holding up of his hands must be as necessary as Moses's
against the Amalekites: For he pricks them on, tells them that God loves none
but the valiant: but when Bullets fly, Himself runs first, and then cries All
the sons of Adam are cowards! Were there any Metempsychosis his Soul would want
a Lodgiog; no single Beast could fit him, being wise as a Sheep and innocent as
a Wolf. His sole comfort is, he cannot out-sin Hugh Peter's: Sure, as Satan has
possessed the Assembler, so Hugh Peter's has possessed Satan, and is the Devi's
Devil. He alone would fill a whole Herd of Gadarens. He has sucked Blood ever
since he lay in the Butcher's Sheets: and now (like his Sultan) has a Shambles
in his Countenance; so crimson and torrid, you may there read how St. Laurence
dyed, and think the three Children were delivered from his face. This is St.
Hugh, who will Level the Assembler, or the Devil's an Ass. Yoke these
Brethren; and they two couple like a Sadducee and a Pharisae, or a Turk and a
Persian, both Mahumetans. But the Assembler's deepest, highest Abomination, is
his Solemn League and Covenant; whereby he strives to damn or beggar the whole
Kingdom; out-doing the Devil, who only persuades, but the Assembler forces to
perjury or starving. And this) whoever lives to observe it) will one day sink
both him and his Faction: for he and his Oath are so much one, that were he
halfhang'd and let down again, his first word would be Covenant! Covenant!

But I forget, a Character should be brief (though tedious Length be his best
Character.) Therefore I Will give ye' (what He denies the Sequesterd Clergy) but
a fifth Part. For weigh him single, and he has the Pride of three Tyrants, the
Forehead of six Gaolers and the Fraud of twelve Brokers. Or take him in the
Bunch, and their whole Assembler is a Club of Hypocrites, where six dozen of
Schismatik-spends two hours for four shillings apiece.

FINIS

