An Extract BY Mr. BUSHEL OF HIS LATE ABRIDGMENT OF THE Lord Chancellor BACONS
PHILOSOPHICAL Theory in Mineral Prosecutions. Published for the Satisfaction of
his Noble Friends, that importunately desired it.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Leach, in the Year, 1660

portrait of King Charles II Charles the 2d: by the Grace of God King of great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of ye: faith.
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE. G. Faithorne exc


DREAD SOVEREIGN,
SInce Providence has been propitious to You, even to a miracle, and having
dispelled those gross mists and mistakes which formerly Clouded You, You now
begin to Shine in Your proper Sphere, beyond the luster of your most
Illustrious Predecessors; which has drawn to You, not only the Addresses, but
the Admiration of all others; lest it should be a sin in me, whose heart and
actions have ever been humble and loyal to Your Royal Father, If I did not, to
testify my gratitude, make early tender of such a poor Miners mite, to the
recesses of Your acceptance and honor, as was first intended by the Lord
Chancellor Bacons Philosophical Theory to Eternize the memory of Your Royal
Grandfather in an Heroic and pious Act, without any other countenance of Your
Power, or contribution of Your Purse, than a mere virtuous patronage of this
providential work of Mineral discoveries, and concealed Treasures: Be pleased
therefore, Royal Sir, when Your leisure serves, to cast Your favorable Eye
upon a small part of the Cabalistick way of that intended practice, here humbly
presented by his menial Servant, to Your sacred Majesty; and if Your wisdom
upon the perusal thereof shall approve of the same, as Your two immediate
Predecessors, of ever blessed memory have done, I doubt not at all, by Gods
blessing, But I shall be instrumental in rendering You the greatest Prince on
earth by my prosecution of my Lords Philosophical design aforesaid. And as my
Lord directed me, to have no Partner, so my humble suit, to Your Majesty, is,
That no Person whatsoever should share with You in the glory of this
Philosophical design, or frustrate the success thereof by their self-respects,
as King Henry the 7th. lost the benefit of the West Indies by following the
counsel of such as obstructed his pursuing of that great affair, which this
Nation has ever repented in vain. But fearing the multiplicity of Your more
urgent occasions might not give Your Majesty time to read the whole Narrative
of all proceedings in that abridgment; Therefore I have thus Epitomized the
Way; to which I have annexed my Lords chief Ends therein, propounded by one of
the Fathers of his Solomon's House, under a continued Prosopopeia, and I have
discovered withal in the cloze, what has hitherto obstructed my happy
progress in the same; all which that your sacred Majesty would be pleased to
peruse, is the only boon that he humbly craves, who has no other ambition, but
to subscribe himself, as he is in duty bound,

Your Majesty's Beads-man, till death, Thomas Bushel.

My Lords and Gentlemen,
THe most probable expedient to discover and obtain the Treasures of these
three Kingdoms, that hitherto have layen hid, (and which statu quo were freely
granted by King James to the Lord St. Albans, toward the erecting and
maintenance of that Philosophical College called his Solomon's House, described
in his new Atlantis, according to that Lords Cabalistick directions, as a way
more safe, certain, and innocent, than those of Necromantick Charms, Magnetic
Rods, Enchanted Circles, or the corrupt aids of Avaritious men's Purses) is
first to find out (if possible) such a regenerate man, as is of an humble,
ingenuous, and refined Soul, a virtuous mind, and a clear intellect; so
sensible of, and truly abhorring all worldly vanity, that he had rather be
dissolved, than live any other way than that of penitential Devotions for sins
of omission and commission, chiefly because they aggravated the tortures of his
Saviors Crucifixion; let his fastings be mixed with proportionable obedience
and self-denial, that his fervent Prayers may ascend as incense, and his humble
Addresses as an evening Sacrifice before the Mercy-Seat of that Omnipotent
Deity, which inhabits Eternity, till by his indefatigable and zealous
importunity he has freely obtained one true grain of lively Faith in his
Creators Mercy, and his Redeemers Merits; and then, as in Mat. 17. ver. 20.
Christ tells his foiled Disciples, such a one so fortified and accomplished
with Faith, and the inseparable concomitants thereof, Hope and Charity, is not
only able to command the rocky Mountains to remove themselves from their
mineral Beds, that they may discover their riches for pious uses, but also to
compel the stubborn and subterranean spirits (which frequently fright the
industrious Miners from their innocent labors) to avoid their dismal
habitations in the mineral Maeanders, and thereby facilitate their honest
endeavors, which their cursed obstruction had too long made frustrate; And
further, for the illustrating of Gods Glory, to constrain those wretched fiends
(that so frequently fright frail mortals, when they are searching for treasure)
to discover all such concealments as the provident care of well-meaning Parents
(fallen into dangerous times) has hid as a Patrimony for their surviving
Children, but being suddenly taken out of this world, either by a common
calamity, or by the Treachery of some false friends whom they trusted, were
thereby prevented of all possible means for them to reveal the same; and yet
who has not he^d, if not observed, that Providence has so ordered the matter,
that not only the Murder and Murderers have been strangely disclosed, but
even some of those lapsed Angels (professed enemies to the good of mankind)
have both used to haunt the places where such Treasures were hid, and also by
Alarming the Issue or the Allies of the so deceased, with dreadful Noyses,
horrid Apparitions, and ghostly Spectrums, they have, if I may so speak, even
terrified them into a kind of Sanctimony of life, and put them upon the
pursuit, by Prayer, and other holy means, of such a lively Faith, and so
undaunted a Resolution, that ere long they have taken heart of Grace, as we
say, and with Christian courage, not only questioned, but confronted those
formidable Gobblins, and chased them, at least in a seeming flight, to their
uncouth habitations, which (as it is probably conjectured) are the Cryptick
lodgings of such hidden Treasures, or the fatal Dormitories of such unfortunate
Persons, as by wilful murder, and Tragical violence being hurryed hence in
bloody winding-sheets, have been secretly interred by their conscious
Assassinates, to prevent (what in them lay) the temporal vengeance of impartial
Justice? for it cannot be constantly doubted, much less denied, by the most
Atheistical Sceptick, that no sooner the same hidden Treasure is utterly lost
from the knowledge of mankind, but that the spirit of delusion takes its
possession; and he who is absolute Monarch of the Universe, Father of Spirits
(to whom the good Angels are so many Ministers, and the evil ones are subject
perforce) can command to do his will, when in his own preordinate time he is
pleased to reveal his inscrutable Judgments, which so far exceed humane
comprehension: yet this we know, that the Devil makes it his main business, to
abuse mankind, and to prevent or destroy whatever tends to his good: and this
appears, in that he is so averse and unwilling to make known such Treasures as
are hid, even to his own devoted Servants, lest when they can keep them no
longer, they should dedicate them to Pious uses, and so the good should in
Process of time come to be partakers of them. I make no question, but Balaam,
who while he lived was a notorious Sorcerer, did cordialy desire to dye the
death of the Righteous, and though he was willing enough to have cursed Gods
Israel, to get some of Balaacks Gold, yet it is full as probable, he would have
purchased some of their Prayers at his death, with the wages of
unrighteousness: and give me leave to tell you, that my ever-honoured Lord
(the Noblest Philosopher of his time) was wont to say often, That he believed,
that such hidden Treasures, as well as those of Mineral discoveries (being
freely devoted by Religious Princes, to holy and charitable uses and ends, and
to none but such; and accordingly by them granted only to persons of known
integrity, abhorring all self-interest, and aiming solely at the Glory of God,
in promoting great designs for the public good of his Church and People) may,
and will most probably be recovered by Persons so qualified, as has been
already hinted. For as God at first created all things for the lawful use of
man, so whatever we find written in his Word, he has revealed to the self-same
purpose, though he has neither dated the time, nor yet always clearly directed
the manner, but leaves us as Creatures whom he has endued with Reason, to
proceed as just occasion shall be afforded; we read in the Gospel that Christ
charge us to seek, with a gracious Promise, That we shall find; and to
seeking he annexeth knocking, with the like Promise, That it shall be opened
unto us. Now who sees not that there never was more need both of industrious
seeking, and of importunate knocking by honest and holy endeavors, th^n there
is at this day, when the sad consequences of the ^ate Civi^ war have driven so
many whole families which formerly flourisht, to seek their daily bread from
the hands of such as had been their underlings, and to knock aloud at the Gates
of such as oppressed them, to keep them from starving for want of that Alms
which they were wont to distribute? Therefore I humbly conceive, in such an
Article of necessity as this, any lawful course, whereby such poor Souls may
be completely relieved, without any charge at all to the public, will now be
most grateful and acceptable to all good men. And this very consideration has
(beyond all other motives) encouraged me in this Exigence and juncture of time,
to reveal my incomparably-great Lord and Masters most reserved Cabal, for (as
his strongest Obligation to my Gratitude) he would in a good mood, and in his
greatest recesse, privately impart to me, That the highest Perfection and
Elucidations of humane ^ason do but rove at Metaphysical Notions, and that most
Philosophical speculations are both obscure and uncertain, did not Divine
Contemplation rap us, with the Apostle, into the third Heaven, and beam into us
a glimpse of that supernatural light, wherewith the intellectual Angels
themselves are illuminated; to which he added, that the superficial
discernments of Philosophy incline a man to Atheism, but the intrinsecal, and
through-discovery of the grounds of the same, confirm him in the solid
fundamentals of true Religion: for (said he) our corporeal substance is too
much of kin to the brute Animals; but our Souls are so many sparks or beamlings
of that eternal l^ght which is the fountain of the Sun, from whence all visible
light does stream. A d further, that had not the All wise Creator appointed a
tutelar A^gel to every man, as his Guardian and Conductor, through this vale of
misery, then that Arch-enemy, the Prince of this world, or some of his
subordinate legionary Spirits, would deal far worse with each of us, than ever
he did with Job himself; and (as an argument of his inveterate rancour and
virulent policy) he more than once asserted, that this great Impostor and
Spirit of delusion, has suggested, and raised innumerable errors, and
contagious Heresies, out of the different opinions of the greatest Fathers of
the Primitive Church, to the end that he might thereby scandalize Religion it
self, and make it seem but a stalking-horse, and to be esteemed but an umbrella
for self-interest, and hypocritical Machiavilians; and he sometimes modestly
intimated to me, that since I was not then fixed, and not sufficiently armed
against such potent temptations, the best way I could take, both to avoid such
delusions, and also to improve my Contemplations to my eternal advantage, was
to retire my self from all popular parts of the world, to u^frequented
solitudes, and there, after my first fruits offered in an ingenuous confession
of all my sins, and unfeigned sorrow, testified in my serious endeavor to
forsake them all, and wholly to resign my self to my Creators will, which
though it should conclude me a vessel of dishonor, yet like the humble clay in
the hands of this great Potter, I should not dare to dispute his Decree, but
that I should submissively acknowledge, that his Omnipotence cannot err in the
dispensations of his Mercies, or distributions of his Justice and righteous
Judgments; and that if the Almighty should recall and pardon me, and confirm
me in the hopes of his undeserved mercy, and think me fit to be put again into
the dispatch of any temporal affairs, which may tend to his glory and the
public good, that then I should use all possible diligence to find out in the
three Kingdoms, or in the whole race of mankind, such a number of men (capable
of my Lord Character) as in effect Abraham interceded for, who by their
righteousness, at least in Gods acceptance, might have made an atonement for
condemned Sodom; and having found but a few such, that then I should not need
to doubt of accomplishing all his Philosophical designs portrayed in his New
Atlantis, or his Cabalistick Theory, concredited only to me in the management
of the same; and he hoped by this way to reduce, in time, all Errors, Schisms,
and Heresies in Religion, to the Orthodox Faith, according to the un-erring
Canon of Sacred Scripture. So great an estimation, and reverend an opinion, had
my great Lord and Master of the prevalent and operative sanctity of those truly
humble Persons, whom he appointed as the Hermits and Hospitallers of his
Solomon's House, by the Energy of whose divinely-sublimed Souls, and inspired
Intellectuals, he not only supposed, but proposed, that all his Philosophical
seeming miracles should take their wished effect, now far soever they transcend
all that the ancient Magi, or the Royal Trismegistus himself ever effected, or
but so much as aimed at in their stupendous undertakings: for these are the
men (said he) must evidence unto us by perspicuous and perfect demonstration,
those glorious Ideaes, which the divine Plato (so long before Christ's time)
most learnedly discoursed of.

Now, Courteous Reader, Let me tell you, that my great Masters modesty and
confidence were alike, strange and unparalled; for I speak it upon my own
knowledge, that when his magnificent Master, King James of happy memory,
offered him the whole benefit of his Mineral discoveries, together with his
forfeited Estates of Capital Offenders for a considerable time, toward the
erecting and maintaining of my Lords Philosophical College mentioned before, My
Lord, like a right and royal Philosopher, returned his humble thanks with this
H^roick Answer, That he had no ends at all upon his Majesty's Exchequer, either
to drain that, or to enrich himself; but his only aim was to eternize his
Majesty's Name and Fame, by doing such a glorious work as could not be effected
in the Reign of any of his Royal Predecessors; and for the completing whereof,
he craved no other aid and supply, but only the profits of such drowned and
utterly-deserted Mineral works as his own Philosophical industry should
recover, unless his Majesty would be pleased to add thereunto such supposed
Treasure a Trover as the Art and Industry of all former Ages could never attain
unto; and to help him herein, he desired no other Pioneers, but only such
penitent persons, as being convicted of petty Felonies were condemned for want
of Clergy; except such Volunteers, as being convicted by their own consciences,
came into the work with truely-contrite spirits, and truly-mortified
affections, and were willing to vow Voluntary poverty before they were
admitted: and his reason was (if my memory fail me not) That Gods providence is
all-sufficient to carry on with success any virtuous undertaking, where
patient industry, simple obedience, and humble self-denial, are the principal
Agents, Religious men the only Surveyors, not biased by interest; their diet
temperance, and the produ^tion of the whole solely dedicated to his Honor and
Service. Neither would my Lord admit of any Partners or Co-adjutors in this
design: But as Princes cannot endure any Competitors, and Lovers will brook no
Corrivals; so it was my Lords only ambition to have no Auxiliaries that should
share with him in the honor of his Philosophical discoveries, that so he might
gratefully ascribe and attribute the whole invention, perfection, and emolument
thereof to the Omnipotent and only-wise Architect of the Universe.

Now all the premises being laid together, I humbly refer to your grave and
serious consideration, which are more fully set down in my Abridgment of my
Lord Bacons Mineral Theory; and when to your admiration the mystic
propositions therein discoursed of shall be successefully experimented, and
perfected by such inconsiderable instruments, and dis-regarded humble ones,
then what carnal reason now looks upon as impossible, I hope all sober men will
acknowledge to be feasible, and be brought not only to confess, that all
self-seeking worldy wisdom is foolishness with God, but also, that such
matchless precedents of Gods incomprehensible mercy and bounty, have not only
plausibly persuaded, but even powerfully compelled them to be cordially
asisting in their several places, and to the utmost of their power, by removing
all such rubs and Remoras, as do any way obstruct or retard the persuing, and
prosecuting of that, which by Gods blessing, may in short time be improved to
so public a benefit; and in this assurance, I Rest,

The Humblest of your Lordships Servants, THOMAS BUSHEL.

Mr. BVSHEL'S LETTER To the Right Honorable the LORD FAIRFAX Touching his
Articles of War.
Right Honorable,
BY the enclosed Remonstrance you will discern the readiness of my industry to
do my Country service, and by my Articles of War, how much your Lordship, and
my Lord Say and Seal are engaged in Honor to see them ratified; and therefore I
shall not need to put your Lordship in mind of more than what proceeds from
your quick-sighted Genius, and springs from the veins of your Noble Blood,
especially when the fidelity of performance on my part (as a private Gentleman)
shall be balanced and scanned by your own wisdom. For (my Lord) I held my
Articles of War, made by such persons of quality, and from the Authority of
Parliament, more impregnable than the strongest Garrison: And why I should be
made the only Trophe of Misfortune, by being rendered thus into a Prison upon an
Arrest, through my confiden^e of your engagements to protect me, when (by my
publ^ck Actions) the Honor of a Parliament, and your own interests are bound
to make them good, I know not, neither do I see the Equity or Justice of it:
For it is impossible your Lordships should conceive my judgment so weak (I
having the late Kings Monitory Letter, a true Copy whereof is here
underwritten) when you shall consider the great Debts I have contracted for
him and my self, as to part from so Tenable a place as Lundy, without my Estate
restored to enable me to pay them, or my Person protected till I got the
possession, but much rather have died in the place, than be exposed to a
loathsome prison, by the common rigor of Bailiffs and Sergeants; unless it be
decreed by the Eternal Power, that future Ages shall find on Record, there was
a time when a Writ, procured by a Mechanic Fellow, did baffle an Ordinance of
Parliament, impowering their General and one of the greatest Peers of the Realm
to Treat with me concerning that Garrison. In a word, my Lord, solid judgments
do conceive, that my Person cannot suffer more by imprisonment, than your
Honors in the censure of all States for suffering it. I write not this, my
Lord, to free my self from prison, until pay the utmost farthing of any just
debt I ow either for the late King, or upon my own score, if both your engaged
Honors are not concerned in my Restraint, but only crave liberty to pursue
those Mines which Providence has in all probability designed to pay such
patient Creditors, Orphans, and Wid^ws, as never laid any other action upon me
than their daily Prayers: For (my Lord) the fears of not enjoying (when brought
to perfection) do far transcend any doubts I have of recovering Mineral Riches
out of the hardest Rocks; and since Divine bounty was pleased to confer such
hidden Treasures upon a Heathen King, Isa. 45.3.
it were a sin of a high nature in me, that profess Christianity, to suspect a
lesser success, when the All-seeing Eye well knows my designed end is no more
than the love of gratitude to pursue those Philosophical Notions described in
the Lord Bacons New Atlantis, for magnifying the God of Nature in his secret
works of Nature: And therefore I could wish, and humbly pray, That the
Nobleness of your Spirit might be the corner stone of such a Fabric to
posterity, since the Lord Chief Justice St. John's and the Lord Say have
vouchsafed to approve of it for a general good.

My Lord, these sufferings in my Reputation, Life, and Fortune, by this
impr^sonment, I was resolved to submit unto in a silent patience; But some of
my distressed friends fearing the deep wounds in my head from that unhappy
Arrest might prove to be mortal, have occasioned this my Adresse, upon a
confident hope, that the Parliaments Wisdom will not deny a favor of such just
concernment to your Lordships Merits, and the Lord Viscount Says, if their
more weighty affairs can but permit them leisure to pry into that Politic Act
of State whereby Garrisons were acquired for great sums, and then it is
conceived, your Lordships care in securing Lundy Isle will redound to your
greater Honor, when they shall consider that much Piracy might have been
committed in that place without control, which was surrendered (through your
Prudencies) without any other condition than one person to be protected until
the possession of his estate were restored to satisfy the just debts of

Your Lordships most humble Servant, Thomas Bushel.
April 18. 1659.
His Majesty's Answer to Mr. Bushel, concerning the Surrender of Lundy.
BUSHEL,
WE have perused thy Letter, in which We find thy care to answer the Trust We
at first reposed in thee: Now since the place is inconsiderable in it sel^, and
yet may be of great advantage unto you in respect of your Mines, We do hereby
give you leave to use your discretion in it, with this Caution, That you take
example by Our Selves, and be not over-credulous of vain promises, which has
made Us great only in Our Sufferings, and will not discharge your Debts.

From Newcastle, 14 July 1646.
Mr. Bushels Articles upon his Surrender of the Isle of Lundy.
The Propositions, Articles, Conditions, Engagements, and Agreements made,
concluded, and assented unto, the Tenth of September, in the year 1647. between
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, Knight, Lord General, and the Lord Viscount
Say and Seal, of the one part, and Thomas Bushel Esquire; Governor of the Isl^nd
of Lundy for the Kings Majesty of the other part, in perfuance of several
Orders of the Committee of both Kingdoms, and an Order or Ordinance of the
Lords and Commons in Parliament, as follows,
FIrst, It is agreed, that the said Mr. Bushel shall Surrender and Deliver up
the said Island unto the said Lord Say, or unto such person as he shall
appoint, and all Ammunition, and Magazin there.

And that in consideration thereof, The Delinquency of the said Mr. Bushel
shall be taken off, and all Sequestration in respect thereof discharged; and he
the said Mr. Bushel shall be restored unto his Estate, and such right as he or
his Assigns had in the Mines of Devon, Cornwall, and Wales, before these
troubles; and all the persons with him in the Island, and not being persons of
quality, shall be pardoned of their Delinquency, and suffered to live quietly
at home, not acting any thing contrary to the Authority of Parliament.

Secondly, that Mr. Bushel shall be protected from Arrest, until he obtain the
possession of his said Estate.

THO. FAIRFAX.

The Lord Fairfax Letter to the Speaker of the Parliament.
Master Speaker,
I Cannot but be sensible of any thing that reflects on the Honor of the
Parliament, as on my self, who for the^r service have granted Articles to
several persons as importancy of affairs required, and particularly to your
Petitioner Mr. Bushel; but of late there has been some obstruction in due
execution of them, to the prejudice of such as cast themselves on your
protection, which Mr. Bushel more readily did in hope of performance of those
Articles made upon his surrender of the Isle of Lundy, with the Lord Say and my
self on the behalf of the Parliament, then concived most reasonable as his
papers herewith do express; therefore entreat, at your first opportunity, you
would acquaint the Honorable House with the contents of my humble desires,
which is, that they would make good Mr. Bushels Articles, and be pleased to
recompense his great sufferings with their timely assistance, that he may be
better enabled to satisfy his Creditors, which he cannot do but by persute of
such Mineral discoveries as Art and Experience has taught him, which will not
only be their advantage in securing those debts, but render him more capable of
doing considerable service to the Commonwealth. And in so just an Act you will
preserve the Justice and Honor of the Parliament, and his, who has ever been

Your most humble Servant, T. Fairfax.
Bath, 29 July, 1659
To the Right Honorable WILLIAM LENTHAL Speaker to the PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
MY old Master the Lord Chancellor Bacon would often say, That the magnificence
of a Parliament consisted much in the presence of their Prince and; that the
reflection of his Royal Affection was as a foil to render them as Diamonds of
greater value in their Countries service, If those natural flaws of
Self-interest were not frequently known to become a motive to make them forfeit
their Trust, and subvert their Obedience, which invited that Lords observation
to reflect upon such a Model of new Laws, as no forced power should be able to
take away the Regality of Sovereign Rights, nor their Prerogative have a Medium
to entrench upon the privilege of their Subjects; and that his Philosophy
should be the sole revenue to support the Magi of so magnificent a Machine,
without any other imposition on the people, than its attendance upon
Providence; and to change the temper of loose and avaritious minds into Moral
and Divine virtues: But that Lord being commanded by King James, to write the
life of Henry the seventh, and his great employments in State affairs, were the
divertisements which retarded his inclination to that study, and left only the
Essay of his Mineral Philosophy to support his Solomon's House, described in his
New Atlantis, as a rest whereby the success of his other experiments might be
judged. And now most Honored Sir, you having re^eived the Lord Fairfax his
Letter to the Parliament, in answer of mine, touching the making good my
Articles, as also to recompense my great sufferings, has made me so presume on
your Lordship, as to beseech you to patronize this publication of my
proceedings, and the rather, for that I perceive by the weekly Occurrence, Your
Honor has sent a Letter of thanks to the Lord Fairfax, in the Name of the
whole House, for his late opportune service done to the Honorable Parliamenr,
which has emboldned me the more to put your Honor in mind of a result of the
said Lords Letter directed to your self, and dated the 29 of July last, lest
the interpretation of your Honors Letter should be held in the Diary of a
Complement, when the Lord Fairfax his Letter is laid aside, which concerns his
and the Parliaments Honor to make good; and because his Lordship did me the
favor to send me a true Copy of what was writ, I have made bold humbly to
present you with the grounds and reasons at large, which induced him to it,
that the Parliaments wisdom might take a more present care of the whole matter,
rather than the glory of such a work should perish for want of a right
understanding. And if it may seem to any Person of that Honorable House, too
great a favor for me to have my Articles made good, I shall humbly pray no
more, than that their Justice may protect my Mineral adventures at Rowpits upon
the Forest of Mendip, and other deserted places, and to defend my Feoffees in
trust, who have resolved to make a true trial of my Lords Philosophy in that
affair, since most Men reputed me not well in my wits, for attempting the
seeming impossibility of recovering their drowned conditions, otherwise those
public spirits will doubtless inevitably suffer. From whence God lead your
Lordship by the hand, and all others that will take the pains to read the
ensuing Treatise, for then my Genius invites me to believe, I shall have their
unanimons consent to an irrevocable Act like the Medes and Persians, which is
and shall be the Prayer of

Your most Humble Servant Tho. Bushel.

Right Honorable,
GRatitude having obliged my Soul to serve such a surviving Friend, as your
Lordship has ever been to the memory of my Lord Bacons Philosophy, and now
finding general fame to give out, that the vicissitude of State Affairs are
become dubious ever since the French Embassy, and other unbyassed occurrences
were made public, I held it my duty to tender the conception of your humble
Servant, how to manage a safe retreat for your Lordships perpetual Honor, which
is in a word (my Lord) to get the start of some men's understand compliance, by
casting the faculties of your divine part upon the Heroic nature of your
Princes clemency, and with the same sense of your Lordships unparalleld
language, in the public Senate, to lead the judicious to the like obedience,
rather, than the effusion of more b^ood should be spilt by the dangerous
consequence of a foreign Invasion, and then it were impossible, if such an Act
of gallantry proceeding from those pious Principles, might spring from your
Lordships undaunted Spirit, but that it must meet with the splendour of a
Princes favor and mercy in their greatest glory. I write not this (my Lord)
from my own head, but that I have often heard my Lord Bacon discourse the like
upon the same Subject, and that the way to out-vi^ Princes rage in hi^
conceived wrong, by a politic prud nce, was to blunt the edge of his
revengeful Sword with such an opportune submission, as might add to his greater
Honor, in pardoning the crime, than punishing the offense, and especially when
his Conscience must bear him witness, he is restored to three Kingdoms, by
such a stratagem from the wisdom of your L^rdsh^ps, and might in time by the
same scales know the persons that betrayed his Cabinet Counsels, which were a
work without compare, and as miraculous as meritorious before God and Man; for
(my Lord) his Royal Father would frequently aver, that it was below his nature
to take revenge upon an open Enemy; but th se which betrayed the secrets of his
trust, he could not tell what to say in the punishment of them (unless God
should direct his heart) but must leave such to the stroke of divine Justice.
In a word (my Lord) I have nothing to do with Court-holy-water, nor State
Policy, but through Providence and your Honors assistance to Crown my old
Master the Lord Viscount Verulam, King of Philosophy, for his unparalleld
knowledge in Mineral discoveries, and to support thereby the magnificent
Monument of his Atlantis, above those that endeavor to lay his Honor in the
dust, without the participant purse of any person, than the breath of such
Senators as should proceed from your Lordships abilities, and therefore I shall
humbly beg pardon for this bold Address, and remain (as obliged)

Your Lordships ever devoted Servant Thomas Bushel.

Mr. Bushel's Mineral Overtures.
Right Honorable,
ACcording to your commands, I do here present your Lordships with a brief
Narrative of the Lord Chancellor BACONS directions to my self, for the
management of his Mineral experiments, in case his own Death should stop his
intended progress therein, before he could practically discover the true
generation, and spreading qualities of Minerals, I being then his Menial
Servant.

King JAMES having already promised to grant his Lordship all his own
discoveries of Mines Royal, and also of any drowned Lands, or deserted works,
by him to be recovered within the space of Forty years, paying him the fifth,
according to the usual custom of the King of Spain, in his Mines of the
West Indies, and of other Princes, after the expiration of fourteen years first
granted gratis toward the great ^arge of his new Invention, to facilitate the
obtaining the Mineral Riches of this Land, occasioned by a learned Speech his
Lordship has lately made to his Majesty, [Count GUNDAMORE, and diverse of the
Nobility being present, concerning the rise, and magnificent growth of the
China Trade; wherein by a perfect demonstration he made it appear, that the
invention of one man (by his help ng the Defects of Nature, with the Materials
of Art, and the patience of three Ages industry to bring its concoction to
perfection) became the great Revenew of that Empire, and has been for this
thousand years the only honor of that people, as well as their livelihood and
Patrimony] In which he seriously protested, That his utmost ambition in the
affairs of this world affected no greater glory, than to leave the real fruits
of his best service to his Sovereign, Honor to his Name, his written Works to
Posterity, and by such Treasures as his own Industry should raise out of his
Mineral expe^iments, to accomplish the noble Design and Fabric of his SOLOMON'S
House, described in his new Atlantis, annexed to his Na^ural History; seeing
that the Corporation of the Mines Royal, institute^ by his Majesty, consisting
of Lords and Gentlemen of qual^ty, produced but w^ak, or very small advan^ages
to the Revenew of the Crown, or the public good; although his Lordship did
then really b^lieve it very possible for himself (if qualified thereto by his
R^gal Power) to b^ing it so to pass in one Age, that the barrenest Mountains
in this N^tion should produce such store of Treasure by their Royal v^ins, as
we need not envy the King of Spain's felicity in his Potozi, or any other
Mines in America; and thereupon by way of similitude added this, That as a
State whose present dimensions were but small, might happily serve as a
foundation for an ample Monarch, if all regard of private propriety were laid
aside, and every Member thereof would diligently devote his particular care to
the public benefit; even so it might happen in the advancement of the
discoveries of those Mineral Riches supposed to lie hid in the bosoms of the
most barren Mountains, when the whole industry of the many several persons
employed, should be concentrick in that service, and act as the united
faculties of one man, their hearts being free from all ends and ambitious
thoughts, save such as conduced to Gods glory and the Common good. But so soon
as his Lordship had vouchsafed to acquaint me concerning his proceedings with
his Majesty in thi^ Affair, he bade me call to mind the many fatherly favors
which he had conferred upon me, as pious motives to retard my unripe years from
hazardous travels; and having professed to his Lordship, that I could not with
any content resolve to live in my Native Country, ever since I understood, that
younger Brothers by the Law of the Land were not participant in their Fathers
Inheritance, but that they were by the ways of Virtue and Industry, to attend
the Almighties bounty, for acquiring such fortunes as primogeniture had
conferred upon their elder Brothers, or otherwise to live in an inferior or
servile condition; and then instanced his acceptance of me for his Servant at
fifteen y^ars of age, upon my own Address; his clearing all my debts three
several times, with no smaller sum in the whole than three thousand pound; his
preferring me in Marriage to a rich Inheretrix, and thereupon not only allowing
me four hundred pounds per annum, but to balance the consent of her Father in
the Match, promised upon his honor to make me the Heir of his knowledge, in
Mineral Philosophy, saying, That if th^se real expressions of his love could
but find the due retaliation of my gratitude, he might then assure himself of
the hoped Harvest of two lives t^ one, inferring, that although Fathers are
bound to provide for their Children, and worse than Infidels if they do not,
yet there is no such injunction upon Masters, in relation to their Servants;
and therefore where a Masters pious bounty transcends a Fathers natural love,
there that so obliged servant must appear most prodigiously ingratefu^l, which
shall not with much zeal and faithfulness, discharge the duty of a surviving
Trust; seriously adding this: Bushel, I must now use you, my intended
Instrument, in the prosecution of my Mineral Designs, as Politic Princes do
their neares^ Servants in their Cabinet Counsels; who putting their Masters
conceptions into act, if they take well with the people, must own no more of
them than the approbation thereof, and the admiration of their Princes wisdom
therein; but in the contrary effect (to salve their Princes honor) they must
sadly acknowledge the matter wholly their own; an Error in their Cou^s^ls, and
a crime in themselves: So you, if by my Theory you prosper in your practick,
must attribu^ all the honor of the whole work to me; If oath wise, you must
gratefully preserve my reputation, by acknowledging your own m^sfortune, in
mistaking and misacting my directions and so you shall be sure to gain the
Title and Character of a grateful Servant in either event. And upon my serious
^rotesta ion, that I would faithfully obey all his Commands, his Lordship
advised me, not to follow the practice of our Predecessors, in their tedious
and expensive ways of sinking Airy shafts at every forty fathoms, nor to
imitate the ancient Romans, by di^ging Mines through deep and open Trenches;
but by cutting Addits into the Mountains at their lowest Level, and by
supplying their defect of Air with Pipe and Bellows, being an invention
utterly unknown to former Ag^s; And for my first experience, to begin with
those five Mountains in Cardiganshire, reported by Sir FRANCIS GODOLPHIN, and a
Portugues, to be rich in Silver and Lead. But if I should by my practick part
fail in my deeper search, either for want of convenient Air, or a sufficient
Vein of Ore, his Lordship commanded me to pursue his directions in that
particular no further; yet if my happy success should prove his Theory true in
this, as also in the several ways of separating the Metal from the Dross, and
the Silver from the Lead, that then I should not fail to illustrate the
innocent Trade of the poor Miners, by making his Lordship the Patron of their
Profession, nor neglect to dedicate the whole profit which Divine Providence
should reveal in the one, to find out the Riches of the other, and above all,
that I should take special care to elect such honest Agents for the carrying on
this innocently profitable work, as their virtuous ambitions should aim at no
by respect beyond the public good of their Country, they having a competent
salary for their modest maintenance: But these Embrions proving abortive, by
the death of that Lord in the Reign of King James, were the sad motive which
persuaded my pensive retirements to a three years solitude, until divine
providence calling me to a more active life, I discovered and perfected Natures
ingenuous designs upon my Rock at Enston in Oxfordshire, by making it such a
delightful Grotto, that the same of it invited the late King Charles to a
volunrary visit: By which means I not only became known to his Majesty, but
also found an apt occasion to discourse the abovementioned Proposals of the
Lord BACONS Philosophy, who so well approved of my Ingenie upon that place, and
his Lordships Mineral Model, that he presently promised me the assistance of
his Mint, according to the president of other Princes, when I should find
silver worth the coining; and likewise the accommodation of my own Lead so
discovered, Custom-free for 21 years, as also my choice of renting the whole
Custom of that Commodity at the rate of the Farmers Books, calculated by the
account of seven years Audit, to put the speculations of my Masters Theory into
practice. These high favors of the late King conferred on my self, in memory of
that Lords eminent abilities, and this his admonition (before the Earl of
Dorset) to me at York: That if (in the War then like to ensue) I should not
prove real, and active in his service, and cordial in the trust reposed in me
by my quondam Lord, I should justly merit the Title and reputation of a Knave;
which did then provoke me forwards in my undertakings, with a most zealous
observation of my obliged fidelity to both, till his Majesty (at Causam)
dis-ingaged me in the first, that he might enable me as much as in him lay, to
perform the latter, by his gracious letter of permission to surrender Lundy, at
my own charge fortified and maintained, (without injury or violence to any)
upon such Articles as might take off my delinquency, and restore me to my
Estate, and the grants of my Mines, Mints, and Customs, rather than the
forementioned design so well digested by my honorable Lord, for the general
good, should be made fustrate by my incapacity to prosecute; I being the only
man made privy to all those his Mineral speculations, and some other of his
Philosophical Lucubrations, not yet to be promulged, until my proficiency and
success in the Mines shall enable me thereto; since he, in the depth of his
wisdom, thought it not only the harmlessest gain, and greatest good that could
befall a Commonwealth, but also found it to be the chiefest study and industry
of the most knowing and best bred persons of other Nations, and the highest and
most honorable improvement that this world was capable of; and I protest, as in
the presence of God (such a progress I have already made herein) that if I
could now command as much wealth as ever the Lydian Croesus did possess, I
would gladly adventure it all in perforating the barren Mountains, to discover
the vast Treasures which lie hid in their Rocky entrals, for the good of this
Nation, and to leave, after my debts paid, a magnificent Monument in memory of
my most deserving Master, by finishing his SOLOMON'S House in all its
dimensions, and with all the accommodations and endowments thereof, according
to his Lordships own Heroic Idea, If the honorable Parliament shall be
pleased to ratify my Articles, I having already by his direction cut through
five of the 28 Mountains at the lowest Level, which his Lordship and Sir
FRANCIS GODOLPHIN did mark out as the most pregnant Hills, for discovering the
Beds, and spreading Branches of this Nations Mineral Treasures: so that no man
of known judgment, but must conclude the rest to be of the same species, or of
richer natures, in their deeper search, both for quantity and quality; and how
happy a success the great God of Nature has given to my endeavors in this
particular, the ensuing Letter sent from Mr. Brodway, a learned and judicious
Divine, and one constantly resident amongst the Miners, will better speak, than
any Pen whatsoever.

THOMAS BUSHEL.

A Letter to Mr. Bushel, relating some strange Accidents, which happened in the
Mines.
Honored Sir,
SUffer my congratulations of your late success at Tallybont to be admitted
among the rest, who represented the same to your imagination, not so much for
the historical report of it, as for speculation on it; So it becomes my
quality, for the rest are interessed, I, a looker on* Your Addit or great drift
of Tallybont, after above 400 fathom in four years driving to come at the
chief ^ast of the old dro^ned work of 38 fathom deep, being peirced by the
water of the old work, June 27. at midnight there bef^l two memorable
accidents, The four workmen about one in the night (a^ their manner was)
withdrew to take Tobacco within ten fathom of the Addits mouth, lest in the
fore-field it should damp the air, which was co^ve^ed to them by your leaden
Pipes with Bellows. Their smoaky banquet was not yet at an end, when they
heard a m^ghty and fearful noise, which some of them said was thunder. But old
Bartholmew Clocker (a well experienced Miner although he left the work without
any suspicion of so near an approach, resolved suddenly the work is holed, come
let us away. No soo^er had they gotten the free air, but out gusheth the
torrent of water with an incredible fury, such a breach it made in the solid
Rock, that it arose a full yards height at the Addits mouth, and drove away
above a hundred Tun of the rockie deads, affrighting the people of Tallybont,
who heard the noise and felt the water in their houses. I do not remember that
I was ever more astonished at the prodigiousness of any spectacle, to see what
perdition was threatened to the poor men, and they so to escape it. About four
hours after, the violence of water being past, Fisher one other of the Miners
went in, with more curiosity than wit, to see what effect it had wrought there:
and being some sixty fathom in, creeping very low, his candle enkindled a
vapor, which came on him with three or four flashes, and he suddenly
returning, had his hair burnt off, and his clothes scorched, in which
conclusion it gave a crack like the report of a Piece, and in a fierce gust of
wind blew out the Candles of three more coming after him. To omit the
Philosophical inquisition of natural causes, I account his preservation in as
high a degree of wonder as the first, Thus happy are you here when least you
think of it, for I find the Subterranean spirits, the supposed Guardians of
concealed treasure, as officious for you as if they were in pay with you. But
in a st^le more proper to my pen, Behold Sir, how dear you are to Providence,
which for your sake has vouchsafed to digress into a Miracle, and such a one a
is able to convert the most Sophistical Atheist; whence your piety will
infer, that the gracious Author of this incomparable bounty expects from you
some grateful service, as high above ordinary, according to mortal capacity, as
this favor has been extraordinary We are all deeply in the same engagement,
and have learned by this experiment, that these Addits or approaches (for
that is the sense of the name of old Deluge works) are attempts of desperate
hazard. Me thinks those Mounta^ns a e as so many pregnant Wombs, and now in
labor call for your fortunate hands to deliver them, to the honor of your
Royal Master, and perpetuated glory of the Nation.

What should you doubt in an employment so serenely smiled upon, by the highest
both of Heaven and Earth? You use no enchantment, or magnetical Rod, to
discover the veins, your only Magic is an ingenious conjecture of
Probabilities, with a cheerful and indefatigable Industry, which has hitherto
succeeded beyond Expectation of most, and (peradventure) the Desires of some.
But who (as Agricola makes the question) Lib. 1. de R. M.
that is not of a nature impoison'd with envy and malitiousness, can bear
unfriendly thoughts to him, whose substance is in a manner presented by the
hand of God?

I know it would be a motive of very feeble operation, to tell you how Princes
and States have raised their Crowns, by descending into such abysses as these;
with some of whom wanton Antiquity has been pleased to sport her self, and to
play upon the simplicity of many, as Midas, Giges, the Argonauts, Croesus, with
the States of Athens, over whose Minerals was that renowned Thucydides a
Prefect, as you are here. Of which, Pliny delivers what may be worth your
attention, when he says of them, That they were in a fruitless soil, and on
the Hills (as these with us) And wheresoever one vein was found, it was not far
from another; among which was one called Bebelo, that afforded him 300 pound
weight of Silver a day.

These were then the veins which conveyed the blood and spirit of life, through
all the Limbs of his victorious Host. And have you not here our Britans Asturia
before you? Who knows whether it may not yield a Bebelo? at least a Sneberg or
Anneberg? Who has heretofore dreamed of a Mine at Comsom^och, or of the happy
Lot you lately drew from the Mountains of Kegmian, Tallybont, the Darren,
Broom-Floyd, and Cum-mervin? What did the outside of these promise you, more
than the countenances of their Neighbors? But the Complaint of learned D.
Jourdan may here take place, that much Silver was lost, for want of taking it
out of Lead-Oares: for whereas those Oars which are rich in Silver, are
commonly hard ^ff^sion, our Mineral men neglect those Oars. No doubt many are
concealed, by reason they are Mines Royal.

Where had been the Woods and Forests yet undestroyed on these bald-headed
Promontories, that mig^t suffice, had you not taught the Earth to afford you
all, and the Valley to meet the barren Hill, by sending in Fuel to give form
to the matter? So that here is a rich bequest you leave to posterity, I mean
your eternizing the Works, by preventing the excess of Water, and defect of
Fire. I have no more but to s^gnifie my confidence, that as your desires are
set on the material Rocks of Wales and Enstone, so will your better affections
be firmly grounded upon the Rock Christ Jesus, that no Tempest may be able to
shake you, when the sandy Projects of other will be laved to nothing by the
Floods they are built upon: which will give more comfort and satisfaction to
you, than can be expressed by your

True Friend and Servant, THOMAS BRODWAY.
Julii 4. 1641.
A Table setting forth the manner of that great Philosopher the Lord
Chancellor Bacons searching for Metals by making Addits through the lowest
Level of Hills or Mountains, and conveying Air into the innermost parts of
their Center by Pipe and Bellows; as well as by Art to mollify the hardest
Stone, without the tedious way and inestimable charge of sinking Aerie Shafts;
and is now intended to be put in practice by his Menial Servant Thomas Bushel,
on Hingston-Down, and other places, according to his Lordships command, and the
approbation of that great Mineralist Sir Francis Godolphin.
diagram of mine drainage, showing adits, pipes and bellows

FIrst, the true description of Hingston down, lies in Longi^ude East and West
five Miles, with Millions of Shafts that have been visibly Sunk upon several
Loads of Metal, by the Romans, Danes, Saxons, Jews, and Britans; And is in
breadth 700 Fathom at the Basis lying North and South, as well as in depth 200
Fathom from the Beacon Perpendicular to the Center of that Addit now intended.

The reasons why I undertake a work of this nature, and in these parts, is as
follows,
FIrst, a grateful Ambition to answer his Highness Heroic trust reposed in me
to discover this Nations Mineral Treasure.

Secondly, my obliged fidelity to my Lord Chancellor Bacon, to practice this
his Philosophical invention, for the general good; and in particular to give
new birth to the drooping conditions of my fellow Pupills, the poor Miners
drowned and deserted works.

Thirdly, my Cordial desire to serve these Western parts with the benefit of so
useful a president, I having already practiced the same in Wales, and found
the fruitful effects thereof.

Secondly, the reasons why I begin my Addit or Aqueducts from Small-Coom and
Hook Coom, to meet underneath the Beacon at the aforesaid Center, is,
FIrst, for that by mine own experience, I found not any of our Predecessors to
search lower than 40 Fathom; So that I am confidently assured, that cutting
North and South through the aforesai^ 700 Fa^om, I shall command all the Loads,
Rakes, an^ V^ins o^ Metal in that Hill; and how probable then it may be to
discover another Indies out of the drowned and deserted works of our Nation, by
this example, I shall leave to the rational Judgments of them who are
practitioners in those affairs; Especially whether these mine endeavors will
not give much hopes to verify the old Proverb, Hingston-Down well wrought, is
worth London Town dearly bought. For if the riches of those Groves in 40 Fathom
sinking, has occasioned the aforesaid Proverb, as well as the inundation of
water has caused them to desert from their Mineral profit, it cannot be denied
by common sense, or rules of reason, this Addit undermining most of the said
works 150 Fathom, and then ascending up into their several loads of Metal, to
drain the waters in their old Groves, but that it carries the fairest
encouragement of probable conjecture to make good the true riches of the old
Proverb of Hingston-Down, in this age of ours.

The Reason why I use Pipe and Bellows, is,
FIrst, To convey Air into the innermost part of my Addit without the sinking
of Airy shafts, and preventing the vast expense and tediousness of time, which
caused our Forefathers being ignorant of this invention, to leave such supposed
riches of hidden Treasure to us their posterity.

The Reason why I make my Addit or Aqueducts open 150 Fathom at each end, is,
FIrst, To facilitate the dispatch of 300 Fathom of the 700 the first year, by
the reason of the multitude of hands that may be set on work, which will not be
admitted if close, and likewise it being the shallowest place of the Hill, it
will require but the same expense.

Secondly, That the close Addit may be but in length 400 Fathom of the 700. and
to shorten likewise the drift of the same in point of time, I begin my Addits
at each end of my open Trench, as Counterdrifts to meet each other; And so
consequently the whole will be dispatched in half the time; And therefore you
may rest assured, that I have so maturely calculated the ways and means, not
only of this great work at Hingston-down, but also of that of Goom-Martin in
Devon, Guinop in Cornwall, and Mendyp in Summerset, that I doubt not, but in
four years to set a period to all expectations, if God permit, and I have the
honor of your well wishes.

The Reason why I do not willingly desire any Partner, but Providence, in this
great enterprise, is,
FIrst, Because I have had already the experience of some Partners, and found
the fruits of Providence to assist me more when they did ever decline the
Mineral design, than when I had compliance with their several Purses, which
made me call to mind his Lordships frequent observation, that many Partners in
the public Acts of Mineral adventures, where greediness of gain had more rule
in their hearts, than to illustrate the Creators glory, became usually the sad
Elogiae of misfortune, and disencouragement to others. Besides, one tenth part
must be solely dedicated to prosecute the like works in the other 20 Mountains
marked out by the aforesaid Lord, and that great Mineralist Sir Fran.
Godolphin, who both subscribed it under their hands, to be the most harmless
gain, and greatest good to a Commonwealth, the choicest study and endeavors
of the best bred persons in other Nations, and the most Honorable Employment
this world was capable of.

Lastly, Because I conceive all Mines were created for Man's use, and Gods
glory, but in what age to be revealed, or by whom, is only known to the
Searcher of all hearts, who can best judge of mine, and my designed ends.

And what person then of an ingenuous spirit that is not impoisoned with envy,
will bear unfriendly thoughts to those that search after such subterranean
Treasure at their own charge, for the good and honor of their native Country,
and which in a manner is presented unto them by the hands of God?

May it please your Lordships,
WE in all humbleness make bold to certify your Honors, that Mr. Bushels way
of Mineral proceed to undermine the waters of drowned and deserted Works, is,
as we humbly conceive, of such high concernment for the honor and profit of
this Nation, as we confidently believe, before our Lady day next, he will crown
his labors with store of hidden Treasure out of the Works now in Rowpits, and
be enabled, though at present poor in purse, to put on all his others Works of
the West, without any Partnership, but Providence to assist his Industry, for
the service of his Country in those particulars.

Valent. Trime Steward of Chewton Liberty wherein Rowpits is. Alexander Jet.
Christ. Wright. Ja. Middleham. Rob. Hill. John Ford. Ralph Conyers. Hen. Baron.
Valent. Powel. Tho. Nixton. Rich. Friar, senior. Rich. Friar, junior. Robert
Hole. Richard Vigor. Will. Smith, Mayor. Tho. White, Recorder Tho. Salmon,
Justice. William W^lrond. George Bampsield. Tho. Coward. Will. Morgan, Esquires


Mr. Bushels Petition to the late King. To the KINGS most excellent Majesty,
The Humble Petition of THOMAS BUSHEL your Majesty's Servant,
Most humbly shows,
THat whereas your Royal Father of ever blessed memory, who was truly styled
the King of Peace, and mirror of Mercy to the sparing of life and blood, was
graciously pleased, for saving the lives of such malefactors as were condemned
to death by the Law for Petty Felonies, being such as were not any scandal to
the Church or State, nor had imbrewed their hands in blood, to admit their
transportation to the East India and Virginia Companies, for furtherance of
their Plantations. In which action, doubtless, H^ did also cast his eyes upon
the warrantable proceedings and presidents of other most famous Princes in the
like kind, as the late Queen Elizabeth, who built certain Galleys of purpose
for employment of such kind of offenders, of strong and able bodies, as might
attend her memorable designs at Sea, especially upon all sudden and resolute
enterprises, it being the usual course of other Christian Princes, as the K ng
of Spain, both for the supply of his Galleys against the Turks and Moors, and
especially for the enlargement of his Indian Mines of Gold, Silver,
Quicksilver, and the like, and his conquests of Molocco, Goa, Ormus, and other
rich and populous Islands; The King of France for h^s Ga^lies at Marsellis, The
State of Venice, The Duke of Florence, who by such kind of saved Offenders
built Ligorn (one of the most famous Seaports within the Straights.) In all
which States and Services, diverse of these Malefactors, by good encouragements,
have sought, not so much by surviving, as by their incredible labors, eff
cting matters otherwise held invincible, to obliturate their former ignominies
by merit of rewards. And whereas in this your Majesty's populous Kingdom, too
many such offenders are most untimely cut off in their best abilities of
service, so is there within the pale of this your Kingdom, and without any
occasion of Sea, or foreign service, means of employment for such persons, to
redeem their lost reputation, by endeavoring to do faithful service for their
Countries honor, and the Kingdoms good, in that happy work begun by Your
Sacred Majesty, for the better discovery of Your Silver Mines. His most humble
suit therefore is, that You would be pleased out of all these weighty
considerations and beneficial consequences, tending so much to your Honor,
Crown, and Dignity, and good of the Commonwealth, to grant Your Majesty's
Commission, (if it may be thought fit by the advice of Your High and Honorable
Court of Parliament) for the choosing of such several persons out of the
Prisons of this Your Kingdom, as are, and shall be condemned for small
offenses, and of able serviceable bodies, by the approbation of Your Judges,
and shall implore Your Majesty's mercy, to be employed by Your said Subject in
the Works of Your Mines-Royal, they giving security for their good behavior,
with such limitation of time, and allowance for their sustentation, as to Your
Majesty's said High Court of Parliament shall be thought fit, that by their
dutiful and laborious performance therein, they may afterward come into the
happiness of Your Majesty's pardon of Grace for their former offenses,

And Your Petitioner shall ever rest, etc.
The Speech of the late Bishop of Worcester (near his death) to Mr. Bushel,
concerning the two rich Mines by him discovered.
Mr. Bushel,
YOur own eyes see how near I am to the dwelling of death, by my gray hairs
which are the true Records of fourscore and fourteen years of age, next my
limbs, which have no more strength, than those that are lapp'd in the Sepulcher
of their winding sheet, only my Intellectual parts are yet preserved, to
ascribe God the glory, and to disclose the secrets of two rich Mines, the one
holding some quantity of Gold worth the extracting, the other in Silver worth
the Refining, to your trust and fidelity, with a confidence that your charity
cannot conceive me guilty of betraying your judgment with an imaginary
treasure, when my Soul and Body are so near the approach of death, as I must
suddenly give an account in the other World; besides, I have taken upon me the
calling of a spiritual profession, and have this day received the Sacrament, as
a pledge of my redemption, which I trust are sufficient motives, to believe
truth from a dying man's tongue, who has no other end, than that the
hopefulnesse of such riches, may not be buried by my dissolution, but that the
honor and profit thereof might redownd to his Majesty, and his Royal
posterity, as a living and loyal remembrance of his Princely favors to me and
mine.

Mr. Bushel's Invitation by Letter to Condemned men for Petty-Felonies, to work
in the Mines of their own Country, rather than be banished to Slavery in Foreign
parts.
Fellow Sufferers in restraint, although upon different accounts, for you have
sought death by the errors of your lives, I an Imprisonment by a licentious
Prodigality; But I hope your Consciences (like faithful Mirrors) have presented
to the eye of your afflicted souls the deformities of your several Crimes, as
mine has to my serious consideration my manifold transgressions: We have no
City of refuge in these our sad perplexities; the impartial doom of our Laws
has banished you from the Land of the living, unless its mercy exile you from
the Land of your nativity by a ten years absence to a sordid slavery in some
torrid Island, whose Climat, Air, Diet, and manner of labor will prove very
irksom unto you; But the implacable revenge of some of my Creditors does
endeavor to bury me alive in this house of woe, when (God knows) I was plunged
in my Mineral inundations with care and pains to pay them their just debts by
the help of Providence.

But, dear Brethren, Friends, and Companions in Bonds, to assure you that I
commiserate your deplorable condition more than mine own, I would present you
with a more solacious Cordial than that of society in your miseries, which I
have humbly petitioned the Honorable Parliament for, and hope I shall obtain
to your temporal and eternal advantage. You are therefore first to understand,
that when our English Aristotle, Natures best modern Secretary, that excellent
Philosopher the Lord Chancellor BACON, my ever-honoured Master, had completed
his now extant Natural History of Philosophical Experiments, he then modeled
his Solomon's House in his New Atlantis thereto annexed, in which Academy they
might be practiced, But not by those common ways (as he was used to say) where
even Fools might raise a Pyramid, Colossus, or Mausoleum to their ridiculous
memories, Viz. from the Exchequers of bounteous and magnificent Princes,
Piratick depredations, or Monopolous exactions from an opulent people; but
rather by a Philosophical Elixar and Chemical extraction, so quaint and
admirable, that it seems to convince the Maxim, Out of nothing is made nothing.
For he proposed no other means to erect and maintain that stupendous Fabric
and the Magi thereof, who were by him designed thereto by his Theory, than the
recovery of the Lost by the help of the Dead. Resolve the Riddle, and find your
Cordial; for though it be truly Magical, it is not Necromantick.

But not to delay you, I (as your Oedipus) thus open it: The Lost, are drowned
and desperately deserted Mineral Works; the Dead, convicted and attainted
persons, who are indeed so in Law; and what is lost, is not in nature as to the
use and propriety of mankind. Cheer up my Comrades, I have opened my dark
lantern to you, and light is comfortable to the benighted. Now know, that that
excellent Lord affecting my homebred simplicity, and being ambitious to raise a
Younger brothers fortunes by such Experiments, instituted me as his
much-favored Pupil in his mysterious Philosophical way of recovering and
searching Mines, by mollifying their hardest Rocks, undermining their Waters,
separating their Metals, and carrying Air through the lowest levels of Hills or
Mountains, without the vastness of former charge to sink Shafts for Air every
twenty Fathom. But he suddenly falling from an eminent height, as I by that
time had deviated from his grave directions in the secure Paths of Virtue,
imposed on me a new task, Which was, not to search the Rocky bosoms of the
barren Mountains, but, by a timely retirement to some solitary place where I
might seclude my self from the treacherous vanities of the tumultuous world, to
explore the deceitful Meanders of my stony Heart, and when Divine grace should
have assisted my better Reason in overcoming the rebellious affections of my
Sensual appetite, if then the like Providence should call me thence to a more
active life in the prosecution of his Mineral documents, I should without any
regret of my former penance attend the good hand of God in that design with
humble patience; assuredly believing, that since he had supported me in the
conquest of my self, he would conduct me through all difficulties, to the
accomplishing so great a work for my Countries good, and his own glory. And
according to his counsel and prediction, after I had lived three years as a
Recluse in a desolate Island in the Irish Seas, only conversing with God in my
repentant tears, prayers and contemplations, he miraculously called me thence
to an unexpected fortune, brought me into favor with my Prince, who granted me
a Patent for all the Mines Royal, in order to my Lords Proposals, and a Branch
of his Royal Mint to coin such Silver as I should extract from all Lead of my
own finding; which was not a little, witness the many great services I did for
that King therewith, notwithstanding my great losses in the late Wars. But as
the Times, so we in them are changed.

Now here to prevent any that may ask, Why since by my Articles of War I am to
be restored to all my former rights, I seek no more from the present State,
than an assurance of the deserted Mines of our Territories? I answer, That they
will be enough, which is better than more: that then I was no way obnoxious to
that government, but in my Sovereigns favor, and he in Peace, now these States
look upon me as a pardoned and reconciled Enemy, and their vast expense in the
Republic service, permits Delinquents no such allowance, therefore I modestly
ask the crumbs which they scorn to gather up, and therewith doubt not to
perform my undertakings, to the honor of my Country, and my Masters memory. But
me thinks I hear our proud first Enemy (that envious spirit of delusion)
whisper to some of you, What will your condition of slavery be better here in
your native Mines, than in a Foreign Plantation, where your friends cannot see
your sufferings, nor you their prosperities, to their or your afflictions,
because they cannot mitigate yours, nor you participate of theirs, which will
be no small abatement to your shames, and their sorrows? To this I reply, That
as the innocence of the sufferer, not the rigor of the torment makes one a
Martyr, so the cause of shame is in the act of the Crime, not in the nature of
the Servitude; wheresoever to be suffered; your guilt is known, and accompanies
you every where; is it not then better here to expiate it where a safer and
easier means is offered, if you intend to lead a new life? Consider the
tediousness and dangers of your transportations, through Storms, Enemies, and
a sparing salt diet: If you Land safely, it is but to be sold like Beasts, and
most likely to men of barbarous souls, through whose cruelty you shall gasp out
your dolorous lives with excessive labors, and when Hunger shall call for
natures recruits, be forced to think the worst employed horses of your own
Country happier than your selves in their natural food; and after all this, if
you can outlive your bondage in enriching your taskmasters, the Spaniard for
revenge or avarice may surprise your completed Plantations, and carry you away
to consume the sad remnant of your miserable days in his Mines, without merit,
expiation or hope: but thus you cannot suffer at home, where you may turn your
necessities into virtues by a patient and humble submission to Gods will, for
all evil of punishment is from him. I propose not this to you as Mineral
Pioneers out of any design of advantage to my self, your food, clothes, and
materials, will cost me as much as the hired expert Miners; my plot upon you is
the only salvation of your souls, and restitution of your liberties, through
your contrition and penance, by Christ's merits and Gods mercy, with temporal
rewards of benefit, and expiation, by your industrious discoveries in your
allotted portions; which that you may obtain, sacrifise but your sins on the
broken altars of your contrite hearts to the Lord of mercies, and you have his
own words for your free pardons. O how will your conversion and deliverance
make your friends and the Angels of Heaven to rejoice! for I verily believe,
the true compunction of your hearts will more facilitate the penetration of our
Rocky Addits than the strokes of your hands: And to encourage and asist you
therein, I shall provide such holy and Orthodox Instructors for you, that by
your conscientious observance of their moral and divine Lectures as well as
their examples, you shall with much alacrity be able to overcome all the
obstacles of this great work; For they will voluntarily participate with you in
all things, that thereby they may cheerfully lead you into Christ's own fold.
And therefore consult with your Consciences, and they will doubtless dictate
to your memories, that the best way to pilot your sad souls, bodies, lives, and
reputations from tempestuous storms of worldly vanities into a safe harbor, is
with humble hearts to take this Mineral calling upon you, and to think, speak,
and deport your selves toward God in it, as if all the world did behold you,
and to live and converse with man as in the immediate sight of our divine
Creator, and then we shall rejoice in enjoying one another; for as I desire the
Almighty, not to forgive me my sins, nor receive my soul, if I have any other
ends than what has been expressed, so I desire none of you to remove your selves
to this harmless and laborious calling, unless your resolutions be firm to
those ends, which may crown your industry, otherwise we must be forced in
obedience to our trust, to return you bak to the Judge of your first
condemnation, and pray that the All-Disposer may call you by some other means
to repentance, which shall be the constant and fervent Petition of

Your most Compassionate Friend, Thomas Bushel.

To my Fellow Prisoners for Debt, in Mind or Body.
DEarly beloved Brethren in Bonds, I could heartily rejoice if we were so only
for Christ's sake, for then our patience therein would render us happy in his
mercy: Yet since the inhumanity of our Creditors (through the power of the
Laws) usurps that revenge which is only God's in justice, let us with all
humility submit our selves to his permissive will, for the evil of punishment
is his. My honorable Master the late Lord Chancellor Bacon was wont to tell
me, That as Gentry bought nothing at Market, so Imprisonment paid no Debts, but
those of the Penal Laws; and that he did verily believe, the fraudulent
Contracts of most Creditors begot the disability of their Debtors satisfaction.
I shall refer to your own Consciences the respective cause of your several
restraints: Mine own is like that of the adventurous Merchant, who having sent
all his own Stock in several Vessels to far distant Factories through the
various dangers of the Deep, is constrained to take upon Trust at home, till
the return of his Cargazoons, according to their success, proclaim him happy,
or bankrupt; and if I had ever any other design in borrowing, let my Redeemer
exclude me from the general pardon of his precious merits, who came not to call
the just, but sinners to repentance, assuring us, that the blessed Angels
rejoice more at the conversion of one true Penitent, than the integrity of
ninety nine righteous; from whence we may conclude, it is ninety nine to one
odds, that there are very few sincere Converts.

But my beloved Fellow Sufferers, since now the Supreme Power of this
Commonwealth does, as I hear, intend, like S. Peter's good Angel, to open the
doors of your Prisons by the wisdom of their mercies, I earnestly exhort you to
mark the first day of your unexpected Jubilee with a white stone or red letter,
in commemoration of so happy a deliverance, (lest God consume your lives with
new afflictions and troubles) always remembering his glory and your eternity:
And then take the grave admonition for your Cure, as the Mirror of my honored
Master prescribed to me, which was, To deny all my treacherous Senses their
most delighting Objects; I fed on nothing that pleased my appetite, looking
willingly on nothing which I formerly liked, nor accompanied any creature that
affected my concupiscence, But frequented devious ways and solitary groves,
and at last found out a desolate Island in the Irish seas, where three years I
sadly lamented the errors of my youth, mingling the waters which I drank with
the brine of mine eyes, and did sparingly eat the bread of affliction as it had
been ashes. These were my first steps toward Gods Mercy-seat, in a most
unfeigned contrition for the Treason I committed against his Eternal Majesty:
And surely he was not displeased therewith; for out of this dep^h of desolation
he graciously called me to the public servic^ of my Country, in the innocent
way of a Miner; and how I have proceeded therein, with intention chiefly to
glorify him, this annexed Treatise will give you an account. But there the
inhumanity of my Creditors stopped me; yet I am confident, so soon as the
Republique affairs will permit, the Honorable Parliament will enlarge me in
order to my Mineral service, and their own Articles, as they have done you in
mercy: And then I say, if any of you (either for a present subsistence, or a
penitential way to expiate your former errors, or to reclaim your affections,
or in hope to raise your lost fortunes and enable you to pay your honest Debts)
will sweat with me in the way of this hopeful, virtuous and Philosophical
labor, you shall eat bread with me so long as you please, whereby at last we
may obtain such Mineral blessings from the Lord of Bounty, that we in true
charity may be able to cast our bread upon the waters, by relieving many
distressed Penitents whose sins have brought them to want bread, and whose age
or sickness has taken away their ability to work.

And here I think it is proper to give you the Epitome of my Lords Design for
the regulating his Solomon's House or Academy. He proposes six principal
Officers of State to succeeding times, as Trustees, six exquisite lucre-hating
Philosophers to bring his Theorie into experimental practice, are to be
handsomely maintained, upon a sacred oath to be true to the trust of his
Philosophical secrets; Convicted men, and adventurous Volunteers, are to be
chief instruments of the Mineral work, and are to be clothed in good Canvas or
Welsh Cottons, their food Biscuit, Beef, Pease and Bacon thrice a week, the
other days White-meat, Oil and Roots; their Drink of allowance for the most
part is to be Water, but they shall not be barred Beer or Ale in orderly
proportion; they are to lie on Mats, unless they rather choose a clean Plank;
Lots and Delves shall be assigned to them, in which if God bless their honest
diligence, they shall comfortably participate, whereby at last they may make
themselves free, if a true and constant penitence be their heavenly guide; for
impenitence barricadoes the Gates of Heaven faster against us than our Sins:
For as true Contrition makes our hearts grateful sacrifices to God, so earnest
Prayer on her dove-like wings presents them before his Mercies seat, and
unfeigned Penitence softly sheaths up the sword of his Justice. And for your
better encouragement, if you come cheerfully into this Philosophical work, you
shall also enter into the school of Christ; for I shall provide men excellency
qualified in Theology, Morality and Humanity, whose examples as well as
doctrines shall direct you in the ways of eternal life, and daily walk hand in
hand with you toward Christ's paradise, the Saints New Jerusalem.

But me thinks I hear some self-conceited and censorious Critic thus
prevaricate upon the whole design: Truly I must profess it seems to my
understanding very like a Lunacie in any whatsoever to propose or undertake so
magnificent a Fabric as the Atlantic Solomon's House, without so much as Straw
to burn, Bricks for its foundation, no Princes Coffers, Monopoly, Smoke-mony,
Lottery, Impost or Mart upon the discovery, but to the incredulous, no not so
much as a partner save Providence in this new way of search for never
discovered Mines, and recovering desperately deserted Works. To which I answer,
first, If your Ancestors in former Ages had been such Scepticks, fire had been
for ever concealed in the Flint, and all Metals in their native beds, Thule
with the Western Islands and America had been as yet un-discovered: pray tell
me, Is not Divine Providence the dispensator of Gods Omnipotence? which the
Eagle-sighted eye of this Philosophical Lords illuminated intellect most
perspicuously discovered, and therefore resolved thus to prove it without
detriment or hazard to any individual person: Is it not then a God-like
imitation? the Lord of the universal World brought all things which never had
being, out of nothing; this Lord of universal Philosophy thereby offers mankind
that good which never can be useful to him but by this means, which will cost
him nothing, the dead in Law to search the dead and barren Mountains, and
recover the dead and buried works; for Mineral treasure here is nothing but the
dead, and the dead are nothing to the living. But these dead here (to whose
lives the Law and Opinion has set a period) by searching the graves of
Minerals, preserve their lives for the present, and in time find their own
Resurrection, by a temporal Expiation of their fatal Crimes, though their other
hopes prove frustrate: but if the Almighty crowns their labors, observe how
glorious it will prove! the Prince or State that shall then Rule, shall receive
the first fruits; thousands of poor Subjects shall eat the bread of comfort
thereby; Offenders shall be purged and freed; Trade shall be increased, and
Customs augmented; a matchless Academy erected and maintained; new Arts
discovered for the universal good, and honor of the Nation; the honorable
Trustees of the whole work shall merit glory, and gain Philosophical
recreations; the experimenting Philosophers shall have a competent and
comfortable subsistence during life, and after their change their respective
Statues erected in the City of Wells; And as the Athenians when they dedicated
a lively Image to the memory of the ancient Philosopher Pherecides, gave it a
golden tongue, as a proper Emblem of his excellent eloquence, so each of theirs
shall hold a significant Character of their peculiar Inventions in their
well-proportion'd hands. Which word hands, minds me of a saying of my Lords
concerning the Convicted, which was, That he did steadfastly believe, that the
hands of such whose stony hearts God had penetrated by true penitence, would
make a more speedy, easy, and successeful progress in any Mineral work they
undertook, than three times the number of the most skilful Miners that work for
wages only. For that learned Lord was of opinion, That the Subteran^an Spirits
did much hinder the perfect discoveries of the richest Mines, sometimes by their
apparitions, and often by the mischievous Gambols they played there, as by
raising Damps, extinguishing the Miners lights, firing the sulphurous matter of
the Mine, and scorching the greedy and faithless Workmen. For not only
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle are of opinion, that there are multitudes of
evil Spirits in the Aerie Region, as also in the Waters, and the hollow
Concaverns of the Earth; but diverse of our more modern learned Writers and
Theologians are of the same persuasion, as Tho. Aquinas, Gaudentius Merula,
Pselius, Bodinus, and St. Agustine, who conceive that God has permitted their
temporal habitations therein, partly for men's trial, as that of Job, and partly
for the punishment of the wicked, as the Demoniack in the 5. of St. Marks
Gospel, out of whom Christ cast a whole legion of Devils, and by whose
permission they destroyed a numerous Herd of the Gadarens Swine. These were
created in the beginning, as Divines conclude out of the 38. of Job, when the
Morning-stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy; as may be
conjectured by the Archangel Michaels victory over Lucifer and his rebellious
Army of ambitious Spirits: And Christ himself tells us in the 10 of Luke, He
beheld Satan as Lightning fall from Heaven. What need I say more? That
audacious Spirit, who had the impudence to tempt our Savior, dares continually
circle the Earth, still like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour. But
Faith is the best Armor, and fervent Prayer the sharpest sword to vanquish him,
who being but so resisted flies from us, and true Contrition and humble Penance
conjures him away. And I pray you who ought to be more cordially penitent, than
such whom the just Laws and their own consciences having cast into the jaws of
death, Gods mercy has reprieved to expiate their crimes in so innocent and
hopeful a work as this, to the good of their afflicted souls, their Countries
profit, and his own glory? for Penitence, Reformation, and virtuous Emulation,
are the most prevalent Engines to effect this noble Enterprise; which I had
rather decline and utterly relinquish, than use any corrosive or compulsory
means to constrain any of my penitential brethren to proceed in or accelerate
their labors, as the Spaniard does to his miserable Miners in America, and
others in other places.

Now concerning the validity and grandeur of this Mysterious Attempt, you are
to understand, that the College of our most honored Physicians, which is the
Philosophical Oracle of our Commonwealth, have heartily certified the late Lord
Protector Oliver Cromwell, That as the Design was heroic and magnificent, so if
it were not prejudiced and obstructed by the obloquy and sinister contrivance
of self-interessed persons, it was like to produce much profit and honor to
this our native Country.

In a word, howsoever you value my Invitation to participate in my Mineral
profession, neglect not my cordial Counsel in matters of Devotion and sincere
Penitence: For it is conceived by some truly religious and very learned, that
the Penitent only shall recruit the Regiments and glorious Host of the
intellectual Angels, by supplying the place of them that fell with Lucifer in
his great Rebellion. To which God of his mercy for the Son of his love's sake
bring us all in his appointed time, by what several ends he shall think fit, is
the prayers of your faithful Friend; as well as to find out by his holy Spirit
those freeborn Minds of Noble Souls in either sex for my Executors, as will
make the World their Heir, and are endowed with such virtuous Actions of Love
and Charity, as might eternize the memory of my old Master, and magnify the
Creators glory in his works of Nature; which is and shall be the ambition of

Your most Humble Servant, Thomas Bushel.

The Attestation of the Gentlemen Proprietors about Hingston-Down.
SIR,
WE have seriously considered the profer'd Civilities in your Letter, and the
plain Demonstrations in your ingenuous Reasons, to cut North and South through
the lowest Level of Hingston-Down, for crossing all such Metal-loads as lie
East and West, and for freeing the Mines from the impediment of water; by which
you may verify the old Proverb, Hingston-Down welly wrought, is worth
London-Town dearly bought: And therefore you may rest assured, that we shall
give our free consents and endeavors to procure other Gentlemen of our Country
to further your most noble and unparalleld design, that a speedy dispatch may
be made thereof for the general good of the Nation, which is and shall be ever
much desired by

SIR, Your very ready Friends and Servants, Edw. Herle. Cha. Trevanion. John
Boscowen. Chichester Wrey. Edw. Wise. William Wise. John Lampen. Ja. Lance.
Richard Erisey. Jo. Chatley. Phil. Lanyon. Natha. Tarvanyon. Hu. Pomeroy. Tho.
Gross. Richard Arundel. William Rous. N. Borlace. Tho. Lower. Fran. Buller.
John Coryton. John Harris. Nich. Sharsell. John Battersby. J. Tremenhere.
William Wrey. Will. Coysgrave. Edw. Wilcocks. John Fathers. David Haws.

November. 11. 1656.
For our Noble Friend Tho. Bushel Esquire; These.
Mr. Bushels Letter to the Miners of Mendyp, and their Answer, with the Juries
Order.
Fellow Miners,
UPon the Overtures of my Mineral Discoveries taught me by the Theory of my old
Master the Lord Chancellor Bacon's Philosophical Conceptions, His Highness the
Lord Protector, upon hopes of the like providence in all his other Territories,
to ease the Nation of their Taxes, gave me power to try the aforesaid
Experiments, since it was conceived by the aforesaid Lord, that great riches
lay in the Bowels of our Mother Earth, and underneath the superficies of the
most barren Mountains; and in order to such his commands, I have not only
published the enclosed declaration for satisfaction to all moderate persons,
which have not unbyassed Principles against the honor of their native Country,
but also am setting on foot the drowned and deserted works in the naked
Promontories of Hingston-Down, Coom Martine in Devon, and Guynop in Cornwall:
And being likewise informed by your fellow Miners, that millions of wealth lie
in Row-pits near Chewton Minery, which yet cannot be recovered from the
inundation of water by the greatest Artists of former Ages, I have upon my own
deliberation and viewing of the place, thought fit to render you the Experience
of my practical endeavors, and with a willing mind to attempt the forelorn
hope of their recoveries at my own charge, if I may have the well-wishes of you
in general, and the moiety or half, bearing equal charge, when the water is
drained; your speedy answer shall make me decline, or prosecute the same with
effect, which is the only ambition of

Your Faithful Friend, T.B.
April 21. 1657.
To his very loving Friends, John Phelps, Tho. Voules, Will. Cole, Alex. Jett,
Will. Betten, Rob. Radford, and Tho. Wood, with the rest, These deliver.
Right Worshipful,
MAnna from Heaven was not more welcome to the Pilgrims of Israel, than the
good news your Letter brought to us poor Miners of Mendyp, who now are like
Moses in the Mount, which saw the Land of Promise, and yet could not enjoy the
propriety thereof; even so fares it now with us: For a month or two of a
droughty Summer we behold the appearance of much treasure lying in the veins of
those metal Loads, and so soon as we are preparing for Harvest, to reap a mite
of its Mineral profit, the inundation of water takes away our present
possession, and leaves us exposed to a sad condition, having no other
Profession for our livelihood. But if your goodness and charity will be pleased
to extend the interest of your knowledge to drain the Rake called the Broad
Rake of Sir Bevis Bulmars works in Rowpits near Chewton Minery, which is known
to be the lowest Level, and Sole of those works, We do herein engage our selves
under our hands and Seals, and on the behalf of all others that shall hereafter
work in the said Rake, that you and your Assigns shall have the moiety of the
whole, paying half the charge; and likewise procure the Lord of the Soil to do
the like, if you please to proceed with speed for the perfecting of the same;
and in token of our affection to serve you, we have presumed not only to
petition his Highness in your behalf for the better encouragement, but also
oblige our selves to tender you the first refusal of all our parts and shares
of Oar, paying ready money, and giving us from time to time the same rate as
other Merchants shall conceive it to be worth: And so we bid you heartily
farewell, resting

Your ever obliged Servants, Valen. Tryme, for his part. Tho. White. John
Hoskins. Andrew Baller. Nich. Barrel. John Blackhouse. John Johnsons. Will.
Norman. John Thrisel. Tho. Atwood sen. John Naish. Edw. Hopkins. Nich. Plumley.
John Hinsh. Rich. Friar. James Midleham. John Phelps. Will. Voules. John Cole.
Rob. Clark sen. Rob. Clark jun. Tho. Voules. Tho. Atwood jun. Alex. Jett. Tho.
Rowles. Nich. Parker. Will. Dudden. John Radford. Rob. Radford.

May 2. 1657.
For Tho. Bushel Esquire.
Mr. Basbee's Affidavit.
Walter Basbee, aged ab^u^ 80 years, makes oath, That he was Saymaster ^o
G^ldsmi^hs Hall about fifty years ago, and versed in Minerals ever since both
at home and abroad, and was by King J^m^s sent to the Emperor of Russia, to
make him a S^ndard of Gold and Silver in his Mint in the City of Moscovia,
equivalent to the ^ower of London; And no sooner was that service performed by
this Deponent, but his Imperial Majesty commanded him to refine the Gold of a
rich Copper-mine lying in Cyberea, five hundred miles beyond the River Volgo,
which held of Gold in every Tun to the value of three, four, or five hundred
pounds; where this Deponent did remain until he was taken Prisoner by the
Tartars, and afterward exchanged by the Emperor to be sent for England, where
this Deponent has ever since spent most of his time, under Mr. Bushell's
Philosophical way, taught him by the late Lord Chancellor Bacon, which (in the
judgment of this Deponent) cannot be paralleled by any, and if now practiced
according to his printed Remonstrance, and the Mineral Grand-Jury's Order of
Chewton, this Deponent does verily believe that the Age we live in will exceed
all former Ages in Mineral Discoveries and their Separations.

WALTER BASBEE.

Sworn the 7. of December 1658. before me one of the Masters of Chancery in
ordinary, W. GLASCOCK.

Christopher Wrights Affidavit.
CHristopher Wright, aged fifty six years, makes Oath, That he was sent by Mr.
Joseph Hexeter of Cumberland, to be in the same place of Steward for direction
of Mr. Bushels Minerals under ground, as the said Mr. Hexeter was under him in
Wales at 100 l. per an. salary: And finding the said Mr. Bushel to give such
probable reasons for recovering the inundation of water out of the vast and
drowned Works of Rowpits, by persuing a Drift as a Common-shore, from the
Concaves of a natural Swallow twenty fathom deep, after his industry had sunk
twenty shafts to discover the same, on purpose to come to the rich Loads of
metal known to be buried in the adjacent Groves of water, This Deponent and
others, upon confidence of making good his great undertakings therein (although
his judgment was then much questioned by the Inhabitants for the attempt) did
and do desire but half wages ever since the Miners of Mendip had invited the
said Mr. Bushel under their hands and Decree of their Court, to have half the
profit, bearing half the charge, after the water was drained, which this
Deponent does verily believe will be in a short time perfected, and appear for
precedent sake, as well as for present profit, the greatest work that has been
done by any Mineralists these hundred years, if the malicious attempts of some
ill-natured persons do not now hinder the growth of his proceedings therein:
For this Deponent does depose, That by some wicked persons there was a great
Lake of muddy water turned about the hour of midnight, and upon a great flood,
into the Swallow, on purpose as is conceived to choke it, and so consequently
to drown his men that came from foreign parts, and were then working twenty
fathom deep, which this Deponent does aver were forced to save their lives by
running up their Groves at the same time, the Swallow being not able to receive
the torrent of its water. And this Deponent does likewise depose, That about
the 10. of October last there was some other such envious persons, who pulled
down so much of the under-timber of his Shaft, that the whole Grove of earth
fell into Mr. Bushels Drift, when his men were at work underneath; and it was
supposed by diverse never to be recovered: But thanks be to God, the danger is
past, and Mr. Bushels Drift goes on toward the rich Works known to lie 150
fathom before him; for this Deponent was one of the workmen that landed 100 l.
per week out of one Shaft this last summer, and saw 200 l. per week out of
another; but the charge of drawing water, though in the drought of the summer,
stood (as they reported) in 80 l. per week a piece, which Mr. Bushels Drift
will prevent; and likewise to 1000 more of the like nature as are supposed to
be within the verge of Rowpits.

CHRISTOPHER WRIGHT.

Sworn the 3. of December 1658. before me one of the Masters of Chancery in
ordinary, W. GLASCOCK.

The Testimony of some Miners of Mendyp to the Council.
WE whose names are hereunder written, being Miners, and well versed in the
Mineral Rakes of Rowpits upon the Forest of Mendyp, are ready to testify upon
Oath, That the great wrongs done to the Works of Thomas Bushel Esquire; in Rowpits,
as is deposed by Christopher Wright before a Master of Chancery, are of a
certain truth; And we are likewise ready to testify our Opinions upon Oath,
That if the way of Mr. Bushels now proceeding to recover these drowned and
deserted works, may go on without molestation, according to the Orders of the
Grand Jury of Chewton made for his encouragement, we do believe in our
Consciences that there has not been these hundred years such a service done to
this Commonwealth, in advancing the knowledge of the Miners Trade, for profit
and precedent. And we also humbly conceive, That if a binding Order be made by
your Lordships to confirm (in all points) the said Grand Jury of Chewton's
Orders for deterring unruly Miners from such exorbitancies, as also that no
persons should lose any more their Summers work to follow the Mines of Rowpits
(which are now to no more purpose in matter of profit, than to wash the
Black-moor) until Mr. Bushels Drift can come up to drain their inundation of
waters, which (as we find expressed in his Remonstrance) he does undertake to
perfect in four years; and we do verily believe, that not only all the Oar may
be then landed for two shillings per Tun, but that we shall then also know the
inestimable riches of that place without further charge, or ruining more
families in working upon Rowpits. And we do also confidently believe in our
Consciences, that when Mr. Bushels now Drift from his Swallow does come up to
the old works drowned, and that he does pursue likewise his Cross-Rake from his
Swallow to the forebreast of Sir Bevis Bulmars deserted work (as he says he
intends to do, so soon as he has secured the place according to agreement, and
the Grand Jury's Order of Chewton dated the 28 of May) the said Mr. Bushel will
make good his Marqus of a Thousand pound per week: For there are men yet alive
that will justify, that the forebreast of Sir Bevis Bulmar's work was nine
foot wide in Oar; and we our selves know, that a hundred pounds per week out of
one Grove in the old work is ordinary, when the suffocation of water does not
hinder them.

Jo. Bakehouse. Tho. Bakehouse. Jo. Doxie.


The late Kings Letter of Invitation to Mr. Bushel, confirming his procedure in
Mineral Discoveries.
CHARLES R.

TRusty and welbeloved, We having taken into consideration your late Relation
concerning your proceedings and intentions for the perfecting of that great
Work happily by you begun in Our County of Cardigan in Our Principality of
Wales, concerning those hopeful Mines by you discovered, approving well of your
beginnings, proceedings, and intentions, We have thought good out of Our Royal
disposition, to the encouraging of you and all such as are studious or
industrious, to do to Us or Our Commonwealth profitable service, to assure you
by these Our Letters, that you shall not only by Our Protection peaceably
enjoy the Contract and Bargain by you made with the Lady Elizabeth Middleton
concerning the said Mines, with all things thereunto belonging; but also be
well assured, that both you, your Agents, Assistants or Coadjutors, shall from
time to time have all the furtherance and favor We can vouchsafe to you or
them. And for the better encouraging of you to go cheerfully and confidently on
with the Works, when your learned Council at the Law shall advise you to pray
any further Act or Acts from Us, whereby the Design may be advanced, and you
and your assistants secured, you shall find Us ready to grant unto you any your
lawful desires: And in the mean time these Our Letters shall be a good and
sufficient Testimony of Our Royal intentions toward you, and our good wishes
to the prosperity of your undertakings. Given at Our Court at Whitehall under
Our Signet, the three and twentieth day of February, in the twelfth year of Our
Reign.

To Our trusty and welbeloved Subject and Servant Thomas Bushel Esquire.
This is entered in the Signet-Book the 23 of Febr. 1636, Ja. Store.

The Merchants Letter of Barnstaple to Mr. Bushel concerning their
accommodation of transporting his Lead and Oar gratis, etc.
SIR,
SInce you have been pleased at your own great charge to discover those
deserted Works at Combmartin for the public good of our Country; and whereas
you are interessed in the Mines of Wales, which furnish you both with Lead and
Lead-Oar, These are to request you, to be pleased to make this our Harbor
partaker of the Benefits may proceed therein, and what we buy not from you for
ready moneys, we shall be ready to transport for you Frait-free instead of
Ballast, you rendering it aboard, to all such Ports as our Vessels shall
commerce withal. In so doing, we suppose the result thereof will more properly
conduce to your hopeful proceedings in the said Works of Combmartin, which we
wish all happy success, and remain

Your Loving Friends, Richard Harris William Leigh George Shurt Robert Dennis
John Tucker Thomas Ho^wood Anthony Benny William Palmer Lyonel Becher Rich.
Harris William Nottel John Down Walter Tucker R. Flemming Richard Medford
William Wood Francis Newton Edward Flemming Tho. Cox Nathaniel Fisherleigh
Robert Frayn.

Barnstable the 6, of October. 1648.
The Attestation of the Physicians College in the City of London.
WE whose names are hereunder written, have seen a Printed Paper of Mr.
Bushels concerning Minerals, and opening of Mines, and do conceive it fit that
he be encouraged in the prosecution of that design, which we conceive may be
Benefit and Honor to our Commonwealth.

Fran. Pruiean, Collegii Medicor. Londines. Praeses. Thomas Winston H. Clerk
Tho. Turner Walter Charleton S. Argall Guliel. Rant Robert Loyd Josh. Hinton
Tho. Nurse Geo. Bate Edw. Smith Edw. Alstone.

November. 29. 1652.
A Certificate from the Miners presented to the Right Honorable, the Lordr and
other of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council.
May it please your Lordships,
ACcording to your commands, We whose names are under written, being Miners,
Smelters, Refiners, Carryers, Washers, and Monyers belonging to his Majesty's
Mines Royal, in the County of Cardigan, in all humility do certify of our
certain knowledge and experience, concerning the new works lately discovered by
Gods providence to Thomas Bushel Esquire, Farmer of his Majesty's Mines Royal
in these parts, that the said Master Bushel at his inestimable charge, having
cut six hundred Fathom through the Rock at the lowest levels, North and South,
for discovering the lost vein of Cum-sum lock, lying East and West, two hundred
Fathom through the Mountain of Tallibont at sixty Fathom perpendicular, three
several Addits at Koginenn, one above another twenty and thirty Fathom center,
another at the Darren, to come under the Romans work, at an hundred Fathom
center, another at Bryn Lloyd fifty Fathom in length, and thirty Fathom center,
working day and night for the Drayning of the water, which formerly in the time
of Customer Smith, and Sir Hugh Middleton in their working of the Mines Royal
was never used, they only working upon the Superficies of the earth, the works
being drowned with water before they could sink to the best of the vein, both
for quantity and quality, and so the charge made to exceed the benefit, which
danger is prevented by the aforesaid Addits, and the Royal Mines become more
hopeful, especialy by the assistance of his Majesty's Mint, for the speedy
payment of all those that are employed in the said works, And Mr. Bushels own
invention to save Wood, by reducing the Ore into Lead, and Silver, with Turff
and Sea-cole Charked, which happy invention, had it not been found out, the
works must needs have been left unwrought, the Country not being able to have
supplied necessary fuel. And further, by the prohibition of transporting Ore
unwrought, that holds silver worth the refining, which His Majesty in his
Princely wisdom saw to be very prejudicial, even to the utter overthrow of his
Mines Royal.

We have therefore great reason to be confident that his way of Working, with
the restraint of transporting Ore, will in short time greatly increase the
Bullion of this Kingdom, for the honor of the King, and good of the
Commonwealth, together with the employment of many hundred poor people, which
would be otherwise an unsupportable burden to this barren Country, who by
their present labor in these Mines are able to subsist with their Families,
and thousands more might be daily set on work if Mr. Bushels undertakings in
the Mines Royal, may be confirmed for a certain time by this present high Court
of Parliament.

MINERS.
David Fowls. William Rashly. Henry Cockler. David Bebb. Joseph Jefferies.
George Turner. Hugh Reece. William David's. George Scotsmer. Thomas B^ickhead.
Will. Griffith. Peter Baltiser. Francis Pierce. Maurice Lewis. Peter Edriser.
Edward Blewys. Rob Emblin. Rob. Tailor. Robert Lowning. Thomas Fletcher. David
Evans. George Dixon. Hugh Mason. David op Richard. Tho. Blewys. Michael
Sanders. Morgan Williams. Tho. Clocker. Tho. Green. Bartho. Clocker. Francis
Fisher. Hugh Benn. John Mason. George Tickle John Mason. John Fisher. David
Loyd. David Williams. Henry Emblin. Maurice Tailor. John Emblin. Edward Reece.
John Mason Sen. Will. Picharets. Evan Thomas. John Harris. Will. Tyson. Watkin
Reece. John Smith. Morgan Pritchet. Griffith John. Will. Reece John Tuddar.
John Huson. David Iinkins. Joseph Acherson. Edmund Poole. Edward Bebb. Philip
Benn. Thomas James
With two Hundred more, whom for brevity we omit to name. Moniers.
Henry Such. John Corbet. Richard Arnold.
Refiners.
John Estopp. David Estopp. Samuel Johnson. Edw. Gibbon. Tho. Parker. Arthur
Elissa.
Smelters.
Thomas Botham. Hugh James. Griffith Evans. John Watkin. Iinkin Owen. John
Epslie. John Evans. John Jews. Ia. Meredith.
Washers.
John Wringe. Morgan John Lewis. Davy John. John Ienkins. Morgan Griff. John.
Edmund Symons. Reece Morgan. Charles Willi^m^. Thomas Adams.


To the Right Honorable the Lords and others of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
ACcording to Yours Honors command, we have enquired and considered how the
Mines-Royal were l^ft to Mr. Bushel by the Lady Middleton, and do in all
humility declare, that the Silver Mines were not worth the working, until Mr.
Bushel at his great charge discovered Rich Ore in the adjacent mountains, which
in all likelihood will both increase the Bullion, and by his way of working, in
short time give his Majesty a true trial what the invaluable riches of these
his Welsh mountains are: for whereas the Mines in these parts were formerly
wrought by Pumps, and so growing deep were left drowned with water, Mr. Bushel
cuts through the main Rocks, at the lowest level, to an hundred fathom
perpendicular, according to the German manner of working, which though
chargable, yet certain, having four several Addits which he continues driving
night and day into four several mountains; his industry also has outstript
former times, for by melting the poor fusible Ore, with the Rich, he produces
a third part more of Silver with the same charge: and for accommodating the
works with all materials fit for Mines-Royal, he has spared no cost about
repairing the mils, has also built in his Majesty's Castle of Aberystwith a
fair Mint, has contracted with Merchants of our own and other Nations to
supply the peoples necessity with Corn and other Provision, and pays the
Miners and Carriers at the Scales, and doubts not to make them able Pyoners,
and fit Soldiers to do his Majesty and their Country service upon any assault
of an enemy. All which we commend to your Honorable consideration, praying,
etc.

Your Lordships humbly to be commanded Joseph Hexsteter, chief Steward of the
Mines. Samuel Reynish, Water Barkesby, Assay Masters of the Mint. Humphrey
Owen, Clark of the Mines.


The Case of the Mine Royal judged to be by the most learned Lawyers under
their hands.
ALthough the Gold or Silver contained in the base Metals of a Mine in the Land
of a Subject, be of less value than the baser Metal, yet if the Gold or Silver
do countervail the charge of the refining it, or be of more worth then the base
Metal spent in refining it, this is a Mine Royal, and as well the base Metal as
the Gold and Silver in it belongs by Prerogative to the Crown.

Sir Ralph Whitefield his Majesty's Sergeant at Law. Sir Edward Herbert
Attorney General. Oliver St. John Solicitor General. Orlando Bridegman the
Princes Solicitor. John Glanvil Sergeant. Rich. Creswel Sergeant. John Wild
Sergeant. Rob. Holborn. John Hern. Edward Bagshaw. Thomas Lane. Richard King.
Edmund Prideaux. Esqs; Jo. Maynard. Edward Hide. John Glynne. Charles Fulwood.
Harbottle Grimstone. John White. George Peard. John Franklin. Richard Weston.
John Glover. William Ellis. Thomas Culpepper. John Goodwine. William Sanford.
John George. Ia. Haward, Esqs;


Chewton 28 of July, 1658.
WHereas we of the Mineral Grand Jury finding by a decretal Order of our
Predecessors, May 28. and their Letter May 2. in answer of Tho: Bushell's Esquire;
to encourage him to go on in his adventures for recovering the drowned works of
Rowpits, which were formerly the deserted works of Sir Bevis Bulmar in the time
of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; And whereas many of the chief Adventurers in the
said Rowpits, do and have consented to surrender not only the one half of their
works and Mines there, but likewise the pre-emption of the other half, paying
as much as any other Merchant will give, unto the said Tho: Bushel and his
Assigns, when the said Tho: Bushel does make it appear unto the Mineral Court
for the time being, that by his and their workmanship they be freed from the
inundation of their waters; We of the Grand Jury do Order and confirm the said
Decree. And whereas we find the said Tho. Bushel has (in relation to his
undertakings of recovering their waters) brought it so near a probability of
perfection, that in time all persons of known Judgment cannot but conclude,
the same will be done for the general good of those that had formerly suffered
by those Grooves, and likewise a president for others to follow the like
example, as also the certainty of knowing the vast riches that lie in Rowpits
and Green Oar: And whereas we are informed by the said Tho. Bushel and others,
of several misdemeanors committed against him by turning floods into his
swallow, to choke and extirpate all his proceedings, stealing of his tools
from his works, depraving of his Person with scandalous language, and making
new pitches in Rowpits before him, so soon as they saw the fore-field of Mr.
Bushell's Drift from his Swallow had but a vein of ground Oar, four foot wide,
and three fathom high, to cherish his chargeable undertakings; which uncivil
actions of theirs were, as we conceive, contrary to all equity and good
conscience; and in a manner an Act of Tyranny in us, that Mr. Bushel should
drain our waters, and we should suffer strangers to take the benefit of new
pitches from his adventures to recover such drowned and forsaken works as the
greatest Engineer has deserted, when all persons have the whole Hill of Mendyp
to make their fortunes by such pitches, as he allegeth, and not to ^iscourage
his desperate undertakings therein by such ^alicious practices, and especially
to such a person as Mr. Bushel, that is sent by his Highness the Lord
Protector, to recover such drowned and deserted works for the public good of
the Nation, with power to dig, delve, and search in the several grounds of all
his Territories, by Letters Patents, paying double trespass, as well as in all
vast Commons, upon hopes from such experiments to ease in time the Taxes of the
Subject, and to give new birth to the drooping condition of a Miners posession;
We of the grand Jury of Chewton (and other Workmasters and Miners) for the
reasons aforesaid, and for preventing any just complaints to the Lord Paramount
against out Lord Royal's Court of Chewton for such incivilities to the person
which his Highness has trusted in that affair, do Order and make this Decree
(for the said Tho. Bushell's better encouragement) That from the day of the
date of the Order May 28, all such new pitches shall be void in Rowpits and
Green Oar, but such as the said Tho. Bushel shall approve and allow of; and
that all former works that have been wrought upon within these five years, and
sunk five fathom deep, to stand good by consent, provided that they keep them
lawful, and sink them to the water, when the said Thomas Bushel is come near
them with his Drift of sixteen fathom deep by the approbation of this grand
Jury, that so the wilfulness of any malicious person might not hinder such a
proceed to know the Meanders of those Mineral Rakes in their deeper search, and
the way to go to their recoveries for their own good, as well as Mr. Bushell's
reputation in the attempt of that great design. And whereas the said Tho.
Bushel does aver, that he never did intend to make it a Mine Royal by his Art
and Skill (to the prejudice of us, our Laws and Liberties) as it was reported,
unless it ^ere against the interest of some cross-grained scurrilous fellow,
that will not be governed by our own grand Jury, but rather contest with his
Highness right to Rowpits, and bids defiance to Prerogative Power, or are backed
by a malicious faction that would hinder the growth of the Lord Chancellor
Bacons Philosophy in recovering the same for the glory of the Nation, these
considerations, and at our request to him upon the aforesaid agreement, that he
would show his quondam Masters Philosophy for recovering Rowpits and Green Oar
from their inundations of water, which is well known to us to be rich in the
tre^sures of Ledd, and to free other works of greater moment from their
contagious damps, that now lie deserted, on purpose that the overplus of their
revenew, proceeding from such a deplorable condition, and raised by the hand of
Providence and Industry, might go (as Mr. Bushel did likewise aver, upon the
word of a Gentleman) to charitable uses of discovering richer Metals expressed in
his late Remonstrance to his Highness, as well as by his late Will and
Testament, for the first fruits thereof to ledd the Tower and School in the
Church of Wells; We of the grand Jury do likewise make this Order and Decree,
That if any misdemeanor as aforesaid, shall be proved to be done against the
said Tho. Bushel, his Agents, Servants or works, such are not only to be
banished the occupation upon Mendyp, but we do humbly implore his Highness to
send them to the Mines of Iamaica, that they may not infect others, nor bring
by their exorbitant courses more scandal upon the whole profession of a Miners
innocent calling; since we are satisfied in our consciences, that the way of
Mr. Bushell's Mineral proceedings, will in this Age bring wonderful things to
pass, and be admired in the next, for the glory of the Nation; And especially
when as the said Tho. Bushel does aver that he will transport all his rich
Western Mines, lying upon the Seaside, which are or shall be discovered in
Wales, Devon, Cornwall and Ireland, unto the Port or Haven at Uphill, to
receive their true separations according to the Lord Chancellor Bacons
Philosophy, and so to be minted in the adjacent City of Wells, for satisfying
all returns, as well as to pay the Miner with his own Coin, and (without any
further salary than in one place) to pay the whole of that Commerce.

Io Radford Foreman of the Mineral Grand Jury there, with his fellows. Walter
Webb. Richard Frank. Richard Adams. John Phelps. Thomas Young. William
Dowgling. Alexander Cuer. William Hopkins. Jonas Lexstond. John House. Richard
Ayrer.


To our Dread Sovereign Lord the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
May it please your Majesty,
WE do most humbly and thankfully acknowledge, that your Majesty's vouchsafing
to this your Principality the trust of a branch of your Royal Mint, is an
honor that neither our Ancestors nor our selves durst wish for; and we do as
humbly and as thankfully acknowledge and confess, that by it you have not only
honored us more, than any of your Royal predecessors, but have thereby offered
us the means to enrich our selves, to the making of us happier than our
Fathers, in freeing us from the cares and fears that hindered us from diving
into these Mountains that promise a mass of Treasure. For be pleased to know,
that before your Majesty vouchsafed unto us this great favor, we were
fearful to adventure far into the Mountains, because we had far to send before
we could make the Silver current, that we should at charge recover. Nor was our
care of carriage and recarriage the least hinderance to our proceedings, from
all which, by your Majesty's goodness, and the endeavors of your industrious
and faithful Servant Thomas Bushel, we are happily freed; for which favor, we
whose names are hereunto subscribed, in the behalf of all the Inhabitants of
this your Principality of WALES, do render all humble and hearty thanks, and
for them, and our selves, do hereby promise to Your Sacred Majesty, that we
will do our utmost endeavors, to find out that Treasure, which we believe God
and Nature from the Creation has preserved for your Majesty's use; that
thereby we may approve our selves your Majesty's loyal and most Obedient
Subjects, and humble Servant.

Thomas Milward Knight, Chief Justice of Chester. Marmaduke LLoyd Knight.
Richard Price K. Baronet. James Price Knight. Sampson Eure Knight. John Lewis
Knight. Timothy Turner Esquire; L. Littleton Esquire; Walter LLoyd Esquire; Thomas Price
Esquire; Robert Corbet Esquire; Evan Gwin Esquire; Morgan Herbert Esquire; John Vaughan Esquire;
Vincent Corbet Esquire; Humfrey Green Esquire; John LLoyd Esquire; David LLoyd ap Reighnald
Esquire; Thomas Phillips Esquire; John Edmund Esquire; Hugh LLoyd Gent. David Rees Gent.
John Bowen Gent. William Watkin Gent. John Meredith Gent. James Kegitt Gent.


Die Sabbati 14. Aug. 1641.
WHereas this House has been informed, that Thomas Bushel Esquire, undertaker
of his Majesty's Mines-Royal in the County of Cardigan, by his great charge and
industry in cutting Addits has gained His Majesty's old drowned and forsaken
works or Tallybont, and other works, and made new discoveries of Royal-Mines
there, which are already very considerable; And whereas diverse persons of qual
ty encouraged by his Majesty's Letters to them directed, do intend to adventure
great sums of money in the said works, which in time (if well encouraged) may
prove of great consequence, both for Honor and Profit to His Majesty and the
Kingdom; And whereas also it appears unto this House by diverse Affidavits and
Certificates of credit, that some persons ill-affected to these Honorable and
Public services who in time may receive deserved punishments, have disturbed
the possession of the said Tho. Bushel in some of his Majesty's Mines-Royal,
and Edifices appertaining to the Royal-works, and have plucked up diverse plumps
cast in the Rubbish, drowned, and (so much as in them did lie) destroyed the
said work, so as it has been a labor of four years night and day to recover
the same. And that also the said Tho. Bushel has been disturbed in the
getting of Turf and Peat for the service of his Majesty's works, being an
invention of his own, very commendable and commodious for the preserving of
Wood, which has been heretofore by the former Undertakers much wasted in those
parts. Now for the remedy of the said Mischiefs, and that the said Tho. Bushel
and his Assigns, and such persons as are or shall be Undertakers and
Adventurers with him in the said service may receive all due encouragement and
assistance in those chargeable undertakings; It is ordered by the Lords in the
Upper House of Parliament now assembled, That the Speaker of this House, in the
Name, and by the Authority of the same, shall direct His Letters unto the
Judges of Assize, and Justices of the Peace of the said County of Cardigan:
Requiring them, that they do in all lawful things endeavor to advance, and
encourage the said service in his Majesty's Royal Mines, and assist the said
Tho. Bushel and other Undertakers, in all things so far as lawfully they may,
both for the continuance of his lawful Possessions, and and the quiet and
peaceable working of the said Mines, until he shall be evicted by due course
of Law, as also for getting and working of Turf and Peat, according to his
Legal right upon his Majesty's Wastes, and other places lawful, and all other
lawful accommodations of necessary passages, and other Legal things, which may
any ways advance His Majesty's service in the said Royal Mines.

JO. BROWN Cler. Parliament.

The Miners contemplative Prayer in his solitary Delves, which is conceived
requisite to be puhlished, that the Redder may know, his heart implores
Providence for his Mineral increase, as well as Petitions liberty from men to
dig for Treasure in their barren Mountains.
MOst glorious and omniscient Lord God, who inhabitest Eternity, and by thy
omnipotent fiat did in the beginning create the admirable fabric of the
Universe; the Heavens are thy Throne, and the Earth is thy Footstool, on which
thou did frame our first Parent of red Clay, and from thence gave him his
name, into whose Nostrils thou did breath the Spirit of Life, enduing him
with a reasonable Soul, and made him Lord of all thy Creatures; But he being
in honor could not abide so, but became like the Beast that perishes, through
the treachery of that first Rebel Satan, who ever since endeavors to
supplant his wretched posterity, of whom my sinful self am one. Give me
therefore (O Lord) a true sense of mine own sins without despair, sincere
contrition, unfeigned sorrow and earnest repentance without hypocrisy; make my
Prayers fervent, holy and grateful, that they may come before thee as the
incense of a true penitent soul; for a broken and contrite heart, is a
sacrifice which thou will not despise: And now, O God, having first sought thy
mercy on my soul, give me leave to implore thy blessing on my temporal affairs
to thy sole glory. O Lord, thy Spirit has affected mine with the speculation
and practice of Mineral Philosophy, and thou were pleased to bless that most
Royal and ancient Philosopher, who understood and writ of the natures of all
vegetables, from the Cedar of Lebanon, to the pellitory or moss on the wall,
as plainly appeared by the success of his Miners transported by Hyram's
Mariners to Opher, whence they returned with 450. Talents of Gold, for
effecting whereof that King built and rigged a powerful Navy at Ezron Gebar on
the red Sea, with a vast expense of his own or peoples treasure; But (O Lord)
my modest design requires no such charge or means, the propositions of that
great modern Philosopher, my worthy honored Lord, are to discover those hidden
Treasures, which thy inscrutable wisdom has lodged in the Bowels of the most
barren Mountains, and desperately deserted Mineral works of our native
Countries. It is true (Lord) they that descend to the Sea in ships, see they
wonders in the depth thereof; but such as search the secret Entrails of the
Earth, to find out thy concealed wonders there, carry their lives in their
hands, being free among the dead, whence they pray unto thee, and praise thy
mavelous works of nature, when men ride over their heads. But (O Lord) the
insatiate thirst of riches or vain glory spurs not me on to this dangerous and
laborious attempt, but my zeal to thy glory, and my Countries good. Solomon
beautified thine own Temple which he had built with his far sought Mineral
Treasure, and I would therefore willingly erect a house to the honor of his
name; in which fabric (designed by my honored Master) true Christian
Philosophers, of eminent knowledge, virtuous lives, and holy conversations,
might by practical search and discoveries reveal to succeeding ages these
beneficent rarities, and profitable experiments which that great King first
treated of, being lost (as is conceived) to all mankind through thy several
Judgments, thrown in thine own back sliding people, till that Lord (my quondam
Master) assisted by thy Spirit of wisdom, did in his natural History, and that
most excellent model in his New Atlantis propose to the world a new means to
make use of them, to thy glory, and the benefit of all thy servants, without
any considerable charge to this or any other State. But (O Lord) the
blindness, stupidity and diffidence of man's heart has as yet obstructed the
procedure thereof. Dives desired no other means than a Messenger from Hell for
the conversion of his Brethren which he had misled; now the living which
converse with the subterranean spirits cannot be believed in reporting thy
wonders in the bosom of the Earth. The Ninevites were converted when thy
fugitive Prophet brought them a penitential Sermon out of the belly of the
Whale; grant (O my God) that I which am at present buried alive, and secluded
from the World may be thence heard by thee, and so credited by the present
ruling Power, that I thy humble suppliant (who like the poor bedridden men at
the Pool of Bethesda have lain long impotent and unable to move) may find some
faithful Patriots to assist my cause, and make them sensible that I beg
nothing but that which is lost, and the help of the dead only to recover it.
The Mines that I Petition for are drowned, and their works desperately
deserted; the persons I propose for their recovery, are such as are dead in
Law, and crave as a mercy to be buried in them, by a patient undergoing their
punishment as pioneers, and turning their necessities into such virtuous
actions, rather than a forced banishment should expose them to a seven years
slavery in foreign plantations. Diamonds best cut Diamonds, the stony-hearted
are fittest to cut the stony Addits of the Mines, and like to like will agree
best, when a penitential Soul strikes the blow. For (O Lord) we all know, the
Prodigal Child was punished with its opposite; and believe all others have
congruity in the like, when thy only Son was forced for taking upon him the
sins of man, to descend himself into Hell, before he could ascend into Heaven;
and who knows (O Lord) but that this Mineral employment is the best way found
out for us Mortals, to discipline all offenders capable of mercy, with
discovering thy concealed Treasures, and make such thy only creatures, when the
person which thou placest over them by thy Ministers of State, shall take
delightful care in their education and amendment, to thy own glory and the
public good, fince thou joyest more in one of them, than in 99. righteous,
that need no repentance. O Lord, in these designs I earnestly beg thy
assistance, since thy Son our Savior has bid us to ask, seek and knock, that
we may obtain, find and be admitted; pardon then my confidence, diligence and
importunity: I have now spent many Lustres of my life, and some Treasure in
prosecution of this defign; O let me effect it so to thy glory before I go
hence, as my Feoffees in trust may not be discouraged to go on where I have
left; for time makes have, to call for natures debt, and Death is none of thy
Creature. Let not then my worst Creditor be only satisfied, before thou have
assisted me in some measure to pay the Debt of Zeal and Obedience which I owe
to thee, that of Love and Service due to my native County, the real sums due to
confiding friends, and the great Debt of gratitude to the memory of my famous
Master, Foster-Father and Instructor in these undertakings. Pardon then my
sins, and grant this my Boon, since mercy and bounty are the most essential
Attributes of thy Glory; to whom all Honor, Obedience, Praise and Thanksgiving
is now and ever due, Amen.

An Abridgement of my Lord Bacon's Atlantis.
GOD bless thee my Son, I will give thee the greatest Jewel I have: For I will
impart unto thee, for the true love of God and Men, a relation of the true
State of Solomon's House. Son, to make you know the true State of Solomon's
House, I will keep thi^ order. First, I will set forth unto you the end of our
Foundation. Secondly, the Preparations and Instruments we have for our works.
Thirdly, the several Employments and Functions whereto our Fellows are
assigned. And fourthly, the Ordinances and Rites which we observe.

The end of our Foundation is the knowledge of Causes, and secret motions of
things: and the Enlarging of the bounds of Humane Empire, to the effecting of
all things possible.

The Preparations and Instruments are these. We have large and deep Caves of
several Depths: The deepest are sunk 600 Fathom: And some of them are dug
and made under great Hills and Mountains: So that if you reckon together the
Depth of the Hill, and the Depth of the Cave, they are (some of them) above
three miles deep. For we find, that the depth of an Hill, and the depth of a
Cave from the Flat, is the same thing; both remote alike from the Sun, and
Heavens Beams, and from the open Air. These Caves we call the Lower Region. And
we use them for all Coagulations, Indurations, Refrigerations, and
Conservations of Bodies. We use them likewise for the Imitation of Natural
Mines; And the producing also of new Artificial Metals, by Compositions and
Materials which we use and lay there for many years. We use them also
sometimes, (which may seem strange) for Curing of some Diseases, and for
Prolongation of Life, in some Hermits that choose to live there, well
accommodated of all things necessary, and indeed live very long, by whom also
we learn many things.

We have Burials in several Earths, where we put diverse Cements, as the
Chinese do their Porcellane. But we have them in greater Variety, and some of
them more fine. We also have great variety of Composts, and Soils, for the
making of the Earth fruitful.

We have high Towers, The highest about half a Mile in height; And some of them
likewise set upon high Mountains: So that the vantage of the Hill with the
Tower, is in the highest of them three Miles at least. And these places we call
the Upper Region; Accounting the Air between the High places, and the Low, as a
Middle Region. We use these Towers, according to their several Heights and
Situations, for Insolation, Refrigeration, Conversion; And for the View of
diverse Meteors; as Wind, Rain, Snow, Hail; And some of the Fiery Meteors also.
And upon them, in some places, are dwellings of Hermits, whom we visit
sometimes, and instruct what to observe.

We have great Lakes, both Salt and Fresh, whereof we have use for the Fish,
and Fowl. We use them also for Burials of some Natural Bodies: For we find a
difference in things buried in Earth, or in Air below the Earth, and things
buried in Water. We have also Pools, of which some do strain Fresh Water out of
Salt; And others by Art do turn Fresh Water into Salt. We have also some Rocks
in the midst of the Sea; And some Bays upon the Shore for some Works, wherein
is required the Air and Vapor of the Sea. We have likewise violent Streams and
Cataracts, which serve us for many Motions: And likewise Engines for
Multiplying and Enforcing of Winds, to set also on going diverse Motions.

We have also a number of Artificial Wels and Fountains, made in imitation of
the Natural Sources and Baths; as tincted upon Vitriol, Sulphur, Steel, Brass,
Lead, Nitre, and other Minerals: And again, we have little Wels for Infusions
of many things, where the Waters take the virtue quicker and better, than in
Vessels or Basins, And amongst them we have a Water, which we call water of
Paradise, being by that we do to it, made very Sovereign for Health and
Prolongation of Life.

We have also great and spacious Houses, where we imitate and demonstrate
Meteors; as Snow, Hail, Rain, some Artificial Rains of Bodies, and not of
Water, Thunder, Lightnings; Also Generations of Bodies in Air; as Froggs,
Flies, and diverse others.

We have also certain Chambers, which we call Chambers of Health, where we
qualify the Air as we think good, and proper for the cure of di- Diseases, and
preservation of Health.

We have also fair and large Baths, of several mixtures, for the Cure of
Diseases and the restoring of Man's Body from Arefaction: and other for the
Confirming of it in Strength of Sinews, vital parts; and the very Juice and
Substance of the Body.

We also have large and various Orchards and Gardens, wherein we do not so much
respect beauty, as variety of Ground and Soil, proper for diverse Trees and
Herbs: And some very spacious, where Trees and Berryes are set, whereof we make
diverse kinds of Drinks, besides the Vineyards. In these we practice likewise
all Conclusions of Grafting, and Inoculating, as well of Wild-Trees as
Fruit Trees, which produces many effects: And we make (by Art) in the same
Orchards, and Gardens, Trees, and Flowers, to come earlier or later than their
Seasons, and to come up and bear more speedily than by their Natural Course
they do. We make them also by Art much greater than their Nature; And their
Fruit greater and sweeter, and of different Taste, Smell, Color, and Figure,
from their Nature. And many of them we so order, that they become of Medicinal
Use.

We have also means to make diverse Plants rise by Mixtures of Earth without
Seeds; And likewise to make diverse New Plants, differing from the vulgar, and
to make one Tree or Plant turn into another.

We have also Parks, and Enclosures of all sorts of Beasts and Birds, which we
use not only for view or Rareness, but likewise for Dissections and Trials;
That thereby we may take light, what may be wrought upon the Body of Man.
Wherein we find many strange Effects. as Continuing Life in them, though diverse
Parts, which you account Vital, be perished, and taken forth, Resuscitating of
some that seem Dead in Appearance, and the like. We try also all Poisons, and
other Medicines upon them, as well of Surgery as Physic. By Art likewise we
make them Greater or Taller than their kind is; And contrary wise Drawf them
and stay their Growth: We make them more Fruitful and Bearing than their kind
is; And contrariwise Barren and not Generative. Also we make them differ in
Color, Shape, and Activity many ways. We find means to make Commixtures and
Copulations of diverse Kinds, which have produced many New Kinds, and them not
Barren, as the general opinion is. We make a number of Kinds of Serpents,
Worms, Flies, Fishes, of Putrefaction, whereof some are advanced (in effect) to
be Perfect Creatures, like Beasts, or Birds; And have Sexes, and do propagate.
Neither do we this by Chance, but we know before hand, of what Matter and
Commixture, what Kind of those Creatures will arise.

We have also Particular Pools, where we make Trials upon Fishes, as we have
said before of Beasts and Birds.

We have also Places for Breed and Generation of those Kinds of Worms, and
Flies, which are of Special Use; such as are with you your Silkworms and Bees.

I will not hold you long with recounting of our Brew-houses, Bake-houses, and
Kitchins, where are made diverse Drinks, Bread, and Meats, rare and of especial
effects. Wines we have of Grapes; and Drink of other Juice, of Fruits, of
Grains, and of Roots, and of Mixtures with Honey, Sugar, Manna; and Fruits
dried and decocted: Also of the Tears or Woundings of Trees; And of the Pulp of
Canes. And these Drinks are of several Ages, some to the Age or Last of forty
years. We have Drinks also brewed with several Herbs, and Roots, and Spices;
Yea with several Fleshes, and White-Meats; whereof some of the Drinks are such
as they are in effect Meat and Drink both: So that diverse, especially in Age,
do desire to live with them, and with little or no Meat, or Bread. And above
all we strive to have Drinks of Extreme Thin Parts, to insinuate into the Body,
and yet without all Biting Sharpness, or Fretting; Insomuch as some of them put
upon the back of your hand, will with a little stay pass through to the Palm,
and yet taste mild to the Mouth. We have also Waters, which we ripen in that
fashion, as they become Nourishing; So that they are indeed excellent Drink:
And many will use no other. Breads we have of several Grains, Roots, and
Kernels; Yea, and some of Flesh, and Fish, Dried, with diverse kinds of
Leavings, and Seasonings: So that some do extremely move Appetites; Some do
nourish so as diverse do live of them, without any other Meat; Who live very
long. So for Meats, we have some of them so beaten, and made Tender, and
mortified, yet without all Corrupting, as a Weak heat of the Stomach will turn
them into good Chilus; As well as a Strong heat would Meat otherwise prepared.
We have some Meats also, and Breads and Drinks, which taken by Men, enable them
to Fast long after; and some other, that used make the very Flesh of Men's
Bodies sensibly more Hard and Tough, and their Strength far greater, than
otherwise it would be.

We have Dispensatories, or Shops of Medicines, wherein you may easily think,
if we have such variety of Plants, and Living Creatures, more than you have in
Europe, (for we know what you have) the Simples, Drugs, and Ingredients of
Medicines must likewise be in so much the greater Variety. We have them
likewise of diverse Ages, and long Fermentations. And for their Preparations, We
have not only all manner of exquisite Distillations, and Separations, and
especially by Gentle Heats, and Percolations through diverse Strainers, yea and
Substances, But also Exact Forms of Composition, whereby they incorporate
almost as they were Natural Simples.

We have also diverse Mechanical Arts, which you have not; And Stuffs made by
them; As Papers, Linen, Silks, Tissues, dainty Works of Feathers of wonderful
luster; excellent Dies, and many others: and Shops likewise as well for such as
are not brought into vulgar use among us, as for those that are. For you must
know, that of the things before recited, many of them are grown into use
throughout the Kingdom, But yet, if they did flow from our Invention, we have
of them also for Patterns and Principles.

We have also Furnaces of great Diversities, and that keep great Diversity of
Heats: Fierce and Quick; Strong and Constant; Soft and Mild; Blown, Quiet, Dry,
Moist; And the like. But above all we have Heats, in imitations of the Suns and
Heavenly Bodies Heats, that pass diverse inequalities, and (as it were) Orbs,
Progresses, and Returns, whereby we may produce admirable effects. Besides we
have Heats of Dungs; and of Bellies and Maws of Living Creatures, and of their
Bloods and Bodies; and of Hayes and Herbs laid up moist, of Lime unquenched,
and such like. Instruments also which generate Heat only by Motion. And
further, Places for strong Insolations; And again, places under the Earth,
which by Nature, or Art yield Heat. These diverse Heats we use, as the Nature of
the Operation which we intend, requires.

We have also Perspective Houses, where we make Demonstrations of all Lights
and Radiations; And of all Colors: And out of Things uncoloured and
Transparent, we can represent unto you all several Colors, not in Rain-bows
(as it is in Gemms, and Prisms,) but of themselves Single; We represent also
all Multiplications of Light, which we carry to great distance: and make so
sharp, as to discern small Points and Lines. Also all Colourations of Light.
All Delusions and Deceits of the Sight, in Figures, Magnitudes, Motions,
Colors; All Demonstrations of Shadows. We find also diverse means yet unknown
to you, of Producing of Light, Originally, from diverse Bodies; We procure means
of seeing Objects Afar off; as in the Heaven and remote places: And represent
Things Near as Afar off; And Things Afar off as Near, making Feigned distances.
We have also Helps for the Sight far above Spectacles and Glasses in use; We
have also Glasses and Means to see Small and Minute Bodies, perfectly and
distinctly; As the Shapes and Colors of Small Flies and Worms, Grains, Flaws
in Gemms, which cannot otherwise be seen: Observations in Urine and Blood not
otherwise to be seen. We make Artificial Rain-bows, Heloes and Circles about
Light. We represent also all manner of Reflections, Refractions, and
Multiplication of Visual Beams of Objects.

We have also Precious Stones, of all kinds, many of them of great beauty and
to you unknown; Christals likewise; And Glasses of diverse kinds, and among them
some of Metals Vitrificated, and other Materials, beside those of which you
make Glass. Also a number of Fossiles, and imperfect Minerals which you have
not. Likewise Load-sfones of Prodigious Virtue: And other rare Stones, both
Natural and Artificial.

We have also Sound Houses, where we practice and Demonstrate all Sounds, and
their Generation. We have Harmonies which you have not, of Quarter-Sounds, and
Slides of Sounds. Diverse Instruments of Music likewise to you unknown, some
sweeter than any you have; With Bells and Rings that are dainty and sweet. We
represent small sounds, as great and deep; Likewise Great sounds Extenuate and
sharp; we make diverse tremblings and Warblings of Sound which in their Original
are Entire, we represent and imitate all Articulate sounds and Letters, and the
Voices and Noats of Beasts and Birds. We have certain Helps, which set to the
Ear do further the Hearing greatly. We have also diverse strange and Artificial
Echoes Reflecting the Voice many times, and as it were tossing it: And some
that give back the voice louder than it came, some shriller, and some Deeper;
Yea some rendering the Voice, Differing in the Letters or Acriculate Sound, from
that they receive. We have all means to convey Sounds in Trunks, and Pipes, in
strange Lines, and Distances.

We have also Perfume-houses, wherewith we join also Practices of Taste. We
Multiply Smells which may seem strange. We Imitate Smells, making all Smells to
breath out of other mixtures than those that give them. We make diverse
Imitations of Taste likewise, so that they will deceive any man's Taste. And in
this House we contain also a Confiture-House; where we make all Sweetmeats Dry
and Moist; And diverse pleasant Wines, Milks, Broaths, and Sallets, far in
greater Variety than you have.

We have also Engine-Houses, where are prepared Engines and Instruments for all
sorts of Motions. There we imitate and practice to make Swifter Motions than
any you have, either out of your Muskets, or any Engine that you have, and to
Make them, and multiply them more Easily, and with Small-Force by Wheels and
other Means, and to make them stronger and more Violent, than yours are;
Exceeding your greatest Cannons and Basilisks. We represent also Ordnance and
Instruments of War, and Engines of all kinds: and likewise new Mixtures and
Compositions of Gunpowder, Wild-fires burning in Water, and Unquenchable: Also
Fireworks of all Variety, both for pleasure and use. We imitate also Flights of
Birds; We have some Degrees of Flying in the Air. We have Ships and Boats for
going under Water, and Brooking of Seas; Also Swimming Girdles, and Supporters.
We have diverse curious Clocks, and other Motions of Return: And some perpetual
Motions. We imitate also Motions of Living Creatures, by Images of Men, Beasts,
Birds, Fishes and Serpents; We have also a great number of other Various
Motions, strange for Equality, Finenesse and Subtilty.

We have also a Mathematical-House, where are represented all Instruments as
well of Geometry, as Astronomy, exquisitely made.

We have also Houses of Deceits of the Senses; Where we represent all manner of
Feats of juggling, false Apparitions, Impostures, and Illusions; And surely you
will easily believe that we that have so many Things truly Natural, which
induce Admiration, could in a world of Particulars deceive the Senses, if we
would disguise those Things, and labor to make them more Miraculous. But we do
hate all Impostures and Lies: Insomuch as we have severely forbidden it to all
our Fellows, under pain of Ignominy and Fines, that they do not show any
Natural Work or Thing, Adorned, or Swelling; but only Pure as it is, and
without all Affectation of Strangeness.

These are (my Son) the Riches of Solomon's House.

For the several Employments and Offices of our Fellows, We have Twelve that
Sail into Foreign Countries under the Name of other Nations, (for our own we
conceal:) Who bring us the Books and Abstracts, and Patterns of Experiments of
all other parts. These we call Merchants of Light.

We have Three that collect the Experiments, which are in all Books. These we
call Depredators.

We have Three that Collect the Experiments of all the Mechanical Arts; And
also Libetal Sciences; And also of practices which are not Arts. These we call
Mystery men.

Such as themselves think good. These we call Pioneers or Miners.

We have Three that draw the Experiments of the Former four into Titles and
Tables, to give the better light for the drawing of Observations and Axioms out
of them. These we call Compilers.

We have Three that bend themselves, looking into the Experiments of their
Fellows, and cast about how to draw out of them Things of Use, for Man's life
and knowledge, as well for Works as for Plain Demonstration of Causes, clear
Means of Natural Divinations, and the easy Discovery of the virtues and Parts
of Bodies. These we call Dowry-men or Benefactors.

Then after diverse Meetings and Consults of our whole Number, to consider of
the former labors and Collections, we have Three that take care, out of them
to direct new Experiments, of a Higher Light, more Penetrating into Nature than
the Former. These we call Interpreters of Nature.

We have Three others that do execute the Experiments, so Directed, and Report
them. These we call Inoculators.

Lastly, We have Three that raise the former Discoveries by experiments, into
Greater Observations, Axioms, and Aphorisms. These we call Interpreters of
Nature.

We have also, as you must think, Novices and Apprentices, that the succession
of the former employed men do not fail; besides a great Number of Servants and
Attendants, Men and Women. And this we do also: We have Consultations, which of
the Inventions and Experiences which we have discovered shall be published, and
which not: And take all an Oath of Secrecy, for the concealing of those which
we think meet to keep Secret, Though some of those we do reveal sometimes to the
State, and some not.

For our Ordinances and Rites; we have two very Long and Fair Galleries: In one
of these we place Patterns and Samples of all manner of the most Rare and
excellent Inventions; In the other we place the Statuaes of all Principal
Inventors. There we have the Statua of your Columbus, that discovered the
West Indies; Also the Inventor of Ships. Your Monck that was the Inventor of
Ordnance, and of Gunpowder: The Inventor of Music: The Inventor of Letters:
The Inventor of Printing: The Inventor of Observations of Astronomy: The
Inventor of Works in Metal: The Inventor of Glass: The Inventor of Silk of the
Worm: The Inventor of Wine: The Inventor of Corn and Bread: The Inventor of
Sugars: And all these, by more certain Tradition, than you have. Then we have
diverse Inventors of our own of Excellent Works; which since you have not seen,
it were too long to make Description of them; And besides, in the right
Understanding of those Descriptions, you might easily err. For upon every
Invention of Value, we erect a Statua to the Inventor, and give him a Liberal
and Honorable Reward. These Statuaes are, some of Brass; some of Marble and
Touchstone; some of Cedar and other special Woods gilt and adorned; some of
Iron, some of Silver, some of Gold.

We have certain Hymns and Services, which we say daily, of Laud and Thanks to
God for his Mavelous Works; And Forms of Prayers, imploring his Aid and
Blessing for the Illumination of our Labors; the end turning them into Good
and Holy Uses.

Lastly, we have Circuits or Visits of diverse Principal Cities of the Kingdom;
whereas it comes to pass, that we do publish such new profitable Inventions as
we think good. And we do also declare Natural Divinations of Diseases, Plagues,
Swarms of Hurtful Creatures, Scarcity, Tempest, Earthquakes, Great Inundations,
Comets, Temperature of the Year, and diverse other things; And we give Counsel
thereupon what the People shall do for the prevention and Remedy of it.

And when he had said this, He stood up, And I, as I had been taught, kneeled
down: and he laid his right hand upon my Head, and said, God bless thee my Son,
and God bless this relation which I have made. I give thee leave to publish it,
for the good of other Nations; For we are in Gods Bosom, a Land unknown. And
so he left me; Having assigned a value of about two thousand Ducats, for a
Bounty to me and my fellows. For they give great Largesses, where they come,
upon all occasions.

The Impressa of Mr. Bushels Golden Medal.
depiction of Thomas Bushell's medal of Francis Bacon FRA BACON VICECO SCT
ALBAN ANGLIAE CANCEL DEVS EST QVI CLAVSA RECLVDIT THO BVSHELL

THe Lord St Alban's Atlantis is a Magazine of compendious (but sublime)
documents to enrich a Commonwealth with universal Notions, as far above a
vulgar capacity, as the Empyreal Heavens are the Earth; for which cause himself
styled it his Solomon's house, or six days work: But the way to advance a
proportionable Revenue (proposed by his Philosophical Theory) to accomplish the
vast design of such a Magnificent Structure, without a Princes Purse, will seem
as abstruse to some acute apprehensions, as the immortal descent of the Soul to
animate the Embryon in the Womb: yet if any responsible persons are incredulous
of Mr. Bushell's proceedings to perfect the said Lords Philosophical Theory in
Mineral discoveries, according to his undertakings, let them, or any other that
have heretofore given him credit upon the late Kings score, or his own, repair
to the assurance Office at the Royal Exchange, where they shall have tendered
(by Friends of his) Medals of Gold, by way of Mart, to raise 1000 l. per week,
according to the tenor of a Bill expressed at large in his Abridgement of the
Lord Chancellor Bacon's mineral Prosecutions, so soon as it is settled in
Parliament for their encouragement, and himself has liberty to attend
Providence in the success.

FINIS.
Postscript to the Judicious Reader.
READER,
IF thou have perused the foregoing Treatise of the Isle of Bensalem, wherein
the Philosophical Father of Solomon's House does perfectly demonstrate my
Heroic Masters (the Lord Chancellor Bacons) design, for the benefit of
mankind; then give me leave to tell thee, how far that illustrious Lord
proceeded in the practical part of such his Philosophical Notions, and when and
where they had their first rise, as well as their first Eclipse; their first
rise (as I have heard him say) was from the noble nature of the Earl of Essex's
affection and so they were clouded by his fall, although he bequeathed to that
Lord (upon his presenting him with a secret curiosity of Nature, whereby to
know the season of every hour of the year by a Philosophical Glass, placed
(with a small proportion of Water) in his Chamber,) Twitnam Park, and its
Garden of Paradise, to study in. But the sudden change of his Royal Mistresses
countenance, acting so Tragical a part upon his only friend, and her once
dearest Favorite, he likewise yielded his Law-studies as lost, despairing of
any preferment from the present State, as by many of his Letters in his Book of
Remains appears, so that he retired to his Philosophy for some few months, from
whence he presented the then rising Sun (Prince Henry) with an experiment of
his second Collections, to know the heart of Man by a sympathizing stone, made
of several mixtures, and ushered in the conceit with this ensuing discourse:
Most Royal Sir, Since you are by birth the Prince of our Country, and your
virtues the happy pledge to our posterity; and that the seigniory of Greatness
is ever attended more with flatterers, than faithful Friends, and loyal
Subjects; and therefore needs more helps to discern and pry into the hearts
of the People, than private persons. Give me leave noble Sir, as small Rivulets
run to the vast Ocean to pay their tribute; so let me have the honor to show
your Highness the Operative quality of these two triangular stones (as the
first fruits of my Philosophy) to imitate the pathetical motion of the
Lodestone and Iron, although made up by the Compounds of Meteors, (as
Star-shot jelly and other like magical ingredients, with the reflected beams of
the Sun, on purpose, that the warmth distilled unto them through the moist heat
of the hand, might discover the affection of the heart, by a vis ble sign of
their attraction and appetite to each other, like the hand of a Watch, within
ten minutes after they are laid upon a marble Table, or the Theater of a
Looking-glass. I write not this as a feigned story, but as a real truth; for I
was never quiet in mind till I had procured those Jewels of my Lords Philosophy
from Mr. Archy Prim-Rose, the Princes Page. But the sudden death of that Prince
give new cause of sorrow (to the whole Nation, as well as) to that Lord;
whereupon his Lordship dedicated his Advancement of Learning to his Brother
Charles, the surviving Prince; and to his prudent Father King James his Novum
Organum, who so much approved of his transcendent knowledge, and singular
eloquence, as in his Royal Wisdom he made him Lord Chancellor during life, and
Lord Protector during his absence in his Scottish Progress, and though this
eminent greatness gave many advantages to envious tongues, yet when his
Lordship had revealed the most mysterous parts of his Philosophy to his Master
the King, and delivered him his opinion concerning the disposition of Mr.
Suttons charity (expressed also in his Remains) he thereby so indulged his
Majesty's Genius, as he prevailed with him to call a Parliament, chiefly for
his Majesty's own pressing occasions, and to confirm this Academy of learning
in his way of Mining, by an Act of State, upon hopes of perfecting all other
expencefull trials by the said Revenue, and to that purpose his Lordship had
prepared the heads of a Speech to the said Parliament, which were as follows.

My Lords and Gentlemen, the King my Royal Master was lately (graciously)
pleased to move some discourse to me concerning Mr. Suttons Hospital, and such
like worthy foundations of memorable piety, which humbly seconded by my self,
drew his Majesty into a serious consideration of the Mineral Treasures of his
own Territories, and the practical discoveries of them by way of my
Philosophical Theory: which he then so well resented, that afterward (upon a
mature digestion of my whole design) he commanded me to let your Lordships
understand, how great an inclination he has to farther such a hopeful work,
for the Honor of his own Dominions and the public good, as the most probable
means to relieve all the poor thereof, without any other stock or benevolence
than that which divine bounty should confer on their own industries and honest
labors, in recovering all such drowned Mineral works as have been or shall be
therefore deserted.

And my Lords, all that is now desired from his Majesty and your Lordship, is
no more than a gracious Act of this present Parliament to authorize them
therein, adding a mercy to a munificence, which is, the persons of such strong
and able petty Felons, who in true penitence for their Crimes, shall implore
his Majesty's mercy, and permission to expiate their offenses by their
assiduous labors, in so innocent and hopeful a work.

For by this unch^rgeable way, my Lords, have I proposed to erect the
Academical fabric of this Islands Solomons-House, modeled in my new Atlantis;
And I can hope my Lords that my midnight studies to make our Countries
flourish, and outvie European neighbors in mysterious and beneficent Arts,
have not so ingratefully affected your noble intellects, that you will delay or
resist his Majesty's desires, and my humble Petition in this benevolent, yea,
magnificent affair, since your honorable posterities may be enriched thereby,
and my ends are only to make the world my Heir, and the learned Fathers of my
Solomons-House, the successive and sworn Trustees in the dispensation of this
great service for Gods glory, my Princes magnifice, this Parliaments honor, our
Countries general good, and the propagation of my own memory. And I may assure
your Lordships, that all my proposals in order to this great Architype, seemed
so rational and feisable to my Royal Soveragin our Christian Solomon, that I
thereby prevailed with his Majesty to call this Honorable Parliament to
confirm and empower me in my own way of Mining, by an Act of the same, after
his Majesty's more weighty affairs were considered in your wisdoms: both which
he desires your Lordships, and you Gentlemen that are chosen as the Patriots of
your respective Countries, to take speedy care of, which done, I shall not then
doubt the happy issue of my undertakings in this design; whereby concealed
Treasures which now seem utterly lost to mankind, shall be confined to so
universal a piety, and brought into use by the industry of converted Penitents,
whose wretched Carcases the impartial Laws have or shall dedicate as untimely
feasts to the worms of the earth, in whose womb those deserted Mineral riches
must ever lie buried as lost abortments unless those be made the active
Midwives to deliver them. For my Lords, I humbly conceive them to be the
fittest of all men to effect this great work, for the ends and causes which I
have before expressed.

All which, my Lords, I humbly refer to your grave and solid Judgments to
conclude of, together with such other assistances to this frame as your own
oraculous wisdom shall intimate, for the magnifying our Creator in his
inscrutable providence and admirable works of Nature.

But before this could be accom^lished to his own content, there arose such
complaints against his Lordship, and the then Favorite at Court, that for some
days put the King to this Quere, whether he should permit the Favorite of his
affection, or the Oracle of his Counsel to sink in his service? whereupon his
Lordship was sent for by the King, who after some discourse, gave him this
positive advice, to submit himself to his House of Peers, and that (upon his
Princely word) he would then restore him again, if they (in their honors)
should not be sensible of his merits; Now though my Lord foresaw his
approaching ruin, and told his Majesty there was little hopes of mercy in a
multitude, when his Enemies were to give fire, if he did not plead for himself,
yet such was his obedience to him from whom he had his being, that he resolved,
his Majesty's will should be his only Law, and so took leave of him, with these
words, Those that will strike at your Chancellor (its much to be feared) will
strike at your Crown; and wished that as he was then the first, so he might be
the last of Sacrifices. Soon after (according to his Majesty's commands) he
wrote a submissive letter to the House, and sent me to my Lord Windsor to know
the result, which I was loath at my return to acquaint him with, for, alas! his
Sovereigns favor was not in so high a measure, but he (like the Phoenix) must
be sacrifized in flames of his own raising, and so perished (like Icarus) in
that his lofty design, the great revenue of his Office being lost; and his
Titles of Honor saved but by the Bishops Votes; whereto he replied, That he
was only bound to thank his Clergy; the thunder of which fatal sentence did
much perplex my troubled thoughts, as well as others, to see that famous Lord,
who procured his Majesty to call this Parliament, must be the first subject of
their revengeful wrath; and that so unparalleld a Master should be thus brought
upon the public stage for the foolish miscarriages of his own servants,
whereof (with grief of heart) I confess my self to be one. Yet shortly after,
the King dissolved the Parliament, but never restored that matchless Lord to
his place; which made him then to wish the many years he had spent in
State Policy and Law-study, had been solely devoted to true Philosophy: for
(said he) the one at best does but comprehend man's frailty in its greatest
splendour, but the other the mysterious knowledge of all things created in the
six days work. Wherefore considering his fatherlike favors to my undeservings,
expressed in my confession to the honorable Council, and knowing the Library he
left to the world, viz.

His great work entitled, Instauratio Magna, an admirable piece, containing

First, de Augmentis Scientiarum, or his advancement of Learning, in nine
Books, written in Latin, and dedicated to King Charles, then Prince of Wales.

Secondly, Novum organum, sive Judica vera de interpretatione naturae, written
in Latin and dedicated to King James.

Thirdly, Sylva Sylvarum, or his Natural History, his New Atlantis, his History
of Life and Death, and historia ventorum, all dedicated to King Charles by D.
Rawley, sometimes his Lordships Chaplain.

Sermones fideles sive interioria rerum, otherwise called his Essays, dedicated
to the Duke of Buckingham.

De sapientia veterum, or the wisdom of the Ancients, dedicated to the Earl of
Salisbury (Lord Treasurer, and Chancellor of the University of Cambridge) and
to the University, a double dedication, which was afterward translated by Sir
Arthur Gorges, and dedicated to the Queen of Bohemia.

Dialogus de Bello Sacro, dedicated to Lancelot Andrews Bishop of Winchester.

The History of Henry the Seventh, dedicated to K. Charles.

His Elements of the Law.

Resuscitatio, certain excellent Discourses, Letters, and the like, being his
Remains, set forth by the said Doctor Rawley.

A Manual of Devotions, entitled Comfortable Crumbs of refreshment, by Prayers,
Meditations, Consolations, and Ejaculations, with a confession of Faith,
published by the aforesaid worthy and faithful Doctor Rawley, Doctor in
Divinity, and one of his Majesty's Chaplains.

I willingly then betook my self to that penance of solitude, imposed me by his
Lordships Fatherly advice, (as is expressed in my Letter to my fellow Prisoners
for Debt) before I should dare to attempt any of his Mineral ^rust, formerly
consigned me by the favor of his affection (as does more at large appear in my
humble Remonstrance to the Honorable Council;) the which for three years I
strictly kept, as if obliged by a Religious Vow; from whence I was grown so
sensible of other men's suffering restraint for Conscience sake, as I procured
the liberty of many Jesuit Priests, Anabaptists, Brownists, Familists of love,
Adamites, and one of the Rosie-Crucians, whose humility and knowledge I much
admired, conceiving it (in my weak judgment) very hard measure for any mortal
to punish such with imprisonment, when those that committed them could not
warrant to save their souls, though they might protect their persons, which
last is the only cause of our allegiance to a Sovereign power. But then finding
another desolate Cell of Natures rarities at the head of a Spring near my own
House in Oxfordshire, which my Conscience gave me was allotted by Providence to
retard my intended travels, I (in imitation of that excellent Lords sublime
fancy) beautyfied the same with the Ornaments of contemplative Groves and
Walks, as well as artificial Thunder and Lightning, Rain, Hail-showers, Drums
beating, Organs playing, Birds singing, Waters murmuring, the Dead arising,
Lights moving, Rainbows reflecting with the beams of the Sun, and watery showers
springing from the same Fountain; these were then my sole Companions, and
speechless Preachers to inform me without trusting to the broken staff of
faithless men. And to free my self from the trouble of any Cook, I observed my
Lords prescription, to satisfy nature with a Diet of Oil, Honey, Mustard, Herbs
and Biscuit, my Drink Water, like those long-lif'd Fathers before the Food;
where the late King finding me in this posture, and by my then discourse in
commemoration of my old Master, conceived me capable (with the help of that
Lords Philosophy) to do him some more acceptable service in Mineral discoveries
(for the Honor of the Nation) than the collation I made him of his own native
silver, upon his second visiting that Rock the year following.

But let me tell you, before these Philosophical trials of natural causes could
be brought to any perfection, I with patience endured all reproaches of
malicious minds, and woar the fools coat in the repute of men more ready to
condemn, than examine; yet had not Lawsutes arose upon my successes in Mineral
discoveries, and the late Wars intervened, with the commands of the King to
attend his motion therein, (which occasioned my proceedings for sixteen years
to be lost) I presume, providence (without any partner) had enabled me to give
incredulous persons a plenary satisfaction of that Lords unparalleld abilities,
the mere fame of whose unlimited bounty and nobleness of mind, did so much
incline my affections to serve him, at the first sight, as I was never
satisfied till (by my own address, without intercession of others) he admitted
me his servant, that so I might (from my own experience) give account of his
merits, when I traveled into foreign parts. But (I must confess) I never so
much admired his universal knowledge in his prosperity, as in his adversity;
for in the one (without flattery) I discovered his seeming ends were no more,
than to aspire to popular greatness in Princes Courts, and so gain the Trophy
of that Honor to his Name; but in the other I found his soaring thoughts were
so much above the World, as the Earth is beneath Heaven, that had I been Heir
to the greatest Dukedom on Earth, I would have made a dedication of it all to
have had his Age doubled in this time of his profound and Divine Philosophical
observations, for then his Judgment plainly concluded, that all was vanity, and
that he that was wise in his own conceit, there was more hope of a Fool than of
him, Saying daily to me and others, That the knowledge a man was to learn
whereby to save his Soul, and magnify the Creator, was included in these two
words, Love and Charity, And that those volumes written by the Dictates of the
holy Ghost were but explanations of their sense. But to speak of the general
practice of the world, from his own observation, he was sparing, because (as I
conceive) by former discourse, that he found it to be but an apparent Cheat,
even from the highest to the lowest, according to their capacities in their
several callings. For then his deep intellectuals were so frequent in
foretelling things to come, as he gave me not only the divination and
predictions of many future events of Kings and States, Arts and Sciences, but
advised me to observe the reasons thereupon, by his Divine Philosophical
Theory, and yet not to divulge them as his, until those notions observed by
himself should come to pass, which was to kn^w whether Minerals at their
lowest level of the Mountains did increase in quality and quantity, and whether
the eye by inspection through a prospective Glass, might not take the longitude
and latitude of its object many miles distant in as large a manner as the sight
alone does contract it self at a smaller, (for by those principles of his) upon
the same natural causes, it seems, do depend matters of greater moment, which
are left to the practical trials of his six Philosophers to collect and add to
his natural History, and this I can assure you, by the report of an honest
Gentleman, and discreet person, is now completed in Holland, to the admiration
of all men. In a word (Gentle Reader) had I no more to do than to mollify the
hardest Rocks, undermine Mountains, drain their waters, discover their
Minerals, separate their qualities, and (by that Lords Philosophy) to make this
Northern Climate a second Indies for honor and profit, I should then think my
burden light in doing my Country service. But (to say truth) I am to encounter
(in pursuit of that Lords design (with the subterranean spirits) which are
(supposed) the Guardians of all concealed treasures) and their evil Accomplices,
wicked men, who prove to me more obnoxious, and greater Remoras in the ways of
their perverse natures, than any of those infernal Spirits can be: for by a
contrite heart, humble Prayer, and industrious labor, I can conjure the one to
a due obedience; but (I fear) whole hoasts of men will not be able to qualify
the barbarous condition of the other, so that (Courteous Reader) if (upon this
result) you plead not my cause, and secure me from men's fraudulent practices,
when I have brought such treasures to public sight, I shall expect no success
for my honest Creditors satisfaction, nor so great a blessing to follow, for
the good of the Nation.

And now having given you (for the most part) an account of the Lord Bacons
retardments in his Mineral Philosophy, and my own last obstructions occasioned
by the late Wars, give me leave to tell you what my Lord gave me in charge by
way of caution, which was;

First, To beware of those people who are so self-conceited, as they think
nothing is well done, if they have not an interest by their vote therein; lest
they make their revenge upon this Mineral design; witness (faith that Lord)
the loss of the West Indies upon that score.

Secondly, That Lord charged me not to intermeddle with any trial of curiosity
in his or any others man's Philosophy, whereby to prejudice my purse, lose my
time, or put my self to trouble, until I had compassed a considerable revenew
(by his notions) and an i^fallible assurance of its daily increase by
undermining those loads of Metal, and separating their qualities; and yet not
then neither but by the help of those six Philosophers mentioned in the
foregoing Treatise, after they are settled to that service, sworn to secrecy,
and taking his Theorical directions also to be considered in their own
practices: for how have the wisest men (says he) consumed vast Estates through
their covetous desires to be great in the transmuting of Metals, and the
knowledge of the sympathy of minds at a distance, as well as curing of wounds
with having but sight of the weapon that hurt the p^rty? for (says he)
repentance cannot then follow, nor thy ignorance be blamed, when providence
bears the purse, and such prudence waits with industry to try the success of
the secrets of nature out of the bountifulness of her own Coffers so
discovered.

Thirdly, That no money should enchant my heart to take a partner, be I never
so poor, unless I find his heart inclined to magnify the Creators glory, and
make the poor ma^s box the Heir of his Stewardship, as well as my self; for else
(says he) thou do distrust in providence, and so the others money will be
but thy ruin at l^st, like a house divided, which cannot stand.

Fourthly, That I should be careful to prefer such poor fatherless Children
that intend to sacrifize the flower of their youth to the service of God, and
resolve so to continue to their death, for the good of others as well as
themselves.

Fifthly, To be cautious of having any thing to do with a Miner that is an
habitual drunkard, swea^er or liar, for his custom of sinning may infe^t many
others and it is contrary to all divine Philosophy, to seek to magni^ie Gods
Glory with such Creatures, when no hopes of a blessing can follow their
actions.

Sixthly, Have a c^re (says that Lord) you place such a person to be Steward
of your Mines under ground, whose remorse for sin makes him so sensible of
sorrow and hame for his errors, as that he desires to live in contrition within
the caverns of rocks, and not to behold other light than of a candle, to labor
and help his contemplation in such an Abyss; for that Lo^d was wont to say, the
blind once restored to sight, illuminates the Creators mercy more than any
other Creature, and is of my own experience, the best Philosophical step to the
mortification of the mind, by attracting the defects of us mortals that are
prone to such habitual errors.

Seventhly, (says he) do not punish any offender by the superior Officer, but
as shall be judged by a Jury of penitential souls of their own Tribe; for
(says he) if civil usage cannot make the heart strike the blow, as well as the
hand, severity should never force a builder of his Solomon's house, since it is
barbarous for a Christian to behold the Image of God used like a Dog.

Eighthly, He wished me not to search after new Mines until I knew the
Meanders, windings and depths of the old, with the natures of the Quarries they
lodge in, by the way of that direction he gave me; for otherwise he said I
should verify the old Proverb, to look for a needle in a bottle of Hay, having
no probable rules to guide me, but my own will, which could not prosper, nor be
coherent with Gods word, until I denied my self that privilege; yet in the
mean time, that I should make some public Declaration from a place certain, to
relieve the poor of all such parishes where Spars and shades of Mines are found
through ploughing the barren grounds, or by ditchers labors, when notice be
given thereof, to be wrought at my own charge. But be sure (said he) have a
care that you come into no man's ground (although you have power from the King
and Parliament) until you have acquainted him of your intended adventures, for
the common good, and of the poor of the parish, at your own charge; for leave
is said to be light, and do as you would be done by: yet if he will neither
work himself, nor give his consent to you paying double trespass, as the next
Justice of peace shall judge, go by his door, for thou have done thy duty, when
thou have aquainted the supreme power wherein the remora lies, that the poor
are not relieved, nor the riches of the Commonwealth discovered.

Ninethly, That no Grant should go under my hand (if I gained the whole power
of that trust) but with such restrictions, limitations and provisoe^, as he had
left me in charge; for by that means men would buckle to their work and go
faster on with their discoveries, when thou have the honor of pre-emption of
he place from the King and State.

Tenthly, That I should be cautelous of not coveting riches, nor mindful of
vainglorious pleasures; but above all, not to disquiet my Conscience with the
ingratitude of any wicked acts, for the mystery of divine Philosophy will not
admit of any of those to have a share in such a blessing.

But (Gentle Reader) fearing there might be a grand Inquest to sit upon that
Lords unparalled judgment, for trusting this transcendent Mineral work to my
weak capacity, and decline his nearest kindred, as well as the greatest
Scholars, I shall unfold the riddle of his conception, and leave the resolution
for your wisdom to judge of. And yet I must be forced before I enter upon such
a Subject, to observe the rule of that great Ambassador the Lord Gundamor, who
was known never to move any weighty affairs of his Master the King of Spain to
King James, but what he ushered in with some Spanish story, and left the
application to the prudency of his Princely consideration, from whence (if it
may not be thought tedious or troublesome) I shall tell you a true English
passage, which sprang from the saying of my Lord Bacon, That he conceived civil
courtesies were seldom conferred on suffering persons, but that they ever wore
the badge of contempt, and were the scorn of the rich, and scarcely pittyed of
the poor, the application being alluded by his Lordship to my own prodigal
expenses; and observing his precepts as oracles, I took it so much to heart,
that in the prime of my youth, and flourishing fortune in his affection, I
forced my will to change the Scene of Court pleasure in his service, to a
Cottagers habit and low condition, lest I should be surprised with the frowns
of indigent fortune to my greater shame, before such a prepara^ion might be had
to encounter those storms that are incident to such natural causes, and so meet
them half way by affecting the low condition of a Fishermans life, and his
honest calling, as a step to greater perfection to know my self. From whence
after some few months spent in this humble way of life, to read the Histories
of those great Princes and most magnificent Commanders which had surfited with
all inconstant pleasures and vain glorious pomp, voluntarily descended from
their Crowns and Conquests into the deserts of so desolate Cells, solitary
Groves, and imprisoned themselves in monasteries as the fittest preparative to
the other worlds felicity; I met with an old man near the Needles in the Isle
of Wight, and asking of him some ^stions of his sad condition, he gave me to
understand, that his ^sion was a Beggar by descent, saying, that his Father
before him was one, and born so lame by a natural cause, as the same grief
became hereditary to himself being his only son, which he willingly embraced as
a Legacy given him from a divine Power, ever since his deceased Father had
assured him, that he which was bo^n lame, blind, or deaf, was a true Beggar to
ask in Christ's behalf the charity of the rich, and that they should be the only
witnesses of their Stewardship at their general account; and not any of those
whose poverty proceeded from their prodigal expense or lascivious behavior, to
deter others from the like of their own shame, for they were but marckt out as
the living Statues, and to show Gods Mercy if they did truly repent, as well as
his Justice in increasing their punishment if they did not: This divine and
canting language from a Beggars Scrip (says he) is the down right Documents we
hold in the head Council of our Fraternity, which made me then to be so much in
love with his company and condition, asking him another question, Whether he
was really contented in his heart with his poverty, without repining at other
men's prosperity, when he was denied at their door the poor man's alms to relieve
his necessities, although he said his Prayers for the same in Christ name? who
modestly replied, There was a God above well knew, he never envied any man's
greatness, nor wished to change his hourly affliction for rheir daily
felicities, by reason (as he said) his own account would be the more easy to
make at the general Judgment, than the others that live in variety of
pleasures. His upper and nether garments were left as a legacy from his Father,
and recruited by the constant Drapery of every hedges, and that the care of his
Summers harvest was no more than by daily prayers, Gods providence, and the
Alms of others, to purchase a pair of high shoes against the winter storms
and dirty ways, by selling the worth of two pence for a penny to those poor
widows known by him to be next to his own degree of Beggary. Night growing on,
I gave him a half-fac'd groat to beget his further acquaintance, and to
increase his stock toward purchasing his content therein, which he so
thankfully took (after I told him Providence had given me the value of the Sum
in a draught of fish the day before) that he promised me a visit, and I another
days labor upon the same score, For know (sweet Reader) his homespun
discourse was so pleasing to my solitude, as the Soul and Body never strugled
more with their diversor death, than I did in my own reason to spend some
hours of time in his society, and to that purpose made my humble addresses to
my quondum Master by the ensuing Letter.

My only Lord, observing your precepts as Oracles, the (...) prodigality
continued it would be certainly rewarded with reproach and poverty, I did upon
second thoughts think fit in the first step to my amendment to become a
Fishermans Cottager from your princely service, rather than such high
obstructions should remain in me by connivency, to the years of old age, and to
embrace rather the conversation of a Beggars society, with h^s Principles here
enclosed, which I look upon as the shepherds star to g^id, my perverse will in
the rules of reason: for since my profuse carriage did sway me so much, as I
could not withstand a temptation, when I beheld the object of evil, but rather
grew to be worse and worse, I am resolved now to become your Lordships
Beads-man in some solitary Cell, and endeavor to make my self worthy of your
Honors command, in the other world

Longing more to meet with this Beggar again,, than the Mistress of my heart,
when I acted the Scholars part in Cupids Schoof. Sunday month after he came to
the Church Porch to hear public prayer, where my self being placed upon a form
by my friend the Fisherman, the lot of providence drove my next Neighbor to
his devotion, and yet (such was his humility, that) I could not persuade him to
sit down by me, but the morning service being shortly after completed, I shook
him by the hand as I went out of the Church, which caused some persons of
quality that were behind me to ask him particular questions, how we came to be
acquainted? who cried me so much up for my familiar discourse, and giving him a
half-fac'd groat, that the better sort took me for such a spy (disguised) as
heretofo^e had attempted the betraying that Island to the French; and in order
to the same Inquest, the prime Gentleman of the parish invited the Fisherman
and his wife to supper, and to bring me along with them; where after a civil
treatment, he gave me to understand what had passed betwixt the said Beggar of
Beggars and himself, concerning the deportment of my carriage. But I (unwilling
to be known) kept my thoughts to those principles agreed on between me and the
Fisherman, as his Kinsman; howsoever he informed me what the fame of the
Country was upon my being in such a remote Cottage, and giving the Beggar a
groat in the poor habit I wore, the which if I would but relate to him the
truth of my coming thither, no man should be more my servant than himself,
saying, That it might be possible for public distastes to cause private
resolutions in the heart of the greatest persons; and therefore (if it might be
suitable to my own reason to unfold the cause, and make him of my Cabinet
Council) the interest he had as Lord of the place, I should command, without
the least prejudice to my self, or fear of invading those composures of my
quiet. For which great courtesy I kindly thankt him, but withal told him,
That if he desired my name, and the occasion of my repose, it would not be in
his power to do me a private civility; for being once known, the place of my
residence would be then as obnoxious to my mind, as it was now pleasing to my
senses, and therefore to be forward in searching more after me, were to
disoblige a stranger that coveted his acquaintance; for if I were a person of
that quality as he conceived, his silence might make me grateful upon the score
of his own merit. And so parting upon those hopes to have his honest
Neigbourhood and best assistance, I went to meet the old Beggar with a cheerful
heart at the place appointed, and discoursing of our former subject over a
Collation I made him of Bread and Cheese, he then told me, that he and his
comrades had not only the same diet every night before they went to Bed in
their spacious Barn of straw, (consigned them by the Christian charity of some
honest Farmer, or good Freeholder) but after a thankful remembrance to the
All-disposer, they had a repetition of the present times, and the bounty of
rich men's Tables, as well as the mock-Beggars Palaces, giving their verdict as
canonical amongst the sage Beggars by inspection from their own observation,
what must become of their actions and issue that, quoth he, live by oppression
and in pleasures; whereof (yo^ng man) I must tell you, my Father was held a
great Astrologer for those hidden mysteries in the Beggars fraternity, although
his education had no other Tutorship then 76 years experience under the green
Canopy of summer hedges, (called the Beggars College) in moonshiny nights, (and
as I take it) the Shepherds Calendar went no further with them in the literal
sense of Astrology, than the cognizance of all Creatures behaviors in their
lives and deaths; intimating once a month as a general Lector to our memory,
that nothing more of learning was required from us mortals, but the glory of
humility and obedience. Which caused me to propose this question, Whether his
mind was not addicted to the same study of his fathers Collections, or whether
they were buried in his own Sepulcher? Who with a sigh and sobbing heart, told
me in short, It was his greatest grief, for he had nothing of the book but
seven Prayers, for every day in the week one: And yet (young man) said he, if
you have a desire to see fashions in a Beggars habit, as well as in the gay
clothes of the Worlds converse, I will conduct you to the acquaintance of those
persons that were of repute with my father, and of such singular documents and
principles, without worldly ends, as they in short time will make you heir to
the track of their knowledge in moral virtues, if they find by your physiognomy
and carriage, an inclination of yo^rs to do good to the sad condition of their
own tribe, as well as to your self, and indoctrinate the rest by winnowing the
chaff from the corn, the good from the bad. For we have most commonly once a
week in our Barn, Gypsies, Bedlams, and all sorts of lazy Vagabonds, which we
conceive i^ the poor and honest Beggars purgatory, and a great trial of his
hum^ne patience, when such a misery is added to his poverty; there being all
degrees of professions from the highest to the lowest that come within the
verge of our Beggars assembly, to give us an abstract of the rest of the
family, as well as the occasion that brought them to our acquaintance; and then
we commonly show them their pedigree from the Usurers book, the Lawiers
library, the Courtiers chea^, the Countrimans fraud, the Merchants falsity, and
what sprang from their own exorbitant fooleries, when and where came the curse
to them of such a desolation, and how to salve the same from despair of Gods
mercy, which ever attends their consciences in such wicked actions.

I had no sooner received the Epi^ome of those Beggars pilgrimages in a far
larger measure than is here expressed, but I began to contemplate upon the
happiness I should receive, if a Summers progress were spent in such a
service, that was called by him the Charnel-house of the living being buried
alive; because it was observed, that some of every family had always their
recourse to this impregnable Citadel of misery, that can and must hold out (as
he did aver) to the last man: Which considerations brought me then to lo^th my
self, and the whole Worlds Commerce, for his solid society. But some ten days
after I was summoned by the Governor of that Island upon the old score of a
Spy; Where giving him the same account as before expressed, in answer to his
Queries, I found him so rigidly bent to make me his prisoner, as I was forced
to put on the disguise of a discontented Lover, and to implore the intercession
of three virtuous and amiable Ladies that were accidentally present, letting
them know, that I had lost the Mistress of my heart by death, which is Natures
Sergeant, a month before, and could not assuage that passion of affection
remaining with me in remembrance of her fidelity, unless I should interre my
self in her Tomb, or use this means of so itude to ease my groaning spirit and
oppressed mind, hoping their compassionate natures wou^d favor me with their
pi^ies, and palliate the Governors fury through their familiar acquaintance,
if they had ever been in Love themselves, or did believe there was such a
prevalent power in that passion after the death of his or her dearly beloved
Friend. From whence, with joint consent, they rose up like Lightning, tore the
Warrant made for my Commitment, saying, It were impossible for such expressions
of fervent love to proceed from so simple a fellow as I did seem to be, but
that it must be the cause of my obscurity, and not any other affinity to the
nature of a Spy, than contemplating on her memory that was dead to the world,
though living to my self.

But his hard heart being frozen with age from any such affection, signed
another warrant to secure my person his prisoner, which made me then disclose
my name, and whose servant I was, with contempt to his power. Dinner then
coming in. I took my leave, saying to the Ladies, That the Mistress I meant to
harbor in my breast, as my only companion in this solitude, was to exchange
the habitual errors of my youth for virtuous acts; And though the place can now
afford me (being known) no other content than shame, yet the Mother should
sooner forget her Child, than I their noble civilities, and to that purpose I
would wait upon them in another habit toward my Journey to London: where
giving my quondam Master an account with the reason of my revolt, he said, It
showed I was lukewarm in my Devotion, when I was ashamed of such an innocent
profession; howsoever he seemed glad of my return, and said, If he were assured
of my perseverance to endeavor the Mastery of my self, he would trust me in
the secrets of his Mineral design before any Kinsman or Scholar of his
acquaintance; being jealous (as I conceive from his following discourse) that
the one might be careless or covetous, and the other arrogate the whole honor
to himself, although Divine Providence gave the increase, and inspired that
Lords Philosophy to make the model from such a promiscuous Chaos as drowned
Minerals and Condemned men, hoping by their conversions to do the work for Gods
greater glory, and his own more perpetual honor.

The Moral of which truth in trying a retired life, confirmed by my Lords
trust, and my perseverance in the like way, induced the late King to grant me
not only my own desires in the Mines, Mint and Customs, but afterward his
Majesty was confined to Carisbrook Castle in the Isle of Wight, where (amongst
other Discourses with which some of his Attendants entertained him) he was
assured of the truth of this passage between my self and the Beggar, he called
to mind a Treatment I had given him and diverse of his Nobility, at my Grotto in
Oxfordshire 33. years ago, where one (by my appointment) in the habit of one of
those Philosophical Hermits before mentioned in the 28 page of my Lords
Atlantis, addressed himself to his Majesty by this ensuing speech, ascending
out of the ground, as a prophetic preludium to the practical discovery of
Mineral Treasures, and all mysterious Arts; (for I must tell you, the third
year following, I gave him a collation of his own coined Silver newly
discovered out of his barren mountains, whereby the utmost grandeur of humane
Empire might be completed by such true Hermits if persued in the like nature)
commanded me to ask my Lord Say, whether it might not be possible to have his
restraint limited to that place, and not to return to the said Castle any more,
giving such of the Nobility as were his friends engaged as Security that he
should not go out of the Precincts of that Grotto, nor intermeddle with any
State Affairs, until themselves found it expedient for the general good: But
this being denied, made me decline the recesses of that solitude.

And now (gentle Reader) since that Lord in his wisdom conceived it necessary
to limit the aforesaid Practice according to the Dictates of his own Theory, I
refer my self to your judicious censure; although I confess my simplicity is so
great, that I cannot arrogate any thing of ^nowledge to my self, (which may
seem to lessen the merits of that unparalled Lord) but am like the Mule that
bears his Masters Treasure, or a Porter that carries a Letter, yet knows not
the worth of its contents. The Moral whereof is this, That the Poor man's Tale
may be heard as well as the Rich, and that self-willed persons of self-intere^
may not sway the judgment of a whole state from trying the Divine Mysteries of
that Lords Philosophy, lest his Overtrres (penned by his Pupils observation in
this foregoing Treatise, for setting the Poor on work, easing the Subjects Tax,
and giving the Tenth of what Treasure-trove shall be discovered by such Art, or
of Drowned Lands recovered from the Sea, without prejudice to any) should prove
witnesses against us in the next age, to the perpetual shame and dishonor of
this.

I write not this (Gentle Reader) to ingratiate my self into your good opinion
for releasing me from imprisonment, or to be restored to the possession of my
Estate (according to Articles) lest a Critic, o^ self-ended person should carp
at the same, and report I had trapan'd the Judgment of a State under the
notion of this Treasure; although I am assured that the Parliament and the then
Lord General will find their Honors as much imprisoned as my person, when they
shall read their own Articles, signed by their General, and confirmed by
themselves; which makes me not remove my body by a Habeas Corpus to the upper
Bench or Fleet, as others in my condition do, for I find the major part of my
just Creditors are satisfied at the s ght of my sufferings, as well as the
others are pleased that I do suffer from their severe cruelties; and I pray God
the rest of their Estates and reputation do not consume and come to nothing,
since they have brought me to this sad condition; for (I assure you) some of
them that were actors in ruining my credit by detraction, and had wrested my
Estate from me by getting the possession in those times of War, and pleading
Outlawries to my Bills of Equity, came to my Bedside when they were sick to
death and told me before my servants, that they could not dye with a quiet
Conscience until they had asked me forgiveness, and so revealed the Plots of
others that had a hand in my ruin, wh^h has reduced me to a contended mind in
the midst of discontent.

But that which grieves my Soul, is, I fear my Ghost will walk when I am dead,
in those shades of Mineral obscurities, to see so matchless a design of my Lord
Bacons Atlantis that is Translated into all Languages for its exquisite
contrivancy, and his Mineral Philosophy that was consigned to support its
Fabric, should suffer shipwreck through self-interest, when mere Providence in
these revolutions and junctures of time has brought it so far to light, as I
dare engage my life, that (out of those drowned works I have now in hand, and
many others prescribed by that Lord) I may in the effecting this great Work for
my Countries good, vie with the wisdom of a State, the valor of an Army, and
the City purses, if Justice permit me to enjoy what Providence shall produce
out of those works, provided no other follow the way of my Lords Mineral
experiments, and become my corrival in the deserted works. So that Gentle
Reader, I have no more to write, but to end as I begun with the Lord Gondomar's
to King James, who said they had a Spanish Proverb. That that man which sought
by the ruin of his native Country, to erect a Trophy of honor to his own
name, more than to Gods glory, was in his conception cursed, his Mother
bewitched, and himself nursed with a Tiger. Inferring, that the hands of public
persons employed to Noble actions, are his vicegerents upon Earth, in making
the world their Heir without ends of their own and so become the truest
Stewards of those Talents, which his gracious Providence has committed to
their trust.

Your faithful friend and humble Servant T. B.

The Hermits Speech when he ascended out of the ground, as the King and some of
his Nobility entered Mr. Bushels Rock.
WITH bended knees thus Humbly do I pray,
You blessed powers, that glorify this day,
And to my frozen lips have utterance given,
Speak, O speak the Commands you bring from Heaven!
For by times Emblem that since Noah's flood
I thus have grasped, my Soul has understood,
The world no farther journey has to sail
Than is betwixt the Serpents head, and tail.
If then before the Earths great funeral,
Most glorious SIR, you hit her come to call
The Inmates of this solitary place
To strict account, for Heaven sake daign the grace
To lend your patience, and a Gentle ear
To what I ought to speak, and you may hear:
A Prodigal profuse in vast expense,
That nothing studied, but to please his sense,
Trimming a glorious outside, whilst within
He cherisht naught but propagating sin,
That multiplied so fast, there was no place
Allowed for virtue, or for saving grace;
God of his mercy pleased was at last
A glorious Eye upon his Soul to cast,
Which being so near a final rack as now,
His only care, his study is, but how
He may redeem the years he lost in sin,
And live as he to live now did begin.
What followed next, must be conceived of course,
Confession, contrition, and remorse,
These guides to Heaven he happily persu'd,
Viewed his past life, and that again reviewed:
And to that end he purchased at a price
This field, then steril, now his Paradise;
Where he, as man of old by God being bound,
With Adam, wrought, and dig'd, and dressed the ground:
Here are no Rivers such as Eden had,
Nor were there banks with trees or flowers clad
T'invite a stay, the Owl, not Philomel
Within this solitary place did dwell.
And I, the Genius of this obscure Cave
Since the great deluge, lived as in a grave,
Chained to this Rock, my Tombstone in despair
Of freedom, or to view such beams, as are
Shot from your Virtues: All my days were night,
Until the humble Owner brought to light
These eyes of mine, and forced great Nature show
This Masterpiece, a grace she did not owe
To any age before; and sooth to say,
I think it was created against this day.
If then ye be the God of Britains earth,
And rule this Isle (as sure you are by birth)
Vouchsafe a blessing, such a one as may
Preserve this Rock, my mansion, from decay,
For envy would expel me from my home,
And sink me in the ruins of my own.
But let the true Professor, to whom Heaven
For pure devotion sake the place has given,
Let him in Peace enjoy it, that he may
Build Altars here, and daily offerings pay
For his preservers health, grant this, and then
I that lived long with stones, will live with men,
And think the Golden Age is now begun,
In which no injuries are meant or done:
Such Innocents as yet remain with us
That do inhabit here, and humbly thus
We mean to live, having no other fare
Than uncurst water, uncorrupted air.
Vouchsafe to enter, and you here shall find
Nothing but what may please a displeased mind.
My bold Commission's done, and I return
Down to my humble grave, my peaceful urn.
The Hermits Contemplation upon the Rock.
GReat Nature, had I not a Soul, that spies
A greater Power enth^on'd above the skies,
I should I adore thee, and should Idolize
This Masterpiece of thine, and sacrifize
The fat of Bullocks to thy memory:
But we forbidden are to defy
What may be seen; since that it is revealed
The face of what is Divine must be concealed
From mortal eyes, until that greatest light
Be quite put out that severs day from night.
Where are the Muses, that were wont to sing
Their well-tuned notes about Parnassus spring?
Where is that Master Piece of Poets now,
That had a Laurel wreath to crown each brow?
Where are those Paperspoilers, that can part
With many sheets to paint out painted Art
In praising faces, features such as be
In beauty poor, if once compared to thee?
Shall I not think the world on's dead-bed lies,
And summoned to his funeral obsequies,
The Souls departed hence, when thus I see
Nature unlock her richest Treasury,
And in this doting Age discover more
Than in six thousands years that past before?
You, that can sequester your self from men,
And buried be alive in Cave, or Den,
In hollow Rock, or in defart a Grove,
That the sad note of murmuring water love;
I Will bring you to a Rock, that for it is pleasure
The Indies cannot purchase with their Treasure,
Where none but Virgin-silence lives there,
And sweetest Music charms the chastest ear;
The fountains time do keep to birds that sing,
And on the plain song uttered by each spring
The ayry Choristers division run;
The solid Rock that various streams has spun
Even into strings as small as smallest wire,
Seems to consort, and so make up a quire,
Such as the holy Virgins sweetly raise
When they choice Hymns do sing on holy days.
So that devotion here is kept on wing,
And rather raised, than checked by whispering
Of springs with Rocks, or Rocks with light-heel'd streams.
Night swims away in rest, the day in dreams,
So that the watchful Hermit needs no Clock,
There are perpetual Chymes within this Rock,
That will not let his contemplation sleep:
Would he be sad? there he may learn to weep
Of every object offered to his eye;
The humble pavement never shall be dry,
But moistened still, with tears that there are shed,
From the rich fountain of the Rocks curled head.
This my Prophetic Soul foretells shall be,
ENSTON, the honor, that shall dwell with thee.
A Sonnet within the Pillar of the Table at the Banquet.
COme away blessed Soul, no more
Feed your eyes with what is poor,
It Is enough that you have blessed
What was rude, what was undrest,
And created in a trice
Out of Chaos Paradise.
Come away and cast your eyes
On this humble sacrifice.
We no golden apples give,
Here Is no Adam, here is no Eve,
Not a Serpent dare appear,
Whilst your Majesty is here.
Oh then sit, and take your due,
Those the first fruits are that grew
In this Eden, and are thrown
On this Altar as your own.
Set a Chair for earth's Jove,
Bring another for his love,
Come away, vouchsafe, and taste
What was gathered up in haste,
If we live another year
By your grace and favor here,
Italy, France, and Spain
Of their fruits shall boast in vain.
Mr. Bushel presenting the Rock by an Echo to the Queen.
ECHO, ECHO.
I charge thee answer me to what I ask, ask
Has ought presented to these Princes pleased? pleased
Pleased! O gentle Echo speak that word again, again
How have they liked our Rock, our Cave, our Well? well
Well! proud would their Host be should I tell him; tell him
Tell him Echo I will, that he despair not. spare not
What shall we give 'em by way of thankfulness? thankfulness
That like thee is air; we would give what is real; all
All, Why? All what we have is but this Rock, this Rock
Give them this poor Rock, Echo mean you so? so
To which of them, to the King or to the Queen? the Queen
What to the King, if this be given the Queen? the Queen
The Queen, there is naught more precious; it is true: true
Can nothing more be added to her bliss? bliss
Bliss, the bliss of Heaven Echo you mean sure, sure
Sure be it to them as this our blessing; sing
Sing gentle Echo, Is that thy desire? desire
THen blessed be this pair
On the earth, in the air;
Blessed in their lasting joys,
Blessed in their Girls, and Boys,
Let them live to hear it told,
Their grand-Grandchildren are grown old.
Let her beauty ever last,
And her vigor never waste.
Let the Sea that bounds the Isles,
Ebb at least ten thousand miles,
And return no more, but leave
New Kingdoms for them to bequeath
To the many heirs they get:
And when they pay natures debt,
Let their bodies not be found
Dwelling in the sluttish ground,
But translated to those Thrones,
Only built for blessed ones.
Echo, let these Prayers be
Posted up to Heaven by thee;
And if granted, let us know,
Gentle Echo Echo, answer so. so
So then it is agreed above, above
That this pair shall live and love and love
And for ever happy be happy be
(...) posterity. posterity
Echo, for this news, I Will give give
Leave that thou shall ever live live
In this Paradise of theirs; theirs
Theirs, Echo, it is no more mine; mine
Theirs and thine Echo ever ever
Fates decreed alter never. never
A Sonnet sung to the King and Queen at Mr. Bushels Rock.
HArk, hark, how the stones in the Rock
Strive their tongues to unlock,
And would show
What they know
Of the Joy here has been
Since the King and the Queen
Daign to say
They would pay
A visit to this Cell:
But all tongues cannot tell,
Nor language express
Our full thankfulness.
Hark, hark, how the streams roll along,
And for want of a tongue
Vent in tears
All their fears.
Lest the King, lest the Queen
Being come, having seen,
What we have
In his Cave,
That nothing can delight
That is brought to their sight,
Or fully express
Our hearts thankfulness.
Hark, hark, how the Birds in the Groves
Strive to tender their loves,
For the Spring,
That the King,
And the Queen bring along;
Do but see how they throng
With their notes
In their throats,
On each B^k, in each Bush
Sits a Lark, and a Thrush,
That strive to express
Their hearts thankfulness.
Hark, hark, we humbly do entreat,
How your Host's heart does beat,
How it pants
Cause it wants
What he gladly would bring
To the Queen and the King,
Daign to speak,
Lest it break,
Let him know you are pleased,
That his heart may be eased,
Or this Rock, or this Cave,
Is his Tomb, or his Grave.
FINIS.

