A LITTLE TREATISE CONCERNING Things Indifferent, In Relation unto WORSHIP:
DIRECTED To the KING, and his COUNCIL, and all Others who are concerned (or do
think themselves so to be) in matters of RELIGION; FOR THEM To Weigh well,
Mind, and Consider (if they please) ere any Determination be had in Things of
that nature. By one that loves the Truth and Peace. GEORGE BISHOPE.

All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. All things are
lawful for me, but I will not be brought under the power of any, 1 Cor. 6. 12.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient. All things are
lawful for me, but all things edify not, 1 Cor. 10. 23. Printed in the Year
1663.

A LITTLE TREATISE CONCERNING Things Indiferent, etc.
THings Indifferent are so called, either from the Nature of the Things
themselves; Or, of the things about which they are Conversant. And the General
signification of them, or of the word [Indifferent] (the Term unto which they
relate, and by which they are understood) is, Something that may be done or not
done, according to the Liberty and Choice of him that does them, or not does
them. So that if they be done, it imports not any thing of a Necessity; and if
they be not done, it implies not any matter of Guilt; but that they may be
done, or not done, according to the pleasure of him who does them, or does them
not. And this is the Nature and Signification of Things Indifferent.

And this I lay down in the first Place, because the Nature, and Signification
of the things treated about, are necessary to be opened, ere that which is
intended therefrom comes to be Discoursed.

Now it may be demanded as to the Thing; What are things Indifferent, and what
not, in relation to the Worship of God? For that is the Thing unto which this
Little Treatise is terminated by me.

I Answer, Things Indifferent, in relation to the Worship of God, are to be
considered, either as things that may be done or not done; as being so, or
things Indifferent, in their own Nature; or, as things that are not so in their
own Nature, yet are, or may be left so by him who orders all things according
to the good pleasure of his will, especially as to that in which he will be
Worshipped. And so they may be considered, either as to the Worship it self,
or, to the Manner thereof, or as to the things that are conversant thereabouts.

As to the Worship it self, there is nothing that can be called Indifferent.
For, nothing is indeed the Worship of God, or can be truly called so, but what
he requires, or, what proceeds from the measure of him; and the very requiring
of a thing takes away the Indifferency of it.

So the Jews who were commanded (all the Males of them) once in a year to come
and appear before the Lord, and worship at Jerusalem; and to observe New Moons,
and Sabbaths, and to offer Incense, and to keep appointed Feasts, to Pray there
in the Place where he said he would be heard; yet they coming in the mind in
which they should not come, and offering in that which he accepts not; which is
not of him, of the measure of him, and from it, he said unto them, When ye come
to appear before me who has required this at your hand, to tread in my Courts?
Bring no more vain Oblations (and all that is so, which is not from him, the
measure of him; it proceeds from that which is vain, and its end is vain, it
accomplishes not the thing it intends) Incense is an abomination to me; the New
Moons, and Sabbaths, the calling of Assemblies, I cannot away with; It is
Iniquity, even the solemn Meeting; Your New Moons, and your appointed Feasts my
soul hates, they are a trouble unto me, I am weary to bear them. And when you
spread forth your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make
[many] prayers I will not hear. And the Reason is subjoyned, Your hands are
full of blood, said the Lord by the Prophet, Isa. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15.

Now, if the Jews who were so commanded, coming to offer, and to tread in his
Courts, and to pray, and to keep days, and to frequent the solemn Meetings,
and to observe the appointed Feasts which they were commanded, had this said
unto them; When ye come to appear before me, who has required this at your
hand, to tread in my Courts? because their hands were full of Blood; because it
was the murtherous spirit in which they came to appear; the spirit that is out
of Truth, the Devil, unto which he has not regard; nor to the offering of that
which is not from the Spirit of him whom he accepts, the spirit of the Devil,
who was a Liar from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth; who caused Cain
to slay his Brother about Religion, the Murderer, which was not accepted, nor
his Offering; who slew his Brother, and therefore is said to be of that wicked
one, and to slay his Brother, because his own works were evil, and his Brothers
righteous; how much more will he say it, as to that which he requires not?

And the reason of this is plain; because all such things as are done as
Worships, and the Lord commands them not, are Will Worship; or, that which
proceeds not from the Lord, or the measure of him in man, (which he only
accepts, that which is offered from it) but from the Creature, the spirit which
is in the Creature, and guides and rules it, which is not of God, which he does
not accept, but is an abomination in his sight. The Sacrifice of the wicked is
an abomination to the Lord; but the Prayer of the upright is his Delight, Prove.
15. 8.

Therefore it is said, They Sacrificed unto Devils, not to God, to gods whom
they knew not; to new gods that came newly up, whom their Fathers feared not;
when they Worshipped that, or did that Worship which he required not. But
Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked; Thou art waxen fat, thou art grown thick, thou
art covered with fatness; then he forsook God that made him, and lightly
esteemed the rock of his salvation; they provoked him to jealousy with strange
gods; with abomination they provoked him to anger: They sacrificed to Devils
not to God, etc. (though they seemed to pretend to Worship God when they
worshipped, but not as he required, this was a sacrificing to Devils, and not
to God, though he was in their mind; or though they thought they worshipped
him; when it was not from him, the measure of him, the requirings of him, who
will be worshipped as he requires; the thing and the mind, the spirit and the
thing) And so (says Moses) of the Rock that begat thee, (this was Israel who
had a measure of God, his firstborn, something in which he might know how to
worship God, and from which he will be worshipped, and he accepts no other but
what comes from it, and is of it) Thou art unmindful, and have forgotten God
that formed thee, (when he went from this) said the Lord by Israel, Deuteronomy. 32.
15, 16, 17, 18.

And of King Jeroboam, who set up the Calves at Dan, and at Bethel for Israel
to worship, and the high Places, and ordained Priests unto them, which the Lord
required not; it is said, (who did it without the command of the Lord) -- And
he ordained him Priests for the high Places, and for the Devils, and for the
Calves which he had made, 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. And he it was that made Israel to
sin.

And of the Men of Judah it is said, And the Princes thereof, when they
sacrificed that which the Lord required not, -- They Sacrificed their sons and
their daughters unto Devils, and shed innocent blood, even the blood of their
sons, and of their daughters, whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan;
and the Land was polluted with blood; (Read this within, as well as without,
for the offering up of the mind to a strange god, to, or in a thing which the
Lord requires not, is the same; for the Birth of God is there strangled, and
made to pass through the fire of that which is offered to that of which the
offering is; even that from which it proceeds, for unto that is the Offering
made, to that spirit from whence it comes, and it being from the Devil, it is
to the Devil; though the Mind may be to God, which is deceived, and thinks he
is worshipped, when it is the contrary.) Thus were they defiled with their own
works, and went a whoring after their own Inventions, (such is all that Worship
which the Lord requires not) says the Prophet, Psalm. 106. 37, 38, 39.

And of them who worshipped Stocks and Stones, the works of men's hands, yet
pretended that they minded God therein, and did it as a worship to God; or,
that through them they intended the Lord, which he required not. It is said,
Confounded be all they that serve graven Images, that boast themselves of
Idols; Worship him all ye Gods, Psalm. 97. 7. And their Idols are silver and
gold, the work of men's hands; they have mouths, but they speak not; eyes have
they, but they see not; noses have they, but smell not; they have hands, but
they handle not; feet have they, but they walk not; neither speak they through
their throats: They that make them are like unto them, so is every one that
trusts in them, Psalm. 115. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And Saying to a Stock, Thou art my
Father, and to a Stone, thou have brought me forth. For, they have turned their
back unto me (said the Lord) and not their face; but in the time of their
trouble they will say, arise and save us. But where are the gods that thou have
made thee? Let them arise if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble.
For, according to the number of thy Cities, are thy gods, O Judah, said the
Lord to, and of the Kings, Princes, Priests and Prophets of Israel; who so said
to a Stock and to a Stone, that is, the thing spoke it, bowing to that which
the Lord did not require: for that unto which any man does bow he makes that
his God; and puts it as that which has begot him, and which has brought him
forth. And what a thing this is, to say to a Stock, Thou art my father, etc.
let the man whose eyes are open, judge, Jer. 2. 27, 28. As the thief is ashamed
(says he) when he is found; so is the house of Israel ashamed, they, their
Kings, their Princes, and their Priests, and their Prophets, saying, etc. as
aforesaid.

And hence it is that the Apostle, speaking of such things as stood in the will
of man, and were after the Doctrines and Commandments of men, and from the
Rudiments of the world, which he calls all that which stands not in the will of
God; and the Commandment of him (the measure of him in every one) who is the
Head, by whom the Body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and
knit together, increases with the increase of God, says to the Colossians,
Let no man beguile you of your reward, in a [voluntary] humility and
[worshipping] of [Angels] intruding into those things which he has not seen,
[vainly] puffed up with his [fleshly] mind, and [not hodling] the [head] from
which [all] the Body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit
together, increases with the increase of God. Wherefore if ye be [dead] with
Christ from the [Rudiments] of the world, why as though [living] in the world,
are ye [subject] unto [Ordiances?] (Touch not, taste not, handle not) which
[all] are to perish with the using after the [commandments] and [doctrines] of
men. Which things have indeed a [shew] of [wisdom] in [will-worship] and
[humility] and [neglecting] of the Body, not in any honor to the [satisfying]
of the flesh, Col. 2. 18, to the end.

Thus as to the Worship it self. Now as to the manner of it. The Jews had not
Liberty in any thing as to the Manner of the Worship to order and appoint, but
what the Lord Commanded, as they had not for the Worship, as the Books of
Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy testify at large. Nor had David and
Solomon liberty, as to the Manner of building of the Temple, as of the building
(the figure of this Other, not made with hands, in which the Sacrifice is to be
offered, Christ Jesus, who is come; but it was built, for manner, as well as
matter, according to the Pattern, which David received from the Spirit of the
Lord, and which the Lord made David to understand in writing by his hand upon
him, even all the work of that Pattern, 1 Chronicles. 28. 12, 19. and which David
gave to Solomon, verse. 11. etc. And Ezekiel had the Pattern of the second
Temple from the Spirit of the Lord. And the Apostles were led into [all] Truth,
(all, matter and manner) by the Spirit. Howbeit (says Christ) when he, the
Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into [all] Truth; for he shall not
speak of himself, but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak; and he
will show you things to come. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of
mine, and show it unto you, John 16. 12, 13. And John speaking of the times
after the Apostasy, which was to follow, yea, it entered before the decease of
the Apostles, as he testifies; Little children (says he) it is the [last]
time; and, as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now there are many
Antichrists, whereby we [know] that it is the [last] time, 1 John 2. 18. And
says Paul, Now we beseech you brethren, by the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and by our gathering together unto him, that ye be not soon shaken in
mind, or be troubled neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as from us,
as that the day of Christ is at hand; Let no man deceive you by any means, for
that day shall not come, except there come a [falling] away [first] 2 These. 2.
1, 2, 3. And -- I know this, that [after] my departure, shall grievous Wolves
enter in among you, not sparing the flock. Also of your own selves shall men
arise, speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them. Therefore
watch, and remember, that by the space of three years, I ceased not to warn
every one, night and day with tears, Act. 20. 29, 30, 31. And Jude says, But
beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken [before] of the Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the
[last] time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts; [these] be [they]
etc. Jude Epist. ver. 17, 18, 19.) I say, John speaking of the times which
should be after the Apostasy, which was then entering, says, And I saw no
[Temple] therein (that is, in the Holy City which had been long trod under foot
by the Gentiles, of which he speaks, he saw no Temple therein, Nothing made
with hands, No Institutions, No Ordinations, No Appointments of Men; Nothing
that is made with Men's hands, or ordered by Men) for the [Lord] God Almighty]
(says he) and the [Lamb] are the [Temple] of it, (which the outward Temple
signified as aforesaid) and the City had no need of the Sun (says he) neither
of the Moon (nothing that is made) to shine in it; for the [Glory] of [God]
(says he) did [lighten] it, and the [Lamb] is the [light] thereof. (Read this
in the Light within, that which reproves, that which makes manifest, and there
see the Mystery.) And the Nations (says he) of them that are saved, shall walk
in the [Light] of it. And the Kings of the Earth do bring their Glory and
Honor unto it, Rev. 21. 22, 23, 24.

And this he spoke of the New Jerusalem, the Holy City (as aforesaid) which he
says he saw coming down from God out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned
for her Husband. And I saw (says he) a New Heaven, and a New Earth; for the
first Heaven, and the first Earth were passed away, and there was no more Sea.
And I heard a great Voice out of Heaven saying, The Tabernacle of God is with
Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People, and God himself
will be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from
their eyes, and there shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying,
neither shall there be any more Pain; for the former things are passed away.
And he that sat upon the Throne, said, Behold I make all things new. Then
(says he) he said unto me, Write; for these things are true, and faithful.

Then he describes the City, and the Gates, and the Wall, and the Foundation,
and the Light thereof (the Glory of God like unto a stone most precious) and
its form, and breadth, and height, and building, and the stones thereof; and
who should, and who should not enter therein; and what was in it, as the Angel
which carried him away in the Spirit to a great and high Mountain, showed to
him.

And this (as I said) was what should be after the Apostasy, and the Overthrow
of Babylon; and the Casting of Satan, the old Deceiver, into the Pit, and
Death, and Hell, into the Lake; and the Destruction of Gog and Magog; and the
taking of the Beast, and of the false Prophet alive, and the casting them alive
into the Lake of fire burning with brimstone, which had brought in and ruled
the Apostasy, and the Great Supper of the Lord God Almighty, wherein was eaten
the flesh of Kings, and of Captains, and of Mighty Men, and of Horses, and of
them that sat of them; and the flesh of all men, both free and bond, both
small and great. And when the time of the Lamb's Marriage was come, and his
Wife had made her self ready, Rev. 18, 19, 20, 21 chapters.

Then he says, chap. 22. -- He said unto me, These Sayings are faithful and
true, and the Lord God of the Holy Prophets sent his Angel to show unto his
Servant the things which must shortly be done. Behold, I come quickly. Blessed
is he that keeps the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book. And (he says) he
says unto me, Seal not the Sayings of the Prophecy of this Book, for the time
is at hand. He that is Unjust, let him be Unjust still; and he which is filthy,
let him be filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still;
and he that is holy, let him be holy still. And behold I come quickly, and my
Reward is with me, to give every man according as his work shall be.

And he closes up all and says, -- I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify
to you these things in the Churches. I am the Root, and Offspring of David,
and the bright and Morning Star. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; and
let him that hears say, Come; and whosoever will, let him take the Water of
Life freely: For I testify unto every one that hears the words of the
Prophecy of this Book; If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add
unto him the Plagues that are written in this Book. And if any man shall take
away from the words of the Book of this Prophecy, God shall take away his Part
out of the Book of Life, and out of the Holy City, and from the things that are
written in this Book. He that testifies these things says, Surely I come
quickly. Amen. Even so, come Lord Jesus, Chap. 22. 6. to the end.

Lastly; As to the things conversant thereabouts, They must stand in the same
that the Worship it self, and the manner of it does. For it is [wholly] his own
that the Lord accepts. For he is a Spirit, and he that worships him, must
worship him in Spirit and Truth throughout, and such Worshippers the Father
seeks. And he that comes to God, must believe that he is; and that he is a
Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. And Faith is the gift of God, and is
the evidence of things not seen (which cannot be said of any outward thing, for
that can be seen) the substance of things hoped for. And, whatsoever is not of
Faith, is sin: for it stands not in the Root which is holy, Nor proceeds from
it; in which stands Faith. And, therefore the Word preached did not profit (the
Word nigh in the mouth, and in the heart; which witnesses to God, Christ
Jesus.) Say not in thine heart, who shall ascend into Heaven? (that is, to
bring Christ down from above) Or, who shall descend into the Deep? (that is, to
bring up Christ again from the Dead) but what faith it? The Word is nigh thee,
in thy mouth, and in thy heart; that is the Word of Faith (which we preach,
said the Apostle, Romans 10. 6, 7, 8. And the Righteousness which is of Faith,
says he, speaks on this wise, etc. as aforesaid.) I say, the Word (this
Word) preached did not profit them, not being mixed with Faith in them that
heard it. And, without Faith it is impossible to please God. This is my
wel-beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him, says the Lord of his
Son, in whom he is well pleased, in the measure of him, and no other. And
therefore has he given a measure of him, a measure of the Spirit of him to
every one to profit withal; that every one in it might know how to do his Will,
so that he need not ask, Who shall ascend into the Heaven? etc. Or, who shall
descend into the Deep? to bring Christ down, or up again, as a thing without
them; Nor depend upon another to know the Will of God; but as every man must be
saved for himself, or damned; and as the Lord will require an Account of every
man; and as every man must give an Account to the Lord for himself, not for
another, nor another for him, as to the deeds done in the body, whether they be
good, or whether they be evil; So has he put a measure of himself into every
man, that every man might have in him something of the Lord to Direct him, and
Guide him, and lead him into that which he should do; by which he might know
what he is to do, and how to worship God, so as it may be acceptable in his
sight: For that which pleases God, stands not in the will of man, (though it
is fit there should: be in the Creature a ready mind (If there be first a
willing mind, it is accepted according to that a man has, and not according to
that a man has not, 2 Cor. 8. 11. And thy People shall be willing in the day
of thy Power, in the beauties of Holiness, from the Womb of the Morning thou
have the dew of thy Youth, Psalm. 110. 3. My heart is fixed; O God, my heart is
fixed, I will sing and give praise, Psalm. 57. 7.) because of its Relation unto
God, and its Dependency on him; to be ready when he moves, whose Spirit is as
the Wind, which blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof,
but know not from whence it comes, nor whither it goes. So is every one
(says the Son of God) that is born of the Spirit, Joh. 3. 8. I say, that which
pleases God, in which he will be worshipped, stands not in the Will of man
(though it is fit the Creature should be willing and ready when the Lord moves;
and in the Day of his Power it will be so as aforesaid, as that which answers
to God is hearkened to and obeyed, by which his Power comes to be made known,
which makes his People willing) but in the measure of him in every one, which
(as I have said) he has placed in every one that every one may know how, and
in what to worship him; which every one is to know, and in which every one is
to believe, and to wait to know what is the Will and Counsel of God, and how
and when, and after what manner, and in what he will be worshipped, that so it
may be acceptable in his sight. Let the Words of my mouth, and the Meditation
of my heart be acceptable in thy sight, O Lord, my strength, and my Redeemer,
(Psalm. 19. 14.) prayed the holy man of God.

For all other Services, or things done from this measure of him, in the will
of man; Or, of the spirit that is in him that lusts unto Envy, and knows not
God, is as Swines flesh -- He that kills an Ox, (says the Lord by the
Prophet) is as if he slew a Man; He that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a
Dogs neck; He that offers an Oblation, as if he offered Swines blood; He that
burns Incense, as if he blessed an Idol; Isa. 66. 3. and such must come to an
account for their Services and Worships, as for their Transgressions and Sins;
and this will be hard when in that Day a man shall find that that which he
thought pleased God; and he therefore did it, as thinking it might please God
(being deceived by the Enemy to offer that, and from that which is not God's,
from the measure of him which he requires, and only accepts) is Iniquity. For,
then, what is left a man in which he can hope? If his Righteousness; if his
Worships; if his Services (as he thinks) to God, be as menstrous rags, be
iniquity, and the Lord is weary to bear them (as has been said) and it is a
trouble to him, and his Soul abhors them; and he cannot away with it; and it is
an Abomination in his sight; What then is left a Man wherein to hope? Or,
wherein is it that he can say I am accepted of God? seeing that in him alone,
in the measure of him, that which comes from the measure of him, Christ Jesus,
it is that the Lord is well-pleased; and that which is done out of him, out of
the measure of him, can have no hope in Christ, (Nothing that is truly so, but
all such hope will fail a man;) and that which is done out of the measure of
him, is not in him; and that which is in him, is as he is: for, as he is, so
are we in this world, 1 John 4. 17. and, he that does righteousness is
righteous, as he is righteous, 1 John 3. 7. And, if any man be in Christ Jesus,
he is a New Creature. Old things are passed away, behold all things are become
new, 2 Cor. 5. 17. And this will be found so in the Day wherein the Lord will
judge the Secrets of all men by the Man Christ Jesus.

Therefore it concerns every one to come to, and to heed, and to know the
measure of God in him, whereby to know in what, and when, and how to worship
him, and to do that which is acceptable in his sight. For, God is a Spirit (as
I have said) and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth; and that which is Letter, is not Spirit; and therefore the manifestation
of the Spirit which is given to every man to profit withal, (which is that
which reproves, that which makes manifest) must of necessity be come unto,
heeded and believed in, ere there can be a worshipping in spirit; or, that the
Worship which is in spirit (which the Father seeks such to worship him; who
will be worshipped in spirit and in truth) can be known: For nothing is known
out of its Principle; and the Measure of God is the Principle of the things of
God, in which only God is known, and the things that are of him; which
Principle is as aforesaid; which must be come unto, believed in and obeyed,
(viz. that which reproves, that which makes manifest) ere that the Worship of
God (that which is truly so) can be known; or the way how to worship him, who
will be worshipped in spirit and in truth.

So hither all must come, to this Principle, to that which is of God in them,
and from hence they must offer, who offer unto God, and are accepted in his
sight. Something that is his own, from his own, of his own, the measure of him;
which is not born of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of
man, but of God; As David did in the figure, when he and his Princes offered
unto the Temple (the figure of him who was to come, Christ Jesus, by whom all
our Sacrifices are to be offered, who is come the second time without sin unto
salvation) of thine own (says he) have we given thee. For we are strangers
before thee, and sojourners as were all our Fathers; (see how low he was when
he came to offer to the Figure; to that which perished, the Temple and the
things thereof, against the time it should be builded, which was to be after
his days. For he was not to build it, though it was in his heart; because he
had made great wars, and had shed much blood; but Solomon was to build it; for
in his days peace and quietness, the Lord said he would give Israel, and that
he should be a man of Rest, and that he would give him rest from all his
enemies round about. He shall build an house for mine Name, and he shall be my
son, and I will be his Father, and I will establish the throne of his kingdom
over Israel, for ever, said the Lord, 1 Chronicles. 22. 7, 8, 9, 10. See the
difference between the man of Blood and the man of Peace, and the offering that
comes from each, and what it signifies, and who it is that is to build the
Temple of the Lord, and which the Lord accepts, and in whom he is well pleased;
it is Solomon, the man of rest.) Our days on the earth are as a shadow, and
there is none abiding. O Lord our God, all this store that we have prepared to
build thee an house for thine holy Name, comes of thine hand, and it is [all]
thine own, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14, 15, 16. and this the Lord accepted. And it must be
of his own, that now must be given him; else he accepts it not; and his own is
that which is of him, of the measure of him as aforesaid. And therefore a
necessity there is for all men hither to come, ere that they can come to serve
or worship him acceptably with reverence and godly fear, who is a consuming
fire, and will be had in reverence by all that are about him, Heb. 12. 29.
Psalm. 89. 7. Or, that he will be worshipped of them.

Therefore has he moved me, (and it has lain upon me from the Lord) to write
these things unto you, that you may not be mistaken, as to your Worships; or
think ye be doing that which is well-pleasing to him when he accepts it not.
For, he is a God of purer eyes than to behold evil; and no iniquity can come
near his dwelling, nor can he look on iniquity; and he beholds the proud afar
off; and he scatters the proud in the imaginations of their hearts; how then
can they come near him? For nothing can come near him, but what is like him,
and as he is, as aforesaid. This is my well-beloved Son, in whom I am
well-pleased, hear him, says the Lord.

So to the Son every one must come, to the measure of him in every one (that
which reproves, that which makes manifest) that they may know the Lord, and his
Power, and his Arm, and his working, the mighty power of his working; who is
able to subdue all things unto himself; and to bring down the mighty from their
seats, and to exalt the humble and meek. For, Thus says the high and lofty
one, that inhabiteth eternity, whose Name is Holy; I dwell in the high, and
holy place; with him also that is of an humble and contrite spirit; to revive
the spirit of the humble; and to revive the heart of the contrite ones, Isa.
57. 15. For, all these things has mine hand made, (Heaven is my Throne, and
the Earth is my Footstool; where is the House that ye build unto me? and where
is the place of my Rest?) and all these things have been, says the Lord: But
to this man will I look, even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit,
and that trembles at my word, Isa), 66. 2.

And thus it concerns every man to mind, for as much as he stands in a state of
dependency upon God, and has need of him and his Mercy, to save, and preserve
him to all Eternity; for as much as there is something in him, which is
eternal, that can never be destroyed; with which if it should be ill with, for
ever it will be sad; and this the Lord knows; and in what state man is, and
what need he has of him, and therefore has he placed something of himself in
man to show him how it is with him, and his state; and the way to God who is
lost in the fall, and how he may please him, and do that which is acceptable in
his sight; that so it may be well with him for ever. For otherwise, what is a
man profited, (says Christ) if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or, what shall a man give (see how high it goes) in exchange for his
soul? Mat. 16. 26. And now is the hour of your visitation whilst ye are here;
and whilst the Lord strives with you; the measure of him in every one of you
which calls upon you to heed this, and tells you this is so, and ye believe
this is Truth, but yet are not guided by that which tells you it is so, and
which ye believe, though ye believe it, and know it is so, and that it is good
for you to heed it, thereby to be led out of the evil, and to be delivered from
all evil, and so redeemed unto God; for the Redemption is from evil, and the
deliverance, which holds the mind in captivity, and estrangeth it from God; so
that it knows him not who gives it life, and breath, and moving; and the
displeasure of God is against the Creature, because his mind is alienated from
God by wicked works. And therefore that his creature may be saved, and
delivered from the wrath to come, from that on which his wrath is revealed, and
will be revealed, (the Lord Jesus will) in flaming fire, taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ;
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the
Lord, and the glory of his power; when he shall come to be glorified in his
Saints, and to be admired in them that believe, 2 These. 1. 7, 8, 9, 10. I say,
that his creature may be saved, and delivered from the wrath to come, has he
put something of himself in him; that he may know whither to go to be delivered.

And because no man may say in his heart, who shall ascend for me into Heaven,
(that is, to bring Christ down from above?) or, who shall descend for me into
the deep? (that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead) (as I have said) he
has placed a measure of himself in every man, that no man may be at a loss in
this particular, or, at a stand how to know him, or come at him, in the
knowledge of whom is eternal life. For, he is in man, and that of him in every
man, that shows man iniquity and sin; the compass and the end of his actings,
the thoughts and the intents of his heart, and that searches the heart, and
tries the reins, and judges them, leads unto him.

So all men are, and will be left without excuse in the day wherein he shall
judge the Secrets of all men, by the Man Christ Jesus; whom he has ordained,
and appointed thereunto, and a day wherein he will do it, because he has put a
measure of himself in every one, whereby they may know him who is true; and be
in him who is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; this is true God, and eternal
life.

And if it were not so, indeed it would be hard; and how indeed then could man
be left without excuse, if he had not something in him of God and knew not that
it was in him, to lead him unto God, and out of all evil; and to give him
Dominion over sin and evil, and to redeem him unto God, from whom he is fallen;
which is not of him, though in him; nor in the will of him, nor of the flesh,
though in the flesh, but of God? For all men know something in them, that shows
them evil, and that they should not do evil, and judges them for it, and makes
them confess, that the Judgment is just; but all men do not obey it, all men
do not heed it; therefore all men are not redeemed by it, all men are not
delivered: For, He became the Author of eternal Salvation, unto all them that
obey him, Heb. 5. 9. And, he came to his own, and his own received him not; but
as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God; even
to them that believe in his Name, Joh. 1. 11, 12. And, This is the
condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and men loved darkness rather
than light, because their deeds were evil. For every one that does evil, hates
the light, neither comes to the light, left his deeds should be reproved; but
he that does truth comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest,
that they are wrought in God, Job. 3. 19, 20, 21. And, If ye were blind, ye
should have no sin; but now ye say, we see; therefore your sin remains, Joh.
9. 41.

So Friends all, this is the thing that ye are to mind, and the thing that ye
are to heed, (viz.) That which witnesses to God in you; and against every evil
thing; and for every thing that is good; that ye may come to know the Lord, and
his Power, and his Arm which delivers, and be purged from all your
uncleanness, and so ye may offer unto him an Offering in righteousness, in
which he will be well-pleased, being sprinkled from an evil conscience by the
blood of Jesus; that which takes away sin, which shows it, which delivers from
it; and so ye will have Peace with God, and no otherwise; and know the Offering
that he accepts, his well-beloved Son, in whom he is well-pleased, and in that
which comes from him, and is in him, and offered by him; who suffered without
the Gate; Wherefore Jesus, that he might sanctify the People with his own
blood, suffered without the gate. Let us go forth therefore unto him, without
the Camp, bearing his reproach; for here we have in continuing City, but we
look for one to come. (...) him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of God
continually, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to his Name, Heb.
13. 12, 13, 14, 15. (as has been instanced) And so here all Indifferency has
an end. For, Man has nothing to do in things of this nature to make this or
that Indifferent, or not, out of the Will of God, is, or as, to his Worship,
but Man must wait upon God in that is himself in man to show him, how, and
when, and after what manner he will be Worshipped; As to all which, the Choice
is in God, not in man, and the Indifferency is as the Lord shall require, and
in his Prerogative, not as man shall make this and that, as the requirings of
the Lord; and require the Lord, (the measured him in man) for where man shall
so require, he requires the Lord; for that of the Lord in every man, is to lead
every man, and to show him how to worship him; and he that requires man to
Worship God, requires the measure of him in man, by which man is to Worship
him. For, Do I now persuade men, or God? said the Apostle, Gal. 1. 10. And
these things are not only requiring of men, but of God; because that of God in
man, is that by which man is to worship God; and he that requires the leading
of a man, requires that which was before to lead him; and this is manifest. And
what an intrenchment this is on the Sovereignty of God, and an usurpation on
him, that lives for ever; let that of God judge in every man's conscience? and
whether the Lord will hold such guiltless, who entrench upon his Power, and
encroach upon his Dominion, who lives for ever? Who will (...) them to pieces,
and rule in the midst of his enemies; Whose Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom,
and his Dominion that which shall never have end. To him be glory, and praise,
and dominion everlasting; Who comes in Clouds, and every eye shall see him,
those also who have pierced him; and all Nations shall wail because of him,
Amen. I am Alpha, and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, says the Lord; which
is, and which way and which is to come; the Almighty.

And so here is no room for any thing of this nature, but every one must wait on
the Lord for his pleasure, to know what he is to do, and to follow that, not to
require others to follow that in the Worship of God which he pleases; for he
that does so, sets himself up above that which man is to follow, as to the
Worship of God, (viz.) the measure of God in him; Or that of God in man, which
witnesses for God, as aforesaid. For, he that requires over a People, where
another has the Proper Jurisdiction, requires Over him who has the Proper
Jurisdiction of that People; He gives Law to him who gives Law to them; and he
that makes things so and so, as to the Worship of God, and commands it, where
the Lord does not, makes things so and so as to God, and commands him; that is
to say, the measure of him in every man, which every man is to follow, as to
the Worship of God over whom, as to Worship it has, and no other, the sole
Jurisdiction.

So men must here take heed what they do; It Is a tender Case; It Is the
Jurisdiction of the Lord; It Is his Sovereignty; his Dominion, which is an
Everlasting Dominion; and his Kingdom which shall never have end; lest he Dash
them to Pieces: For, the Day will come, wherein the King will say, As for all
those mine, Enemies which would not have me to reign Over them, bring them
hither, and slay them before me: which I would not have to be the Case of any
of you; for then I know it will be very hard. For, whosoever falls on this
Stone, shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to
Powder, said Christ to the Pharisees of the Stone which the Builders refused,
which he told them was made head of the Corner: Yea, says he -- The Kingdom of
God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation bringing forth the fruits
thereof, Matthew. 21. 41, 42, 43. And therefore have I written; for I desire your
Salvation and that of God; and that none of ye may perish, but that all of ye
may have Everlasting Life. For your days are short, and but as a (...); and
they pass away as a tale that is told; and you will, come to be Cut down, and
to Return unto your Dust; and Eternity attends it; and then Blessed is the man
whose God is the Lord; whom he has chosen for his own Inheritance. For, if the
Tree fall toward the South, or toward the North, in the place where the Tree
falls, there it shall be, says the Preacher, who had Experimented Vanity to
the height, Eccles. 11. 3. And the Days of Vanity will have an End; that is,
the Days of vain man will be cut off; and then he must account for the Deeds
done in the body, whether they be good, or whether they be evil; and to
Judgment must he come; and under it he must pass, and it he must abide for ever
and ever, Whether as to Eternal Woe, or Life Everlasting; and in the Grave there
is no Repentance. Therefore it concerns ye all to mind whilst it is your Day,
to Day, whilst it is said, To Day if ye will hear his Voice, harden not your
hearts, said the Apostle, Heb. 3. 15. To Day, lest any of you be hardened
through the Deceitfulness of Sin, ver. 13. For what Good will all your
Pleasure, and your Greatness, and your Pomp, and your Power do you, when ye
shall come to be cut down, and his Wrath shall seize on you, (should it so be,
which (as I have said) I desire not, but the contrary; and therefore have I
written) and you bear the burden of his Displeasure for ever and ever; which,
who is able to bear? Who knows the Power of thine Anger? Even according to thy
Fear, so is thy Wrath, said Moses the Man of God, Psalm. 90. 11. So to the
measure of him in them, every One must come to know that, and to do it, which
is acceptable in his sight.

And here is the true Balance, and the Right Measure in things of this nature;
Not what Man wills, but the Lord. Because Every Man must be accountable to the
Lord; and be judged by the Lord in, and for his own Particular; and therefore
is he bound to follow that of the Lord in him, and to be guided by that, as to,
and unto which he is to give an account; and the Judgment of this cannot be
avoided; and from this none can escape; Every Man that is born of a Woman comes
under this state, not One is privileged; from the King that sits on the
Throne, to the Beggar on the Dunghill; Every One that has something that is
Eternal in him (and something that is Eternal in him has every man) must heed
that which is of him in Him that is Eternal to guide and lead him; not that he
must be a Guide to him who is Eternal, or, to that of him in Man, or think that
he may so be. For, who has directed the Spirit of the Lord; or, being his
Counselor, has taught him? With whom took he Counsel? Or, who instructed him
in the way of Judgment, and taught him Knowledge, and showed to him the way of
Understanding? Isa. 40. 13, 14.

So Every Man must come to his Proper state, and know how it is with him;
because Every Man must account to God; and before his Judgment all must stand.
We shall all stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ: For it is written, As I
live says the Lord, Every Knee shall bow to me, and Every Tongue shall confess
to God. So then every One of Us shall give an Account of himself to God. Let us
not therefore judge one another any more; but judge this rather, That no Man
put a stumbling block, or an occasion to fall in his Brothers way. And (so) why
do thou judge thy Brother? and, why do thou set at naught thy Brother,
says Paul, Romans 14. 10, 11, 12, 13.

And this is needful for Every Man to do; because (as I have said) he must be
accountable to God after all his Work in the World, and his doing whatsoever he
pleases therein; he must come before his Judge, that cannot be avoided.
Rejoice O Young man in thy Youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of
thy Youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes;
but know thou that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment,
says the Preacher; that experimented (as I have said) all kinds of Vanity, and
lavished himself forth into the extremes of Pleasures, and had an Understanding
to search it out, and Opportunity, and Riches, and Power to his Will; such as
No Man had before him, nor shall have after him; the Wise man, King Solomon, in
his Repentance, his Ecclesiastes, chap. 11. 9.

So to Judgment all must come, and all must receive according to what they
have done in the Body, whether it be good, or whether it be evil (as has been
said:) And seeing all must come to Judgment, and receive according to what
they have done in the Body, It concerns all to heed what they do in the Body,
and how they Answer the Will of Him who has put them in the Body, whilst they
are in the Body, and ere it be too late, before his Spirit has done striving
with them, and the hour of their Visitation be over; For Nothing will
Privilege any Man then, from the Judgment of Him, whose Judgment is Just.
And this unto ye all is the Word of the LORD. And so I have done.

GEORGE BISHOPE.

THE END.

