A MANIFESTO Declaring What George Bishope has been to the City of Bristoll,
and the particular Persons now in Authority therein, and what He has received
from Them in RECOMPENSE

Occasioned BY THE ^^te Sentence of Banishment Pronounced upon Him by Them,
16th. 7th. Mon. 1665 and other useages for his Conscience to God.

By GEORGE BISHOPE.

All this have I seen, and applied my heart unto every work that is done under
the Sun. There is a time wherein one Man rules over another to his own hurt.
And so I saw the wicked buried who had come, and gone from the place of the
holy, and they were forgotten in the City where they had so done. This is also
vanity. Eccles. 8.9, 10, 11. Printed in the Year, 1665.

A MANIFESTO, etc.
I Ever bore a Natural love to the City of Bristol, the place of my Nativity,
and as opportunity, and my understanding gave me leave, I still improved it for
the advantage thereof. I was very young when the Differences began between the
Late King, and the Parliament, yet I inclined to the Parliament, as those unto
whom drew the more sober people of the Nation, which had some influence upon
me; the fear of the Lord being with me from a Child.

When the City was taken by Prince Rupert I was there, and marched out with the
Parliament's Forces, and returned again when the City was retaken by the
Parliament.

Being come to Bristol, and settled there again, I made it my business what in
me lay, to advantage the Good thereof, and in the first place wrought what I
could for the procuring of a Friendly Governor, that so the place which had
been miserably torn with Wars and factions, might have some relief, and that
the necessities thereof might arise in a calm and friendly favor above the
sterrility that was over it through the harshness of the rough storms that had
compassed it about, and my endeavors herein were not without success, for they
produced Colonel Charles Fleetwood (a man as much to the purpose as could be
desired) to be appointed Governor.

In the next place in regard the City had been for sometime before sorely
visited with the Plague, and there died now upwards of One hundred a Week, and
the well and the sick were promiscuously together by reason of the Leagure; I
endeavored the separation of the Sick from the Well in place^ convenient, and
where the streets or parts were generally infected, Watchmen were set to keep
them in, which with other endeavors then used, through the good hand of the
Lord soon ceased the Contagion in that place.

Thirdly, In regard that the City and the Country adjacent had been much
harassed by reason of the Leagure, and the other attendencies of War, I
procured an Order from General Fairfax that no Forces but those of the Garrison
should quarter in, or about the City for the space of six miles, which gave the
City and the Country in particular, much relief, who came thereby to be freed
from the hard Quartering of the Regiments, and other Forces designed for
Ireland, which long lay in the Country before they were imbarqu'd.

These things in their time put the City into a wholesome and quiet posture,
and unity, and love seemed to spring therein, and men began to forget the old
Engagements wherein they had been mutually exercised to the detriment of each
other, and to apply themselves to things that concerned their Own, and the good
of each other; and I may truly say, and I suppose there are yet alive those who
can bear me testimony therein, that in a Months space after the Reducing
thereof, there was such a Metamorphosis as had been scarcely seen during the
Wars in this Nation; and great pity it was (and I am sure it was exercise
enough to me to see the contrary, as afterward I found, and therefore opposed
that which gave it, as the sequel manifests;) that ever it should be turned
into Winter again and those storms brought over it, which had near laid it in
the dust, I am sure endeavors were not wanting-in me according to my Capacity,
and as I had opportunity to turn it aside, which produced that which is part of
the ensuing Relation, in recompense of which some of my Neighbors, fellow
Citizens and Countrymen thus concerned, as the Relation makes manifest, have
thought fit to place Banishment upon me, and other usages, barely for my
Conscience to God, as to his Worship, who is a spirit, and will be worshipped
in spirit and in truth, as the Frontispiece of this Relation, or Manifesto
instances it; of which I shall in order speak.

Long was not the day of this fair Sun shine, and promising Prosperity of
Bristol, there was an eye that saw it* and did envy it, and therefore attempted
to hinder the progress thereof whilst it was (as it were) the Morning, and so
drew a Cloud over it: Col. Charles Fleetwood though a person without exception
(as then) saving that his spirit seemed to some who looked a squint, too
indulgent, he savouring more of Unity then Division, rather to heal then widen
Differences that had been, though as to his N^^^^^^Capacity he was known to be
both vigilant and stout, was ^^^^^ a weeks time unworthily laid aside, and M.
G. Skippon by the solicitation of some of this place above, who had little
known the sharpes of Swords, or the the brunt of the Battle, was placed in his
stead, and they themselves in the Capacity of doing what they pleased, being
with their Favorites and Relations most of them instated the men of the
Committee therein; who (with the new Governor) not long after came down to the
City.

Now the state of the City began to alter, and another face to appear upon it:
Those of the contrary part who thought they had bought their peace in their
large proportion of 6000 l. raised, and given as a free contribution to the
Army for their tenderness to the City, and general forbearance to Plunder, and
to be secure in the Articles of Surrender, were called upon to pay their 5 th.
and 20 th. parts, and after sometime summoned to Composition, or Sequestration;
In order whereunto Witnesses were examined as to what they had done during the
being of the Forces of the contrary part in the City, on the one hand, and on
the other Ald. Humphry Hook, and several others of the Council to the number of
Thirteen, were removed by a Vote of the Lords and Commons, which were the
Committee for the West, without being called to answer, or any due or legal
conviction, through the instigation of those who so carried things below as
aforesaid. And Alderm. Francis Creswick who was chosen Mayor after the City was
reduced; Notwithstanding that he carried things without exception was put out
also, and another put in who had acted foot for foot the same that Alderman
Creswick had done when the contrary part had the City merely out of Faction, to
serve a private and a particular Interest: For Alderman Hooks abilities being
well known to far exceed in the Governance of the City any of those who now
seemed to bear the day; he must be removed, and those who were more related and
seemed to adhere to him, because otherwise that Faction must veil in the City.
And here began that unhappy encounter which gave much sorrow and trouble in the
City, and to me much travel. For the rest of the Council were men that had been
acting in the same day, the same things; yet they were kept in, and these were
put out; as hereafter is mentioned.

These proceedings were an abomination to me, and I hated them exceedingly, the
rather because I saw it was not so much for the advancement of the Interest
unto which they pretended, as indeed for the seting up of a particular Party,
or Faction, the progress, and issue of which has tended to the undoing of the
City; For all things hitherto were carried, and whatsoever was the pretense to
the contrary; yet all concentred here, that is to say, the private Comodity,
and advantage of some particular persons, who as Horsleeches sucked the breasts
of the opportunity to serve their purpose, dividing the City into Factions for
that end under the pretense of the Public.

I hated also to see that almost intolerable Oppression, viz. some of those
very persons who in the former day had conjointly acted, and with as much
seeming zeal for the Interest then on foot, now to sit in the Committee as
Judges of those who with them had acted the same thing. To speak plainly, to
see Cavileer in show fitting in Judgment upon Cavileer for the same things done
jointly by each quatenus and quando Cavileers, and to behold the body of the
Counsil who together as one man strenuously appeared for the Interest of the
King to be reserved as well affected to the Parliament (for so the exclusion
spoke) and to act as such, when Alderman Hook, and those with him were ejected
the Counsil; for having done the same did smell so rank of a Faction that it
was manifest that it was not because the Parliaments Interest was in danger of
being damnified, if he and they had been continued, but that some of those who
now rose up to bear the day over them, conceived themselves in danger by reason
of him, and them to be overtopt, that is to say, that not themselves but he and
them would rule the City, though for the Parliament; so that the ground of that
ilfavoured (though called) Reformation was, that themselves might bear the
sway; not that they themselves had been together bearing the sway for the
Interest of the King. And I appeal to those judicious unbiassed men whom the
Faction swayed not, who then minded those transactions as they then were, and
have since observed the issue of those things, whether the measure I have given
be not the Diameter of those Proceedings.

I say I hated these things, and they were an abomination to me; and as I did
upon all opportunities bear my Testimony against them, foe which they sat in
opposition to me, so I endeavored to outwork them, and the whole Interest; and
the Understanding I had I made use of to counterwork, at least, to obviate the
issue of these things, which I saw must needs be the Natural effect: If in all
these things they prospered, viz. the ruin of the City, and the particular
persons therein that were men of Estates, whom the enterchanges of the former
day had brought into the capacity of Sequestration. In the prosecution of which
I met with many notable and great Encounters (as what follows will in part make
manifest) which were they to be attempted with money, could not have been
purchased of me at any rate. For the Obstractions I met with, the length of
time, the most tedious waitings and Disappointments were such that ( I speak in
truth of heart) no such consideration could have wrought me over thereunto.
Nevertheless I set my self to it, and though Young (as I have said) and not
having many to join with me, I mean such as would make it their business to
tug in such a matter, yet I was determined in the thing, and in the
consequence, obtained that which is some ground of this Relation.

General Fairfax being near about the City, and the head Quarters of the Army
at Bath, in the year 1646. after the first Wars were over, some of the men
oppressed as aforesaid foreseeing what was coming upon them, applied themselves
to the General by Petition, concerning the Interpretation of the Articles of
Surrender, hoping thereby to stemm, if it might be the flood of Sequestration
that was coming upon them; who in a Letter to the Parliament, gave his sense to
this effect, viz. That he intended by the fourth Article (which was that unto
which they had particular resort) as much saving to the Corporation, and the
particular persons concerned therein as was in his power to grant. Which was as
much as could be expected at his hands, considering the state he and the Army
stood in at that time; (sc.) as being thought in Principle and otherwise as to
Religion, not in order to that Reformation which those then in Power thought to
settle in the Nation.

I was at Bath when this thing was in agitation, and I helped it forward with
the General Officers what I could, on whom I had an influence, but it
accomplished nothing, for it was not made use of. So things stood in reference
to this as before, and they lay objected to as much mischief as those that rose
against them, were able to do unto them, and their Disease was yet without a
Remedy. And indeed, this matter sprang of themselves through the opportunity of
some friend of Alderman Hooks, who accomplished it with the General; which
nevertheless was assisted by the General Officers, whose agitation therein was
not altogether useless; their concurrence being something to the General
therein; with whom I had to do as aforesaid. Nor was it altogether unnecessary,
for thereby by they came to be so informed in the state of Affairs as to
Bristol, and to be brought into such a sense, that for ever afterward they
assisted the good and benefit of the City what lay in their power. And indeed
without them the things that were afterward could not have been affected, for
their valor and success gave them to be something in the ordring of Affairs of
this nature, especially where their Swords had led the way thereunto, and
wherein their honor as Soldiers was engaged in point of Articles.

And here I laid the stress of the matter, viz. upon the Army, and those who
were with them in the Parliament, and Council, and other places of Concernment
in the Nation; and the Others placed their Opposition against me in the
Interest that was contrary; and so the rugg became hard, the chiefest Men in
Power in England then on both sides being concerned in the matter* and so it
rose, and fell as the Interests prosper'd, who, in other things as well as
this, had the Competition. Nor could I tell where better to place it then so,
viz. In the hands of those who had the Sword in their hands, whose business it
was (as I have said) most properly, and naturally to see it brought to pass;
who were best able; who if they fell, the thing must, but in their standing,
which was the most likely of the two, a Man might reasonably promise to himself
the greatest prosperity.

So things stood, and so they were placed, and here began the Engagement in the
matter. I was considering with my self the condition of the City; how low it
was brought by reason of the Wars, how it was a Port Town; how the present
Men that were of Estates were (mostly) the contrary party; or such whom the
Rules of Sequestration, if strictly laid, would take hold of, as having had to
do in things that by the Parliaments Orders were Sequestrable; or would make
them liable so to be; how the Sequestration of them would be in a manner as a
Statute of Banqueroutisme, how one way, or another, all the Inhabitants, and
Citizens that had been there whilst the City was not taken, were in the
capacity of Sequestration; how the noise of this would spoil their Reputation
(especially the Merchants) in Foreign Parts, and their Bills would be worth
nothing; how that Trade hereby would fall, and being once lost or fallen into
the Londoners hands (who watch't for it) would not easily, if at all, be
recovered; how that the Consequence would be matter of sorrow hereafter not to
be recovered; therefore I bestir'd my self; and seeing that on this foot
matters stood, and clearly too, in my understanding; I resolved to do the part
of a Native, and Citizen, the Son of a Freeman; One that was Freeborn; and
rather to hazard my self in the issue, then that thorough any failer of mine,
the City should fall not to be recovered. And so mine own natural, and (I may
say) Native love to the City, in which I first drew breath in such
considerations as these prompted me (not any other, or Person whatsoever, for
it arose in mine own breast) to what I afterward undertook, and perfected; as
by, and by shall be made manifest.

The Committee going on in their Examinations for Sequestration,
notwithstanding their exacting the 5 th. and 20 th. part, I made it my business
what I could to take off their edge, and so wrought with some particular
persons, as (to give them their due) they took things so into consideration
that they proceeded with no one effectually in this matter, but suffered things
to fall, and the heat by Degrees, as the matters of consideration took place,
and they had leisure to receive them; yet this was not presently nor at once,
that they so did but they held it on as they pleased, and no one was certain,
(no not they themselves who were more moderate amongst them) whether they
should so hold the matter among themselves, or whether they should not
otherwise be compelled thereunto, because the Oath of Committee Men seemed to
oblige them to the contrary.

In the mean time whilst things lay thus in suspense, neither done nor undone,
but in probability, my travel was still continued upon me, and my cares were
least some sudden slip might effect it, therefore I carried a wary eye on every
hand, least the thing being once done, it should be past recovery.

Therefore when the Election for Burgesses to fit in Parliament came to be, I
endeavored what I could the bringing into Election Col. Charles Fleetwood
aforesaid, because he was a man of Moderation and Interest, and probably in the
House might best serve the advantage of the City, whose condition was now
brought very low; at least he might serve for the turning by of that rigidity,
which by the means of the Instigation of some, might produce a Sequestration.
For I knew right well that if things in the fountain were not stopped as well as
in the stream, what was done, or might be as to the stream, might signify
little. And the rather minded I this thing, because those who on the other hand
drove on the Election, sought to elect, (and in the issue carried it, though
unduly) such in that place as would (and it afterward proved so, and I felt
the effects of it in my after Prosecutions) force the contrary.

And here, though Major General Skippon the then Governor, and my Superior
Officer (for I was in command under him) and my very loving friend, sat in the
Hall in order to an Election; yet before his face I prosecuted for the other
with the uttermost that my Interest and strength was able, and had accomplished
it for Col. Fleetwood had the Pole been granted, as near as a man could well
judge by a view in that matter, but the business was otherwise packt, and a
return made by the Sheriffs presently in the Hall for those two, on the
foundation of whose after proceedings lay the misery, and unhappiness of the
City. I opposed it what I could as aforesaid, as foreseeing that which has
since proved in the end; and something was sent up against the Election which
was of weight, but they being returned, and coming to fit in the House, there
was a Guard against such things as these, so as that the prosecution of things
of this nature seldom received any effect, especially where the persons
opposed sided with or served the prevailing party in the House, which these
did, and so the matter could never come within.

There were many sober Citizens that were with me in this matter, and many of
them such as had suffered much by the contrary party.

Indeed this encounter put me to some, yea a great trial, for I thereby
hazarded my Interest with the Major General then Governor, and the loss of the
friendship of that part of the City which I opposed in the Election; and of the
men returned themselves; and moreover (as it might prove, and so it did as
hereafter will more appear) I apprehended it would lay a bone of contention
between me and them, and a ground of prejudice in them against me, which had
not the hand of the Lord preserved me, had been my ruin. For, ever afterward
those then sitting as Burgesses in the House look upon me with a squint eye,
and as they could with their party wrought against me, and had not the other
Interest, viz. the Army stood it thorough, they had carried it against me: For,
with the opposite Interest to the Army they stood in this thing, which gave a
fore encounters, and notable disappointments, and a male interpretation of all
that I did to them, and the party unto which the did adhere; and if a hole
could have been picked in my Coat, I should have been sure to have had it; and
they and that Interest would have served it upon me, but they were disappointed.

This struck the stroke between us, and laid a perpetual ground of Opposition
on their part against me, when they saw that by no means they could court me to
turn from that on which I was; and they wrought at me as they pleased; and
words passed, and actions from some of them, not fit here to be related, but in
the summ^ of the matter they secretly held me for their enemy, and did against
me what lay in their power, though in all that I did I had nothing in mine eye
but the preservation of the City from that outrage which malice and wickedness
sought to attempt against it, which now arose to a great height, so that I was
enforced to attend the motions of it higher then this place, even in the
Parliament it self, whither the heads of this Faction were removed, and sat,
and where they had their influence.

Hereunto I was enforced to lay my Leagure, that is to say, to attend the
motions of these Men above, who here below had accomplished little though it was
endeavored; and because some principal Men of the contrary part; viz. Alderman
Hook, Alderman James, Alderman Francis Creswick, etc. were called upon to
Composition through the Instigation of those of the City who sat as Members of
Parliament, whereby those of this City who were in the like capacity, were (in
effect) called to the same, therefore I removed the matter higher then this
place; and because I saw what force was engaged, I thought to bring as good as
themselves, and so having considered of certain Considerations to the number of
thirteen, why the Citizens, and Inhabitants of Bristoll should be freed from
Sequestration, I sent them up to a Friend at London to communicate them to the
General Officers, and to him who was then Lieutenant General, to have their
Judgments whether they were fitting, or feiseable.

Unto this I had an Answer, that they judged them to be both, and encouraged me
to a coming up to London, which having provided for that purpose, I undertook,
bringing with me a Petition which I had drawn to the Parliament; unto which
were subscribed the hands of several of the City that had been for the
Parliament; unto which were added the Reasons aforesaid, desiring, and
endeavoring, an Indemnity for the City.

To the Lieutenant General I came, after I was come up to London, who so
approved what I had drawn, that he added another Consideration himself, and
told me that if I had no better a hand, he would present it to the Parliament
himself.

I was very glad of this; and the then Commissary General, and other Officers
that were Members of Parliament; and several others of the House that were
friendly to the Army being possessed with the business, the Lieutenant General
took it with him, and had a time to present it to the House; but such had been
the influence, and preoccupation of those, who sat as Burgesses, that John Ash
who was Chairman at Goldsmiths-Hall, (whom upon this foot they had made my
mortal Enemy) openly said -- That I had married a Malignant of Bristol's
Daughter, and that I had my Wife on Consideration of freeing the Malignants of
Bristoll from Sequestration.

This troubled the Leiutenant General, and the Commiss. General, and the rest
very much, who having not then in particular to remove such an obstruction
unthought of, thought fit to withdraw the matter till they had further spoken
with me, who finding (which were their thoughts before) that it was a mere
calumny, and that it was upon no such consideration, but as has been said, and
that in the Marriage of my Wife, who was the Daughter of Alderman William
Can, then Mayor of the City when I married her; I had answered on my part
what was fitting, if not over, and above what was usual, upon my private
particular, they were greatly troubled; and being in great indignation that the
opportunity was thus put by, as well on the Cities part unto which they were
wrought into a great regard, as on mine; they determined to attempt something
else, and because the City had Articles, and that by the 4 th. of those
Articles of Surrender the Citizens and Inhabitants were to be defended from
all, manner of force and violence, and to be preserved in their Persons and
Estates, as the said Article has it more at large, which these Proceedings
seemed to invade; therefore they determined to endeavor an Act of Parliament
for the establishing a Court for Articles to stand indifferently between the
Justice of the Parliament, and the honor of the Army, as Supreme Judge between
them both in p^int of Articles, and because this could not be done for Bristol
alone as seeming too particular, and so a Repulse might be received, they
resolved to attempt it for the General, viz. as to all Articles in which
Bristols particular might be included.

I helped the matter what I could, and forwarded it, and attended the Members
Instrumental therein from time to time, suggesting what was thought Material
therein, which cost me a very long and wearisom attendance, as it was also
chargable, till it was effected; which Act passed and had the General inclusion
as aforesaid.

The Act being passed, and the Court coming to fit, of which Nathanael Brent
Knight was then President, I procured a Letter from some of the chief in the
Army, and from Col. Charles Fleetwood, in particular to John Steel then
Recorder of London, to be Counsil in the Matter, which he accepted, and
promised; and I also obtained Genesis Fairfax and Leiutenant Ge. Cromwell's
Letters to the Court (who were many of them Members of the Army, and had to
doing in this my friendly assistance;) in way of Explanation to the Articles,
and what their sense was, and intended when they granted the same, with other
passages to induce them, not fit here to be mentioned.

So being prepared on every hand as well as I could, I attended with the
Counsil aforesaid in the Court being the first cause attempted in the Court, as
it was the cause wherefore the Court was attempted to be empowered: So when the
Counsil had spoken, and I had opened Matters for a long space of time, as to
the Leagure of Bristol, and my particular knowledge in some Transactions, and
the state of the City, and the reasonableness of what was proposed, it was very
clear to the Court, and so, nemine contradicente, they voted, That by the 4 th.
Article of the Surrender of Bristol, the Citizens ought to be freed from
Sequestration, for any thing done by them to that time, and therefore ordered
that the Commissioners at Goldsmit^ shall should forbear proceeding upon the
Citizens for any thing done by them to that time, unless any thing of
Delinquency could be proved against them since the Surrender thereof: As by the
Copy of the Order it self, which is ready to be produced, may more plainly
appear.

This command (as I may so call it) was sent to Goldsmiths-Hall, and upon the
Petition of Humphry Hook, Alex James, Francis Creswick and Edward Caple, (Son
in Law to the said Francis Creswick) which I drew, who were called upon as to
Composition, as aforesaid, was it grounded, because being called upon as to
Composition who had Articles, there was ground wherefore the Court for Articles
should take cognizance of their being so called upon as to composition: And
hereupon the whole contrary Party, that is to say, by this Act had privilege as
to Articles to appeal, who, I suppose will confess that many of them received
much right, and advantage; which upon occasion of Bristol, was thus brought to
effect, and produced.

Here rested the Matter about two days time, during which the Commissioners at
Goldsmiths-Hall grumbled much at the matter, and John Ash in particular, who
wrote peremtorily to the Court thereabouts. And great muttrings in the house
there was about the Courts determination, through occasion of the Burgesses,
who made it their business to incense the House against it, and ceased not till
upon one consideration or the other, the House overruled the Judgment given by
the Court, and appointed another to be President, and the (then) Atturny
General, to attend the Court in the behalf of the Parliament.

Now that the Burgesses were instrumental in this matter, and the persons who
were the occasion of the forcing of the thing, many of the (then) Members then
informed me; and John Ash in particular, being calmly spoken to by some friends
of the aforesaid Petitioners, wherefore he drove on things so against the
Petitioners, and Bristol; said to this effect, That he could not help it in
regard that the Burgesses had complained to the House, and that he had received
a check thereupon for not proceeding therein.

This put me to new work again, and the Lieutenant General being made
Lieutenant of Ireland, and coming to Bristol for Transportation, I came down at
the same time, and here spoke to him about this matter, who spoke to me to draw
a Letter to the Court for Articles which he would sign for that purpose: So I
drew a Letter very significant, which he signed, wherein he placed his
expedition to Ireland to be grounded on what the Court should do in reference
to what he had wrote; alleging to this purpose, that he knew not what his
Expedition thither might signify, if the honor of the Army should not be made
good in point of Articles.

This was sent, and delivered to the Court, who hitherto had proceeded little
in reference to Bristol, and because a starting hole was found out for what the
Parliament had overruled, viz. That the Articles for Bristol were not formally
confirmed by the House. There being a Clause in the Act that gave them
Cognizance of such Articles only, as the House had confirmed; I was constrained
to rummage among the Parliament Rolls, and to take out of them (which I did my
self) all such passages as had proceeded in the House in reference to the
Surrender of Bristol, viz. The thanks of the House to the General Officers,
and Army upon Col. Ingoldsby's Narrative in the House of the Proceedings of the
Army as to Bristol. The day of Thanksgiving ordered throughout the Nation for
the Surrender of the said place, their Letter to the General, and sundry other
things, which I abstacted and delivered to the Court, amounting in the whole to
more then a Confirmation. For indeed, that Surrender considering the season of
the Year (being in the approach of Winter) and the Reputation thereof, and the
Armies liberty thereupon to prosecute to the end of that War, was of as much
consequence to the Parliaments part, as it was against them when it was taken
by that Party which was contrary.

Nevertheless, neither the one nor the other could prevail, neither the
Letter, nor the Abstract, nor whatsoever was offered, to have a Salvo to the
former order of the Court; the influence of the House through the Burgesses
solicitation lying in the way, but still they held it to that Clause, viz. the
Confirmation of the House; so that the sollications were forced there to cease,
without any further advantage then a prompting the Parties concerned to
Goldsmith shall and a recommendation of them thither for an easy Composition;
forasmuch as by the said Article the Petitioners might suppose themselves (and
to have some reason for that purpose) to be freed from Sequestration: And one
of the Petitioners distrusting the issue of things at last, and being promised
favor by John Ash at Goldsmiths-Hall, viz. Alexander James, took the
opportunity, so did Alderman Waliis also, who was no Petitioner but in the same
predicament. And thus this Matter came to be broken, and by some of the
Petitioners own hands at last, which had been brought thus far, and
Goldsmiths-Hall in a capacity of having to do with them; And indeed it was the
design of that time thus to break them; unto which some of their own hands
served. And here Matters for a while rested.

The truth of it is, there were many Lords, and others then in the City at the
time of the Surrender, that were concerned in that Article, who either had, or
were in a condition of compounding for considerable Estates; who if they had
been excluded, the order for the Validity of that Article had not been
expunged. And so much for that business.

Now as a Vessel in the Sea which had lost her Oars and Rudder, so were the
rest of the Petitioners, and other Citizens, who thought themselves in the same
condition, tossed up and down, serving themselves as they could, sometimes this
way, sometimes that, till another expedient came to be pitched upon, which might
give them relief, though yet as to what had been offered the Court for Articles,
and the reason thereof, there was a Cessation; and not with that violence at
Goldsmiths-Hall as to them, were things prosecuted as usual, upon the ground
before mentioned. The Commissioners at Goldsmiths-Hall had an Exeunt in a short
time, and they were forced to give way to a new Bill that authorized several
new Commissioners, who sat at Haberdashers-Hall who were empowered to all those
things relating to Sequestration, and particular persons in every County were
appointed as Subcommissioners for Sequestrations, and these applied themselves
in discharge of that Office, and the Rules were very strickt, so that no man
who had publicly to do on the contrary part could (probably) escape them; and
those who were appointed for Subcommissioners for Sommersetshire made their
Progress to Bristol, as included in the County of Sommerset, and made demand of
the Committee the Papers that lay before them concerning Sequestrations.

This appeared as a new furnace, wherein to terrify those Citizens, and to
turn aside all that had been on the contrary before, so I looked on the Act,
and finding there that the Subcommissioners must be men of the same County, and
considering that Bristol was a City and County of it self, I thought there was
a hole in it, and that upon this ground those Subcommissioners had nothing to
do in Bristol, being not (all of them though one was) Inhabitants of the City.

This flaw I showed to my Cozen Haggatt (who was both a Councellor at Law, and
a Member of the Committee, who before, and then, and afterward vigorously
acted with me, and with whom I particularly corresponded in this freedom of the
City, who here acted what lay in him, as I did above, though now by some of the
Men concerned, as ill rewarded) and told him that I thought it would be well if
he would communicate it to the Committee.

He was of my mind in both, and so wrought that the Committee denied the Papers
that lay before them to these Subcommissioners as not being capacitated by the
Act thereunto, being not Inhabitants. Nevertheless on they proceeded on their
own legs, and part of Alderman Hooks Estate in Sommersetshire was sequestered,
and part in Gloucestershire by the Subcommissioners of that County, and one
came to his House to Inventory his Goods in the City.

Now I was put to it, for the matter was precidential to all, for though the
Burgesses to wave the business of the Articles, suggested, that there was only
two or three Malignants, Hook, etc. that were in prosecution, and no others
intended; thereby making the matter little, yet having broke the ice on them,
the rest must have followed; for the same Rules served for the one as for the
other, and the leading men being overcome, the rest must follow: the
Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall having about 200. on the List: Though with
this Dawberry, their Emissaries thought to charm the residue so concerned in
the City into an Opinion that the matter was not of that moment, nor would have
reflection (at least in intent) upon them, so as that they needed to fear.
Hereby turning aside their general sense and appearance in the Matter, and
endeavoring the lessning of that which was attempted for them.

To those of Gloucestershire, viz. Capt. Buck, and Hancolk, Col. Nath. Rich.
(at my desire) and my self wrote, who thereupon took off the seizure in order
to Sequestration on Alderman Hook's Estate, and for those of Sommersetshire I
so wrought that they were soon turned out, and such Men put in their places, as
upon whom I had an influence, whom by Letters and otherwise I kept off from
Bristol, least they should run themselves into a Praemunire as acting in cases
where they were not Commissionated.

This stemmed the Tide again, and gave some respite; nevertheless the
endeavors of the other part were not wanting to bring it on afresh with
Haherdashers-Hall, and from the fountain as it were, to cause their suffering.

With Haberdashers-Hall I was forced now to work, and several of the
Commissioners I engaged with the Reason of the thing not to act; and of this
number Three there were, a fourth was Newtral, and cared to do little in the
matter: So that the Orders from them to the Subcommissioners lay sometime a
Month together unsigned, there being but seven of them, and the signing
required a Majority of the Commissioners. One while I held them with one thing,
and another while with another; and sometimes I wrote to them, and made use of
the then state of the Nation that required there should be no irritation,
especially of such a City, in such a time, which might turn much to prejudice:
And because I knew not what might be the Consequence, at last I got the Matter
in the House again as to the particular of Alderman Hook and the rest, which
being not so well timed by the Speaker, it being early in the Morning, and the
Members that were to assist it, not being present, one of the Burgesses crushed
it in the bud, and so it died. The motion arose from a Letter General Fairfax
wrote to the House in that particular, which I procured, and gave to the
Speaker who presented it.

Then I wrought in the Counsil of State, (I being then at White Hall, and in
the nature of a Secretary of State, though they being then in the form of a
Commonwealth, they gave no such appellation, such an appellation being to a
state improper, yet Secretary I was, and such was the term that by their order
they gave me.) I say, I wrought with the Counsil of State, and exhibited
considerations to them according to the nature of things, and the reason of the
times, and so accomplished that some of the Commissioners were sent for by the
Counsil to appear before them, where we had a hearing; but neither here could
any thing be accomplished by reason of the workings of the Burgesses with some
of the Counsil, though the (then) President and others did what they could: The
matter indeed, not so properly relating unto them to judge in, seeing the Law
was as to Sequestration, otherwise then as to a prudent suspension of putting
the Law in execution, where (probably) such execution might return to a greater
prejudice, and to commend the consideration of the whole to the Parliament.

This gave a little breathing, the Commissioners being found no otherwise
acting, but in reference to their Oaths in the discharge of what they had
undertaken according to the Rules that were set them, which being prompted to
by others instigation, and such as were Members of Parliament, it could be
expected to have no other influence.

Nevertheless, things ended not here, but new solicitations to Sequestration
produced new Orders, and a peremptory Letter by the Commissioners was sent down
to the Committee in reference to their Non-Sequestration, demanding the Copies
of the Papers that were before them, for that purpose threatening to lay a fine
upon their heads, and that a Sergeant at Arms moreover should be sent for
them. John Creswick's Land also at Langford in the County of Sommerset was
sequestered.

To this the Committee gave a manly Reply, my Coz. Haggat being Instrumental
therein, who drew it; and as for John Creswick I informed the Commissioners
that his father Alderman Creswick aforesaid was dead, who in his life time was
not sequestered, and now his Estate was divided among his Children, and this
particular part of it to his Son John, whom none of their Rules had included
for Sequestration: So that the matter fell to the ground, and the Sequestration
was taken off; as did the other by the return to the Letter aforesaid. So this
tide was stemmed again, and a Pause there was.

Now drew near the time wherein the King and his Army marched out of Scotland
into England, which was not an ordinary time in England: The Counsil of State
then bestir'd themselves, and Intelligence they had from all parts of the
Nation every day (for so it was laid) of what was done therein, and how their
Militia advanced. From Bristol also they received an account amongst the rest,
of what was done in that City, which the Counsil so took and I was careful so
to improve that they ordered it to be reported to the House by Henry Vane Knight.
then High Steward of the City; who being willing to do it a kindness, and
having been assistant unto me in my endeavors for the City, so managed it that
a Letter of Thanks was ordered by the House to be sent to Bristol for their good
affection unto them: And that the City might not be put to charge at that time,
I procured a Bill of 500 l. to be sent also by the Counsil upon the account of
the State, toward what should be done therein.

Well, Worcester business was over, and the Parliament were upon an Act of
Indemnity, and I thought it high time now to look about, and to finish what I
had with so much travel, and more then three years expense of time, endeavored
to bring to pass. Therefore least this Act should be closed with an exclusion
of Bristol, I drew a third Petition to the House in the Name of several
Citizens and Inhabitants of Bristol that had been well affected to them, who
had signed the first Petition aforesaid, and I adjoined thereto certain
Considerations wherefore the Parliament should grant Bristol an Indemnity; and
I engaged in the Delivery and prosecution thereof, the most leading men that
then were in the House; As the then Lord General, Lord Commissioner Whitlock,
Lord Gray of Groby, Sir Henry Vane, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Col. Hen. Martin,
Major Sallaway, the Lord Commissioner Lisle, the Lord Chief Justice St. John's,
etc. with many others; who well timing the thing, took their opportunity, and
being presented the House, so spoke, that the Parliament voted to this effect,
That if the Instructions for the Act of Indemnity, and general Pardon in the
general did not reach Bristol in particular, Bristol should have a particular
Act of Indemnity for it self; and ordered the Petition and Considerations
annexed, to be left in the hands of the Clark of the House for that purpose.

This I thought pretty well, yet I could not judge the matter secure whilst
there was any thing between this and the thing done, I having received so many
disappointments, and well knowing that Votes of Parliament many times admit of
Alterations; and as Ships at Sea are forced often times according to the Winds;
but principally was I jealous of Haberdashers-Hall, and the workings of the
opposite party there that hitherto had given me that exercise in the matter;
least that now upon the closing of the thing, they should struggle to undo my
work, and to finish their own. And the rather was I confiderate in the matter,
because when the Vote aforesaid passed the House, I being in the Lobby
attending what should be done, I saw one of the Burgesses come out, as not able
to stay therein, when he saw it like to be carried when the Vote passed; so
least any thing should again come between the cup and the lip, (as they use to
say) between the Vote and the finishing, least Haberdashers-Hall should yet
interpose, or be driven thereunto, I drew a few lines unto them,, signifying
what the Parliament had done, because, being not enacted, these Commissioners
were not bound to take notice of what was voted in the House, and desiring them
to forbear any further prosecutions on Bristol till what the Parliament would
do in the thing might come to be understood: Which some of the Members
aforesaid signed, particularly the Lord Commissioner Whitlock (whom upon the
withdrawing of Edmund Prideaux to be Atturny General, I bespoke and procured to
be Recorder of Bristol, that so by his Relation he might have the more open
opportunity to do that good which was in his heart to do for the City) Sir Hen.
Vane, with some others, but as for the Burgesses one or both of them; but I am
sure one of them refused to put his hand thereunto.

This had its effect on Haberdashers-Hall, at least they did nothing further in
the Sequestration of Bristol, and so one of the general Instructions of the Act
of Indemnity, having this clause in particular, viz. That all those that were
not actually sequestered before such a day of September 1649. should be freed
from Sequestration; those of the City who had been on the contrary Party were
freed from Sequestration, they not being actually sequestered before the said
day of September. And so the keeping off the actual Sequestration of Bristol
during those years wherein the Matters were tossed up and down as aforesaid,
and thorough such difficulties wrought in order to this time, which finished the
matter, and freed those who had so much Resolution as to hold it out (which was
the whole except some few particular persons aforesaid) from Sequestration.

And so I made an end of my work, which I began as aforesaid, out of mine own
particular Consideration of the good of the place, and the particular persons
therein, without the influence of any other persons whatsoever; and which
(through many sore and long attendances, disappointments, abuses, and
oppositions, sometimes waiting six, sometimes eight Weeks together from Bristol
upon them, then when at Whitehall, applying the whole of my Interest, besides
what else of trouble and anxiety of Spirit did intervene, and other troubles in
a thing of that nature, which I have chosen rather to forget, then by
remembering to renew my sorrows again.) I finished, not with greater advantage
to the Citizens, and the City it self, being considered as aforesaid, then
satisfaction to my self, and gladness of heart that I had (though with all the
Appendices aforesaid) accomplished the Peace and Welfare of my Native place,
and the Citizens therein concerned, as has been said; hoping at least justly
expecting that in the peace thereof I might enjoy peace, and that such a thing
as this being done for them, which no place in England obtained but themselves,
and thus freely by me, (for they to this day never asked me what it cost me?
nor gave me Consideration therein, nor did I ever receive any thing at their
hands, directly or indirectly, for what I so did for them therein; and what
charge and trouble I was at; wise men may guess, but cannot thoroughly
understand;) I say, hoping at least justly expecting that in the Peace thereof
I might sit down in peace, and that such a thing as this being thus freely done
by me, which had been done for no place, I might in the love and good will of
those for whom I had acted, and from whom ( I may modestly say) deserved it,
have my future recess, and being in that place when opportunity called me to
return, and to have my retirement therein.

But I have found it other wise as aforesaid, which has given the occasion of
this adjusting of Accounts with them, already hitherto, and hereafter to be
mentioned. For being put on this foot of Banishment in the eye of those who do
not understand me, nor know the ground and reason wherefore it is so come to
pass, nor what I have been to this place, and the particular Men therein who
have sentenced me thereunto, I am rendered and bespoken (as the thing it self
signifies) such a person, and that in the judgment of those with whom I live,
as deserves not a being in my Native Country; whom therefore the Laws and
those in Power with whom I live, sent me from thence: Therefore it lay upon me
as a necessity to my own Reputation and credit among men to this Generation,
and to the Ages to come, thus to do my self right, that so it may appear that
it was for no evil deed, but having done many Good things among them, I am thus
Banished.

And in what I have already, and have yet further to say I have, and shall say
the truth, and in the contrary thereunto disprove me who can: For, I have only
minded as aforesaid, to do my self this necessary right, whereunto had I not
been thus compelled, I had been in silence, and these things together with my
person had in process of time when I had finished my work in my Generation (for
ought that I know should ever have proceeded from me, of these kind of
Reckonings) been laid in the Dust: But (as I have said) I am compelled
hereunto, and those who are concerned must hear their Reckoning which they have
thus compelled, which must stand from Generation to Generation on record
against them, which shall never be bloted out; and let the Witness of God in
all Men's Consciences, even in them of their own Principle judge when they have
considered this throughout, whether have proved natural to Bristol, they or I?
Or whether they have done to me as they would be done unto themselves? Or
whether they have rendered unto me a recompense that is meet?

I am not ignorant how even this that I have said may come to bear a
misconstruction, and how it may be judged that I do this either for
Ostentation, or to bespeak my self with them, with whom I have to do, and so to
fall under, or seek favor from them. But I am satisfied in that neither the
one nor the other thus stand with me, but only as aforesaid, being (I say
again) thus compelled thereunto: And let him that is most envious, but put
himself in my stead, and make the case his own, as is mine, and I dare stand to
his judgment therein; I say it is only because this thing of Banishment in the
nature of it, renders me as aforesaid in the eye of those who know me not to
have so deserved, that I so write; and for the decision hereof I leave it to
the Lord who knows my heart and uprightness therein, and to his witness in Men,
as he shall please to give it opperation in them, being sensible of his
presence which is with me herein, without whom and his motion thereunto I had
not written.

But to proceed, thus were things finished as aforesaid, but this was not all,
but rather one Act for the advantage of the City, which in process of time
through many changes and various Interruptions and Difficulties was thus
brought unto effect, My Natural Love to my Native City ended not here, nor was
it herein only terminated, but as I had opportunity, and was in the place of
Power, my love led me to serve it, and the particular Citizens and Inhabitants
thereof, and I think there are few men that then were judged to be Men of
Estates, and had business but found the benefit of my endeavor one way or
another, and of my being in a Capacity to do them service.

The Company of Merchants, I suppose will do me right herein, who being pursued
by one Lewis upon the Patent for Calve-skins, and Butter, and endeavored to be
brought under great damage, found my help. Often times they had addresses to the
then Committee for the Navy in that Case: Their Delegates can witness how ready
I was to assist them there, as often as they came up, and with what suc^ess: Then
when that particular came to that height, that notwithstanding all the
endeavors and suspensions, a peremptory day was set, them to plead in the
Exchequer, or Judgment would be given against them, their then Alderman (those
of them that are yet alive) and others that were then of that Company are able,
and I suppose will testify (if not the Generality of the Company) that I gave
them notice from Whitehall of this peremptory rule, which without their
knowledge (having not so minded that business as they ought) was so set, and
how that when they came up to me I so wrought that in the morning by nine of
the Clock I got the matter of Judgment by the Parliament taken off, which had
it not been so done, had been given in the afternoon in the Exehequer against
them, to the Damage, as was then said, of above Twenty Thousand Pounds.

There are also I suppose, yet alive of Merchants that then were not of the
Company, who can testify, that being pursued by the same Lewis upon the foot
of treble Damages, which amounted to a great height upon particular persons,
because that the taking off of the Judgments aforesaid was upon Petition of the
Company of Merchants, and they being not actually of the Company were not
concerned in the Order of Parliament, which was a mistake; for upon their
Petition of the Company of Merchants it was granted which had reference to all
Merchants whatsoever that had to do in Calveskins and Butter, not that it was
granted only to those Merchants who were of the Company, which was the
Critisme, or rather than which was sought to evade the Judgment so far as to
them. I think there are yet alive of them, as I have said, that can witness
that having put their matters into the Court of Indemnity, which was then at
Haberdashers-Hall, I appeared there of my self without their desire, and
pleaded their Matters so, none of them being present, nor any one of Council
for them, when the Council on the other side pleaded I say, I so accomplished
it with the Commissioners that they were freed therefrom, it amounting to some
in the sum of 800 l. a piece, and to some 1200 l. as was then said, I am sure
that they cannot say that they so much as paid for my comeing thither.

Then when in the time of the little Parliament (so called) the Company of
Merchants were summoned before a Committee of them to answer as to that whole
business upon the same suggestions in the Painted Chamber, and I was retired
from Whitehall, I judge there are yet in being those of them that can bear me
record, that at their desire in the midst of Winter I rod up with them, and
when the time of hearing was come, their Opponents seeing me appear with Papers
in my hand (for I told the Merchants that I would if they pleased, and so they
were, plead the Matter my self without any Council) withdrew their
Information, the matter falling thereby to the ground, and how that I put them
to no other trouble that Journey, (if so be my being with them at their desire
was a trouble) then to bear up and down and there my own charge.

Afterward since that Parliament, having the show of some trouble again, I
drew the state of that case, and gave to the late Alderman Joseph Jackson, (who
had been up about the other, with the other Aldermen, and I suppose was then
Master of the Company, when I so stated the case) and desired him to show it to
whomsoever that hereafter should question them thereabouts, and it would
satisfy them, which proved the effect; so that to this day they have
thereabouts received (as I know of, and I judge I should have heard of it if it
had been so, having been their friend therein, and in the City) any further
trouble: As the said Alderman Jackson (were he alive) for his time (and others
since) could (at least) the Paper it self will) testify. All that I received
in consideration of that whole business for the said Company was, they did of
themselves (for I am sure there was therein no influence of mine) make me free,
or gave me the freedom of the Company.

Then when Virginia came to be discoursed of, which was then held by the
contrary Party, and Ships were talked of to be sent thither to reduce it; some
Merchants of London would have excluded Bristol, which of my self I then
opposed and prevented, none of the City being there with me, they indeed not
knowing thereof: And so the exclusion of that trade was prevented, which now is
become the Principal Foreign Trade of the City.

In the business of English Tobacco, I assisted the bringing forth of that Act
against the Planting thereof, being discommodious to a greater benefit to the
Nation, and destructive to Land, which in England has better uses; and in
procuring the Act for Navigation, I bore a share which had its influence on the
good of the City.

When Edward Caple was sequestered in Gloucestershire, and so called upon to
compound in his absence at Sea, and his Wifes Solicitor had elap'st the day
appointed for such as were in his Qualification, and she was hard bestead with
trouble in the thing; I laid by mine own occasion then in London, (which then
was of some considerable loss to me) and pitying her condition, seeing her in
danger of distraction if her matters could not be retrived; I went to the
Court, and being within the Bar had some ruffle with the then Chief Baron, who
desired me to let them alone, and not hinder them in the doing of Justice; I
told him that I was not there to hinder them in the doing of Justice, but that
they might do it: For, what Justice (said I) is it for a man to loose the
benefit of Composition, who really intends to comply with the Law, because the
negligence or falsehood of his Solliciter had brought him within the expiration
of the day, and so excluded him the benefit of Composition, as was the case of
Edward Caple, which to me was a hard case: At length I so wrought what with the
one Baron, and what with the other, and the Sequestrator, that she was dismissed:
The matter in question being 50 l. a year free Land, which (as I remember) was
her Jointure, and seven years Arrears thereof, which was as much as if I had
given it her in her Pocket, besides it saved her from Distraction.

The Woman was Sister to Henry Creswick now Alderman, Eldest Son to Alderman
Francis Creswick aforesaid; Who in Recompense of what I did (as has been said)
for his Father, and his Fathers House, and his Brother John, and this his
Sister Sarah Caple, and her Wifes Father, Alderman Humphry Hook, (as aforesaid)
then which no man had done more for a Family in this Nation; having not only
saved him a Composition, but delivered him from the force of the Burgesses, and
the strength of the Great Men of that Party in the Nation, notwithstanding that
his Estate was in part under Sequestration, and the very goods of his House
Inventoryed, who had a very great Estate (as aforesaid) and consequently to
himself in the quiet enjoyment of what he had by his own Father, and his Wives,
which I think was some Thousands of Pounds thick, he having the more of their
Estates, by how much the state had none, and his being freed himself with the
rest that had been on the contrary party, as at large has been declared; I
having been always a tender friend to him and them never having given them so
much as the least just personal cause of Offense, but having been always in
love and tenderness to them as aforesaid, I say in Recompense he caused me to
be taken from a Meeting, wherein We were quietly waiting on the Lord without
offense to any, with diverse of my Friends and fellow Citizens, Men of Quality
and Reputation in the City, in the year he was Mayor, and then committed me to
the Guard at the Guildhall, where with the rest of my Friends I lay all night
on the Boards in Georges Chapel, then to the Marshalsey, an old pitiful house,
ready as a man would think to have fallen about one's ears, when we had large
Houses of our own near, which lay for the most part empty. And (to add no more)
signed the Warrant for my third Conviction upon the first Bill of which I stood
indicted, and sat on the Bench as one of the Court that sentenced me to
Banishment, and signed the Warrant for my Transportation, though an Alderman
that sat by him refused so to do, to whom I had done no such Kindness, there
being only the Relation of Brother in Law between us, whose Name is Tho.
Langton.

And to show what an ingrate spirit lay in his breast, and how unworthy he was,
when I was upon the first Indictment aforesaid, and in the words of soberness,
and moderation desired, as it was reasonable, a Copy of my Indictment, and the
Convictions, that I might not be put to plead to a thing of that weight, as was
that of which I stood Indicted; the Consequence of which might remove me from
my Native Country, my Family, Children, Estate, Relations, etc. barely upon the
hearing of a Paper read; Minding them that they also, as I said, We all must
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ; and therefore it behoved them and us
so to do, as that we might be able to give a good account before him; telling
them also that if the Case were theirs; and if they stood where I did, which
for ought they knew (I said) they might, and that for their Consciences, as was
my Case; they would, if it fell within their Consideration, desire the same;
which drew tears from some in the Hall, Into a great rage he fell, and in
great bitterness of spirit; Unprovoked, unexpected, unthought of, when all were
silent, very falsely, and maliciously, and with the highest Ingratitude, and
unworthiness, said to this effect -- That I, and my Accomplices had sat in
Judgment upon their Estates, and his in particular -- who never sat in
Judgment upon him, or them, or their Estates; or was one of the Committee, but
helped them, as has been declared, To whom I replied -- I never sat in
Judgment upon you, but have saved you, and this is thy gratitude -- and I
added, some such like kind of payment, I shall have from some more of you by
and by -- The Court was offended with him for this Retaliation, and Alderman
Knight himself, who sat next him, thought it but an unworthy payment; and that
therefore he was too blame, and so jogged him to be silent, though at the same
time in other things, he there showed himself bad enough and in particular to
me.

When the Isle of Man was reduced, one Child of this City was concerned in a
Ship there taken, and sent to me thereabouts; I spoke to the Council, who so
much credited what I said to them about the Vessel, that without so much as a
Deposition, or further Testemony, they Ordered the Ship, and her Appurtenances
to be (and which was) delivered to him, I am sure it cost him not a farthing as
to me.

My Kinsman John Wright being summoned peremptorily to appear by such a day
before the Lords and Commons for Sequestration, which was within three or four
days of the time when the summons was left him, which was withheld from
serving, on purpose that he might be surpised, it being in the depth of
Winter, and near Paul's fair, his Wife also miscarrying on the fright thereof;
wrote up to me, who appeared for him before the Lords and Commons, and
publicly charged a Member then present, of that Committee, that he served
that matter in the behalf of a Brother of his who was in suite of Law with one
Whitehead about a parcel of Land, whom John Wright assisted ( he being a man of
Estate, and a Merchant) to withdraw him from which, or to make him suffer, if
he would not, this was offered: Whereupon, and upon what else was suggested by
me in that matter, he was discharged; and an Order made, that for the future,
no person should be required to appear before them until matter of Delinquency
was first sworn, and made good, which was of advantage to all that were
concerned in such matters as well as John Wright: And I do not remember (nay I
am certain it is so) that it cost John Wright so much as the charge of his
Post-Letter to me.

The Lady St. John's Wife to (...) Arundel of Warder Castle (who was here, I
mean the man under some Distemper of Melancholy) being in great distress, (and
a very stranger to me) in so much that she was constrained in a strange place
to sell off the little Goods she had to give her bread, and speaking with me, I
was so sensible of her condition, making it my own case, that I never left till
with the Committee here and above she had a clearing, and enjoyed her Estate
and Land again; which that Noble Woman (for I call her as she was) if alive, or
her then Husband, or Eldest Son, can at large testify: She was a Papist (so
called) and her Husband, and great Oppression was exercised on her, out of
which I saw her delivered, which was my only Recompense.

Nor was I here limited, or did limit my self, but my tenderness extended it
self to others that suffered: Some Moneys I gathered and gave to Bishop Howel's
Wife, who with her Children, when this City was taken, was found in distress;
and several of the then Ministers had their Relief from me, who were not
prosecuted when Articles were sent against them; in particular Henry Jones of
Stevens, and who being cast out, I got in again, as was Richard Pounal at
John's in particular.

The time would fail me if I should instance all: the City was under a great
blur of Malignancy, the Burgesses held it on as they could as aforesaid; all
Matters ran athwart, and through the fire were drawn, that were accomplished,
by reason thereof, for the City, till after the time of Worcester I never gave
over whilst I had time or opportunity to serve its welfare, till all was
accomplished. I never thought it too much that I did, nor of what I have done,
ever did I, or do I repent; I had no sinister end in my eye, that would now
have shown it self; I did it whilst I had opportunity, to do good to them, who
I knew would requite me evil. I have my desire, viz. the Prosperity of the
place, and of these men in particular, for whom so to do, I never received from
them an Obligation: I am glad I had the opportunity, and that it is done. The
Welfare of the City, not the destruction thereof, have I sought. Well may it
prosper say I, and be multiplied, and that in the Peace and Prosperity thereof,
the Nation may have peace, and prosper, though for my love, and being thus in
order thereunto, I am Banished my Native City, and Country to Barbados, (with
many more of my Brethren) for my Conscience to God in Recompense; which no Law
pointed me but to, for I was not named therein, but to them that it gave power
to execute the Law, and to their discretion it is by Law lest, whom to take,
and whether to take any or no, that they found at our Meetings; which
Discretion of theirs has been thus exercised to me, who have been thus to
them, who have always carried my self civil, and a friend to them; who with as
much Integrity of heart, and more Industry have endeavored their, and the
prosperity of the City then ever I did to get penny for my Child; in Recompense
of which they will not suffer me to breath in my Native Country for my
Conscience, though the foot of the prosperity of them, and the City stands upon
what I have freely done for them and the City; I say, as to my particular, well
may the City prosper, and be multiplied, and that in the peace and prosperity
thereof the Nation may have peace and prosper, but I fear, nay I am certain,
that the Lord will visit for these things; and that he whose is Conscience, and
the Dominion thereof, for which we suffer, will lay Bristol, as it has done
London an heap for this thing; which I would not have had, and therefore wrote
to their Mayor John Lawford therein: For, that which led me to save it when I
had power, gave me Bowels over it, when I was not in the capacity to save, nor
have I had so much as a rising thought in me of revenge to them herein, but is
tears have wept over it and them, desiring that in this their day they would
know the things that concern their peace: and so have sought their peace, when
they my ruin; and it has been no small occasion of my suffering that they on
his foot who has saved th^^ should come to split, which will be the
Consequence, the Lord has spoken It.

Newgate Prison Bristol the 25 th. of the 8 th Month 1665. where I remain as a
Banished Person waiting who shall be my Executioners therein. GEORGE-BISHOPE.

THE END.

