THE HISTORY OF THE REIGNS OF

HENRY the SEVENTH, HENRY the EIGHTH, EDWARD the SIXTH, AND QUEEN MARY.
The First Written by the Right Honorable, FRANCIS Lord VERULAM, Viscount St.
ALBAN. The other Three by the Right Honorable AND Right Reverend Father in God,

FRANCIS GODWYN, Lord Bishop of HEREFORD.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. for R. Scot, T. Basset, J. Wright, R. Chiswell, and
J. Edwyn. M. D C. LXXVI.

To the most Illustrious and most Excellent PRINCE, CHARLES, Prince of Wales,
Duke of Cornwall, Earl of Chester, etc.
It may Please Your Highness,
IN part of my acknowledgment to Your Highness, I have endeavored to do Honor
to the Memory of the last King of England, that was Ancestour to the King your
Father, and Your self; and was that King to whom both Unions may in a sort
refer: That of the Roses being in him Consummate, and that of the Kingdoms by
him begun. Besides, his times deserve it. For he was a Wise Man, and an
Excellent King; and yet the times were rough, and full of Mutations and rare
Accidents. And it is with Times, as it is with Ways. Some are more Vp-hill and
Down-hill, and some are more Flat and Plain; and the One is better for the
Liver, and the Other for the Writer. I have not flattered him, but took him to
life as well as I could, sitting so far off, and having no better light. It is
true, Your Highness has a Living Pattern, Incomparable, of the King Your
Father. But it is not amiss for You also to see one of these Ancient Pieces.
GOD preserve Your Highness.

Your Highness most humble and devoted Servant, FRANCIS St. Alban.

AN INDEX ALPHABETICAL, Directing to the most Observable Passages in the
ensuing HISTORY.
A.
AN Accident, in it self trivial, great in effect Page 108 Advice desired from
the Parliament 33, 35, 56 Aemulation of the English to the French, with the
reasons of it 36 Affability of the King to the City of London 113 Affection of
King Henry to the King of Spain 61 Affection of the King to his Children 136
Aid desired by the Duke of Britain 33 Aid sent to Britain 37 Aiders of Rebels
punished 23 Alms-deeds of the King 131 Ambassadors to the Pope, 24 into
Scotland 25 Ambassadors from the French King 26 Ambassadors in danger in France
31 Ambassadors into France 54 Ambition exorbitant in Sir William Stanley 78
Answer of the Archduke to the King's Ambassadors 74 Appeach of Sir William
Stanley 76 Arms of King Henry still victorious 133 Arrows of the (...), the
length of them 96 Articles between the King and the Archduke 91 Arthur Prince
married to the Lady Katherine 116 Arthur Prince dies at Ludlow 117 Aton Castle
in Scotland taken by the Earl of Surrey 98 Attainted persons in Parliament,
excepted against 8 Attaindor and corruption of Blood reaches not to the Crown
ibid. 15 Avarice of King Henry 134 Audley General of the Corhish Rebels 93

B.
BAnishment of (...) our of the Kingdom 74 Battle at Bosworth-field, 1 at
Stokefield (...) at St. Albans in Britain 87 at Bannocksbourn in Scotland (...)
at Black Heath (...) Behavior of King Henry toward (...) Children 117
Benevolence to the King for his (...) (...) Benevolence, who the first Author
ibid Benevolence (...) by Act of (...) (...) Benevolence revived by Act of
(...) ibid A Benevolence (...) to the King 23 Birth of Henry the (...) 35
Bishops, (...) (...) by the King (...) Blood not unrevenged 112, 122 Britain
(...) (...) 37 Three causes of the (...) of the (...) of (...) ibid. Britain
united (...) (...) by Marriage (...) Brakenbury (...) (...) murder King (...)
(...) (...) (...) Broughton Sir (...), joined with the Rebels 11 A Bull
procured from the Pope by the King, for what causes 24 Bulloign besieged by
King Henry 63

C.
CArdinal Morton dies 113 Capell Sir William fined 80, 131 Cap of Maintenace
from the Pope 101 Ceremony of Marriage new in these parts 48 Chancery, power
and description of that Court 38 Clifford Sir Robert flies to Perkin, 70
revolts to the King 72 Clergy privileges abridged 39 Christendom enlarged 61
Columbus Christopher and Bartholomeus invite the King to a discovery of the
West Indies 107 Confiscation aimed at by the King 76 Conference between King
Henry and the King of Castile, by casualty landing at Weymouth 128 Conquest,
the Title unpleasing to the People, declined by William the Conqu. 3 and by the
King 5 (...) for Perkin 70 Contraction of Prince Henry and the Lady Katherine
118 Conditional speech does not qualify words of Treason 77 Commissioners into
Ireland 79 Commissioners about Trading 91 Coronation of King Henry 7 Coronation
of the Queen 24 Counsel, the benefit of good 25 Counsel, of what sort the
French King used 32 Counsel of mean men, what and how different from that of
Nobles ibid. Lord Cords envy to England 48 Cottagers but housed Beggars 44
Counterfeits.
Lambert proclaimed in Ireland, 15 Crowned at Dublin, 19 taken at Battle, 22
put into the King's Kitchen, ibid. made the King's Faulconer, ibid. Duke of
York counterfeit. See Perkin. Wilford another counterfeit, Earl of Warwick 111
Courage of the English, when 37 Court, what Pleas belong to every Court 38
Court of Star Chamber confirmed ibid. Creations 6 Crown confirmed to King Henry
by Parliament 7 Cursing of the King's Enemies at Paul's Cross, a custom of
those times 72, 122

D.
DAm, a Town in Flanders, taken by a slight 59 Lord Daubeny 96 Devices at
Prince Arthur's Marriage 117 Device of the King to divert Envy 64 Decay of
Trade does punish Merchants 90 Decay of People, how it comes to pass 44
Declaration by Perkin to the Scottish King 85 Desires intemperate of Sir
William Stanley 78 Dighton, a murderer of King Edward's two Children 71
Dilemma, a pleasant one of Bishop Morton 58 Diligence of the King to heap
Treasures 120 Displacing of no Counselors, nor Servants in all King Henry's
Reign save of one 138 Dissimulation of the French King 29, 30, 49 Dissimulation
of King Henry in pretending War 56 A Doubt long kept open, and diversely
determined, according to the diversity of the times 117 Dowry of Lady
Katherine, how much 116 Dowry of Lady Margaret into Scotland, how much 119
Drapery maintained, how 45 Dudley one of the King's Herse-leeches 119 Duke of
York counterfeit. See Perkin.

E.
EArl of Suffolk flies into Flanders, 121 returns 129 Earl of Northumberland
slain by the People in collecting the Subsidy somewhat harshly 40 Earl of
Warwick executed 111 Earl of Warwick counterfeit 13, 110 Earl of Surrey enters
Scotland 98 Edmund, a third Son born to King Henry, but died 109 Edward the
Fifth murdered 85 Envy toward the King, unquenchable; the cause of it 111 Envy
of the Lord Cords to England 48 Enterview between the King and the King of
Castile 128 Emblem 94 Empson, one of the King's Horse-leeches 119 Errors of
the French King in his business for the Kingdom of Naples 82 Errors of King
Henry, occasioning his many troubles 128 (...) service 92 Espials in the Rebels
camp 21 Espousals of James King of Scotland and Lady Margaret 118 Exchanges
unlawful, prohibited 40 Exceter besieged by Perkin, 102 the Loyalty of the
Town, 103 the Town rewarded with the King's own Sword 105 Execution of
Humphrey Stafford, 12 John a Chamber, and his fellowRebels at York, 41 Sir
James Tyrril, murderer of King Edward's two Sons, 71 of diverse others, 75 Sir
William Stanley, 77 Rebels, 79 Perkin's company, 81 Audley and Cornish Rebels,
96 another counterfeit Earl of Warw. 110 Perkin Warbeck, 111 the Mayor of Cork
and his Son, ibid. Earl of Warwick ibid.

F.
FAme ill affected 97 Fame entertained by diverse, the reasons of it 70 Fame
neglected by Empson and Dudley 119 Fear, not safe to the King 79 Fines 43
Without Fines, Statute to sell Land 58 Flammock a Lawyer, a Rebel 92 Flemings
banished 75 Flight of King Henry out of Britain into France, wherefore 34
Forfeitures and Confiscations furnish the King's wants 9, 17 Forfeitures aimed
at 45, 76 Forfeitures upon Penal Laws taken by the King, which was the blot of
his times 80 Fortune various 16, 22 Forwardness inconsiderate 96 Fox made Privy
Counselor, 10 made Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal, ib. his providence 98
Free-fishing of the Dutch 129 Title to France renewed by the King in Parliament
56 Frion joins with Perkin 68 First Fruits 10 In forma Pauperis, a Law enacted
for it 84

G.
GAbato Sebastian makes a Voyage for Discovery 107 Gordon Lady Katherine, wife
to Perkin 87 Granado vindicated from the Moors 60 Guard Yoomen first instituted
7 Gifts of the French King to King Henry's Counselors and Soldiers 64
Gratitude of the Pope's Legate to King Henry 42

H.
HAllowed Sword from the Pope 101 Hatred of the People to the King, with the
main reason of it 12 Hearty Acclamations of the People to the King (...) King
Henry his Description, 133, etc. his Piety, 1, 60 he has three Titles to the
Kingdom 2 Heretics provided against, a rare thing in those times 115 Hern, a
Counselor to Perkin 101 Hialas, otherwise Elias to England, how 98 Holy War
114 Hopes of gain by War 64 Hostages redeemed by the King 10 Houses of
Husbandry to be maintained, to prevent the decay of People 45 Histories,
defects in them, what 46

I.
James the Third, King of Scotland, his distress and death 42 Idols vex God and
King Henry 105 John Egremond Leader of the Rebels 41 Enclosures, their manifest
inconveniences, and how remedied 44 Ingratitude of Women punished 85
Innovation desired 12 Incense of the People, what 118 Instructions of Lady
Margaret to (...) 66 Intercursus Magnus 91 Intercursus Malus ibid. 129
Invectives of Maximilian against the French King (...) Invectives against the
King and Council 79 Improvidence of King Henry to prevent his troubles 12, 14
Improvidence of the French 82 Jointure of Lady Katherine, how much 117 Jointure
of Lady Margaret in Scotland, how much 119 Joseph a Rebel 92 Ireland favors
York Title 15 Ireland receives Simon the Priest of Oxford, with his
counterfeit ibid. Irish adhere to Perkin 68 Jubilee at Rome 114 Juno, i. e. the
Lady Margaret, so called by the King's friends 65

K.
KAtherine Gordon Perkin's Wife, royally entertained by K. Hen. 104 Kent loyal
to the King 81, 94 The King the public Steward 36 Kings, their miseries 50
King of Rakehels, Perkin so called by King Henry 103 The King's Skreen, who 92
King of France Protector of King Henry in his trouble 133 Kingdom of France
restored to its integrity 25 King of France buys his Peace of King Henry 64
King of Scots enters England, 87 again 98 Knights of the Bath 95 Knights of
Rhodes (...) King Henry Protector of the Order 115

L.
LAncaster Title condemned by Parliament 3 Lancaster House in possession of the
Crown for three Descents together (...) Lambert Simnel. See Counterfeit 13 Laws
enacted in Parliament 38 Diverse Laws enacted 123 Law charitable enacted 84 A
good Law enacted ibid. A Law of a strange (...) 83 A Law against carrying away
of Women by violence, the reasons of it 39 Law of Poynings 79 Laws Penal put in
execution 80 A Legate from the Pope, 42 preferred to be Bishop in England by
King Henry, ibid. his gratitude to King Henry ibid. Lenity of the King abused
101 Letters from the King out of France to the Mayor of London 64 A Libel 55
Libels, the causes of them 79 Libels, the females of Sedition ibid. Libels, the
Authors executed ibid. A Loan from the City to the King, repaid 46 London
entered by King Henry in a close Chariot, wherefore 5 London in a tumult because
of the Rebels 95 London purchase Confirmation of their Liberties 124

M.
Malcontents, their effects 40 Margaret of Burgundy the fountain of all the
mischief to K. Henry, 18 she entertains the Rebels, 41, 69 she a Juno to the
King, 65 she instructs Perkin 66 Lady Margaret desired in Marriage by the
Scottish King 108 Manufacture foreign, how to be kept out 36, 123 Marriage of
King Henry with Lady Elizabeth, 10 of the French King with the Duchess of
Britain, 55 of Prince Arthur 116 Mart translated to Calice, the reasons of it
74 Maintenance prohibited by Law 38 Merchants of England received at Antwerp
with procession and great joy 91 A memorable Memorandum of the King 121
Military power of the Kingdom advanced, how 44 Mills of Empson and Dudley,
what, and the gains they brought in 124 Mitigations 120 Money, bastard
employments thereof repressed 36 Money left at the King's death, how much 132
Morton made Privy Counselor, 10 made Archbishop of Canterbury, ib. his Speech
to the Parliament 32 Morton's Fork 58 Morton author of the Union of the two
Roses 114 Moors expelled Granado 61 Murmuring 14 Murmurs of the People against
the King 70 Murder and Manslaughter, a Law concerning it, in amendment of the
common Law 39 Murder of King Edward the Fifth 85 Murder of a Commissioner for
the Subsidy 93

N.
NAvigation of the Kingdom, how advanced 45 Neighbor over-potent, dangerous 34
Bad News, the effect thereof in Soldiers 63 Nobility neglected in Council, the
ill effects of it 32 Nobility, few of them put to death in King Henry's time
134 North, the King's journey thither, for what reasons 11

O.
OAth of Allegiance taken 9 Oath enforced upon Maximilian by his Subjects 46
Oath kept ibid. Obedience neglected, what follows 42 First Occasion of a happy
Union 109 Obsequies for the French King, performed in England ibid. Obsequies
to Tyrants, what 1 An Ominous answer of the King 119 An Ominous Prognostic 129
Opinions diverse what was to be done with Perkin 105 Orator from the Pope met at
LondonBridge by the Mayor 101 Order of the Garter sent to Alphonso 64
Ostentation of Religion by the King of Spain 60 Over-merit prejudicial to Sir
William Stanley 73 Outlawries how punished 120 Oxford Earl fined for breach of
the Law 121

P.
PAcificator, King Henry between the French King and Duke of Britain 32 Pardon
proclaimed by the King 9, 11, 16 A Parliament called speedily 7 A Parliament
called for two reasons 33 another 122 Parliaments advice desired by the King
33, 35, 56 Passions contrary in King Henry, joy and sorrow, with the reasons of
both 36 Peace pretended by the French King 29 Peace to be desired, but with two
conditions 33 Peace concluded between England and France 64 People, how brought
to decay, the redress of it by the King 44 Pensions given by the King of France
64 A Personation somewhat strange 65 A great Plague 12 Edward Plantagenet Son
and Heir of George Duke of Clarence 4 Edward Plantagenet showed to the People
17 Plantagenet's Race ended 195 Perkin Warbeck,
History of him, 65 his Parentage, 68 God son to K. Edward the Fourth, ibid.
his crafty behavior, 65, 69 favored by the French King, 68 by him discarded,
69 favored by the Scottish King, 85 he yields, and is brought to the Court,
106 set in the Stocks, 109 executed at Tyburn 111 A Pleasant passage of Prince
Arthur 118 Policy to prevent War 26 A point of Policy to defend the Duchy of
Britain against the French 29, 34 Policy of State 26 Pope, sows seeds of War 54
Pope, Ambassador to him 24 Poynings Law in Ireland 79 Priest of Oxford, Simon
13 Pretense of the French King 28, 29 Prerogative, how made use of 133 Price of
Cloth limited 45 Prisoners,
Edward Plantagenet, 4 Prince of Orange and Duke of Orleance, 37 Maximilian by
his Subjects 46 Privileges of Clergy abridged 39 Privileges of Sanctuary
qualified in three points 24 Proclamation of Perkin, what effect 90 Protection
for being in the King's service limited 58 Proverb 104 Providence for the
future 43

Q.
QUeen Dowager 13 enclosed in the Monastery of Bermondsey, 16 her variety of
Fortune ibid. Queens College founded in Cambridge 17 Q. Elizabeth Crowned
after two years 24 Queen Elizabeth's death 119

R.
REbellion of Lord Lovel and Staffords 11 Rebellion in Yorkshire 41 Rebellion
how to be prevented 35 Rebellion, how frequent in King Henry's time 42
Rebellion of the Cornishmen 92 Rebels but half-couraged men 96 Religion abused
to serve Policy 122 Remorse of the King for oppression of his People 131
Restitution to be made by the King's Will 132 Return of the King from France 64
Retribution of King Henry for Treasure received of his Subjects 43 Revenge
divine 1 Revenge of Blood 122 Reward proposed by Perkin 111 Richard the Third a
Tyrant 1 Richard slain at Bosworth-field, ibid. this (...) Burial, ibid. murder
of his two Nephews, 2 jealous to maintain his Honor and Reputation, ibid.
hopes to win the People by making Laws, ibid. this Virtues overswayed by his
Vices, 2 yet favored in Yorkshire 40 Riches of King Henry at his death 132
Riches of Sir William Stanley 76 Richmond built, upon what occasion 106 Riot
and Retainers suppressed by Act of Parliament 123 Rome ever respected by King
Henry 42 A Rumor false, procuring much hatred to the King 12 Rumor false,
enquired after to be punished 23 Rumor that the Duke of York was alive, first
of the King's own nourishing 37

S.
SAnctuary at Colneham could not protect Traitors 12 Sanctuary-priviledges
qualified by a Bull from the Pope in three points 24 Saturday observed and
fancied by King Henry 5, 96 Saying of the King when he heard of Rebels 41
Scottish men voyded out of England 58 Service of (...) 92 Simon the Priest 13
Skreens to the King, who 92 A Slight ingenious, and taking good effect in War
(...) Sluice besieged and taken ibid. Soothsayers Prediction mistaken (...)
Speeches 32, 49, 53 Speech of the King to Parliament 55 Speech of Perkin 85
Speech conditional does not qualify (...) of Treason 77 Speeches bitter
against the King 64 Sparks of Rebellion neglected, dangerous (...) Spies from
the King 72 Sprites of what kind, vexed K. Henry 65 Stanley Sir William crowns
King Henry in the field, (...) motives of his falling from the King 77 is
appeached of Treason, 70 is confined, examined, and consesseth, (...) is
beheaded, 77 Reasons which alienated the King's affections 78 Star Chamber
Court confirmed in certain cases 38 Star-Camber Court described, what Causes
belong to it ibid. Statute of Non-claim 43 Steward public, the King 36
Strength of the Cornishmen 96 Spoils of Bosworth-field 78 Spoils as water spilt
on the ground 97 Subsidy denied by the inhabitants of Yorkshire and Durham, the
reason wherefore 40 Subsidies denied by the Cornishmen 92 Subsidy Commissioner
killed 93 Subsidy, how much 91 Swart Martin 19 Sweating Sickness, 6 the manner
of the cure of it ibid. Sweating Sickness, the interpretation the People made
of it, 23

T.
ATale pleasant concerning the King 137 Terror among the King's Servants and
Subjects 67 Tyrrell Sir James, a murderer of King Edward's two Sons 71 Tyrell
executed 122 Thanks of the King to the Parliament 32 Thanksgiving to God for
the Victory 1, 23, 24, 61 Three Titles to the Kingdom meet in King Henry 2
Title to France stirred, 54 by the King himself 55 Treasure to be kept in the
Kingdom 45 Treasure raised by the King, how 23, 31, 120 Treasure inordinately
affected by the King 121 Treasure how increased 124 Treasure left at the King's
death, how much 132 Trade, the increase thereof considered 36 Trade in decay
pincheth 90 Traitors taken out of Sanctuary 12 Tower the King's lodging,
wherefore 75 A Triplicity dangerous 94 Triumph at the Marriage of the Lady
Elizabeth to King Henry 10 Truce with Scotland 25 Tyrants, the Obsequies of the
People to them 1

V.
VIctory wisely husbanded by the French 37 Victory at Black Heath 96 Union of
England and Scotland, its first original 98 Voyage of King Henry into France 63
Voyage for Discovery 107 Urswick Ambassador 65 Usury 40

W.
Walsingham Lady vowed to by King Henry 20 Wards wronged 120 War between the
French King and the Duke of Britain 30 War, the fame thereof advantageous to
King Henry 31 War gainful to the King 91 War pretended to get money 57 War of
France ended by a Peace, where at the Soldiers murmur 64 White Rose of England
69, 104 Wilford counterfeit Earl of Warwick 110 A Wives affection 129 Woodvile
voluntarily goes to aid the Duke of Britain 31 Woodvile slain at St. Albans in
Britain 62 Wolsey employed by the King 130 Women carried away by violence, a
Law enacted against it; the reasons 39 Women's ingratitude punished by Law 84

Y.
YEomen of the Guard first instituted 7 Yeomanry how maintained 44 York House
and Title favored by the People 3, 12 York Title and Line depressed by King
Henry 4, 10 York Title favored in Ireland 15 Yorkshire and Durham deny to pay
the Subsidy 49

THE HISTORY Of the Reign of KING HENRY The SEVENTH.
AFter that Richard the Third of that Name, King in Fact only, but Tyrant both
in Title and Regiment, and so commonly termed and reputed in all times since,
was by the Divine Revenge, favoring the Design of an Exiled man, overthrown
and slain at Bosworth-field: There succeeded in the Kingdom the Earl of
Richmond, thence-forth styled Henry the Seventh. The King immediately after the
Victory, as one that had been bred under a devout Mother, and was in his
nature, a great observer of Religious Forms, caused Te Deum Laudamus to be
solemnly sung in the presence of the whole Army upon the place, and was himself
with general Applause, and great Cries of Joy, in a kind of Militar Election,
or Recognition, saluted King. Meanwhile the Body of Richard, after many
Indignities and Reproaches (the Dirigies and Obsequies of the common People
toward Tyrants) was obscurely Buried. For though the King of his Nobleness
gave charge unto the Friars of Leicester to see an Honorable Interrment to be
given to it, yet the Religious people themselves (being not free from the
Humors of the Vulgar) neglected it; wherein nevertheless they did not then
incurr any man's blame or Censure. No man thinking any Ignominy or Contumely
unworthy of him, that had been the Executioner of King Henry the Sixth (that
innocent Prince) with his own hands; the Contriver of the death of the Duke of
Clarence, his Brother; the Murderer of his two Nephews (one of them his Lawful
King in the Present, and the other in the Future failing of him) and vehemently
suspected to have been the Impoisoner of his Wife, thereby to make vacant his
Bed, for a Marriage within the Degrees forbidden. And although he were a Prince
in Militar Virtue approved, jealous of the Honor of the English Nation, and
likewise a good Lawmakers, for the ease and solace of the common People: yet
his Cruelties and Parricides, in the Opinion of all men, weighed down his
Virtues and Merits; and in the opinion of Wise men, even those Virtues
themselves were conceived to be rather feigned, and affected things to serve
his Ambition, than (...) Qualities ingenrate in his Judgment or Nature. And
therefore it was noted by men of great Understanding, (who seeing his after
Acts, looked back upon his former Proceedings) that even in the time of King
Edward his Brother, he was not without secret Trains and Mines to turn Envy and
Hatred upon his Brother's Government; as having an Expectation and a kind of
Divination, that the King, by reason of his many Disorders, could not be of
long Life, but was like to leave his Sons of tender years; and then he knew
well, how easy a step it was, from the place of a Protector, and first Prince
of the Blood, to the Crown. And that out of this deep root of Ambition it
sprang, that as well at the Treaty of Peace that passed between Edward the
Fourth, and Lewis the Eleventh of France, concluded by Enterview of both Kings
at Piqueny, as upon all other Occasions, Richard then Duke of Gloucester, stood
ever upon the side of Honor, raising his own Reputation to the disadvantage of
the King his Brother, and drawing the eyes of all (specially of the Nobles and
Soldiers) upon himself; as if the King by his voluptuous Life and mean
Marriage, were become Effeminate, and less sensible of Honor, and Reason of
State, than was fit for a King. And as for the Politic and wholesome Laws
which were Enacted in his Time, they were interpreted to be but the Brocage of
an Usurper, thereby to woo, and win the Hearts of the People; as being
conscious to himself that the true Obligations of Sovereignty in him failed,
and were wanting. But King Henry in the very entrance of his Reign, and the
instant of time, when the Kingdom was cast into his Arms, met with a Point of
great difficulty, and knotty to solve, able to trouble and confound the Wisest
King in the newness of his Estate; and so much the more, because it could not
endure a Deliberation, but must be at once deliberated and determined. There
were fallen to his Lot, and concurrent to his Person, three several Titles to
the Imperial Crown: The first, the Title of the Lady Elizabeth, with whom, by
precedent Pact with the Party that brought him in, he was to Marry. The second,
the Ancient and long disputed Title (both by Plea and Arms) of the House of
Lancaster, to which he was Inheritour in his own Person. The third, the Title
of the Sword or Conquest, for that he came in by Victory of Battle, and that
the King in possession was slain in the field. The first of these was fairest,
and most like to give contentment to the People, who by Two and twenty Years
Reign of King Edward the Fourth, had been fully made capable of the clearness
of the Title of the White-Rose or House of York; and by the mild and plausible
Reign of the same King toward his latter time, were become affectionate to that
Line. But then it lay plain before his Eyes, that if he relied upon that Title,
he could be but a King at Courtesy, and have rather a Matrimonial than a Regal
Power: the Right remaining in his Queen, upon whose decease, either with Issue,
or without Issue, he was to give place, and be removed. And though he should
obtain by Parliament to be continued, yet he knew there was a very great
difference between a King that holds his Crown by a civil Act of Estates, and
one that holds it Originally by the Law of Nature, and Descent of Blood.
Neither wanted there even at that time secret Rumors and whisperings (which
afterward gathered strength, and turned to great Troubles) that the two young
Sons of King Edward the Fourth, or one of them (which were said to be destroyed
in the Tower) were not indeed Murdered, but conveyed secretly away, and were
yet living: which if it had been true, had prevented the Title of the Lady
Elizabeth. On the other side, if he stood upon his own Title of the House of
Lancaster, inherent in his Person; he knew it was a Title condemned by
Parliament, and generally prejudged in the common Opinion of the Realm, and
that it tended directly to the Dis-inherison of the Line of York, held then the
indubiate Heirs of the Crown. So that if he should have no Issue by the Lady
Elibabeth, which should be Descendents of the Double-Line, then the Ancient
flames of Discord and Intestine Wars, upon the Competition of both Houses,
would again return and revive.

As for Conquest notwithstanding, Sir William Stanly, after some Acclamations
of the Soldiers in the Field, had put a Crown of Ornament (which Richard wore
in the Battle, and was found amongst the Spoils) upon King Henry's Head, as if
there were his chief Title; yet he remembered well upon what Conditions and
Agreements he was brought in, and that to claim as Conqueror, was to put as
well his own Party, as the rest, into Terror and Fear; as that which gave him
Power of Disannulling of Laws, and disposing of Men's Fortunes and Estates, and
the like points of Absolute Power, being in themselves so harsh and odious, as
that William himself, commonly called the Conqueror, however he used and
exercised the Power of a Conqueror, to reward his Normans, yet he forbear to
use that Claim in the beginning, but mixed it with a Titulary pretense grounded
upon the Will and Designation of Edward the Confessor. But the King out of the
greatness of his own mind, presently cast the Die, and the Inconveniences
appearing unto him on all parts; and knowing there could not be any Interreign
or suspension of Title; and preferring his Affection to his own Line and Blood,
and liking that Title best which made him independent; and being in his Nature
and constitution of Mind not very apprehensive or forecasting of future Events
a-far off, but an Entertainer of Fortune by the Day; resolved to rest upon the
Title of Lancaster as the Main, and to use the other two, that of Marriage, and
that of Battle, but as Supporters, the one to appease secret Discontents, and
the other to beat down open murmur and dispute: Not forgetting that the same
Title of Lancaster had formerly maintained a possession of three Descents in
the Crown, and might have proved a Perpetuity, had it not ended in the weakness
and inability of the last Prince. Whereupon the King presently that very day,
being the Two and Twentieth of August, assumed the Style of King in his own
name, without mentioning of the Lady Elizabeth at all, or any relation
thereunto. In which course he ever after persisted, which did spin him a Thread
of many Seditions and Troubles. The King full of these thoughts, before his
departure from Leicester, dispatched Sir Robert Willoughby to the Castle of
Sheriff-Hutton in Torkshire, where were kept in safe Custody by King Richard's
commandment, both the Lady Elizabeth Daughter of King Edward, and Edward
Plantagenet, Son and Heir to George Duke of Clarence. This Edward was by the
King's Warrant delivered from the Constable of the Castle to the hand of Sir
Robert Willoughby; and by him with all safety and diligence conveyed to the
Tower of London, where he was shut up Close-prisoner. Which Act of the King's
(being an Act merely of Policy and Power) proceeded not so much from any
apprehension he had of Doctor Shaw's Tale at Paul's Cross, for the Bastarding
of Edward the Fourth's Issues, in which case this young Gentleman was to
succeed, (for that Fable was ever exploded) but upon a settled disposition to
depress all Eminent Persons of the Line of Tork. Wherein still the King out of
strength of Will, or weakness of Judgment, did use to show a little more of
the Party, than of the King.

For the Lady Elizabeth she received also a direction to repait with all
convenient speed to London, and there to remain with the Queen Dowager her
Mother; which accordingly she soon after did, accompanied with many. Noblemen
and Ladies of Honor. In the mean season the King set forwards by easy
Journeys to the City of London, receiving the Acclamations and Applauses of the
People as he went, which indeed were true and unfeigned, as might well appear
in the very Demonstrations and fullness of the Cry. For they thought generally
that he was a Prince as ordained and sent down from Heaven, to unite and put to
an end to the long Dissentions of the two Houses, which although they had had
in the times of Henry the Fourth, Henry the Fifth, and a part of Henry the
Sixth on the one side, and the times of Edward the Fourth on the other,
Lucid-Intervalls and happy Pauses; yet they did ever hang over the Kingdom,
ready to break forth into new Perturbations and Calamities. And as his Victory
gave him the Knee, so his purpose of Marriage with the Lady Elizabeth gave him
the Heart; so that both Knee and Heart did truly bow before him.

He on the other side, with great Wisdom, (not ignorant of the Affections and
Fears of the People) to disperse the conceit and terror of a Conquest, had
given Order that there should be nothing in his Journey like unto a Warlike
March, or manner: but rather like unto the Progress of a King in full Peace and
Assurance.

He entered the City upon a Saturday, as he had also obtained the Victory upon a
Saturday, which Day of the Week first upon an Observation, and after upon
Memory and Fancy, he accounted and chose as a Day prosperous unto him.

The Mayor and Companies of the City received him at Shoreditch: whence, with
great and Honorable attendance and troops of Noblemen, and Persons of Quality
he entered the City; himself not being on Horseback, or in any open Chair, or
Throne, but in a close Chariot, as one that having been sometimes an Enemy to
the whole State, and a Proscribed person, chose rather to keep State, and
strike a Reverence into the People, than to fawn upon them.

He went first into Saint Paul's Church, where not meaning that the People
should forget too soon that he came in by Battle, he made an Offertory of his
Standards, and had Orizon and Te Deum again sung, and went to his Lodging
prepared in the Bishop of London's Palace, where he stayed for a time.

During his abode there, he Assembled his Council, and other principal Persons,
in presence of whom, he did renew again his promise to marry with the Lady
Elizabeth. This he did the rather, because having at his coming out of Britain
given artificially, for serving of his own turn, some hopes, in case he
obtained the Kingdom, to Marry Anne Inheritress to the Duchy of Britain, whom
Charles the Eighth of France soon after Married. It bred some doubt and
suspicion amongst diverse, that he was not sincere, or at least not fixed in
going on with the Match of England so much desired: which Conceit also, though
it were but Talk and Discourse, did much afflict the poor Lady Elizabeth her
self. But howsoever he both truly intended it, and desired also it should be so
believed, (the better to extinguish Envy and Contradiction to his other
purposes) yet was he resolved in himself not to proceed to the Consummation
thereof, till his Coronation and a Parliament were past. The one, lest a joint-
Coronation of himself and his Queen might give any countenance of Participation
of Title: The other, lest in the Intayling of the Crown to himself, which he
hoped to obtain by Parliament, the Votes of the Parliament might any ways
reflect upon her.

About this time in Autumn, toward the end of September, there began and
reigned in the City and other parts of the Kingdom a Disease then new; which of
the Accidents, and manner thereof, they called the Sweating-Sickness. This
Disease had a swift course both in the Sick-Body and in the Time and Period of
the lasting thereof: for they that were taken with it, upon Four and twenty
Hours escaping were thought almost assured. And as to the Time of the malice
and reign of the Disease e're it ceased; It began about the One and twentieth
of September, and cleared up before the end of October, insomuch that it was no
hinderance to the King's Coronation, which was the last of October: nor (which
was more) to the holding of the Parliament, which began but seven days after.
It was a Pestilent-Feaver, but, as it seems, not seated in the Veins or
Humors, for that there followed no Carbuncle, no purple or livid Spots, or the
like, the Mass of the Body being not tainted: only a malign Vapor flew to the
Heart, and seized the Vital Spirits; which stirred Nature to strive to send it
forth by an extreme Sweat. And it appeared by Experience that this Disease was
rather a Surprise of Nature, than obstinate to Remedies, if it were in time
looked unto. For if the Patient were kept in an equal temper, both for Clothes,
Fire, and Drink, moderately warm, with temperate Cordials, whereby Natures work
were neither irritated by Heat, nor turned back by Cold, he commonly Recovered.
But infinite Persons dyed suddenly of it, before the manner of the Cure and
attendance was known. It was conceived not to be an Epidemick Disease, but to
proceed from a Malignity in the Constitution of the Air, gathered by the
predispositions of Seasons: and the speedy Cessation declared as much.

On Simon and Jude's Even the King dined with Thomas Bourcchier, Archbishop of
Canterbury and Cardinal: and from Lambeth went by Land over the Bridge to the
Tower, where the morrow after he made Twelve Knights-Bannerets. But for
Creations he dispensed them with a sparing Hand. For notwithstanding a Field so
lately fought, and a Coronation so near at hand, he only created Three: James
Earl of Pembrook (the King's Uncle) was created Duke of Bedford; Thomas the
Lord Stanley (the King's Father-in-Law) Earl of Derby; and Edward Courtney Earl
of Devon; though the King had then nevertheless a purpose in himself to make
more in time of Parliament; bearing a wise and decent respect to Distribute his
Creations, some to honor his Coronation, and some his Parliament.

The Coronation followed two days after upon the Thirtyeth day of October in
the year of our Lord 1485. At which time Innocent the Eighth was Pope of Rome,
Frederick the Third, Emperor of Almaine; and Maximilian his Son newly chosen
King of the Romans; Charles the Eighth, King of France; Ferdinando and
Isabella, Kings of Spain; and James the Third, King of Scotland: with all which
Kings and States, the King was at that time in good Peace and Amity. At which
Day also (as if the Crown upon his Head, had put Perils into his Thoughts) he
did institute sor the better Security of his Person a Band of Fifty Archers
under a Captain to attend him, by the name of Yeomen of his Guard: and yet that
it might be thought to be rather a matter of Dignity, after the imitation of
that he had known abroad, than any matter of Diffidence appropriate to his own
Case, he made it to be understood for an Ordinance not Temporary, but to hold
in Succession for ever after.

The Seventh of November the King held his Parliament at Westmister, which he
had Summoned immediately after his coming to London. His Ends in calling a
Parliament (and that so speedily) were chiefly three; First, to procure the
Crown to be entayled upon himself. Next, to have the Attaindors of all of his
Party (which were in no small Number) reversed, and all Acts of Hostility by
them done in his Quarrel, remitted and discharged: and on the other side, to
attaint by Parliament, the Heads and Principals of his Enemies. The Third, to
calm and quiet the fears of the rest of that Party by a General Pardon: not
being ignorant in how great danger a King stands from his Subjects, when most
of his Subjects are conscious in themselves, that they stand in his danger.
Unto these three special Motives of a Parliament was added, that he as a
prudent and moderate Prince, made this Judgment; That it was fit for him to
hasten to let his People see, that he meant to govern by Law, howsoever he came
in by the Sword: and fit also to reclaim them to know him for their King, whom
they had so lately talked of as an Enemy or Banished man. For that which
concerned the Entayling of the Crown; (more than that he was true in his own
Will, that he would not endure any mention of the Lady Elizabeth: no not in the
nature of Special-Intail,) he carried it otherwise with great Wisdom and
measure. For he did not press to have the Act penned by way of Declaration or
Recognition of Right: as on the other side, he avoided to have it by new Law or
Ordinance; but chose rather a kind of middle-way, by way of Establishment, and
that under covert and indifferent words; That the inheritance of the Crown
should rest, remain, and abide in the King, etc. which words might equally be
applied; That the Crown should continue to him: but whether as having former
Right to it, (which was doubtful,) or having it then in Fact and Possession,
(which no man denied,) was left fair to Interpretation either way. And again
for the limitation of the Entail, he did not press it to go further than to
himself and to the Heirs of his Body, not speaking of his right Heirs; but
leaving that to the Law to decide: so as the Entail might seem rather a
personal Favor to him and his Children, than a total Dis-inherison to the
House of York. And in this form was the Law drawn and passed. Which Statute he
procured to be confirmed by the Pope's Bull the year following, with mention
nevertheless (by way of Recital) of his other Titles; both of Descent and
Conquest. So as now the wreath of Three was made a wreath of Five, for to the
three first Titles of the two Houses, or Lines, and Conquest, were added two
more; the Authorities Parliamentary and Papal.

The King likewise in the Reversal of the Attaindors of his Partakers, and
discharging them of all Offenses incident to his service and succor, had his
Will: and Acts did pass accordingly. In the passage whereof, exception was
taken to diverse Persons in the House of Commons, for that they were Attainted,
and thereby not legal, nor habilitate to serve in Parliament, being disabled in
the highest degree; And that it should be a great incongruity to have them to
make Laws, who themselves were not Inlawed. The truth was, that diverse of those
which had in the time of King Richard been strongest and most declared for the
King's Party, were returned Knights and Burgesses for the Parliament, whether
by care or recommendation from the State, or the voluntary inclination of the
People: many of which had been by Richard the Third attainted by Outlawries, or
otherwise. The King was somewhat troubled with this. For though it had a grave
and specious Show, yet it reflected upon his Party. But wisely not showing
himself at all moved therewith, he would not understand it but as a Case of
Law; and wished the Judges to be advised thereupon: who for that purpose were
forthwith Assembled in the Exchequer-Chamber, (which is the Council Chamger of
the Judges,) and upon deliberation they gave a grave and safe Opinion and
Advice, mixed with Law and Convenience; which was, That the Knights and
Burgesses attainted by the course of Law, should forbear to come into the
House, 'till a Law were passed for the Reversal of their Attaindors.

It was at that time incidently moved amongst the Judges in their Consultation,
what should be done for the King himself, who likewise was attainted; But it
was with unanimous consent Resolved; That the Crown takes away all defects and
stops in Blood: and that from the time the King did assume the Crown, the
Fountain was cleared, and all Attaindors and Corruption of Blood discharged.
But nevertheless for Honors sake it was Ordained by Parliament, that all
Records wherein there was any memory, or mention of the King's Attaindor,
should be defaced, cancelled, and taken off the File.

But on the part of the King's Enemies there were by Parliament attainted; the
late Duke of Gloucester, calling himself Richard the Third, the Duke of Norfolk,
the Earl of Surrey, Viscount Lovel, the Lord Ferrers, the Lord Zouch, Richard
Ratcliff, William Catesby, and many others of degree and quality. In which
Bills of Attaindors, nevertheless there were contained many just and temperate
Clauses, Savings and Proviso's, well showing and foretokening the Wisdom, Stay,
and Moderation of the King's Spirit of Government. And for the Pardon of the
rest, that had stood against the King; the King, upon a second advice, thought
it not fit it should pass by Parliament, the better (being matter of Grace) to
impropriate the Thanks to himself: using only the Opportunity of a Parliament
time, the better to disperse it into the Veins of the Kingdom. Therefore during
the Parliament, he Published his Royal Proclamation, offering Pardon and Grace
of Restitution, to all such as had taken Arms, or been participant of any
Attempts against him; so as they submitted themselves to his Mercy by a Day,
and took the Oath of Allegiance and Fidelity to him. Whereupon many came out of
Sanctuary, and many more came out of Fear, no less guilty than those that had
taken Sanctuary.

As for Money or Treasure; the King thought it not seasonable, or fit to demand
any of his Subjects at this Parliament: both because he had received
satisfaction from them in matters of so great Importance, and because he could
not remunerate them with any General Pardon, being prevented therein by the
CoronationPardon, passed immediately before: but chiefly, for that it was in
every man's Eye, what great Forfeitures and Confiscations he had at that present
to help himself: Whereby those Casualties of the Crown might in reason spare
the Purses of his Subjects; especially in a time when he was in Peace with all
his Neighbors. Some few Laws passed at that Parliament, almost for form sake:
amongst which there was One, to reduce Aliens, being made Denizens, to pay
Strangers Customs; and another, to draw to himself the Seisures and
Compositions of Italian Goods, for not employment, being Points of Profit to
his Coffers, whereof from the very Beginning he was not forgetful; and had been
more happy at the Latter End, if his early Providence (which kept him from all
necessity of Exacting upon his People) could likewise have attemp'red his
nature therein. He added during Parliament, to his former Creations, the
Innoblement or Advancement in Nobility of a few others: The Lord Chandos of
Britain, was made Earl of Bath; and Sir Giles Dawbeny was made Lord Dawbeny;
and Sir Robert Willoughby Lord Brook.

The King did also with great Nobleness and Bounty (which Virtues at that time
had their turns in his Nature) restore Edward Stafford (eldest Son to Henry,
Duke of Buckingham, attainted in the time of King Richard,) not only to his
Dignities, but to his Fortunes and Possessions, which were great; to which he
was moved also by a kind of Gratitude, for that the Duke was the man that moved
the first Stone against the Tyranny of King Richard, and indeed made the King a
Bridge to the Crown upon his own Ruins. Thus the Parliament brake up.

The Parliament being dissolved, the King sent forthwith Money to redeem the
Marquess Dorset, and Sir John Bourchier, whom he had left as his Pledges at
Paris, for Money which he had borrowed, when he made his Expedition for
England. And thereupon he took a fit occasion to send the Lord Treasurer and
Master Bray (whom he used as Counselor) to the Lord Mayor of London, requiring
of the City a Pressed of six thousand Marks: But after many Parlees, he could
obtain but two thousand Pounds. Which nevertheless the King took in good part;
as men use to do, that practice to borrow Money when they have no need. About
this time, the King called unto his PrivyCouncil, John Morton, and Richard Fox,
the one Bishop of Ely, the other Bishop of Exceter, vigilant men, and secret,
and such as kept watch with him almost upon all men else. They had been both
versed in his Affairs before he came to the Crown, and were partakers of his
adverse Fortune. This Morton soon after upon the death of Bourchier', he made
Archbishop of Canterbury. And for Fox, he made him Lord Keeper of his
Privy Seal, and afterward advanced him by Degrees, from Exceter to Bath and
Wells, thence to Durham, and last to Winchester. For although the King loved to
employ and advance Bishops, because having rich Bishoprics they carried their
Reward upon themselves: yet he did use to raise them by steps; that he might
not lose the profit of the First Fruits, which by that course of Gradation was
multiplied.

At last, upon the Eighteenth of January was Solemnized the so long expected
and so much desired Marriage, between the King and the Lady Elizabeth: which
Day of Marriage was celebrated with greater Triumph, and Demonstrations
(especially on the Peoples part) of Joy and Gladness, than the days either of
his Entry, or Coronation; which the King rather noted, than liked. And it is
true, that all his life time, while the Lady Elizabeth lived with him, (for she
dyed before him) he showed himself no very indulgent Husband toward her,
though she was beautiful, gentle, and fruitful. But his aversion toward the
House of York was so predominant in him, as it found place, not only in his
Wars and Councils, but in his Chamber and Bed.

Toward the middle of the Spring, the King, full of confidence and assurance,
as a Prince that had been Victorious in Battle, and had prevailed with his
Parliament in all that he desired, and had the Ring of Acclamations fresh in
his Ears, thought the rest of his Reign should be but Play, and the enjoying of
a Kingdom. Yet as a wise and watchful King, he would not neglect any thing for
his Safety; thinking nevertheless to perform all things now, rather as an
Exercise, than as a Labor. So he being truly informed, that the Northern parts
were not only Affectionate to the House of York, but particularly had been
Devoted to King Richard the Third, thought it would be a Summer well spent to
visit those Parts, and by his presence and application of himself, to reclaim
and rectify those Humors. But the King, in his account of Peace, and Calms,
did much overcast his Fortunes, which proved for many Years together full of
Broken Seas, Tides, and Tempests. For he was no sooner come to Lincoln, where
he kept his Easter, but he received news, that the Lord Lovel, Humphrey
Stafford, and Thomas Stafford (who had formerly taken Sanctuary at Colchester)
were departed out of Sanctuary, but to what place, no man could tell. Which
advertisement, the King despised, and continued his Journey to York. At York
there came fresh. and more certain advertisement, that the Lord Lovel was at
hand with a great power of men, and that the Staffords were in Arms in
Worcestershire, and had made their approaches to the City of Worcester, to
assail it. The King, as a Prince of great and profound Judgment, was not much
moved with it; for that he thought it was but a Ragg or Remnant of
Bosworth-Field, and had nothing in it of the main Party of the House of York.
But he was more doubtful of the raising of Forces to resist the Rebels, than of
the Resistance it self; for that he was in a Core of People, whose affections
he suspected. But the Action enduring no delay, he did speedily levy and sent
against the Lord Lovel to the number of three thousand men, ill armed, but well
assured, (being taken some few out of his own Train, and the rest out of the
Tenants and Followers of such as were safe to be trusted,) under the Conduct of
the Duke of Bedford. And as his manner was to send his Pardons rather before
the Sword than after, he gave Commission to the Duke, to proclaim Pardon to all
that would come in: Which the Duke, upon his approach to the Lord Lovel's Camp,
did perform. And it fell out as the King expected; the Heralds were the
GreatOrdnance. For the Lord Lovel, upon Proclamation of Pardon, mistrusting his
men, fled into Lancashire, and lurking for a time with Sir Thomas Broughton,
after sailed over into Flanders, to the Lady Margaret. And his men, forsaken of
their Captain, did presently submit themselves to the Duke. The Staffords
likewise, and their Forces, hearing what had happened to the Lord Lovel (in
whose Success their chief Trust was) despaired, and dispersed. The two
Brothers, taking Sanctuary at Colnham, a Village near Abington; which Place,
upon view of their Privilege in the King's Bench, being judged no sufficient
Sanctuary for Traitors, Humphrey was Executed at Tyburn; and Thomas, as being
led by his elder Brother, was Pardoned. So this Rebellion proved but a Blast;
and the King having by this Journey purged a little the Dregs and Leaven of the
Northern People, that were before in no good affection toward him, returned to
London.

In September following, the Queen was delivered of her first Son, whom the
King (in Honor of the British-Race, of which himself was) named Arthur,
according to the Name of that ancient worthy King of the Britains; in whose
Acts there is truth enough to make him Famous, besides that which is Fabulous.
The Child was strong and able, though he was Born in the eighth Month, which
Physicians do prejudge.

THere followed this Year, being the Second of the King's Reign, a strange
Accident of State, whereof the Relations which we have, are so naked, as they
leave it scarce credible; not for the nature of it, (for it has fallen out
often,) but for the manner and circumstance of it, especially in the beginnings.
Therefore we shall make our Judgment upon the things themselves, as they give
light one to another, and (as we can) dig Truth out of the Mine. The King was
green in his Estate; and contrary to his own Opinion, and Desert both, was not
without much Hatred throughout the Realm. The root of all, was the
discountenancing of the House of York, which the general Body of the Realm
still affected. This did alienate the Hearts of the Subjects from him daily
more and more, especially when they saw, that after his Marriage, and after a
Son born, the King did nevertheless not so much as proceed to the Coronation of
the Queen, not vouchsafing her the Honor of a Matrimonial Crown; for the
Coronation of Her was not 'till almost two Years after, when Danger had taught
him what to do. But much more, when it was spread abroad (whether by Error, or
the cunning of Malcontents) that the King had a purpose to put to death
Edward Plantagenet closely in the Tower: Whose case was so nearly paralleled
with that of Edward the Fourth's Children, in respect of the blood, like age,
and the very place of the Tower, as it did refresh and reflect upon the King a
most odious resemblance, as if he would be another King Richard. And all this
time it was still whispered every where, that at least one of the Children of
Edward the Fourth was living. Which Bruit was cunningly fomented by such as
desired Innovation. Neither was the King's nature and customs greatly fit to
disperse these Mists; but contrary-wise he had a fashion rather to create
Doubts, than Assurance. Thus was Fuel prepared for the Spark: the Spark that
afterward kindled such a Fire, and Combustion, was at the first contemptible.

There was a subtle Priest called Richard Simon, that lived in Oxford, and had
to his Pupil a Baker's Son named Lambert Simnel, of the age of some Fifteen
years; a comely Youth, and wellfavoured, not without some extraordinary dignity
and grace of Aspect. It came into this Priest's fancy (hearing what men talked,
and in hope to raise himself to some great Bishopric,) to cause this Lad to
counterfeit and Personate the second Son of Edward the Fourth, supposed to be
murdered; and afterward (for he changed his intention in the manage) the Lord
Edward Plantagenet then Prisoner in the Tower, and accordingly to frame him and
instruct him in the Part he was to play. This is that which (as was touched
before) seems scarcely credible: Not that a false Person should be assumed to
gain a Kingdom, for it has been seen in ancient and late times; nor that it
should come into the mind of such an abject Fellow, to enterprise so great a
matter for high Conceits do sometime come streaming into the Imaginations of
base persons, especially when they are drunk with News and Talk of the People.
But here is that which has no appearance; That this Priest being utterly
unacquainted with the true Person, according to whose pattern he should shape
his Counterfeit, should think it possible for him to instruct his Player,
either in gesture and fashions, or in recounting past matters of his Life and
Education; or to fit Answers to Questions, or the like, any ways to come near
the Resemblance of him whom he was to represent. For this Lad was not to
personate one, that had been long before taken out of his Cradle, or conveyed
away in his Infancy, known to few; but a Youth that 'till the age almost of Ten
years had been brought up in a Court where infinite Eyes had been upon him. For
King Edward touched with remorse of his Brother the Duke of Clarence's Death,
would not indeed restore his Son, (of whom we speak) to be Duke of Clarence,
but yet created him Earl of Warwick, reviving his Honor on the Mothers side,
and used him honorably during his time, though Richard the Third afterward
confined him. So that it cannot be, but that some great Person, that knew
particularly, and familiarly Edward Plantagenet, had a hand in the business,
from whom the Priest might take his aim. That which is most probable, out of
the precedent and subsequent Acts, is, that it was the Queen Dowager, from whom
this Action had the principal source and motion. For certain it is, she was a
busy negotiating Woman, and in her withdrawing-Chamber had the fortunate
Conspiracy for the King against King Richard the Third, been hatched; which the
King knew, and remembered perhaps but too well; and was at this time extremely
discontent with the King, thinking her Daughter (as the King handled the
matter) not advanced, but depressed: and none could hold the Book so well to
prompt and instruct this Stage Play, as she could. Nevertheless it was not her
meaning; nor no more was it the meaning of any of the better and sager sort
that favored the Enterprise and knew the Secret, that this disguised Idol
should possess the Crown; but at his peril to make way to the Overthrow of the
King: and that done, they had their several Hopes and Ways. That which does
chiefly fortify this Conjecture, is, that as soon as the matter brake forth in
any strength, it was one of the King's first Acts to cloister the Queen Dowager
in the Nunnery of Bermonsey, and to take away all her Lands and Estate; and
this by close Council without any Legal proceeding, upon far-fetcht Pretenses;
That she had delivered her two Daughters out of Sanctuary to King Richard,
contrary to promise. Which Proceeding being even at that time taxed for
rigorous and undue, both in-matter and manner, makes it very probable there was
some greater matter against her, which the King upon reason of Policy, and to
avoid Envy would not publish. It is likewise no small Argument that there was
some Secret in it, and some suppressing of Examinations; for that the Priest
Simon himself, after he was taken, was never brought to Execution, no not so
much as to public Trial, (as many Clergymen were upon less Treasons,) but was
only shut up close in a Dungeon. Add to this, that after the Earl of Lincoln (a
principal Person of the House of York) was slain in Stoke-field, the King
opened himself to some of his Council, that he was sorry for the Earl's Death,
because by him (he said) he might have known the bottom of his Danger.

But to return to the Narration it self; Simon did first instruct his Scholar
for the part of Richard Duke of York, second Son to King Edward the Fourth, and
this was at such time as it was voyced that the King purposed to put to Death
Edward Plantagenet Prisoner in the Tower, whereat there was great murmur. But
hearing soon after a general bruit that Plantagenet had escaped out of the
Tower, and thereby finding him so much beloved amongst the People, and such
rejoicing at his Escape, the cunning Priest changed his Copy, and chose now
Plantagenet to be the Subject his Pupil should personate, because he was more
in the present speech, and Votes of the People; and it pieced better, and
followed more close and handsomely upon the bruit of Plantagenet's Escape. But
yet doubting that there would be too near looking and too much Perspective into
his Disguise; if he should show it here in England; he thought good (after the
manner of Scenes in Stage Plays and Masks) to show it a-far-off; and
therefore sailed with his Scholar into Ireland, where the Affection to the
House of York was most in height. The King had been a little Improvident in
matters of Ireland, and had not removed Officers and Chancellors, and put in
their places, or at least intermingled persons, of whom he stood assured, as he
should have done, since he knew the strong Bent of that Country toward the
House of York; and that it was a ticklish and unsettled State, more easy to
receive distempers and mutations, than England was. But trusting to the
reputation of his Victories and Successes in England, he thought he should have
time enough to extend his Cares afterward to that second Kingdom.

Wherefore through this neglect, upon the coming of Simon with his pretended
Plantagenet into Ireland, all things were prepared for Revolt and Sedition,
almost as if they had been set and plotted beforehand. Simon's first Address
was to the Lord Thomas Fitz-Gerard, Earl of Kildare, and Deputy of Ireland:
before whose Eyes he did cast such a Mist, (by his own insinuation, and by the
carriage of his Youth, that expressed a natural Princely Behavior;) as joined
perhaps with some inward Vapors of Ambition and Affection in the Earl's own
mind, left him fully possessed, that it was the true Plantagenet. The Earl
presently communicated the matter with some of the Nobles and others there, at
the first secretly. But finding them of like Affection to himself, he suffered
it of purpose to vent and pass abroad; because they thought it not safe to
resolve, till they had a taste of the Peoples Inclination. But if the Great ones
were in forwardness, the People were in fury, entertaining this Airy Body or
Phantasm with incredible affection; partly out of their great devotion to the
House of York; partly out of a proud humor in the Nation, to give a King to
the Realm of England. Neither did the Party in this heat of affection much
trouble themselves with the Attaindor of George Duke of Clarence; having newly
learned by the King's example, that Attaindors do not interrupt the conveying
of Title to the Crown. And as for the Daughters of King Edward the Fourth, they
thought King Richard had said enough for them: and took them to be but as of
the King's Party, because they were in his power, and at his disposing. So that
with mavelous consent and applause, this Counterfeit Plantagenet was brought
with great Solemnity to the Castle of Dublin, and there saluted, served and
honored as King; the Boy becoming it well, and doing nothing that did bewray
the baseness of his condition. And within few days after he was proclaimed King
in Dublin, by the Name of King Edward the Sixth; there being not a Sword drawn
in King Henry his Quarrel.

The King was much moved with this unexpected Accident, when it came to his
Ears, both because it struck upon that String which ever he most (...), as also
because it was stirred in such a Place, where he could not with safety transfer
his own Person, to suppress it. For partly through natural Valor, and partly
through an universal Suspicion (not knowing whom to trust) he was ever ready to
wait upon all his Achievements in person. The King therefore first called his
Council together at the Charterhouse at Shine. Which Council was held with
great secrecy, but the open Decrees thereof, which presently came abroad, were
three.

The first was, That the Queen Dowager, for that she contrary to her Pact and
Agreement with those that had concluded with her concerning the Marriage of her
Daughter Elizabeth with King Henry, had nevertheless delivered her Daughters
out of Sanctuary into King Richard's hands; should be Cloystered in the Nunnery
of Bermonsey, and forfeit all her Lands and Goods.

The next was, That Edward Plantagenet then Close-prisoner in the Tower, should
be in the most public and notorious manner, that could be devised, showed unto
the People: In part to discharge the King of the Envy of that opinion and
bruit, how he had been put to death privily in the Tower; But chiefly to make
the People see the levity and imposture of the Proceedings of Ireland, and that
their Plantagenet was indeed but a Puppet, or a Counterfeit.

The third was, That there should be again Proclaimed a General-Pardon to all
that would reveal their Offenses, and submit themselves by a Day. And that this
Pardon should be conceived in so ample and liberal a manner, as no High Treason
(no not against the King's own Person) should be excepted. Which though it
might seem strange, yet was it not so to a wise King, that knew his greatest
dangers were not from the least Treasons, but from the greatest. These
Resolutions of the King and his Council were immediately put in execution. And
first, the Queen Dowager was put into the Monastery of Bermonsey, and all her
Estate seized into the King's hands, whereat there was much wondering; That a
weak Woman, for the yielding to the menaces and promises of a Tyrant, after
such a distance of time, (wherein the King had showed no displeasure, nor
alteration,) but much more after so happy a Marriage, between the King and her
Daughter, blessed with Issue-male, should upon a sudden mutability or
disclosure of the King's mind be so severely handled.

This Lady was amongst the Examples of great variety of Fortune. She had first
from a distressed Suitor, and desolate Widow, been taken to the Marriage Bed of
a Batchelor-King, the goodliest Personage of his time; and even in his Reign
she had endured a strange Eclipse by the King's flight, and temporary depriving
from the Crown. She was also very happy, in that she had by him fair Issue, and
continued his Nuptial Love (helping her self by some obsequious bearing and
dissembling of his Pleasures) to the very end. She was much affectionate to her
own Kindred, even unto Faction; which did stir great Envy in the Lords of the
King's side, who counted her Blood a disparagement to be mingled with the
King's. With which Lords of the King's Blood, joined also the King's Favorite
the Lord Hastings; who, notwithstanding the King's great affection to him, was
thought at times through her malice and spleen, not to be out of danger of
falling. After her Husband's death, she was matter of Tragedy, having lived to
see her Brother beheaded, and her two Sons deposed from the Crown, bastarded in
their Blood, and cruelly murdered. All this while nevertheless she enjoyed her
Liberty, State, and Fortunes. But afterward again, upon the Rise of the wheel,
when she had a King to her Son-in-Law, and was made Grandmother to a
Grandchild of the best Sex; yet was she (upon dark and unknown Reasons, and no
less strange Pretenses) precipitated, and banished the World, into a Nunnery;
where it was almost thought dangerous to visit her, or see her; and where not
long after she ended her Life: but was by the King's commandment Buried with
the King her Husband at Windsor. She was Foundress of Queens-College in
Cambridge. For this Act the King sustained great Obloquy, which nevertheless
(besides the reason of State) was somewhat sweetened to him by a great
Confiscation.

About this time also Edward Plantagenet was upon a Sunday brought throughout
all the principal Streets of London, to be seen of the people. And having
passed the view of the Streets, was conducted to St. Paul's Church, in solemn
Procession, where great store of people were assembled. And it was provided
also in good fashion, that diverse of the Nobility, and others of Quality
(especially of those that the King most suspected, and knew the person of
Plantagenet best) had communication with the young Gentleman by the way, and
entertained him with speech and discourse; which did in effect mar the Pageant
in Ireland with the Subjects here, at least with so many, as out of Error, and
not out of Malice, might be misled. Nevertheless, in Ireland (where it was too
late to go back) it wrought little or no effect. But contrariwise, they turned
the Imposture upon the King, and gave out, That the King, to defeat the true
Inheritor, and to mock the World, and blind the Eyes of simple men, had tricked
up a (...) in the likeness of Edward Plantagenet, and showed him to the People,
not sparing to profane the Ceremony of a Procession, the more to countenance
the Fable.

The General-Pardon likewise near the same time came forth; and the King
therewithal omitted no diligence, in giving straight Order, for the keeping the
Ports; that Fugitives, Malcontents, or suspected Persons might not pass over
into Ireland, and Flanders,

Mean while the Rebels in Ireland had sent privy Messengers both into England,
and into Flanders, who in both places had wrought effects of no small
Importance. For in England they won to their Party John, Earl of Lincoln, Son
of John de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, and of Elizabeth, King Edward the Fourth's
eldest Sister. This Earl was a man of great Wit and Courage, and had his
thoughts highly raised by Hopes and Expectations for a time. For Richard the
Third had a Resolution, out of his hatred to both his Brethren, King Edward,
and the Duke of Clarence, and their Lines, (having had his hand in both their
Bloods,) to disable their Issues upon false and incompetent pretexts; the one,
of Attaindor; the other, of Illegitimation: and to design this Gentleman (in
case himself should dye without Children) for Inheritor of the Crown. Neither
was this unknown to the King, who had secretly an Eye upon him. But the King
having tasted of the Envy of the People, for his Imprisonment of Edward
Plantagenet, was doubtful to heap up any more distasts of that kind, by the
Imprisonment of De la Pole also; the rather thinking it Policy to conserve him
as a Corrival unto the other. The Earl of Lincoln was induced to participate
with the Action of Ireland, not lightly upon the strength of the Proceedings
there, which was but a Bubble, but upon Letters from the Lady Margaret of
Burgundy, in whose succors and declaration for the Enterprise, there seemed to
be a more solid Foundation, both for Reputation and Forces. Neither did the
Earl refrain the Business, for that he knew the pretended Plantagenet to be but
an Idol. But contrariwise, he was more glad it should be the false Plantagenet
than the true: because the false being sure to fall away of himself, and the
true to be made sure of by the King; it might open and pave a fair and prepared
way to his own Title. With this Resolution he sailed secretly into Flanders;
where was a little before arrived the Lord Lovel, leaving a correspondence here
in England with Sir Thomas Broughton, a man of great Power and Dependencies in
Lancashire. For before this time, when the pretended Plantagenet was first
received in Ireland, secret Messengers had been also sent to the Lady Margaret,
advertising her what was passed in Ireland, imploring Succors in an Enterprise
(as they said) so pious and just, and that God had so miraculously prospered
the beginning thereof; and making offer, that all things should be guided by
her will and direction, as the Sovereign Patroness and Protectress of the
Enterprise. Margaret was second Sister to King Edward the Fourth, and had been
second Wife to Charles, surnamed the Hardy, Duke of Burgundy; by whom, having
no Children of her own, she did with singular care and tenderness intend the
Education of Philip and Margaret, Grandchildren to her former Husband; which
won her great Love and Authority among the Dutch. This Princess (having the
Spirit of a Man, and Malice of a Woman) abounding in Treasure, by the greatness
of her Dower, and her provident Government, and being childless, and without
any nearer Care, made it her Design and Enterprise, to see the Majesty Royal of
England once again re-placed in her House, and had set up King Henry as a Mark,
at whose Overthrow all her Actions should aim and shoot; in-so-much as all the
Counsels of his succeeding Troubles came chiefly out of that Quiver. And she
bare such a mortal Hatred to the House of Lancaster, and personally to the
King, as she was no ways mollified by the Conjunction of the Houses in her
Neeces Marriage, but rather hated her Niece, as the means of the King's ascent
to the Crown, and assurance therein. Wherefore with great violence of affection
she embraced this Overture: And upon Counsel taken with the Earl of Lincoln,
and the Lord Lovel, and some other of the Party, it was resolved with all
speed, the two Lords assisted with a Regiment of two thousand Almains, being
choice and veterane Bands under the Command of Martin Swart (a valiant and
experimented Captain) should pass over into Ireland to the new King. Hoping,
that when the Action should have the face of a received and settled Regality,
(with such a second Person, as the Earl of Lincoln, and the Conjunction and
Reputation of Foreign Succors,) the Fame of it would embolden and prepare all
the Party of the Confederates and Malcontents within the Realm of England, to
give them Assistance, when they should come over there. And for the Person of
the Counterfeit, it was agreed, that if all things succeeded well, he should be
put down, and the true Plantagenet received: Wherein nevertheless the Earl of
Lincoln had his particular hopes. After they were come into Ireland, and that
the Party took courage, by seeing themselves together in a Body, they grew very
confident of success, conceiving and discoursing amongst themselves, that they
went in upon far better Cards to overthrow King Henry, than King Henry had to
overthrow King Richard. And that if there were not a Sword drawn against them
in Ireland, it was a sign the Swords in England would be soon sheathed, or
beaten down. And first, for a Bravery upon this accession of Power, they
Crowned their new King in the in the Cathedral Church of Dublin; who formerly
had been but Proclaimed only; and then sat in Council what should further be
done. At which Council, though it were propounded by some, that it were the
best way to Establish themselves first in Ireland, and to make that the Seat of
the War, and to draw King Henry thither in Person, by whose absence, they
thought there would be great Alterations and Commotions in England, yet because
the Kingdom there was poor, and they should not be able to keep their Army
together, nor pay their German Soldiers, and for that also the sway of the
Irish-men, and generally of the Men-ofWar, which (as in such cases of popular
Tumults is usual) did in effect govern their Leaders, was eager, and in
affection to make their Fortunes upon England: It was concluded with all
possible speed to transport their Forces into England. The King in the mean
time, who at the first when he heard what was done in Ireland, though it
troubled him, yet thought he should be well enough able to scatter the Irish as
a Flight of Birds, and rattle away this Swarm of Bees, with their King; when he
heard afterward that the Earl of Lincoln was embarked in the Action, and that
the Lady Margaret was declared for it, he apprehended the danger in a true
Degree as it was, and saw plainly that his Kingdom must again be put to the
Stake, and that he must fight for it. And first, he did conceive, before he
understood of the Earl of Lincoln's sailing into Ireland out of Flanders, that
he should be assailed both upon the East-parts of the Kingdom of England by
some impression from Flanders, and upon the Northwest out of Ireland. And
therefore having ordered Musters to be made in both Parts, and having
provisionally designed two Generals, Jasper Earl of Bedford, and John Earl of
Oxford, (meaning himself also to go in person, where the Affairs should most
require it,) and nevertheless not expecting any actual Invasion at that time
(the Winter being far on) he took his journey himself toward Suffolk and
Norfolk, for the confirming of those parts. And being come to St. Edmonds-bury,
he understood, that Thomas, Marquess Dorset (who had been one of the Pledges in
France) was hastening toward him, to purge himself of some Accusations which
had been made against him. But the King, though he kept an Ear for him, yet was
the time so doubtful, that he sent the Earl of Oxford to meet him, and
forthwith to carry him to the Tower; with a fair Message nevertheless, that he
should bear that disgrace with patience, for that the King meant not his hurt,
but only to preserve him from doing hurt, either to the King's service, or to
himself; and that the King should always be able (when he had cleared himself)
to make him reparation.

From St. Edmonds-bury he went to Norwich, where he kept his Christmas. And
from thence he went (in a manner of Pilgrimage) to Walsingham, where he visited
our Ladies Church, famous for Miracles, and made his Prayers and Vows for help
and deliverance. And from thence he returned by Cambridge to London. Not long
after, the Rebels with their King (under the Leading of the Earl of Lincoln,
the Earl of Kildare, the Lord Lovel, and Colonel Swart) landed at Fouldrey in
Lancashire, whither there repaired to them, Sir Thomas Broughton, with some
small company of English. The King by that time (knowing now the Storm would
not divide, but fall in one place) had levied Forces in good number; and in
person (taking with him his two designed Generals, the Duke of Bedford, and the
Earl of Oxford) was come on his way toward them as far as Coventry, whence he
sent forth a Troop of Light-horsmen for discovery, and to intercept some
straglers of the Enemies, by whom he might the better understand the
particulars of their Progress and purposes, which was accordingly done; though
the King otherwise was not without Intelligence from Espials in the Camp.

The Rebels took their way toward York, without spoiling the Country, or any
act of Hostility, the better to put themselves into favor of the People, and
to personate their King: who (no doubt, out of a Princely feeling) was sparing,
and compassionate toward his Subjects. But their Snow-ball did not gather as
it went. For the People came not in to them: Neither did any rise or declare
themselves in other parts of the Kingdom for them, which was caused partly by
the good taste that the King had given his People of his Government, joined with
the reputation of his Felicity, and partly for that it was an odious thing to
the People of England, to have a King brought in to them upon the shoulders of
Irish and Dutch, of which their Army was in substance compounded. Neither was
it a thing done with any great Judgment on the Party of the Rebels, for them
to take their way toward York: Considering that howsoever those parts had
formerly been a Nursery of their Friends; yet it was there, where the Lord
Lovel had so lately disbanded, and where the King's presence had a little
before qualified discontents. The Earl of Lincoln, deceived of his hopes of the
Countries concourse unto him, (in which case he would have temporized,) and
seeing the business past Retract, resolved to make on where the King was, and
to give him Battle; and thereupon, marched toward Newark, thinking to have
surprised the Town. But the King was somewhat before this time come to
Nottingham, where he called a Council of War, at which was consulted, whether
it were best to protract time, or speedily to set upon the Rebels. In which
Council the King himself (whose continual vigilance did suck in sometimes
causeless Suspicions, which few else knew) inclined to the accelerating a
Battle. But this was presently put out of doubt, by the great Aids that came in
to him in the instant of this Consultation, partly upon Missives, and partly
Voluntaries from many parts of the Kingdom.

The principal persons that came then to the King's aid, were the Earl of
Shrewsbury, and the Lord Strange, of the Nobility; and of Knights and Gentlemen
to the number of at least Threescore and ten persons, with their Companies,
making in the whole, at the least Six Thousand fighting men, besides the Forces
that were with the King before. Whereupon the King, finding his Army so bravely
re-enforced, and a great alacrity in all his men to fight, was confirmed in his
former Resolution, and marched speedily, so as he put himself between the
Enemies Camp and Newark; being loath their Army should get the commodity of that
Town. The Earl nothing dismayed, came forwards that day unto a little Village
called Stoke, and there camped that night, upon the brow or hanging of a Hill.
The King the next day presented him Battle upon the Plain, the fields there
being open and champion. The Earl courageously came down and joined Battle with
him. Concerning which Battle, the Relations that are left unto us are so naked
and negligent, (though it be an Action of so recent memory) as they rather
declared the Success of the day, than the Manner of the Fight. They say, that
the King divided his Army into three Battles, whereof the Vaunt-guard only well
strengthened with Wings, came to fight. That the Fight was fierce and obstinate,
and lasted three hours, before the Victory inclined either way; save that
Judgment might be made, by that the King's Vaunt-guard of it self maintained
fight against the whole Power of the Enemies, (the other two Battles remaining
out of action,) what the success was like to be in the end: That Martin Swart
with his Germans performed bravely; and so did those few English that were on
that side, neither did the Irish fail in courage or fierceness, but being
almost naked men, only armed with Darts and Skeins, it was rather an Execution,
than a Fight upon them; insomuch as the furious slaughter of them was a great
discouragement and appalement to the rest: That there dyed upon the place all
the Chieftains; that is, the Earl of Lincoln, the Earl of Kildare, Francis Lord
Lovel, Martin Swart, and Sir Thomas Broughton; all making good the fight,
without any ground given. Only of the Lord Lovel there went a report, that he
fled and swam over Trent on horseback, but could not recover the further side,
by reason of the steepness of the Bank, and so was drowned in the River. But
another report leaves him not there, but that he lived long after in a Cave or
Vault. The number that was slain in the field, was of the Enemies part, Four
thousand at the least; and of the King's part, one half of his Vaunt-guard,
besides many hurt, but none of name. There were taken Prisoners, amongst
others, the Counterfeit Plantagenet (now Lambert Simnel again) and the crafty
Priest his Tutor. For Lambert, the King would not take his Life, both out of
Magnanimity, taking him but as an Image of Wax, that others had tempered and
molded; and likewise out of Wisdom, thinking that if he suffered death, he
would be forgotten too soon; but being kept alive, he would be a continual
Spectacle, and a kind of remedy against the like Enchantments of People, in
time to come. For which cause he was taken into service in his Court, to a base
office in his Kitchen; so that (in a kind of Mattacina of humane fortune) he
turned a Broach, that had worn a Crown: Whereas Fortune commonly does not bring
in a Comedy or Farce after a Tragedy. And afterward he was preferred to be one
of the King's Falconers. As to the Priest, he was committed Closeprisoner, and
heard of no more, the King loving to seal up his own dangers.

After the Battle, the King went to Lincoln, where he caused Supplications and
Thanksgivings to be made for his Deliverance and Victory. And that his
Devotions might go round in Circle, he sent his Banner to be Offered to our
Lady of Walsingham, where before he made his Vows. And thus delivered of this
so strange an Engine and new Invention of Fortune, he returned to his former
confidence of mind, thinking now, that all his misfortunes had come at once.
But it fell out unto him according to the Speech of the common People in the
beginning of his Reign, that said; It was a token he should reign in Labor,
because his Reign began with a sickness of Sweat. But howsoever the King
thought himself now in a Haven, yet such was his Wisdom, as his Confidence did
seldom darken his Foresight, especially in things near hand. And therefore
awakened by so fresh, and unexpected dangers, he entered into due consideration,
as well how to weed out the Partakers of the former Rebellion, as to kill the
Seeds of the like in time to come: and withal to take away all shelters and
harbors for discontented Persons, where they might hatch and foster
Rebellions, which afterward might gather strength and motion. And first, he
did yet again make a Progress from Lincoln to the Northern parts, though it
were indeed rather an Itinerary Circuit of Justice, than a Progress. For all
along as he went, with much severity and strict inquisition, partly by Martial
Law, and partly by Commission, were punished, the Adherents and Ayders of the
late Rebels: not all by Death, (for the Field had drawn much blood,) but by
Fines and Ransoms, which spared Life, and raised Treasure. Amongst other Crimes
of this nature, there was diligent inquiry made of such as had raised and
dispersed a bruit and rumor, a little before the Field fought, That the Rebels
had the day; and that the King's Army was overthrown, and the King fled.
Whereby it was supposed that many Succors, which otherwise would have come
unto the King, were cunningly put off, and kept back. Which Charge and
Accusation, though it had some ground, yet it was industriously embraced and
put on by diverse, who having been in themselves not the best affected to the
King's part, nor forward to come to his aid, were glad to apprehend this
color, to cover their neglect and coldness, under the pretense of such
discouragements. Which cunning nevertheless, the King would not understand,
though he lodged it, and noted it in some particulars, as his manner was.

But for the extirpating of the roots and causes of the like Commotions in time
to come, the King began to find where his shoe did wring him, and that it was
his depressing of the House of York, that did rancle and fester the Affections
of his People. And therefore being now too wise to disdain perils any longer,
and willing to give some contentment in that kind (at least in Ceremony) he
resolved at last to proceed to the Coronation of his Queen. And therefore at
his coming to London, where he entered in State, and in a kind of Triumph, and
celebrated his Victory, with two days of Devotion, (for the first day he
repaired to St. Paul's, and had the Hymn of Te Deum sung, and the morrow after
he went in Procession, and heard the Sermon at the Cross,) the Queen was with
great solemnity Crowned at Westminster, the five and twentyeth of November, in
the third year of his Reign, which was about two years after the Marriage; Like
an old Christning, that had staid long for Godfathers. Which strange and
unusual distance of time, made it subject to every man's note, that it was an
Act against his stomach, and put upon him by necessity and reason of State.
Soon after, to show that it was now fair weather again, and that the
Imprisonment of Thomas Marquess Dorset, was rather upon suspicion of the Time,
than of the Man, he the said Marquess was set at liberty without Examination,
or other circumstance. At that time also the King sent an Ambassador unto Pope
Innocent, signifying unto him this his Marriage, and that now (like another
Aeneas) he had passed through the floods of his former Troubles and Travels,
and was arrived unto a safe Haven: and thanking His Holiness, that he had
honored the Celebration of his Marriage with the presence of his Ambassador,
and offering both his Person and the Forces of his Kingdom upon all occasions
to do him service.

The Ambassador, making his Oration to the Pope, in the presence of the
Cardinals, did so magnify the King and Queen, as was enough to glut the
Hearers. But then he did again so extol and deifie the Pope, as made all that
he had said in praise of his Master and Mistress seem temperate and passable.
But he was very honorably entertained, and extremely much made on by the Pope;
who knowing himself to be lazy and unprofitable to the Christian World, was
wonderfully glad to hear that there were such Eccho's of him sounding in remote
parts. He obtained also of the Pope a very just and honorable Bull, qualifying
the Privileges of Sanctuary, (wherewith the King had been extremely galled) in
three Points.

The first, that if any Sanctuary-man did by night, or otherwise, get out of
Sanctuary privily, and commit mischief and trespass, and then come in again, he
should lose the benefit of Sanctuary for ever after. The second, that howsoever
the Person of the Sanctuary-man was protected from his Creditors, yet his Goods
out of Sanctuary should not. The third, that if any took Sanctuary for case of
Treason, the King might appoint him Keepers to look to him in Sanctuary.

The King also for the better securing of his Estate, against mutinous and
male-contented Subjects (whereof he saw the Realm was full) who might have
their refuge into Scotland, which was not under Key, as the Ports were: For
that cause, rather than for any doubt of Hostility from those parts, before his
coming to London (when he was at Newcastle) had sent a solemn Embassage unto
James the Third, King of Scotland, to treat and conclude a Peace with him. The
Ambassadors were Richard Fox Bishop of Exceter, and Sir Richard Edgcomb
Comptroller of the King's House, who were honorably received and entertained
there. But the King of Scotland laboring of the same disease that King Henry
did, (though more mortal, as afterward appeared) that is, Discontented
Subjects, apt to rise, and raise Tumult, although in his own affection he did
much desire to make a Peace with the King: Yet finding his Nobles averse, and
not daring to displease them, concluded only a Truce for seven years; giving
nevertheless promise in private, that it should be renewed from time to time,
during the two Kings lives.

HItherto the King had been exercised in settling his Affairs at home. But about
this time brake forth an occasion that drew him to look abroad, and to hearken
to foreign business. Charles the Eighth the French King, by the virtue and good
fortune of his two immediate Predecessors, Charles the Seventh his
Grandfather, and Lewis the Eleventh his Father, received the Kingdom of France
in more flourishing and spread Estate, than it had been of many years before;
being redintegrate in those principal Members, which anciently had been
portions of the Crown of France, and were after dissevered, so as they remained
only in Homage, and not in Sovereignty, (being governed by absolute Princes of
their own) Anjou, Normandy, (...) and Burgundy; there remained only Britain to
be reunited, and so the Monarchy of France to be reduced to the ancient Terms
and Bounds.

King Charles was not a little inflamed with an ambition to re-purchase, and
re-annex that Duchy. Which his ambition was a wise and well-weighed Ambition;
not like unto the ambitions of his succeeding Enterprises of Italy. For at that
time being newly come to the Crown, he was somewhat guided by his Father's
Counsels, ( Counsels, not Counselors) for his Father was his own Counsel, and
had few able men about him. And that King (he knew well) had ever distasted the
Designs of Italy, and in particular had an Eye upon Britain. There were many
circumstances that did feed the Ambition of Charles, with pregnant and apparent
hopes of Success. The Duke of Britain old, and entered into a Lethargy, and
served with Mercenary Counselors, Father of two only Daughters, the one sick
and not likely to continue. King Charles himself in the flower of his age, and
the Subjects of France at that time well trained for War, both for Leaders and
Soldiers; men of service being not yet worn out, since the Wars of Lewis
against Burgundy. He found himself also in Peace with all his
Neighbour-Princes. As for those that might oppose to his Enterprise; Maximilian
King of the Romans, his Rival in the same desires, (as well for the Duchy, as
the Daughter) feeble in means; and King Henry of England as well somewhat
obnoxious to him for his favors and benefits, as busied in his particular
troubles at home. There was also a fair and specious occasion offered him to
hide his Ambition, and to justify his Warring upon Britain, for that the Duke
had received and succored Lewis Duke of Orleance, and other of the French
Nobility; which had taken Arms against their King. Wherefore King Charles being
resolved upon that War, knew well he could not receive any opposition so
potent, as if King Henry should either upon Policy of State, in preventing the
growing Greatness of France; or upon gratitude unto the Duke of Britain, for
his former favors, in the time of his distress, espouse that Quarrel, and
declare himself in aid of the Duke. Therefore he no sooner heard that King
Henry was settled by his Victory, but forth with he sent Ambassadors unto him,
to pray his assistance, or at the least that he would stand neutral. Which
Ambassadors found the King at Leicester, and delivered their Embassy to this
effect: They first imparted unto the King the success that their Master had had
a little before against Maximilian, in recovery of certain Towns from him:
which was done in a kind of privacy, and inwardness toward the King; and if
the French King did not esteem him for an outward or formal Confederate, but as
one that had part in his Affections and Fortunes, and with whom he took
pleasure to communicate his Business. After this Compliment, and some
gratulation for the King's Victory, they fell to their Errand; declaring to the
King, that their Master was enforced to enter into a just and necessary War
with the Duke of Britain, for that he had received and succored those that
were Traitors, and declared Enemies unto his Person and State. That they were
no mean, distressed, and calamitous persons that fled to him for refuge, but of
so great quality, as it was apparent that they came not thither to protect
their own fortune, but to infest and invade his; the Head of them being the
Duke of Orleance, the first Prince of the Blood, and the second Person of
France. That therefore, rightly to understand it, it was rather on their
Master's part a Defensive War, than an Offensive; as that, that could not be
omitted or forborne, if he tendered the conservation of his own Estate; and that
it was not the first Blow that made the War Invasive, (for that no wise Prince
would stay for) but the first Provocation, or at least the first Preparation.
Nay that this War was rather a suppression of Rebels, than a War with a just
Enemy, where the Case is; That his Subjects, Traitors, are received by the Duke
of Britain his Homager. That King Henry knew well what went upon it in example,
if Neighbor Princes should patronize and comfort Rebels, against the Law of
Nations and of Leagues. Nevertheless that their Master was not ignorant, that
the King had been beholding to the Duke of Britain in his adversity; as on the
other side, they knew he would not forget also the readiness of their King, in
ayding him when the Duke of Britain, or his mercenary Counselors failed him,
and would have betrayed him; And that there was a great difference between the
courtesies received from their Master, and the Duke of Britain; for that the
Dukes might have ends of Utility and Bargain, whereas their Masters could not
have proceeded but out of entire Affection. For that, if it had been measured
by a politic line, it had been better for his affairs, that a Tyrant should
have reigned in England, troubled and hated, than such a Prince, whose virtues
could not fail to make him great and potent, whenever he was come to be
Master of his affairs. But howsoever it stood for the point of Obligation,
which the King might owe to the Duke of Britain, yet their Master was well
assured, it would not divert King Henry of England from doing that, that was
just, nor ever embarque him in so ill-grounded a Quarrel. Therefore, since this
War which their Master was now to make, was but to deliver himself from
imminent dangers, their King hoped the King would show the like affection to
the conservation of their Master's Estate, as their Master had (when time was)
showed to the King's acquisition of his Kingdom. At the least, that according
to the inclination which the King had ever professed of Peace, he would look
on, and stand Neutral; for that their Master could not with reason press him to
undertake part in the War, being so newly settled and recovered from intestine
Seditions. But touching the Mystery of re-annexing of the Duchy of Britain to
the Crown of France, either by War, or by Marriage with the Daughter of
Britain; the Ambassadors bare aloof from it, as from a Rock, knowing that it
made most against them. And therefore by all means declined any mention
thereof, but contrariwise interlaced in their conference with the King, the
assured purpose of their Master, to match with the Daughter of Maximilian; And
entertained the King also with some wandering Discourses of their King's
purpose, to recover by Arms his right to the Kingdom of Naples, by an
expedition in Person; All to remove the King from all-jealousie of any Design,
in these hither Parts upon Britain, otherwise than for quenching of the Fire,
which he feared might be kindled in his own Estate.

The King after advice taken with his Council, made answer to the Ambassadors.
And first returned their Compliment, showing he was right glad of the French
King's reception of those Towns from Maximilian. Then he familiarly related
some particular passages of his own Adventures and Victory passed. As to the
business of Britain, the King answered in few words; That the French King and
the Duke of Britain, were the two persons to whom he was most obliged of all
men; and that he should think himself very happy, if things should go so
between them, as he should not be able to acquit himself in gratitude toward
them both; and that there was no means for him as a Christian King and a common
Friend to them, to satisfy all Obligations both to God and man, but to offer
himself for a Mediator of an Accord and Peace between them; by which course he
doubted not but their King's Estate, and Honor both, would be preserved with
more Safety and less Envy than by a War, and that he would spare no cost or
pains, no if it were To go on Pilgrimage, for so good an effect; And concluded,
that in this great Affair, which he took so much to heart, he would express
himself more fully by an Embassage, which he would speedily dispatch unto the
French King for that purpose. And in this sort the French Ambassadors were
dismissed; the King avoiding to understand any thing touching the re-annexing
of Britain, as the Ambassadors had avoided to mention it; save that he gave a
little touch of it in the word, Envy. And so it was, that the King was neither
so shallow, nor so ill advertised, as not to perceive the intention of the
French, for the investing himself of Britain. But first he was utterly
unwilling (howsoever he gave out) to enter into War with France. A Fame of a
War he liked well, but not an Achievement; for the one he thought would make
him Richer, and the other Poorer: and he was possessed with many secret fears,
touching his own People, which he was therefore loath to arm, and put Weapons
into their hands. Yet notwithstanding (as a prudent and courageous Prince) he
was not so averse from a War, but that he was resolved to choose it, rather
than to have Britain carried by France, being so great and opulent a Duchy,
and situate (...) opportunely to annoy England, either for Coast, or Trade. But
the King's hopes were, that partly by negligence, commonly imputed to the
French, (especially in the Court of a young King) and partly by the native,
power of Britain it self, which was not small; but chiefly in respect of the
great Party, that the Duke of Orleance had in the Kingdom of France, and
thereby means to stir up Civil troubles, to divert the French King from the
Enterprise of Britain: And lastly, in regard of the Power of Maximilian, who
was Cotrival to the French King in that pursuit, the Enterprise would either
bow to a Peace, or break in it self. In all which, the King measured and valued
things amiss, as afterward appeared. He sent therefore forth with to the
French King, Christopher Urswick, his Chaplain, a person by him much trusted
and employed; choosing him the rather, because he was a Churchman, as best
sorting with an Embassy of Pacification: and giving him also a Commission, That
if the French King consented to Treat, he should thence repair to the Duke of
Britain, and ripen the Treaty on both parts. Urswick made declaration to the
French King, much to the purpose of the King's answer to the French Ambassadors
here; instilling also tenderly some overture of receiving to grace the Duke of
Orleance, and some tasted of Conditions of Accord. But the French King on the
other side proceeded not sincerely, but with a great deal of art and
dissimulation, in this Treaty; having for his end to gain time, and so put off
the English Succors, under hope of Peace, till he had got good footing in
Britain, by force of Arms. Wherefore he answered the Ambassador, That he would
put himself into the King's hands, and make him Arbiter of the Peace: and
willingly consent, that the Ambassador should straightways pass into Britain,
to signify this his (...), and to know the Duke's mind likewise; well
foreseeing, that the Duke of (...), by whom the Duke of Britain was wholly
led, taking himself to be upon terms irreconcilable with him, would admit of no
Treaty of Peace. Whereby he should in one, both generally abroad veil over his
Ambition, and win the reputation of just and moderate proceedings; and should
withal endear himself in the (...) of the King of England, as one, that had
committed all to his Will: Nay, and (which was yet more fine) make faith in
him, That although he went on with the War, yet it should be but with his Sword
in his hand, to bend the stiffness of the other party to accept of Peace: and
so the King should take no umbrage of his arming and prosecution; but the
Treaty to be kept on foot, to the very last instant, till he were Master of the
Field.

Which grounds being by the French King wisely laid, all things fell out as he
expected. For when the English Ambassador came to the Court of Britain, the
Duke was then scarcely perfect (...) his memory, and all things were directed
by the Duke of Orleance; who gave audience to the Chaplain Urswick, and upon
his Embassage delivered, made answer in somewhat high terms, That the Duke of
Britain having been an Host, and a kind of Parent or Foster-father to the King,
in his tenderness of age, and weakness of fortune, did look for at this time
from King Henry (the renowned King of England) rather brave Troops for for his
Succors, than a vain Treaty of Peace. And if the King could forget the good
Offices of the Duke done unto him (...); yet he knew well, he would in his
Wisdom consider of the future, how much it imported his own Safety and
Reputation, both in Foreign parts, and with his own People, not to suffer
Britain (the old Confederates of England) to be swallowed up by France, and so
many good Ports, and strong Towns upon the Coast, be in the command of so
potent a Neighbour-King, and so ancient an Enemy. And therefore humbly desired
the King to think of this business as his own; and therewith brake off, and
denied any further Conference for Treaty.

Urswick returned first to the French King, and related to him what had passed.
Who finding things to sort to his desire, took hold of them, and said; That the
Ambassador might perceive now, that which he for his part, partly, imagined
before; That considering in what hands the Duke of Britain was, there would be
no Peace, but by a mixed Treaty of force and persuasion. And therefore he would
go on with the one, and desired the King not to desist from the other. But for
his own part, he did faithfully promise, to be still in the King's power, to
rule him in the matter of Peace. This was accordingly represented unto the
King-by Urswick at his return, and in such a fashion, as if the Treaty were in
no sort desperate, but rather stayed for a better hour, till the Hammer had
wrought, and beat the Party of Britain more pliant. Whereupon there passed
continually Pacquets and Dispatches between the two Kings, from the one out of
desire, and from the other out of dissimulation, about the negotiation of
Peace. The French King meanwhile invaded Britain with great Forces, and
distressed the City of Nantes with a strait Siege, and (as one, who though he
had no great Judgment, yet had that, that he could Dissemble home) the more he
did urge the prosecution of the War, the more he did at the same time, urge the
solicitation of the Peace. Insomuch as during the Siege of Nantes, after many
Letters and particular Messages, the better to maintain his dissimulation, and
to refresh the Treaty, he sent Bernard Daubigney (a person of good quality) to
the King, earnestly to desire him, to make an end of the business howsoever.

The King was no less ready to revive and quicken the Treaty; and thereupon
sent three Commissioners, the Abbot of Abbington, Sir Richard Tunstal, and
Chaplain Urswick formerly employed, to do their utmost endeavors, to manage
the Treaty roundly and strongly.

About this time the Lord Woodvile, (Uncle to the Queen) a valiant Gentleman,
and desirous of Honor, sued to the King, that he might raise some Power of
Voluntaries underhand, and without license or pasport (wherein the King might
any ways appear) go to the aid of the Duke of Britain. The King denied his
request, (or at least seemed so to do) and (...) strait Commandment upon him,
that he should not stir, for that the King thought his Honor would suffer
therein, during a Treaty, to better a Party. Nevertheless this Lord (either
being unruly, or out of conceit that the King would not inwardly dislike that,
which he would not openly avow) sailed secretly over into the Isle of (...),
whereof he was Governor, and levied a fair Troop of four hundred men, and with
them passed over into Britain, and joined himself with the Duke's forces. The
news whereof when it came to the French Court, put diverse Young bloods into
such a fury, as the English Ambassadors were not without peril to be outraged.
But the French King, both to preserve the Privilege of Ambassadors, and being
conscious to himself, that in the business of Peace, he himself was the greater
dissembler of the two, forbad all injuries of fact or word, against their
Persons; or Followers. And presently came an Agent from the King, to purge
himself touching the Lord Woodvile's going over, using for a principal
argument, to demonstrate that it was without his privity, for that the Troops
were so small, as neither had the face of a Succor by Authority, nor could
much advance the Britains Affairs. To which Message, although the French King
gave no full credit, yet he made fair weather with the King, and seemed
satisfied. Soon after the English Ambassadors returned, having two of them been
likewise with the Duke of Britain, and found things in no other terms, than
they were before. Upon their return, they informed the King of the state of the
Affairs, and how far the French King was from any true meaning of Peace; and
therefore he was now to advise of some other course. Neither was the King
himself (...) all this while with credulity merely, as was generally supposed;
but his Error was not so much facility of belief, as an ill-measuring of the
Forces of the other Party.

For (as was partly touched before) the King had cast the business thus with
himself. He took it for granted in his own judgment, that the War of Britain,
in respect of the strength of the Towns, and of the Party, could not speedily
come to a period. For he conceived that the Counsels of a War, that was
undertaken by the French King, then Childless, against an Heir-apparent of
France, would be very faint and slow. And besides, that it was not possible,
but that the state of France should be embroyled with some troubles and (...)
in favor of the Duke of Orleance. He conceived likewise, that Maximilian, King
of the Romans, was a Prince warlike and potent, who (he made account) would
give succors to the Britains roundly. So then judging it would be a work of
Time, he laid his Plot, how he might best make use of that Time, for his own
affairs. Wherein first he thought to make his vantage upon his Parliament;
knowing that they being affectionate unto the Quarrel of Britain, would give
Treasure largely. Which Treasure, as a noise of War might draw forth, so a
Peace succeeding might coffer up. And because he knew his People were (...)
upon the business, he chose rather to seem to be deceived, and (...) asleep by
the French, than to be backward in himself; considering his Subjects were not
so fully capable of the reasons of State, which made him hold back. Wherefore
to all these purposes he saw no other expedient, than to set and keep on foot a
continual Treaty of Peace; laying it down, and taking it up again, as the
occurrence required. Besides, he had in consideration the point of Honor in
bearing the blessed person of a Pacificator. He thought likewise to make use of
the Envy, that the French King met with, by occasion of this War of Britain, in
strengthening himself with new Alliances; as namely that of Ferdinando of Spain,
with whom he had ever a consent even in Nature and Customs, and likewise with
Maximilian, who was particularly interessed. So that in substance he promised
himself Money, Honor, Friends, and Peace in the end. But those things were too
fine to be fortunate, and succeed in all parts; for that great affairs are
commonly too rough and stubborn to be wrought upon by the finer edges, or
points of Wit. The King was likewise deceived in his two main grounds. For
although he had reason to conceive, that the Council of France would be wary to
put the King into a War against the Heir-apparent of France; yet he did not
consider, that Charles was not guided by any of the principal of the Blood or
Nobility, but by mean men, who would make it their Masterpiece, of Credit and
Favor, to give venturous Counsols, which no great or wise man durst or would.
And for Maximilian, he was thought then a Greater-matter than he was; his
unstable and necessitous Courses being not then known.

After Consultation with the Ambassadors, who brought him no other news, than
he expected before, (though he would not seem to know it till then) he
presently summoned his Parliament, and in open Parliament propounded the Cause
of Britain to both Houses, by his Chancellor Morton Archbishop of Canterbury,
who spoke to this effect:

MY Lords and Masters; The King's Grace our Sovereign Lord, has commanded me
to declare unto you the Causes that have moved him at this time to summon this
his Parliament; which I shall do in few words, craving Pardon of his Grace, and
you all, if I perform it not as I would.

His Grace does first of all let you know, that he retains in thankful memory
the Love and Loyalty showed to him by you, at your last Meeting, in
Establishment of his Royalty; freeing and discharging of his Partakers, and
confiscation of his Traitors and Rebels: more than which could not come from
Subjects to their Sovereign, in one action. This he takes so well at your
hands, as he has made it a Resolution to himself to communicate with so loving
and well-approved Subjects, in all Affairs that are of public nature, at home
or abroad.

Two therefore are the causes of your present Assembling: the one, a Foreign
business; the other, matter of Government at home.

The French King (as no doubt ye have heard) makes at this present hot War
upon the Duke of Britain. His Army is now before Nantes, and holds it
straightly Besieged, being the principal City (if not in Creremony and
Pre-eminence, yet in Strength and Wealth) of that Duchy. Ye may guess at his
Hopes, by his attempting of the hardest part of the War first. The cause of
this War he knows best. He alleges the entertaining and succouring of the
Duke of Orleance, and some other French Lords, whom the King takes for his
Enemies. Others divine of other Matters. Both parts have by their Ambassadors
diverse times prayed the King's Ayds: The French King, Ayds or Neutrality; the
Britons, Ayds simply; for so their case requires. The King, as a Christian
Prince, and blessed Son of the Holy Church, has offered himself as a Mediator,
to treat a Peace between them. The French King yields to Treat, but will not
stay the prosecution of the War. The Britons, that desire Peace most, hearken
to it least; not upon considence or stiffness, but upon distrust of true
meaning, seeing the War goes on. So as the King, after as much pains and care
to effect a Peace, as ever he took in any business, not being able to remove
the Prosecution on the one side, nor the Distrust on the other, caused by that
Prosecution, has let fall the Treaty; not repenting of it, but despairing of
it now, as not likely to succeed. Therefore by this Narrative you now
understand the state of the Question, whereupon the King prays your Advice;
which is no other, but whether he shall enter into an auxiliary and defensive
War for the Britons, against France.

And the better to open your understandings in this Affair, the King bath
commanded me to say somewhat to you from him, of the Persons that do intervene
in this Business; and somewhat of the Consequence thereof, as it has relation
to this Kingdom; and somewhat of the Example of it in general: making
nevertherless no Conclusion or Judgment of any Point, until his Grace has
received your faithful and politic Advices.

First, for the King our Sovereign himself, who is the principal Person you are
to eye in this business; his Grace does profess, that he truly and constantly
desires to reign in Peace. But his Grace says, he will neither buy Peace with
Dishonor, nor take it up at interest of Danger to ensue; but shall think it a
good Change, if it pleased God to change the inward Troubles and Seditions,
wherewith he has been hitherto exercised, into an honorable Foreign War. And
for the other two Persons in this Action, the French King, and the Duke of
Britain, his Grace does declare unto you, that they be the men, unto whom he is
of all other Friends and Allies most bounden: the one having held over him his
hand of Protection from the Tyrant; the other having reached forth unto him his
hand of help, for the Recovery of his Kingdom. So that his affection toward
them in his natural Person, is upon equal terms. And whereas you may have
heard, that his Grace was enforced to fly out of Britain into France, for
doubts of being betrayed; his Grace would not in any sort have that reflect
upon the Duke of Britain, in defacement of his former benefits: for that he is
thoroughly informed, that it was but the practice of some corrupt persons about
him, during the time of his Sickness, altogether without his consent or privity.

But howsoever these things do interess his Grace in his particular, yet he
knows well that the higher Bond that tyeth him to procure by all means the
safety and welfare of his loving Subjects, does dis-interess him of these
Obligations of Gratitude, otherwise than thus; that if his Grace be forced to
make a War, he do it without Passion, or Ambition.

For the consequence of this Action toward this Kingdom, it is much as the
French King's intention is. For if it be no more, but to range his Subjects to
reason, who bear themselves stout upon the strength of the Duke of Britain, it
is nothing to us. But if it be in the French King's purpose, or if it should
not be in his purpose, yet if it shall follow all one, as if it were sought,
that the French King shall make a Province of Britain, and join it to the Crown
of France: then it is worthy the consideration, how this may import England, as
well in the increasement of the greatness of France, by the addition of such a
Country, that stretches his Boughs unto our Seas, as in depriving this
Nation, and leaving it so naked of so firm and assured Confederates, as the
Britons have always been. For then it will come to pass, that whereas not long
since, this Realm was mighty upon the Continent, first in Territory, and after
in Alliance, in respect of Burgundy and Britain, which were Confederates
indeed, but dependant Confederates; now the one being already cast, partly into
the greatness of France, and partly into that of Austria, the other is like
wholly to be cast into the greatness of France, and this Island shall remain
confined in effect within the Salt-Waters, and girt about with the
Coast-Countries of two mighty Monarchs.

For the Example, it rests likewise upon the same Question, upon the French
King's intent. For if Britain be carried and swallowed up by France, as the
World abroad (apt to impute and construe the Actions of Princes to Ambition)
conceive it will; then it is an Example very dangerous and universal, that the
lesser Neighbour-Estate should be devoured of the greater. For this may be the
case of Scotland, toward England; of Portugal, toward Spain; of the smaller
Estates of Italy, toward the greater; and so of Germany; or as if some of you
of the Commons might not live and dwell safely, besides some of these great
Lords. And the bringing in of this Example, will be chiefly laid to the King's
charge, as to him that was most interessed and most able to forbid it. But then
on the other side, there is so fair a Pretext on the French King's part, (and
yet pretext is never wanting to power) in regard the danger imminent to his own
Estate is such; as may make this Enterprise seem rather a work of Necessity,
than of Ambition, as does in reason correct the Danger of the Example. For that
the Example of that which is done in a man's own defense, cannot be dangerous;
because it is in another's power to avoid it. But in all this business, the
King remits himself to your grave and mature Advice, whereupon he purposes to
rely.

This was the effect of the Lord Chancellor's Speech touching the Cause of
Britain: For the King had commanded him to carry it so, as to affect the
Parliament toward the Business; but without engaging the King in any express
Declaration.

The Chancellor went on:

FOR that which may concern the Government at home, the King has commanded me
to say unto you; That he thinks there was never any King (for the small time
that he has reigned) had greater and juster cause of the two contrary Passions
of Joy and Sorrow, than his Grace has. Joy, in respect of the rare and visible
Favors of Almighty GOD in girting the Imperial Sword upon his side; and
assisting the same his Sword against all his Enemies: and likewise in blessing
him with so many good and loving Servants and Subjects, which have never failed
to give him faithful Counsel, ready Obedience, and courageous Defense. Sorrow
for that it both not pleased God to suffer him to sheath his Sword, (as he
greatly desired, otherwise than for Administration of Justice) but that he has
been forced to draw it so often, to cut off Traiterous and disloyal Subjects,
whom (it seems) God has left (a few amongst many good) as the Canaanites among
the People of Israel to be thorns in their sides, to tempt and try them though
the end has been always (God's Name be blessed therefore) that the Destruction
has fallen upon their own Heads.

Wherefore his Grace says; That he sees that it is not the Blood spelt in the
Field, that will save the Blood in the City not the Marshal's Sword, that will
set this Kingdom in perfect Peace: But that the true way is, to stop the Seeds
of Sedition and Rebellion in their beginnings; and for that purpose to devise,
confirm, and quicken good and wholesome Laws, against Riots and unlawful
Assemblies of People and all Combinations and Confederacies of them; by
Liveries, Tokens, and other Badges of Factious dependence; that the Peace of
the Land may by these Ordinances, as by Bars of Iron, be soundly bound in and
strengthened, and all Force, both in Court, Country, and private Houses, be
suppressed. The care hereof, which so much concern eth your selves, and which the
nature of the Times does instantly calls for his Grace commends to your Wisdoms.

And because it is the King's desire, that this Peace, wherein he hops to
govern and maintain you, do not bear only'unto you. Leaves for you to sit under
the shade of them in Safety; but also should bear you fruit of Riches, Wealth
and Plenty: Therefore his Grace prays you to take into consideration matter of
Trade, as also the Manufactures of the Kingdom, and to repress the bastard and
barren Employment of Moneys, to Usury and unlawful Exchanges, that they may be
(as their natural use is) turned upon Commerce, and lawful and Royal Trading.
And likewise, that Our People be set on work in Arts and Handycrafts; that the
Realm may subsist more of it self; that Idleness be avoided, and the draining
out of our Treasure, for Foreign Manufactures, stopped. But you are not to rest
here only, but to provide further, that whatsoever Merchandise shall be brought
in from beyond the Seas, may be employed upon the Commodities of this Land;
whereby the Kingdoms stock of Treasure may be sure to be kept from being
diminished, by any over-trading of the Foreiner.

And lastly, because the King is well assured, that you would not have him
poor, that wishes you rich; he doubts not, but that you will have care, as
well to maintain his Revenues, of Customs, and all other Natures, as also to
supply him with your loving Ayds, if the case shall so require. The rather, for
that you know the King is a good Husband, and but a Steward in effect for the
Public; and that what comes from you is but as Moisture drawn from the Earth,
which gathers into a Cloud, and falls back upon the Earth again. And you know
well, how the Kingdoms about you grow more and more in Greatness, and the Times
are stirring; and therefore not fit to find the King with an empty Purse. More
I have not to say to you; and wish, that what has been said, had been better
expressed: But that your Wisdoms and good Affections will supply. GOD bless your
Doings.

IT was no hard matter to dispose and affect the Parliament in this Business,
as well in respect of the Emulation between the Nations, and the Envy at the
late growth of the French Monarchy; as in regard of the Danger, to suffer the
French to make their approaches upon England, by obtaining so goodly a Maritim
Province, full of Sea-Towns, and Havens, that might do mischief to the English,
either by Invasion, or by interruption of Traffic. The Parliament was also
moved with the point of Oppression; for although the French seemed to speak
Reason, yet Arguments are ever with multitudes too weak for Suspicions.
Wherefore they did advise the King roundly to embrace the Britons Quarrel, and
to send them speedy Ayds, and with much alacrity and forwardness granted to the
King a great rate of Subsidy, in contemplation of these Ayds. But the King both
to keep a decency toward the French King, to whom he (...) himself to be
obliged, and indeed desirous rather to show War, than to make it; sent new
solemn Ambassadors to intimate unto him, the Decree of his Estates, and to
iterate his motion, that the French would desist from Hostilitiy; or if War
must follow, to desire him to take it in good part, if at the motion of his
People, who were sensible of the cause of the Britons as the ancient Friends,
and Confederates, he did send them Succors; with protestation nevertheless,
that to save all Treaties and Laws of Friendship, he had limited his Force, to
proceed in aid of the Britons, but in no wise to war upon the French, otherwise
than as they maintained the possession of Britain. But before this formal
Embassage arrived, the Party of the Duke had received a great blow, and grew to
manifest declination. For near the Town of Saint Alban in Britain, a Battle had
been given, where the Britons were overthrown, and the Duke of Orleance, and
the Prince of Orange taken Prisoners; there being slain on the Britons part six
thousand men, and amongst them the Lord Woodvile, and almost all his Soldiers,
valiantly fighting. And of the French part one thousand two hundred, with their
Leader, James Galeot, a great Commander.

When the news of this Battle came over into England, it was time for the King
(who now had no subterfuge to continue further Treaty, and saw before his Eyes,
that Britain went so speedily for lost, contrary to his hopes, knowing also
that with his People and Foreiners both, he sustained no small Envy and
disreputation for his former delays) to dispatch with all possible speed his
Succor into Britain; which he did under the Conduct of Robert Lord Brook, to
the number of eight thousand choice men, and well armed; who having a fair
wind, in few hours landed in Britain, and joined themselves forthwith to those
Briton Forces, that remained after the Defeat, and marched straight on to find
the Enemy, and encamped fast by them. The French wisely husbanding the
possession of a Victory, and well acquainted with the Courage of the English,
especially when they are fresh, kept themselves within their Trenches, being
strongly lodged, and resolved not to give Battle. But meanwhile, to harrass and
weary the English, they did upon all advantages set upon them with their
Light Horse; wherein nevertheless they received commonly loss, especially by
means of the English Archers.

But upon these Achievements Francis Duke of Britain deceased; an accident
that the King might easily have foreseen, and ought to have reckoned upon, and
provided for, but that the Point of Reputation, when news first came of the
Battle lost, (that somewhat must be done) did over-bear the Reason of War.

After the Duke's decease, the principal persons of Britain, partly bought,
partly through faction, put all things into confusion; so as the English not
finding Head or Body with whom to join their Forces, and being in jealousy of
Friends, as well as in danger of Enemies, and the Winter begun, returned home
five Months after their landing. So the Battle of Saint Alban, the death of the
Duke, and the retire of the English Succors were (after some time) the causes
of the loss of that Duchy; which action some accounted as a blemish of the
King's Judgment; but most, but as the misfortune of his times.

But howsoever the temporary Fruit of the Parliament in their Aid and Advice
given for Britain, took not, nor prospered not; yet the lasting Fruit of
Parliament, which is good and wholesome Laws, did prosper, and does yet continue
to this day. For according to the Lord Chancellor's admonition, there were that
Parliament diverse excellent Laws ordained, concerning the Points which the King
recommended.

First, the Authority of the Star Chamber, which before subsisted by the
ancient Common-Laws of the Realm, was confirmed in certain Cases by Act of
Parliament. This Court is one of the sagest and noblest Institutions of this
Kingdom. For in the distribution of Courts of Ordinary Justice (besides the
High Court of Parliament) in which distribution the King's Bench holds the
Pleas of the Crown, the Commonplace, Pleas-Civil, the Exchequer-Pleas
concerning the King's Revenue, and the Chancery the Pretorian power for
mitigating the rigor of Law, in case of extremity, by the conscience of a good
man; there was nevertheless always reserved a high and preheminent power to the
King's Council, in Causes that might in example, or consequence, concern the
state of the Commonwealth, which if they were Criminal, the Council used to
sit in the Chamber, called the StarChamber; if Civil, in the White-Chamber, or
White Hall. And as the Chancery had the Pretorian power for Equity, so the
StarChamber had the Censorian power for Offenses, under the degree of Capital.
This Court of Star Chamber is compounded of good Elements: for it consists of
four kinds of Persons, Counselors, Peers, Prelates, and chief Judges. It
discerns also principally of four kinds of Causes; Forces, Frauds, Crimes
various of Stellionate, and the Inchoations or middle, acts toward Crimes
capital; or heinous, not actually committed or perpetrated. But that which was
principally aimed at by this act was Force, and the two chief Supports of
Force, Combination of Multitudes, and Maintenance or Headship of Great persons.

From the general peace of the Country, the King's care went on to the peace
of the King's House, and the security of his great Officers and Counselors.
But this Law was somewhat of a strange composition and temper; That if any of
the King's Servants under the degree of a Lord, do conspire the death of any of
the King's Council; or Lord of the Realm, it is made Capital. This Law was
thought to be procured by the Lord Chancellor, who being a stern and haughty
man, and finding he had some mortal Enemies in Court, provided for his own
safety; drowning the envy of it in a general Law, by communicating the
privilege with all other Counselors and Peers, and yet not daring to extend
it further, than to the King's Servants in Check-roll, lest it should have been
too harsh to the Gentlemen, and other Commons of the Kingdom; who might have
thought their ancient Liberty, and the clemency of the Laws of England invaded,
If the will in any case of Felony should be made the deed. And yet the reason
which the Act yields (that is to say, That he that conspireth the death of
Counselors may be thought indirectly, and by a mean (...) conspire the death
of the King himself,) is indifferent to all Subjects, as well as to Servants in
Court. But it seems this sufficed to serve the Lord Chancellor's turn at this
time. But yet he lived to need a General Law, for that he grew afterward as
odious to the Country, as he was then to the Court.

From the peace of the King's House, the King's care extended to the peace of
Private Houses and Families. For there was an excellent Moral Law molded thus;
The taking and carrying away of Women forcibly, and against their will (except
FemaleWards and Bond-Women) was made Capital. The Parliament wisely and justly
conceiving, that the obtaining of Women by force into Possession (howsoever
afterward Assent might follow by Allurements) was but a Rape drawn forth in
length, because the first Force drew on all the rest.

There was made also another Law for Peace in general, and repressing of
Murders and Man-slaughters, and was in amendment of the Common Laws of the
Realm, being this: That whereas by the Common Law, the King's Suit in case of
Homicide, did expect the Year and the Day, allowed to the Parties Suit by way
of Appeal; and that it was found by experience, that the Party was many times
compounded with, and many times wearied with the Suit, so that in the end such
Suit was let fall, and by that time the matter was in a manner forgotten, and
thereby Prosecution at the King's Suit by Indictment (which is ever best,
Flagrante crimine) neglected; it was Ordained, That the Suit by Indictment
might be taken as well at any time within the Year and the Day, as after, not
prejudicing nevertheless the Parties Suit.

The King began also then, as well in Wisdom as in Justice to pare a little the
Privilege of Clergy, ordaining, That Clerks convict should be burned in the
hand; both because they might taste of some corporal Punishment, and that they
might carry a Brand of Infamy. But for this good Acts sake, the King himself
was after branded by Perkin's Proclamation, for an execrable breaker of the
Rites of Holy Church.

Another Law was made for the better Peace of the Country; by which Law the
King's Officers and Farmors were to forfeit their Places and Holds, in case of
unlawful Retainer, or partaking in Routs and unlawful Assemblies.

These were the Laws that were made for repressing of Force, which those times
did chiefly require; and were so prudently framed, as they are found fit for
all succeeding times, and so continue to this day.

There were also made good and politic Laws that Parliament against Usury,
which is the Bastard-use of Money; And against unlawful Chievances and
Exchanges, which is Bastard-Usury; And also for the Security of the King's
Customs; And for the Employment of the Procedures of Foreign Commodities,
brought in by Merchant-strangers, upon the Native-Commodities of the Realm;
together with some other Laws of less importance.

But howsoever the Laws made in that Parliament did bear good and wholesome
Fruit; yet the Subsidy granted at the same time, bare a Fruit, that proved
harsh and bitter. All was inned at last into the King's Barn; but it was after
a Storm. For when the Commissioners entered into the Taxation of the Subsidy in
Yorkshire, and the Bishopric of Duresm; the People upon a sudden grew into
great mutiny, and said openly, that they had endured of late years a thousand
miseries, and neither could nor would pay the Subsidy. This (no doubt)
proceeded not simply of any present necessity, but much by reason of the old
humor of those Countries, where the memory of King Richard was so strong, that
it lies like Lees in the bottom of men's hearts; and if the Vessel was but
stirred, it would come up. And (no doubt) it was partly also by the instigation
of some factious Malcontents, that bare principal stroke amongst them.
Hereupon the Commissioners being somewhat astonished, deferred the matter unto
the Earl of Northumberland, who was the principal man of Authority in those
Parts. The Earl forthwith wrote unto the Court, signifying to the King plainly
enough in what flame he found the people of those Countries, and praying the
King's direction. The King wrote back peremptorily, That he would not have one
penny abated, of that which had been granted to him by Parliament, both because
it might encourage other Countries to pray the like Release or Mitigation, and
chiefly, because he would never endure, that the base Multitude should
frustrate the Authority of the Parliament, wherein their Votes and Consents
were concluded. Upon this dispatch from Court, the Earl assembled the principal
Justices and Freeholders of the Country; and speaking to them in that
imperious Language wherein the King had written to him, which needed not, (save
that an harsh business was unfortunately fallen into the hands of a harsh man,)
did not only irritate the People, but make them conceive, by the stoutness and
haughtiness of delivery of the King's Errand; that himself was the Author or
principal Perswader of that Counsel. Whereupon the meaner sort routed together,
and suddenly assailing the Earl in his house, slew him, and diverse of his
servants. And rested not there, but creating for their Leader Sir John
Egremond, a factious person, and one that had of a long time born an ill Talent
toward the King; and being animated also by a base Fellow, called John A
Chamber, a very Boutefeu, who bare much sway amongst the vulgar and popular,
entered into open Rebellion, and gave out in flat terms that they would go
against King Henry, and fight with him for the maintenance of their Liberties.

When the King was advertised of this new Insurrection (being almost a Fever
that took him every year) after his manner little troubled therewith, he sent
Thomas Earl of Surrey (whom he had a little before not only released out of the
Tower, and pardoned, but also received to special favor) with a competent
Power against the Rebels; who fought with the principal Band of them, and
defeated them, and took alive John A Chamber, their firebrand. As for Sir John
Egremond, he fled into Flanders, to the Lady Margaret of Burgundy; whose Palace
was the Sanctuary and Receptacle of all Traitors against the King. John A
Chamber was Executed at York, in great state; for he was hanged upon a Gibbet
raised a Stage higher in the midst of a square Gallows, as a Traitor paramount;
and a number of his men that were his chief Accomplices, were hanged upon the
lower Story round about him; and the rest were generally pardoned. Neither did
the King himself omit his custom, to be first or second in all his Warlike
Exploits; making good his Word, which was usual with him when he heard of
Rebels; that He desired but to see them. For immediately after he had sent down
the Earl of Surrey, he marched toward them himself in person. And although in
his journey he heard news of the Victory, yet he went on as far as York, to
pacify and settle those Countries. And that done returned to London, leaving
the Earl of Surrey for his Lieutenant in the Northern parts, and Sir Richard
Tunstal for his principal Commissioner, to levy the Subsidy, whereof he did not
remit a Denier.

About the same time that the King lost so good a Servant, as the Earl of
Northumberland, he lost likewise a faithful Friend and Allie of James the
Third, King of Scotland, by a miserable disaster. For this unfortunate Prince,
after a long smother of discontent, and hatred of many of his Nobility and
People, breaking forth at times into seditions and alterations of Court, was at
last distressed by them, having taken Arms, and surprised the person of Prince
James his Son, partly by force, partly by threats that they would otherwise
deliver up the Kingdom to the King of England, to shadow their Rebellion, and
to be the titular and painted Head of those Arms. Whereupon the King (finding
himself too weak) sought unto King Henry, as also unto the Pope, and the King
of France, to compose those troubles, between him and his Subjects. The King
accordingly interposed their Mediation in a round and Princely manner: Not only
by way of request and persuasion, but also by way of protestation of menace;
declaring, that they thought it to be the common Cause of all Kings, If
Subjects should be suffered to give Laws unto their Sovereign; and that they
would accordingly resent it, and revenge it. But the Rebels that had shaken off
the greater Yoke of Obedience, had likewise cast away the lesser Tie of
Respect. And Fury prevailing above Fear, made answer, That there was no talking
of Peace, except the King would resign his Crown. Whereupon (Treaty of Accord
taking no place) it came to a Battle, at Bannocks-bourn by Strivelin. In which
Battle, the King transported with wrath and just indignation, inconsiderately
fighting and precipitating the charge, before his whole numbers came up to him,
was (notwithstanding the contrary express and straight commandment of the
Prince his Son) slain in the Pursuit, being fled to a Mill, situate in the
field, where the Battle was fought.

As for the Pope's Embassy, which was sent by Adrian de Castello an Italian
Legate, (and perhaps, as those times were, might have prevailed more) it came
too late for the Embassy, but not for the Ambassador. For passing through
England, and being honorably entertained, and received of King Henry; (who
ever applied himself with much respect to the Sea of Rome) he fell into great
grace with the King, and great familiarity and friendship with Morton the
Chancellor. In so much as the King taking a liking to him, and finding him to
his mind, preferred him to the Bishopric of Hereford, and afterward to that
of Bath and Wells, and employed him in many of his affairs of State, that had
relation to Rome. He was a man of great learning, wisdom, and dexterity in
business of State; and having not long after ascended to the degree of
Cardinal, paid the King large tribute of his gratitude, in diligent and
judicious advertisement of the occurrents of Italy. Nevertheless in the end of
his time, he was partaker of the conspiracy, which Cardinal Alphonso Petrucci,
and some other Cardinals had plotted against the life of Pope Leo. And this
offense in it self so heinous, was yet in him aggravated by the motive thereof,
which was not malice or discontent, but an aspiring mind to the Papacy. And in
this height of impiety there wanted not an intermixture of levity and folly;
for that (as was generally believed) he was animated to expect the Papacy, by a
fatal mockery, the Prediction of a Soothsayer; which was, That one should
succeed Pope Leo, whose name should be Adrian, an aged man of mean birth, and
of great learning and wisdom. By which character, and figure, he took himself
to be described, though it were fulfilled of Adrian the Fleming, Son of a Dutch
Brewer, Cardinal of Tortosa, and Preceptor unto Charles the Fifth, the same
that not changing his Christen-name, was afterward called Adrian the Sixth.

But these things happened in the year following, which was the fifth of this
King. But in the end of the fourth year the King had called again his
Parliament, not as it seems for any particular occasion of State. But the
former Parliament being ended somewhat suddenly, in regard of the preparation
for Britain, the King thought he had not remunerated his People sufficiently
with good Laws, which evermore was his Retribution for Treasure. And finding by
the Insurrection in the North, there was coffeehouse abroad, in respect of
the Subsidy, he thought it good to give his Subjects yet further contentment,
and comfort in that kind. Certainly his times for good Commonwealths Laws did
(...). So as he may justly be celebrated for the best Lawgiver to this Nation,
after King Edward the First. For his Laws (who so marks them well) are deep,
and not vulgar: not made upon the spur of a particular Occasion for the
present, but out of Providence of the future, to make the Estate of his People
still more and more happy; after the manner of the Legislators in ancient and
Heroical times.

First therefore he made a Law, suitable to his own Acts and Times. For as
himself had in his Person and Marriage made a final Concord, in the great Suit
and Title for the Crown; so by this Law he settled the like Peace and Quiet in
the private Possessions of the Subjects. Ordaining, That Fines thence-forth
should be final, to conclude all Strangers Rights; and that upon Fines levied,
and solemnly proclaimed, the Subject should have his time of Watch for five
years after his Title accrued; which if he forepassed, his Right should be
bound for ever after; with some exception nevertheless, of Minors,
Married-women, and such incompetent Persons.

This Statute did in effect but restore an ancient Statute of the Realm, which
was it self also made but in affirmance of the Common Law. The alteration had
been by a Statute, commonly called the Statute of Non-claim, made in the time
of Edward the Third. And surely this Law was a kind of Prognostic of the good
Peace, which since his time has (for the most part) continued in this Kingdom,
until this day. For Statutes of Nonclaim are fit for times of War, when men's
heads are troubled, that they cannot intend their Estate; but Statutes, that
quiet Possessions, are fittest for times of Peace, to extinguish Suits and
Contentions, which is one of the Banes, of Peace.

Another Statute was made of singular Policy, for the Population apparently,
and (if it be thoroughly considered) for the Soldiery, and Militar Forces of the
Realm.

Enclosures at that time began to be more frequent, whereby Arable Land (which
could not be manured without People and Families) was turned into Pasture,
which was easily rid by a few Herds-men; and Tenancies for Years, Lives, and At
Will (whereupon much of the Yeomandry lived) were turned into Demesnes. This
bred a decay of People, and (by consequence) a decay of Towns, Churches,
Tithes, and the like. The King likewise knew full well, and in no wise forgot,
that there ensued withal upon this a decay and diminution of Subsidy and Taxes;
for the more Gentlemen, ever the lower Books of Subsidies. In remedying of this
inconvenience, the King's Wisdom was admirable, and the Parliaments at that
time. Enclosures they would not forbid, for that had been to forbid the
improvement of the Patrimony of the Kingdom; nor Tillage they would not compel,
for that was to strive with Nature and Utility. But they took a course to take
away depopulating Enclosures, and depopulating Pasturage, and yet not by that
name, or by any Imperious express Prohibition, but by consequence. The
Ordinance was, That all Houses of Husbandry, that were used with twenty Acres
of Ground, and upwards, should be maintained and kept up for ever; together
with a competent proportion of Land to be used and occupied with them; and in
no wise to be severed from them, as by another Statute, made afterward in his
Successors time, was more fully declared. This upon Forfeiture to be taken; not
by way of Popular Action, but by seizure of the Land it self, by the King and
Lords of the Fee, as to half the Profits, till the Houses and Lands were
restored. By this means the Houses being kept up, did of necessity enforce a
Dweller; and the proportion of Land for Occupation being kept up, did of
necessity enforce that Dweller, not to be a Beggar or Cottager, but a man of
some substance, that might keep Hinds and Servants, and set the Plough on
goingThis did wonderfully concern the Might and Manner-hood of the Kingdom, to
have Ferms, as it were of a Standard sufficient to maintain an able Body out of
Penury, and did in effect amortize a great part of the Lands of the Kingdom
unto the Hold and Occupation of the Teomanry or Middle people, of a condition
between Gentlemen and Cottagers or Pesants. Now, how much this did advance the
Militar power of the Kingdom, is apparent by the true Principles of War, and
the examples of other Kingdoms. For it has been held by the general Opinion of
men of best Judgment in the Wars (howsoever some few have varied, and that it
may receive some distinction of Case) that the principal strength of an Army
consists in the Infantry or Foot. And to make good Infantry, it requires men
bred, not in a servile or indigent fashion, but in some free and plentiful
manner. Therefore if a State run most to Noblemen and Gentlemen, and that the
Husbandmen and Plough-men be but as their Work-folks and Laborers, or else
mere Cottagers, (which are but Housed-Beggars) you may have a good Cavalry, but
never good stable Bands of Foot; like to Coppice-Woods, that if you leave in
them Staddles too thick, they will run to Bushes and Briars, and have little
clean Underwood. And this is to be seen in France, and Italy, and some other
parts abroad, where in effect all is Nobless, or Pesantry, I speak of people
out of Towns, and no middle people; and therefore no good Forces of Foot: In so
much, as they are enforced to employ Mercenary Bands, of Switzers and the like,
for their Battuilions of Foot; Whereby also it comes to pass, that those
Nations have much People, and few Soldiers. Whereas the King saw, that
contrariwise it would follow, that England, though much less in Territory, yet
should have infinitely more Soldiers of their native Forces, than those other
Nations have. Thus did the King secretly sow Hidra's teeth, whereupon
(according to the Poets fiction) should rise up Armed men for the service of
the Kingdom.

The King also (having care to make his Realm potent, as well by Sea as by
Land) for the better maintenance of the Navy, Ordained, That Wines and Woads
from the parts of Gascoign and Languedock; should not be brought but in English
Bottoms; Bowing the ancient Policy of this Estate, from consideration of
Plenty, to consideration of Power. For that almost all the ancient Statutes
incite by all means Merchant-strangers, to bring in all sorts of Commodities;
having for end cheapness, and not looking to the point of State concerning the
Naval-power.

The King also made a Statute in that Parliament Monitory and Minatory, toward
Justices of Peace, that they should duly execute their Office, inviting
complaints against them, first to their Fellow Justices, then to the Justices
of Assize, then to the King or Chancellor; and that a Proclamation, which he
had published of that Tenor, should be read in open Sessions four times a year,
to keep them awake. Meaning also to have his Laws executed, and thereby to reap
either Obedience or Forfeitures; (wherein toward his latter times he did
decline too much to the left hand) he did ordain remedy against the practice
that was grown in use, to stop and damp Informations upon Penal Laws, by
procuring Informations by collusion to be put in by the Confederates of the
Delinquents, to be faintly prosecuted, and let fall at pleasure, and pleading
them in Bar of the Informations, which were prosecuted with effect.

He made also Laws for the correction of the Mint, and counterfeiting of Foreign
Coin current. And that no payment in Gold should be made to any
Merchant-stranger, the better to keep Treasure within the Realm, for that Gold
was the metal that lay in least room.

He made also Statutes for the maintenance of Drapery, and the keeping of Wools
within the Realm; and not only so, but for stinting, and limiting the prices of
Cloth, one for the finer, and another for the courser sort. Which I note, both
because it was a rare thing to set prices by Statute, especially upon our
HomeCommodities; and because of the wise Model of the Act, not prescribing
Prices, but stinting them not to exceed a rate, that the Clothier might drape
accordingly as he might afford.

Diverse other good Statutes were made that Parliament, but these were the
principal. And here I do desire those, into whose hands this Work shall fall,
that they do take in good part my long insisting upon the Laws that were made
in this King's Reign; whereof I have these reasons: Both because it was the
preheminent virtue and merit of this King, to whose memory I do honor, and
because it has some correspondence to my Person; but chiefly, because (in my
judgment) it is some defect even in the best Writers of History (...) that
they do not often enough summarily deliver and set down the most memorable
Laws, that passed in the times whereof they write, being indeed the principal
Acts of Peace. For although they may be had in Original Books of Law
themselves; yet that informs not the judgment of Kings and Counselors, and
Persons of Estate, so well as to see them described, and entered in the Table
and Pourtrait of the Times.

About the same time, the King had a Loan from the City of Four thousand
pounds; which was double to that they lent before, and was duly and orderly
paid back at the day, as the former likewise had been; the King ever choosing
rather to borrow too soon, than to pay too late, and so keeping up his Credit.

Neither had the King yet cast off his cares and hopes touching Britain, but
thought to master the occasion by Policy, though his Arms had been unfortunate,
and to bereave the French King of the fruit of his Victory. The sum of his
design was, to encourage Maximilian to go on with his suit, for the Marriage of
Ann, the Heir of Britain, and to aid him to the consummation thereof. But the
affairs of Maximilian were at that time in great trouble and combustion, by a
Rebellion of his Subjects in Flanders; especially those of Bruges and Gaunt,
whereof the Town of Bruges (at such time as Maximilian was there in person) had
suddenly armed in tumult, and slain some of his principal Officers, and taken
himself prisoner, and held him in durance, till they had enforced him, and some
of his Counselors, to take a solemn Oath to pardon all their offenses, and
never to question and revenge the same in time to come. Nevertheless Frederick
the Emperor would not suffer this reproach and indignity offered to his Son to
pass, but made sharp Wars upon Flanders, to reclaim and chastise the Rebels.
But the Lord Ravenstein, a principal person about Maximilian, and one that had
taken the Oath of Abolition with his Master, pretending the Religion thereof,
but indeed upon private ambition, and (as it was thought) instigated and
corrupted from France, forsook the Emperor and Maximilian his Lord, and made
himself an Head of the popular Party, and seized upon the Towns of Ipre and
Sluice, with both the Castles; and forthwith sent to the Lord Cords, Governor
of Picardy under the French King, to desire aid, and to move him, that he on
the behalf of the French King would be Protector of the united Towns, and by
force of Arms reduce the rest. The Lord Cords was ready to embrace the
occasion, which was partly of his own setting, and sent forthwith greater
Forces, than it had been possible for him to raise on the sudden, if he had not
looked for such a summons before, in aid of the Lord Ravenstein, and the
Flemmings, with instructions to invest the Towns between France and Bruges. The
French Forces besieged a little Town called Dixmue, where part of the Flemish
Forces joined with them. While they lay at this siege, the King of England,
upon pretense of the safety of the English Pale about Calice, but in truth
being loath that Maximilian should become contemptible, and thereby be shaken
off by the States of Britain about this Marriage, sent over the Lord Morley
with a thousand men unto the Lord Daubigny, then Deputy of Calice, with secret
instructions to aid Maximilian, and to raise the siege of Dixmue. The Lord
Daubigny (giving it out that all was for the strengthening of the English
Marches) drew out of the Garrisons, of Calice, Hammes, and Guines, to the
number of a thousand men more. So that with the fresh Succors that came under
the Conduct of the Lord Morley, they made up to the number of two thousand, or
better. Which Forces joining with some Companies of Almains, put themselves
into Dixmue, not perceived by the Enemies; and passing through the Town with
some re-enforcement, (from the Forces that were in the Town) assailed the
Enemies Camp, negligently guarded, as being out of fear; where there was a
bloody Fight, in which the English and their Partakers obtained the Victory,
and slew to the number of eight thousand men, with the loss on the English part
of a hundred or thereabouts; amongst whom was the Lord Morley. They took also
their great Ordnance, with much rich spoils, which they carried to Newport,
whence the Lord Daubigny returned to Calice, leaving the hurt men, and some
other Voluntaries in Newport. But the Lord Cords being at Ipre with a great
power of men, thinking to recover the loss and disgrace of the Fight at Dixmue,
came presently on, and sat down before Newport and besieged it; and after some
days siege, he resolved to try the fortune of an Assault: Which he did one day,
and succeeded therein so far, that he had taken the principal Tower and Fort in
that City, and planted upon it the French Banner. Whence nevertheless they were
presently beaten forth by the English, by the help of some fresh Succors of
Archers arriving by good fortune (at the instant) in the Haven of Newport;
Whereupon the Lord Cords discouraged, and measuring the new Succors (which
were small) by the Success, (which was great,) levied his Siege. By this means,
matters grew more exasperate between the two Kings of England and France, for
that in the War of Flanders, the auxiliary Forces of French and English were
much blooded one against another. Which Blood rankled the more, by the vain
words of the Lord Cords, that declared himself an open Enemy of the English,
beyond that that appertained to the present Service; making it a common byword
of his, That he could be content to lie in Hell seven years, so he might win
Calice from the English.

The King having thus upheld the Reputation of Maximilian, advised him now to
press on his Marriage with Britain to a conclusion. Which Maximilian
accordingly did, and so far forth prevailed both with the young Lady, and with
the principal persons about her, as the Marriage was consummate by Proxy, with
a Ceremony at that time in these parts new. For she was not only publicly
contracted, but stated as a Bride, and solemnly Bedded; and after she was laid,
there came in Maximilian's Ambassador with Letters of Procuration, and in the
presence of sundry Noble Personages, Men and Women, put his Leg (stripped naked
to the Knee) between the Espousal-Sheets; to the end, that that Ceremony might
be thought to amount to a Consummation, and actual Knowledge. This done,
Maximilian (whose property was to leave things then, when they were almost come
to perfection, and to end them by imagination; like ill Archers, that draw not
their Arrows up to the Head: and who might as easily have Bedded the Lady
himself, as to have made a Play and Disguise of it) thinking now all assured,
neglected for a time his further proceeding, and intended his Wars. Meanwhile,
the French King (consulting with his Divines, and finding that this pretended
Consummation was rather an Invention of Court, than any ways valid by the Laws
of the Church) went more really to work, and by secret Instruments and cunning
Agents, as well Matrans about the young Lady, as Counselors, first sought to
remove the point of Religion and Honor out of the mind of the Lady her self,
wherein there was a double labor. For Maximilian was not only contracted unto
the Lady, but Maximilian's Daughter was likewise contracted to King Charles. So
as the Marriage halted upon both feet, and was not clear on either side: But
for the Contract with King Charles, the Exception lay plain and fair, for that
Maximilian's Daughter was under years of Consent, and so not bound by Law, but
a power of Disagreement left to either part. But for the Contract made by
Maximilian with the Lady her self, they were harder driven; having nothing to
allege, but that it was done without the consent of her Sovereign Lord, King
Charles, whose Ward and Client she was, and he to her in place of a Father; and
therefore it was void, and of no force, for want of such Consent. Which defect
(they said) though it would not evacuate a Marriage, after Cohabitation, and
Actual Consummation, yet it was enough to make void a Contract. For as for a
pretended Consummation, they made sport with it, and said; That it was an
argument, that Maximilian was a Widdower, and a cold Wooer, that could content
himself to be a Bridegroom by Deputy, and would not make a little Journey, to
put all out of question. So that the young Lady; wrought upon by these Reasons,
finely instilled by such as the French King, (who spared for no Rewards or
Promises) had made on his side; and allured likewise by the present Glory and
Greatness of King Charles, (being also a young King, and a Bachelor) and loath
to make her Country the Seat of a long and miserable War; secretly yielded to
accept of King Charles: But during this secret Treaty with the Lady, the better
to save it from Blasts of Opposition and Interruption, King Charles resorting
to his wonted Arts, and thinking to carry the Marriage, as he had carried the
Wars, by entertaining the King of England in vain belief, sent a solemn
Embassage by Francis Lord of Luxemberg, Charles Marignian and Robert Gaguein,
General of the Order of the Bonnes Hommes of the Trinity, to treat Peace and
League with the King; accoupling it with an Article in nature of a Request,
that the French King might with the King's good will (according unto his right
of Seigniory and Tutelage) dispose of the Marriage of the young Duchess of
Britain, as he should think good; offering by a Judicial proceeding to make
void the Marriage of Maximilian by Proxy. Also all this while the better to
amuse the World, he did continue in his Court and custody the Daughter of
Maximilian, who formerly had been sent unto him, to be bred and educated in
France; not dismissing or renvoying her, but contrariwise professing and giving
out strongly, that he meant to proceed with that Match. And that for the
Duchess of Britain, he desired only to preserve his right of Seigniory, and to
give her in Marriage to some such Allie, as might depend upon him.

When the three Commissioners came to the Court of England, they delivered
their Embassage unto the King, who remitted them to his Council; where some
days after they had Audience, and made their Proposition by the Prior of the
Trinity, (who though he were third in place, yet was held the best Speaker of
them) to this effect:

MY Lords, the King our Master, the greatest and mightiest King that reigned in
France since Charles the Great, (whose Name he bears) has nevertheless
thought it no disparagement to his Greatness, at this time to propound a Peace,
yea, and to pray a Peace with the King of England. For which purpose he has
sent us his Commissioners instructed and enabled with full and ample power, to
treat and conclude; giving us further in charge, to open in some other business
the secrets of his own intentions. These be indeed the precious Love Tokens
between great Kings, to communicate one with another the true state of their
Affairs, and to pass by nice Points of Honor, which ought not to give Law unto
Affection, This I do assure your Lordships; It is not possible for you to
imagine the true and cordial Love, that the King our Master bears to your
Sovereign, except you were near him, as we are. He uses his Name with so great
respect; he remembers their first acquaintance at Paris with so great
contentment; nay, he never speaks of him, but that presently he falls into
discourse of the miseries of great Kings, in that they cannot converse with
their Equals, but with Servants. This affection to your King's Person and
Virtues, GOD has put into the Heart of our Master, no doubt for the good of
Christendom, and for purposes yet unknown to us all. For other Root it cannot
have, since it was the same to the earl of Richmond, that it is now to the King
of England. This is therefore the first motive that makes our King to desire
Peace, and League with your Sovereign: Good affection, and somewhat that he
finds in his own Heart. This affection is also armed with reason of Estate. For
our King does in all candor and frankness of dealing open himself unto you;
that having an honorable, yea, and a Holy purpose, to make a Voyage and War in
remote parts, he considers that it will be of no small effect, in point of
Reputation to his Enterprise, if it be known abroad, that he ulin in good peace
with all his Neighbor Princes, and specially with the King of England, whom
for good causes he esteems most.

But now (my Lords) give me leave to use a few words to remove all scruples and
miss-understandings, between your Sovereign and ours, concerning some late
Actions; which if they be not cleared, may perhaps hinder this Peace. To the
end, that for matters past, neither King may conceive unkindness of other, nor
think the other conceives unkindness of him. The late Actions are two; that of
Britain, and that of Flanders. In both which, it is true, that the Subjects
swords of both Kings, have encountered and stricken, and the ways and
inclinations also of the two Kings, in respect of their Confederates and
Allies, have severed.

For that of Britain, The King your Sovereign knows best what has passed. It
was a War of necessity on our Masters part. And though the Motives of it were
sharp and piquant as could be, yet did be make that War rather with an
Olive Branch, than a Laurel-branch in his hand, more desiring Peace than
Victory. Besides, from time to time he sent (as it were) Blank-papers to your
King, to write the conditions of Peace. For though both his Honor and Safety
went upon it, yet he thought neither of them too precious, to put into the King
of England's hands. Neither does our King on the other side make any unfriendly
interpretation, of your King's sending of Succors to the Duke of Britain; for
the King knows well, that many things must be done of Kings for satisfaction
of their People, and it is not hard to discern what is a King's own. But this
matter of Britain is now (by the Act of GOD) ended and passed; and (as the King
hopesh) like the way of a Ship in the Sea, without leaving any impression in
either of the Kings minds; as he is sure, for his part, it has not done in his.

For the Action of Flanders; As the former of Britain was a War of Necessity,
so this was a War of Justice; which with a good King is of equal necessity,
with danger of Estate, for else he should leave to be a King. The Subjects of
Burgundy are Subjects in Chief to the Crown of France, and their Duke the
Homager and Vassal of France. They had wont to be good Subjects, howsoever
Maximilian has of late distempered them. They fled to the King for Justice,
and deliverance from Oppression. Justice he could not deny; Purchase he did not
seek. This was good for Maximilian, if he could have seen it in people mutined,
to arrest Fury, and prevent Despair. My Lords, it may be this I have said is
needless, save that the King our Master is tender in any thing, that may but
glance upon the Friendship of England. The amity between the two Kings (no
doubt) stands entire and inviolate. And that their Subjects swords have
clashed, it is nothing unto the public Peace of the Crowns; it being a thing
very usual in Auxiliary Forces of the best and straitest Confederates, to meet
and draw blood in the Field. Nay, many times there be Ayds of the same Nation
on both sides, and yet it is not (for all that) A Kingdom divided in it self.

It rests (my Lords) that I impart unto you a matter, that I know your
Lordships all will much rejoice to hear; as that which imports the Christian
Commonweal more, than any Action that has happened of long time. The King our
Master has a purpose and determination, to make War upon the Kingdom of
Naples; being now in the possession of a Bastardship of Arragon, but
appertaining unto his Majesty, by clear and undoubted right; which if he should
not by just Arms seek to recover, he could neither acquit his Honor, nor
answer it to his People. But his Noble and Christian thoughts rest not here.
For his Resolution and Hope is, to make the Re-conquest of Naples, but as a
Bridge, to transport his Forces into Grecia; and not to spare Blood or Treasure
(if it were to the impawning of his Crown, and dis-peopling of France) till
either he has overthrown the Empire of the Ottomans, or taken it in his way to
Paradise. The King knows well, that this is a design, that could not arise in
the mind of any King, that did not steadfastly look up unto GOD, whose quarrel
this is, and from whom comes both the will, and the Deed. But yet it is
agreeable to the Person that he bears (though unworthy) of the
Thrice-Christian King, and the Eldest Son of the Church. Whereunto he is also
invited by the Example (in more ancient time) of King Henry the Fourth of
England, (the First Renowned King of the House of Lancaster, Ancestor, though
not Progenitor to your King) who had a purpose toward the end of his time (as
you know better) to make an Expedition into the Holy Land; and by the Example
also (present before his eyes) of that Honorable and Religious War which the
King of Spain now makes, and has almost brought to perfection, for the
Recovery of the Realm of Granada from the Moors. And although this Enterprise
may seem vast and unmeasured, for the King to attempt that by his own Forces,
wherein heretofore a Conjunction of most of the Christian Princes has found
work enough; yet his Majesty wisely considers, that sometimes smaller Forces
being united under one Command, are more effectual in Proof (though not so
promising in Opinion and Fame) than much greater Forces, variously propounded
by Associations and Leagues; which commonly in a short time after their
beginnings, turn to Dissociations and Divisions. But (my Lords) that which is
as a Voice from Heaven that called the King to this Enterprise, is a Rent at
this time in the House of the Ottomans. I do not say, but there has been
Brother against Brother in that House before, but never any that had refuge to
the Arms of the Christians, as now has Gemes, (Brother unto Bajazeth, that
reigns) the far braver man of the two; the other being between a Monk and a
Philosopher, and better read in the Alcoran and Averroes, than able to weild
the Scepter of so warlike an Empire. This therefore is the King our Master's
memorable and heroical Resolution for an Holy War. And because he carries in
this the person of a Christian Soldier, as well as of a great Temporal Monarch;
he begins with Humility, and is content for this cause, to beg Peace at the
hands of other Christian Kings. There remains only rather a Civil Request,
than any essential part of our Negotiation, which the King makes to the King
your Sovereign. The King (as the World knows) is Lord in chief of the Duchy
of Britain. The Marriage of the Heir belongs to him as Guardian. This is a
private Patrimonial Right, and no business of Estate: yet nevertheless (to run
a fair course with your King; whom he desires to make another Himself, and to
be one and the same thing with him) his Request is, That with the King's Favor
and Consent, he may dispose of her Marriage, as he thinks good, and make void
the intruded and pretended Marriage of Maximilian, according to Justice. This
(my Lords) is all that I have to say, desiring your pardon for my weakness in
the delivery.

THus did the French Ambassadors with great show of their King's affection, and
many sugared words seek to adulce all matters between the two Kings, having two
things for their ends; The one, to keep the King quiet till the Marriage of
Britain was past, and this was but a Summers-fruit, which they thought was
almost ripe, and would be soon gathered. The other was more lasting; and that
was to put him into such a temper as he might be no disturbance or impediment
to the Voyage for Italy. The Lords of the Council were silent; and said only,
That they knew the Ambassadors would look for no answer, till they had reported
to the King; and so they rose from Council. The King could not well tell what
to think of the Marriage of Britain. He saw plainly the ambition of the French
King was to impatronize himself of the Duchy; but he wondered he would bring
into his House a litigious Marriage, especially considering who was his
Successor. But weighing one thing with another, he gave Britain for lost; but
resolved to make his profit of this business of Britain, as a quarrel for War;
and that of Naples, as a Wrench and mean for Peace; being well advertised, how
strongly the King was bent upon that Action. Having therefore conferred diverse
times with his Council, and keeping himself somewhat close, he gave a direction
to the Chancellor, for a formal Answer to the Ambassadors, and that he did in
the presence of his Council. And after calling the Chancellor to him apart,
bade him speak in such language, as was fit for a Treaty that was to end in a
Breach; and gave him also a special Caveat, that he should not use any words,
to discourage the Voyage of Italy. Soon after the Ambassadors were sent for to
the Council, and the Lord Chancellor spoke to them in this sort:

MY Lords Ambassadors, I shall make answer by the King's Commandment, unto the
eloquent Declaration of you my Lord Prior, in a brief and plain manner. The
King forgets not his former love and acquaintance with the King your Master.
But of this there needs no repetition. For if it be between them as it was,
it is well; if there be any alteration, it is not words that will make it up.

For the Business of Britain, the King finds it a little strange that the
French King makes mention of it, as matter of well-deserving at his hand. For
that Deserving was no more, but to make him his Instrument, to surprise one of
his best Confederates. And for the Marriage, the King would not meddle in it if
your Master would marry by the Book, and not by the Sword.

For that of Flanders, if the Subjects of Burgundy had appealed to your King,
as their Chief Lord, at first, by way of Supplication, it might have had a show
of Justice. But it was a new form of Process, for Subjects to imprison their
Prince first, and to slay his Officers, and then to be Complainants. The King
says, That sure he is, when the French King, and himself sent to the Subjects
of Scotland (that had taken Arms against their King) they both spoke in another
Style, and did in Princely manner signify their detestation of Popular
Attentates, upon the Person or Authority of Princes. But my Lords Ambassadors,
the King leaves these two actions thus: That on the one side, he has not
received any manner of satisfaction from you concerning them; and on the other,
that he does not apprehend them so deeply, as in respect of them, to refuse to
treat of Peace, if other things may go hand in hand. As for the War of Naples,
and the Design against the Turk; the King has commanded me expressly to say,
That he does wish with all his heart, to his good Brother the French King, that
his Fortunes may succeed according to his hopes, and honorable intentions. And
whenever he shall hear, that he is prepared for Grecia, as your Master is
pleased now to say, that he beggeth a Peace of the King, so the King will then
beg of him a part in that War.

But now my Lords Ambassadors, I am to propound unto you somewhat on the King's
part. The King your Master has taught our King what to say and demand. You say
(my Lord Prior) that your King is resolved to recover his right to Naples,
wrongfully detained from him. And that if he should not thus do, he could not
acquit his Honor, nor answer it to his People. Think (my Lords) that the King
our Master says the same thing over again to you touching Normandy, Guien,
Anjou, yea and the Kingdom of France it self. I cannot express it better than
in your own words: If therefore the French King shall consent, that the King
our Master's Title to France (at least Tribute for the same) be handled in the
Treaty, the King is content to go on with the rest, otherwise he refuses to
Treat.

THE Ambassadors being somewhat abashed with this demand, answered in some
heat; That they doubted not, but the King their Sovereign's Sword would be able
to maintain his Scepter: And they assured themselves, he neither could nor
would yield to any diminution of the Crown of France, either in Territory or
Regality. But howsoever, they were too great matters for them to speak of,
having no Commission. It was replied, that the King looked for no other answer
from them; but would forthwith send his own Ambassadors to the French King.
There was a question also asked at the table, Whether the French King would
agree to have the disposing of the Marriage of Britain with an exception and
exclusion, that he should not marry her himself? To which the Ambassadors
answered; That it was so far out of their King's thoughts, as they had received
no Instruction touching the same. Thus were the Ambassadors dismissed, all save
the Prior; and were followed immediately by Thomas Earl of Ormond, and Thomas
Goldenston Prior of Christ-Church in Canterbury, who were presently sent over
into France. In the mean space, Lionel Bishop of Concordia, was sent as Nuntio
from Pope Alexander the sixth to both Kings, to move a Peace between them. For
Pope Alexander finding himself pent and locked up, by a League and Association
of the principal States of Italy, that he could not make his way for the
advancement of his own House, (which he immoderately thirsted after) was
desirous to trouble the waters in Italy, that he might fish the better; casting
the Net, not out of St. Peter's, but out of Borgia's Bark. And doubting lest
the fear from England, might stay the French King's voyage into Italy,
dispatched this Bishop to compose all matters between the two Kings, if he
could. Who first repaired to the French King, and finding him well inclined (as
he conceived) took on his Journey toward England, and found the English
Ambassadors at Calice, on their way toward the French King. After some
conference with them, he was in honorable manner transported over into
England, where he had audience of the King. But notwithstanding he had a good
ominous name to have made a Peace, nothing followed. For in the mean time, the
purpose of the French King to marry the Duchess could be no longer dissembled.
Wherefore the English Ambassadors (finding how things went) took their leave,
and returned. And the Prior also was warned from hence, to depart out of
England. Who when he turned his back (more like a Pedant, than an Ambassador)
dispersed a bitter Libel, in Latin Verse, against the King; unto which the King
(though he had nothing of a Pedant) yet was content to cause an answer to be
made in like Verse; and that as speaking in his own person, but in a style of
scorn and sport. About this time also was born the King's second Son Henry, who
afterward relgned. And soon after followed the solemnization of the Marriage
between Charles, and Ann Duchess of Britain, with whom he received the Duchy of
Britain as her Dowry; the Daughter of Maximilian being a little before sent
home. Which when it came to the ears of Maximilian, (who would never believe it
till it was done, being ever the Principal in deceiving himself, though in this
the French King did very handsomely second it) and tumbling it over and over in
his thoughts, that he should at one blow (with such a double scorn) be
defeated, both of the Marriage of his Daughter, and his own (upon both which he
had fixed high imaginations;) he lost all patience, and casting off the
Respects fit to be continued between great Kings, (even when their blood is
hottest, and most risen) fell to bitter Invectives against the person and
actions of the French King. And (by how much he was the less able to do,
talking so much the more) spoke all the Injuries he could devise of Charles,
saying; That he was the most Perfidious man upon the earth, and that he had
made a Marriage compounded between an Advoutry and a Rape: which was done (he
said) by the just judgment of God; to the end, that (the Nullity thereof being
so apparent to all the World) the Race of so unworthy a person might not reign
in France. And forthwith he sent Ambassadors as well to the King of England as
to the King of Spain, to incite them to War, and to treat a League offensive
against France, promising to concur with great Forces of his own. Hereupon the
King of England (going nevertheless his own way) called a Parliament, it being
the seventh year of his Reign, and the first day of opening thereof, (sitting
under his Cloth of Estate) spoke himself unto his Lords and Commons, in this
manner:

MY Lords, and you the Commons; When I purposed to make a War in Britain by my
Lieutenant, I made declaration thereof to you by my Chancellor. But now that I
mean to make a War upon France in Person, I will declare it to you my Self.
That War, was to defend another man's right, but this is to recever our own;
and that ended by Accident, but we hope this shall end in Victory.

The French King troubles the Christian World. That which he has, is not his
own, and yet he seeks more. He has invested himself of Britain, he
maintains the Rebels in Flanders, and he threatens Italy. For Our Selves, he
has proceeded from Dissimulation to Neglect, and from Neglect to Contumely. He
has assailed our Confederates; he denies our Tribute; in a word, he seeks
War. So did not his Father, but sought Peace at our hands; and so perhaps will
be, when good Counsel or Time shall make him see as much as his Father did.

Meanwhile; let us make his Ambition, our Advantage; and let us not stand upon
a few Crowns of Tribute, or Acknowledgement, but (by the favor of Almighty
GOD) try Our Right for the Crown of France it self; remembering that there has
been a French King Prisoner in England, and a King of England Crowned in
France. Our Confederates are not diminished. Burgundy is in a mightier Hand
than ever, and never more provoked; Britain cannot help us, but it may hurt
them. New Acquests are more Burden, than Strength. The Malcontents of his
own Kingdom have not been Base, Popular, nor Titulary Impostors, but of an
higher nature. The King of Spain (doubt ye not) will (...) with us, not knowing
where the French King's Ambition will stay. Our Holy Father the Pope, likes no
Tramontanes in Italy. But howsoever it be, this matter of Confederates, is
rather to be thought on, than reckoned on. (For God forbid; but England should
be able to get Reason of France, without a Second.

At the Battles of Cressy, Poictiers, Agent-Court, we were of Our selves.
France has much People, and few Soldiers. They have no stable Bands of Foot:
some good Horse they have; but these are Forces, which are least fit for a
Defensive War, where the Actions are in the Assailant's choice. It was our
Discords only, that lost France; and (by the Power of GOD) it is the good Peace
which we now enjoy, that will recover it. GOD has hitherto blessed my Sword. I
have in this time that I have Reigned, weeded out my bad Subjects, and tried my
good. My People and I know one another; which breeds Confidence. And if there
should be any bad Blood left in the Kingdom, an Honorable Foreign War will vent
it, or purify it. In this great Business, let me have your Advice, and Aid. If
any of you were to make his Son Knight; you might have aid of your Tenants by
Law. This concerns the Knighthood and Spurs of the Kingdom, whereof I am
Father; and bound not only to seek to maintain it, but to advance it. But for
matter of Treasure, let it not be taken from the Poorest sort; but from those,
to whom the Benefit of the War may redound. France is no Wilderness: and I,
that profess good husbandry, hope to make the War (after the Beginnings) to pay
it self. Go together in GOD's Name, and lose no time; for I have called this
Parliament wholly for this Cause.

THus spoke the King. But for all this, though he showed great forwardness for
a War, not only to his Parliament and Court, but to his Privy Council likewise,
(except the two Bishops, and a few more) yet nevertheless in his secret
intentions, he had no purpose to go through with any War, upon France. But the
truth was, that he did but traffic with that War, to make his Return in money.
He knew well, that France was now entire, and at unity with it self, and never
so mighty many years before. He saw by the taste that he had of his Forces sent
into Britain, that the French knew well enough how to make War with the
English; by not putting things to the hazard of a Battle, but wearing them by
long Sieges of Towns, and strong fortified Encampings. James the Third of
Scotland, (his true Friend, and Confederate) gone; and James the Fourth (that
had succeeded) wholly at the devotion of France, and ill affected toward him.
As for the Conjunctions of Ferdinando of Spain, and Maximilian; he could make
no foundation upon them: for the one had Power, and not Will; and the other had
Will, and not Power. Besides that, Ferdinando had but newly taken breath, from
the War with the Moors; and merchanded at this time with France, for the
restoring of the Counties of Russignon and Perpignian, oppignorated to the
French. Neither was he out of fear of the Discontents, and ill blood within the
Realm; which having used always to repress and appease in person, he was loath
they should find him at a distance beyond Sea, and engaged in War. Finding
therefore the Inconveniences and Difficulties in the prosecution of a War, he
cast with himself how to compass two things: The one, how by the declaration,
and inchoation of a War, to make his Profit; the other, how to come off from
the War, with saving of his Honor. For Profit, it was to be made two ways;
upon his Subjects for the War, and upon his Enemies for the Peace; like a good
Merchant, that makes his gain, both upon the Commodities Exported, and
Imported back again. For the point of Honor, wherein he might suffer, for
giving over the War; he considered well, that as he could not trust upon the
ayds of Ferdinando and Maximilian for supports of War: so the impuissance of
the one, and the double proceeding of the other, lay fair for him for occasions
to accept of Peace. These things he did wisely foresee, and did as
artificially conduct, whereby all things fell into his lap, as he desired.

For as for the Parliament, it presently took fire, being affectionate (of old)
to the War of France; and desirous afresh to repair the dishonor, they thought
the King sustained by the loss of Britain. Therefore they advised the King
(with great alacrity) to undertake the War of France. And although the
Parliament consisted of the first and second Nobility, (together with principal
Citizens and Townsmen) yet worthily and justly respecting more the People
(whose Deputies they were) than their own private Persons, and finding by the
Lord Chancellor's Speech the King's inclination that way; they consented that
Commissioners should go forth, for the gathering and levying of a Benevolence,
from the more able sort. This Tax (called Benevolence) was devised by Edward
the Fourth, for which he sustained much Envy. It was abolished by Richard the
Third, by Act of Parliament, to ingratiate himself with the people; and it was
now revived by the King, but with consent of Parliament, for so it was not in
the time of King Edward the Fourth. But by this way he raised exceeding great
sums. Insomuch as the City of London (in those days) contributed nine thousand
pounds and better, and that chiefly levied upon the wealthier sort. There is a
Tradition of a Dilemma, that Bishop Morton the Chancellor used, to raise up the
Benevolence to higher Rates; and some called it his Fork, and some his Crotch.
For he had couched an Article in the Instructions to the Commissioners, who
were to levy the Benevolence; That if they met with any that were sparing, they
should tell them, That they must needs have, because they laid up; and if they
were spenders, they must needs have, because it was seen in their port, and
manner of living. So neither kind came amiss.

This Parliament was merely a Parliament of War; for it was in substance, but a
Declaration of War against France and Scotland, with some Statutes conducing
thereunto; As the severe punishing of Mortpayes, and keeping back of Soldiers
Wages in Captains. The like severity for the departure of Soldiers without
license; Strengthening of the Common Law in favor of Protections, for those
that were in the King's service; And the setting the gate open and wide, for
men to Sell or Mortgage their Lands without Fines for Alienation, to furnish
themselves with Money for the War; And lastly, the avoiding of all Scottish-men
out of England. There was also a Statute, for the dispersing of the Standard of
the Exchequer, throughout England; thereby to size Weights and Measures; and
two or three more of less importance.

After the Parliament was broken up (which lasted not long) the King went on
with his Preparations for the War of France; yet neglected not in the mean time
the affairs of Maximilian, for the quieting of Flanders, and restoring him to
his Authority amongst his Subjects. For at that time, the Lord of Ravenstein
being not only a Subject rebelled, but a Servant revolted, (and so much the
more malicious and violent, by the aid of Bruges and Ghent) had taken the Town,
and both the Castles of Sluyce; as we said before.

And having (by the commodity of the Haven) gotten together certain Ships and
Barques, fell to a kind of Pyratical trade; robbing and spoiling, and taking
Prisoners the Ships and Vessels of all Nations, that passed along that Coast,
toward the Mart of Antwerp, or into any part of Brabant, Zealand, or
Friesland; being ever will victualled from Picardy, besides the commodity of
Victuals from Sluyce, and the Country adjacent, and the avails of his own
Prizes. The French assisted him still underhand; and he likewise (as all men
do, that have been of both sides) thought himself not safe, except he depended
upon a third Person.

There was a small Town some two miles from Bruges, toward the Sea, called
Dam; which was a Fort and Approach to Bruges, and had a relation also to Sluyce.
This Town the King of the Romans had attempted often, (not for any worth of the
Town in it self, but because it might choke Bruges, and cut it off from the
Sea) and ever failed. But therewith the Duke of Saxony came down into Flanders,
taking upon him the person of an Umpire, to compose things between Maximilian
and his Subjects; but being (indeed) fast and assured to Maximilian. Upon this
Pretext of Neutrality and Treaty, he repaired to Bruges; desiring the States of
Bruges, to enter peaceably into their Town, with a Retinue of some number of
men of Arms, fit for his Estate, being somewhat the more (as he said) the
better to guard him in a Country, that was up in Arms: and bearing them in
hand, that he was to communicate with them of diverse matters of great
importance, for their good. Which having obtained of them, he sent his
Carriages and Harbingers before him, to provide his Lodging. So that his Men of
War entered the City in good Array, but in peaceable manner, and he followed.
They that went before, enquired still for Inns and Lodgings, as if they would
have rested there all night, and so went on, till they came to the Gate, that
leads directly toward Dam; and they of Bruges only gazed upon them, and gave
them passage. The Captains and inhabitants of Dam also suspected no harm, from
any that passed through Bruges; and discovering Forces a-far-off, supposed they
had been some Succors, that were come from their Friends, knowing some Dangers
toward them. And so perceiving nothing but well, till it was too late,
suffered them to enter their Town. By which kind of Slight, rather than
Stratagem, the Town of Dam was taken, and the Town of Bruges shrewdly blockt
up, whereby they took great discouragement.

The Duke of Saxony having won the Town of Dam, sent immediately to the King,
to let him know that it was Sluyce chiefly, and the Lord Ravenstein, that kept
the Rebellion of Flanders in life; And that if it pleased the King to besiege
it by Sea, he also would besiege it by Land, and so cut out the Core of those
Wars.

The King willing to uphold the Authority of Maximilian, (the better to hold
France in awe) and being likewise sued unto by his Merchants, for that the Seas
were much infested by the Barques of the Lord Ravenstein; sent straightways Sir
Edward Poynings, a valiant man, and of good service, with twelve Ships, well
furnished with Soldiers and Artillery, to clear the Seas, and to besiege Sluyce
on that part. The Englishmen did not only coop up the Lord Ravenstein, that he
stirred not, and likewise hold in strait Siege the Maritim part of the Town;
but also assailed one of the Castles, and renewed the assault so for twenty
days space (issuing still out of their Ships at the Ebb) as they made great
slaughter of them of the Castle; who continually fought with them to repulse
them, though of the English part also were slain a Brother of the Earl of
Oxford's, and some fifty more.

But the Siege still continuing more and more strait, and both the Castles
(which were the principal strength of the Town) being distressed, the one by
the Duke of Saxony, and the other by the English; and a Bridge of boats, which
the Lord Ravenstein had made between both Castles, whereby Succors and Relief
might pass from the one to the other, being on a night set on fire by the
English, he despairing to hold the Town, yielded (at the last) the Castle to
the English, and the Town to the Duke of Saxony, by composition. Which done,
the Duke of Saxony and Sir Edward Poynings treated with them of Bruges, to
submit themselves to Maximilian their Lord; which after some time they did,
paying (in some good part) the Charge of the War, whereby the Almains and
foreln Succors were dismissed. The example of Bruges, other of the Revolted
Towns followed, so that Maximilian grew to be out of danger, but (as his manner
was to handle matters) never out of necessity. And Sir Edward Poynings (after
he had continued at Sluyce some good while, till all things were settled)
returned unto the King, being then before Bulloign.

Somewhat about this time came Letters from Ferdinando, and Isabella, King and
Queen of Spain; signifying the final Conquest of Granada from the Moors; which
action in it self so worthy, King Ferdinando, (whose manner was never to lose
any virtue for the showing) had expressed and displayed in his Letters at
large, with all the particularities, and Religious Puncto's and Ceremonies,
that were observed in the reception of that City and Kingdom: Showing amongst
other things, That the King would not by any means in person enter the City,
until he had first aloof seen the Cross set up upon the greater Tower of
Granada, whereby it became Christian ground: That likewise before he would
enter, he did Homage to God above, pronouncing by an Herald from the height of
that Tower, that he did acknowledge to have recovered that Kingdom, by the help
of God Almighty and the glorious Virgin, and the virtuous Apostle St. James,
and the holy Father Innocent the Eighth, together with the ayds and services of
his Prelates, Nobles and Commons: That yet he stirred not from his Camp, till
he had seen a little Army of Martyrs, to the number of seven hundred and more
Christians (that had lived in bonds and servitude, as Slaves to the Moors) pass
before his Eyes, singing a Psalm for their redemption, and that he had given
Tribute unto God by alms, and relief, extended to them all, for his admission
into the City. These things were in the Letters, with many more Ceremonies of a
kind of Holy Ostentation.

The King ever willing to put himself into the consort or Choir of all
Religious actions, and naturally affecting much the King of Spain, (as far as
one King can affect another) partly for his virtues, and partly for a
counterpoise to France; upon the receipt of these Letters, sent all his Nobles
and Prelates, that were about the Court, together with the Mayor and Aldermen
of London, in great solemnity to the Church of St. Paul's; there to hear a
Declaration from the Lord Chancellor, now Cardinal. When they were assembled,
the Cardinal (standing upon the uppermost step, or half-pace before the Chair;
and all the Nobles, Prelates, and Governors of the City at the foot of the
stairs) made a Speech to them; letting them know, that they were assembled in
that Consecrate place, to sing unto God a New-song; For that (said he) these
many years the Christians have not gained new ground or Territory upon the
Infidels, nor enlarged and set further the Bounds of the Christianworld: But
this is now done, by the prowess and devotion of Ferdinando and Isabella, Kings
of Spain; who have (to their immortal Honor) recovered the great and rich
Kingdom of Granade, and the populous and mighty City of the same name, from the
Moors, having been in possession thereof by the space of seven hundred years
and more. For which, this Assembly and all Christians are to render laud and
thanks unto God, and to celebrate this noble Act of the King of Spain; who in
this is not only Victorious, but Apostolical, in the gaining of new Provinces
to the Christian Faith. And the rather, for that this victory and Conquest is
obtained, without much effusion of blood. Whereby it is to be hoped, that there
shall be gained, not only new Territory, but infinite Souls, to the Church of
Christ; whom the Almighty (as it seems) would have live to be converted.
Herewithal he did relate some of the most memorable particulars of the War and
Victory. And after his Speech ended, the whole assembly went solemnly in
Procession, and Te Deum was sung.

Immediately after the Solemnity, the King kept his May Day at his Palace of
Shein, now Richmond. Where to warm the blood of his Nobility, and Gallants,
against the War, he kept great Triumphs of Justing and Tourney, during all that
Month. In which space it so fell out, that Sir James Parker, and Hugh Vaughan,
(one of the King's Gentlemen-Ushers) having had a controversy touching certain
Arms, that the King at Arms had given Vaughan, were appointed to run some
Courses one against another. And by accident of a faulty Helmet, that Parker
had on, he was stricken into the mouth at the first Course, so that his tongue
was born unto the hinder part of his head, in such sort that he died presently
upon the place. Which because of the Controversy precedent, and the Death that
followed, was accounted among the Vulgar, as a Combat or Trial of Right. The
King, toward the end of this Summer, having put his Forces, wherewith he meant
to invade France, in readiness, (but so as they were not yet met or mustered
together) sent Urswick (now made his Almoner) and Sir John Risley, to
Maximilian; to let him know, that he was in Arms, ready to pass the Seas into
France, and did but expect to hear from him, when and where he did appoint to
join with him, according to his promise made unto him by Countebal, his
Ambassador.

The English Ambassadors, having repaired to Maximilian, did find his power and
promise at a very great distance; he being utterly unprovided of Men, Money,
and Arms, for any such enterprise. For Maximilian, having neither Wing to fly
on (for that his Patrimony of Austria was not in his hands, his Father being
then living: And on the other side, his Matrimonial Territories of Flanders
being partly in Dowre to his Mother-in-law, and partly not serviceable, in
respect of the late Rebellions) was thereby destitute of means to enter into
War. The Ambassadors saw this well, but wisely thought fit to advertise the
King thereof, rather than to return themselves, till the King's further
pleasure were known: The rather, for that Maximilian himself spoke as great, as
ever he did before, and entertained them with dilatory Answers; so as the
formal part of their Embassage might well warrant and require their further
stay. The King hereupon (who doubted as much before, and saw through his
business from the beginning) wrote back to the Ambassadors, commending their
discretion in not returning, and willing them to keep the state wherein they
found Maximilian, as a Secret, till they heard further from him; And mean while
went on with his Voyage Royal for France, suppressing for a time this
Advertisement touching Maximilian's poverty and disability.

By this time, was drawn together a great and puissant Army into the City of
London; in which were Thomas Marquess Dorset, Thomas Earl of Arundel, Thomas
Earl of Derby, George Earl of Shrewsbury, Edmond Earl of Suffolk, Edward Earl
of Devonshire, George Earl of Kent, the Earl of Essex, Thomas Earl of Ormond,
with a great number of Barons, Knights, and principal Gentlemen; and amongst
them, Richard Thomas, much noted for the brave Troops that he brought out of
Wales; the Army rising in the whole to the number of five and twenty thousand
Foot, and sixteen hundred Horse. Over which, the King (constant in his
accustomed trust and employment) made Jasper Duke of Bedford, and John Earl of
Oxford Generals under his own person. The ninth of September, in the eighth
year of his Reign, he departed from Greenwich; toward the Sea, all men
wondering, that he took that season (being so near Winter) to begin the War;
and some thereupon gathering it was a sign that the War would not be long.
Nevertheless, the King gave out the contrary, thus: That he intending not to
make a Summer-business of it, but a resolute War (without term prefixed) until
he recovered France; it skilled not much when he began it: especially having
Calice at his back; where he might winter, if the reason of the War so
required. The sixth of October, he embarked at Sandwich; and the same day took
land at Calice: which was the Rendezvonz, where all his Forces were assigned to
meet. But in this his Journey toward the Seaside (wherein, for the cause that
we shall now speak of, he hovered so much the longer) he had received Letters
from the Lord Cords: who the hotter he was against the English in time of War,
had the more credit in a Negotiation of Peace; and besides was held a man open,
and of good faith. In which Letters there was made an overture of Peace from
the French King, with such Conditions, as were somewhat to the King's taste: but
this was carried at the first with wonderful secrecy. The King was no sooner
come to Calice, but the calm winds of Peace began to blow. For first, the
English Ambassadors returned out of Flanders from Maximilian; and certified the
King, that he was not to hope for any aid from Maximilian, for that he was
altogether improvided. His will was good; but he lacked money. And this was
made known; and spread through the Army. And although the English were
therewithal nothing dismayed; and that it be the manner of Soldiers, upon bad
news to speak the more bravely: yet nevertheless it was a kind of preparative
to a Peace. Instantly in the neck of this (as the King had laid it) came news
that Ferdinando and Isabella, Kings of Spain, had concluded a peace with King
Charles; and that Charles had restored unto them the Counties of Russignon and
Perpignian, which formerly were Mortgaged by John King of Arragon (
Ferdinando's Father) unto France, for three hundred thousand Crowns; which debt
was also, upon this Peace, by Charles clearly released. This came also
handsomely to put on the Peace: both because so potent a Confederate was fallen
off, and because it was a fair example of a Peace bought; so as the King should
not be the sole Merchant in this Peace. Upon these Airs of Peace, the King was
content, that the Bishop of Exceter, and the Lord Daubigny (Governor of
Calice) should give a meeting unto the Lord Cords, for the Treaty of a Peace.
But himself nevertheless, and his Army, the fifteenth of October, removed from
Calice, and in four days march sat him down before Bulloign.

During this Siege of Bulloign (which continued near a Month) there passed no
memorable Action, nor Accident of War: only Sir John Savage, a valiant Captain,
was slain, riding about the Walls of the Town, to take a View. The Town was
both well fortified, and well manned; yet it was distressed, and ready for an
Assault: which if it had been given (as was thought) would have cost much
blood; but yet the Town would have been carried in the end. Mean while, a Peace
was concluded by the Commissioners, to continue for both the Kings Lives. Where
there was no Article of importance; being in effect, rather a Bargain, than a
Treaty. For, all things remained as they were: save that there should be paid
to the King seven hundred forty five thousand Ducats in present, for his
Charges in that Journey; and five and twenty thousand Crowns yearly, for his
Charges sustained in the Ayds of the Britons. For which Annual, though he had
Maximilian bound before for those Charges; yet he counted the alteration of the
Hand, as much as the principal Debt. And besides, it was left somewhat
indefinitely; when it should determine or expire; which made the English esteem
it as a Tribute, carried under fair Terms. And the truth is, it was paid both
to the King, and to his Son King Henry the Eighth, longer than it could
continue upon any computation of Charges. There were also assigned by the
French King, unto all the King's principal Counselors, great Pensions, besides
rich Gifts for the present. Which whether the King did permit, to save his own
Purse from Rewards, or to communicate the Envy of a Business, that was
displeasing to his People, was diversely interpreted; for certainly, the King
had no great fancy to own this Peace. And therefore, a little before it was
concluded, he had underhand procured some of his best Captains, and Men of
War, to advise him to a Peace under their hands, in an earnest manner, in the
nature of a Supplication. But, the truth is, this Peace was welcome to both
Kings. To Charles, for that it assured unto him the possession of Britain, and
freed the enterprise of Naples. To Henry, for that it filled his Coffers; and
that he foresaw at that time a storm of inward troubles coming upon him; which
presently after brake forth. But it gave no less discontent to the Nobility,
and principal persons of the Army; who had many of them sold or engaged their
Estates, upon the hopes of the War. They stuck not to say, That the King cared
not to plume his Nobility and People, to feather himself. And some made
themselves merry with that the King had said in Parliament: That after the War
was once begun, he doubted not but to make it pay it self; saying he had kept
promise.

Having risen from Bulloign, he went to Calice, where he stayed some time. From
whence also he wrote Letters, (which was a Courtesy that he sometimes used) to
the Mayor of London, and Aldermen his Brethren; half bragging, what great sums
he had obtained for the Peace; knowing well, that full Coffers of the King, is
ever good news to London. And better news it would have been, if their
Benevolence had been but a Loan. And upon the seventeenth of December
following, he returned to Westminster, where he kept his Christmas.

Soon after the King's return, he sent the Order of the Garter, to Alphonso
Duke of Calabria, eldest Son to Ferdinando King of Naples; an honor sought by
that Prince, to hold him up in the eyes of the Italians: who, expecting the
Arms of Charles, made great account of the Amity of England, for a Bridle to
France. It was received by Alphonso, with all Ceremony and Pomp that could be
devised; as things use to be carried that are intended for Opinion. It was sent
by Urswick: upon whom the King bestowed this Embassage, to help him, after many
dry Employments.

AT this time the King began again to be haunted with Spirits, by the Magic
and curious Arts of the Lady Margaret: who raised up the Ghost of Richard Duke
of York, second Son to King Edward the Fourth, to walk and vex the King. This
was a finer Counterfeit Stone, than Lambert Simnel, better done, and worn upon
greater hands; being graced after, with the wearing of a King of France, and a
King of Scotland, not of a Duchess of Burgundy only. And for Simnel, there was
not much in him, more than that he was a handsome Boy, and did not shame his
Robes. But this Youth (of whom we are now to speak) was such a Mercurial, as
the like has seldom been known, and could make his own Part, if at any time he
chanced to be out. Wherefore, this being one of the strangest Examples of a
Personation, that ever was in Elder or Latter times; it deserves to be
discovered, and related at the full: Although the King's manner of showing
things, by Pieces and by Dark Lights, has so musfled it, that it has left it
almost as a Mystery to this day.

The Lady Margaret (whom the King's Friends called Juno, because she was to him
as Junb was to Aeneas, stirring both Heaven and Hell, to do him mischief) for a
foundation of her particular Practices against him, did continually, by all
means possible, nourish, maintain, and divulge the flying Opinion, That Richard
Duke of York (second Son to Edward the Fourth) was not murdered in the Tower,
(as was given out) but saved alive; For that those, who were employed in that
barbarous Fact, having destroyed the elder Brother, were stricken with remorse
and compassion toward the younger, and set him privily at liberty, to seek his
Fortune. This Lure she cast abroad, thinking that this Fame and Belief
(together with the fresh Example of Lambert Simnel) would draw at one time, or
other, some Birds to strike upon it. She used likewise a further diligence, not
committing all to Chance. For, she had some secret Espials (like to the Turks
Commissioners for Children of Tribute) to look abroad for handsome and graceful
Youths to make Plantagenets, and Dukes of York. At the last she did light on
one, in whom all things met, as one would wish to serve her turn, for a
Counterfeit of Richard Duke of York.

This was Perkin Warbeck, whose Adventures we shall now describe. For, first,
the years agreed well. Secondly, he was a Youth of fine favor and shape. But
more than that, he had such a crafty and bewitching fashion, both to move Pity,
and to induce Belief, as was like a kind of Fascination, and Enchantment to
those that saw him, or heard him. Thirdly, he had been from his Childhood such
a Wanderer, or (as the King called him) such a Land-loper, as it was extreme
hard to hunt out his Nest and Parents. Neither again could any man, by company
or conversing with him, be able to say or detect well what he was; he did so
flit from place to place. Lastly, there was a Circumstance (which is mentioned
by one that wrote in the same time) that is very likely to have made somewhat
to the matter; which is, That King Edward the Fourth was his Godfather. Which,
as it is somewhat suspicious, for a wanton Prince to become Gossip in so mean a
House; and might make a man think, that he might indeed have in him some base
Blood of the House of York: so at the least (though that were not) it might
give the occasion to the Boy, in being called King Edward's God-son, or perhaps
in sport, King Edward's Son, to entertain such Thoughts into his Head. For,
Tutor he had none, (for ought that appears) as Lambert Simnel had, until he
came unto the Lady Margaret, who instructed him.

Thus therefore it came to pass: There was a Towns-man of Tourney, that had
born Office in that Town, whose name was John Osbeck, a Convert- Jew, married
to Catherine de Faro; whose business drew him, to live for a time with his Wife
at London, in King Edward the Fourth's days. During which time he had a Son by
her: and being known in Court, the King either out of a religious Nobleness,
because he was a Convert, or upon some private acquaintance, did him the Honor,
as to be Godfather to his Child, and named him Peter. But, afterward, proving
a dainty and effeminate Youth, he was commonly called by the diminutive of his
name; Peterkin, or Perkin. For, as for the name of Warbeck, it was given him
when they did but guess at it, before examinations had been taken. But yet he
had been so much talked on by that name, as it stuck by him after his true name
of Osbeck was known. While he was a young Child his Parents returned with him
to Tourney. Then was he placed in a house of a kinsman of his, called John
Stenbeck, at Antwerp: and so roved up and down between Antwerp and Tourney, and
other Towns of Flanders, for a good time; living much in English Company, and
having the English Tongue perfect. In which time, being grown a comely Youth,
he was brought by some of the Espials of the Lady Margaret unto her Presence.
Who viewing him well, and seeing that he had a Face and Personage that would
bear a Noble fortune, and finding him otherwise of a fine Spirit, and winning
Behavior; thought she had now found a curious Piece of Marble, to carve out an
Image of a Duke of York. She kept him by her a great while, but with extreme
secrecy. The while, she instructed him, by many Cabinet-Conferences. First, in
Princely behavior and gesture; teaching him how he should keep State, and yet
with a modest sense of his misfortunes. Then she informed him of all the
circumstances and particulars, that concerned the Person of Richard Duke of
York, which he was to act: Describing unto him the Personages, Lineaments, and
Features of the King and Queen, his pretended Parents; and of his Brother and
Sisters, and diverse others, that were nearest him in his Childhood; together
with all passages, some secret, some common, that were fit for a Child's
memory, until the death of King Edward. Then she added the particulars of the
time, from the King's death, until he and his Brother were committed to the
Tower, as well during the time he was abroad, as while he was in Sanctuary. As
for the times while he was in the Tower, and the manner of his Brother's death;
and his own escape; she knew they were things that a very few could control.
And therefore she taught him, only to tell a smooth and likely Tale of those
matters; warning him not to vary from it. It was agreed likewise between them,
what account he should give of his Peregrination abroad; intermixing many
things which were true, and such as they knew others could testify, for the
credit of the rest: but, still making them to hang together, with the Part he
was to play. She taught him likewise how to avoid sundry captious and tempting
questions which were like to be asked of him. But, in this she found him of
himself so nimble and shifting, as she trusted much to his own wit and
readiness; and therefore labored the less in it. Lastly, she raised his
thoughts with some present rewards, and further promises; setting before him
chiefly the glory, and fortune of a Crown, if things went well; and a sure
refuge to her Court, if the worst should fall. After such time as she thought
he was perfect in his Lesson, she began to cast with her self from what coast
this Blazing star should first appear, and at what time it must be upon the
Horizon of Ireland; for there had the like Meteor strong influence before: the
time of the Apparition to be, when the King should be engaged into a War with
France. But well she knew, that whatsoever should come from her, would be held
suspected. And therefore; if he should go out of Flanders immediately into
Ireland, she might be thought to have some hand in it. And besides, the time
was not yet ripe; for that the two Kings were (...) upon terms of Peace.
Therefore she wheeled about; and to put all suspicion a far off, and loath to
keep him any longer by her, (for that she knew Secrets are not long-lived) she
sent him unknown into Portugal, with the Lady (...), an English Lady, (...)
(...) for Portugal at that time; with some Privado of her own, to have an eye
upon him: and there he was to remain and to expect her further directions. In
the mean time, she omitted not to prepare things for his better welcome, and
accepting, not only in the Kingdom of Ireland, but in the Court of France. He
continued in Portugal about a year; and, by that time, the King of England
called his Parliament (as has been said) and declared open War against France.
Now did the Sign (...), and the (...) was come, under (...) Perkin should
appear. And therefore he was straight sent unto by the Duchess, to go for
Ireland, according to the first designment. In Ireland he did arrive at the
Town of Cork. When he was thither come, his own Tale was, (when he made his
Confession afterward) That the Irish-men, finding him in some good clothes,
came flocking about him, and bare him down, that he was the Duke of Clarence,
that had been there before; and after, that he was Richard the Third's base
Son; and lastly, that he was Richard Duke of York, second Son to Edward the
Fourth: But that he (for his part) renounced all these things, and offered to
swear upon the Holy Evangelists, that he was no such man; till, at last, they
forced it upon him, and bad him fear nothing, and so forth. But the truth is,
that immediately upon his coming into Ireland, he took upon him the said Person
of the Duke of York., and drew unto him Accomplices, and Partakers, by all the
means he could devise: Insomuch, as he wrote his Letters unto the Earl of
Densmond and Kildare, to come in to his Aid, and be of his Party: the Originals
of which Letters are yet extant.

Somewhat before this time, the Duchess had also gained unto her a near Servant
of King Henry's own, one Stephen Frion, his Secretary for the French Tongue; an
active man, but turbulent, and discontented. This Frion had fled over to
Charles the French King, and put himself into his service, at such time as he
began to be in open enmity with the King. Now King Charles, when he understood
of the Person and Attempts of Perkin (ready of himself to embrace all
advantages against the King of England; instigated by Frion, and formerly
prepared by the Lady Margaret,) forthwith dispatched one Lucas, and this Frion,
in the nature of of Ambassadors to Perkin, to advertise him of the King's good
inclination to him, and that he was resolved to aid him, to recover his right
against King Henry, an Usurper of England, and an Enemy of France; and wished
him, to come over unto him at Paris. Perkin thought himself in heaven now, that
he was invited by so great a King, in so honorable a manner; And imparting
unto his Friends in Ireland for their encouragement; how Fortune called him,
and what great hopes he had, sailed presently into France. When he was come to
the Court of France, the King received him with great honor; saluted, and
styled him by the name of the Duke of York; lodged him, and accommodated him in
great State: And the better to give him the representation and the countenance
of a Prince, assigned him a Guard for his Person, whereof the Lord Congreshall
was Captain. The Courtiers likewise (though it be ill mocking with the French)
applied themselves to their King's bent, seeing there was reason of State for
it. At the same time there repaired unto Perkin diverse Englishmen of Quality;
Sir George Nevile, Sir John Tailor, and about one hundred more: and amongst the
rest, this Stephen Frion, of whom we spoke; who followed his fortune both then
and for a long time after, and was indeed his principal Counselor and
Instrument in all his Proceedings. But all this, on the French King's part, was
but a Trick, the better to bow King Henry to Peace. And therefore upon the
first Grain of Incense, that was sacrificed upon the Altar of Peace, at
Bulloign, Perkin was smoaked away. Yet would not the French King deliver him up
to King Henry (as he was labored to do) for his Honors sake, but warned him
away, and dismissed him. And Perkin on his part, was as ready to be gone,
doubting he might be caught up underhand. He therefore took his way into
Flanders, unto the Duchess of Burgundy; pretending, that having been variously
tossed by Fortune, he directed his course thither, as to a safe Harbor: No
ways taking knowledge, that he had ever been there before, but as if that had
been his first address. The Duchess; on the other part, made it as new and
strange to see him: pretending (at the first) that she was taught and made wise
by the example of Lambert Simnel, how she did admit of any Counterfeit stuff;
though even in that (she said) she was not fully satisfied. She pretended at
the first (and that was ever in the presence of others) to pose him and sift
him, thereby to try whether he were indeed the very Duke of York, or no. But,
seeming to receive full satisfaction by his answers, she then feined her self
to be transported with a kind of astonishment, mixed of Joy and Wonder, at his
miraculous deliverance; receiving him, as he were risen from death to life; and
inferring, that God, who had in such wonderful manner preserved him from Death,
did likewise reserve him for some great and prosperous Fortune. As for his
dismission out of France, they interpreted it not, as if he were detected or
neglected for a Counterfeit Deceiver; but contrariwise, that it did show
manifestly unto the World, that he was some Great matter; for that it was his
abandoning, that (in effect) made the Pear: being no more but the sacrificing
of a poor distressed Prince unto the utility and Ambition of two Mighty
Monarchs. Neither was Perkin for his part wanting to himself, either in
gracious and Princely behavior, or in ready and apposite answers, or in
contenting and caressing those that did apply themselves unto him or in pretty
scorn and disdain to those that seemed to doubt of him; but in all things did
notably acquit himself: Insomuch as it was generally believed (as well amongst
great Persons, as amongst the Vulgar) that he was indeed Duke Richard. Nay,
himself, with long and continual counterfeiting, and with often telling a Lie,
was turned by habit almost into the thing he seemed to be, and from a Liar, to
a Believer. The Duchess therefore (as in a case out of doubt) did him all
Princely honor, calling him always by the name of her Nephew, and giving him
the Delicare Title of the White-Rose of England; and appointed him a Guard of
thirty persons, Halberdiers, clad in a party-colored Livery of Murrey and
Blew, to attend his Person. Her Court likewise, and generally the Dutch and
Strangers in their usage toward him, expressed no less respect.

The News hereof came blazing and thundering over into England; that the Duke
of York was sure alive. As for the name of Perkin Warbeck, it was not at that
time come to light, but all the news ran upon the Duke of York; that he had
been entertained in Ireland, bought and sold in France, and was now plainly
avowed, and in great honor in Flanders. These Fames took hold of diverse; in
some upon discontent, in some upon ambition, in some upon levity and desire of
change, and in some few upon conscience and belief, but in most upon
simplicity; and in diverse out of dependence upon some of the better sort, who
did in secret favor and nourish these bruits. And it was not long, ere these
rumors of Novelty, had begotten others of Scandal and Murmur against the King,
and his government; taxing him for a great Taxer of his People, and
discountenancer of his Nobility. The loss of Britain, and the Peace with France
were not forgotten. But chiefly they fell upon the wrong that he did his Queen,
in that he did not reign in her Right. Wherefore they said, that God had now
brought to light a Masculine-Branch of the House of York, that would not be at
his Courtesy, howsoever he did depress his poor Lady. And yet (as it fares in
things which are current with the Multitude, and which they affect) these Fames
grew so general, as the Authors were lost in the generality of Speakers. They
being like running Weeds, that have no certain root; or like Footings up and
down, impossible to be traced. But after a while, these ill Hamors drew to an
head, and settled secretly in some eminent Persons; which were Sir William
Stanley Lord Chamberlain of the King's Household, the Lord Fitz-water, Sir Simon
Mountfort, Sir Thomas Thwaites. These entered into a secret Conspiracy to favor
Duke Richard's Title. Nevertheless none engaged their fortunes in this business
openly, but two; Sir Robert Clifford, and Master William Barley, who sailed
over into Flanders, sent indeed from the Party of the Conspirators here, to
understand the truth of those things that passed there, and not without some
help of moneys from hence; Provisionally to be delivered, if they found and
were satisfied, that there was truth in these pretenses. The person of Sir
Robert Clifford (being a Gentleman of Fame and Family) was extremely welcome to
the Lady Margaret. Who after she had confeernce with him, brought him to the
sight of Perkin, with whom he had often speech and discourse. So that in the
end won either by the Duchess, to affect, or by Perkin to believe, he wrote
back into England, that he knew the Person of Richard Duke of York, as well as
he knew his own; and that this Young Man was undoubtedly he. By this means all
things grew prepared to Revolt and Section here, and the Conspiracy came to
have a Correspondence between Planders and England.

The King on his part was not asleep; but to Arm or levy Forces yet, he thought
would but show fear, and do this Idol too much worship. Nevertheless the Ports
he did shut up, or at least kept a Watch on them, that none should pass to or
fro that was suspected. But for the rest, he chose to work by Counter-mine. His
purposes were two; the one, to lay open the Abuse: the other, to break the knot
of the Conspirators. To detect the Abuse, there were but two ways; the first,
to make it manifest to the world, that the Duke of York was indeed murdered:
the other, to prove, that were he dead or alive, yet Perkin was a Counterfeit.
For the first, thus it stood. There were but four persons that could speak upon
knowledge, to the murder of the Duke of York; Sir James Tirrel, (the
employed-man from King Richard) John Dighton, and Miles Forest, his Servants,
(the two Butchers or Tormentors) and the Priest of the Tower, that buried them.
Of which four, Miles Forest, and the Priest were dead, and there remained
alive only Sir James Tirrel, and John Dighton. These two the King caused to be
committed to the Tower, and examined touching the manner of the Death of the
two Innocent Princes. They agreed both in a Tale, (as the King gave out) to
this effect: That King Richard having directed his Warrant for the putting of
them to death, to Brackenbury the Lieutenant of the Tower, was by him refused.
Whereupon the King directed his Warrant to Sir James Tirrel, to receive the
Keys of the Tower from the Lieutenant (for the space of a night) for the King's
special service. That Sir James Tirrel accordingly repaired to the Tower by
night, attended by his two Servants aforementioned, whom he had chosen for that
purpose. That himself stood at the stair-foot, and sent these two Villains to
execute the murder. That they smothered them in their bed; and that done,
called up their Master to see their naked dead bodies, which they had laid
forth. That they were buried under the Stairs, and some stones cast upon them.
That when the report was made to King Richard, that his will was done, he gave
Sir James Tirrel great thanks, but took exception to the place of their burial,
being too base for them that were King's children. Where upon another night by
the King's Warrant renewed, their bodies were removed by the Priest of the
Tower, and buried by him in some place, which (by means of the Priest's death
soon after) could not be known. Thus much was then delivered abroad, to be the
effect of those Examinations. But the King nevertheless made no use of them in
any of his Declarations; whereby (as it seems) those Examinations left the
business somewhat perplexed. And as for Sir James Tirrel, he was soon after
beheaded in the Tower-yard, for other matters of Treason. But John-Dighton (who
it seems spoke best for the King) was forthwith set at liberty, and was the
principal means of divulging this Tradition. Therefore this kind of proof being
left so naked, the King used the more diligence in the latter, for the tracing
of Perkin. To this purpose, he sent abroad into several parts, and especially
into Flanders, diverse secret and nimble Scouts and Spies; some feigning
themselves to fly over unto Perkin, and to adhere unto him; and some under
other pretenses, to learn, search, and discover all the circumstances and
particulars of Perkin's Parents, Birth, Person, Travels up and down; and in
brief, to have a Journal (as it were) of his life and doings. He furnished
these his employed-men liberally with Money, to draw on and reward
intelligences: giving them also in charge, to advertise continually what they
found, and nevertheless still to go on. And ever as one Advertisement and
Discovery called up another, he employed other new Men, where the Business did
require it. Others he employed in a more special nature and trust, to be his
Pioners in the main Counter-mine. These were directed to insinuate themselves
into the familiarity and confidence of the principal persons of the Party in
Flanders, and so to learn what Associates they had, and Correspondents, either
here in England, or abroad; and how far every one engaged, and what new ones
they meant afterward to try, or board. And as this for the Persons; so for the
Actions themselves, to discover to the Bottom (as they could) the utmost of
Perkin's and the Conspirators their Intentions, Hopes, and Practices. These
latter Best-be-trust-Spies had some of them further instructions, to practice
and draw off the best Friends and Servants of Perkin, by making remonstrance to
them, how weakly his Enterprise and Hopes were built, and with how prudent and
potent a King they had to deal; and to reconcile them to the King, with promise
of Pardon, and good Conditions of Reward, And (above the rest) to assail, sap,
and work into the constancy of Sir Robert Clifford; and to win him, (if they
could) being the man that knew most of their secrets, and who being won away,
would most appall and discourage the rest, and in a manner break the Knot.

There is a strange Tradition; That the King being lost in a Wood of
Suspicions, and not knowing whom to trust, had both intelligence with the
Confessors and Chaplains of diverse great men, and for the better Credit of his
Espials abroad with the contrary side, did use to have them cursed at St. Paul's
(by Name) amongst the Bead-Roll of the King's Enemies, according to the Custom
of those Times. These Espials plied their Charge so roundly; as the King had an
Anatomy of Perkin alive; and was likewise well informed of the particular
correspondent Conspirators in England, and and many other Mysteries were
revealed; and Sir Robert Clifford in especial won to be assured to the King,
and industrious and officious for his service. The King therefore (receiving a
rich Return of his diligence, and great satisfaction touching a number of
Particulars) first divulged and spread abroad the Imposture and juggling of
Perkin's Person and Travels, with the Circumstances thereof, throughout the
Realm. Not by Proclamation (because things were yet in Examination, and so
might receive the more or the less) but by Court-fames, which commonly print
better than printed Proclamations. Then thought he it also time to send an
Embassage unto Archduke Philip, into Flanders, for the abandoning and
dismissing of Perkin. Herein he employed Sir Edward Poynings, and Sir William
Warham, Doctor of the Canon Law. The Archduke was then young, and governed by
his Council: before whom the Ambassadors had audience, and Doctor Warham spoke
in this manner:

MY Lords, the King our Master is very sorry, that England and your Country
here of Flanders having been counted as Man and Wife for so long time, now this
Country of all others should be the Stage, where a base Counterfeit should
play the part of a King of England; not only to his Graces disquiet and
dishonor, but to the scorn and reproach of all Sovereign Princes. To
counterfeit the dead Image of a King in his Coin, is an high Offense by all
Laws: But to counterfeit the living Image of a King in his Person, exceeds
all Falsifications, except it should be that of a Mahomet, or an Antichrist,
that counterfeit Divine Honor. The King has too great an Opinion of this sage
Council, to think that any of you is caught with this Fable, (though way may be
given by you to the passion of some): the thing in it self is so improbable. To
set Testimonies aside of the Death of Duke Richard, which the King has upon
Record, plain and infallible (...) because they may be thought to be in the
King's own Power) let the thing testify for it self. Sense and Reason no Power
can command. Is it possible (trow you) that King Richard should damn his Soul,
and foul his Name with so (...) a Murder, and yet not mend his Case? Or do you
think, that Men of Blood (that were his Instruments) did turn to Pity in the
midst of their Execution? Whereas in cruel and savage Beasts, and Men also,
the first Draught of Blood does yet make them more fierce, and enraged. Do you
not know, that the Bloody Executioners of Tyrants do go to such Errants, with
an Halter about their neck: So that if they perform not, they are sure to die
for it? And do you think, that these men would hazard their own lives, for
sparing another? Admit they should have saved him: What should they have done
with him? Turn him into London-Streets, that the Watchmen or any Passenger
that should light upon him, might carry him before a Justice, and so all come
to light? Or should they have kept him by them secretly? That surely would have
required a great deal of Care, Charge, and continual Fears. But (my Lords) I
labor too much in a clear Business. The King is so wise, and has so good
Friends abroad, as now he knows Duke Perkin from his Cradle. And because he
is a great Prince, if you have any good Poet here, he can help him with Notes
to write his Life; and to parallel him with Lambert Simnel, now the King's
Falconer. And therefore (to speak plainly to your Lordships) it is the
strangest thing in the World, that the Lady Margaret (excuse us, if we name
her, whose Malice to the King is both causlless and endless) should now when
she is old, at the time when other Women give over Childbearing, bring forth
two such Monsters; being not the Births of nine or ten Months, but of many
Years. And whereas other natural Mothers bring forth Children weak, and not
able to help themselves; she brings forth tall Striplings, able soon after
their coming into the World, to bid Battle to mighty Kings. My Lords, we stay
unwillingly upon this Part. We would to God, that Lady would once taste the
Joys, which God Almighty does serve up unto her, in beholding her Niece to
Reign in such Honor, and with so much Royal Issue, which she might be pleased
to account as her own. The Kings Request unto the Archduke, and your Lordships,
might be; That, according to the example of King Charles, who has already
discarded him, you would banish this unworthy Fellow out of your Dominions. But
because the King may justly expect more from an ancient Confederate, than from
a new reconciled Enemy; he makes his Request unto you, to deliver him up into
his hands. Pirates and Impostures of this sort, being fit to be accounted the
Common Enemies of Mankind, and no ways to be protected by the Law of Nations.

After some time of deliberation, the Ambassadors received this short Answer:

THat the Archduke, for the love of King Henry, would in no sort aid or assist
the pretended Duke, but in all things conserve the Amity he had with the King.
But for the Duchess Dowager, she was absolute in the Lands of her Dowry, and
that he could not let her to dispose of her own.

THE King, upon the return of the Ambassadors, was nothing satisfied with this
Answer. For well he knew, that a Patrimonial Dowry carried no part of
Sovereignty, or Command of Forces. Besides, the Ambassadors told him plainly,
that they saw the Duchess had a great Party in the Archduke's Council; and that
howsoever it was carried in a course of connivence, yet the Archduke underhand
gave aid and furtherance to Perkin. Wherefore (partly out of Courage, and
partly out of Policy) the King forthwith banished all Flemings (as well their
Persons, as their Wares) out of his Kingdom; commanding his Subjects likewise
(and by name his Merchants-Adventurers) which had a Resiance in Antwerp, to
return; translating the Mart (which commonly followed the English Cloth) unto
Calice, and embarred also all further Trade for the future. This the King did,
being sensible in point of honor, not to suffer a Pretender to the Crown of
England, to affront him so near at hand, and he to keep terms of Friendship
with the Country where did set up. But he had also a further reach: for that
he knew well, that the Subjects of Flanders drew so great commodity from the
Trade of England, as by this Embargo they would soon wax weary of Perkin, and
that the Tumults of Flanders had been so late and fresh, as it was no time for
the Prince to displease the People. Nevertheless for forms sake, by way of
requital, the Archduke did likewise banish the English out of Flanders; which
in effect was done to his hand.

The King being well advertised, that Perkin did more trust upon Friends and
Partakers within the Realm, than upon foreign Arms, thought it behoved him to
apply the Remedy, where the Disease lay; and to proceed with severity against
some of the principal Conspirators here within the Realm; Thereby to purge the
ill humors in England, and to cool the hopes in Flanders. Wherefore he caused
to be apprehended (almost at an instant) John Ratcliff Lord Fitz-water, Sir
Simon Mountford, Sir Thomas Thwaites, William Daubigney, Robert Ratcliff,
Thomas Chressenor, and Thomas Astwood. All these were arraigned, convicted and
condemned for High Treason, in adhering, and promising aid to Perkin. Of these,
the Lord Fitz-water was conveyed to Calice, and there kept in hold, and in hope
of life, until soon after (either impatient, or betrayed) he dealt with his
Keeper to have escaped, and thereupon was beheaded. But Sir Simon Mountford,
Robert Ratcliff, and William Daubigney were beheaded immediately after their
Condemnation. The rest were pardoned, together with many others, Clerks and
Laics; amongst which were two Dominican Friars, and William Worseley, Dean of
St. Paul's: which latter sort passed Examination, but came not to public Trial.

The Lord Chamberlain at that time was not touched; whether it were, that the
King would not stir too many humors at once, but (after the manner of good
Physicians) purge the Head last; or that Clifford (from whom most of these
Discoveries came) reserved that Piece for his own coming over: signifying only
to the King in the mean time, that he doubted there were some greater ones in
the business, whereof he would give the King further account, when he came to
his presence.

Upon All-hallows-day-even, being now the tenth year of the King's Reign, the
King's second Son Henry was created Duke of York; and as well the Duke, as
diverse others, Noblemen, KnightsBatchelors, and Gentlemen of quality were made
Knights of the Bath, according to the Ceremony. Upon the morrow after
Twelfthday, the King removed from Westminster (where he had kept his Christmas)
to the Tower of London. This he did as soon as he had advertisement, that Sir
Robert Clifford (in whose Bosom or Budget most of Perkin's secrets were laid
up) was come into England. And the place of the Tower was chosen to that end,
that if Clifford should accuse any of the Great-ones, they might without
suspicion, or noise, or sending abroad of Warrants, be presently attached; the
Court and Prison being within the cincture of one Wall. After a day or two, the
King drew unto him a selected Council, and admitted Clifford to his presence;
who first fell down at his feet, and in all humble manner craved the King's
Pardon, which the King then granted, though he were indeed secretly assured of
his life before. Then commanded to tell his knowledge, he did amongst many
others (of himself, not interrogated) appeach Sir William Stanley, the Lord
Chamberlain of the King's Household.

The King seemed to be much amazed at the naming of this Lord, as if he had
heard the news of some strange and fearful Prodigy. To hear a man that had done
him service of so high a nature, as to save his Life, and set the Crown upon
his head; a man, that enjoyed by his favor and advancement, so great a
fortune, both in Honor and Riches; a man, that was tied unto him in so near a
band of Alliance, his Brother having married the King's Mother; and lastly, a
man to whom he had committed the trust of his Person, in making him his
Chamberlain. That this Man, no ways disgraced, no ways discontent, no ways put
in fear, should be false unto him. Clifford was required to say over again, and
again, the Particulars of his Accusation; being warned, that in a matter so
unlikely, and that concerned so great a Servant of the King's, he should not in
any wise go too far. But the King finding that he did sadly, and constantly
(without hesitation or varying, and with those civil Protestations that were
fit) stand to that that he had said, offering to justify it upon his soul and
life; he caused him to be removed. And after he had not a little bemoaned
himself unto his Council there present, gave order that Sir William Stanley
should be restrained in his own Chamber, where he lay before, in the Square
Tower. And the next day he was examined by the Lords. Upon his Examination, he
denied little of that wherewith he was charged, nor endeavored much to excuse
or extenuate his fault. So that (not very wisely) thinking to make his Offense
less by Confession, he made it enough for Condemnation. It was conceived, that
he trusted much to his former Merits, and the interest that his Brother had in
the King. But those helps were over-weighed by diverse things that made against
him, and were predominant in the King's nature and mind. First, an Over-merit;
for convenient Merit, unto which reward may easily reach, does best with Kings.
Next the sense of his Power; for the King thought, that he that could set him
up, was the more dangerous to pull him down. Thirdly, the glimmering of a
Confiscation; for he was the richest Subject for value in the Kingdom: there
being found in his Castle of Holt forty thousand Marks in ready Money, and
Plate, besides Jewels, Household Stuff, Stocks upon his grounds, and other
Personal Estate, exceeding great. And for his Revenue in Land and Fee, it was
three thousand Pounds a year of old-Rent, a great matter in those times.
Lastly, the Nature of the Time; for if the King had been out of fear of his own
Estate, it was not unlike he would have spared his life. But the Cloud of so
great a Rebellion hanging over his head, made him work sure. Wherefore after
some six Weeks distance of time, which the King did honorably interpose, both
to give space to his Brother's Intercession, and to show to the world, that he
had a conflict with himself what he should do; he was arraigned of
High Treason, and condemned, and presently after beheaded.

Yet it is to this day left but in dark memory, both what the Case of this
Noble Person was, for which he suffered; and what likewise was the ground and
cause of his defection, and the alienation of his heart from the King. His Case
was said to be this: That in discourse between Sir Robert Clifford and him, he
had said, That if he were sure, that that young man were King Edward's Son, he
would never bear Arms against him. This Case seems somewhat an hard Case, both
in respect of the Conditional, and in respect of the other words. But for the
Conditional, it seems the Judges of that time (who were Learned men, and the
three chief of them of the Privy Council) thought it was a dangerous thing to
admit Ifs and Ands, to qualify words of Treason; whereby every man might
express his malice, and blanch his danger. And it was like to the Case (in the
following times) of Elizabeth-Barton, the holy Maid of Kent; who had said, That
if King Henry the Eighth did not take Catherine his Wife again, he should be
deprived of his Crown, and dye the death of a Dog. And infinite Cases may be
put of like nature. Which (it seems) the grave Judges taking into
Consideration, would not admit of Treasons upon Condition. And as for the
Positive words, That he would not bear Arms against King Edward's Son, though
the words seem calm, yet it was a plain and direct Overruling of the King's
Title, either by Line of Lancaster, or by Act of Parliament. Which (no doubt)
pierced the King more, than if Stanley had charged his Lance upon him in the
field. For if Stanley would hold that opinion, that a Son of King Edward had
still the better right, he being so principal a person of Authority, and favor
about the King; it was to teach all England to say as much. And therefore (as
those times were) that speech touched the quick. But some Writers do put this
out of doubt; for they say, that Stanley did expressly promise to aid Perkin,
and sent him some help of Treasure.

Now for the Motive of his falling off from the King; It is true, that at
Bosworth-Field the King was be-set, and in a manner enclosed round about by the
Troops of King Richard, and in manifest danger of his life; when this Stanley
was sent by his Brother, with three thousand men to his Rescue, which he
performed so, that King Richard was slain upon the Place. So as the condition
of Mortal men is not capable of a greater benefit, than the King received by
the hands of Stanley; being like the benefit of Christ, at once to Say, and
Crown. For which service the King gave him great gifts, made him his Counselor
and Chamberlain; and (some what contrary to his nature) had winked at the great
Spoils of Bosworth-Field, which came almost wholly to this man's hands, to his
infinite enriching. Yet nevertheless blown up with the conceit of his Merit, he
did not think he had received good Measure from the King, at least not
Pressing-down, and Runningover, as he expected. And his ambition was so
exorbitant, and unbounded, as he became Sultor to the King for the Earldom of
Chester. Which ever being a kind of Appennage to the Principality of Wales
(...) and using to go to the King's Son; his Suit did not only end in a Denial,
but in a Distaste. The King perceiving thereby, that his Desires were
intemperate, and his Cogitations vast, and irregular, and that his former
Benefits were but cheap, and lightly regarded by him. Wherefore the King began
not to brook him well. And as a little Leaven of new Distaste does commonly
sour the whole Lump of former Merits, the King's Wit began now to suggest unto
his Passion, that Stanley, at Bosworth-Field, though he came time enough to
save his life, yet he stayed long enough to endanger it. But yet having no
matter against him, he continued him in his Places, until this his Fall.

After him was made Lord Chamberlain, Giles Lord Dawbeny, a man of great
sufficiency and valor; the more, because he was gentle and moderate.

There was a common Opinion, That Sir Robert Clifford (who now was become the
State-Informer) was from the beginning an Emissary, and Spy of the King's; and
that he fled over into Flanders, with his consent and privity. But this is not
probable; both because he never recovered that degree of Grace, which he had
with the King before his going over: and chiefly, for that the Discovery which
he had made touching the Lord Chamberlain (which was his great Service) grew
not from any thing he learned abroad, for that he knew it well before he went.

These Executions (and especially that of the Lord Chamberlain's, which was the
chief strength of the Party, and by means of Sir Robert Clifford, who was the
most inward man of Trust amongst them) did extremely quail the Design of
Perkin, and his accomplices, as well through Discouragement, as Distrust. So that
they were now (like Sand without Lime) ill bound together; especially as many
as were English: who were at a gaze, looking strange, one upon another, not
knowing who was faithful to their Side; but thinking, that the King (what with
his Baits, and what with his Nets) would draw them all unto him that were any
thing worth. And indeed it came to pass, that diverse came away by the Thread,
sometimes one, and sometimes another, Barley (that was Joynt-Commissioner with
Clifford) did hold out one of the longest, till Perkin was far worn; yet made
his Peace at the length. But the Fall of this Great man, being in so high
Authority and Favor (as was thought) with the King; and the manner of Carriage
of the Business, as if there had been secret Inquisition upon him, for a great
time before, and the Cause for which he suffered, which was little more, than
for saying in effect, That the Title of York was better than the Title of
Lancaster; which was the Case almost of every man (at the least in Opinion;)
was matter of great Terror amongst all the King's Servants and Subjects:
Insomuch, as no man almost thought himself secure; and men durst scarce commune
or talk one with another: but there was a general Diffidence every where. Which
nevertheless made the King rather more Absolute, than more Safe. For, Bleeding
Inwards and shut Vapors strangle soonest, and oppress most.

Hereupon presently came forth Swarms and Volies of Libels (which are the Gusts
of Liberty of Speech restrained, and the Females of Sedition) containing bitter
Invectives, and Slanders against the King, and some of the Council. For the
contriving and dispersing whereof (after great Diligence of Inquiry) five mean
persons were caught, and executed.

Mean while; the King did not neglect Ireland, being the Soil where the
Musbromes and Upstart-Weeds (that spring up in a Night) did chiefly prosper. He
sent therefore from hence (for the better settling of his affairs there)
Commissioners of both Robes: The Prior of Lanthony, to be his Chancellor in
that Kingdom; and Sir Edward Poynings, with a Power of Men, and a Marshal
Commission, together with a Civil Power of his Lieutenant, with a Clause, That
the Earl of Kildare, then Deputy, should obey him. But, the Wild-Irish (who
were the principal Offenders) fled into the Woods and Bogs, after their manner:
and those, that knew themselves guilty, in the Pale, fled to them. So that Sir
Edward Poynings was enforced to make a Wild-Chase upon the Wild-Irish: Where
(in respect of the Mountains and Fastnesses) he did little good. Which (either
out of a suspicious Melancholy upon his bad Success, or the better to save his
service from Disgrace) he would needs impute unto the Comfort, that the Rebels
should receive underhand from the Earl of Kildare; every light suspicion
growing upon the Earl, in respect of the Kildare that was in the Action of
Lambert Simnel, and slain at Stoke-field. Wherefore he caused the Earl to be
apprehended, and sent into England; where, upon Examination, he cleared himself
so well, as he was re-placed in his Government. But, Poynings (the better to
make compensation of the Meagerness of his Service in the Wars, by acts of
Peace) called a Parliament; where was made that memorable Act, which (...) this
day is called Poynings Law, whereby all the Statutes of England were made to be
of force in Ireland. For, before they were not: neither are any now in force in
Ireland, which were made in England since that time; which was the tenth year
of the King.

About this time, began to be discovered in the King that disposition, which,
afterward nourished and whet-on by bad Counselors and Ministers, proved the
Blot of his times; which was, the course he took, to crush Treasure out of his
Subjects Purses, by Forfeitures upon Penal Laws. At this, men did startle the
more at this time, because it appeared plainly to be in the King's Nature, and
not out of his Necessity, he being now in Float for Treasure; For that he had
newly received the Peace-money from France, the Benevolence-money from his
Subjects, and great Casualties upon the Confiscations of the Lord Chamberlain,
and diverse others. The first noted Case of this kind, was that of Sir William
Capel, Alderman of London: Who, upon sundry Penal Laws, was condemned in the
sum of seven and twenty hundred Pounds, and compounded with the King for
sixteen hundred: And yet after, Empson would have cut another Chop out of him,
if the King had not died in the instant.

The Summer following, the King, to comfort his Mother (whom he did always
tenderly love and revere) and to make Demonstration to the World, that the
proceedings against Sir William Stanley (which was imposed upon him by
necessity of State) had not in any degree diminished the affection he bare to
Thomas, his Brother; went in Progress to Latham, to make merry with his Mother,
and the Earl; and lay there diverse days.

During this Progress, Perkin Warbeck finding, that time and temporizing, which
(whilst his practices were covert and wrought well in England) made for him;
did now, when they were discovered and defeated, rather make against him, (for
that when matters once go down the Hill, they stay not without a new force)
resolved to try his adventure in some exploit upon England; hoping still upon
the affections of the Common People toward the House of York. Which body of
Common People he thought was not to be practiced upon, as persons of Quality
are; But, that they only practice upon their affections, was, to set up a
Standard in the field. The Place where he should make his Attempt, he chose to
be the Coast of Kent.

The King by this time was grown to such an height of Reputation for cunning
and Policy, that every Accident and Event, that went well, was laid and imputed
to his foresight, as if he had set it before: As, in this particular of
Perkin's Design upon Kent. For, the world would not believe afterward, but the
King, having secret Intelligence of Perkin's intention for Kent (the better to
draw it on) went of purpose into the North, a-faroff, laying an open side unto
Perkin, to make him come to the close, and so to trip up his heels, having made
sure in Kent beforehand.

But so it was, that Perkin had gathered together a Power of all Nations,
neither in number, not in the hardiness and courage of the Persons,
contemptible; but, in their nature and fortunes, to be feared as well of
Friends as Enemies; being Bankrupts, and many of them Felons, and such as lived
by Rapine. These he put to Sea, and arrived upon the Coast of Sandwich and Deal
in Kent, about July.

There he cast Anchor; and to prove the affections of the People, sent some of
his men to land, making great boast of the Power that was to follow. The
Kentish-men (perceiving that Perkin was not followed by any English of name or
account, and that his forces consisted but of strangers born, and most of them
base People, and Free-booters, fitter to spoil a Coast, than to recover a
Kingdom) resorting unto the principal Gentlemen of the Country, professed
their loyalty to the King, and desired to be directed and commanded for the
best of the King's service. The Gentlemen, entering into Consultation, directed
some forces in good number, to show themselves upon the Coast; and some of them
to make signs, to entice Perkin's Soldiers to land, as if they would join with
them: and some others to appear from some other places, and to make semblance
as if they fled from them; the better to encourage them to land. But, Perkin
(who, by playing the Prince, or else taught by Secretary Frion, had learned
thus much, That People under Command, do use to consult, and after to march in
order; and Rebels contrariwise run upon an Head together in confusion)
considering the delay of time, and observing their orderly, and not tumultuary
Arming, doubted the worst. And therefore the wily Youth would not set one foot
out of his Ship, till he might see things were sure. Wherefore the King's
Forces, perceiving that they could draw on no more than those that were
formerly landed, set upon them, and cut them in pieces, ere they could fly
back to their Ships. In which Skirmish (besides those that fled, and were
slain) there were taken about an hundred and fifty persons. Which, for that the
King thought, that to punish a few for example was Gentleman's play, but for
Rascal-People, they were to be cut off every man, especially in the beginning
of an Enterprise; and likewise for that he saw, that Perkin's Forces would now
consist chiefly of such Rabble and scum of desperate people; he therefore
hanged them all, for the greater terror. They were brought to London, all
railed in Ropes, like a Team of Horses in a Cart; and were executed some of
them at London, and Wapping, and the rest at diverse places upon the Seacoast
of Kent, Sussex, and Norfolk, for Sea-marks, or Light-houses, to teach Perkin's
People to avoid the Coast. The King, being advertised of the landing of the
Rebels, thought to leave his Progress: But, being certified the next day, that
they were partly defeated, and partly fled, he continued his Progress, and sent
Sir Richard Guilford into Kent in message. Who, calling the Country together,
did much commend (from the King) their fidelity, manhood, and well handling of
that service; and gave them all thanks, and (in private) promised Reward to
some particulars.

Upon the sixteenth of November (this being the Eleventh year of the King) was
holden the Serjeants-Feast, at Ely-Place; there being nine Sergeants of that
Call. The King, to honor the Feast, was present with his Queen at the Dinner;
being a Prince, that was ever ready to grace and countenance the Professors of
the Law; having a little of that, That as he governed his Subjects by his Laws,
so he governed his Laws by his Lawyers.

This year also the King entered into League with the Italian Potentates, for
the defense of Italy, against France. For, King Charles had conquered the Realm
of Naples, and lost it again, in a kind of Felicity of a Dream. He passed the
whole length of Italy without resistance: so that it was true which Pope
Alexander was wont to say; That the Frenchmen came into Italy, with (...) in
their hands, to mark up their lodgings, rather than with Swords to fight. He
likewise entered and won, in effect, the whole Kingdom of Naples it self,
without striking stroke. But, presently thereupon, he did commit and multiply
so many Errors, as was too great a task for the best fortune to overcome. He
gave no contentment to the Barons of Naples, of the Faction of the Angeovines;
but, scattered his rewards according to the mercenary appetites of some about
him. He put all Italy upon their Guard, by the seizing and holding of Ostia,
and the protecting of the Liberty of Pisa: which made all men suspect that his
purposes looked further, than his Title of Naples. He fell too soon at
difference with Ludovico Sfortia; who was the man that carried the Keys which
brought him in, and shut him out. He neglected to extinguish some relics of
the War. And lastly, in regard of his easy passage through Italy without
resistance, he entered into an overmuch despising of the Arms of the Italians:
whereby he left the Realm of Naples, at his departure, so much the less
provided. So that not long after his return; the whole Kingdom revolted to
Ferdinando the younger, and the French were quite driven out. Nevertheless,
Charles did make both great threats, and great preparations, to re-enter Italy
once again. Wherefore, at the instance of diverse of the States of Italy (and
especially of Pope Alexander, there was a League concluded, between the said
Pope, Maximilian King of Romans, Henry King of England, Ferdinando and
Isabella, King and Queen of Spain (for so they are constantly placed in the
Original Treaty throughout,) Augustissimo Barbadico, Duke of Venice and
Ludovico Sfortia, Duke of Millan, for the common defense of their Estates.
Wherein though Ferdinando of Naples was not named as principal; yet, no doubt,
the Kingdom of Naples was tacitly included, as a Fee of the Church.

There dyed also this year Cecile, Duchess of York, Mother to King Edward the
Fourth, at her Castle of Barkbamstead, being of extreme years; and who had
lived to see three Princes of her body crowned, and four murdered. She was
buried at Foderingham, by her Husband.

This year also the King called his Parliament: where many Laws were made, of a
more private and vulgar nature, than ought to detain the Reader of an History.
And it may be justly suspected, by the proceedings following, that as the King
did excel in good Commonwealth Laws; so nevertheless he had, in secret, a
design to make use of them, as well for collecting of Treasure, as for
correcting of Manners; and so, meaning thereby to harrow his People, did
accumulate them the rather.

The principal Law, that was made this Parliament, was a Law of a strange
nature: rather just, than legal; and more magnanimous than provident. This Law
did ordain, That no person, that did assist in Arms, or otherwise, the King for
the time being, should after be impeached therefore, or attainted, either by
the course of the Law, or by Act of Parliament: But, if any such Act of
Attainder did happen to be made, it should be void, and of none effect; For
that it was agreeable to reason of Estate, that the Subject should not enquire
of the justness of the King's Title, or Quarrel; and it was agreeable to good
Conscience, (that whatsoever the fortune of the War were) the Subject should
not suffer for his Obedience. The spirit of this Law was wonderful Pious and
Noble: being like in matter of War, unto the spirit of David in matter of
Plague, who said, If I have sinned, strike me; but what have these sheep done?
Neither wanted this Law parts of prudent and deep foresight. For, it did the
better take away occasion, for the People to busy themselves, to pry into the
King's Title for that howsoever it fell, their safety was already provided for.
Besides, it could not but greatly draw unto him, the love and hearts of the
People, because he seemed more careful for them, than for himself. But yet
nevertheless, it did take off from his Party, that great Tie and Spur of
necessity, to fight and go Victors out of the field; considering their lives
and fortunes were put in safety, and protected, whether they stood to it, or
ran away. But the force and obligation of this Law was in it self Illusory, as
to the latter part of it; by a precedent Act of Parliament, to bind or
frustrate a future. For a supreme and absolute Power cannot conclude it self,
neither can that which is in nature revocable be made fixed: no more than if a
man should appoint or declare by his Will, that if he made any Latter Will, it
should be void. And for the Case of the Act of Parliament, there is a notable
President of it in King Henry the Eighth's time: Who, doubting he might dye in
the minority of his Son, procured an Act to pass, That no Statute made during
the minority of the King, should bind him or his Successors, except it were
confirmed by the King under his great Seal, at his full age. But the first Act
that passed in King Edward the Sixth his time, was an Act of Repeal of that
former Act; at which time nevertheless the King was Minor. But things that do
not bind; may satisfy for the time.

There was also made a shoaring or under-propping Act for the Benevolence; to
make the sums which any person had agreed to pay, and nevertheless were not
brought in, to be leviable by course of Law. Which Act did not only bring in
the Arears, but did indeed countenance the whole business, and was pretended to
be made at the desire of those, that had been forward to pay.

This Parliament also was made that good Law, which gave the Attaint upon a
false Verdict between Party and Party, which before was a kind of Evangile,
irremediable. It extends not to causes Capital, as well because they are for
the most part at the King's Suit; as because in them (if they be followed in
Course of Indictment) there passes a double Jury, the Indictors and the
Tryers; and so not Twelve Men, but Four and twenty. But it seems that was not
the only reason; for this reason holds not in the Appeal. But the great
reason was, lest it should tend to the discouragement of Jurors in Cases of
Life and Death; if they should be subject to Suit and Penalty, where the favor
of Life makes against them. It extends not also to any Suit, where the
Demand is under the value of forty Pounds; for that in such Cases of petty
value, it would not quit the Charge, to go about again.

There was another Law made against a branch of Ingratitude in Women, who
having been advanced by their Husbands., or their Husbands Ancestors, should
alien, and thereby seek to defeat the Heirs, or those in Remainder, of the
Lands, whereunto they had been so advanced. The remedy was, by giving power to
the next, to enter for a forfeiture.

There was also enacted that Charitable Law, for the admission of poor Suitors
In Forma Pauperis, without Fee to Counselor, Attorney, or Clerk, whereby poor
men became rather able to vex; than unable to sue. There were diverse other good
Laws made that Parliament, as we said before: but we still observe our manner,
in selecting out those, that are not of a Vulgar nature.

The King this while, though he sat in Parliament, as in full Place, and
seemed to account of the designs of Perkin (who was now returned into Flanders)
but as a May Game; yet having the composition of a wise-King ( Stout without,
and Apprehensive within) had given order for the watching of Beacons upon the
Coasts, and erecting more where they stood too thin; and had a careful eye
where this wandering Cloud would break. But Perkin advised to keep his fire
(which hitherto burned as it were upon green wood) alive, with continual
blowing; Sailed again into Ireland, whence he had formerly departed, rather
upon the hopes France, than upon any unreadiness or discouragement he found in
that People. But in the space of time between the King's Diligence and Poynings
Commission, had so settled things there, as there was nothing left for Perkin,
but the blustering affection of wild and naked people. Wherefore he was advised
by his Council, to seek aid of the King of Scotland; a Prince young, and
valorous, and in good terms with his Nobles and People, and ill affected to
King Henry. At this time also both Maximilian and Charles of France began to
bear no good will to the King. The one being displeased with the King's
Prohibition of Commerce with Flanders; the other holding the King for suspect,
in regard of his late entry into League with the Italians. Wherefore besides
the open Ayds of the Duchess of Burgandy, which did with Sails and Oars put on
and advance Perkin's designs, there wanted not some secret Tides from
Maximilian and Charles, which did further his fortunes. In so much as they,
both by their secret Letters, and Messages, recommended him to the King of
Scotland.

Perkin therefore coming into Scotland upon those hopes, with a well appointed
company, was by the King of Scots (being formerly well prepared) honorably
welcomed, and soon after his arrival admitted to his Presence, in a solemn
manner. For the King received him in State in his Chamber of Presence,
accompanied with diverse of his Nobles. And Perkin well attended, as well with
those that the King had sent before him, as with his own Train, entered the room
where the King was, and coming near to the King, and bowing a little to embrace
him, he retired some paces back, and with a loud voice (that all that were
present might hear him) made his Declaration in this manner:

HIgh and Mighty King, your Grace, and these your Nobles here present, may be
pleased benignly to bow your Ears, to hear the Tragedy of a young Man, that by
right ought to hold in his hand the Ball of a Kingdom; but by Fortune is made
Himself a Ball; tossed from Misery to Misery, and from Place to Place. You see
here before you the Spectacle of a Plantagenet, who has been carried from the
Nursery to the Sanctuary; from the Sanctuary, to the direful Prison; from the
Prison, to the hand of the cruel Tormentor; and from that hand, to the
wide-Wilderness (as I may truly call it) for so the World has been to me. So
that he that is born to a great Kingdom, has not ground to set his foot upon,
more than this where he now stands, by your Princely Favor. Edward the
Fourth, late King of England, (as your Grace cannot but have heard) left two
Sons; Edward, and Richard Duke of York, both very young. Edward, the eldest
succeeded their Father in the Crown, by the name of King Edward the Fifth. But
Richard, Duke of Gloceffer, their unnatural Uncle, first thirsting after the
Kingdom, through Ambition, and afterward thirsting for their Blood, out of
desire to secure himself; employed an Instrument of his (confident to him, as
he thought) to murder them both. But this Man that was employed to execate
that execrable Tragedy, having cruelly slain King Edward the eldest of the two,
was moved partly by Remorse, and partly by some other mean, to save Richard his
Brother; making a Report nevertheless to the Tyrant, that he had performed his
Commandment for both Brethren. This Report was accordingly believed, and
published generally. So that the World has been possessed of an Opinion, that
they both were barbarously made away, though ever Truth has some sparks that
fly abroad, until it appear in due time, as this has had. But Almighty God,
that stopped the mouth of the Lion, and saved little Joas from the Tyranny of
Athaliah, when she massacred the King's Children; and did save Isaac, when the
hand was stretched forth to sacrifice him, preserved the second Brother. For I
my self, that stand here in your presence, am that very Richard, Duke of York,
Brother of that unfortunate Prince, King Edward the Fifth, now the most
rightful surviving Heir-male to that Victorious and most Noble Edward, of that
name the Fourth, late King of England. For the manner of my Escape, it is fit
it should pass in silence, or (at least) in a more secret Relation: for that it
may concern some alive, and the memory of some that are dead. Let it suffice to
think, that I had then a Mother living, a Queen, and one that expected daily
such a Commandment from the Tyrant, for the murdering of her Children. Thus in
my tender age escaping by God's mercy out of London, I was secretly conveyed
over Sea. Where, after a time, the Party that had me in Charge, (upon what new
Fears, change of Mind; or Practice, God knows) suddenly forsook me. Whereby I
was forced to wander abroad, to seek mean Conditions for the sustaining of my
Life. Wherefore distracted between several Passions, the one of fear to be
known, lest the Tyrant should have a new Attempt upon me; the other of Grief
and Disdain to be unknown, and to live in that base and servile manner that I
did; I resolved with my self to expect the Tyrant's death, and then to put my
self into my Sisters hands, who was next Heir to the Crown. But in this season,
it happened one Henry Tidder, Son to Edmond Tidder Earl of Richmond, to come
from France, and enter into the Realm, and by subtle and foul means to obtain
the Crown of the same, which to me rightfully appertained. So that it was but a
change, from Tyrant to Tyrant. This Henry, my extreme and mortal Enemy, so soon
as he had knowledge of my being alive, imagined and wrought all the subtle ways
and means he could, to procure my final Destruction. For my mortal Enemy has
not only falsely surmised me to be a feigned Person, giving me Nicknames, so
abusing the World; but also, to deferr and put me from entry into England, has
offered large sums of Money, to corrupt the Princes and their Ministers, with
whom I have been retained; and made importune Labors to certain Servants about
my Person, to murder or Poison me, and others to forsake and leave my
righteous Quarrel, and to depart from my Service, as Sir Robert Clifford, and
others. So that every man of Reason may well perceive, that Henry, calling
himself King of England, needed not to have bestowed such great sums of
Treasure, nor so to have busied himself with importune and incessant Labor and
Industry, to compass my Death and Ruin, if I had been such a feigned Person.
But the truth of my Cause being so manifest, moved the most Christian King
Charles, and the Lady Duchess Dowager of Burgundy, my most dear Aunt, not only
to acknowledge the truth thereof, but lovingly to assist me. But it seems
that God above (for the good of this whole Island, and the knitting of these
two Kingdoms of England and Scotland in a strait Concord and Amity, by so great
an Obligation) had reserved the placing of me in the Imperial Throne of
England, for the Arms and Succors of your Grace. Neither is it the first time
that a King of Scotland has supported them, that were bereft and spoiled of
the Kingdom of England; as of late (in fresh memory) it was done in the Person
of Henry the Sixth. Wherefore for that your Grace has given clear signs, that
you are in no Noble quality inferior to your Royal Ancestors; I, so distressed
a Prince, was hereby moved to come and put my self into your Royal Hands,
desiring your Assistance to recover my Kingdom of England; promising faithfully
to bear my self toward your Grace no otherwise, than if I were your own
Natural Brother, and will upon the Recovery of mine Inheritance, gratefully do
you all the Pleasure that is in my utmost Power.

AFter Perkin had told his Tale, King James answered bravely and wisely; That
whatsoever he were, he should not repent him of putting himself into his hand.
And from that time forth, though there wanted not some about him, that would
have persuaded him, that all was but an Illusion; yet notwithstanding, either
taken by Perkin's amiable and alluring behavior, or inclining to the
recommendation of the great Princes abroad, or willing to take an occasion of a
War against King Henry, he entertained him in all things, as became the person
of Richard Duke of York; embraced his Quarrel; (and the more to put it out of
doubt, that he took him to be a great Prince, and not a Representation only) he
gave consent that this Duke should take to Wife the Lady Catherine Gordon,
Daughter to Earl Huntley, being a near Kinswoman to the King himself, and a
young Virgin of excellent beauty and virtue.

Not long after, the King of Scots in person, with Perkin in his company,
entered with a great Army (though it consisted chiefly of Borderers, being
raised somewhat suddenly) into Northumberland. And Perkin, for a Perfume before
him as he went, caused to be published a Proclamation of this tenor following,
in the name of Richard Duke of York, true Inheritor of the Crown of England.

The Original of this Proclamation remains with Sir Robert (...), a worthy
Preserver and Treasurer of rare Antiquities: from whose Manuscripts I have had
much light for the furnishing of this Work.
IT has pleased God, who puts down the Mighty from their Seat, and exalts
the Humble, and suffers not the hopes of the Just to perish in the end, to
give Us means at the length, to show Our Selves armed unto Our Lieges and
People of England. But far be it from Us, to intend their hurt and damage, or
to make War upon them, otherwise than to deliver Our Self and them from Tyranny
and Oppression. For, Our mortal Enemy Henry Tidder, a false (...) of the Crown
of England, (which tolls by Natural and Lineal Right appertains) knowing in
his own Heart Our undoubted Right, (We being the very Richard, Duke of York;
younger Son, and now surviving Heir-male of the Noble and Victorious Edward the
Fourth, late King of England) has not only deprived Us of Our Kingdom, but
likewise by all foul and wicked means, sought to betray Us, and bereave Us of
Our Life. Yet if his Tyranny only extended it self to Our Person (although Our
Royal Blood teaches Us to be sensible of Injuries) it should be less to Our
Grief. But this Tidder, who boasts himself to have overthrown a Tyrant, has
ever since his first entrance into his Usurped Reign, put little in practice,
but Tyranny and the feats thereof.

For King Richard Our unnatural Uncle, although desire of Rule did blind him,
yet in his other actions (like a true Plantagenet) was Noble, and loved the
Honor of the Realm, and the Contentment and Comfort of his Nobles and People.
But this Our Mortal Enemy (agreeable to the meanness of his Birth) has trod
under foot the Honor of this Nation; selling Our hest Confederates for Money,
and making Merchandise of the Blood, Estates, and Fortunes of Our Peers and
Subjects, by feigned wars, and dishonorable Peace, only to enrich his Coffers.
Nor unlike has been his hateful Mis-government, and evil Deportments at home.
First, he has (to fortify his false Quarrel) caused diverse Nobles of this Our
Realm (whom he held Suspect, and stood in dread of) to be cruelly murthred; as
Our Cousin Sir William Stanley Lord Chamberlain, Sir Simon Mountfort, Sir
Robert Ratcliff, William Dawbeney, Humphrey Stafford, and many others, besides
such as have dearly bought their Lives with intolerable Ransoms. Some of which
Nobles are now in the Sanctuary. Also he has long kept, and yet keeps in
Prison, Our right entirely beloved Cousin Edward, Son and Heir to Our Uncle
Duke of Clarence, and others; with-bolding from them their rightful
Inheritance, to the intent they should never be of might and power, to aid and
assist Us at Our need, after the duty of their Liegeances. He also married by
compulsion certain of Our Sisters, and also the Sister of Our said Cousin the
Earl of Warwick, and diverse other Ladies of the Royal Blood, unto certain of
his Kinsmen and Friends of simple and low Degree, and putting apart all
well-disposed Nobles, he has none in favor and trust about his Person, but
Bishop Fox, Smith, Bray, Lovel, Oliver King, David Owen, Risley, Turbervile,
Tiler, Cholmley, Empson, James Hobart, John Cut, Garth, Henry Wyat, and such
other Cattiffs and Villains of Birth, which by subtle Inventions and Pilling of
the People, have been the principal Finders, Occasioners, and Counselors of
the Mis-rule and Mischief now reigning in England.

We remembering these Premises, with the great and execrable Offenses daily
committed and done by Our foresaid great Enemy, and his Adherents, in breaking
the Liberties and Franchises of Our Mother the Holy Church, upon pretenses of
Wicked and Heathenish Policy, to the high displeasure of Almighty God; besides
the manifold Treasons, abominable Murders Man-slaughters, Robberies,
Extortions, the daily Pilling of the People, by Disms, Taxes, Tallages,
Benevolences, and other unlawful Impositions, and grievous Exactions, with many
other heinous Effects, to the likely destruction and desolation of the whole
Realm; shall by God's grace, and the help and assistante of the great Lords of
Our Blood, with the counsel of other sad Persons, see that the Commodities of
Our Realm be employed to the most advantage of the same; the intercourse of
Merchandise betwixt Realm and Realm, to be ministered and handled, as shall more
be to the Commonweal and prosperity of Our Subjects; and all such Disms,
Taxes, Tallages, Benevolences, unlawful Impositions, and grievous Exactions, as
be above rehearsed to be fore-done and laid apart, and never from henceforth to
be called upon, but in such cases as Our Noble Progenitors, Kings of England,
have of old time been accustomed to have the aid, succor, and help of their
Subjects and true Liege-men.

And further, We do out of Our Grace and Clemency, hereby as well publish and
promise to all our Subjects Remission and free Pardon of all Bypast Offenses
whatsoever, against Our Person, or Estate, in adhering to Our said Enemy, by
whom (We know well) they have been misled, if they shall within time
convenient submit themselves unto Us. And for such as shall come with the
foremost, to assist Our Righteous Quarrel, We shall make them so far partakers
of Our Princely Favor and Bounty; as shall be highly for the Comfort of them
and theirs, both during their life, and after their death. As also We shall by
all means, which God shall put into Our hands, demean Our selves to give Royal
contentment to all Degrees and Estates of Our People, maintaining the Liberties
of Holy Church in their Entire, preserving the Honors, Privileges, and
Prebeminences of Our Nobles, from contempt or disparagement, according to the
dignity of their Blood. We shall also unyoak. Our People from all heavy
Burdens and Endurances, and confirm Our Cities, Boroughs, and Towns in their
Charters and Freedoms, with enlargement, where it shall be deserved, and in all
points give Our Subjects cause to think, that the blessed and debonair
Government of Our Noble Father King Edward (in his last times) is in Us revived.

And for as much as the putting to death, or taking alive of Our said Mortal
Enemy, may be a mean to stay much effusion of Blood, which otherwise may ensue,
if by Compulsion or fair Promises, he shall draw after him any number of Our
Subjects to resist Us; whith We desire to avoid (though We be certainly
informed, that Our said Enemy is purposed and prepared to fly the Land, having
already made over great masses of the Treasure of Our Crown, the better to
support him in Foreign Parts) We do hereby declare, That whosoever shall take or
distress Our said Enemy (though the Party be of never so mean a Condition) he
shall be by Us rewarded with a Thousand Pound in Money, forthwith to be laid
down to him, and an Hundred Marks by the year of Inheritance; besides that he
may otherwise merit, both toward God and all good People, for the destruction
of such a Tyrant.

Lastly, We do all men to wit; and herein We take also God to witness, That
whereas God has moved the Heart of Our dearest Cousin, the King of Scotland,
to aid Us in Person, in this Our righteous Quarrel; it is altogether without
any Pact or Promise, or so much as demand of any thing, that may prejudice Our
Crown, or Subjects: But contrariwise with promise on Our said Cousin's part,
that whenever he shall find Us in sufficient strength to get the upper hand
of Our Enemy, (which we hope will be very suddenly) he will forthwith peaceably
return into his own Kingdom; contenting himself only with the glory of so
Honorable an Enterprise, and Our true and faithful Love and Amity. Which We
shall ever (by the Grace of Almighty God) so order, as shall be to the great
comfort of both Kingdoms.

BUT Perkin's Proclamation did little edify with the people of England;
neither was he the better welcome for the company he came in. Wherefore the King
of Scotland seeing none came in to Perkin, nor none stirred any where in his
favor, turned his Enterprise into a Rode; and wasted and destroyed the
Country of Northumberland with fire and sword. But hearing that there were
Forces coming against him, and not willing that they should find his men heavy
and laden with booty, he returned into Scotland with great Spoils, deferring
further prosecution, till another time. It is said, that Perkin acting the part
of a Prince handsomely, when he saw the Scottish fell to waste the Country,
came to the the King in a passionate manner, making great lamentation, and
desired, That that might not be the manner of making the War, for that no Crown
was so dear to his mind, as that he desired to purchase it with the blood and
ruin of his Country. Whereunto the King answered half in sport; that he
doubted much, he was careful for that that was none of his, and that he should
be too good a Steward for his Enemy, to save the Country to his use.

By this time, being the Eleventh year of the King, the Interruption of Trade
between the English and the Plemmish, began to pinch the Merchants of both
Nations very sore. Which moved them, by all means they could devise, to affect
and dispose their Savereigns respectively, to open the Intercourse again.
Wherein, time favored them. For the Archduke and his Council began to see,
that Perkin would prove but a Runnagate, and Citizen of the World; and that it
was the part of Children to fall out about Babies. And the King on his part,
after the Attempts upon Kent and Northumberland, began to have the business of
Perkin in less estimation; so as he did not put it to account, in any
Consultation of State. But that that moved him most, was, that being a King
that loved Wealth and Treasure, he could not endure to have Trade sick, nor any
Obstruction to continue in the Gate-vein, which disperseth that blood. And yet
he kept State so far, as first to be sought unto. Wherein the
Merchant-Adventurers likewise, (being a strong Company at that time, and well
under-set with rich men, and good order) did hold out bravely; taking off the
Commodities of the Kingdom, though they lay dead upon their hands for want of
Vent. At the last, Commissioners met at London, to Treat. On the King's part;
Bishop Fox Lord Privy Seal, Viscount Wells; Kendal Prior of St. John's, Warham
Master of the Polls, who began to gain much upon the King's opinion; Urswick,
who was almost ever one; and Risley. On the Arch-Duke's part, the Lord Bevers
his Admiral, the Lord Verunsel President of Flanders, and others. These
concluded a perfect Treaty, both of Amity and Intercourse, between the King and
the Archduke; containing Articles both of State, Commerce, and Free-Fishing.
This is that Treaty, which the Flemings call at this day; Intercursus Magnus;
both because it is more complete, than the precedent Treaties of the Third and
Fourth years of the King: and chiefly to give it a difference from the Treaty
(that followed in the One and twentieth year of the King, which they call
Intercursus Malus. In this Treaty, there was an express Article against the
Reception of the Rebels of either Prince by other; purporting, that if any such
Rebel should be required by the Prince whose Rebel he was, of the Prince
Confederate, that forthwith the Prince Confederate should by Proclamation
command him to avoid the Country. Which if he did not within fifteen days, the
Rebel was to stand proscribed, and put out of Protection. But nevertheless in
this Article, Perkin was not named, neither perhaps contained, because he was
no Rebel. But by this means his wings were clipped off his Followers, that were
English. And it was expressly comprised in the Treaty, that it should extend to
the Territories of the Duchess Dowager. After the Intercourse thus restored,
the English Merchants came again to their Mansion at Antwerp, where they were
received with Procession and great Joy.

The Winter sollowing, being the Twelfth year of his reign, the King called
again his Parliament: Where he did much exaggerate both the Malice, and the
cruel Predatory War lately made by the King of Scotland; That that King, being
in Amity with him, and no ways provoked, should so burn in hatred toward him,
as to drink of the Lees and Dregs of Perkin's Intoxication, who was every where
else detected and discarded. And that when he perceived it was out of his
reach, to do the King any hurt, he had turned his Arms upon unarmed and
unprovided people, to spoil only and depopulate, contrary to the Laws both of
War and Peace: Concluding, that he could neither with Honor, nor with the
safety of his People, to whom he did owe Protection, let pass these wrongs
unrevenged. The Parliament understood him well, and gave him a Subsidy, limited
to the sum of one hundred and twenty thousand Pounds, besides two Fifteens.
For his Wars were always to him as a Mine of Treasure, of a strange kind of
Ore; Iron at the top, and Gold and Silver at the bottom. At this Parliament
(for that there had been so much time spent in making Laws the year before; and
for that it was called purposely in respect of the Scottish War, there were no
Laws made to be remembered. Only there passed a Law, at the Suit of the
Merchant-Adventurers of England, against the Merchant-Adventurers of London,
for Monopolizing and exacting upon the Trade: which it seems they did, a
little to save themselves, after the hard time they had sustained by want of
Trade. But those Innovations were taken away by Parliament.

But it was fatal to the King, to fight for his Money. And though he avoided to
fight with Enemies abroad, yet he was still enforced to fight for it with
Rebels at home. For no sooner began the Subsidy to be levied in Cornwall, but
the people there began to grudge and murmur. The Cornish being a race of men,
stout of stomach, mighty of body and limb, and that lived hardly in a barren
Country, and many of them could (for a need) live under ground, that were
Tinners; they muttered extremely, that it was a thing not to be suffered, that
for a little stir of the Scots, soon blown over, they should be thus grinded to
Powder with Payments: And said, it was for them to pay, that had too much, and
lived idly. But they would eat the bread they got with the sweat of their
brows, and no man should take it from them. And as in the Tides of People once
up, there want not commonly stirting Winds to make them more rough: So this
People did light upon two Ringleaders, or Captains of the Rout. The one was
one Michael Joseph, a Blacksmith or Farrier of Bodmin; a notable talking
Fellow, and no less desirous to be talked of. The other was Thomas Flammocke, a
Lawyer; who, by telling his neighbors commonly upon any occasion, that the Law
was on their side, had gotten great sway amongst them. This man talked
learnedly, and as if he could tell how to make a Rebellion, and never break the
Peace. He told the people, that Subsidies were not to be granted nor levied in
this case; that is, for Wars of Scotland, (for that the Law had provided
another course, by service of Escuage, for those Journies,) much less when all
was quiet, and War was made but a Pretense to poll and pill the People: And
therefore that it was good, they should not stand now like sheep before the
Shearers, but put on Harness, and take Weapons in their hands: Yet to do no
creature hurt; but go and deliver the King a Strong Petition, for the laying
down of those grievous Payments, and for the punishment of those that had given
him that Counsel; to make others beware how they did the like in time to come:
And said, for his part he did not see how they could do the duty of true
Englishmen, and good Liege-men, except they did deliver the King from such
wicked Ones that would destroy both Him and the Country. Their aim was at
Archbishop Morton, and Sir Reginald Bray, who were the King's Skreens in this
Envy.

After that these two, Flammocke and the Blacksmith, had, by joint and several
Pratings, found tokens of consent in the Multitude, they offered themselves to
lead them, until they should hear of better men, to be their Leaders; which
they said would be ere long: Telling them further, that they would be but their
servants, and first in every danger; but doubted not but to make both the
West End and East End of England to meet in so good a Quarrel; and that all
(rightly understood) was but for the King's service. The People, upon these
seditious Instigations, did arm (most of them with Bows, and Arrows, and Bills,
and such other Weapons of rude and Country People) and forthwith under the
Command of their Leaders (which in such cases is ever at pleasure) marched out
of Cornwall, through Devonshire, unto Taunton in Somersetshire, without any
slaughter, violence, or spoil of the Country. At Taunton they killed, in fury,
an officious and eager Commissioner for the Subsidy, whom they called the
Provoct of Perin. Thence they marched to Wells: where the Lord Audley (with
whom their Leaders had; before, some secret Intelligence) a Nobleman of an
ancient Family, but unquiet and popular, and aspiring to Ruin, came-in to
them, and was by them (with great gladness and cries of Joy) accepted as their
General; they being now proud, that they were led by a Nobleman. The Lord
Audley led them on from Wells to Salisbury, and from Salisbury to Winchester.
Thence the foolish people, who (in effect) led their Leaders, had a mind to be
led into Kent; fancying, that the people there would join with them, contrary
to all reason or judgment; considering, the Kentish-men had showed great
Loyalty and Affection to the King so lately before. But the rude People had
heard Flammock say, that Kent was never Conquered, and that they were the
freest People of England. And, upon these vain Noises, they looked for great
matters at their hands, in a cause which they conceited to be for the liberty
of the Subject. But when they were come into Kent, the Country was so well
settled, both by the King's late kind usage toward them, and by the credit and
power of the Earl of Kent, the Lord Abergaveny, and the Lord Cobham, as neither
Gentleman nor Yeoman came-in to their aid; which did much damp and dismay many
of the simpler sort: Insomuch, as diverse of them did secretly fly from the
Army, and went home. But the sturdier sort, and those that were most engaged,
stood by it, and rather waxed Proud, than failed in Hopes and Courage. For as
it did somewhat appall them, that the people came not in to them; so it did no
less encourage them, that the King's Forces had not set upon them, having
marched from the West unto the East of England. Wherefore they kept on their
way, and encamped upon Black Heath, between Greenwich and Eltham; threatening
either to bid Battle to the King, (for now the Seas went higher than to Morton,
and Bray) or to take London within his view, imagining with themselves, there
to find no less Fear, than Wealth.

But to return to the King. When first he heard of this Commotion of the
Cornish-men occasioned by the Subsidy, he was much troubled therewith: Not for
it self, but in regard of the Concurrence of other Dangers, that did hang over
him at that time. For he doubted lest a War from Scotland, a Rebellion from
Cornwall, and the Practices and Conspiracies of Perkin and his Partakers, would
come upon him at once; Knowing well, that it was a dangerous Triplicity to a
Monarchy, to have the Arms of a Foreiner, the Discontents of Subjects, and the
Title of a Pretender, to meet. Nevertheless, the Occasion took him in some part
well provided. For as soon as the Parliament had broken up, the King had
presently raised a puissant Army, to war upon Scotland. And King James of
Scotland likewise, on his part, had made great preparations either for defense,
or for new assailing of England. But as for the King's Forces, they were not
only in preparation, but in readiness presently to set forth, under the Conduct
of Dawbeney, the Lord Chamberlain. But as soon as the King understood of the
Rebellion of Cornwall, he stayed those Forces, retaining them for his own
service and safety. But therewithal he dispatched the Earl of Surrey into the
North, for the defense and strength of those parts, in case the Scots should
stir. But for the course he held toward the Rebels, it was utterly differing
from his former custom, and practice; which was ever full of forwardness and
celerity, to make head against them, or to set upon them as soon as ever they
were in Action. This he was wont to do. But now, besides that he was attempered
by Years, and less in love with Dangers, by the continued Fruition of a Crown;
it was a time when the various appearance to his Thoughts of Perils of several
Natures, and from diverse Parts, did make him judge it his best and surest way,
to keep his Strength together, in the Seat and Center of his Kingdom. According
to the ancient Indian Emblem; in such a swelling Season, To hold the hand upon
the middle of the Bladder, that no side might rise. Besides, there was no
necessity put upon him, to alter this Counsel. For neither did the Rebels spoil
the Country; in which case it had been dishonor to abandon his People:
Neither on the other side, did their Forces gather or increase, which might
hasten him to precipitate and assail them, before they grew too strong. And
lastly, both Reason of Estate and War seemed to agree with this course; For
that Insurrections of base People are commonly more furious in their
Beginnings. And by this means also he had them the more at Vantage, being tired
and harrassed with a long march; and more at Mercy, being cut off far from
their Country, and therefore not able by any sudden flight to get to Retrait,
and to renew the Troubles.

When therefore the Rebels were encamped on Black Heath, upon the Hill, whence
they might behold the City of London, and the fair Valley about it: the King
knowing well, that it stood him upon, by how much the more he had hitherto
protracted the time in not encountering them, by so much the sooner to dispatch
with them, that it might appear to have been no Coldness in foreslowing, but
Wisdom in choosing his time; resolved with all speed to assail them, and yet
with that Providence, and Surety, as should leave little to Venture or Fortune.
And having very great and puissant Forces about him, the better to master all
Events and Accidents, he divided them into three parts. The first was led by
the Earl of Oxford in chief, assisted by the Earls of Essex and Suffolk. These
Noblemen were appointed, with some Cornets of Horses and Bands of Foot, and
good store of Artillery wheeling about to put themselves beyond the Hill, where
the Rebels were encamped; and to beset all the skirts and descents thereof,
except those that lay toward London; whereby to have these Wild Beasts (as it
were) in a Toil. The second part of his Forces (which were those that were to
be most in Action, and upon which he relied most for the Fortune of the Day) he
did assign to be led by the Lord Chamberlain, who was appointed to set upon the
Rebels in Front, from that side which is toward London. The third part of his
Forces (being likewise great and brave Forces) he retained about himself, to be
ready, upon all Events, to restore the Fight, or consummate the Victory; and
mean while, to secure the City. And for that purpose he encamped in Person in
St. George's Fields, putting himself between the City and the Rebels. But the
City of London (specially at the first) upon the near encamping of the Rebels,
was in great Tumult: As it uses to be with wealthy and populous Cities,
(especially those, which, for greatness and fortune, are Queens of their
Regions) who seldom see out of their Windows, or from their Towers, an Army of
Enemies. But that which troubled them most, was the conceit, that they dealt
with a Rout of People, with whom there was no Composition, or Condition, or
orderly Treating, if need were, but likely to be bent altogether upon Rapine
and Spoil. And although they had heard that the Rebels had behaved themselves
quietly and modestly, by the way as they went; yet they doubted much, that
would not last, but rather make them more hungry, and more in appetire, to fall
upon spoil in the end. Wherefore there was great running to and fro of People,
some to the Gates, some to the Walls, some to the Water (...); giving
themselves Alarms, and Panick fears continually. Nevertheless, both Tate the
Lord Mayor, and Shaw, and Haddon, the Sheriffs, did their parts stoutly and
well, in arming and ordering the People. And the King likewise did adjoyn some
Captains of experience in the Wars, to advise and assist the Citizens. But soon
aften, when they understood that the King had so ordered the matter, that the
Rebels must win three Battles, before they could approach the City, and that he
had put his own Person between the Rebels and them, and that the great care was
rather how to impound the Rebels, that none of them might escape, than that any
doubt was made to vanquish them; they grew to be quiet and out of fear. The
rather, for the confidence they reposed (which was not small) in the three
Leaders, Oxford, Essex, and Dawbency; all, men famed and loved amongst the
People. As for Jasper Duke of Bedford, whom the King used to employ with the
first in his Wars, he was then sick, and dyed soon after.

It was the two and twentieth of June, and a Saturday (which was the day of the
week the King fancied) when the Battle was fought; though the King had, by all
the Art he could devise; given out a false Day, as if he prepared to give the
Rebels Battle on the Monday following, the better to find them unprovided, and
in disarray. The Lords, that were appointed to circle the Hill, had some days
before planted themselves (as at the Receipt) in places convenient. In the
afternoon, toward the decline of the day, (which was done, the better to keep
the Rebels in opinion that they should not fight that day) the Lord Dawbeney
marched on toward them, and first beat some Troops of them from
Detford-bridge, where they fought manfully: But being in no great number were
soon driven back, and fled up to their main Army upon the Hill. The Army, at
that time hearing of the approach of the King's Forces, were putting themselves
in Array, not without much Confusion. But neither had they placed upon the
first high-ground toward the Bridge, any Forces to second the Troops below,
that kept the Bridge; neither had they brought forwards their Main-Battel
(which stood in array far into the Heath) near to the ascent of the Hill. So
that the Earl with his Forces mounted the Hill, and recovered the Plain,
without resistance. The Lord Dawbeney charged them with great fury; Insomuch,
as it had like (by accident) to have brandled the Fortune of the Day. For, by
inconsiderate Forwardness in fighting in the head of his Troops, he was taken
by the Rebels; but, immediately rescued, and delivered. The Rebels maintained
the Fight for a small time, and for their Persons showed no want of courage:
but being ill armed, and ill led, and without Horse or (...), they were with no
great difficulty cut in pieces, and put to flight. And for their three Leaders;
the Lord Audley, the Blacksmith, and Flammocke, (as, commonly the Captains of
Commotions are but half-couraged Men) suffered themselves to be taken alive.
The number slain on the Rebels part, were some two thousand men, their Army
amounting (as it is said) unto the number of sixteen thousand. The rest were
(in effect) all taken; for that the Hill, as was said, was encompassed with the
King's Forces round about. On the King's part there dyed about three hundred;
most of them shot with Arrows, which were reported to be of the length of a
Taylor's-yard: So strong and mighty a Bow the Cornish-men were said to draw.

The Victory thus obtained, the King created diverse Bannerets, as well upon
Black Heath, where his Lieutenant had won the Field (whither he rode in Person
to perform the said Creation) as in St. George's Fields, where his own person
had been encamped. And for matter of Liberality, he did (by open Edict) give
the goods of all the Prisoners, unto those that had taken them; either to take
them in Kind, or compound for them as they could. After matter of Honor and
Liberality, followed matter of Severity and Execution. The Lord Audley was led
from Newgate to Tower Hill, in a Paper-Coat painted with his own Arms; the Arms
reversed, the Coat torn, and he at Tower Hill beheaded. Flammocke, and the
Blacksmith were hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburn; The Blacksmith taking
pleasure upon the Hurdle (as it seems by words that he uttered) to think that
he should be famous in aftertimes. The King was once in mind to have sent down
Flammocke, and the Blacksmith, to have been executed in Cornwall, for the more
terror. But, being advertised, that the Country was yet unquiet and boiling,
he thought better not to irritate the People further. All the rest were
pardoned by Proclamation, and to take out their Pardons under Seal, as many as
would: So that, more than the blood drawn in the Field, the King did satisfy
himself with the lives of only three Offenders, for the expiation of this great
Rebellion.

It was a strange thing, to observe the variety and inequality of the King's
Executions and Pardons. And a man would think it, at the first, a kind of
Lottery or Chance. But, looking into it more nearly, one shall find there was
reason for it, much more perhaps than (after so long a distance of time) we can
now discern. In the Kentish Commotion (which was but an handful of men) there
were executed to the number of one hundred and fifty; and, in this so mighty a
Rebellion, but three: Whether it were, that the King put to account the men
that were slain in the field; or that he was not willing to be severe in a
popular cause; or that the harmless behavior of this People (that came from
the West of England, to the East, without mischief almost, or spoil of the
Country) did somewhat mollify him, and move him to compassion; or lastly,
that he made a great difference between People, that did rebel upon Wantonness,
and them that did rebel upon Want.

After the Cornish-men were defeated, there came from Calioe to the King, an
honorable Embassage from the French King, which had arrived at Calice a Month
before, and there was stayed in respect of the troubles; but honorably
entertained and defrayed.

The King, at their first coming, sent unto them, and prayed them to have
patience, till a little Smoke, that was raised in his Country, were over,
which would soon be: Slighting (as his manner was) that openly, which
nevertheless he intended seriously.

This Embassage concerned no great Affair; but only the Prolongation of Days
for payment of Moneys, and some other Particulars of the Frontiers. And it was
(indeed) but a wooing Embassage; with good respects to entertain the King in
good affection: but nothing was done, or handled, to the derogation of the
King's late Treaty with the Italians.

But, during the time that the Cornish-men were in their march toward London,
the King of Scotland (well advertised of all that passed, and knowing himself
sure of War from England, whenever those Stirs were appeased) neglected not
his opportunity; But, thinking the King had his hands full, entered the
Frontiers of England again with an Army, and besieged the Castle of Norham in
Person, with part of his Forces, sending the rest to forage the Country. But
Fox, Bishop of Duresm (a wise man, and one that could see through the Present,
to the Future) doubting as much before, had caused his Castle of Norham to be
strongly fortified, and furnished, with all kind of Munition: And had manned it
likewise, with a very great number of tall Soldiers, more than for the
proportion of the Castle; reckoning rather upon a sharp Assault, than a long
Siege. And for the Country likewise, he had caused the people withdraw their
Cattle and Goods into Fact Places, that were not of easy approach; and sent in
post to the Earl of Surrey (who was not far off, in Yorkshire) to come in
diligence to the Succor. So as the Scottish King both failed of doing good
upon the Castle, and his men had but a catching Harvest of their Spoils. And
when he understood, that the Earl of Surrey was coming on with great Forces, he
returned back into Scotland. The Earl finding the Castle freed, and the Enemy
retired, pursued with all (...) into Scotland; hoping to have overtaken the
Scottish King, and to have given him Battle; But not attaining him in time,
sat down before the Castle of Aton (one of the strongest places, then
esteemed, between Berwick and Edinburgh) which in a small time he took. And
soon after, the Scottish King retiring further into his Country, and the
weather being extraordinary foul and stormy, the Earl returned into England. So
that the Expeditions on both parts were (in effect) but a Castle taken, and a
Castle distressed; not answerable to the puissance of the Forces, nor to the
heat of the Quarrel, nor to the greatness of the Expectation.

Amongst these Troubles, both Civil and External, came into England from Spain
Peter Hialas, some call him Elias, (surely he was the fore runner of the good
Hap, that we enjoy at this day. For his Embassage set the Truce between England
and Scotland; the Truce drew on the Peace; the Peace the Marriage; and the
Marriage the Union of the Kingdoms) a man of great Wisdom, and (as those times
were) not unlearned; sent from Ferdinando and Isabella Kings of Spain unto the
King, to treat a Marriage between Catherine their second Daughter, and Prince
Arthur. This Treaty was by him set in a very good way, and almost brought to
perfection. But it so fell out by the way, that upon some Conference which he
had with the King touching this business, the King (who had a great dexterity
in getting suddenly into the bosom of Ambassadors of foreign Princes, if he
liked the men; Insomuch as he would many times communicate with them of his own
affairs; yea and employ them in his service) fell into speech and discourse
incidently, concerning the ending the Debates and differences with Scotland.
For the King naturally did not love the barren Wars with Scotland, though he
made his profit of the Noise of them. And he wanted not in the Council of
Scotland those that would advise their King to meet him at the halfway, and to
give over the War with England; pretending to be good Patriots, but indeed
favoring the affairs of the King. Only his heart was too great to begin with
Scotland for the motion of Peace. On the other side, he had met with an Allie
of Ferdinando of Arragon, as fit for his turn as could be. For after that King
Ferdinando had; upon assured confidence of the Marriage to succeed, taken upon
him the person of a Fraternal Allie to the King, he would not let (in a Spanish
gravity) to counsel the King in his own affairs. And the King on his part not
being wanting to himself, but making use of every man's humors, made his
advantage of this in such things as he thought either not decent, or not
pleasant to proceed from himself; putting them off, as done by the Counsel of
Ferdinando. Wherefore he was content that Hialas (as in a matter moved and
advised from Hialas himself) should go into Scotland, to treat of a Concord
between the two Kings. Hialas took it upon him: and coming to the Scottish
King, after he had with much Art brought King James to hearken to the more safe
and quiet Counsels, wrote unto the King, that he hoped that Peace would with no
great difficulty cement and close, if he would send some wise and temperate
Counselor of his own, that might treat of the Conditions. Whereupon the King
directed Bishop Fox (who at that time was at his Castle of Norham) to confer
with Hialas, and they both to treat with some Commissioners, deputed from the
Scottish King. The Commissioners on both sides met. But after much dispute upon
the Articles and Conditions of Peace, propounded upon either part, they could
not conclude a Peace. The chief Impediments thereof was the demand of the King,
to have Perkin delivered into his hands, as a reproach to all Kings, and a
person not protected by the Law of Nations. The King of Scotland, on the other
side, peremptorily denied so to do; saying, That he (for his part) was no
competent Judge of Perkin's Title: But that he had received him as a Suppliant,
protected him as a person fled for Refuge, espoused him with his Kinswoman, and
aided him with his Arms, upon the belief that he was a Prince; And therefore
that he could not now with his Honor so unrip, and (in a sort) put a Lie upon
all that he had said and done before, as to deliver him up to his Enemies. The
Bishop likewise (who had certain proud instructions from the King, at the least
in the Front, though there were a pliant clause at the Foot, that remitted all
to the Bishop's discretion, and required him by no means to break off in ill
terms) after that he had failed to obtain the delivery of Perkin, did move a
second point of his Instructions; which was, that the Scottish King would give
the King an Enterview in Person at Newcastle. But this being reported to the
Scottish King, his answer was, That he meant to treat a Peace, and not to go a
begging for it. The Bishop also (according to another Article of his
Instructions) demanded Restitution of the Spoils taken by the Scottish, or
Damages for the same. But the Scottish Commissioners answered; That that was
but as Water spilt upon the ground, which could not be gotten up again; and
that the King's People were better able to bear the loss, than their Master to
(...) it. But in the end (as persons capable of Reason) on both sides they made
a kind of Recess, than a Breach of Treaty, and concluded upon a Truce for some
Months following. But the King of Scotland, though he would not formally
retract his judgment of Perkin, wherein he had engaged himself so far; yet in
his private opinion, upon often speech with the Englishmen, and diverse other
advertisements, began to suspect him for a Counterfeit. Wherefore in a Noble
fashion he called him unto him, and recounted the benefits and favors that he
had done him, in making him his Allie, and in provoking a Mighty and Opulent
King by an Offensive War in his Quarrel, for the space of two years together.
Nay more; that he had refused an Honorable Peace, whereof he had a fair Offer,
if he would have delivered him; and that to keep his promise with him, he had
deeply offended both his Nobles and People, whom he might not hold in any long
discontent. And therefore required him to think of his own Fortunes, and to
choose out some fitter place for his Exile: Telling him withal, that he could
not say, but the English had forsaken him before the Scottish, for that upon
two several Trials, none had declared themselves on his side. But nevertheless
he would make good what he said to him at his first receiving, which was, That
he should not repent him, for putting himself into his hands; For that he would
not cast him off, but help him with Shipping and means, to transport him where
he should desire. Perkin, not descending at all from his Stage-like Greatness,
answered the King in few words; That he saw his time was not yet come; But
whatsoever his Fortunes were, he should both think and speak Honor of the
King. Taking his leave, he would not think on Flanders, doubting it was but
hollow ground for him, since the Treaty of the Archduke concluded the year
before; but took his Lady, and such followers as would not leave him, and
sailed over into Ireland.

This Twelfth year of the King, a little before this time, Pope Alexander (who
loved best those Princes that were furthest off, and with whom he had least to
do) taking very thankfully the King's late entrance into League, for the
defense of Italy, did remunerate him with an Hallowed Sword, and
Cap-of-Maintenance sent by his Nuncio. Pope Innocent had done the like, but it
was not received in that Glory. For the King appointed the Mayor and his
Brethren to meet the Pope's Orator at London Bridge, and all the Streets
between the Bridge-foot and the Palace of St. Paul's (where the King then lay)
were garnished with the Citizens, standing in their Liveries. And the morrow
after (being All-hallows day) the King, attended with many of his Prelates,
Nobles, and principal Courtiers, went in Procession to St. Paul's, and the Cap
and Sword were born before him. And after the Procession, the King himself
remaining seated in the Choir, the Lord Archbishop upon the greece of the
Choir, made a long Oration, setting forth the greatness and Eminency of that
Honor, which the Pope (in these Ornaments and Ensigns of Benediction) had done
the King, and how rarely, and upon what high deserts they used to be bestowed.
And then recited the Kings principal Acts and Merits, which had made him appear
worthy in the eyes of his Holiness of this great Honor.

All this while the Rebellion of Cornwall (whereof we have spoken) seemed to
have no relation to Perkin; save that perhaps Perkin's Proclamation had
stricken upon the right Vein, in promising to lay down Exactions and Payments,
and so had made them now and then have a kind thought on Perkin. But now these
Bubbles by much stirring began to meet, as they use to do upon the top of
Water. The King's lenity (by that time the Cornish Rebels, who were taken and
pardoned, and (as it was said) many of them sold by them that had taken them,
for twelve pence and two shillings a piece, were come down into their Country)
had rather imboldened them, than reclaimed them: Insomuch, as they stuck not to
say to their Neighbors and Contrymen, that The King did well to pardon
them, for that he knew he shouldl eave few Subjects in England, if he hanged
all that were of their mind: And began whetting and inciting one another to
renew the Commotion. Some of the subtilest of them, hearing of Perkin's being
in Ireland, found means to send to him, to let him know, that if he would come
over to them, they would serve him.

When Perkin heard this News, he began to take heart again, and advised upon it
with his Council, which were principally three; Herne a Mercer, that had fled
for Debt; Skeleton a Tailor, and Astley a Scrivener: for Secretary Frion was
gone. These told him, that he was mightily overseen, both when he went into
Kent, and when he went into Scotland. The one being a place so near London, and
under the King's Nose; and the other a Nation so distasted with the People of
England, that if they had loved him never so well, yet they could never have
taken his part in that Company. But if he had been so happy, as to have been in
Cornwall at the first, when the People began to take Arms there, he had been
crowned at Westminster before this time. For, these Kings (as he had now
experience) would sell poor Princes for shoes: But he must rely wholly upon
People; and therefore advised him to sail over with all possible speed into
Cornwall. Which, accordingly he did; having in his Company four small Barques,
with some six score or seven score fighting men. He arrived in September at
Whitsand-Bay; and forthwith came to Bodmin, the Black-smith's Town: Where there
assembled unto him to the number of three thousand men of the rude People.
There he set forth a new Proclamation, stroaking the People with fair Promises,
and humouring them with Invectives against the King and his Government. And; as
it fares with Smoke, that never loses it self till it be at the highest; he
did now before his end raise his Style, intituling himself no more Richard,
Duke of York; but Richard the Fourth, King of England. His Council advised him,
by all means, to make himself Master of some good walled Town; as well to make
his Men find the sweetness of rich Spoils, and to allure to him all loose and
lost People; by like hopes of Booty; as to be a sure Retrait to his Forces, in
case they should have any ill Day, or unlucky Chance in the Field. Wherefore
they took heart to them, and went on, and besieged the City of Exceter, the
principal Town for Strength and Wealth in those Parts.

When they were come before Exceter, they forbear to use any Force at the
first; but made continual Shouts and Outcries, to terrify the Inhabitants.
They did likewise in diverse places call and talk to them from under the Walls,
to join with them, and be of their Party; telling them, that the King would
make them another London, if they would be the first Town that should
acknowledge him. But they had not the wit to send to them, in any orderly
fashion, Agents, or chosen Men, to tempt them, and to treat with them. The
Citizens on their part showed themselves stout and loyal Subjects. Neither was
there so much as any Tumult or Division amongst them: but all prepared
themselves for a valiant Defense, and making good the Town. For, well they saw,
that the Rebels were of no such Number or Power, that they needed to fear them
as yet: and well they hoped, that before their Numbers increased, the King's
Succors would come-in. And, howsoever, they thought it the extremest of Evils,
to put themselves at the mercy of those hungry and disorderly People.
Wherefore, setting all things in good order within the Town, they nevertheless
let down with Cords, from several parts of the Walls privily, several
Messengers (that, if one came to mischance, another might pass-on) which should
advertise the King of the State of the Town, and implore his aid. Perkin also
doubted, that Succors would come ere long; and therefore resolved to use his
utmost Force to assault the Town: And for that purpose, having mounted
Scaling-Ladders in diverse places upon the Walls, made at the same instant an
Attempt to force one of the Gates. But, having no Artillery nor Engines, and
finding that he could do no good by ramming with Logs of Timber, nor by the use
of Iron Bars and Iron Crows, and such other means at hand, he had no way left
him, but to set one of the Gates on fire: which he did. But the Citizens, well
perceiving the Danger, before the Gate could be fully consumed, blocked up the
Gate, and some space about it on the inside, with Fagots and other Fuel: which
they likewise set on fire, and so repulsed fire with fire; And, in the mean
time, raised up Rampires of earth, and cast up deep Trenches, to serve instead
of Wall and Gate. And for the Escalada's, they had so bad success, as the
Rebels were driven from the Walls, with the loss of two hundred men.

The King, when he heard of Perkin's Siege of Exceter, made sport with it, and
said to them that were about him, that The King of Rake-hells was landed in the
West, and that he hoped now to have the honor to see him, which he could never
yet do. And it appeared plainly to those that were about the King, that he was
indeed much joyed with the News of Perkin's being on English ground, where he
could have no retreat by Land; thinking now, that he should be cured of those
privy Stitches, which he had long had about his Heart, and had sometimes broken
his Sleeps in the midst of all his felicity. And, to set all men's hearts on
fire, he did by all possible means let it appear, that those, who should now do
him service to make an end of these troubles, should be no less accepted of
him, than he that came upon the Eleventh Hour, and had the whole Wages of the
Day. Therefore now (like the end of a Play) a great number came upon the Stage
at once. He sent the Lord Chamberlain, and the Lord Brook, and Sir Rice ap
Thomas, with expedite Forces to speed to Exceter, to the Rescue of the Town,
and to spread the Fame of his own following in Person with a Royal Army. The
Earl of Devonshire, and his Son, with the Caroes, and the Fulfords, and other
principal Persons of Devonshire (uncalled from the Court, but hearing that the
King's heart was so much bent upon this Service) made haste with Troops, that
they had raised, to be the first that should succor the City of Exceter, and
prevent the King's Succors. The Duke of Buckingham likewise, with many brave
Gentlemen, put themselves in Arms, not staying either the King's, or the Lord
Chamberlain's coming on, but making a Body of Forces of themselves, the more to
indear their merit, signifying to the King their readiness, and desiring to
know his pleasure. So that according to the Proverb, In the coming down, every
Saint did help.

Perkin, hearing this Thunder of Arms, and Preparations against him from so
many Parts, raised his Siege, and marched to Taunton; beginning already to
squint one eye upon the Crown, and another upon the Sanctuary: Though the
Cornish-men were become, like Metal often fired and quenched, churlish, and
that would sooner break than bow; swearing and vowing not to leave him, till
the uttermost drop of their blood were spilt. He was at his rising from Exceter
between six and seven thousand strong, many having come unto him, after he was
set before Exceter, upon fame of so great an Enterprise, and to partake of the
Spoil; though upon the raising of his Siege, some did slip away. When he was
come near Taunton, he dissembled all fear, and seemed all the day to use
diligence in preparing all things ready to fight. But about midnight, he fled
with threescore Horse to Bewley in the New-Forest, where he and diverse of his
Company registered themselves Sanctuary-men, leaving his Cornish-men to the Four
Winds; But yet thereby easing them of their Vow, and using his wonted
Compassion, Not to be by when his Subjects blood should be spilt. The King, as
soon as he heard of Perkin's Flight, sent presently five hundred Horse to
pursue and apprehend him, before he should get either to the Sea, or to that
same little Island, called a Sanctuary. But they came too late for the latter
of these. Therefore all they could do, was to beset the Sanctuary, and to
maintain a strong Watch about it, till the King's pleasure were further known.
As for the rest of the Rebels, they (being destituted of their head) without
stroke stricken, submitted themselves unto the King's Mercy. And the King, who
commonly drew Blood (as Physicians do) rather to save life, than to spill it,
and was never Cruel, when he was Secure; now he saw the danger was past,
pardoned them all in the end, except some few desperate persons which he
reserved to be Executed, the better to set off his Mercy toward the rest.
There were also sent with all speed some Horse to St. Michael's-Mount in
Cornwall, where the Lady Catherine Gordon was left by her Husband, whom in all
fortunes she entirely loved; adding the virtues of a Wife, to the virtues of
her Sex. The King sent in the greater diligence, not knowing whether she might
be with Child; whereby the business would not have ended in Perkin's person.
When she was brought to the King, it was commonly said, that the King received
her not only with Compassion, but with Affection; Pity giving more Impression
to her excellent Beauty. Wherefore comforting her (to serve as well his Eye as
his Fame) he sent her to his Queen, to remain with her; giving her very
honorable Allowance for the suport of her Estate: which she enjoyed both
during the King's life, and many years after. The name of the White-Rose (which
had been given to her Husband's False-Title) was continued in common speech to
her true Beauty.

The King went forward on his Journey, and made a joyful entrance into Exceter,
where he gave the Citizens great commendations and thanks; and taking the Sword
he wore, from his side, he gave it to the Mayor, and commanded it should be
ever after carried before him. There also he caused to be executed some of the
Ringleaders of the Cornish-men, in sacrifice to the Citizens, whom they had
put in fear, and trouble. At Exceter the King consulted with his Council,
whether he should offer life to Perkin, if he would quit the Sanctuary, and
voluntarily submit himself. The Council were divided in opinion. Some advised
the King to take him out of Sanctuary per-force, and to put him to death, as in
a case of Necessity, which in it self dispenses with Consecrated Places and
things. Wherein they doubted not also, but the King should find the Pope
tractable to ratify his Deed, either by Declaration, or (at least) by
Indulgence. Others were of opinion (since all was now safe, and no further hurt
could be done) that it was not worth the exposing of the King to new Scandal
and Envy. A third sort fell upon the opinion that it was not possible for the
King ever, either to satisfy the World well touching the Imposture, or to
learn out the bottom of the Conspiracy, except by promise of Life and Pardon,
and other fair means, he should get Perkin into his hands. But they did all in
their Preambles much bemoan the King's Case, with a kind of Indignation at his
Fortune; That a Prince of his high Wisdom and Virtue, should have been so long,
and so often exercised and vexed with Idols. But the King said; that it was the
Vexation of God Almighty himself, to be vexed with Idols, and therefore that
that was not to trouble any of his Friends. And that for himself, he always
despised them; but was grieved that they had put his People to such trouble and
misery. But (in Concusion) he leaned to the third opinion, and so sent some to
deal with Perkin. Who seeing himself Prisoner, and destitute of all hopes,
having tried Princes and People, Great and Small, and found all either false,
faint or unfortunate, did gladly accept of the Condition. The King did also
(while he was at Exceter) appoint the Lord Darcy, and others, Commissioners,
for the fining of all such, as were of any value, or had any hand or partaking
in the aid or comfort of Perkin or the Cornish-men, either in the Field or in
the Flight.

These Commissioners proceeded with such strictness and severity, as did much
obscure the King's mercy in sparing of Blood, with the bleeding of so much
Treasure. Perkin was brought unto the King's Court, but not to the King's
presence; though the King (to satisfy his Curiosity) saw him sometimes out of
a window, or in passage. He was in show at liberty, but guarded with all care
and watch that was possible, and willed to follow the King to London. But from
his first appearance upon the Stage, in his new person of a Sycophant or
Jugler, instead of his former person of a Prince, all men may think how he was
exposed to the derision, not only of the Courtiers, but also of the
Common People who flocked about him as he went along; that one might know
a-far-off, where the Owl was by the Flight of Birds. Some mocking, some
wondering, some cursing, some prying and picking matter out of his Countenance
and Gesture, to talk of. So that the false Honor and Respects which he had so
long enjoyed, was plentifully repayed in Scorn and Contempt. As soon as he was
come to London, the King gave also the City the solace of this May Game. For he
was conveyed leisurely on Horseback (but not in any ignominious fashion)
through Cheapside, and Cornwill, to the Tower; and from thence back again unto
Westminster, with the Churm of a thousand taunts and reproaches. But to amend
the Show, there followed a little distance of Perkin, an inward Counselor of
his, one that had been SerjeantFarrier to the King. This Fellow when Perkin
took Sanctuary, chose rather to take an Holy Habit than an Holy Place, and clad
himself like an Hermit, and in that weed wandered about the Country, till he
was discovered, and taken. But this Man was bound hand and foot upon the Horse,
and came not back with Perkin, but was left at the Tower, and within few days
after Executed. Soon after, now that Perkin could tell better what himself was,
he was diligently examined; and after his Confession taken, an Extract was made
of such parts of them as were thought fit to be divulged, which was Printed and
dispersed abroad. Wherein the King did himself no Right. For as there was a
labored Tale of particulars, of Perkin's Father, and Mother, and Grandsire,
and Grandmother, and Uncles, and Cousins, by Names and Sirnames, and from what
places he traveled up and down; so there was little or nothing to purpose of
any thing concerning his Designs, or any Practices that had been held with him;
nor the Duchess of Burgundy her self (that all the World did take knowledge of,
as the Person that had put Life and Being into the whole Business) so much as
named or pointed at. So that men missing of that they looked for, looked about
for they knew not what, and were in more doubt than before. But the King chose
rather not to satisfy, than to kindle Coals. At that time also it did not
appear by any new Examinations or Commitments, that any other Person of quality
was discovered or appeached, though the King's closeness made that a
DoubtDormant.

About this time, a great Fire in the night time suddenly began at the King's
Palace of Sheyn, near unto the King's own Lodgings, whereby a great part of the
building was consumed, with much costly Household Stuff; which gave the King
occasion of Building from the ground that fine Pile of Richmond, which is now
standing.

Somewhat before this time also, there fell out a memorable Accident. There was
one Sebastian Gabato, a Venetian, dwelling in Bristow, a man seen and expert in
Cosmography and Navigation. This man seeing the success, and emulating perhaps
the enterprise of Christopherus Columbus in that fortunate discovery toward
the South-west, which had been by him made some six years before; conceited
with himself, that Lands might likewise be discovered toward the North-west.
And surely it may be he had more firm and pregnant Conjectures of it, than
Columbus had of this at the first. For the two great Islands of the Old and New
World, being (in the shape and making of them) broad toward the North, and
pointed toward the South; it is likely, that the discovery first began where
the Lands did nearest meet. And there had been before that time a discovery of
some Lands, which they took to be Islands, and were indeed the Continent of
America, toward the North-west. And it may be, that some Relation of this
nature coming afterward to the knowledge of Columbus, and by him suppressed,
(desirous rather to make his Enterprise the Child of his Science and Fortune,
than the Follower of a former Discovery) did give him better assurance that all
was not Sea, from the West of Europe and Africa unto Asia, than either Seneca's
Prophecy, or Plato's Antiquities, or the Nature of the Tides, and Land-winds,
and the like, which were the Conjectures that were given out, whereupon he
should have relied. Though I am not ignorant, that it was likewise laid unto
the casual and wind-beaten Discovery (a little before) of a Spanish Pilot, who
dyed in the house of Columbus. But this Gabato bearing the King in hand, that
he would find out an Island endued with rich Commodities, procured him to man
and victual a Ship at Bristow, for the discovery of that Island; With whom
ventured also three small Ships of London-Merchants, fraught with some gross
and slight Wares, fit for Commerce with barbarous people. He sailed (as he
affirmed at his return, and made a Card thereof) very far Westwards, with a
Quarter of the North, on the North-side of Tierra de Labrador, until he came to
the Latitude of sixty seven Degrees and an half, finding the Seas still open.
It is certain also, that the King's Fortune had a tender of that great Empire
of the West Indies. Neither was it a Refusal on the King's part, but a Delay by
accident, that put by so great an Acquest. For Christopherus Columbus refused
by the King of Portugal (who would not embrace at once both East and West)
employed his Brother Bartholomaus Columbus unto King Henry, to negotiate for
his Discovery. And it so fortuned, that he was taken by Pirates at Sea, by
which accidental impediment he was long ere he came to the King. So long, that
before he had obtained a Capitulation with the King for his Brother; the
Enterprise by him was achieved, and so the West Indies by Providence were then
reserved for the Crown of Castilia. Yet this sharpened the King so, that not
only in this Voyage, but again in the Sixteenth year of his Reign, and likewise
in the Eighteenth thereof, he granted forth new Commissions, for the Discovery
and investing of unknown Lands.

In this Fourteenth year also (by God's wonderful providence, that boweth
things unto his will, and hangs great Weights upon small Wires) there fell
out a trifling and untoward Accident that drew on great and happy effects.
During the Truce with Scotland, there were certain Scottish young Gentleman,
that came into Norham Town, and there made merry with some of the English of
the Town. And having little to do, went sometimes forth, and would stand
looking upon the Castle. Some of the Garrison of the Castle, observing this
their doing twice or thrice, and having not their minds purged of the late ill
blood of Hostility, either suspected them, or quarrelled them for Spies.
Whereupon they fell at ill Words, and from Words to Blows; so that many were
wounded of either side, and the Scottish-men (being strangers in the Town) had
the worst. In so much as some of them were slain, and the rest made haste home.
The matter being complained on, and often debated before the Wardens of the
Marches of both sides, and no good order taken, the King of Scotland took it to
himself, and being much kindled, sent a Herald to the King to make
Protestation, That if Reparation were not done, according to the Conditions of
the Truce, his King did denounce War. The King (who had often tried Fortune,
and was inclined to Peace) made answer; That what had been done, was utterly
against his will, and without his Privity. But if the Garrison-Souldiers had
been in fault, he would see them punished, and the Truce in all points to be
preserved. But this answer seemed to the Scottish King but a delay, to make the
complaint breathe out with time; and therefore it did rather exaspetare him,
than satisfy him. Bishop Fox, understanding from the King, that the Scottish
King was still discontent and impatient, being troubled that the occasion of
breaking of the Truce should grow from his men, sent many humble and
deprecatory Letters to the Scottish King to appease him. Whereupon King James,
mollified by the Bishop's submiss and eloquent Letters, wrote back unto him;
That though he were in part moved by his Letters, yet he should not be fully
satisfied, except he spoke with him; as well about the compounding of the
present differences, as about other matters that might concern the good of both
Kingdoms. The Bishop advising first with the King, took his Journey for
Scotland. The meeting was at Metross, an Abbey of the Cestercians; where the
King then abode. The King first roundly uttered unto the Bishop his offense
conceived for the insolent Breach of Truce, by his men of Norham Castle.
Whereunto Bishop Fox made such an humble and smooth answer, as it was like Oil
into the wound, whereby it began to heal. And this was done in the presence of
the King and his Council. After, the King spoke with the Bishop apart, and
opened himself unto him, saying; That these temporary Truces and Peaces were
soon made, and soon broken: But that he desired a straiter Amity with the King
of England, discovering his mind; that if the King would give him in Marriage,
the Lady Margaret, his eldest Daughter, That indeed might be a Knot
indissoluble. That he knew well what Place and Authority the Bishop deservedly
had with his Master. Therefore, if he would take the business to heart, and
deal in it effectually, he doubted not but it would succeed well. The Bishop
answered soberly, that he thought himself rather happy, than worthy, to be an
instrument in such a matter; but would do his best endeavor. Wherefore the
Bishop returning to the King, and giving account what had passed, and finding
the King more than well disposed in it, gave the King advice; first to proceed
to a Conclusion of Peace, and then to go on with the Treaty of Marriage, by
degrees. Hereupon a Peace was concluded, which was published a little before
Christmas in the Fourteenth year of the King's Reign to continue for both the
Kings lives, and the overliver of them, and a year after. In this Peace there
was an Article contained, that no Englishman should enter into Scotland, and
no Scottish-man into England, without Letters Commendatory from the Kings of
either Nation. This at the first sight might seem a means to continue a
strangeness between the Nations; but it was done, to lock in the Borderers.

This year there was also born to the King a third Son, who was christened by
the name of Edmund, and shortly after dyed. And much about the same time came
news of the death of Charles the French King; For whom there were celebrated
Solemn and Princely Obsequies.

It was not long, but Perkin (who was made of Quicksilver, which is hard to
hold or imprison) began to stir. For deceiving his Keepers, he took him to his
heels, and made speed to the Seacoasts. But presently all Corners were laid for
him, and such diligent pursuit and search made, as he was fain to turn back,
and get him to the house of Bethleem, called the Priory of Shine, (which had
the privilege of a Sanctuary) and put himself into the hands of the Prior of
that Monastery. The Prior was thought an Holy Man, and much reverenced in those
days. He came to the King, and besought the King for Perkin's life only,
leaving him otherwise to the Kings discretion. Many about the King were again
more hot than ever, to have the King take him forth, and hang him. But the King
(that had an high stomach, and could not hate any that he despised) bid, Take
him forth, and set the Knave in the stocks. And so promising the Prior his
life, he caused him to be brought forth. And within two or three days after,
upon a (...) fold, set up in the Palace-Court at Westminster, he was (...) and
set in the Stocks, for the whole day. And the next (...) after, the like was
done by him at the Cross in Cheapside (...) in both places he read his
Confession, of which we made (...) before; and was from Cheapside conveyed and
laid up (...) the Tower. Notwithstanding all this, the King was (as (...)
partly touched before) grown to be such a Partner with (...), as no body could
tell what Actions the one, and what (...) other owned. For it was believed
generally that Perkin was betrayed, and that this Escape was not without the
King's privity, who had him all the time of his Flight in a Line; and that the
King did this, to pick a Quarrel to him to put him to death, and to be rid of
him at once. But this is not probable. For that the same Instruments who
observed him in his Flight, might have kept him from getting into Sanctuary.

But it was ordained, that this Winding-Ivy of a Plantagenet, should kill the
true Tree it self. For Perkin, after he had been a while in the Tower, began to
insinuate himself into the favor and kindness of his Keepers, Servants to the
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir John Digby, being four in number; Strangways,
Blewet, Astwood, and Long-Roger. These Varlets, with mountains of promises, he
sought to corrupt, to obtain his Escape. But knowing well, that his own
Fortunes were made so contemptible, as he could feed no man's Hopes (and by
Hopes he must work, for Rewards he had none) he had contrived with himself a
vast and tragical Plot, which was, to draw into his Company Edward Plantagenet
Earl of Warwick, then Prisoner in the Tower; whom the weary life of a long
Imprisonment, and the often and renewing Fears of being put to Death, had
softened to take any impression of counsel for his Liberty. This young Prince he
thought these Servants would look upon, though not upon himself. And therefore
after that by some Message by one or two of them, he had tasted of the Earl's
consent; it was agreed that these four should murder their Master the
Lieutenant, secretly in the night, and make their best of such Money and
portable Goods of his, as they should find ready at hand, and get the Keys of
the Tower, and presently let forth Perkin and the Earl. But this Conspiracy was
revealed in time, before it could be executed. And in this again the Opinion of
the King's great Wisdom did surcharge him with a sinister Fame, that Perkin was
but his Bait, to entrap the Earl of Warwick. And in the very instant while this
Conspiracy was in working (as if that also had been the King's industry) it was
fatal, that there should break forth a counterfeit Earl of Warwick, a
Cordwainer's Son, whose name was Ralph Wilford; a young man, taught and set on
by an Augustine Friar, called Patrick. They both from the parts of Suffolk, came
forwards into Kent, where they did not only privily and underhand give out,
that this Wilford was the true Earl of Warwick; but also the Friar finding some
light Credence in the People, took the boldness in the Pulpit to declare as
much, and to incite the People to come in to his aid. Whereupon they were both
presently (...), and the young fellow executed, and the Friar condemned (...)
perpetual Imprisonment. This also happening so opportunely, to (...) the danger
to the King's Estate, from the Earl of Warwick, and thereby to color the
King's severity that followed, together (...) the madness of the Friar, so
vainly and desperately to divulge a Treason, before it had gotten any manner of
strength; and the saving of the Frier's life, which nevertheless was (indeed)
but the privilege of his Order; and the Pity in the common People (which if it
run in a strong Stream, does ever cast up Scandal and Envy) made it generally
rather talked, than believed, that all was but the King's device. But howsoever
it were, hereupon Perkin (that had offended against Grace now the third time)
was at the last proceeded with, and by Commissioners of Oyer and Determiner,
arraigned at Westminster, upon diverse Treasons committed and perpetrated after
his coming on land within this Kingdom (for so the Judges advised, for that he
was a Poreiner) and condemned, and a few days after executed at Tyburn. Where
he did again openly read his Confession, and take it upon his Death to be true.
This was the end of this little Cockatrice of a King, that was able to destroy
those that did not espy him first. It was one of the longest Plays of that
kind, that has been in memory; and might perhaps have had another end, if he
had not met with a King both wise, stout and fortunate.

As for Perkin's three Counselors, they had registered themselves Sanctuary-men
when their Master did. And whether upon Pardon obtained, or continuance within
the Privilege, they came not to be proceeded with.

There was executed with Perkin the Mayor of Cork, and his Son, who had been
principal Abettors of his Treasons. And soon after were likewise condemned
eight other Persons, about the TowerConspiracy, whereof four were the
Lieutenant's men. But of those eight but two were executed. And immediately
after was arraigned before the Earl of Oxford (then for the time High-Steward
of England) the poor Prince the Earl of Warwick; not for the Attempt to escape
simply (for that was not acted; And besides, the Imprisonment not being for
Treason, the Escape by Law could not be Treason) but for conspiring with Perkin
to raise sedition, and to destroy the King. And the Earl confessing the
Indictment had Judgment, and was shortly after beheaded on Tower Hill.

This was also the end not only of this Noble and Commiserable person Edward
the Earl of Warwick, eldest Son to the Duke of Clarence, but likewise of the
Line-Male of the Plantagenets, which had flourished in great Royalty and
Renown, from the time of the famous King of England King Henry the Second.
Howbeit it was a Race often dipped in their own Blood. It has remained since
only transplanted into other Names, as well of the Imperial-Line, as of other
Noble Houses. But it was neither guilt of Crime, nor reason of Estate, that
could quench the Envy that was upon the King for this Execution. So that he
thought good to export it out of the Land, and to lay it upon his new (...)
Ferdinando King of Spain. For these two Kings understanding one another at half
a word, so it was, that there were Letters showed out of Spain, whereby in the
passages concerning the Treaty of the Marriage, Ferdinando had written to the
King in plain terms, that he saw no assurance of his Succession, as long as the
Earl of Warwick lived; and that he was loath to send his Daughter to Troubles
and Dangers. But hereby, as the King did in some part remove the Envy from
himself; so he did not observe, that he did withal bring a kind of Malediction
and Infausting upon the Marriage, as an ill Prognostic. Which in event so far
proved true, as both Prince Arthur enjoyed a very small time after the
Marriage, and the Lady Katherine, her self (a sad and a religious woman) long
after, when King Henry the Eighth his resolution of a Divorce from her was
first made known to her, used some words; That she had not offended: but it was
a Judgment of God, for that her former Marriage was made in blood; meaning that
of the Earl of Warwick.

This Fifteenth year of the King there was a great Plague, both in London, and
in diverse parts of the Kingdom. Wherefore the King after often change of Places
(whether to avoid the danger of the Sickness, or to give occasion of an
Enterview with the ArchDuke, or both) sailed over with his Queen to Calice.
Upon his coming thither, the Archduke sent an honorable Embassage unto him,
as well to welcome him into those parts, as to let him know, that (if it pleased
him) he would come and do him reverence. But it was said withal; That the King
might be pleased to appoint some place, that were out of any Walled Town or
Fortress, for that he had denied the same upon like occasion to the French
King. And though he said, he made a great difference between the two Kings, yet
he would be loath to give a President, that might make it after to be expected
at his hands, by another whom he trusted less. The King accepted of the
Courtesy, and admitted of his Excuse, and appointed the place to be at St.
Peter's Church without Calice. But withal he did visit the Archduke with
Ambassadors sent from himself, which were the Lord SaintJohn, and the
Secretary; unto whom the Archduke did the honor, as (going to Mass at St.
Omers) to set the Lord Saint-John on his right hand, and the Secretary on his
left, and so to ride between them to Church. The day appointed for the
Enterview, the King went on Horseback some distance from St. Peter's Church,
to receive the Archduke. And upon their approaching, the ArchDuke made have to
light, and offered to hold the King's Stirrup at his alighting; which the King
would not permit, but descending from Horseback, they embraced with great
affection, and withdrawing into the Church to a place prepared, they had long
Conference, not only upon the Confirmation of former Treaties, and the (...) of
Commerce, but upon Cross Marriages, to be had between the Duke of York the
King's second Son, and the Arch-Duke's Daughter, And again between Charles the
ArchDukes Son and Heir, and Mary the King's second Daughter. But these Blossoms
of unripe Marriages, were but friendly wishes, and the Airs of loving
Entertainment; though one of them came afterward to Conclusion in Treaty,
though not in Effect. But during the time that the two Princes conversed and
commoned together in the Suburbs of Calice, the Demonstrations on both sides
were passing hearty and affectionate, especially on the part of the Archduke.
Who (besides that he was a Prince of an excellent good nature) being conscious
to himself, how drily the King had been used by his Council in the matter of
Perkin, did strive by all means to recover it in the King's affection. And
having also his ears continually beaten with the Counsels of his Father and
Fatherin-law, who (in respect of their jealous hatred against the French King)
did always advise the Archduke to anchor himself upon the Amity of King Henry
of England; was glad upon this occasion, to put in ure and practice their
precepts, calling the King Patron, and Father, and Protector, (these very words
the King repeats; when he certified of the loving behavior of the Archduke to
the City) and what else he could devise, to express his love and observance to
the King. There came also to the King the Governor of Picardy, and the Bailiff
of Amiens, sent from Lewis the French King to do him honor, and to give him
knowledge of his victory and winning of the Duchy of Millan. It seems the
King was well pleased with the honors he received from those parts, while he
was at Calice. For he did himself certify all the News and Occurrents of them
in every particular, from Calice, to the Mayor and Aldermen of London, which
(no doubt) made no small talk in the City. For the King, though he could not
entertain the good will of the Citizens, as Edward the Fourth did; yet by
affability and other Princely Graces, did ever make very much of them, and
apply himself to them.

This year also dyed John Morton, Archbishop of Canterbury, Chancellor of
England, and Cardinal. He was a wise man, and an eloquent, but in his nature
harsh, and haughty; much accepted by the King, but envied by the Nobility, and
hated of the People. Neither was his name left out of Perkin's Proclamation for
any good will, but they would not bring him in amongst the King's
Casting-Counters, because he had the Image and Superscription upon him of the
Pope, in his Honor of Cardinal. He wan the King with Secrecy and Diligence,
but chiefly because he was his old Servant in his less Fortunes: And also for
that (in his affections) he was not without an inveterate malice against the
House of York, under whom he had been in trouble. He was willing also to take
Envy from the King, more than the King was willing to put upon him. For the
King cared not for Subterfuges, but would stand Envy, and appear in any thing
that was to his mind; which made Envy still grow upon him more universal, but
less daring. But in the matter of Exactions, time did after show, that the
Bishop in feeding the King's humor, did rather temper it. He had been by
Richard the Third committed (as in custody) to the Duke of Buckingham, whom he
did secretly incite to revolt from King Richard. But after the Duke was
engaged, and thought the Bishop should have been his chief Pilot in the
Tempest, the Bishop was gotten into the Cock-boat, and fled over beyond Seas.
But whatsoever else was in the Man, he deserves a most happy Memory, in that
he was the principal Mean of joining the two Roses. He dyed of great years, but
of strong health and Powers.

The next year, which was the Sixteenth year of the King, and the year of our
Lord One thousand five hundred, was the year of Jubilee at Rome. But Pope
Alexander, to save the Hazard and Charges of men's Journeys to Rome, thought
good to make over those Graces by exchange, to such as would pay a convenient
Rate, seeing they could not come to fetch them. For which purpose was sent into
England Jasper Pons, a Spaniard, the Pope's Commissioner, better chosen than
were the Commissioners of Pope Leo, afterward employed for Germany; for he
carried the Business with great wisdom, and semblance of Holiness. In so much
as he levied great sums of Money within this Land to the Pope's use, with
little or no Scandal. It was thought the King shared in the Money. But it
appears by a Letter which Cardinal Adrian, the King's Pensioner, wrote to the
King from Rome some few years after, that this was not so. For this Cardinal,
being to persuade Pope Julius on the King's behalf, to expedite the Bull of
Dispensation for the Marriage between Prince Henry and the Lady Katherine,
finding the Pope difficil in granting thereof, does use it as a principal
Argument concerning the King's merit toward that See, that he had touched none
of those Deniers, which had been levied by Pons in England. But that it might
the better appear (for the satisfaction of the Common people) that this was
Consecrate Money, the same Nuncio brought unto the King a Brief from the Pope,
wherein the King was exhorted and summoned to come in Person against the Turk.
For that the Pope (out of the care of an Universal Father) seeing almost under
his eyes the Successes and Progresses of that great Enemy of the Faith, had had
in the Conclave, and with the Assistance of the Ambassadors of foreign Princes,
diverse Consultations about an Holy War, and a General Expedition of Christian
Princes against the Turk. Wherein it was agreed, and thought fit, that the
Hungarians, Polonians, and Bobemians should make a War upon Thracia; the French
and Spaniards upon Gracia; and that the Pope (willing to sacrifice himself in
so good a Cause) in Person and in Company of the King of England, the
Venetians, and such other States as were great in maritim Power, would sail
with a puissant Navy through the Mediterrane unto Constantinople. And that to
this end, his Holiness had sent Nuncio's to all Christian Princes; As well for
a Cessation of all Quarrels and Differences amongst themselves, as for speedy
Preparations and Contributions of Forces and Treasure for this Sacred
Enterprise.

To this the King, (who understood well the Court of Rome) made an Answer
rather Solemn, than Serious: Signifying;

THat no Prince on Earth should be more forward and obedient, both by his
Person, and by all his possible Forces, and Fortunes, to enter into this Sacred
War, than himself. But that the distance of Place was such, as no Forces that
he should raise for the Seas, could be levied or prepared, but with double the
charge, and double the time (at the least) that they might be from the other
Princes, that had their Territories nearer adjoining. Besides, that neither the
manner of his Ships (having no Galleys) nor the Experience of his Pilots and
Mariners could be so apt for those Seas, as theirs. And therefore that his
Holiness might do well, to move one of those other Kings, who lay fitter for
the purpose, to accompany him by Sea. Whereby both all things would be sooner
put in readiness, and with less Charge, and the Emulation and Division of
Command, which might grow between those Kings of France and Spain, if they
should both join in the War by Land upon Grecia, might be wisely avoided. And
that for his part, he would not be wanting in Ayds and Contribution. Yet
notwithstanding, if both these Kings should refuse, rather than his Holiness
should go alone, he would wait upon him, as soon as he could be ready. Always
provided, that he might first see all Differences of the Christian Princes
amongst themselves, fully laid down and appeased (as for his own part he was in
none.) And that he might have some good Towns upon the Coast in Italy put into
his hands, for the Retrait and safeguard of his Men.

With this Answer Jasper Pons returned, nothing at all discontented. And yet
this Declaration of the King (as superficial as it was) gave him that
Reputation abroad, as he was not long after elected by the Knights of the
Rhodes, Protector of their Order; All things multiplying to Honor in a Prince,
that had gotten such high Estimation for his Wisdom and Sufficiency.

There were these two last years some proceedings against Heretics, which was
rare in this King's Reign, and rather by Penances, than by Fire. The King had
(though he were no good School-man) the Honor to convert one of them by
Dispute at Canterbury.

This year also, though the King were no more haunted with Sprites, for that by
the sprinkling, partly of Blood, and partly of Water, he had chased them away;
yet nevertheless he had certain Apparitions that troubled him, still showing
themselves from one Region, which was the House of- York. It came so to pass,
that the Earl of Suffolk, Son to Elizabeth, eldest Sister to King Edward the
Fourth, by John Duke of Suffolk, her second Husband, and Brother to John Earl
of Lincoln, that was slain at Stockfield, being of an hasty and Choleric
disposition, had killed a man in his fury; whereupon the King gave him his
Pardon. But either willing to leave a Cloud upon him, or the better to make him
feel his Grace, produced him openly to plead his Pardon. This wrought in the
Earl, as in a haughty stomach it uses to do; for the Ignominy printed deeper
than the Grace. Wherefore he being discontent, fled secretly into Flanders,
unto his Aunt the Duchess of Burgundy. The King startled at it. But being
taught by Troubles, to use fair and timely Remedies, wrought so with him by
Messages, (the Lady Margaret also growing by often failing in her Alchymy,
weary of her Experiments, and partly being a little sweetened, for that the King
had not touched her name in the Confession of Perkin) that he came over again
upon good terms, and was reconciled to the King.

In the beginning of the next year, being the Seventeenth of the King, the Lady
Katherine fourth Daughter of Ferdinando and Isabella, King and Queen of Spain,
arrived in England, at Plymouth, the second of October, and was married to
Prince Arthur in Paul's the fourteenth of November following. The Prince being
then about fifteen years of age, and the Lady about eighteen. The manner of her
Receiving, the manner of her Entry into London, and the Celebrity of the
Marriage were performed with great and true Magnificence, in regard of Cost,
Show, and Order. The chief man that took the care was Bishop Fox; who was not
only a grave Counselor for War or Peace, but also a good Surveyor of Works,
and a good Master of Ceremonies, and any thing else that was fit for the Active
part, belonging to the service of Court, or State of a great King. This
Marriage was almost seven years in Treaty; which was in part caused by the
tender years of the Marriage-couple, especially of the Prince. But the true
reason was, that these two Princes, being Princes of great Policy and profound
Judgment, stood a great time looking one upon another's Fortunes, how they
would go, knowing well that in the mean time, the very Treaty it self gave
abroad in the World a Reputation of a strait Conjunction and Amity between
them; which served on both sides to many purposes, that their several Affairs
required, and yet they continued still free. But in the end, when the Fortunes
of both the Princes did grow every day more and more prosperous and assured,
and that looking all about them they saw no better Conditions, they shut it up.

The Marriage-Money the Princess brought (which was turned over to the King by
Act of Renunciation) was two hundred thousand Ducats. Whereof one hundred
thousand were payable ten days after the Solemnization, and the other hundred
thousand at two payments Annual; but part of it to be in Jewels and Plate, and
a due course set down to have them justly and indifferently prized. The
Jointure or Advancement of the Lady, was the third part of the Principality of
Wales, and of the Dukedom of Cornwall, and of the Earldom of Chester, to be
after set forth in severalty. And in case she came to be Queen of England, her
Advancement was left indefinite, but thus; That it should be as great, as ever
any former Queen of England had.

In all the Devices and Conceits of the Triumphs of this Marriage, there was a
great deal of Astronomy. The Lady being resembled to Hesperus, and the Prince
to Arcturus, and the old King Alphonsus (that was the greatest Astronomer of
Kings, and was Ancestor to the Lady) was brought in to be the Fortune-celler of
the Match. And whosoever had those Toys in Compiling, they were not altogether
Pedantical. But you may be sure that King Arthur, the Briton, and the descent
of the Lady Katherine from the House of Lancaster, was in no wise forgotten.
But (as it should seem) it is not good to fetch Fortunes from the Stars. For
this young Prince (that drew upon him at that time, not only the Hopes and
Affections of his Country, but the Eyes and Expectation of Foreiners) after a
few Months, in the beginning of April, deceased at Ludlow-Castle, where he was
sent to keep his Resiance and Court, as Prince of Wales. Of this Prince, in
respect he dyed so young, and by reason of his Father's manner of Education,
that did cast no great Luster upon his Children, there is little particular
Memory. Only thus much remains, that he was very studious and learned, beyond
his years, and beyond the Custom of great Princes.

There was a doubt ripped up in the times following, when the Divorce of King
Henry the Eighth from the Lady Katherine did so much busy the world, whether
Arthur was bedded with his Lady or no, whereby that matter in fact (of Carnal
Knowledge) might be part of the Case. And it is true, that the Lady her self
denied it, or at least her Council stood upon it, and would not blanch that
Advantage, although the plenitude of the Pope's power of Dispensing was the
main Question. And this Doubt was kept long open, in respect of the two Queens
that succeeded, Mary and Elizabeth, whose Legitimations were incompatible one
with another, though their Succession was settled by Act of Parliament. And the
Times that favored Queen Mary's Legitimation, would have it believed, that
there was no Carnal Knowledge between Arthur and Katherine. Not that they would
seem to derogate from the Pope's absolute power, to dispense even in that Case;
but only in point of Honor, and to make the Case more favorable and smooth.
And the Times that favored Queen Elizabeth's Legitimation (which were the
longer, and the later) maintained the contrary. So much there remains in
Memory, that it was half a years time between the Creation of Henry Prince of
Wales, and Prince Arthur's death; which was construed to be, for to expect a
full time, whereby it might appear, whether the Lady Katherine were with Child
by Prince Arthur, or no. Again, the Lady her self procured a Bull, for the
better Corroboration of the Marriage, with a Clause of ( vel forsan cognitam)
which was not in the first Bull. There was given in Evidence also, when the
cause of the Divorce was handled, a pleasant passage, which was; That in a
Morning Prince Arthur, upon his up-rising from Bed with her, called for drink,
which he was not accustomed to do, and finding the Gentleman of his Chamber
that brought him the drink to smile at it and to note it, he said merrily to
him, That he had been in the midst of Spain, which was an hot Region, and his
Journey had made him dry, and that if the other had been in so hot a Clime, he
would have been dryer than he. Besides, the Prince was upon the point of
Sixteen years of Age when he dyed, and forward, and able in Body.

The February following, Henry Duke of York was created Prince of Wales, and
Earl of Chester and Flint. For the Dukedom of Cornwall devolved to him by
Statute. The King also being fasthanded, and loath to part with a second Dowry,
but chiefly being affectionate both by his Nature, and out of Politic
Considerations to continue the Alliance with Spain, prevailed with the Prince
(though not without some Reluctation, such as could be in those years, for he
was not twelve years of Age) to be contracted with the Princess Katherine. The
secret Providence of God ordaining that Marriage, to be the Occasion of great
Events and Changes.

The same year were the Espousals of James King of Scotland, with the Lady
Margaret, the King's eldest Daughter, which was done by Proxy, and published at
Paul's Cross, the five and twentieth of January, and Te Deum solemnly sung. But
certain it is, that the Joy of the City thereupon showed, by Ringing of Bells,
and Bon-fires, and such other Incense of the People, was more than could be
expected, in a Case of so great and fresh Enmity between the Nations;
especially in London, which was far enough off from feeling any of the former
calamities of the War. And therefore might be truly attributed to a Secret
Instinct and Inspiring (which many times runs not only in the Hearts of
Princes, but in the Pulse and Veins of People) touching the happiness thereby
to ensue in time to come. This Marriage was in August following consummate at
Edinburgh. The King bringing his Daughter as far as Colly-Weston on the way,
and then consigning her to the Attendance of the Earl of Northumberland; who
with a great Troop of Lords and Ladies of Honor, brought her into Scotland, to
the King her Husband.

This Marriage had been in Treaty by the space of almost three years, from the
time that the King of Scotland did first open his mind to Bishop Fox. The Sum
given in Marriage by the King, was ten thousand Pounds. And the Jointure and
Advancement assured by the King of Scotland, was two thousand Pounds a year,
after King James his Death, and one thousand Pounds a year in present, for the
Ladys Allowance or Maintenance. This to be set forth in Lands, of the best and
most certain Revenue. During the Treaty, it is reported, that the King remitted
the matter to his Council; And that some of the Table in the Freedom of
Counselors (the King being present) did put the Case; that if God should take
the King's two Sons without Issue, that then the Kingdom of England would fall
to the King of Scotland, which might prejudice the Monarchy of England.
Whereunto the King himself replied; That if that should be, Scotland would be
but an Accession to England, and not England to Scotland, for that the greater
would draw the less: And that it was a safer Union for England, than that of
France. This passed as an Oracle, and silenced those that moved the Question.

The same year was fatal, as well for Deaths, as Marriages, and that with equal
temper. For the Joys and Feasts of the two Marriages, were compensed with the
Mournings, and Funerals of Prince Arthur (of whom we have spoken) and of Queen
Elizabeth, who dyed in Childbed in the Tower, and the Child lived not long
after. There dyed also that year Sir Reginold Bray, who was noted to have had
with the King the greatest Freedom of any Counselor; but it was but a Freedom,
the better to set off Flattery. Yet he bare more than his just part of Envy,
for the Exactions.

At this time the King's Estate was very prosperous, secured by the Amity of
Scotland, strengthened by that of Spain, cherished by that of Burgundy, all
Domestic Troubles quenched, and all Noise of War (like a Thunder a-far-off)
going upon Italy. Wherefore Nuture, which many times is happily contained, and
refrained by some Bands of Fortune, began to take place in the King; carrying
(as with a strong Tide) his Affections and Thoughts unto the gathering and
heaping up of Treasure. And as Kings do more easily find Instruments for their
Will and Humor, than for their Service and Honor; He had gotten for his
purpose, or beyond his purpose, two Instruments, Empson and Dudley, (whom the
people esteemed as his Horse-Leeches and Shearers) bold men, and careless of
Fame, and that took Toll of their Master's Grist. Dudley was of a good Family,
Eloquent, and one that could put Hateful Business into good Language. But
Empson, that was the Son of a Sieve-maker, triumphed always upon the Deed done,
putting off all other respects whatsoever. These two Persons being Lawyers in
Science, and Privy Counselors in Authority (as the corruption of the best
things is the worst) turned Law and Justice into Wormwood and Rapine. For
first, their manner was to cause diverse Subjects to be indicted of sundry
Crimes, and so far forth to proceed in form of Law; But when the Bills were
found, then presently to commit them. And nevertheless not to produce them to
any reasonable time to their Answer, but to suffer them to languish long in
Prison; and by sundry artificial Devices and Terrors, to extort from them
great Fines and Ransoms, which they termed Compositions and Mitigations.

Neither did they (toward the end) observe so much as the Halfface of Justice,
in proceeding by Indictment; but sent forth their Precepts to attach men, and
convent them before themselves and some others, at their private Houses, in a
Court of Commission, and there used to shuffle up a Summary Proceeding, by
Examination, without trial of Jury; assuming to themselves there, to deal both
in Pleas of the Crown, and Controversies Civil.

Then did they also use to enthral and charge the Subjects Lands with Tenures
in Capite, by finding False Offices, and thereby to work upon them for
Wardships, Liveries, Primier Seisins, and Alienations, (being the fruits of
those Tenures) refusing upon diverse Pretexts and Delays, to admit men to
traverse those False Offices, according to the Law. Nay, the King's Wards after
they had accomplished their full Age, could not be suffered to have Livery of
their Lands, without paying excessive Fines, far exceeding all reasonable
Rates. They did also vex men with Informations of Intrusion upon scarce
colorable Titles.

When men were Outlawed in Personal Actions they would not permit them to
purchase their Charters of Pardon, except they paid great and intolerable,
sums; standing upon the strict Point of Law, which upon Out-lawries gives
Forfeiture of Goods. Nay, contrary to all Law and Color, they maintained, the
King ought to have the half of men's Lands and Rents, during the space of full
two years, for a Pain in Case of Out-lawry. They would also ruffle with Jurors,
and enforce them to find as they would direct, and (if they did not) Convent
them, Imprison them, and Fine them.

These and many other Courses, fitter to be buried than repeated, they had of
Preying upon the People; both like Tame Hawks for their Master, and like Wild
Hawks for themselves; in so much as they grew to great Riches and Substance.
But their principal working was upon Penal Laws, wherein they spared none,
great nor small; nor considered whether the Law were possible, or impossible,
in Use or Obsolete. But raked over all old and new Statutes, though many of
them were made with intention rather of Terror, than of Rigor; having ever a
Rabble of Promoters, Questmongers, and leading Jurors at their Command, so as
they could have any thing found either for Fact, or Valuation.

There remains to this day a Report, that the King was on a time entertained
by the Earl of Oxford (that was his principal Servant, both for War and Peace)
nobly and sumptuously, at his Castle at Henningham. And at the King's going
away, the Earl's Servants stood (in a seemly manner) in their Livery-Coats,
with Cognisances, ranged on both sides, and made the King a (...). The King
called the Earl to him, and said; My Lord, I have heard much of your
Hospitality, but I see it is greater than the speech. These handsome Gentlemen
and Yeomen, which I see on both sides of me, are sure your Menial Servants. The
Earl smiled, and said, It may please your Grace, that were not for mine ease.
They are most of them my Retainers, they are come to do me service at such a
time as this, and chiefly to see your Grace. The King started a little, and
said; By my faith (my Lord) I thank you for my good Cheer, but I may not endure
to have my Laws broken in my sight. My Attorney must speak with you. And it is
part of the Report, that the Earl compounded for no less than fifteen thousand
Marks. And to show further the Kings extreme Diligence; I do remember to have
seen long since a Book of Account of Empson's, that had the King's hand almost
to every Leaf, by way of Signing, and was in some places Postilled in the
Margin, with the King's hand likewise, where was this Remembrance:

Item, Received of such a one, five Marks for the Pardon to be procured; and if
the Pardon do not pass, the Money to be re-paid, except the party be some
other-ways satisfied.

And over against this Memorandum (of the King's own hand) Otherwise satisfied.

Which I do the rather mention, because it shows in the King a Nearness, but
yet with a kind of Justness. So these little Sands and Grains of Gold and
Silver (as it seems) helped not a little to make up the great Heap and Bank.

But mean while (to keep the King awake) the Earl of Suffolk having been too
gay at Prince Arthur's Marriage, and sunk himself deep in Debt, had yet once
more a mind to be a Knight Errant; and to seek Adventures in Foreign parts. And
taking his Brother with him, fled again into Flanders. That (no doubt) which
gave him Confidence, was the great Murmur of the People against the King's
Government. And being a Man of a light and rash Spirit, he thought every Vapor
would be a Tempest. Neither wanted he some Party within the Kingdom. For the
Murmur of People awakes the Discontents of Nobles; and again, that calls up
commonly some Head of Sedition. The King resorting to his wonted and tried
Arts, caused Sir Robert Curson, Captain of the Castle at Hammes (being at that
time beyond Sea, and therefore less likely to be wrought upon by the King) to
fly from his Charge, and to feign himself a servant of the Earl's. This
Knight, having insinuated himself into the Secrets of the Earl, and finding by
him upon whom chiefly he had either Hope or Hold, advertised the King thereof
in great secrecy. But nevertheless maintained his own Credit and inward trust
with the Earl. Upon whose Advertisements, the King attached William Courtney,
Earl of Devonshire, his Brother-in-Law, married to the Lady Katherine, Daughter
to King Edward the Fourth; William de la Pole, Brother to the Earl of Suffolk;
Sir James Tirrel, and Sir John Windham, and some other meaner Persons, and
committed them to Custody. George, Lord Abergaveny, and Sir Thomas Green, were
at the same time apprehended; but as upon less Suspicion, so in a freer
Restraint, and were soon after delivered. The Earl of Devonshire, being
interessed in the blood of York, that was rather Feared than Nocent; yet as
One, that might be the Object of others Plots and Designs, remained Prisoner in
the Tower, during the King's life. William de la Pole, was also long
restrained, though not so straightly. But for Sir James Tirrel (against whom the
Blood of the Innocent Princes, Edward the Fifth, and his Brother did still cry
from under the Altar) and Sir John Windham, and the other meaner ones, they
were attainted and executed; the two Knights beheaded. Nevertheless, to confirm
the Credit of Curson (who belike had not yet done all his Feats of Activity)
there was published at Paul's Cross, about the time of the said Executions, the
Pope's Bull of Excommunication and Curse, against the Earl of Suffolk, and Sir
Robert Curson, and some others by name, and likewise in general against all the
Abettors of the said Earl. Wherein it must be confessed, that Heaven was made
too much to bow to Earth, and Religion to Policy. But soon after, Curson (when
he saw time) returned into England, and withal into wonted Favor with the
King, but worse Fame with the People. Upon whose return the Earl was much
dismayed, and seeing himself destitute of hopes (the Lady Margaret also by
tract of Time, and bad Success, being now become cool in those attempts) after
some wandering in France, and Germany, and certain little Projects, no better
than Squibs of an Exiled man, being tired out, retired again into the
Protection of the Archduke Philip in Flanders, who by the death of Isabella
was at that time King of Castile, in the right of Joan his Wife.

This year (being the Nineteenth of his Reign) the King called his Parliament.
Wherein a man may easily guess, how absolute the King took himself to be with
his Parliament, when Dudley that was so hateful, was made Speaker of the House
of Commons. In this Parliament, there were not made any Statutes memorable,
touching public Government. But those that were, had still the Stamp of the
King's Wisdom and Policy.

There was a Statute made for the disannulling of all Patents of Lease, or
Grant, to such as came not upon lawful Summons, to serve the King in his Wars,
against the Enemies or Rebels, or that should depart without the King's
license; With an exception of certain Persons of the Long-robe. Providing
nevertheless, That they should have the King's Wages, from their House, till
their return home again. There had been the like made before for Offices, and
by this Statute it was extended to Lands. But a man may easily see by many
Statutes made in this King's time, that the King thought it safest, to assist
Martial Law by Law of Parliament.

Another Statute was made, prohibiting the bringing in of Manufactures of Silk
wrought by it self, or mixed with any other Thread. But it was not of Stuffs of
whole piece (for that the Realm had of them no Manufacture in use at that time)
but of Knit-Silk, or Texture of Silk; as Ribands, Laces, Cawls, Points, and
Girdles, etc. which the people of England could then well skill to make. This
Law pointed at a true Principle; That where foreign materials are but
Superfluities, foreign Manufactures should be prohibited. For that will either
banish the Superfluity, or gain the Manufacture.

There was a Law also of Resumption of Patents of Gaols, and the Reannexing of
them to the Sherifwicks; Privileged Officers being no less an Interruption of
Justice, than Privileged Places.

There was likewise a Law to restrain the Bylaws or Ordinances of
Corporations, which many times were against the Prerogative of the King, the
Common Law of the Realm, and the Liberty of the Subject, being Fraternities in
Evil. It was therefore Provided, that they should not be put in Execution,
without the Allowance of the Chancellor, Treasurer, and the two Chief-Justices,
or three of them, or of the two Justices of Circuit where the Corporation was.

Another Law was (in effect) to bring in the Silver of the Realm to the Mint,
in making all clipped, minished, or impaired Coins of Silver, not to be current
in payments, without giving any Remedy of weight, but with an exception only of
a reasonable wearing, which was as nothing in respect of the incertainty; and
so (upon the matter) to set the Mint on work, and give way to New Coins of
Silver, which should be then minted.

There likewise was a long Statute against Vagabonds, wherein two things may be
noted; The one, the Dislike the Parliament had of Gaoling of them, as that
which was chargeable, pesterous, and of no open Example. The other, that in the
Statutes of this King's time, (for this of the Nineteenth year is not the only
Statute of that kind) there are ever coupled, the punishment of Vagabonds, and
the forbidding of Dice, and Cards, and unlawful Games unto Servants and mean
people, and the putting down and suppressing of Alehouses, as Strings of one
Root together, and as if the One were unprofitable, without the Other.

As for Riot and Retainers, there passed scarce any Parliament in this time
without a Law against them, the King ever having an Eye to Might, and Multitude.

There was granted also that Parliament a Subsidy, both for the Temporalty and
the Clergy. And yet nevertheless, ere the year expired, there went out
Commissions for a general Benevolence, though there were no Wars, no Fears. The
same year the City gave five thousand Marks, for Confirmation of their
Liberties; A thing fitter for the Beginnings of King's Reigns, than the latter
Ends. Neither was it a small matter, that the Mint gained upon the late
Statute, by the Recoinage of Groats, and Half-Groats, now Twelve-pences and
Sixpences. As for Empson and Dudley's Mills, they did grind more than ever. So
that it was a strange thing, to see what Golden Showrs poured down upon the
King's Treasury at once. The last payments of the Marriage-Money from Spain;
The Subsidy; The Benevolence; The Recoinage; The Redemption of the Cities
Liberties; The Casualties. And this is the more to be marvelled at, because the
King had then no Occasions at all of Wars or Troubles. He had now but one Son
and one Daughter unbestowed. He was Wise; He was of an High Mind; He needed not
to make Riches his Glory. He did excel in so many things else; save that
certainly Avarice does ever find in it self matter of Ambition. Belike he
thought to leave his Son such a Kingdom, and such a Mass of Treasure; as he
might choose his Greatness where he would.

This year was also kept the Sergeants (...), which was the second Call in this
Kings Days.

About this time Isabella, Queen of Castile, deceased; a right Noble Lady, and
an Honor to her Sex, and Times, and the Cornerstone of the Greatness of
Spain, that has followed. This Accident the King took not for News at large,
but thought it had a great Relation to his own Affairs; especially in two
points: The one for Example; the other for Consequence. First, he conceived
that the Case of Ferdinando of Arragon, after the death of Queen Isabella, was
his own Case, after the death of his own Queen: and the Case of Joan the Heir
unto Castile, was the Case of his own Son Prince Henry. For if both of the
Kings had their Kingdoms in the right of their Wives, they descended to the
Heirs, and did not accrue to the Husbands. And although his own Case had both
Steel and Parchment, more than the other (that is to say, a Conquest in the
Field, and an Act of Parliament) yet, notwithstanding, that Natural Title of
Descent in Blood, did (in the imagination even of a wise man) breed a Doubt,
that the other two were not safe nor sufficient. Wherefore he was wonderful
diligent to enquire and observe what became of the King of Arragon, in holding
and continuing the Kingdom of Castile. And whether he did hold it in his own
Right, or as Administrator to his Daughter; and whether he were like to hold it
in Fast, or to be put out by his Son-in-Law. Secondly, he did revolve in his
mind, that the State of Christendom might by this late Accident have a turn.
For whereas before-time himself, with the Conjunction of Arragon and Castile
(which then was one) and the Amity of Maximilian and Philip his Son the
Archduke, was far too strong a Party for France; he began to fear, that now
the French King (who had great Interest in the Affections of Philip the young
King of Castile) and Philip himself, now King of Castile, (who was in ill terms
with his Father-in-Law about the present Government of Castile.) And thirdly
Maximilian, Philip's Father (who was ever variable, and upon whom the surest
Aim that could be taken, was that he would not be long, as he had been last
before) would, all three being potent Princes, enter into some strait League
and Confederation amongst themselves. Whereby though he should not be
endangered, yet he should be left to the poor Amity of Arragon. And whereas he
had been heretofore a kind of Arbiter of Europe, he should now go less, and be
over-topped by so great a Conjunction. He had also (as it seems) an inclination
to marry, and bethought himself of some fit Conditions abroad. And amongst
others he had heard of the Beauty and virtuous Behavior of the young Queen of
Naples, the Widow of Ferdinando the younger, being then of Matronal years of
seven and twenty. By whose Marriage he thought that the Kingdom of Naples
(having been a Goal for a time, between the King of Arragon, and the French
King, and being but newly settled) might in some part be deposited in his hands,
who was so able to keep the Stakes. Therefore he sent in Embassage or Message
three confident Persons; Francis Marsin, James Braybrook, and John Style, upon
two several Inquisitions rather than Negotiations. The One, touching the Person
and Condition of the young Queen of Naples; the Other, touching all particulars
of Estate, that concerned the Fortunes and Intentions of Ferdinando. And
because they may observe best, who themselves are observed least, he sent them
under Colorable Pretexts; giving them Letters of Kindness and Compliment from
Katharine the Princess, to her Aunt, and Niece, the Old and Young Queen of
Naples, and delivering to them also a Book of new Articles of Peace; which
notwithstanding it had been delivered unto Doctor De Putbla, the Leigier
Ambassador of Spain here in England, to be sent, yet for that the King had been
long without hearing from Spain, he thought good those Messengers, when they
had been with the two Queens, should likewise pass on to the Court of
Ferdinando, and take a Copy of the Book with them. The Instructions touching
the Queen of Naples were so curious and exquisite, being as Articles whereby to
direct a Survey, or (...) a Particular of her Person, for Complexion, Favor,
Feature, Stature, Health, Age, Customs, Behavior, Conditions, and Estate, as
if the King had been young, a man would have judged him to be Amorous; but
being ancient, it ought to be interpreted, that sure he was very Chaste, for
that he meant to find all things in one Woman, and so to settle his Affections,
without ranging. But in this March he was soon cooled, when he heard from his
Ambassadors, that this young Queen had had a goodly Jointure in the Realm of
Naples, well answered during the time of her Uncle Frederick, yea, and during
the time of Lewis the French King, in whose Division her Revenue fell; but
since the time that the Kingdom was in Ferdinando's hands, all was assigned to
the Army, and Garrisons there, and she received only a Pension or Exhibition
out of his Coffers.

The other part of the Inquiry had a grave and diligent Return, informing the
King at full of the present State of King Ferdinando. By this Report it
appeared to the King, that Ferdinando did continue the Government of Castile as
Administrator unto his Daughter Joan, by the Title of Queen Isabella's Will,
and partly by the Custom of the Kingdom, as he pretended. And that all Mandates
and Grants were expedited in the name of Joan his Daughter, and himself as
Administrator, without mention of Philip, her Husband. And that King
Ferdinando, howsoever he did dismiss himself of the name of King of Castile,
yet meant to hold the Kingdom, without Account; and in absolute Command.

It appears also, that he flattered himself with hopes, that King Philip
would permit unto him the Government of Castile during his life; which he had
laid his Plot to work him unto, both by some Counselors of his about him,
which Ferdinando had at his devotion, and chiefly by promise, that in case
Philip gave not way unto it, he would marry some young Lady, whereby to put him
by the Succession of Arragon and Granada, in case he should have a Son. And
lastly by representing unto him that the Government of the Burgundians, till
Philip were by continuance in Spain made as Natural of Spain, would not be
endured by the Spaniards. But in all those things (though wisely laid down and
considered) Ferdinando failed; But that Pluto was better to him than Pallas.

In the same Report also, the Ambassadors being mean men, and therefore the
more free, did strike upon a string which was somewhat dangerous. For they
declared plainly, that the People of Spain, both Nobles and Commons, were
better affected unto the part of Philip (so he brought his Wife with him) than
to Ferdinando; and expressed the reason to be, because he had imposed upon them
many Taxes; and Tallages, which was the King's own Case between him and his Son.

There was also in this Report a Declaration of an Overture of of Marriage,
which Amason the Secretary of Ferdinando had made unto the Ambassadors in great
secret, between Charles Prince of Castile and Mary the King's second Daughter;
assuring the King, that the Treaty of Marriage then on foot, for the said
Prince and the Daughter of France, would break, and that she the said Daughter
of France should be married to Angolesme, that was the Heir Apparent of France.

There was a touch also of a speech of Marriage between Ferdinando and Madam De
Fois, a Lady of the Blood of France, which afterward indeed succeeded. But
this was reported as learned in France, and silenced in Spain.

The King by the return of this Embassage, which gave great light unto his
Affairs, was well instructed, and prepared how to carry himself between
Ferdinando King of Arragon, and Philip his Son-in-law, King of Castile;
resolving with himself, to do all that in him lay to keep them at one within
themselves; But howsoever that succeeded, by a moderate Carriage and bearing
the Person of a Common-friend, to lose neither of their Friendships; but yet to
run a Course more entire with the King of Arragon, but more labored and
officious with the King of Castile. But he was much taken with the Overture of
Marriage with his Daughter Mary; Both because it was the greatest Marriage of
Christendom, and for that it took hold of both Allies.

But to corroborate his Alliance with Philip, the Winds gave him an Enterview.
For Philip choosing the Winter-season, the better to surprise the King of
Arragon, set forth with a great Navy out of Planders for Spain in the Month of
January, the One and Twentieth year of the King's Reign. But himself was
surprised with a cruel Tempest, that scattered his Ships upon the several
Coasts of England. And the Ship wherein King and Queen were (with two other
small Barques only) torn, and in great peril to escape the fury of the weather,
thrust into Weymouth. King Philip himself, having not been used (as it seems)
to Sea, all wearied and extreme sick, would needs land to refresh his Spirits,
though it was against the Opinion of his Council, doubting it might breed
Delay, his Occasions requiring Celerity.

The Rumor of the Arrival of a puissant Navy upon the Coast, made the Country
Arm. And Sir Thomas Trenchard with Forces suddenly raised, not knowing what the
matter might be, came to Weymouth. Where understanding the Accident, he did in
all Humbleness and Humanity invite the King and Queen to his House; and
forthwith dispatched Posts to the Court. Soon after came Sir John Caroe
likewise, with a great troop of Men well armed; using the like Humbleness and
Respect toward the King, when he knew the Case. King Philip doubting that
they, being but Subjects, durst not let him pass away again, without the King's
Notice and Leave, yielded to their Entreaties, to stay till they heard from the
Court. The King as soon as he heard the News, commanded presently the Earl of
Arundel, to go to visit the King of Castile, and let him understand; That as he
was very sorry for his Mishap, so he was glad that he had escaped the Danger of
the Seas, and likewise of the Occasion himself had to do him Honor; and
desiring him, to think himself as in his own Land; and that the King made all
haste possible to come and embrace him. The Earl came to him in great
Magnificence, with a brave Troop of three hundred Horse; and (for more State)
came by Torch-light. After he had done the King's Message, King Philip seeing
how the world went, the sooner to get away, went upon speed to the King at
Windsor, and his Queen followed by easy journeys. The two Kings at their
meeting used all the Caresses, and loving Demonstrations, that were possible.
And the King of Castile said presently to the King; That he was now punished,
for that he would not come within his walled Town of Calice, when they met
last. But the King answered, That Walls and Seas were nothing, where Hearts
were open, and that he was here no otherwise, but to be served. After a day or
two's refreshing, the Kings entered into speech of renewing the Treaty; the King
saying, That though King Philip's Person were the same, yet his Fortunes and
State were raised. In which Case a Renovation of Treaty was used amongst
Princes. But while these things were in handling, the King choosing a fit time,
and drawing the King of Castile into a Room, where they two only were private,
and laying his hand civilly upon his arm, and changing his Countenance a little
from a Countenance of Entertainment, said to him; Sir, you have been saved upon
my Coast, I hope you will not suffer me to wrack upon yours. The King of
Castile asked him, What he meant by that speech? I mean it (says the King) by
that same Hare-brain wild Fellow, my Subject, the Earl of Suffolk, who is
protected in your Country, and begins to play the Fool, when all others are
weary of it. The King of Castile answered; I had thought (Sir) your Felicity
had been above those thoughts. But if it trouble you, I will banish him, The
King replied; Those Hornets were best in their Nests, and worst when they did
fly abroad, that his desire was, to have him delivered to him. The King of
Castile herewith a little confused, and in a study, said; That can I not do
with my honor, and less with yours; for you will be thought to have used me as
a Prisoner. The King presently said; Then the matter is at an end. For I will
take that dishonor upon me, and so your honor is saved. The King of Castile,
who had the King in great Estimation, and besides remembered where he was, and
knew not what use he might have of the King's Amity, for that himself was new
in his Estate of Spain, and unsettled, both with his Father-in-Law, and with his
People, composing his Countenance, said; Sir, you give Law to me; but so will I
to you. You shall have him, but (upon your honor) you shall not take his life.
The King embracing him, said; Agreed. Says the King of Castile, Neither shall
it dislike you, if I send to him in such a fashion, as he may partly come with
his own good will. The King said; It was well thought of; and if it pleased
him, he would join with him, in sending to the Earl a Message to that purpose.
They both sent severally, and mean while they continued Feasting and Pastimes.
The King being (on his part) willing to have the Earl sure before the King of
Castile went; and the King of Castile being as willing to seem to be enforced.
The King also with many wise and excellent Persuasions, did advise the King of
Castile, to be ruled by the counsel of his Father-in-Law Ferdinando; a Prince
so prudent, so experienced, so fortunate. The King of Castile (who was in no
very good terms with his said Father-in-Law) answered; That if his Father-inLaw
would suffer him to govern his Kingdoms, he should govern him.

There were immediately Messengers sent from both Kings to recall the Earl of
Suffolk: Who upon gentle words used to him was soon charmed, and willing enough
to return; assured of his Life, and hoping of his Liberty. He was brought
through Flanders to Calice, and thence landed at Dover, and with sufficient
Guard delivered and received at the Tower of London. Mean while King Henry (to
draw out the time) continued his Feastings and Entertainments, and after he had
received the King of Castile into the Fraternity of the Garter, and for a
Reciprocal had his Son the Prince admitted to the Order of the Golden-fleece,
he accompanied King Philip and his Queen to the City of London; where they were
entertained with the greatest Magnificence and Triumph, that could be upon no
greater warning. And as soon as the Earl of Suffolk had been conveyed to the
Tower (which was the serious part) the Jollities had an end, and the Kings took
leave. Nevertheless during their being here, they in substance concluded that
Treaty, which the Flemings term Intercursus malus, and bears Date at Windsor;
for that there be some things in it, more to the Advantage of the English, than
of them; especially, for that the Free-fishing of the Dutch upon the Coasts and
Seas of England, granted in the Treaty of Undecimo, was not by this Treaty
confirmed. All Articles that confirm former Treaties being precisely and warily
limited and confirmed to matter of Commerce only, and not otherwise.

It was observed, that the great Tempest which drove Philip into England, blew
down the Golden Eagle, from the Spire of Paul's, and in the fall it fell upon a
Sign of the Black Eagle, which was in Paul's Churchyard, in the place where the
School-House now stands, and battered it, and brake it down. Which was a
strange stooping of a Hawk upon a Fowl. This the People interpreted to be an
Ominous Prognostic upon the Imperial House, which was (by Interpretation also)
fulfilled upon Philip the Emperor's Son, not only in the Present Disaster of
the Tempest, but in that that followed. For Philip arriving into Spain, and
attaining the Possession of the Kingdom of Castile without resistance,
(insomuch as Ferdinando, who had spoke so great before, was with difficulty
admitted to the speech of his Son-in-Law) sickned soon after, and deceased. Yet
after such time as there was an Observation by the wisest of that Court, That
if he had lived, his Father would have gained upon him in that sort, as he
would have governed his Counsels and Designs, if not his Affections. By this
all Spain returned into the power of Ferdinando in state as it was before; the
rather, in regard of the infirmity of Joan his Daughter, who loving her Husband
(by whom she had many Children) dearly well, and no less beloved of him)
howsoever her Father, to make Philip ill beloved of the People of Spain, gave
out that Philip used her not well) was unable in strength of mind to bear the
Grief of his Decease, and fell distracted of her Wits. Of which Malady her
Father was thought no ways to endeavor the Cure, the better to hold his Regal
Power in Castile. So that as the Felicity of Charles the Eighth was said to be
a Dream; so the Adversity of Ferdinando was said likewise to be a Dream, it
passed over so soon.

About this time the King was desirous to bring into the House of Lancaster
Celestial Honor, and became Suitor to Pope Julius, to Canonize King Henry the
Sixth for a Saint; the rather, in respect of that his famous Prediction of the
King's own Assumption to the Crown. Julius referred the matter (as the manner
is) to certain Cardinals, to take the verification of his Holy Acts and
Miracles. But it dyed under the Reference. The general Opinion was, that Pope
Julius was too dear, and that the King would not come to his Rates. But it is
more probable, That that Pope (who was extremely jealous of the Dignity of the Sea of Rome, and of the Acts thereof) knowing that King Henry the Sixth was
reputed in the World abroad but for a Simple Man, was afraid it would but
diminish the Estimation of that kind of Honor, if there were not a distance
kept between Innocents and Saints.

The same year likewise there proceeded a Treaty of Marriage between the King
and the Lady Margaret Duchess Dowager of Savoy, only Daughter to Maximilian,
and Sister to the King of Castile; a Lady wise, and of great good Fame. This
Matter had been in speech between the two Kings at their meeting, but was soon
after resumed; and therein was employed for his first piece the King's then
Chaplain, and after the great Prelate Thomas Wolsey. It was in the end
concluded, with great and ample Conditions for the King, but with promise De
Futuro only. It may be the King was the rather induced unto it, for that he
heard more and more of the Marriage to go on between his great Friend and Allie
Ferdinando of Arragon, and Madam De Fois, whereby that King began to piece with
the French King, from whom he had been always before severed. So fatal a thing
it is, for the greatest and straitest Amities of Kings, at one time or other to
have a little of the Wheel. Nay there is a further Tradition (in Spain, though
not with us) That the King of Arragon, after he knew that the Marriage between
Charles, the young Prince of Castile, and Mary the King's second Daughter went
roundly on (which though it was first moved by the King of Arragon, yet it was
afterward wholly advanced and brought to perfection by Maximilian, and the
Friends on that side) entered into jealousy, that the King did aspire to the
Government of Castilia, as Administrator during the Minority of his Son-inLaw;
as if there should have been a Competition of Three for that Government;
Ferdinando, Grandfather on the Mothers side; Maximilian, Grandfather on the
Father's side; and King Henry, Father-in-Law to the young Prince. Certainly, it
is not unlike, but the King's Government (carrying the young Prince with him)
would have been perhaps more welcome to the Spaniards, than that of the other
Two. For the Nobility of Castilia, that so lately put out the King of Arragon,
in favor of King Philip, and had discovered themselves so far, could not but
be in a secret Distrust and Distaste of that King. And as for Maximilian, upon
Twenty respects he could not have been the Man. But this purpose of the King's
seems to me (considering the King's safe Courses, never found to be
enterprizing or adventurous) not greatly probable, except he should have had a
Desire to breathe warmer, because he had ill Lungs. This Marriage with Margaret
was protracted from time to time, in respect of the Infirmity of the King, who
now in the Two and Twentieth year of his Reign began to be troubled with the
Gout. But the Defluxion taking also into his Breast, wasted his Lungs, so that
thrice in a Year (in a kind of Return, and especially in the Spring,) he had
great Fitts and Labors of the Tissick. Nevertheless he continued to intend
Business with as great diligence, as before in his Heath. Yet so, as upon this
warning, he did likewise now more seriously think of the World to come, and of
making himself a Saint, as well as King Henry the Sixth, by Treasure better
employed, than to be given to Pope Julius. For this Year he gave greater Alms
than accustomed, and discharged all Prisoners about the City, that lay for Fees
or Debts, under forty Shillings. He did also make haste with Religious
Foundations; and in the Year following (which was the Three and Twentieth)
finished that of the Savoy. And hearing also of the bitter Cries of his People
against the Oppressions of Dudley and Empson, and their Accomplices; partly by
Devout Persons about him, and partly by public Sermons (the Preachers doing
their Duty therein) he was touched with great Remorse for the same.
Nevertheless, Empson and Dudley, though they could not but hear of these
Scruples in the King's Conscience; yet as if the King's Soul and his Money were
in several Offices, that the One was not to intermeddle with the Other, went on
with as great rage as ever. For the same Three and Twentieth Year was there a
sharp Prosecution against Sir William Capel now the second time; and this was
for matters of Misgovernment in his Maioralty. The great Matter being, that in
some Payments he had taken knowledge of False Moneys, and did not his diligence
to examine, and beat it out, who were the Offenders. For this and some other
things laid to his Charge, he was condemned to pay two thousand Pounds; and
being a Man of stomach, and hardened by his former Troubles, refused to pay a
Mite; and be-like used some untoward Speeches of the Proceedings, for which he
was sent to the Tower, and there remained till the King's Death. Knesworth
likewise, that had been lately Mayor of London, and both his Sheriffs, were,
for Abuses in their Offices, questioned, and imprisoned, and delivered, upon
one thousand four hundred Pounds paid. Hawis, an Alderman of London, was put in
Trouble, and dyed with Thought and Anguish, before his Business came to an end.
Sir Lawrence Ailmer, who had likewise been Mayor of London, and his two
Sheriffs, were put to the Fine of one thousand Pounds. And Sir Lawrence, for
refusing to make payment, was committed to Prison, where he stayed till Empson
himself was committed in his place.

It is no marvel (if the Faults were so light, and the Rates so heavy) that the
King's Treasure of Store, that he left at his death, most of it in secret
places, under his own key and keeping, at Richmond, amounted (as by Tradition
it is reported to have done) unto the Sum of near eighteen hundred thousand
Pounds Sterling; a huge Mass of Money, even for these times.

The last Act of State that concluded this King's Temporal Felicity, was the
Conclusion of a Glorious Match between his Daughter Mary, and Charles Prince of
Castile, afterward the great Emperor, both being of tender years; which Treaty
was perfected by Bishop Fox, and other his Commissioners at Calice, the year
before the King's Death. In which Alliance, it seems he himself took so high
Contentment, as in a Letter which he wrote thereupon to the City of London,
(Commanding all possible Demonstrations of Joy to be made for the same) he
expresses himself, as if he thought he had built a Wall of Brass about his
Kingdom. When he had for his Sons-in-Law a King of Scotland, and a Prince of
Castile and Burgundy. So as now there was nothing to be added to this great
King's Felicity, being at the top of all worldly Bliss, (in regard of the high
Marriages of his Children, his great Renown throughout Europe, and his scarce
credible Riches, and the perpetual Constancy of his prosperous Successes) but
an opportune Death, to withdraw him from any future blow of Fortune. Which
certainly (in regard of the great Hatred of his People and the Title of his
Son, being then come to Eighteen years of Age, and being a bold Prince and
liberal, and that gained upon the People by his very Aspect and Presence) had
not been impossible to have come upon him.

To crown also the last year of his Reign, as well as his first, he did an Act
of Piety, rare, and worthy to be taken into Imitation. For he granted forth a
General Pardon, as expecting a second Coronation in a better Kingdom. He did
also declare in his Will, that his mind was, that Restitution should be made of
those Sums, which had been unjustly taken by his Officers.

And thus this Solomon of England (for Solomon also was too heavy upon his
People in Exactions) having lived Two and Fifty Years, and thereof Reigned
Three and Twenty Years and Eight Months, being in perfect Memory, and in a most
Blessed Mind, in a great Calm of a Consuming Sickness passed to a better World,
the Two and Twentieth of April, 1508. at his Palace of Richmond, which himself
had Built.

THis King (to speak of him in Terms equal to his Deserving) was one of the
best sort of Wonders; a Wonder for Wisemen. He had parts (both in his Virtues,
and his Fortune) not so (...) for a Commonplace, as for Observation. Certainly
he was Religious, both in his Affection and Observance. But as he could see
clear (for those times) through Superstition, so he would be blinded (now and
than) by Humane Policy. He advanced Churchmen, he was tender in the Privilege
of Sanctuaries, though they wrought him much Mischief. He built and endowed
many Religious Foundations, besides his Memorable Hospital of the Savoy. And
yet was he a great Almsgiver in secret; which showed, that his Works in public
were dedicated rather to God's glory, than his own. He professed always to love
and seek Peace; and it was his usual Preface in his Treaties; That when Christ
came into the World, Peace was sung; and when He went out of the World, Peace
was bequeathed. And this Virtue could not proceed out of Fear, or Softness; for
he was Valiant and Active, and therefore (no doubt) it was truly Christian and
Moral. Yet he knew the way to Peace, was not to seem to be desirous to avoid
Wars. Therefore would be make Offers, and Fames of Wars, till he had mended the
Conditions of Peace. It was also much, that one that was so great a Lover of
Peace, should be so happy in War. For his Arms (either in Foreign or Civil Wars)
were never Unfortunate, neither did he know what a Disaster meant. The War of
his Coming in, and the Rebellions of the Earl of Lincoln, and the Lord Awdley
were ended by Victory. The Wars of France and Scotland, by Peaces sought at his
hands. That of Britain, by accident of the Duke's death. The Insurrection of
the Lord Lovel, and that of Perkin at Exceter, and in Kent, by flight of the
Rebels, before they came to Blows. So that his Fortune of Arms was still
Inviolate. The rather sure, for that in the quenching of the Commotions of his
Subjects, he ever went in Person. Sometimes reserving himself to back and
second his Lieutenants, but ever in Action; and yet that was not merely
Forwardness, but partly Distrust of others.

He did much maintain and countenance his Laws, which (nevertheless) was no
Impediment to him to work his Will. For it was so handled, that neither
Prerogative, nor Profit went to Diminution. And yet as he would sometimes
strain up his Laws to his Prerogative, so would he also let down his
Prerogative to his Parliament. For Mint, and Wars, and Martial Discipline,
(things of absolute Power) he would nevertheless bring to Parliament. Justice
was well administered in his time, save where the King was Party: Save also,
that the CouncilTable intermedled too much with Meum and Tuum. For it was a
very Court of Justice during his time, especially in the Beginning. But in that
part both of Justice and Policy, which is the Durable Part, and cut (as it
were) in Brass or Marble (which is The making of good Laws) he did excel. And
with his Justice, he was also a Merciful Prince, as in whose time, there were
but three of the Nobility that suffered; the Earl of Warwick, the Lord
Chamberlain, and the Lord Awdley. Though the first two were instead of Numbers,
in the Dislike and Obloquie of the People. But there were never so great
Rebellions, expiated with so little Blood, drawn by the hand of Justice, as the
two Rebellions of Black Heath and Exceter. As for the Severity used upon those
which were taken in Kent, it was but upon a Scum of People. His Pardons went
ever both before, and after his Sword. But then he had withal a strange kind of
Interchanging of large and inexpected Pardons, with severe Executions. Which
(his Wisdom considered) could not be imputed to any Inconstancy, or Inequality;
but either to some Reason which we do not now know, or to a Principle he had
set unto himself, That he would vary, and try both ways in turn. But the less
Blood he drew, the more he took of Treasure. And (as some construed it) he was
the more sparing in the One, that he might be the more pressing in the Other;
for both would have been intolerable. Of Nature assuredly he coveted to
accumulate Treasure, and was a little Poor in admiring Riches. The People (into
whom there is infused, for the preservation of Monarchies, a natural Desire to
discharge their Princes, though it be with the (...) charge of their
Counselors and Ministers) did impute this unto Cardinal Morton, and Sir
Reginold Bray; who (as it after appeared) as Counselors of ancient Authority
with him, did so second his Humors, as nevertheless they did temper them.
Whereas Empson, and Dudley that followed, being Persons that had no Reputation
with him (otherwise than by the servile following of his Bent) did not give way
only (as the first did) but shape him way to those Extremities, for which
himself was touched with remorse at his Death, and which his Successor
renounced, and sought to purge. This Excess of his, had at that time many
Glosses and Interpretations. Some thought the continual Rebellions wherewith he
had been vexed, had made him grow to hate his People. Some thought it was done
to pull down their Stomachs, and to keep them low. Some, for that he would
leave his Son a Golden-fleece. Some suspected he had some high Design upon
Foreign parts. But those perhaps shall come nearest the truth, that fetch not
their reasons so far off; but rather impute it to Nature, Age, Peace, and a
Mind fixed upon no other. Ambition or Pursuit. Whereunto I should add, that
having every day Occasion to take notice of the Necessities and Shifts for
Money of other great Princes abroad, it did the better (by Comparison) set off
to him the Felicity of full Coffers. As to his expending of Treasure, he never
spared Charge which his Affairs required; and in his Buildings was Magnificent,
but his Rewards were very limited. So that his Liberality was rather upon his
own State and Memory, than upon the Deserts of others.

He was of an High Mind, and loved his own Will, and his own Way; as One that
revered himself, and would Reign indeed. Had he been a Private-man, he would
have been termed Proud. But in a wise Prince, it was but keeping of Distance,
which indeed he did toward all; not admitting any near or full Approach,
neither to his Power or to his Secrets. For he was governed by none. His Queen
notwithstanding she had presented him with diverse Children, and with a Crown
also, (though he would not acknowledge it) could do nothing with him. His
Mother he reverenced much, heard little. For any Person agreeable to him for
Society (such as was Hastings to King Edward the Fourth, or Charles Brandon
after to King Henry the Eighth) he had none: Except we should account for such
Persons, Fox, and Bray, and Empson, because they were so much with him. But it
was but as the Instrument is much with the Workman. He had nothing in him of
Vainglory, but yet kept State and Majesty to the height; Being sensible, That
Majesty makes the People bow, but Vainglory boweth to them.

To his Confederates abroad he was Constant and Just, but not Open. But rather
such was his Inquiry, and such his Closeness, as they stood in the Light
toward him, and he stood in the Dark to them. Yet without Strangeness, but
with a semblance of mutual Communication of Affairs. As for little Envies or
Emulations upon Foreign Princes (which are frequent with many Kings) he had
never any; but went substantially to his own Business. Certain it is, that
though his Reputation was great at home, yet it was greater abroad. For
Foreiners that could not see the Passages of Affairs, but made their Judgments
upon the Issues of them, noted that he was ever in Strife, and ever A-loft. It
grew also from the Airs, which the Princes and States abroad received from
their Ambassadors and Agents here; which were attending the Court in great
number. Whom he did not only content with Courtesy, Reward, and Privateness;
but (upon such Conferences as passed with them) put them in Admiration, to find
his Universal Insight into the Affairs of the World. Which though he did suck
chiefly from themselves; yet that which he had gathered from them all, seemed
Admirable to every one: So that they did write ever to their Superiors in high
terms, concerning his Wisdom and Art of Rule. Nay, when they were returned,
they did commonly maintain Intelligence with him. Such a Dexterity he had to
impropriate to himself all Foreign Instruments.

He was careful and liberal to obtain good Intelligence from all parts abroad.
Wherein he did not only use his Interest in the Liegers here, and his
Pensioners which he had both in the Court of Rome, and other the Courts of
Christendom; but the Industry and Vigilance of his own Ambassadors in Foreign
parts. For which purpose, his Instructions were ever Extreme, Curious, and
Articulate; and in them more Articles touching Inquisition, than touching
Negotiation. Requiring likewise from his Ambassadors an Answer, in particular
distinct Articles, respectively to his Questions.

As for his secret Spials, which he did employ both at home and abroad, by them
to discover what Practices and Conspiracies were against him, surely his Case
required it: He had such Moles perpetually working and casting to undermine
him. Neither can it be reprehended. For if Spials be lawful against lawful
Enemies, much more against Conspirators and Traitors. But indeed to give them
Credence by Oaths or Curses, that cannot be well maintained; for those are too
holy Vestments for a Disguise. Yet surely there was this further Good in his
employing of these Flies and Familiars; That as the use of them was cause that
many Conspiracies were revealed, so the Fame and Suspicion of them kept (no
doubt) many Conspiracies from being attempted.

Toward his Queen he was nothing Uxorious, nor scarce Indulgent; but
Companiable, and Respective, and without Jealousy. Toward his Children he was
full of Paternal Affection, Careful of their Education, aspiring to their High
Advancement, regular to see that they should not want of any due Honor and
Respect, but not greatly willing to cast any Popular Luster upon them.

To his Council he did refer much, and sat often in Person; knowing it to be the
Way to assist his Power, and inform his Judgment. In which respect also he was
fairly patient of Liberty, both of Advice, and of Vote, till himself were
declared. He kept a strait hand on his Nobility, and chose rather to advance
Clergymen and Lawyers, which were more Obsequious to him, but had less
Interest in the People; which made for his Absoluteness, but not for his
Safety. In so much as (I am persuaded) it was one of the Causes of his
Troublesome Reign; for that his Nobles, though they were Loyal and Obedient, yet
did not Cooperate with him, but let every man go his own Way. He was not
afraid of an Able Man, as Lewis the Eleventh was. But contrariwise, he was
served by the Ablest Men that were to be found; without which his Affairs could
not have prospered as they did. For War, Bedford, Oxford, Surrey, Dawbeney,
Brook, Poynings. For other Affairs, Morton, Fox, Bray, the Prior of Lanthony,
Warham, Urswick, Hussy, Frowick, and others. Neither did he care how Cunning
they were, that he did employ; For he thought himself to have the Master-Reach.
And as he chose well, so he held them up well. For it is a strange thing, that
though he were a Dark Prince, and infinitely Suspicious, and his Times full of
Secret Conspiracies and Troubles; yet in Twenty-four Years Reign, he never put
down, or discomposed Counselor, or near Servant, save only Stanley, the Lord
Chamberlain. As for the Disposition of his Subjects in General toward him, it
stood thus with him; That of the Three Affections, which naturally tie the
Hearts of the Subjects to their Sovereigns, Love, Fear, and Reverence; he had
the last in height, the second in good measure, and so little of the first, as
he was beholding to the other Two.

He was a Prince, Sad, Serious, and full of Thoughts, and secret Observations,
and full of Notes and Memorials of his own hand, especially touching Persons.
As whom to Employ, whom to Reward, whom to Enquire of, whom to Beware of, what
were the Dependencies, what were the Factions, and the like; keeping (as it
were) a Journal of his Thoughts. There is to this day a merry Tale; That his
Monkey (set on as it was thought by one of his Chamber) tore his Principal
NoteBook all to pieces, when by chance it lay forth. Whereat the Court (which
liked not those Pensive Accounts) was almost tickled with sport.

He was indeed full of Apprehensions and Suspicions. But as he did easily take
them, so he did easily check them, and master them: whereby they were not
dangerous, but troubled himself more than others. It is true; his Thoughts were
so many, as they could not well always stand together; but that which did good
one way, did hurt another. Neither did he at some times weigh them aright in
their proportions. Certainly, that Rumor which did him so much mischief ( That
the Duke of York should be saved, and alive) was (at the first) of his own
nourishing; because he would have more Reason not to reign in the Right of his
Wife. He was Affable, and both Well and Fair-spoken, and would use strange
Sweetness and Blandishments of Words, where he desired to effect or persuade
any thing that he took to heart. He was rather Studious than Learned; reading
most Books that were of any worth, in the French Tongue. Yet he understood the
Latin, as appears in that Cardinal Hadriah, and others, who could very well
have written French; did usu to write to him in Latin.

For his Pleasures, there is no News of them. And yet by his Instructions to
Marsin and Style, touching the Queen of Naples, it seems he could Interrogate
well touching Beauty. He did by Pleasures, as great Princes do by Banquets,
come and look a little upon them, and turn away. For never Prince was more
wholly given to his Affairs, nor in them more of himself. In so much, as in
Triumphs of Justs and Tourneys, and Balls, and Masks (which they then called
Disguises) he was rather a Princely and Gentle Spectator, than seemed much to
be delighted.

No doubt, in bine as in all men (and most of all in Kings) his Fortune wrought
upon his Nature, and his Nature upon his Fortune. He attained to the Crown, not
only from a private Fortune, which might endow him with Moderation; but also
from the Fortune of an Exiled Man, which had quickened in him all Seeds of
Observation and Industry. And his Times being rather Prosperous, than Calm, had
raised his Confidence by Success, but almost marred his Nature by Troubles. His
Wisdom, by often evading from Perils, was turned rather into a Dexterity to
deliver himself from Dangers, when they pressed him, than into a Providence to
prevent and remove them a far off. And even in Nature, the Sight of his Mind
was like some Sights of Eyes; rather strong at hand, than to carry a far off.
For his Wit increased upon the Occasion; and so much the more, if the Occasion
were sharpened by Danger. Again, whether it were the shortness of his
Foresight, or the strength of his Will, or the dazeling of his Suspicions, or
what it was; Certain it is, that the perpetual Troubles of his Fortunes (there
being no more matter out of which they grew) could not have been without some
great Defects, and main Errors in his Nature, Customs, and Proceedings, which
he had enough to do to save and help, with a thousand little Industries and
Watches. But those do best appear in the Story it self. Yet take him with all
his Defects if a Man should compare him with the Kings his Concurrents, in
France, and Spain, he shall find him more Politic than Lewis the Twelfth of
France, and more Entire and Sincere than Ferdinando of Spain. But if you shall
change Lewis the Twelfth, for Lewis the Eleventh, who lived a little before;
then the Consort is more perfect. For that Lewis the Eleventh, Ferdinando, and
Henry, may be esteemed for the Tres Magi of Kings of those Ages. To conclude,
If this King did no greater matters, it was long of himself; for what he
minded, he compassed.

He was a Comely Personage, a little above Just Stature, well and straight
limmed, but slender. His Countenance was Reverend, and a little like a
Churchman: And as it was not strange or dark, so neither was it Winning or
Pleasing, but as the Face of one well disposed. But it was to the Disadvantage
of the Painter; for it was best when he spoke.

His Worth may bear a Tale or two, that may put upon him somewhat that may seem
Divine. When the Lady Margaret his Mother had diverse great Suitors for
Marriage, she dreamed one Night, That one in the likeness of a Bishop, in
Pontificial habit, did tender her Edmund Earl of Richmond (the King's Father)
for her Husband. Neither had she ever any Child but the King, though she had
three Husbands. One day when King Henry the Sixth, (whose Innocence gave him
Holiness) was washing his hands at a great Feast, and cast his Eye upon King
Henry, then a young Youth, he said; This is the Lad, that shall possess quietly
that that we now strive for. But that that was truly Divine in him, was, that
he had the Fortune of a True Christian, as well as of a Great King, in living
Exercised, and dying Repentant. So as he had an happy Warfare in both
Conflicts, both of Sin, and the Cross.

He was born at Pembrook-Castle, and lies buried at Westminster, in one of the
Stateliest and Daintiest Monuments of Europe, both for the Chapel, and for the
Sepulcher. So that he dwells more richly Dead, in the Monument of his Tomb,
than he did Alive in Richmond, or any of his Palaces. I could wish he did the
like, in this Monument of his Fame.

FINIS.
ANNALS OF ENGLAND: CONTAINING THE REIGNS OF

HENRY the Eighth, EDWARD the Sixth, QUEEN MARY.
Written in Latin by the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God,
FRANCIS Lord BISHOP of HEREFORD.

Thus Englished, Corrected, and Enlarged with the Author's consent, BY MORGAN
GODWYN. (...).

Nec verbum verbo curabo reddere, fidus Interpres. -- Horat.

LONDON, Printed by W. G. for T. Basset, J. Wright, and R. Chiswel. M. DC. LXXV.

The Translator's Dedication.
To the Right Honorable, the Lord SCUDAMORE, VISCOUNT SLEGO.
My Lord,
ALthough I have ever been averse from works of this nature, as desirous to
know them in the Original, rather than in any aftertaught Language, yet have I
not unwillingly undergone the task of this Translation. It is an English
History of those turbulent times, whereof no one has written either so largely
or freely as this Author, who intended it for the common good, whereof the mere
English, without these or the like pains of some other would have been
incapable. Your Lordship has known it in the Latin, which Tongue you have
naturalized. Wherefore this Dedication may seem needless. But it is due to you
as the work of your Servant, in which regard it craves your Honorable
Patronage. It has hitherto walked under Royal Protection. Other would not have
befitted the Author of this ingenuous History, by the exemplified Miseries
whereof the busy Spirits of these times may learn rightly to deem of our
modern Happiness. But even small grievances in any Part make us insensible of
the general good estate of the Whole. We will be ignorant of our good, and
unhappy. As for these Annals, they have long passed with approbation. If they
now distaste, let the fault be the Translators, and the Pardon Yours; to whom
alone my maiden pen sueth for favor, and to whose service dedicateth himself

Your Honors most humbly devoted, MORG. GODWYN.

The TRANSLATOR to the READER.
THe Author's Preface bath occasioned mine. Wherein it may be expected I should
give a public account of this action. I had once otherwise resolved. But it is
the fashion. And therefore know (gentle Reader) that Evil is often times the
(accidental) cause of Good. Idleness invited me to the trial of my Pen in some
few loose sheets, which my fancy converted to the private use of a beloved
Friend. Other end had I none. Sitbence the Reverend Author has been pleased to
impose that as a serious task, which I had wantonly begun, Nature commanded
duty and obedience, and so have I the glory of the time, To be in Print.

Sed dic, Posthume, de tribus capellis. How does the Author's Preface conduce
to mine? Why thus. To many who perhaps will not at first consider, that this
work is but a Translation, or seek advantages to expend their Censures, his may
seem impertinent. But let them know, that these Annals were first written, In
gratiam Exterorum Res nostras noscendi cupidorum. So much witnesses the first
Latin Edition. Peruse it and find it. I am but an Interpreter, of whom, I hope,
thou will not expect a dictionaryTranslation. Neither quarrel the omission of
some things, the knowledge whereof is to our Natives so innate, that now to
insert them, were as bad as to farce with tautologies, and make this little
Volume nauseous. Yet has it lost nothing of its bulk, whatsoever it has of
its splendor; those defalcations being here and there in the course of the
History supplied with not unnecessary additions, whereto the Author's
approbation and consent was not wanting. As for errors of the Press, blame the
Printer, not me. If thou by this reap either profit or pleasure, thank the
Author, whose benefit it is that thou have it; and that not tonguetied, but
more than single-languaged. Good is of it self diffusive, and be participates
so much of it, that be cannot endeavor an envious confinement of it.

Farewell.
The Author's Epistle Dedicatory.
To my most Gracious Sovereign, CHARLES, King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland; The most invict Defender of the Faith.
Most Royal Sir,
THese Commentaries, containing the Acts of three Princes, began about some ten
years since, under the Protection of Your most August Father to breathe the
common air; and but for so Gracious an Aspect, had suffered even at the instant
of their Birth. For the errors of the Press had made them such, as might have
deterred even extreme Impudence from so presumptive a Dedication. Yet such as
they were, they found Acceptance and Favor at His Royal Hands. Hence am I
encouraged to consecrate this second (but corrected) Edition to Your Majesty,
Who inherit as well Your Father's Virtues, as his Kingdoms. Neither indeed can
it befit any other after KING JAMES of ever Sacred Memory. Most humbly
therefore beseeches Your Majesty to daign it the like Gracious Acceptance, who
with the same Loyalty and Observance dedicateth and consecrateth to Your
Majesty himself and his,

Your Majesty's most humble Chaplain, FR. HEREFD.

The AUTHOR'S Preface to the READER.
AMong the many who have in Latin compiled the History of our Nation, Polydor
Virgil in the opinion of most excels: not that he has written either more
truly or copiously, than many others; but more politely, and latest of any that
have taken pains in this kind. For indeed it could not be, that a Foreiner, an
Italian, well gone in years even at his first arrival in England, (where being
made Archdeacon of Wells, he long survived not) should not often err in the
delivery of our Affairs, and in regard of his mere ignorance in the English
tongue, in silence bury many worthy passages recorded by our English Writers
only. It being therefore to be wished, and is much desired, that some one
versed in our Antiquities would (as Learned Master Camden has already done for
the description of the Island) consecrate part of his learned labors to the
Eternity of Britain, not in reforming than obsolete Virgilian History, but in
composing a new one: Our Antiquaries may justly be taxed of Sloth (I had almost
said slothfulness.) who had rather suffer the famous Acts of their Ancestors to
dye eternally in silence, and so (as much as in them lies) defraud their
Country of its true and deserved Glory, than bestow any the least pains in
commenting; that so the examples of most eminent Virtues (whereof the harvest
here has ever been most plentiful) might not want the Record of their due
Monuments. This I hope some or other will in good time perform. In the mean
time, others drawing back, although I was never endued with such eloquence, as
that I should dare adventure the writing of an History (but now especially --
vires ultra sortemque senectae, when having passed the age of fifty, long
desuetude may have dulled my faculty of penning) yet have I thought it might
prove pains-worthy, to undertake briefly in three small Commentaries to set
forth the deeds of three Princes, immediate Successors to Henry the Seventh, so
far forth as I have had notice of them. And that, partly that by touching at
the fountain (as they say) I might stir up the wits of others; partly that the
desires of Foreiners might in some sort be satisfied, who not without cause
complain, that these times, than which for a thousand years we have had none
more memorable, in regard of their diverse and remarkable changes, are not
described by any, otherwise than slightly, and as if they had not intended any
such thing. As for Polydor Virgil, he has written either nothing or very
little concerning them; and that little so false and misbeseeming the ingenuity
of an Historian, that he seems to have aimed at no other end, than by bitter
invectives against Henry the Eighth and Cardinal Wolsey to demerit the favor
of Queen Mary, already more than befitted incensed against both for the Divorce
of her Mother. I have therefore written (friendly Reader) and so written, that
although many things (I will not deny) conducing to an Historian may be wanting
in me; yet am I confident, that this my endeavor will find acceptance with
many. Other Writers may here have as it were a storehouse, from whence they
may (if I be not deceived) furnish themselves with some matter, which may help
to raise an everlasting Monument. Foreiners also, ignorant of the English
tougue, may have a taste of these times, until some one arise, who can and will
compile a History of our Nation worthy the majesty of the British name. I have
in this work been so observant of Impartiality, Simplicity, and Truth, that I
fear nothing so much as a Domestic anger for not being pious enough, because I
would not be over-pious. Many contend, that a good Prince should be (...). This
(I think) no man will affirm of an Historian, though some seem to opine it: So
that he shall come short of his duty, either to God or his Country, who in the
delivery of an History will not be at the least (...) and who by affirming
incertainties and known truths, shall not yield much to his affections, so they
be joined with the love of Religion and Country. But how much do they injure
Truth, who from lies and falsehood beg helps to underprop her? Avaunt. We have no
need of them. And had we, yet would it not much profit us to rely on such weak
advantages; one pious lie detected proving more hurtful, than a thousand
others, although so artificially contrived that they avoid discovery, can prove
profitable. For example whereof seek no farther than the Papists, whose feigned
Miracles, Impostures, and Legends patched up of lies have brought to pass, that
even in those things which are true, they scarce gain belief. Wherefore, I am
well content that Truth, which maugre her enemies will at length be every where
victorions, shall prevail with me. I have done to my power. Politely,
eloquently, politickly, I could not write; Truly, and fide Attica, as they say,
I could. If I have done amiss in ought, it is not out of malice, but error,
which the gentle Reader will (I hope) pardon. This I earnestly entreat, withal
beseeching the All-good and All-mighty God, that this my labor directed to no
other end, than to his glory and the good of his Church, may attain its due,
and by me desired success.

Farewell.
ANNALS OF ENGLAND, From the Year 1508, to the Year 1558.
BOOK I.
King HENRY the Eighth.
ANNO DOM. 1509. REG. 1.
AFter the death of Henry the Seventh, his only Son, Henry Prince of Wales,
undertook the Government of this Kingdom. He had then attained to the Age of
Eighteen years, and was richly adorned with Endowments both of Body and Mind.
For of Stature he was tall, of a beautiful Aspect, and of Form through all his
age truly beseeming a King: He was witty, docil, and naturally propense to
Letters, until Pleasures (to which the Liberty of Sovereignty easily prompteth)
did somewhat unseasonably withdraw him from his Studies; to these you may add,
a Great Spirit, aspiring to the glory both of Fortitude and Munificence. This
towardliness was so seconded by the happy care of his Tutors, that if the end
of his Reign had been answerable to the beginning, Henry the Eighth might
deservedly have been ranked amongst the greatest of our Kings. For if you
consider his first Twenty years, you shall not easily find any one, that either
more happily managed Affairs abroad, or Governed more wisely at home, of that
bare greater sway among his Neighbor Princes. This I think ought chiefly to be
ascribed to the providence of his wise Father, and his Grandmother then still
alive. For they took Modeslty, I say, the Guardian of that great Virtue,) then
making use of no Counselor but his Will, he fell into those Vices, which
notwithstanding the glory of his former Reign, branded him deeply with the foul
stains of Luxury and Cruelty. But remitting those things to their proper
places, those Worthies appointed his Counselors were;

William Warham, Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lord His PrivyCouncil.
Chancellor of England. Richard Fox, Bishop of Winchester. Thomas Ruthal,
Bishop of Durham. Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey, Lord Treasurer of England.
George Talbot, Earl of Shrewsbury. Lord Steward of the King's Household. Charles
Somerset, Lord Chamberlain. Knights.
Sir Thomas Lovel, Sir Henry Wyat, Sir Edward Poynings;

These men, the Solemnity of the dead King's Funeral being The Funerals of K.
Henry the Seventh.
duly and magnificently performed, erected him a Tomb all of Brass, accounted
one of the stateliest Monuments of Europe, which one would hardly conceive by
the Bill of Accounts: For it is reported that it cost but a Thousand Pounds.
The Monument is to be seen at Westminster (the usual place of our Kings
Interrments) St. Stephen's Chapel.
in that admirable Chapel dedicated to St. Stephen, by this King heretofore
built from the ground, a testimony of his religious Piety. I have read, that
this Chapel was raised to that height for the sum of Fourteen thousand
Pounds, and no more; and that he at the same time built a Ship of an unusual
burden, called from him, The great Henry, which by that time it was rigged,
cost little less than that stately Chapel. But now, O Henry! what is become of
that Ship of thine? that other Work (besides the reward of Heaven) will
perpetually proclaim thy pious Munificence. Hence learn. O Kings! that the true
Trophies of Glory are not to be placed in Armories and Arsenals, but (and those
more durable) in Pious Works. Seek, first seek the Kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and without doubt all other things shall be added unto
you.

But to go on in my proposed course, although Henry the Eighth April 1509, his
Coronation was deferred to the four and twentieth of June. In The Coronation of
Henry the Eighth.
the mean time, his Council thought it would prove a profitable policy for the
King to marry Katherine the Widow of Prince Arthur, his deceased Brother, and
Daughter to Ferdinando King of Castile; for otherwise that huge mass of Money
assigned for her Jointure must yearly be transported out of the Kingdom.
Neither was there at first any other doubt made of this Match, than whether it
were approved by the Ecclesiastical Constitutions, for as much as the Scripture
(said some) forbad any man to marry his Brother's Wife. But this rub was easily
removed by the omnipotence of the Pope's Bull, in so much that presently upon
the Dispensation of Pope Julius, on the third of June, under a malignant
Constellation, the Nuptials of these Princes were solemnized, His Marriage.
and they both Crowned the four and twentieth of June next following, being St.
John Baptist's day. At these Solemnities there wanted neither pomp, nor
acclamations of the Estates of the Realm. But to show that of Solomon to be
true, The end of Mirth is Heaviness; five days had not yet run their course
since the Coronation, when Margaret Countess of Richmond, the King's The death
of Lady Margaret, Countess of Richmond.
Grandmother, made an exchange of this life with death. She was a very godly
and virtuous Lady, and one who for her benefits to the Estate, deserved with
all honor to be commended to the perpetual memory of Posterity: But her
ever-living Works will so far set forth her praise, that the pains of any
Writer will prove altogether needless. Yet notwithstanding, omitting other
things, it will savor somewhat of Ingratitude, if I should not recount what
she has conferred upon our Universities. She founded two Colleges at
Cambridge; one dedicated to our Savior CHRIST, and the other to St. John the
Evangelist, and endowed them both with such large Revenues, that at this time
besides Officers and Servants, there are about two hundred Students maintained
in them: She also left Lands to both Universities, out of the Rents whereof,
two Doctors, public Professors of Divinity, to this day do receive their
Annual Stipends. She lies interred near her Son, in a fair Tomb of Touchstone,
whereon lies her Image of gilded Brass.

ANNO DOM. 1510. REG. 2.
H Enry the Seventh, Father to this our Eighth, some few Empson and Dudley.
saying, That Laws were to no purpose, unless the fear of Punishment did force
men to observe them. But the Inquisition proceeding so rigorously, that even
the least faults were punished according to Polydor Virgil) cried out, that
this proceeded out of Covetousness, rather than Severity. But the wiser sort
conceived the King's intent to be, partly to curb the fierce mind of the
People, bred up in faction; partly, that by these Fines he might not only
weaken the rich, but also increase his own strength, and fortify himself
against civil Attempts (whereof he had lately seen some sparkles fly abroad)
if so be any smothered coal should happen to break out into a flame. Whatever
the matter was, many there were, who by accusing others sought the King's
favor, and enlarged their own Estates, amongst whom two were chief; the one
was called Richard Empson, the other Edmund Dudley, both Lawyers, and both for
having served the King's turn, lately made Barons of the Exchequer. It is said
that Empson was born at Torcester in Northamptonshire, his Father was a
Sievier. Dudley, though he were well descended, yet being not befriended by
Fortune, long strugled with Adversity. But after they had some Months taken
pains in these matters, both of them arise to that greatness, that there were
few of the Nobility, that would not crouch to them, and be ambitious of their
favor. Therefore it is not so much to be wondered at, if they grew exceeding
wealthy: But this Wealth drew with it an Envy greater than it self, which
nevertheless did them little hurt during the life of Henry the Seventh, but
afterward cast them both down as low as Envy could have wished. The King upon
his deathbed commanded in his Will and Testament, that restitution should be
made to all, who had been wronged by the Exchequer. Whereupon infinite numbers
flocking to the Court, and demanding restitution, there could not a fitter
means be thought of to stop their mouths, than by committing of Empson and
Dudley the occasioners thereof, to the People, as Sacrifices to appease their
fury. They were therefore arraigned and condemned of high Treason. And these
things were done presently upon Henry the Eighth his coming to the Crown. So
their goods being seized upon, they for a whole year endured the miseries, that
usually accompany a Prison, and yet were the Commons as eager against them as
ever. Whence it should first arise I know not, but such a report there was,
that the Queen had begged the poor men's Pardons. The Nobility disdaining, that
such mean fellows had been heretofore so prevalent with their Prince, and the
Commons being easily incited against them by some as eager enemies to them as
themselves, cried out, that they were cheated of their just revenge, and
wearying the King with continual petitions for their death, he was in a manner
forced to satisfy them, Whereupon on the seventeenth day of August, they were
both publicly beheaded. Such was the end of Empson and Dudley, who abounding
with Wealth, and flourishing under their Prince's Dudley, left behind him a Son
named John, who, as if he had been heir to his Father's fortune, being created
Duke of Northumberland, concluded his powerful life with the like unhappy end;
leaving much Issue behind him, even to our time, but yet whereof the heirs male
have long since failed.

ANNO DOM. 1511. REG. 3.
THis year, on New-years-day the Queen was delivered of February, to the great
grief of the King and Kingdom.

About the same time there came Ambassadors from Ferdinand An Expedition into
Africa.
King of Arragon, who craved of the King his Son-in-Law fifteen hundred
auxiliary Archers. He was then in hostility with the Moors inhabiting Africa.
The King very willingly granted their request; and having levied the full
number, embarked them for Spain, in four Ships of the Navy Royal, under the
command of Thomas Lord Darcy. They were scarce arrived there, when news was
brought, that a Peace being made, Ferdinando stood in no farther need of their
aid. Yet every one was liberally paid, the General, and those of greatest note
that accompanied him, were richly rewarded, and all being dismissed, with many
thanks, safely returned home.

In their absence, Margaret Duchess of Savoy (who was Daughter Into Gueldres.
to the Emperor Maximilian, and Governess of the Netherlands under Charles the
Infant of Spain) prevailed with our King for the like number of Archers, she
having then Wars with the Duke of Gueldres, against whom she meant to employ
them. These men in the space of five Months did many brave exploits at
Brimnost, Ask, and Venloo, under the command of Sir Edward Poynings, a brave
Soldier, and in great favor with his Prince. Of them fourteen hundred
returned home, much commended and well rewarded; the fortune of War had cut off
one hundred. Four Captains in regard of their valor were Knighted by the
Infant Charles, afterward Emperor; viz. John Norton, John Fog, John Scot, and
Thomas Lynd.

The King of Scots had then War with the Portugal, under pretext whereof one
Andrew Barton, a famous Pirat, took all Ships Barton, a Pirat, taken.
that coasted either England or Scotland, affirming them always to be
Portugals, of what Nation soever they were, or at least Portugal Merchandise.
The King sent Edward Howard, Lord Admiral of England, and his Brother the Lord
Thomas Howard, eldest Son to the Earl of Surrey, with one John Hopton to take
this Rover. When they had once found him out, after a long and bloody fight
they took him alive (but mortally wounded) with his two Ships, and all his
companions that survived the fight, and brought them to London.

ANNO DOM. 1512. REG. 4.
AS yet Henry had no War with any foreign Prince, neither Lewis the Twelfth of
France, yet he was easily entreated by Pope Julius to renounce War with France.
this Confederacy. This Pope, more like to that Caesar, whose Name he bare,
than Peter, from whom he would fain derive his Succession, that like another
Nero, sitting still he might from on high be a Spectator, while the whole World
was on fire, had written Letters to our King, wherein he entreated his
assistance toward the suppression of the French; Who, without fear of God or
man (these were the pretended Causes) had not only sacrilegiously laid hold on
the Revenues of the Church, had caused Cardinal William to usurp the Papacy,
had upheld Alphonso of Ferara, and the Bentivogli in Rebellion against him; but
had also farther decreed, to make Italy the Theater of his Tyranny. Wherefore
he conjured him by the Love of our Savior, by the Piety of his Ancestors,
whose aids were never wanting when the Church stood in need, and by the fast
tie of Filial Obedience, that he would enter into the Holy League of the
Estates of Italy, who had made choice of him for their General. Jealousy, and
Reverence to the Sea of Rome so prevailed with him, that he easily condescended
to the Pope's request. Yet that he might some way color his action, he would
needs interpose himself as Umpire between the Pope and the French, whom by his
Ambassadors he entreats to lay aside Arms; withal not obscurely threatening,
that if he did not so, he intended to undertake the defense of the Pope against
him, the common disturber of the peace of Christendom. The French set light by
this. Wherefore War is proclaimed by a Herald, the French King commanded to
part with the Kingdom of France, and the Duchies of Normandy and Aquitain,
which he without right unjustly usurped. Then entering into League with
Maximilian the Emperor, the Arragonois, and the Pope, they consult of
assaulting the French with joint forces. The Arragonois invites us into Spain,
that thence we might France, promising besides certain Troops of Horse, store
of Artillery, Wagons for carriage, Munition, and many other things necessary
for such an Expedition. Our King relying on his Father-in-Law his promises,
levies a great Army, whereof he ships one part for Spain, and employs the other
by Sea. Edward Howard, Lord Admiral, had charge of the Sea forces, who fought
with the French Fleet in the Bay of Bretaigne. In which Fight there was no
memorable thing done, besides the combat of the two great Ships, (the one
having seven hundred English in it, under the command of Sir Thomas Knevet; the
other nine hundred French, under Primauget, a Briton.) These Ships being both
fast grapled, after a long fight fell both on fire, and were utterly consumed;
not a man being saved, of whom it might be learned, whether this fire happened
by chance, or were A fruitless Voyage into Spain.
purposely kindled by a forced despair. Our other Army, under the command of
the Lord Thomas Gray, Marquis of Dorset, amongst ten thousand tall English
Soldiers, had five hundred Germans, under one Guint, a Fleming. This Army
landed in Biscay, where they spent some Months in expectation of due
performances from the Arragonois, who feeding them with promises only, tempered
the heat of our Men, who were very eager upon the march for France. It happened
that Gaston of Foix, Competitor for the Kingdom with John King of Navarr, dyed
about the same time. The Navarrois had promised Ferdinand some aids toward this
War. But now fearing no Competitor, he (whether out of inconstancy, or that he
thought his affairs so required) secretly by his Agents makes a League with the
French. Upon this Ferdinand turns his Arms The Spaniard seiseth on Navarr.
upon the Navarrois, and strains all his strings to draw our men to the same
attempt; but the Marquis of Dorset pleaded his Commission, beyond which he
could not with safety proceed. The Navarrois was utterly unprovided, and the
Nobility so divided into the factions of the Egremonts and the Beaumonts, that
he could do nothing. It was bruited that two mighty Kings came against him with
no less forces, what should he do? To hope from France were vain; the French
were too far off, and deeply engaged in other Wars. At the approach of the
Spaniard he quits his Kingdom, and with his Wife and Children flying over the
Pyrenaean Mountains, makes Bern his receptacle. Ferdinand having thus gotten a
new Kingdom, casts off all farther thought of France, only intending the
confirmation of his Conquest; to which end he entreats of Henry the help of our
Forces raised for France, and prevails; but to no purpose. For the English
having their Bodies inflamed with the intolerable heat of a strange Climate,
and the drinking of strong Wines, dropped down every where; insomuch that we lost
about a thousand (some say eighteen hundred) men in an instant. Wherefore
impatient of farther delay, they force their Commanders to set sail homeward.
The King was mightily enraged May, and returned a little before Christmas.

ANNO DOM. 1513. REG. 5.
ABout the beginning of this year the King assembled the high France was
determined, and a mighty mass of Money granted by the Commons. Whereupon, in
the very beginning of the Spring a Fleet is set forth, consisting of two and
forty Men of War, besides Victuallers, and lesser Vessels. The Lord Admiral,
who had the The Lord Admiral drowned.
charge of this Fleet, too too eagerly hunting after Honor, by his rashness
frustrated the designs of so goodly preparations. He attempts to land in the
Haven near adjoining to Breast, where striving in person to set foot first in
the Enemies Country, he, with a Spear born overboard and drowned, was the
only man of all that Fleet that came short home. He therein performed rather
the part of a private Soldier, than of a Commander. For his death brought back
this headless Fleet into England. Where the King makes the Lord Thomas Howard
Admiral, in the place of his deceased younger Brother; exhorting him, by
employing his service for his Countries honor, to revenge his Brother's
inglorious death. This new Admiral with great speed brings his Navy out of
Harbor, and scouring up and down the Seas, struck such a terror into the
French, that not so much as a Fisher-boat durst peep abroad. At last he lands
in Whitsand-Bay, ransacks all the Country thereabout, and without resistance
returns safe to his Ships.

In the mean time the King having raised a mighty Army, arrives at Calais the
last of June, with a Fleet of four hundred Sail. The one and twentieth of July
he marches with all his forces into the French Territory; and having sent some
Ensigns before to besiege Terovenne a City in Picardy, he takes his way
thither, intending Terovenne besieged.
in person to sit down before it with all the strength of his Army. By the way
he meets the French near Dernom: They at first seem resolved to fight; but
whether they distrusted their own strength, and so purposely declined an
unequal combat; or (as by our side it is reported) that our Ordnance being
conveniently placed disordered them, and that so they betook themselves to
flight, as if it had been all one for us to see them, and conquer them, away
they went, and could not any where afterward be discried by us. So without any
let our Army came before Terovenne. This City had (according to the relation of
our Writers) four thousand Defendants, whereof six hundred were Horse. Spaniard
had made an inroad into Aquitain and Navarre; and the Suisses having lately
overthrown Tremoville at Novarr, had now coopt him up in Dijon in Burgoigne;
insomuch that his Forces being by these occasions distracted, he himself had
not under his Colors above twenty thousand Foot (the moiety whereof were
Lansquenets, under the command of the Duke of Gueldres) and two thousand five
hundred Lances. With these he comes to Amiens, that the hope of Succors, he
being so near, might encourage the Defendants. For it much concerned him that
the Siege should be drawn out at length. In our Army were forty thousand Foot,
and five thousand Horse, so that there was no likelihood of doing any good
against us. Neither indeed did the French intend (especially at that time) to
hazard the fortune of a Battle, the loss whereof, in the judgment of the more
expert, would have been accompanied with no less than the loss of the Kingdom,
which would easily have followed our Victory. The French King therefore sitting
still at Amiens, left he might seem to neglect such a City (the danger whereof
did thoroughly grieve him) sends some Troops toward Therovenne, with
instructions to put into the City eighty Horsemen completely armed (but
without Horses, the besieged desiring no other aid) if possibly it could be
effected, as it easily was, by reason of the negligence of our Sentinels. For
indeed the desuetude of a long Peace had made our men altogether unapt for War.
But the indiscretion of the French far surpassed our negligence. For whereas
with the same hazard they might have victualled the besieged, and furnished
them with other necessaries which they wanted; desiring (but too late) to amend
this error, they would needs effect it the same way as before. But our men had
by this time raised a new Fortification to hinder their entrance, and had
withal placed in ambush store of Horse, with fifteen thousand Foot, to cut them
off in their retreat. The French came near the Walls, but finding all entrance
debarred, returned without suspicion of any intended mischief. They had not
gone far, when some (as if they had been out of their Enemies reach) impatient
of the heat, cast off their Helmets, some fell a drinking, most leave their
Horses of service, and for their ease mount on little Nags. Our men charge them
unawares, and without The Battle of Spurs.
any resistance made, put them to rout. The French in this encounter lost three
hundred Horse. There were taken Prisoners, Lewis de Longueville Marquis of
Rotelin, Badi, Clermont d'Anjou, (...) d'Amboise, Bayard, La Fayet, and Palisse
(who escapt out of Prison) with many others. It was then the opinion of most
France: For the French were so affrighted with the news of this overthrow, that
they thought of nothing but flying; and the King himself with tears in his eyes
bewailing his hard fortune, cast about for some place of refuge, and determined
to post into base Bretaigne. But we looking no farther than Therovenne, brought
our Prisoners into the Camp, and without farther proscution left the Enemies to
their fears. The French call this The Battle of Spurs; because they trusted
more to their Heels, than their Swords. The Therovennois Terovenne yielded.
after this overthrow despairing of Succor came to a Parley; and by the advice
of their King, yield up the City the three and twentieth of August, upon
condition, That the Soldiers might depart with Bag and Baggage, Colors
flying, and Drums beating; and the Citizens permitted to carry away their goods.

A few days before the City was yielded Maximilian the Emperor Maximilian the
Emperor serves under King Henry.
came to our Camp, and (which deserves to be recorded to the eternal honor of
our Nation) taking for pay a hundred Crowns a day, besides what was disbursed
among his Soldiers, disdained not to serve under our Colors, wearing the
Cross of England, and a party-colored Rose, the usual Cognizance of our
English Warfare. But he rather came to be a Spectator, than a Partaker in the
danger. Wherefore when he saw into what straights our King was likely to drive
the French, being weak, if he would press hard upon him, and pierce farther
into the Kingdom; although he were a professed Enemy to the French, yet was he
jealous of our prosperous proceeding; and therefore by all means persuaded
Henry, To dismantle Therovenne, and thence to proceed to the Siege of Tournay:
He blamed him (not without just cause) for his late setting forth, Summer being
first well-near spent, Winter was now at hand, when it would not quit cost to
maintain such an Army, good designs being not then to be put in execution: He
told him, That Therovenne was so far from him, that it could not be kept
without great difficulty; therefore he should do well to dismantle it, that it
might not hereafter serve for a Bulwark to the the Enemy: That Tournay was a
French City, but (like an Island with the Sea) surrounded with Flanders and
Hainault, and far divided from the rest of France: True it was, that it was
well stored with inhabitants, and not meanly fortified; but that there was no
other Garrison, than of Citizens, and those he should find effeminate; and for
Provision, that they had none: He should therefore make speed and come on them
unawares, and with a few days siege force them to yield: That the French King,
if he intended to succor them, must first march through all Hainault, and pass
over two or three great Rivers, amongst which were the Escaut and the Scarp:
That the Soldiers should find good booties there, and the King himself the
triumph of a most assured Conquest: That the addition of such a City would be
no mean increase of his Dominions, and so much the less care to be taken of it;
for as much as it would be as easy for him to keep it in obedience, as it was
for the French for the space of so many years to defend it, being placed amidst
so many Enemies, that still had a greedy eye over it. King Henry by this time
had so much of War, that he began to be weary of the toil thereof, and to cast
his mind on the pleasures of the Court. Wherefore (although he wanted not
Counselors for the best) he followed the Emperor's advice, as being the more
easy. The Flemings (who begged it of the King) had leave to raze the Walls of
Therovenne, to fill the Ditches, and to burn all the Buildings except the
Church, and the Chanons houses, which they (in regard of the dissentions usual
to bordering Nations) very gladly performed.

Therovenne being thus taken and destroyed, away they march with all speed to
Tournay, endeavoring by their celerity to prevent The Siege of Tournay.
the fame of their coming. But the Citizens suspecting some such enterprise,
had fortified themselves as well as the shortness of time would permit them;
and the Peasants thereabouts bring all their goods into the City, as to a place
of safeguard. The City was of no great circuit, yet at the beginning of the
Siege it contained fourscore thousand People: by reason whereof Victuals began
quickly to fail them, and they could no way hope for relief. The French King
was far off, they had no Garrison, the Citizens bad Soldiers, two great Princes
had begirt the Town with fifty thousand men; but they had an Enemy within,
called Famine, more cruel and insupportable, than both. So having for some few
days held out the Siege, the nine and Twentieth of September their lives being
granted them, they yield; and to save themselves Tournay yielded
from spoil, pay a hundred thousand Crowns. The King makes them swear Fealty to
him, and appoints Sir Edward Poynings, a Knight of the Garter, their Governor.
Next he gives order for store of Warlike provision, puts in a small Garrison,
and builds a Citadel for the confirmation of his Conquest. Neither amongst
these Politic affairs did he neglect those of the Church. For the Bishop being
proscribed, he conferrs the Sea with all the revenues, upon Thomas Wolsey, of
whose first rising Wolsey Bishop of Tournay.
and immoderate Power we shall have much occasion to speak hereafter.

All things being thus ordered, because Winter came on apace, he began to
bethink himself of returning with his Army into England. This thought so far
pleased him, that having been absent scarce four Months he took Ship, and about
the end of October came home triumphing in the Glory of a double Conquest.

By the way he was entertained with the news of another Victory, the Lord
Howard Earl of Surrey having under his Fortune slain the King of Scots. The
King of France being encumbred James the Fourth King of Scots, The King of
Scots slaim.
By the ancient Laws of Amity, and the late League made between them, that He
would not forsake him, entangled in so many difficulties. If He regarded not
his Friend's case, yet he should at least look to Himself; sor whom it would
not be safe to suffer a bordering Nation, always at enmity with Him, by such
additions to arise to that height of power. The King of England busied with a
foreign War was now absent, and with Him the flower of the English Chivalry: He
should therefore forthwith take Arms, and try to recover Berwick, an especial
Town of the Scottish Dominions, but for many years withheld by the English; He
would easily be victorious, if He would but make use of this occasion so
happily offered. It could not be, but this War would be for His Honor, and
profitable to His Friend, if not to Himself: He should thereby also make known
to His Enemies, that the Scottish Arms were not to be contemned, whose former
Victories a long, and (to them) hurtful Peace had obscured, and buried in
oblivion among the English. As for the charges of it, He need not be troubled,
for that he would afford Him fifty thousand Crowns toward the providing of
Munition and Ordnance.

These Reasons so prevailed with the young King covetous of glory, that
notwithstanding he had lately made a League with our King, whose Sister he had
married, and her vehement dissuasions, he proclaimed War against Henry, which
proved fatal to him, bloody to his, and the cause of many ensuing calamities.
So having raised a great Army, he breaks into our Marches, and besieges
Norham-Castle belonging to the Bishop of Durham, the which having held out six
days was at last yielded unto him. Thence he removes his Camp to Berwick,
wasting all the Country as he marched with Fire and Sword. The news whereof are
brought unto them, to whom the government of the Kingdom was committed in the
absence of the King; and a levy being made through all the North parts of the
Kingdom, Alnewike is appointed the rendezvous, where all the Troops should meet
at a set day, that thence they might set forward against the Enemy, under the
conduct of the Lord Thomas Howard, Earl of Surrey. Among the first (to his
Father's great joy) comes the Earl's Son Thomas Lord Admiral, leading a veteran
Troop of five thousand men of tried valor, and haughty in regard of their
former Naval Victories obtained under the command of this young Lord. After him
came the Lords Dacres, Clifford, Scrope, Latimer, Canyers, Lumley, and Ogle,
besides Sir Nicholas Appleyard, Master of the Ordnance, Sir W. Percie, Sir
William Sidney, Sir William Bulmer, Sir John Stanley, Sir William Molineux, Sir
Thomas Strangwayes, Sir Richard Tempest, and many other Knights.

These sitting in Council, thought it best to send an Herald to the King, to
expostulate with him concerning the outrages committed: to complain, that He
had without all right or reason spoiled the Country of a Prince not only
Ailied unto him, but also his Confederate; and He retorts the violation of the
League, calling God to witness, that King Henry had first by his many injuries
shown evident signs of an alienated mind. For the English (he pretended) robbed
all along the Marches of Scotland, without restitution or punishment: Andrew
Barton, a stout and bonest man, had been unjusty slain by the King's command;
and one Heron, who had murdered Robert Car a Scottish Nobleman, vaunted
himself openly in England, the King taking no notice of so heinous a fact: Of
these things he had often complained by his Ambassadors, but without effect.
There was therefore no other way for him, but to betake himself to Arms for the
common defense of himself, and his Kingdom, against the King's injustice. As
for the meeting, he signified that he accepted of it, and appointed both time
and place for the Battle.

Neither party failed the prefixed day. The Scot seeks to animate his men by
taking away all hope of safeguard by flight, commanding Flodden-Field.
them (I know not how wisely, but the event showed how unhappily for them) to
forsake their Horses, forasmuch as they were to trust to their Hands, not to
their Horses heels; and by his own example showing what he would have done, he
alights, and prepares himself to fight on foot. The rest doing the like, the
whole Army encountered us on foot, to whom, after a long and bloody fight, the
fortune of the Victory inclined. The Scots had two and twenty pieces of great
Ordnance, which stood them in no stead. For our men climbing up a Hill where
the Enemy sat hovering over us, the shot passed over our heads. Our chief
strength were our Archers, who so incessantly played upon four Wings of Scots
(for the King divided his Army into five Battalions) that were but lightly
armed, that they forced them to fly and leave their fellows, who yet stood
stoutly to it. But the main Battle, where the King was, consisting of choice
men, and better armed against our shot, was not so easily defeated. For the
Scots, although they being enclosed as it were in a toil, were forced to fight
in a ring, made most desperate resistance, and that without doubt so much the
rather, because they not only heard their King encouraging them, but saw him
also manfully fighting in the foremost Ranks, until having received wound upon
wound he fell down dead. They say there fell with him the Archbishop of St.
Andrews his natural Son, two other Bishops, two Abbots, twelve Earls, seventeen
Barons, and of common Soldiers eight thousand. The number of the Captives is
thought to have been as many. They lost all their Ordnance, and almost all
their Ensigns: insomuch that the Victory was to be esteemed a very great one,
but that it was somewhat bloody to us in the loss of fifteen hundred. This
Field September, near Flodon-Hill, upon a rising Bank called Piperdi, not far
from Bramston.

I am not ignorant, that the Scottish Writers constantly affirm the King was
not slain in the field, but having saved himself by flight, was afterward
killed by his own people; and that the Body which was brought into England was
not the King's, but of one Alexander Elfinston, a young Gentleman resembling
the King both in visage and stature, whom the King (that he might delude those
that pursued him, and might as with his own presence animate them that fought
elsewhere) had caused with all tokens of Royalty to be armed and apparrelled
like himself. But to let pass the great number of Nobility, whose carcases
found about him sufficiently testify, that they guarded their true King, and
consequently that the counterfeit fought elsewhere: It is manifest that his
Body was known by many of the Captives, who certainly affirmed, that it could
be no other than the King's, although by the multitude of wounds it were much
defaced. For his Neck was opened to the midst with a wide wound, his left Hand
almost cut off in two places, did scarce hang to his Arm, and the Archers had
shot him in many parts of his body.

Thus was James the Fourth King of Scots taken away in the flower of his youth,
who truly in regard of his Princely Virtues deserved a longer life. For he had
a quick wit, and a majestical countenance: he was of a great spirit, courteous,
mild, liberal; and so merciful, that it was observed he was often forced
against his will to punish offenders. These virtues endeared him to his People
in his life time, and made them so much lament the loss of him being dead, that
(as all Historians report) they seemed to have lost only him in the whole
succession of their Kings; which sufficiently argues the improbability of the
Subjects pretended Parricide.

But he had not fallen into this misery, if he would have hearkened to the
advice of those, who persuaded him to have returned home before the Fight,
contented with what he had already performed in the Expedition: that he should
not upon so weak forces hazard the estate of his Kingdom: he had won
glory-enough, and abundantly fulfilled his Friends request. But the French
Agent, and some of the King's Mignons corrupted by the French urging to the
contrary, this haughty Prince, even otherwise very desirous to give proof of
his valor, was easily persuaded to await our great Forces already marching.
His Body (if at least that were his, and not Elfinston's) being enclosed in
Lead, and brought into England, was by our King's (I will not say cruel, but
certainly inhumane) command cast in some by-corner or other, without due
Funeral Rites, saying, that It was a due punishment for one who had perjurously
broken his League; whereas if we examine the premises, we shall find he wanted
not probale

ANNO DOM. 1514. REG. 6.
THE next year having begun his course, Thomas Howard Surrey (he who had been
victorious over the Scots) was created Duke of Norfolk, the title and dignity
of his Ancestors. The descent and Honors of the Howards.
John his Father deriving his pedigree from Thomas de Brotherton, Son to King
Edward the First; the Segraves and the Mowbrays (who had been all Dukes of
Norfolk) enjoyed this Honor by right of Inheritance. But because in
Bosworth-Field (where here he was flain) he took part with the Usurper, both he
and his Posterity were deprived of that Honor. This Thomas dying in the year
1524, his Son of the same name succeeded him, who deceased in the year 1554.
His Son Henry (a young Lord of great hopes) his Father then living was beheaded
toward the end of this King's Reign. He left Issue Thomas the last Duke of
Norfolk (who also lost his Head the year 1572) and Henry (at nurse when his
Father dyed) a very learned and wise man, whom King James (no good man repining
thereat) created Earl of Northampton. Thomas Duke of Norfolk had three Sons
that survived him, Philip, Thomas, and William. Philip Earl of Surrey (and by
his Mother, of Arundel) condemned the year 1589, and after dying in prison,
left Issue Thomas, then a little one, who by King James his favor succeeded
his Father in his Honors. His Uncle Thomas out of the same fountain of Royal
Goodness was created Earl of Suffolk, with addition of the dignity of Lord
Chamberlain. Beside these, this Family has Charles Earl of Nottingham, Lord
Admiral of England, Nephew by the Lord William his Father, to Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, that famous Triumpher over the Scots. This is he, who in emulation of
his Grandfather's glory, in the year 1588, under the fortune of Queen
Elizabeth, most happily overthrew that vainly called Invincible Armada of
Spain. Thomas also Viscount Bindon is derived from Thomas Duke of Norfolk, by
his Son the Lord Thomas. So this noble House lately afflicted, now gloriously
flourishing, has four Earls and a Viscount, all brave and famous men, and of
whom there will be occasion of much to be spoken hereafter: I therefore thought
it good in brief to set down their Genealogy, lest I should trouble the Reader
with too often repetition of their Race upon each mention of the Name. At the
time of this Duke's creation, others were also honored with new Titles; Charles
Brandon made Duke Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolk.
of Suffolk, and Charles Somerset Earl of Worcester, and Edward Stanley Lord
Mountegle, Sir William Brandon Standard Bearer to Henry the Seventh in
Bosworth-Field, and there slain by the hand of Richard the Third, was Father to
this new Duke of Suffolk, of Henry having obtained the Crown was very careful,
and made him rather a Companion than a Servant to the young Prince, of whose
household he was. The Prince so greatly favored him, partly for his Father's
deserts, chiefly for his own, that he being afterward King, created him
Viscount Lisle, and intending (at least many were so persuaded) to give him to
Wife the Lady Mary his Sister, who afterward was married to the King of France;
thought it first good to honor him with the Duchy of Suffolk, which this year
at the feast of Candlemas was performed. But how he was frustrated of his
hopes, and afterward beyond all hope enjoyed her, shall be declared hereafter.
Somerset, the natural Son Charles Somerset, Earl of Worcester.
of Henry of the House of Lancaster, the last Duke of Somerset; took his
surname of his Father's Honor; whereas he should have been called Beaufort, or
rather Plantagenet, according to the ancient name of our English Kings: He
being Cousin-german to Henry the Seventh (whose Mother was Margaret, Sister to
the Duke of Somerset) and famous for his many Virtues, of which that King was a
quick and exact Judge, and was by him made Lord High Chamberlain of England.
But having behaved himself very valiantly in this last Expedition against the
French (wherein Guicciardin untruly reports him to have been slain) Henry the
Eighth added this new Title (which his Posterity still enjoyes) to his ancient
Honors. He was great Grandfather by his Son Henry and Nephew William, to
Edward the now Earl, who being one of His Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, and Lord Privy Seal, does by his virtues much more ennoble his so
noble Ancestors.

The French King hearing of the overthrow of the Scots, perceiving himself
deprived of such a Friend and Confederate, seeing his Kingdom on fire about his
ears, and none to rely upon but himself, determined (if so he might fairly and
with credit) to renew his League with us. Pope Julius the Second, the
Incendiary of Christendom was lately dead, and the French King himself was now
a Widower. He therefore intends to try whether by marrying the Lady Mary the
King's Sister, he might secure himself from War on our side, and by so near
alliance gain the assured Friendship of so potent a Prince. Leo the Tenth
succeeding Julius the Second, did openly side with the French against the
Spaniard. He therefore earnestly soliciting a reconciliation, a Peace was
concluded Peace with France.
profitable to the French, acceptable to us, and on the ninth of October the
Nuptials were with great pomp solemnized. The The Lady Mary the King's Sister,
married to Lewis the Twelfth, King of France.
French King was well stricken in years, his Wife a tender Virgin of some
sixteen or eighteen years of age, but wonderful beautiful. Besides the
forementioned reasons, the desire of Children (for he had no Male Issue) on his
part, on her part the good of the public weal, the authority of her Brother so
willing, and (which bears chiefest sway in a Woman's heart) the supremacy
Brandon for her Husband (so her power had been answerable to her will) than the
greatest Monarch in the World: neither was it long before she enjoyed her
desire. For the King (as it often happens to elderly Men, that apply themselves
to young Women) dyed the last of February, having scarce three Months survived
his Wedding. The Queen might then lawfully, according to the Articles of
agreement, return into England, which she earnestly desiring, the Duke of
Suffolk was sent to conduct her; who becoming a fresh Suitor unto her, so far
easily prevailed, that before their departure from Paris, they were there
privately married. The Marriage was afterward by the King's consent celebrated
at Greenwich, the thirteenth day of May of the ensuing year.

And now we must speak something of Wolsey's sudden and (for Cardinal Wolfey.
these our times) incredible rising, who having (as we have related before)
been invested in the Bishopric of Tournay, was within the year preferred to
two other Bishoprics. That venerable Bishop of Lincoln, William Smith, was
lately deceased; who beside many other Monuments of his Piety, having begun in
Oxford a College for Students, called Brazen-nose-College, was immaturely taken
away before he could finish so good a work. So the Sea being vacant, it is
conferred on Wolsey, now high in the King's favor. He was of very mean
parentage (a Butcher's Son) and Ipswich (a Town in Suffolk, but of Norwich
Diocese) where he afterward laid the foundation of a stately College, was the
place of his Birth. He was brought up at Oxford, in MagdalenCollege, and
afterward became Master of the Free School thereto belonging. Among other
Scholars, the Sons of the Marquess of Dorset were committed to his trust, and
for his care over them, the Parsonage of Limington in Somersetshire (no very
mean one) was bestowed on him. As soon as he had set footing there, he was very
disgracefully entertained by Sir Amias Powlet, who clapped him in the Stocks, a
punishment not usually inflicted upon any but Beggars and base people. What the
matter was that so exasperated him against Wolsey, a man not of least account,
I know not: This I know, that Wolsey being afterward made Cardinal, and Lord
Chancellor of England, so grievously punished this injury, that Sir Amias
Powlet was fain to dance attendance at London some years, and by all manner of
obsequiousness to curry favor with him. There remains to this day a sufficient
testimony hereof in a Building over the Gate of the Middle Temple in London,
built by the Knight at the time of his attendance there, and decked round about
very sumptuously with the Cardinal's Arms, hoping thereby somewhat to allay the
wrath of the incensed Prelate. But these things were long after this year.
Wolsey, whether that he could not brook this disgrace, or beating a mind that
looked beyond this poor Benefice, left it, and became domestic Chaplain to Sir
John Nafant Treasurer of Calais, by whose means he was taken notice of by Fox
Bishop of Winchester, a man that knew rightly how to judge of good wits. He
finding this young man to be very sprightful, of Learning sufficient, and very
active in dispatch of Affairs, so highly commended him to King Henry the
Seventh, (who relied much upon Fox's faith and wisdom) that he thought it good
forthwith to employ him in Affairs of great moment. What need many words? he so
far pleased the King, that in short time he became a great man, and was first
preferred to the Deanery of Lincoln, and then made the King's Almoner. But Henry
the Eighth, a young Prince, coming to the Crown, was wholly taken with his
smooth tongue and pliable behavior. For when all the rest of his friends
advised him to sit every day in person at the Council Table, that so by
experience and daily practice he might reap Wisdom, and to accustom himself to
the managing of Affairs of Estate: Wolsey advised him to follow his Pleasures;
saying, That his Youth would not be able to brook their tedious Consultations;
every Age of man had its Seasons, and Delights agreeable. They did not do well,
that would force the King to act an Old man before his time, Youth being
utterly averse from wrinckled Severity. It would come to pass hereafter, if God
were so pleased, that what was now troublesome to him, would not be disagreeable
to riper years, nay prove perhaps a great pleasure. Until that time came, he
should enjoy the present, and not by harkening to others needless persuasions,
any way interrupt the course of that felicity which the largeness of his
Dominions would easily afford him. He should hawk and hunt, and as much as him
list use honest Recreations. If so be he did at any time desire suddenly to
become an Old man by intermedling with Old men's Cares, he should not want those
(meaning himself) that would in the evening in one or two words relate unto him
the effect of a whole days Consultation. This speech hitting so pat with the
King's humor, made Wolsey so powerful, that whereas the King before favored
him as much as any other; he only was now in favor with and next the King,
with whom there was nothing to be done but by him. For he was the man that was
made choice of, who like another Mercury should pass between this our Jove, and
the Senate of the lesser Gods, offering their petitions to him, and to them
returning his pleasure therein. Wherefore he was even at the first sworn of the
Privy Council, and besides the late collation of Tournay, upon the death of
Smith he was also made Bishop of Lincoln. In the government of which Church he
had not fully spent six months, before he was translated from Lincoln to the
Archbishopric of York, then vacant by the death of Cardinal Bambridge at Rome.
Shortly after, (that I may at once show all his Honors) William Warham
Archbishop of Canterbury leaving the place, he was by the King made Lord
Chancellor of England, and by the Pope Legate a latere. Yet he stayed not
there; but as if the Archbishopric of York, and the Chancellorship of England
had not been sufficient to maintain the port of a Cardinal, besides many other
Livings he procured of the King the Abbey of St. Albans, and the Bishopric of
Bath and Wells. And not content with these, leaving Bath and Wells, he adds
the Bishopric of Durham to that of York, and then leaving Durham seizes on
Winchester, at that time of greatest revenue of any Bishopric in England. You
now see Wolsey in his height, rich, his Prince's Favorite, and from the bottom
raised to the top of Fortunes Wheel. What became of him afterward you shall
know hereafter.

ANNO DOM. 1515. REG. 7.
THe League lately made with Lewis the French King, was Francis his Successor,
and published by Proclamation in London, the ninth day of April.

ANNO DOM. 1516. REG. 8.
BUt the French King having taken into his protection the young Scots, sent
John Stuart Duke of Albany into Scotland, to be Governor both of the King's
Person and Kingdom. The A breach with France.
first thing this Duke undertook, was, either to put to death or banish those,
whom he any way suspected to favor the English. Insomuch, that the Queen
Dowager (who by this time was married to Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus)
forced to save her self by flight, came into England to her Brother, with whom
she stayed at London a whole year, the Earl her Husband after a month or two
without leave returning into Scotland. King Henry being displeased at these
French practices, deals underhand with the Emperor Maximilian (with whom the
French then contended for the Duchy of Milan) and lends him a great sum of
Money, whereby he might hire the Suisses to aid him in the expelling the French
out of Italy. But the Emperor, although he had levied a sufficient Army,
returned home without doing any thing. He was indeed accounted a wise Prince,
but unhappy in the managing of his Affairs: whether it were that Fortune
waiwardly opposed him, or that he was naturally slow in the execution of his
well-plotted Designs. But shortly after he intends a second trial of his
Fortune. Wherefore by his Ambassador the Cardinal of Suisserland, he yet
borrows more Money of the King, which was delivered to certain Merchants of
Genoa, to be by a set day Italy. But they, whether corrupted by the French, or
not of sufficient ability to make return, deceived him; and so his second
designs vanished also into air. I do not think it was the King's fault,
although we might justly suspect, that the great Treasure left him by his
Father being almost spent, and the French secretly offering Peace upon good
terms, the friendship between him and the Emperor, which he had so dearly
purchased, began at length to grow cold. Certainly (to speak nothing of the
League which was afterward concluded with France) the Treasury was now grown
so bare, that the King was driven to invent new ways for the raising of Money.
The care of this business (as almost of all others) was committed to Cardinal
Wolsey, who casting up the Exchequer-Accompts, found many deeply indebted to
the King; and (whether by the negligence or treachery of the Officers) never
yet called to account. Among others, the Duke of Suffolk was found to be a
great debtor, who besides his own Revenues, received yearly out of France his
Wives Joincture, amounting to sixty thousand Crowns. Yet notwithstanding he was
fain to withdraw himself from Court, that by living thriftily in the Country,
he might have wherewith to pay this debt. The Cardinal next bethinks himself of
public Misdemeanors of what sort soever: as Perjury, Rapes, Oppression of the
Poor, Riots, and the like; the Offenders without respect of degree or persons,
he either publicly punished in Body, or set round Fines on their heads. By
which means the Treasury (before empty) was replenished, and the Cardinal by
the people much applauded for his Justice. These things having thus succeeded
to his mind, he undertakes more in the same kind. He institutes a new Court,
where the Lords of the Privy Council, with other of The StarChamber, and The
Court of Requests, instituted by Wolsey.
the Nobility should sit as Judges. The aforesaid Crimes, which then greatly
reigned in this Kingdom, and were punishable in this Court, which (as I
conjecture) from the Stars painted in the roof is called the Star Chamber. He
erected also the Court of Requests, where the complaints of the Poor were to be
heard; and ordained many other things in the Civil government of the Kingdom,
that were acceptable to the People, and are in use at this day, wherein he
alike manifested his wisdom and love of his Country. Certainly they that lived
in that Age would not stick to say, That this Kingdom never flourished more,
than when Wolsey did, to whose Wisdom they attributed the Wealth and Safety
that they enjoyed, and the due Administration of Justice to all without
exception.

ANNO DOM. 1517. REG. 9.
THe Spring growing on, the fear of a Commotion in London May Day. Long Peace
having Ill May Day.
with us begat Plenty, the Mother and Nurse both of good and bad Arts, allured
the most excellent Artificers of foreign Nations to partake of our happiness, by
frequenting the City of London. But the giddy multitude not conceiving what
good became of communicating their skill unto us, took it very heinously, that
Strangers should be permitted to enjoy the Privileges of the City; and our
homebred Artificers did most especially complain, That their means were every
day curtalled, for as much as no small part was necessarily to be defalked for
the maintenance of these Strangers. This was now grown the common discourse;
and had gone so far, that one Lincoln, a ringleader of this tumultuous rout, did
not stick to persuade some Preachers, publicly in the Pulpit to lay open these
common grievances before the Estates of the Realm. Our Ladies Hospital in
London, commonly called the Spittle, is famous for the Easter-Sermons; one of
which was to be preached by Dr. Henry Standish (afterward Bishop of St. Asaph)
a grave and learned man. Lincoln had assayed him, and had the denial, as in a
matter, the very mention whereof a good Patriot should abhor. But Dr. Bell, a
Divine who was after Standish to preach in the same Place, without fear or wit
seconding their seditious attempts, did publicly in his Sermon read the Bill
by them exhibited to him, taking for his Text that of the Prophet in the
hundred and fifteenth Psalm: The heavens, even the heavens are the Lords; but
he has given the earth to the sons of men: Thence most foolishly concluding,
that England was given to Englishmen only, and that therefore it was not to be
endured, that Aliens should enjoy any part thereof. Many things by him spoken
to this purpose, were accepted with great applause and approbation of the
Vulgar, who out of extreme hatred to Strangers, breathed nothing but sedition.
And to add more fuel to this fire, it happened that many outrages were about
that time committed by some of these Strangers. This evil then thus spreading
it self, Foreiners were every where ill entreated, and commonly knocked down in
the streets, having not offered injury to any man. The authors of these riots
being by the Lord Mayor committed to prison, a sudden rumor ran through the
City, That on May Day next all Strangers should be massacred. This without
doubt proceeded from some of this unruly crew, and was intended as a watchword
to all the Faction; but the Strangers made so May-day-Eve therefore (the next
day being the Feast of the Apostles Philip and Jacob, the solemnity thereof is
usually augmented by the liberty granted to the younger sort to sport
themselves and to make merry) the Citizens in general are by Proclamation
commanded to keep fast their doors, and to restrain their Servants from going
abroad until nine of the Clock the next day. But before this had been thoroughly
proclaimed, an Alderman walking in the streets, saw a troop of young men
consisting of Apprentices and such like gathered together, and playing at
cudgels. He sharply reproved them for not obeying the King's Edict, withal
threatening to punish them, if they the sooner betook not themselves every one
to his home. Words not prevailing, he laid hold on one or two, intending to
have committed them. But what reckoning they made of Authority, their
resistance in rescue of their Companions showed; and by outcries giving an
Alarm, drew together all the rest of their Faction in that quarter of the City.
The fame of this hurliburly increased their numbers, by sending Mariners,
Gentlemen's Servants, Beggars, and Citizens, but the greatest part were
Apprentices. Sedition like a torrent carried them headlong, and animated them
to all villainy. They break open the Prisons, set those at liberty, that were
imprisoned for their outrages on Strangers, fly about the City as in a
whirlwind, rob all Foreiners houses, and not content with their goods, seek
after them for their lives. They found their nests, but the birds were fled.
Having thus spent the night, in the morning hearing the King's forces to
approach, most of them slipped away, only some three hundred remained (whereof
eleven were Women) and being apprehended, supplied their places, whom they
before had freed. They were all arraigned, only thirteen designed for death,
whereof, nine suffered on diverse Gibbets purposely erected in diverse parts of
the City. Lincoln, Sherwin, and two Brethren named Bets, Chieftains in this
sedition, were carried to Cheapside, where Lincoln was deservedly hanged. The
Executioner ready to turn off another, was prevented by the King's gracious
Pardon. The mind of man being prone to pity, we may imagine, that others were
well pleased at the news; but certainly the condemned had cause to rejoice. The
Queens of England, the two Dowagers of France and Scotland (both of them the
King's Sisters, and then at Court) became incessant Petitioners to his Majesty,
and on their knees, in the behalf of these condemned persons: and at length,
Wolsey consenting (by whom the King was wholly swayed) their Petitions were
granted to them, and to the poor men their lives. This was the last Scene of
this Tragical Tumult, the like whereof this well-governed City

In August and September the Sweating-sickness (termed beyond The
SweatingSickness.
Sea, Sudor Anglicus, or the English sweat) began, a disease utterly unknown to
former Ages. Of the common sort they were numberless, that perished by it; of
the Nobility, the Lords Clinton, and Gray of Wilton. The symptoms and cure you
may find in Polydor Virgil (in Anno 1. Henr. 7.) who (as confidently, as I
believe truly) maintains, That, this disease was never till then known to be,
much less to be mortal. As if there were a concatenation of evils, one evil
seldom comes alone. A Pestilence succeeded this former mortality, and so raged
the whole Winter season in most parts of the Realm, that the King for fear of
infection, attended by a few, was fain every day to remove his Court from one
place to another.

The eleventh of February was born the Lady Mary, afterward Queen of England.

ANNO DOM. 1518. REG. 10.
THe Peace so long treated of between us and the French, was September at
length concluded on these Conditions: That the Daulphin should marry the Lady
Mary the King's only Child, Peace with France.
and not yet two years old: That Tournay should be restored to the French: That
the French should pay King Henry four hundred thousand Crowns, viz. two hundred
thousand for his charge in building the Citadel, for the Artillery, Powder,
and Munition, which he should leave there; and other two hundred thousand
Crowns, partly for the expense of that War, wherein the City was taken, and
partly in regard of other Pensions that were due unto him.

For the payment of which sums, the French gave eight Hostages; so says
Bellay. But our Writers speak of a far different sum, viz. Six hundred
thousand Crowns for the City, and four hundred thousand Crowns for the
Citadel: besides three and twenty thousand Pounds Tournois, which the City of
Tournay ought the King; and an annual Pension of a thousand Marks assigned to
Cardinal Wolley for renouncing all claim and title to the Bishopric of
Tournay. For the confirmation of these Articles, the Earl of Worcester, and the
Bishop of Ely, with some others, were sent into France, where both by the King
and Princes of the Realm they were magnificently entertained.

ANNO DOM. 1519. REG. 11.
THis year, on the twelfth of January, in the sixty third year Maximilian,
having to prevent a disease, to which he thought himself inclining,
unseasonably The death of the Emperor Maximilian.
taken a Medicine of uncertain operation. His death bred an equal desire in the
minds of two great Princes, who became Competitors for the Empire, Francis King
of France, and Charles King of Spain. But Charles, although King of Spain, yet
being by birth (born at Gand) and descent a German, at the age of nineteen
years was chosen Emperor of Germany, with the full consent and suffrages of
all the Princes Electors. This Election, how-ever other slight matters were
pretended, was undoubtedly the cause of the ensuing dreadful War between these
Princes. The French King taking this repulse impatiently, meditates nothing but
revenge. And that his designs might no way be crossed by us, he labors amain
for the confirmation of the Peace lately agreed upon between Henry and him.
Therefore by the Admiral Bonivet he deals with Wolsey, that at an Enterview
between the two Kings, the League might be ratified. To this end Henry intends
to come to Guisnes, Francis to Ardres, and a convenient place between both is
made choice of for their Enterview.

ANNO DOM. 1520. REG. 12.
HEreupon the King setting forward toward France, by easy Canterbury,
intending there to keep his The Emperor Charles the Fifth in England:
Whitsontide. The next day after being the twenty sixth of May, the new created
Emperor Charles the Fifth in his return from Spain arrives at Dover, distant
twelve miles from Canterbury. The King gladly entertaines the news, and
although it were midnight, takes horse, and within little more than an hour
comes by torchlight to Dover-Castle, where the Emperor lay; who Sea-weary was
then asleep. But being certified of the King's arrival, he suddenly apparelled
himself, and met the King at the top of the stairs. They embraced and saluted
one another, they long conferred together, and the next morning (being
Whit-Sunday) they Canterbury.
rode together to Canterbury, the Emperor always keeping the right hand, and
the Earl of Derby bearing the Sword before them both. Canterbury is a City more
famous for antiquity, than for modern beauty. To let pass, that it was above a
thousand years since made an Archiepiscopal See, our Chronicles do sufficiently
testify, that both in respect of private men's fair Houses, and the magnificent
structure of its Churches, it anciently excelled the bravest Cities of England.
But within these few years it has lost so much of its greatness and beauty,
that a man shall find little of Canterbury London, which swelling like the
Spleen, sucks both blood and moisture from all the other languishing Cities of
the Kingdom. Likewise the subversion of St. Augustine's Monastery, the loss of
Calais, and the pulling down of Archbishop Becket's Shrine, things which
occasioned a great concourse of people, and did by their loss and overthrow
much impair this Cities splendor. One only Ornament thereof survives, which is
the Cathedral and Metropolitical Church, with such a majesty piercing the skies
(says Erasmus) that it a far off fills the beholder with devout amazement.
This Church being at first dedicated to our Savior CHRIST, a few Ages past
degenerated into the nickname of St. Thomas. This Thomas, surnamed Becket,
having obstinately opposed Henry the Second, was in this Church slain by
certain Soldiers; and being afterward canonized for a Saint, his Sepulcher
mightily increased the glory of the place. For from those times even almost to
our days, all sorts of people from all parts of Europe, superstitiously
frequented the Shrine of this upstart Saint, with rich Oblations endeavoring
to procure his favor. Hence the Monastery was so enriched, that of it and the
Church Erasmus said, That every place was enlightened with the luster of most
precious and huge stones, and the Church throughout abounded with more than
Royal Treasure. But the Shrine especially, that contained the Relics of this
Saint, was so embossed with Jewels, that Gold was the meanest thing about it.
Hither accompanied with King Henry, came the Emperor Charles, but whether out
of devotion or curiosity, I cannot say. But this is certain, that the Cardinal
and the Clergy going in Procession, to the Church they went directly, where a
great deal of time was spent in Ceremonious Worship, and Oblations at Becket's
Tomb, not only by the Emperor, but even by him, who shortly after defaced the
Monument, and seized upon that infinite Treasure, heaped up by the devout folly
of many preceding Ages. From the Church they went to the Archbishop's Palace,
where the Queen, Aunt to the Emperor, awaited them, and very joyfully welcomed
her Nephew. Three days were spent in banqueting pastimes, and then the Emperor
went to his Navy at Sandwich, the King and Queen to Dover, from whence they
passed to Calais, that the intended Interview of the two Kings might work its
due effects. The seventh of June was the appointed day; the place, between
Ardres and Guisnes. Interview betwixt the Kings of England and France.
There the two Kings mounted on Spanish Gennets, attended by such a multitude
of Nobility, as the occasions of a hundred years before had not at once brought
together the like, encountered each other, both in the flower of their age, the
goodliest Princes of the world, and most expert in all kind of combats both on
horse and foot. It were needless to set forth the magnificence of these
Princes, The golden Camp. Having embraced each other on horseback, they alight
and betake themselves to a Pavilion there purposely pitched: Henry attended on
by the Cardinal of York, and the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk; Francis by the
Admiral Bonivet, the Chancellor du Prat, and some other Counselors. Having had
familiar conference concerning some private matters, they gave order for
erecting a Theater, and enclosing a ground for a Tilt-yard, that so they might
solace themselves, whiles their Council treated of graver matters, the
conclusion whereof they might at leisure every day know by relation. Fourteen
days these Princes gave each other the meeting, with great concourse of most
famous Soldiers. Henry then entertained the French King at Guisnes, in a House
made of Timber (framed partly in England, partly in Holland, and thence brought
thither) wherein there were four Mansions: The outside was covered with Cloth
so painted, that it would have deceived the beholders for squared Stone; the
inside was hung with most rich Arras, so that it every way seemed a most
artificial and stately Building. The form of it was much like that of the
Exchange at Calais. It being afterward taken asunder, was transported into
England, and so stood the King in little or nothing, says Bellay. (Whereas we
know, and that by Records, that there were sent over out of England for this
Work, three hundred Masons, six hundred Carpenters, two hundred Painters,
Glasiers, and other Artificers (in all eleven hundred) which for the space of
two months labored continually on this Fabric.) The day ensuing, the French
King prepares a Banquet: the Banquetinghouse was a Canopy every way extended
sixty foot, which without was covered with Cloth of Tissue, within with blew
Velvet pouldred with golden Flowers-de-Lys. At each corner was a Pavilion of
the same works; the cords were of blew Silk twisted with Gold of Cyprus, which
was of great esteem. But a most impetuous and tempestuous wind broke asunder
the cords, and laid all this bravery in the dirt. Patience par force. The
French King suddenly makes another Banqueting House, in that place where there
is now a Fort that takes its name from this Banquet. The preparations were
extraordinary, and the magnificence outstripped the reach of humane judgment.
There wanted neither houses, woods, nor fields for disport; for many men
brought them entire on their backs. But pleasures must have their intermission,
and Kings if not by their Greatness, are by their Affairs severed. Henry
therefore returns to Calais, and Francis to Boloign. The tenth of the ensuing
month, the King gallantly attended, visited the Emperor at Graveling. The
Emperor in requital accompanied him Henry visits Emperor at Graveling.
back to Calais. Shows and Banquets are Princes usual Entertainments. To this
end, the King so commanding, a round building is made in the form of an
Amphitheatre, eight hundred foot in French Canopy, made our English Heaven and
Earth meet together. God, as displeased with the mad prodigality of these two
Kings, sent a tempest, the violence whereof scattered this counterfeit Heaven,
blew out above a thousand Wax-tapers, defaced the glorious Thrones prepared for
these Princes, frustrated the expectation of the people, and forced the King to
the necessity of another place. But to let pass the Tilting, Masks, and
gorgeous Feasts during the six days the Emperor staid at Calais: In these
several Enterviews between all these Princes there was no one serious thing
done, but this, that a firm Peace, a perpetual League, and faithful Friendship
seemed to be concluded on all sides. For who would have thought, that it had
been possible for discord it self to have dissolved this knot, where Charles
and Francis attributed so much to Henry, that they made him Umpire of all
controversies that should arise between them? But that there is seldom any heed
to be given to the Agreements of Princes, where they are tied by no other bands
(as of Religion, Affinity, or manifest Utility) than that weak one of their
plighted Troth, those foul dissentions, and bloody wars which afterward rent
all Christendom, and opened a way for that common enemy of our Faith, may be a
sufficient example. The Emperor, after all these passages of courtesy and
humanity, departs toward Graveling, mounted on a brave Horse covered with a
foot-cloth of cloth of gold, richly beset with stones which the King had given
him. He would often speak of his Aunts happiness, that was matched to so
magnificent a Prince. The King staid some few days after at Calais, from whence
passing to Dover, he with all his train arrived safe at London. I cannot but
envy their happiness, who in so little time saw three the mightiest Monarchs in
Christendom, who for their exploits, and the great alterations happening under
each of them, will without doubt be famous through all succeeding Ages.

ANNO DOM. 1521. REG. 13.
E Dward Stafford Duke of Buckingham was about this time arraigned The Duke of
Buckingham accused of Treason.
He derived himself by a direct line from Robert de Stafford, to whom William
the Conqueror gave large revenues, which his posterity greatly enlarged, by
matching with the Heirs female of many noble Families. By the Lady Ann,
Daughter to Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Gloucester, who was Brother to Edward
the Third, he participated of the Blood Royal. The first honorable Title of
the Family was of Lord Stafford, the next of Earl of Stafford, as was Edmund,
that married the Daughter to Thomas of Woodstock. Humphrey Son to Edmund was
created Duke of Buckingham by Henry the Sixth, who left that Honor to his Son
Humphrey, who was Grandfather to this Edward by his Son Henry the third Duke.
How Henry assisted the Usurper Richard the Third, in oppressing Edward the
Fifth, how he after conspired with the Earl of Richmond (afterward Henry the
Seventh) against the Usurper, but was cut off by the Tyrant before he could
bring any thing to pass; the Histories of those times declare. Edward his Son
restored to Blood and Dignities by Henry the Seventh, for his Descent, Wealth,
and Honors, inferior to none but the King, not content with this, was by N.
Hopkins a Charterhouse-Monk induced to believe that Heaven had decreed to cut
off King Henry, after whose death he should reign, and the Crown be for ever
established on his posterity. This the Monk affirmed, God the Governor of all
things, had revealed unto him. He further advised him by liberality and
courtesy to win the minds of the people, for the time was at hand wherein this
should certainly come to pass, if it were not through his own default. The Duke
(no sot, but blinded by ambition) gave such credit to the Monk, who was either
mad, or else flattered him in hope of reward, that although the time prefixed
for these Miracles were past, yet was he still in hope, fed the Impostor with
gifts, who fed him with air, secretly vilified the King, and gave profusely to
all. Nay he could not forbear, but at length he must brag of the Jugler's
promises, as he did to a Gentleman named Charles Knevet, to whom he boldly
unmasked himself, and gave a reason of his actions. Upon Knevet's accusation he
was arraigned, and condemned the thirteenth of May, and on the seventeenth
publicly beheaded. His death was lamented by many, and the rather for that he
was no way faulty, but in his vanity and pride, which overthrew him. Being a
child, I have heard ancient men say, that by his bravery of Apparel, and
sumptuous Feasts he exasperated the King, with whom in these things he seemed
to contend. But he could by no means bear with the intolerable pride of the
Cardinal, whose hatred not He would sit upon his skirts. The Duke to show that
he slighted his threats, and withal, that the King might take notice of the
Cardinal's malice, came the next day to Court, richly (as he usually was)
apparelled, but without skirts to his Doublet. The King and many others
demanding what he meant by that strange fashion, he answered readily, That it
was done by way of prevention, for the Cardinal should not now sit upon his
skirts. He thought he had put a jest upon the Cardinal, to whose informations,
as proceeding from envy and spleen, he hoped the King would hereafter give the
less credit. But he missed his mark: for most men were of opinion, that the
Cardinal's malice crushed him rather, than did the weight of his own offenses.
It was the saying of Charles the Emperor, upon the report of his death, That
the Butcher's Dog had killed the fairest Heart of England. Howsoever it came to
pass, the King who had hitherto ruled without bloodshed, induced by the former
reasons (so the Records run) permitted his hands to be stained with the blood
of this poor Prince; many lamenting, that the indiscreet credulity of one man,
having not attempted ought against the Estate, should be the overthrow of so
noble a Family. If I might lawfully pry so far into God's judgments, which are
indeed inscrutable, I would be bold to impute the punishment of the Son to the
Father's treachery, who conspired with the Usurper against his lawful Prince,
Edward the Fifth, who by his assistance was deprived of his Life and Kingdom.
But forasmuch as that being touched in conscience, he manifestly repented this
fact (for seeking to oppress the Tyrant, whom he himself had raised, he
perished miserably) the Divine Justice (I think) so far regarded his
repentance, that his posterity are nevertheless Peers of the Realm, by the
title of Lord Stafford. The first point of Wisdom is, not to run into Error;
the next, quickly to amend it.

The King having written a Book against Martin Luther, sent King Henry writes
against Luther.
it as a Present to Pope Leo the Tenth. This Leo, not yet thirty eight years
old, was by the combination of the Junior Cardinals elected Pope. In which
dignity he behaved himself according to his years, profusely spending the
Treasures of the Church in hawking and hunting, and other pleasures not deemed
over-honest. Need began at length to pinch him, and money must be had.
Whereupon he resolves to make use of his Keys, against the most subtle locks;
and strongest bars, ever yet held prevalent. Indulgences Peter's Church (this
was the pretense) was out of repair, toward which a certain sum of money
given, would purchase Pardon of Sins, not only for the Living, but for the Dead
also, whose Souls should thereby be redeemed from the pains of Purgatory. But
whatsoever was pretended, every one palpably saw, that these Pardons were
granted to get money for his own relief. And forasmuch as the Commissioners
demanded it after an impudent and shameless manner, they in most places
incurred the dislike and indignation of the people, especially in Germany,
where they saw this faculty of redeeming Sold from Purgatory, was either sold
for little or nothing, or played away in their Taverns. But what speak I of the
Commissioners? That which made the Germans most impatient, was that the
heedless Pope had given to his Sister Magdalen the profit of the exactions of
Indulgences in many parts of Germany, and that so openly, that every one must
needs know it. For all Germany spoke it, (...) this money was not gathered for
the Pope or the Treasury of the Church. (whereby peradventure some part of it
might be employed to good uses) but was exacted to satisfy the greediness of a
Woman. At that time lived Martin Luther, Luther's departure from the Church of
Rome.
a Doctor of Divinity, and an Augustine Monk, one who under a religious Habit,
did not consecrate himself to idleness, but to God. It is reported, how truly I
know not, that recreating himself in the fields, his companion with whom he
then discoursed, was suddenly stricken dead with Thunder. He thereupon falling
into due consideration of the uncertainty of death, and of judgment, left the
study of the Civil Law, to which he then applied himself, and renouncing the
world, betook himself to a Cloister, where for his deportment he was beyond
exception, for Learning (especially divine) he was scarce matchable. Upon this
horrible abuse of the authority of the Keys, being inflamed with a pious zeal,
he could not contain himself, but boldly and bitterly inveighed against this
gross impiety. Neither stayed he there, but (storm the Pope never so much)
proceeds to other enormities in the Church of Rome, some whereof that Church
has since reformed, the rest religious Princes, by Luther awakened out of
their dead sleep of Superstition, notwithstanding the practices of Rome, have
(God be thanked) exploded. New opinions (especially in matters of Religion) are
of themselves always odious. Henry being offended with Luther's new (as the
world then deemed them) Tenets, thought it would prove to his honor, by
writing against Luther; to manifest his Learning and Piety to the world.
Hereupon under his name a Book was set forth, better beseeming some ancient and
deep Divine, than a youthful Prince (whom although he earnestly endeavored it,
yet his affairs would not permit to bury himself among his Books) which many
thought Thomas Moor, some by the Bishop of Rochester, and others (not without
cause) suspected to be the work of some other great Scholar. Whosoever wrote
it, Luther replied in such sort, that although his holy zeal were approved by
many, yet those many could have wished him more temperate, and respective of
the Majesty of Kings. This Book was so acceptable to the Pope, that according
to the example of Alexander the Sixth, who entitled the King of Spain,
Catholic; and of that Pope, whosoever he were, that gave the French King the
title of Most Christian; he decreed to grace King Henry and his Successors with
The Kings of England by the Pope styled, Defender of the Faith. The death of
Leo the Tenth.
that honorable one of Defender of the Faith. Which several Titles are by these
Princes retained to this day. But Leo long survived not his gift, about the end
of the year dying (as is suspected) by poison. In the mean time the exulcerated
minds of the Emperor and the French King (according to the nature of ambitious
hatred, that for its own ends makes all causes just) burst out into open Wars;
for the composing whereof each of them had formerly agreed to refer themselves
(if any differences should arise) to the arbitrament of Henry. He therefore
sends to each of them Ambassadors, Cardinal Wolsey and others sins Ambassadors
to the Emperor and French King.
the Cardinal of York, the Earl of Worcester, and others, who should, if it
were possible, reconcile these enraged Princes. All they could do, proved but
an endeavor: for when they thought they had compassed their desires, sudden
news came, that the Admiral Bonivet had by force taken Fuentaraby, a Town of
the Emperor's in Biscay. The Emperor would not then ratify the Agreement,
unless this Town were redelivered; which the French denying to do, all fell to
pieces again, and the War was renewed. After their devoir in this cause, our
Ambassadors went directly to Bruges to the Emperor, of whom for a fortnight,
which was the time of their stay there, they had Royal entertainment. But he
held the Cardinal in so great esteem, that it was apparent he was not ignorant,
how powerful the Cardinal was with his Prince. And here perhaps it would not be
amiss (in regard of these times) to let the Reader know the pomp and state of
this Cardinal, how many Gentlemen attended him apparelled with Velvet, and
adorned with Gold-chains, and then how many were clothed in Scarlet-coats, the
skirts whereof were guarded with Velvet the full breadth of a hand. But let him
guess Hercules stature by the length of his foot. Such was the bravery of his
attendants, that in Christiern King of Denmark, and other Princes then residing
at Bruges, it bred amazement. It was also reported, that he was by Gentlemen of
the best rank served on the knee, a kind of state which Germany had yet never
known. He spent a huge mass of money in that Embassage, and that (as it is
thought) not against his will. For he by all means sought the Emperor's
favor, hoping that Leo, although much younger, either cut off by treachery, or
his own intemperance, might leave the world Pacey the Dean of Paul's into Italy,
with Mandates to certain Cardinals whom he thought respected him, that they
should do their best in his behalf. But before he could reach Rome, he was
certainly informed, that Adrian (sometimes Tutor to the Emperor, and then
Viceroy of Spain) was already elected, by the name of Adrian the Sixth.

ANNO DOM. 1522. REG. 14.
VV Olsey nevertheless was as full of ambitious hope as ever. Adrian was a
decrepit weak old man, and therefore not likely (as indeed he did not) to
survive him. In the mean time he might make an ascent, by which his ambition
might climb. He therefore seeks to advance the Emperor's designs more than
ever, and to that end he persuadeth Henry to denounce War against the French;
for that he denied to surrender Fuentaraby, and had broken the Covenants made
between them, in not standing to the Arbitrament of Henry, as both Charles and
Francis had compromised; at what time it was likewise decreed, that Henry
should declare himself an Enemy to the obstinate refuser. The French discerning
the storm before it came, arrests all English Ships, commits the Merchants to
prison, and seizes their goods to his own use; stops all Pensions due either
to Henry for Tournay, or to his Sister the Dowager of France, for her
Joincture. The French Ships and Merchants in England find the like
entertainment, the Hostages given by the French for the 'foresaid sums, are
committed to close prison, and the French Ambassador confined to his house.
Levies are made throughout England, and great preparations for another
Expedition into France: To which the King being wholly bent, Ambassadors
suddenly arrive from the Emperor; whose request was, That he would join his
forces with the Imperials: and that, if it so pleased him, Charles would within
few days be in England, that so they might personally confer and advise what
course they were best to run. Many reasons moved the Emperor by the way to
touch at England. His Grandfather Ferdinand being dead, his presence was
necessarily required in Spain, whither he must pass by England. He feared lest
this breach betwixt us and France, might easily be made up, he being so far
distant. He had an Aetna in his breast, which burned with extreme hatred toward
the French, and was confident, that his presence would raise our sparkle to a
flame. They might personally treat and conclude more safely and securely than
by Agents and Posts, of whom in matters of moment no wise man would make use,
unless forced England, was, that he was weary of Wolsey, with whom he saw it
was impossible long to continue friend. For the Cardinal by his importunity,
one while for the Papacy, another while for the Archbishopric of Toledo, did
much molest him, who had determined to afford him nothing but good words. He
disdained not in his Letters to a Butcher's Son, to use that honorable
compellation of Cousin, and whether present or absent, he afforded him all kind
of honor whatsoever. But when the Cardinal craved any earnest of his love,
some excuse or other was found out to put him by, yet so, as still to entertain
him with hopes. But Wolsey was subtle, and of a great spirit. And these devices
were now grown so stale, that they must needs be perceived. Charles therefore
neglecting his wonted course by Wolsey, studies how to be assured of the King
without him. For this no fitter means could be thought of, than this Interview.
The King was naturally courteous, loved the Emperor exceedingly, and reposed
great confidence in him. Charles therefore hoped that by the familiarity of
some few weeks he might make the King his own. But Henry (he thought) would not
long continue so, unless he could some way lessen his favor toward the
Cardinal. This he hoped might be effected by admonishing the King, that he was
now past the years of a child, and needed no Tutor, that it was not fit he
should suffer himself to be swaied by a Priest, one in all reason better
skilled in the mysteries of the Altar, than of State, against which in this
respect (besides the abuse of his power) he must needs be some way (though
perhaps unwillingly) faulty. The addition of some aspersions withal were
thought not to be amiss, which if not true, should at least carry a show of
truth. That the Emperor practiced something in this kind, the consequences
make it more than probable. Henry being a noble Prince, and one that scorned
money as much as any one breathing, was glad of the Emperor's coming; yet was
his Treasury very bare, and so great a Guest could not be entertained without
as great expenses. Charles upon notice of the King's pleasure, attended by the
Marquess of Dorset, the Bishop of Coventry and Lichfield, the Lord De La-ware,
and The Emperor Charles the second time in England.
others of the English Nobility, comes from Graveling to Calais, from whence he
passed to Dover, where he was received by the Cardinal, who was accompanied
with two Earls, ten Bishops, ten Abbots, thirty six Knights, a hundred
Gentlemen, thirty Priests (all these apparelled in Velvet) and at least seven
hundred Servants. Two days he staid at Dover before the King came. At length he
came, and welcomed him with all Princely entertainment, professing, that no
greater happiness could betide him on earth, than the enjoying his Majesty's
most desired company, though but for so short a time. From Dover, taking
Canterbury in the way, they came to Greenwich, where the Queen awaited the
longed for presence London, where they were received by the Citizens with the
solemnities usual at the Coronation of our Kings. At Whitsontide both Princes
came to Paul's, where they heard the Cardinal say Mass. Sports agreeable to the
entertainment of such a Guest, were not wanting. But when mention was made of
renewing the League, Windsor was thought fittest for the Treaty, it being not
above twenty miles from London, and a place altogether as it were composed for
pleasure. Windsor Windsor.
is situated in a large Plain, upon the banks of the River Thames. The Castle
(being the chiefest in England, for strength comparable to that of Dover, but
far exceeding it in greatness and beauty) is built on a hill. This Castle
contains besides the King's Court, a goodly Church by Edward the Third
dedicated to the Blessed Virgin and St. George; adjoining to which is the
College, where are the houses of the Dean, Prebendaries, and Vicars Choral,
where also live twelve Soldiers discharged of the Wars (called Knights) and
having pensions, who in their habits are bound daily to frequent the Church,
there to pray unto God for the Knights of the Illustrious Order of the Garter.
Of this Order the Castle is the Seat, where according to the first Institution,
the Knights are to be installed, on certain days are to Offer and to do some
other duties. Here, upon Corpus Christi day these Princes having on the Robes
of the Order, in their stalls heard Mass, and receiving the Sacrament, bound
themselves by Oath inviolably to observe the Conditions of this new League, the
chief Articles whereof were these:

That they should with joint and as great Forces as they could, invade The
Conditions of the League concluded with the Emperor.
France: That the Emperor should yearly pay to the King as much as was due to
Him and his Sister, from the French, viz. 133000 Crowns: That the Emperor
should at convenient years take to Wife his Cousin-german the Lady Mary, the
King's only Child (who after reigned, and at age of forty years was married to
Philip the Emperor's Son;) That he by whose default it should happen, that
this match should not succeed, should pay the other 500000 Crowns: And for
assurance of this, the Emperor should put St. Omers and Aires into the King's
hands.

One would have thought it had passed the reach of humane policy, to have
dissolved this band. But shortly after broken it was, and could never after be
firmly knit again. After eight days stay at Windsor, these Princes went to
Winchester, and from thence to Southampton, where was the Emperor's Fleet,
consisting of a hundred and eighty Ships. Here on the first of July the
Emperor took Ship and made for Spain.

In the mean time the Earl of Surrey having gathered a Fleet, landed near
Morleys in Bretaigne, forced the Town, and burned it. And having wasted all the
Country thereabout, he went into Picardy, to join with the Imperials. Some
Forts they took and razed. They besieged Hesdin, but without success: For
Winter coming on, and our men dying apace of the Flux, they were fain to set
sail homeward.

I will conclude this year with an ignominious and fatal loss Rhodes taken by
the Turk.
to Christendom, the Isle of Rhodes, being on Christmas Day taken by the Turks,
while Christian Princes disagreeing about matters of nothing, ruin themselves,
and invite the Miscreant to propagate his long since too too formidable Empire.
God grant they may at length, considering the common danger, rouse up
themselves, and with joint-resistance repel this Enemy of Christ's Cross, who
although he be far enough from some, is too near to the farthest.

ANNO DOM. 1523. REG. 15.
C Hristiern the Second, King of Denmark, by the rebellion of Christiern, King
of Denmark.
fifteenth of June, accompanied with his Wife, Niece to Queen Katherine, he
landed at Dover. At London they abode some days, with that due honor that
kindred and Princes give to one another. The fifth of July they returned toward
Calais. In the mean time a Parliament was held at London, wherein the States
being certified of the necessity of War, and what a fair occasion was offered
for the recovery of France, but that the War was like to be defective, in
regard of the weakness of its sinews; a great sum of money was easily granted.
The Kings of France exact money of their Subjects at their pleasure; the Kings
of England do not usually, without a Parliament, wherein the pretense of War
with France was wont to be a great motive of the Subjects liberality. And
indeed France was at this time greatly distracted, being oppressed with so many
Enemies abroad, and having to do with undermining Treachery at home; insomuch
that our advantages, if wisely followed, seemed to promise us whatsoever we
could hope for. Francis was on the one side pressed with the War of Milan, on
the other side by the Emperor: At home Charles The Duke of Bourbon revolts.
Duke of Bourbon revolted from him, by Letters inciting our King to the
recovery of his hereditary (as he acknowledged) Right in France, whereto,
respectless of pain or peril, he promised his faithful assistance. Neither was
this offer to be slighted; for he had conceived an implacable hatred against
his Prince, and was able to make a great party in France. His valor and
experience were after manifested by the greatness of his exploits performed in
a short space, Francis being taken prisoner by him, Rome sacked by his conduct,
the Pope besieged in the Castle of St. Angelo, and

The Parliament being dissolved, the Duke of Suffolk is sent into France with
thirteen thousand men; viz. six hundred Lances, two hundred Archers on
horseback, three thousand Archers on foot, five thousand Halberdiers,
seventeen hundred drawn out of the Garrison of Calais, and two thousand six
hundred Pioners. The English and Imperials joining, invaded the French
Dominions, took Roye, Mondidier, Bohain, Bray, Chasteaubeau, and marching
within twenty two leagues of Paris, put the City in a terrible affright, until
the Lord of Brion, sent by the King with the comfortable news of the coming of
the Duke of Vendosme with four hundred Lances, makes them take heart again.
After these exploits, our Forces toward the end of December were recalled.

In the mean time, on the fourteenth of September died Pope The death of Adrian
the Sixth. Clement the Seventh succeeds, and Wolsey suffers the repulse.
Adrian the Sixth; in whose place Julius Medices was after two months elected.
Here Wolsey again failed in his hopes, who expected by the help of the Emperor
and the King, to have succeeded Adrian. But the Emperor never intended this
dignity for him (for he did his best for Julius.) Neither indeed had he been
willing, could he have advanced him to the Chair. For the Cardinals were in so
short a time weary of Adrian, who was a stranger, and little acquainted with
the Court of Rome. And the College repined to see any other sit in St. Peter's
Chair, than an Italian, or at least one bred up in Italy. Nevertheless Wolsey
was so incensed against the Emperor, by whose default (he was verily
persuaded) it happened that he missed of the Papacy, that now bidding hope
farewell, he was possessed with a desire to be revenged on the Emperor for his
conceived injury. He therefore on a sudden turns French, and to hinder the
Emperor's proceedings, procured our Forces to be called home, pretending the
ill season of the year, with promise that the next Spring they should be
returned again.

ANNO DOM. 1524. REG. 16.
BUt Charles having not given any just cause of breach, Wolsey French, with
whom notwithstanding by the intercourse of one John Joachim a Geniuese he
maintains intelligence, and without the privity of Henry lays the platform of a
new League. The War was very French. Francis had already taken Milan, and with
a mighty Army sat down before Pavia, vowing not to rise from thence until he
had taken it. The Duke of Bourbon and the Imperials were in number little
inferior, and stood in want of nothing but money (indeed all in all) wherewith
the Pope, the Venetians, and our Henry were to furnish him. Clement, although
he had obtained the Papacy chiefly by Charles his means, detained the money
which his predecessor Adrian had promised; saying, it beseemed not his
Holiness, to intermeddle with the Wars of Princes. The Venetians at first
answered coldly, at length plainly denied; for they stood in awe of the French,
and were jealous of the Emperor's ambition: And the malicious Cardinal had so
played his part with Henry, that the Imperials disappointed of the monthly
sums due from him, were exceedingly distressed. Now Wolsey to make a
separation between Wolsey persuades the King to a Divorce.
these two Princes, told the King, that he certainly found that the Emperor
did but delude him: that he had indeed promised to marry the King's Daughter;
but a rumor was raised by the Spaniards, That this match would be little
either for his profit or his honor, forasmuch as upon the point, the Lady Mary
was but a Bastard, begotten, it is true, in wedlock, yet incestuously, the
match being by the Ecclesiastical Constitutions made unlawful: for he could not
lawfully marry Queen Catharine, who had been before married to his Brother
Prince Arthur: That both the Old and New Testaments were express against such
conjunctions, and that therefore it lay not in the Pope to dispense with them.
It is certain that the Emperor's Ambassadors had thus discoursed with Wolsey
upon this very point, and Wolsey made his use of it accordingly. He knew the
King doated not on his Queen, and buzzed these things in his ears, in hope he
would bethink himself of a new Wife. This taking as he desired, and the King
lamenting, that for lack of Issue he should leave the Kingdom to a Child, to a
Woman, to One, whom, in regard the lawfulness of her birth was questionable, he
could not with safety make his Heir; the Cardinal proposed unto him for Wife
Margaret Duchess of (...), a beautiful Lady, and Sister to the King of France.
He knew, that upon his Divorce from Catharine, and Marriage with the other,
Henry must of necessity fall foul with the Emperor, and without hope of
reconciliation, strongly adhere to the French. That this Divorce was for these
reasons set on foot by Wolsey, the Imperial Historians do all accord; neither
for ought I ever read, do Ours deny. But howsoever it came to pass, this is
certain, That Henry instead of furnishing the Emperor with the money he had
promised, demanded all that he had already lent.

ANNO DOM. 1525. REG. 17.
R Ichard Pacey Dean of St. Paul's, had been not long before sent to Venice as
an Agent concerning our affairs in Italy. He Richard Pacey Dean of Paul's
falls mad.
was a very Learned man, and worthy (had God been so pleased) of a better
Destiny. He knew not the change of the King's mind, But perceiving the monthly
pay due from the King, according to promise came not, of whose Honor, which
now lay at stake, he was very tender, he was much discontented. To salve all,
he assaied to take up so much money of certain Merchants, with whom it seems he
in part prevailed. But the sum was so small, that it stood the Imperials in as
small stead, and yet so great, that it exceeded the ability of his private
estate to make satisfaction. Upon notice of the King's alienation from the
Emperor, he fell irrecoverably distracted.

In the mean time the Duke of Bourbon and the Imperials were The Battle of Pavy.
in so great distress and want of all things, that unless they could by some
stratagem or other draw the French to commit all to the fortune of a Battle,
the Army must needs disband. They disquiet and try the French (especially in
the night preceding St. Matthiasday, which was the day of the Emperor Charles
his nativity) with many false Alarms. They make two Squadrons of Horse, and
four of Foot. The first consisting of six thousand Lansquenets, Spaniards; and
Italians, under the command of the Marquess of Guasto; the second of Spanish
Foot, under the Marquess of Pescara; the third and fourth of Lansquenets, under
the Viceroy Launoy and the Duke of Bourbon. They came to a Wall called the
Park-wall, and under the covert of the night cast down above sixty paces, enter
within it, the first Squadron taking the way to Mirabell, the rest marching
toward the King's Army. The King thought the Imperials went to Mirabell, as
making choice of the plain open fields to fight in. He was unwilling to leave
the besieged at liberty, and yet the Plains were advantageous for his Horse. He
therefore commands his Artillery to be discharged, which somewhat endamaged
them, and though unwilling, draws his Forces out of their trenches (than which
the Imperials desired nothing more) and opposed the whole strength of his Army
against them. But passing before the Cannon, hinders their execution. They that
took the way to Mirabell, now turn head, and both Armies engage themselves in a
cruel fight, wherein the King more following Shadows than Substances, and the
idle rumors of the vulgar, than the means of a most certain and glorious
Victory, is overthrown and taken prisoner, losing beside the flower of the
French Nobility (almost all either taken or slain) at one blow the Duchy of
Milan, the possession whereof had made him Lord of the greatest part of
Lombardy. Pope Clement, who had left the Emperor for the French (which he
afterward repented) often advertised the King, England and the rest of the
Confederates, that they should continue bare enough of money. If therefore he
would but hold his hand, and forbear to fight, necessity enforcing the
Imperials to disband, he should be victorious without bloodshed. But he was not
capable of so good advice. His Forces were great (yet short of his account, his
Captains treacherously abusing him, in not furnishing those numbers of Foot for
which they received pay) and it were equally a dishonor to him, either to seem
to avoid the Enemy, or to lie still so long at a Siege, to no purpose. The
Divine Power having decreed to chastise him, permitted him through impatience
to run headlong into these errors, which so deeply plunged him in those
calamities, that without God's especial favor had proved fatal to him and his
France.

When I consider this and many other the like chances happening as well in the
course of a private man's life, as in public affairs, I cannot but wonder at
the sottish valor of this Age, wherein rather than endure the touch of the
least (though false) aspersion, we will run the hazard both of life and
fortunes. How many brave men do we daily see, wonderful ingenious in this kind
of folly (...) who standing upon I know not what Points of Honor, upon the
least offense challenge the field, and wilfully seek out their own destruction.
What in God's name is become of the patience of that lingering Fabius, who
quietly bearing the bitter taunts and mocks of his Soldiers, of the People,
and the Senate, yet brought home an easy, though late Victory? We are
certainly too blame, with the Dog we catch at the shadow and lose the
substance. Of our Savior we shall learn, that it is the highest point of
Fortitude, In patience to possess our Souls. And according to Aristotle, true
Valor is regardless of ill language.

Mordear approbriis falsis, mutemque colores?
Falsus honor juvat, and mendax infamia terret
Quem, nisi mendosum and mendacem?
It is Horace:

Back-bitten, must I needs turn pale for it?
False honors please, and lying slanders fright,
Whom, but the unworthy and vainglorious wight?
In the Tent of the captive King, the Letters of the Pope and our King,
concerning their late League with the French, being found, the Duke of Bourbon
now knew the cause why supplies of Money came in so slowly: And Prat, Leiger
here for the Emperor, upon notice of it, without leave withdrew himself from
Court, and on the ninth of April secretly departed the land. In the mean time
Henry little suspecting that these secret compacts were known March sent
Ambassadors to him Cutbert Tonstal Bishop of London, and Sir Richard Wingfield
Knight of the Garter; by whom He did congratulate his late victorious success,
admonishing him to a close pursuit of his fortunes: That if his Imperial
Majesty intended with greater forces to oppress the already vanquished; in
regard of the strict tie of Friendship between them, his necessary endeavors
should in no sort be wanting. What answer the Emperor gave I know not. It is
very likely he paid the King in his own coin, and dissembled with the
Dissembler; but having courteously entertained our Ambassadors, as courteously
dismissed them.

But the King wants money, and must now dissemble with his Subjects. He
pretended War with France, and with this key hopes to open his Subjects
coffers. The expectation of supplies by a Parliament would prove tedious; some
shorter course must be taken. Money is therefore demanded by Proclamation, and
Money demanded and commanded by Proclamation.
that no less than according to the sixth part of every man's Movables. Diverse
great personages appointed Commissioners, use all fair means to draw the people
to contribute. But although they sat in Commission in diverse parts of the
Kingdom at one and the same time, they were so far from prevailing, that as if
the people had universally conspired, it was every where denied, and the
Commissioners very ill entreated, not without further danger of sedition and
tumult. Hereupon the King calls a Parliament to be held at London; wherein he
professes himself to be utterly ignorant of these intolerable courses by such
burthenous taxations. The King disclaiming it, every one seeks to free himself.
The Cardinal was at last fain to take all upon himself; protesting, That as a
faithful Servant, he had no further end in it, than the profit of his Lord the
King; and that he had advised not only with his Majesty's Council (which they
all acknowledged) but also with the Learned in the Laws both Divine and Humane
whose opinion it was, That the King might lawfully take the same course that
Pharaoh did, who by the ministry of Joseph sequestered a certain portion of
every man's private estate for the public good. But the dislike of the people,
occasioned by this (though fruitless) project, was greater than could be
removed by this excuse.

And yet this project was not altogether fruitless, the King's apparent want
affording a sufficient pretext of deferring the War with France until another
year. Neither was it the King's intent to make use of his advantages over the
French, who now lay open to all his blows. Henry having put away his Wife, the
Emperor must needs be netled, and then the amity of France would stand him in
some stead. Indeed Catharine was a noble and a virtuous Lady, but she had lived
so long, as to make her Husband weary The King falls in love with Ann Bolen.
of her. He affected the Daughter of Sir Thomas Bolen, Treasurer of his
Household. Her he intends to marry, and to be divorced from For he did in his
soul abhor this incestuous Match, and it stood not with the public weal, that
he should live single, especially the lawfulness of his Daughters birth being
so questionable. He married not again for his pleasure, but to settle the
Kingdom on his lawful Issue. The Learned (as many as he had conferred with) did
generally pronounce the first Marriage void: yet would he have it lawfully
decided, that with a safe conscience he might make choice of a second. Thus far
had Wolsey willingly led him, hoping to have drawn him to a Match in France.
But he was of age to choose for himself, and had already elsewhere settled his
affections.

And the more to manifest his love, on the eighteenth of June A creation of
Lords.
he created his future Father-in-Law Sir Thomas Bolen, Viscount Rochfort. At
the same time were created Henry Fitz-roy the King's natural Son by Elizabeth
Blount Daughter to Sir John Blount Knight, Earl of Nottingham, and Duke of
Richmond and Somerset: Henry Courtney Earl of Devonshire, the King's
Cousin-german, Marquess of Exceter: Henry Brandon, eldest Son to the Duke of
Suffolk by the King's Sister the Dowager of France, Earl of Lincoln: Thomas
Manners Lord Roos, Earl of Rutland: Sir Henry Clifford, Earl of Cumberland: and
Robert Ratcliff Lord Fitzwalter, Viscount Fitzwalter.

Cardinal Wolsey this year laid the foundation of two Colleges, Wolsey, 10
build two Colleges,
one at Ipswich the place of his birth, another at Oxford, dedicated to our
Savior CHRIST, by the name of Christ-Church. This latter, though not half
finished, yet a magnificent and royal Work, a most fruitful Mother of Learned
Children, does furnish the Church and Commonwealth with multitudes of able men,
and amongst others, acknowledges me (such as I am) for her Fosterchild. The
other, as if the Founder had also been the foundation, fell with the Cardinal,
and being for the most part pulled down, is long since converted to private
uses. The Cardinal's private estate (although it were wonderful great) being
not sufficient to endow these Colleges with revenues answerable to their
foundation, the Pope consenting, he demolished forty Monasteries demolisheth
forty Monasteries.
of meaner note, and conferred the lands belonging to them, on these his new
Colleges. It has been the observation of some, That this business, like that
proverbial Gold of Toulouse, was fatal Sacrilege punished.
to those that any way had a hand in it. We will hereafter show what became of
the Pope and the Cardinal. But of five, whom he made use of in the alienation
of the Gifts of so many Religious men, it afterward happened, that two of them
challenging the field of each other, one was slain, and the other hanged for
it; a third throwing himself headlong into a Well, perished wilfully; a fourth,
before that a wealthy man, sunk to that low ebb, that he after begged his
bread; and Dr. Allen the fifth, a man of especial note, being Archbishop of
Dublin, was murdered in Ireland. I could wish, that by these and the like
examples, men

Luther had notice of Henry his intended Divorce, and that from Christiern the
expelled King of Denmark, who eagerly solicited him to write friendly unto the
King; putting Luther in hope, that Henry being a courteous Prince, might by
mild persuasions be induced to embrace the Reformation which Luther had begun.
And indeed Luther foreseeing the necessary consequences of this Divorce, was
easily entreated, and did write unto the King in this submissive manner:

He doubted not but he had much offended his Majesty by his late Luther writes
to the King.
Reply: but he did it rather enforced by others, than of his own accord. He did
now write, presuming upon the King's much bruited humanity; especially being
informed, That the King himself was not Author of the Book against him, which
thing he understood was captiously cavilled at by some Sophisters. And having
occasion to speak of the Cardinal of York, he called him the Caterpillar of
England: He understood, the King did now loath that wicked sort of men, and in
his mind to favor the Truth. Wherefore he craveth pardon of his Majesty,
beseeching him to remember, that we being mortal, should not make our enmities
immortal. If the King would be pleased to impose it, he would openly
acknowledge his fault, and blazon his Royal Virtues in another Book. Then he
wished him to stop his ears against those standerous tongues that branded him
with Heresy: for this was the sum of his Doctrine, That we must be saved
through Faith in Christ, who did bear the punishment of our sins in every part,
and throughout his whole body, who dying for us, and rising again, reigns
with the Father for ever. That he taught this to be the Doctrine of the
Prophets and Apostles: and that out of this position he showed, what Charity
was, how we ought to behave our selves one toward another, that we are to obey
Magistrates, and to spend our whole life in the profession of the Gospel. If
this Doctrine contain any Impiety or Error, why do not his Adversaries
demonstrate it? Why do they condemn him without either lawful hearing or
confutation? In that he inveigheth against the Pope and his Adherents, he does
it not without good reason; for as much as for their profits sake, they teach
things contrary to what Christ and the Apostles did, that so they may domineer
over the Flock, and maintain themselves in Gluttony and Idleness. That this was
the mark at which their thoughts and deeds aimed; and that it was so notorious,
that they themselves could not deny it. That if they would reform themselves,
by changing their idle and filthy course of life, maintained by the loss and
wrong of others, the differences might easily be composed. That his Tenets were
Germany, who did reverently acknowledge this great blessing of God, amongst
whom he wonderfully desired he might rank his Majesty. That the Emperor and
some others opposed his proceedings, he did not at all wonder: for the Prophet
David had many Ages since foretold, That Kings and Nations should conspire
against the Lord and against his Christ, and cast away his yoke from them. That
when he did consider this and the like places of Scripture, he did rather
wonder that any Prince did favor the doctrine of the Gospel. And to conclude,
he craved a favorable Answer.

The King made a sharp Reply to Luther's Letter, accusing him The King's Answer.
of base Inconstancy. He stands in defense of his Book, which (he said) was in
great esteem with many Religious and Learned men. That he reviled the Cardinal
(a Reverend Father) was to be regarded as from him from whose impiety neither
God nor man could be free. That both Himself and the whole Realm had found the
profitable and wholesome effects of the Cardinal's endeavors, who should reap
this fruit of Luther's railing, that whereas he loved him very well before, he
would now favor him more than ever: That among other of the Cardinal's good
deeds, this was one, that he took especial care, that none of Luther's
leprosy, contagion, and heresy, should cleave to, or take root in this
Kingdom: Then he upbraided him with his (...) marriage with a Nun, a crime as
heinous and abominable as any.

At this Answer (which the King caused to be printed) Luther grieved much,
blaming his friends that had occasioned it; saying, That he wrote in that
humble manner only to please his Friends, and that he now plainly saw how much
he was mistaken. That he committed the like error in writing friendly at the
request of others, to Cardinal Cajetan, George Duke of Saxony, and Erasmus, the
fruits whereof were, that he made them the more violent. That he showed himself
a fool, in hoping to find Piety and Zeal in Princes Courts, in seeking CHRIST
in the Kingdom of Satan, in searching for John Baptist among the Clothed in
Purple. But being he could not prevail by fair means, he would take another
course.

The late mention of Erasmus puts me in mind of a Book written by him either
this or the year passed, at the entreaty of the King and the Cardinal (as he
himself in an Epistle confesses) entitled, De Libero Arbitrio; whereto Luther
made a quick Reply, writing a Book De Servo Arbitrio.

ANNO DOM. 1526. REG. 18.
MAny reasons might move the Emperor to seek the continuation England. The
French (although they concealed (...), their King being not yet at liberty)
intend to A breach with the Emperor.
revenge their late overthrow: The Turk prepares for Hungary, Lewis) had
married Ann the Emperor's Sister: Almost all Italy by the Pope's means
combined against Charles, whose power is now become formidable: And Germany it
self, the Boors having lately been up in arms, being scarce pacified, does yet
every where threaten new tumults. In this case the enmity of Henry must
necessarily much impeach his proceedings. But many things again urge him on the
other side: his Aunts disgrace; (for of this he long since had an inkling) the
late League concluded underhand with the French; but that which swaied above
all, was, the dislike of his promised match with the King's Daughter. That the
Queen his Aunt might be reconciled to her Husband, there might yet be some
hope. The League with France (especially the French King's case being now so
desperate) might be as easily broken, as it was made: But this Match did no way
sort to his mind, which he had either for love, or for some other private
respects, settled elsewhere. Isabella Sister to John King of Portugal, was a
brave beautiful Lady, and had a Dowry of nine hundred thousand Ducats. Mary was
neither marriagable, nor beautiful; yet her by agreement must he marry without
any other Dowry than those four hundred thousand Crowns which he had borrowed
of Henry. The Wars had drawn his Treasury dry, and his Subjects in Spain being
required to relieve their Prince, do plainly (perhaps not without subornation
of some principal persons) deny it, unless he marry Isabella, one in a manner
of the same Lineage, of the same Language and Nation, and of years sufficient
to make a Mother. By way of service (Custom growing to a Law) they are to give
their King at his Marriage four hundred thousand Ducats: if he will in this be
pleased to satisfy their request, they promise to double the usual sum. For
these reasons, when Henry sent Ambassadors to treat again (whether sincerely or
no, I cannot say) concerning the renewing of the League, the Marriage of the
Lady Mary, and of War in France to be maintained at the common charge of both;
Charles answered but coldly, and at last even in the very Nuptial solemnities
sends to excuse his Marriage to the King, whereunto the undeniable desires of
his Subjects had in a manner forced him. Some do farther add, that concerning
that part of the Embassage, of War against France, our demands were such, as if
they had been purposely coined by Wolsey to force the Emperor to the priority
of an apparent breach. For the King demanded no smaller share in the Conquest,
than Picardy, Normandy, Guien, Gascoign, with the title of, King of France; and
that the Emperor partaking both of Peril and Charge should himself serve in
Person. But Charles wanting money, and tired with continual peril, if he regard
either his safety and ease, or his profit, must not give his assent, especially
considering, that the captive-King made larger offers, and those with Peace,
than these, yea although he became Henry expect any other issue of his Embassy,
than a flat refusal. For at the same time he deals with the Regent (the
captive-King's The King endeavors to relieve the French King.
Mother) to send over some trusty person, with whom he might consult of the
main chance; which she gladly did, dispatching away the Lord of Brion President
of Rouen, and John Joachim with a large Commission, and Instructions by all
submissive and fair language to persuade the King to persist in the prosecution
of this new League. For indeed she much feared, lest the consideration of his
advantages over the tottering Estate of France might make him fly off again.
France was already distressed: what would it be, if the Emperor pressing hard
on the one side, and Duke of Bourbon a homebred enemy revolting, besides many
other occasions, the English should infest it on the other side? In England
these Agents found their entertainments such, that they could not but hope
well, especially making means to the Cardinal, who yet swayed the King. Wolsey
long since disaffected the Emperor, but now made his hate apparent. Charles
before the Battle of Pavy sent no Letters to the Cardinal, but entirely written
by himself, and subscribed, Your Son and Cousin, CHARLES.

After this Victory he sent one or two, subscribed barely with his Name,
without the usual solemn form, or any signification of favor or respect. These
were evident tokens of an alienated mind, and Wolsey durst view hates with him.
Neither did he deal otherwise with Henry, than as one beneath him; being now
puffed up with the conceit of that great Victory, for the obtaining whereof
Henry did bear a part in the charge, though indeed not so great as he promised.
The King's affairs now stood upon those terms, that renouncing the strict
alliance with the Emperor, hitherto by so many ties kept inviolable, he must
make a party with the French.

Brion therefore at the Council Table having audience; Deplores his Prince's
calamity, and the miseries inflicted upon his Country by their late overthrow.
He calls to mind what Trophies the English erected in France, when the Estate
of it was most flourishing, withal acknowledging, that France being now as it
were in the Sunset of its Fortune, occasion was offered of advancing the
English Colors farther than ever. But it would neither beseem so magnanimous a
King, nor would it be for the good of England, at this time to invade it. A
generous mind scorneth to insult over one already dejected. Neither would the
Victory, beside the fortune of War, want its dangers, (...) to be communicated
with one, already become so potent, that no (...) than the united Forces of all
Europe would serve to stop the current of his fortune; which must necessarily
be done, unless we could be content willingly to undergo the miseries of a
Spanish servitude. He therefore craved of his Majesty, that leaving the
Emperor (who puffed up with

Having delivered thus much in Latin, Sir Thomas More (afterward Lord
Chancellor) returned this answer in Latin likewise:

That the King was well pleased, that the French acknowledged he wanted not
power to revenge old injuries; that having felt his Force, they should also
taste of his Bounty; that he would do the utmost of his endeavor to set their
Captive King at liberty. Which if he effected, he hoped when he had occasion to
make use of their King, he would not be unmindful of so good a turn freely done
in so urgent a season. In the mean time he was content to make a perpetual
Peace with them. As for the Emperor, he would consider what to determine of
him.

So a most firm League is concluded with the French (the A League concluded
with the French King.
Regent undertaking for her Son) and a separation from the Emperor so openly
made, that the first thing concluded between them was, That it should not be
lawful for the French King in lieu of his ransom to consign any part of his
Kingdom to the Emperor. The French were glad of this League, who now began to
conceive some hope of good, being secure of England. Indeed it made so great an
impression in the heart of Francis, that in his care of our affairs for many
years together he showed himself mindful of so great a benefit. These things
were done in the Winter season.

A little after, Francis having been a year Prisoner in Spain, The French King
set at liberty.
was upon these Conditions at length set at liberty:

That as soon as be came into France, he should consign the Duchy of Burgoigne
to the Emperor: That he should quit the Sovereignty of Flanders and Arthois:
That he should renounce all his right pretended to the Duchy of Milan and
Kingdom of Naples: That he should restore to his honors the Duke of Bourbon,
and the rest that had revolted with him: That he should marry Eleonor the
Emperor's Sister, Queen of Portugal: That he should pay the whole sums of
money heretofore due to the King of England, his Sister the Queen of France,
and Cardinal Wolsey; The payment whereof the Emperor had undertaken, that we
might not be endamaged by partaking with him.

For the performance of these and other things of less moment, Francis not only
bound himself by Oath, but also delivered his two Sons, Francis the Daulphin,
and Henry Duke of Orleans, who should remain Hostages in Spain until all things
were duly performed. Francis, as soon as he entered into his Realm ratified all
the Articles of the Treaty, but that concerning the Duchy of Burgoigne, which
he pretended he could not alienate without the England and of France, the Pope,
the Venetians, Florentines, and Suisses, (called the Holy League) for the
common liberty of Italy. The Ambassadors much amazed, and seeing small hopes of
the Duchy of Burgoigne (for which they came) return into Spain, and advertise
the Emperor, that if he will be content with a pecuniary ransom, and free the
two Princes, the King was willing to pay it; other Conditions he was like to
have none.

In the mean time Solomon not forgetting to make his profit of The King of
Hungary slain by the Turks.
these horrible confusions, invaded Hungary with a great Army, overthrew the
Hungarians, slew King Lewis the Emperor's Brotherin-Law, and conquered the
greatest part of the Kingdom. For the obtaining of this Victory our Rashness
was more available to him, than his own Forces. The Hungarians in comparison of
their Enemies were but a handful: but having formerly been many times
victorious over the Turks, they persuaded the young King that he should not
obscure the ancient glory of so warlike a Nation: that not expecting the aids
of Transylvania, he should encounter the Enemy even in the open fields, where
the Turks in regard of their multitudes of Horse might be thought invincible.
The event showed the goodness of this counsel. The Army consisting of the chief
strength and Nobility of the Country was overthrown, a great slaughter made,
and the King himself slain, with much of the Nobility and chief Prelates of the
Realm, and among them Tomoraeus Archbishop of Colocza, the chief author of this
ill advised attempt.

I cannot omit an odd jest at the same time occasioned by Wolsey his ambition.
It was (but falsely) rumoured that Pope Clement was dead. The Cardinal had long
been sick of the Pope, and the King lately of his Wife. Wolsey persuades the
King, there was no Wolsey seeks to be Pope, Sede nondum vacant.
speedier way to compass his desires, than if he could procure him to be chosen
Pope, Clement being now dead. Stephen Gardener a stirring man, one very learned
and that had a working spirit, did then at Rome solicit the King's Divorce from
Queen Catharine. Wherein although using all possible means, and that Clement
was no friend to the Emperor, yet could he not procure the Pope's favor in
the King's behalf. Nay, whether he would not cut off all means of
reconciliation with the Emperor, if need were, or whether being naturally
slow, he did not usually dispatch any matter of great moment speedily; or
peradventure (whereto the event was agreeable) that he perceived it would be
for his profit to spin it out at length; or (which some allege) that he was of
opinion, that this Marriage was lawfully contracted, so that he could not give
sentence on either side without either offense to Clement, on whom he much
presumed, what could he expect from another Pope, one perhaps wholly at the
Emperor's devotion? He therefore resolved to endeavor the Advancement of
Wolsey to the Chair; from whom he promised to himself a success answerable to
his desires. Henry therefore sends away speedy Posts to Gardener with with
ample instructions in the behalf of Wolsey, willing him to work the Cardinals,
some with promises, others with gifts, some with threats, others with
persuasions, and to omit no means that might be any way available. But this was
to build Castles in the Air. The messenger had scarce set forth, when report
that had made Clement dead, had again revived him.

ANNO DOM. 1527. REG. 19.
THe sixth of May, Rome was taken and sacked by the Imperials Bourbon, who was
himself slain in the assault marching in the head of his Troops. The Rome
sacked.
Pope, Cardinals, Ambassadors of Princes, and other Nobles hardly escaping into
the Castle of St. Angelo, were there for some days besieged. At length,
despairing of succors, and victuals failing, the Pope, for fear he should fall
into the hands of the Lansquenets for the most part seasoned with Luther's
Doctrine, and therefore passionate enemies to the Sea of Rome, agrees with the
Prince of Auranges (after the death of the Duke of Bourbon chosen General by
the Army) yielding himself and the Cardinals to him, who kept them close
Prisoners in the Castle. Rome was now subject to all kind of cruelty, and
insolences usual to a conquered City intended for destruction. Beside
Slaughter, Spoil, Rapes, Ruin, the Pope and Cardinals were the sport and
mockery of the licentious multitude. Henry pretended much grief at this news;
but was inwardly glad that such an occasion was offered, whereby he might
oblige Clement in all likelihood (as he had just cause) offended with the
Emperor for this so insolent and harsh proceeding. Whereupon he dispatcheth
Wolsey into France, who should intimate to the King, his perpetual Ally, what a
scandal it was to all Christendom, that the Head of it should be oppressed with
Captivity, a thing which did more especially concern Francis his affairs. The
Cardinal set forth from London about the beginning of July, accompanied with
nine hundred Horse, among which were many Nobles; the Archbishop of Dublin, the
Bishop of London, the Earl of Derby, the Lords Sands, Montegle, and Harendon,
besides many Knights and Gentlemen. Wolsey found the French King at Amiens,
where it is agreed, that at the common charge Italy to set the Pope at liberty,
and to restore him to the possessions of the Church, Henry contributing for his
part thirty thousand Pounds sterling a month. Upon the return of the Cardinal,
Francis sent into England Montmorency Lord Steward and Marshall of France, for
Montmorency Ambassador from France.
the confirmation of this League, and to invest the King with the Order of St.
Michael. He arrived in England about the middle of October, accompanied with
John Bellay Bishop of Bayeux (afterward Cardinal) the Lord of Brion, and among
others Martin Bellay the Writer of the French History, who in this manner
describes the passages of this Embassage: Montmorency arriving at Dover was
honorably received by many Bishops and Gentlemen sent by the King, who brought
him to London, where he was met by twelve hundred Horse, who conducted him to
his lodging in the Bishop of London's Palace. Two days after, he went by water
to Greenwich four miles beneath London, where the King often resideth. There he
was very sumptuously entertained by the King and the Cardinal of York. Having
had Audience, the Cardinal having often accompanied him at London and
Greenwich, brought him to a house which he had built a little before, ten miles
above London, seated upon the banks of Thames, called Hampton Court. (The
Cardinal gave it afterward to the King, and it is this day one of the King's
chiefest houses.) The Ambassador with all his Attendants was there feasted by
him four or five days together. The Chambers had hangings of wonderful value,
and every place did glitter with innumerable vessels of Gold and Silver. There
were two hundred and fourscore Beds, the furniture to most of them being Silk,
and all for the entertainment of Strangers only. Returning to London, we were
on St. Martin's day invited by the King to Greenwich to a Banquet the most
sumptuous that ever I beheld, whether you consider the Dishes, or the Masks
and Plays, wherein the Lady Mary the King's Daughter acted a part. To conclude,
the King and Montmorency having taken the Sacrament together, the King for
himself, Montmorency in the behalf of Francis swore the observation of the
League. The King bestowed great gifts on every one, and dismissed Montmorency,
who left the Bishop of Bayeux Leiger for his King, to endeavor the continuance
of the amity begun between these Princes.

Shortly after were sent into France Sir Thomas Bolen Viscount Rochfort, and
Sir Anthony Brown Knight, who together with John Clerre Bishop of Bath and
Wells, Leiger in France, should take the French King's Oath, not to violate the
late League in any part, and to present him with the Order of the Garter.

We had now made France ours. Nothing remained, but to let the Emperor know
the effects of the late Confederacy. To this end Sir Francis Pointz and (...)
King at Arms are dispatched War proclaimed against the Emperor.
away to the Emperor, to demand the molety of the booty gotten in the Battle
of Pavy, and the Duke of Orleans (one French King's Sons left Hostage for his
Father) to be delivered to Henry, who had born a share in the charges of that
War, and therefore expected to partake in the gains: To command him to draw his
Army out of Italy, and not to disturb the peace of Christendom by molesting
Christ's Vicar. This if he refused to do (neither was there expectation of any
thing else) they should forthwith defy him. They execute their Commission, and
perceiving nothing to be obtained, Clarencieux and a certain French Herald
being admitted to the Emperor's presence, do in the names of both King's
proclaim War against him. Charles accepts it cheerfully. But the Ambassadors of
France, Venice, and Florence craving leave to depart, are committed to safe
custody, until it be known what is become of his Ambassadors with these
Estates. The report hereof flies into England, and withal, that Sir Francis
Pointz and Clarencieux were committed with the rest. Whereupon the Emperor's
Ambassador is detained until the truth be known, as it shortly was by the safe
return of them both. But Sir Francis Pointz about the beginning of the next
Summer died suddenly in the Court, being infected with the Sweating Sickness.
The same happening to diverse other Courtiers, and the infection spreading it
self over London, the Term was adjourned, and the King fain to keep a running
Court. But these were the accidents of the ensuing year.

ANNO DOM. 1528. REG. 20.
POpe Clement was of himself naturally slow; but his own The inconstancy of the
Pope.
time in this cause concerning the King's Divorce. Bearing himself as neuter
between the Emperor and the French King, he makes them both become jealous of
him. And War being renewed in Italy, he perceives himself likely again to
become a prey to the Conqueror. Which if it should happen, he must betake
himself to the King of England, of whose help he was certain, as long as his
cause did uncertainly hang in suspense. But if he should determine in the
behalf of the King, would he in gratitude be as beneficial, as hope (or fear of
offending) had made him? That he much doubted.

These thoughts possessing the Pope, Caesar's affairs in Italy began to
decline, almost all the Towns throughout the Realm of Naples out of hatred to
the insolent Spaniard, and affection to the French, making offer of their Keys,
and receiving Garrisons of French. Clement therefore did not now much stand in
awe of the Emperor, Cardinal Campegius (...) sens into England.
much against whose mind he was entreated to send a Legate into England,
Lawrence Campegius, Cardinal and Bishop of Sulisbury, who together with the
Cardinal of York should have the hearing Catharine to be void. This Bull was
committed to the Legate, with these instructions, That having showed it to the
King and the Cardinal of York. He should withal signify to them, that he had
authority to publish it: but not to give sentence, until he received new
instructions; telling him, that he was content the King should enjoy the
benefit of it (and it may be he was then so minded) but that it stood him upon
to have this business delayed, until he had sufficiently secured himself from
the Emperor. These were the pretenses of the old Fox to the Legate. But his
meaning was to make use of all seasons, and to turn with the weather. The ninth
of October to London comes the Legate, the King having given order to the City
for his solemn entertainment. But the old man's infirmity frustrated their
preparations: he was grievously tormented with the Gout, and would be privately
brought into the City. After a few days rest, catried in a Chair, he was
brought to the King's presence, to whom his Secretary made a Latin Oration,
wherein having much complained of the extreme cruelty of the Imperials in the
sacking of Rome; he used many words to signify, that the King's pious bounty
showed in his liberally relieving him in so needful a season was most
acceptable to the Pope and the whole College of Cardinals. To this speech
Edward Fox (afterward Bishop of Hereford) returned an answer in Latin, wherein
he declared, That his Majesty was much grieved at his Holiness calamity, for as
much as man is naturally touched with a feeling of another miseries. That He
had not only performed what could be expected from him as a man; but had also
done the part of a friend for a friend, and what was due from a Prince to
Christ's Vicar on earth. He did therefore hope, that in regard of his filial
obedience to the Holy See, if it should happen that He should stand in need of
its assistance and authority, his Holiness would be pleased readily to grant
those things, which it might beseem a Son to crave of the common Mother. Thus
much passed in public. The King and the Legates conferring in private,
Campegius assured the King of the Pope's forwardness to pleasure him. Campegius
was indeed no bad man, and spoke truly, what he thought. For Clement knowing
how difficult a matter it was to deceive a man that was no fool, by one
conscious of the guile, and that was not deceived himself; made the Legate
believe, that in this matter of the Divorce he would be ready to do for the
King whatsoever he should demand.

After these passages, the Legates spent six, whole months in confultation only
concerning their manner of proceeding in the King's Divorce. In the mean time
the King understanding, that among his Subjects, but especially the women kind,
this his action was much traduced, as if he took this course more to satisfy
his Lust, November made an Oration to this effect:

Twenty years have almost run their course (faithful and loving The King's
Speech concerning his Divorce.
Subjects) since We first began Our Reign among you: In all which tract of time
we have by God's assistance so behaved Our Self, that We hope We have neither
given you cause to complain, nor our Enemies to glory. No foreign power has
endeavored ought against you, but to his own loss; neither have We employed
Our Arms any where, but We have triumphantly erected Our glorious Trophies. So
that whether you consider the sweet fruits of plentiful Peace, or the glory of
Our Warlike exploits, We dare boldly avouch, We have showed Our Self not
unworthy of Our Ancestors, whom (without offense be it spoken) We have in all
points equalled. But when we reflect upon the necessary end of Our frail life,
We are surprised with fear, lest the miseries of future times should so obscure
the splendor and memory of Our present felicity, that as the Romans did after
the death of Augustus, so you may hereafter be forced to wish with tears,
either that We had never been, or might have perpetually lived to govern you.
We see many here present, who in regard of their age might have been parties in
the late Civil Wars, which for eighty years together so miserably rended this
Realm, no man knowing whom to acknowledge for his Sovereign, until the happy
Conjunction of Our Parents did not resolve, but took away all cause of farther
doubt. Consider then, whether after Our death you can hope for better days,
than when the factions of York and Lancaster distracted this Realm. We have a
Daughter, whom we the more affectionately tender, because she is Our sole
Issue. But we would have you know, that having lately treated with Our dear
Brother of France, concerning a match between this Our Daughter, and Henry Duke
of Orleans his younger Son, both of Us were well pleased with this alliance,
until one of his Privy Council made a question of Our Daughter's birth; for it
was much to be doubted, lest she were to be held illegitimate, being begotten
of Us and that Mother, who had before been married to Our deceased Brother:
saying, it was utterly repugnant to the Word of God, that any one should marry
his Brother's Widow; wherefore he was of opinion, that this match with Our most
beloved Spouse was to be deemed no other than incestuous. How grievously this
relation afflicted Us, God the Searcher of Our hearts knows. For these words
did seem to question, not only Our dear Consort, and Our Daughter, but even the
very estate of Our Soul, which after death must necessarily undergo eternal and
inevitable torments, if being admonished of so horrible an Incest, We should
not endeavor an amendment; And for your parts, you cannot but foresee how
great dangers by reason of this doubt do threaten you and your Posterity. Being
therefore desirous (as the case indeed required) to be resolved in this point,
We first conferred with Our Friends, and then with the most

This Oration took according to the diverse dispositions of the hearers: some
lamenting the Kings, but many more the Queens case, every one doubting, and
fearful of the event. Some few weary of the present estate desired a change
even to worse, rather than a continuance of the present. And by these the
course the King had taken (not approved by the vulgar) as pious, and imposed on
him by his own and the public necessity, was according to the nature of
hopeful flattery, most highly applauded.

ANNO DOM. 1529. REG. 21.
AT length about the beginning of April, the King residing at Bridewel, at the
Black Friars in London began the Suit concerning The Suit of the King's Divorce.
the King's Divorce. There was that to be seen, the like whereof the Histories
of no other Nation afford: A most puissant Monarch, actually Sovereign and
bearing rule in his Realm, being cited by the voice of an Apparitor, made his
appearance personally before the Judges. The Ceremonies in a matter so unusual,
and indeed otherwise of great moment, require an accurate and large relation,
beyond the intended shortness of this History. A Chair of State, whereto was an
ascent of some steps was placed above for the King, and by the side of it
another (but a little lower) for the Queen. Before the King, at the fourth step
sat the Legates, but so, as the one seemed to sit at his right Gardener (after
Bishop of Winchester) appointed Register in this business. Before the Judges,
within the limits of the Court, sat the Archbishop of Canterbury with all the
other Bishops of the Realm. At the farther end of each side were the Advocates
and Proctors retained for each party: For the King, Sampson after Bishop of
Chichester, Bell after Bishop of Worcester, Tregonel, and Peter's Father to the
now Lord Peter's, all Doctors of Law: For the Queen, Fisher Bishop of Rochester,
and Standish Bishop of St. Assaph, with Ridley (Doctor, whether of Divinity or
Law I know not, but one) who had the esteem of a very Learned man. All things
being thus formally ordered, the Apparitor willed by the Register to cite the
King, cried, Henry King of England come into the Court, who answered, Here I
am. The Queen being likewise cited (Catharine Queen of England come into the
Court) made no answer, but rising from her seat went directly to the King, to
whom on her knees, purposely raising her voice that every one might hear her,
she is reported to have spoken to this effect:

Sir, I humbly beseech your Majesty so to deal with me at this present, The
Queens speech to the King before the Legates.
that I may neither have cause to complain of Injustice, nor that you have
debarred me the favor of your wonted Clemency. I am here a Woman and a
Stranger, destitute of Friends and Counsel, so that plead for my self I cannot,
and whom I may else employ, I know not. My kindred and Friends are far off,
neither can I safely rely on any here in a matter of so great consequence. They
that are here retained for me, are no other, than whom you have been pleased to
appoint, and are your own Subjects; who if they would deal uprightly (which few
will believe they dare do) yet can they not here withstand your determinate
will and pleasure. But what have wretched I committed, that after twenty years
spent in peaceable Wedlock, and having born you so many Children, you should
now at length think of putting me away? I was I confess the Widow of your
Brother, if at least she may be accounted a Widow, whom her Husband never knew.
For I take Almighty God to witness, and I am persuaded you cannot be ignorant
of it, that I came to your bed an unspotted Virgin; from which time how I have
behaved my self, I am content to appeal even to them, whosoever they are, that
do wish me least good. Certainly whatsoever their Verdict may be, you have
always found me a most faithful (Servant I may better say, than) Wife, having
never to my knowledge withstood your pleasure so much as in show. I always
loved those, whom I thought you favored, without questioning their deserts. I
so carefully farthered and procured your pleasures, that I rather fear, I have
offended God in too much endeavoring your content, than that I have any way
failed in the least performance of my duty. By this my observance unto you, if
so be you ever thought it worthy of regard, by our common Issue, by the memory
of my Father, whom you sometimes held dear, I do humbly Spain, I may thence be
advised by my Friends; in this case what course to take. If then in Justice it
shall be thought meet to rend me from you, a part of whom I have so long been
(the apprehension whereof does more terrify me, than death) I will even in
this continue my long observed course of obedience. But as often as I bethink
me of the wisdom of Our Parents, by whose endeavors and consent this Match was
ratified, I cannot but hope very well of my cause. Your Father was for his
admirable wisdom accounted a second Solomon, neither can Spain throughout the
whole Successions of the Kings of so many Kingdoms produce any one, who may
parallel my Father Ferdinand: And what kind of Counselors must we think these
Princes had, that all should as it were conspire to hurl Us into the miseries
of an incestuous Marriage? No question was then made concerning the lawfulness
of this Match, and yet those times afforded learned men, yea and (whereof to my
harm I have had experimental knowledge) in holiness of life and love of the
Truth far surpassing the Flatterers of these times. (Which last words she
therefore spoke, because she had heard, that all the Bishops of the Realm had
by a common Decree pronounced against the Marriage. And indeed such a Decree
subscribed and sealed by each of them was afterward in the presence of the King
read publicly in the Court, Fisher Bishop of Rochester excepting against it,
who denied, that he had assented to it, and objected forgery to the Archbishop
of Canterbury for putting to it instead of Bishop Fisher's, a false Seal and a
counterfeit hand.)

The Queen having spoken thus much, arising, after her due The Queen diparteth.
obeisance to the King, when every one expected she would have returned to her
seat, made have out of the Court. Every one amazedly wonders what the Queen
intends. But before she had gone far, the King commanded the Apparitor to call
her back again: The Apparitor obeying, the Gentleman who supported her, told
her she was called; to whom she replied, I hear it very well, but go you on. I
cannot hope for justice in this Court: let them proceed against me in what
manner they will, I am resolved not to stay. So away she went, and would never
after be persuaded to make her appearance either personally or by a Proctor.
After she was gone, the King commended her in those terms, that might befit a
great affection and her excellent virtues: Withal protesting how desirous he
was to continue in that estate, so that neither his Soul nor the Commonwealth
might be endangered by it. Here Wolsey interrupted him, beseeching his Majesty,
that forasmuch as it was bruited, that he had persuaded Him to this Divorce,
His Majesty would vouchsafe to signify to the present Assembly how far this
report was true. The King, although that he knew that in this fame lied not,
yet to secure his Favouritefrom the general hate of the people, affirmed, the
Bishop of Bayeux having first made scruple of it, to have first advised him to
this course, and that the Bishop of Lincoln his Confessor, and other Bishops
with whom he had conferred, did the like. These were the Acts of the first day.

This case was for a month or two held in controversy, the King's Advocates
alleging, that

It was not in the Pope's power to ratify this Marriage, which as Reasons for
the Divorce.
prohibited by the Law of Nature the Scripture had pronounced unlawful: That
Catharine had been lawfully married to Prince Arthur the King's elder Brother,
and that the Nuptials were publicly solemnized, no man could deny; and many
circumstances did manifest the consummation of the Marriage by a carnal
conjunction.

On the other side the Queens Advocates maintained,

The Law which forbad the Jews to marry their Brother's Wife, to Reasons
against the Divorce.
be Judicial and not Moral, and therefore abrogated by Christ: but so far forth
as the Church had retained it, it was by the authority of the same Church
dispensable, especially being they were confident, that the forealledged
consummation could no way be proved.

Thus each side pleaded, and time passed on. The King observes Cardinal
Campegius to go more coldly to work than he was wont, from whom he before this
expected the promised decision. But Fortune had since that turned her Wheel.
The Emperor's affairs The Pope's inconstancy.
prospered in Italy, and Clement knew it was not the way to wipe out the
remembrance of an old offense by committing a new. He found some other pretense
to send one Francis Campana into England; but his chief errand was to will
Campegius to burn the Bull, whereby the King's Marriage had before been
pronounced void, and to return to Rome with speed. But the news of the Pope's
sickness at the same time made him defer the execution of his Mandate. For if
Clement should die, the Cardinal might with safety gratify the King, who had
conferred on him the Bishopric of Sarisbury, and to whom the Cardinal had
promised success answerable to his desires: And if he should permit the King to
be thus illuded, he feared he might be accounted, not only ungrateful, but also
treacherous. But he shortly understood the Pope was well, whose Mandate he must
obey, and the Bull as if for Heresy must be condemned to the fire.

In the mean time the King, who was deeply in love with Ann Bolen, according to
the nature of Lovers counting each minute by the hour, quickly resented this
change, and never rested, until he knew the whole carriage of the matter. Then
first fell his wrath like thunder on Wolsey, whose Wit had hitherto made all
Wolsey falls.
his projects feasible: And he could not believe, but that it was in his power
to effect this also. Here I cannot choose but cry out with the Comedian,

(...)
(...)
Jove and ye gods, how hard a thing
It is, to serve a raging King?
Full twenty years had Wolsey served the King, behaving himself so, that he
grew powerful and wealthy beyond a private fortune, and to the rest of the
King's Titles had procured the addition of that rich one of, a good Prince. For
as often as I consider how laudably Henry had hitherto ruled, and behold the
calamities of ensuing times, I cannot but accord with them, who ascribe the
sway which he did bear over all the Princes of Christendom to the excellency of
Wolsey his Counsels. But Wolsey being taken away, to whom shall we impute those
effects of Lust, Tyranny, and Avarice; two Wives killed, two put away; so many
(and among them many of the greater sort) put to death for their Religion only,
extremity only differing in the manner used by Hanging against Papists, by Fire
against Heretics, (these were the terms of those days) and the Church (or
rather the Commonwealth) horribly spoiled and robbed of her Patrimony?
Certainly had Wolsey sat at the Stern, the King had never like a Ship
destitute of a Pilot, been carried to and fro with such contrary and uncertain
motions. But inordinate greatness is always a burden to it self, the weight
whereof is augmented by the usual attendance of public envy and hatred, the
misbegotten Elves of long and powerful happiness.

Wolsey, the King once offended began presently to totter, and at his first
frown as at the roaring of a Lion (before any harder course was taken with him)
was so dejected, that although he after seemed a little to lift up his head,
yet was he never able to stand on his feet. Nay, the King being once alienated
from him would never after admit him to his presence. Behold the power of base
Detraction (yet I will not exclude the greatness of the Cardinal's wealth
already devoured in conceit) which wipes away the remembrance of the faithful
service of so many years, and the consideration of so great glory purchased to
the King by Wolsey's labors. I am not ignorant what things were objected
against him. But they carry so little show of probability, that I should much
suspect his judgment, that would give any credit to them. Until it was known
that the King enraged at the slow proceedings in the cause of his Divorce, did
day and night breathe out against him threats and revenge, no man ever
preferred Bill against him; which, considering the usual severe courses held by
our Parliaments, must needs acquit him of Abuse of Power. As for the causes of
the King's anger, we will derive them rather from his own discontents, than
Wolsey's faultiness.

The King by this time knew the treachery of the dissembling Pope. He had near
five years wandered in the Labyrinth of the Court of Rome, and could find no
clew to lead him out. He therefore determined to make a way where he could not
find one, Alexander by force to undo that Gordian Knot, which by wit and labor
he could not. To Wolsey therefore he communicated his intent of marrying
another whether the Pope were willing or no, wishing him withal to find out
some course or other, whereby Campegius his Colleague (notwithstanding the late
Mandates to the contrary) might be drawn to give sentence on his side. Many
things might be pretended to excuse the deed, but chiefly the fear of the
King's high displeasure, which peradventure he should feel too, unless he
assented to the King's just request. Wolsey his answer to this I cannot relate.
But this is certain, that Wolsey, whether for that he did not approve of the
King's intended course seeming (as the times were then) full of rashness and
insolence, or that he would not undertake the attempting of his Colleague, or
that (as Sleidan writes) the King had notice, that the Cardinal had advised the
Pope not to approve of the Divorce from Catharine, forasmuch as the King was
then resolved to marry another infected with Lutheranism: Wolsey I say was so
sharply taken up and threatened by the King, that even then you might read in
his face and gestures the symptoms of his waining fortune. For the Cardinal at
that time returning from the Court by water, the Bishop of Carlisle being with
him in the same Barge, complained of the heat which was then extraordinary; to
whom Wolsey replied, My Lord, if you had been but now in my place, you would
have found it hot indeed. And as soon as he came home, he put off his clothes,
and went sick to bed. Before he had reposed himself an hour and half, the
Viscount Rochfort came to him, and in the King's Name willed, that he and his
Colleague should instantly repair to the Queen, and exhort her not to contend
any longer with the King, for that it would be more for her good and the honor
of them both to submit her self to the King's pleasure, than to undergo the
disgrace of a public judgment. For it was now brought to that push, that
longer deferred it could not be. The Cardinal advertised of the The Iegates
repair to the Queen.
King's pleasure did arise, and with his Colleague went to the Queen, who having
notice of their coming, went forth and met them. After mutual salutations, the
Cardinals desired she would vouchsafe a few words in private, but the Queen
refused to entertain any conference with them but where she might have
witnesses of what passed. Wolsey then began to speak in Latin, but the Queen
interrupted him, willing, that although she understood Latin, yet he should
speak in English. So in the names of both Legates he began a Speech in English,
wherein he professed a great Their conference with her.
deal of observance and duty to her, and that they came to no other end but to
advise her for her good. The Queen answered them much Her answer.
after this manner:

As for your good will, I thank you: as for your advice, I will give you the
hearing. But the matter (I believe) about which you come, (showing them a skain
of white thread hanging about her neck) in these I spend my time among my Maids,
which indeed are none of the greatest Counselors: yet I have none other in
England, and Spain (where they are on whom I dare rely) God wot is far enough
hence: yet I am content to hear what you have to say, and will give you an
answer when we can conveniently.

So taking the Cardinal by the hand, she brought them into a withdrawing Room,
where having attentively heard out their message, she made this reply:

That now after twenty years the lawfulness of my Marriage should be
questioned, I cannot sufficiently wonder, especially when I consider who were
the Authors of it: Many of them are yet alive both in England and Spain: and
what kind of men the rest were, who are now dead; the world knows: Henry and
Ferdinand our Parents the most sage Princes of their time, and their Counsel
such without doubt, who for their wisdom were approved of as fit servants for
so judicious Masters, besides the Pope, whose Dispensation I have to show, and
which was procured by my Father at no small rate. But what thing is there so
sincere and firm, which envy will not seek to blast. Of these my miseries I can
accuse none but you, my Lord of York. Because I could not away with your
monstrous pride, excessive riot, whoredom, and intolerable oppression,
therefore do I now suffer. And yet not only for this: for some part of your
hatred I am beholding to my Nephew the Emperor, whom, for that he did not
satisfy your insatiable ambition by advancing you to the Papacy, you have ever
since maligned. You threatened to be revenged on him and his Friends, and you
have performed your promise; for you have been the only incendiary and plotter
of all the mischief and Wars against him these late years. And I am his Aunt,
whom how you have persecuted, by raising this new doubt, God only knows, to
whose judgment only I commend my cause.

This she spoke in French, as it seemed very much moved, and would not endure
to hear Wolsey speak in defense of himself, but courteously dismissed Campegius.

It was now June, and the Harvest drawing on, the Legates thought it high time
to make an end of this Suit. A day therefore being prefixed, many of Nobility,
and a multitude of the Commonalty repaired to the Court, verily expecting, that
judgment should have been given for the King. Henry (having I know not how
conceived some hope of the Legates good intents) caused a seat to be placed for
himself behind the hangings, under the covert whereof he might unseen hear
whatsoever was spoken or passed in Court. The Cardinals being seated, the
King's Advocates earnestly requiring that sentence might be given on their
side, Campegius made this Oration, well beseeming the constancy

I have heard and diligently examined whatsoever has been alleged Cardinal
Campegius his Oraition.
in the King's behalf. And indeed the arguments are such, that I might and
ought pronounce for the King, if two reasons did not control and curb my
desires of doing his Majesty right: The Queen (you see) withdraws her self from
the judgment of this Court, having before us excepted against the partiality of
the place, where (she says) nothing can be determined without the consent of
the Plaintiff. Moreover his Holiness (who is the fountain and life of our
authority) has by a messenger given us to understand, that he has reserved
this cause for his own hearing; so that if we would never so fain proceed any
farther, peradventure we cannot, I am sure we may not. Wherefore (which only
remains) I do here dissolve the Court: Other than this (as the case stands) I
cannot do; and I beseech them, whom this Cause concerns, to take in good part
what I have done. Which if they will not, although it may trouble me, yet not
so much, as to regard the threats of any one. I am a feeble old man, and see
death so near me, that in a matter of so great consequence neither hope, nor
fear, nor any other respect, but that of the Supreme Judge, before whom I find
my self ready to appear, shall sway me.

How the King was pleased at this you may easily conceive. It is reported, that
the Duke of Suffolk knowing the King to be present, and conscious of his
infirmity, in a great rage leaping out of his Chair, bountifully bestowed a
volley of curses upon the Legates, saying, It was never well with England,
since it had any thing to do with Cardinals. To whom Wolsey returned a few
words, saying, That it was not in his power to proceed without Authority from
the Pope, and that no man ought to accuse them for not doing that, whereto
their power did not extend.

But the King's implacable anger admitted of no excuse: Wolsey himself must
become a Sacrifice to appease it. As for Campegius, he tasted nevertheless of
the King's bounty, and had leave to depart. But at Calais his carriages were
searched by the King's command. The pretense was, that Wolsey intending an
escape, had by Campegius conveyed his treasures for Rome. But the Bull was the
Treasure so much sought after. The King could not believe it was burned; and if
it were found, it was enough to countenance his second Marriage. But found it
was not, no nor scarce so much money in all the Cardinal's carriages, as had
been given him by the King.

Wolsey his rising and his fall were alike sudden; neither of them by degrees,
but as the Lion gets his prey, by leaps. Shortly after the departure of his
Colleague, upon the eighteenth of October, the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk in
his Majesty's name commanded him to surrender the Great Seal. But he pleaded,
That the King Wolsey discharged of the Great Seal.
had by Patent made him Lord Chancellor during term of life, and by
consequence committed the custody of the Great Seal to him.: Nevertheless he
would resign his place, if his Majesty so commanded. But he thought it not fit,
having received the Seal from the King, to deliver it to any other, but upon
especial Command. The Lords returning to Windsor where the Court then was, the
next day brought the King's Letters, whose Mandate the Cardinal forthwith
obeyed. In this Dignity the six and twentieth of October Sir Thomas More
succeeded, whose admirably general Learning Sir Thomas More Lord Chancellor.
is so well known to the world, that I shall not need to speak any thing of it.

Wolsey being removed from the Chancellorship is presently after The Cardinal
accused of (...).
accused of Treason, and that (which has been seldom seen) in the Parliament,
that so without hearing he might be condemned by Act. But he perceiving the
drist of his Adversaries, procured one of his attendants Thomas Cromwell (he who
afterward became so potent) to be elected a Burgess of the Lower House. The
Cardinal being daily informed by him what things were laid to his charge, did
by Letter instruct him what to answer. Cromwell although no Scholar, was very
wise and eloquent. Which good parts he so faithfully employed in the defense of
his Lord, that the House acquitted him, and himself became famous; opening
withal by these means a way to those Honors, to which the current of a few
years advanced him. Even they who hated Wolsey, honored Cromwell, whose wisdom,
industry, but above all, fidelity in defending his dejected Lord, was admirable.

Now the Cardinal because he would not be found a Traitor, is fallen into a
Praemunire. Whereupon he is thrust as it were naked forth his own house, his
great wealth is seized on by the King's Officers, and he fain to borrow
furniture for his house, and money for his necessary expenses. Judges are sent
into the house whereto he was confined, to take his answer to the objected
crime, which was, that without leave from the King he had dared so many years
to exercise his power Legatine. To which calumny (for can any man believe it to
be other) he made this answer:

I am now sixty years old, and have spent my days in his Majesty's Wolsey's
Speech to the Judges.
service, neither shunning pains, nor endeavoring any thing more, than (next
my Creator) to please him. And is this that heinous offense, for which I am at
this age deprived of my Estate, and forced as it were to beg my bread from door
to door? I expected some accusation of a higher strain, as Treason, or the
like; not for that I know my self conscious of any such matter, but that his
Majesty's wisdom is such, as to know, it little beseems the constancy and
magnanimity of a King for a slight fault to condemn, and that without hearing,
an ancient servant, for so many years next his Person, greatest in his favor,
and to inflict a punishment on him more horrid than death. What man is he, who
is so base minded, that he had not rather a thousand

Upon his confession, the penalty of the Law was forthwith inflicted, only he
was not, as the Law requires, committed to perpetual imprisonment. The
furniture of his house of infinite value, incredible store of Plate and great
Treasure had been already seized to the King's use. There remained nothing but
the Lands wherewith he intended to endow his College, the greatest part
whereof were his own purchase, the rest were the demesnes of the demolished
Monasteries. These Lands amounted to above four thousand pounds per annum, and
were all confiscated. But God would not suffer so brave a work to perish. The
King afterward bestowed on the College in Oxford called Christ-Church,
Christ-Church in Oxford.
revenues for the maintenance of a Dean, eight Prebendaries, a hundred
Students, twelve Chaplains and Singing men, and four and twenty Alms-men, for
which this College acknowledges Henry the Eighth for its Founder. But the
King arrogated to himself what was truly to be ascribed to the Cardinal; who
was now in the case of the poor Mouse, whom the Cat intends to devour. The King
had marked him out for destruction, yet permitted him to live, but so, as that
he could never escape, and yet never despair of escaping. Scarce any day
throughout those few months passed, wherein he endured not something or other,
that would have animated a senseless thing with anger: neither was the Cardinal
composed of patience, yet did he never despair. Wolfey-falls sick.
extremity whereof few expected his recovery. And the King demanding of one of
his Physicians (whose patient the Cardinal was) what disease Wolsey had, the
Doctor replied, What disease soever he has, if you desire his death, you may
be secure, for I promise you he will not live to see the end of three days
more. The King striking the table with his hand, cried out, I had rather lose
twenty thousand Pounds than he should dye: Make have therefore you, and as many
other Physicians as are about the Court, and by all means endeavor his
recovery. The Physician then certifying him, that he was sick, more in mind,
than body; the King dispatched away a Gentleman with a Ring, which Wolsey had
formerly given to him, willing him withal to tell the Cardinal, that the King's
anger was now past, who was sorry that he had so long given ear to detraction;
and that he should shortly find, that the King's affection toward him was no
less, than when he flourished most in the sunshine of his favor. The same
comfortable words being again and again ingeminated by diverse others sent for
that purpose, the Cardinal in a few days recovered his former health.

At Court each one aspired to rise by Wolsey his fall. But now jealous lest the
King intended a real and sincere reconciliation, and fearing revenge from him
whom they had injured, work all their wits to supplant him. At, or about London
he was too near the Court, some trick must be had to send him farther.
Winchester (the Bishopric whereof he held in Commendam) was not far enough
off. Why then should he not (said they) being not detained at London as Lord
Chancellor, betake himself to the government of his Archbishopric of York? So
having a thousand Pounds assigned him by the King (whose Council Wolsey is
confined to York.
thought Marks sufficient) about the end of March in the ensuing year he set
forward toward York. Of all his Livings they leave him only the Archbishopric
of York wherewith to maintain him, the revenues whereof might be valued at four
thousand Pounds per annum. The speech of Seneca concerning Apicius, why may I
not apply it to the present state of Wolsey? How great was his Luxury, who
deemed the income of four thousand Pounds, poverty?

And now it were requisite that we should proceed to the year 1530. But let us
first behold the end of this great Cardinal. That Summer he spent at Cawood, a
Mannor-house belonging to the York, where by his mildness, justice, and
liberality, he did so win the hearts of his Diocesans, that he was both admired
and loved. He seemed to be much delighted with this solitary confinement; for
that having hitherto been tossed in the Court to and fro as in a tempest, he
had now escaped, not from shipwreck to a Rock, but to his desired Haven of
repose. Yet notwithstanding upon any the least hope of recovering his former
power (although he professed, that converted by an Anchorire of Richmond he had
bid adieu to the vanities of the World) he could not conceal the greatness of
his joy. That he failed of his hopes (which indeed were none of the least) I
cannot assent to them, who impute it to the importunity of his potent
Adversaries. For to what end served so many messages full of gracious and
reconciliatory promises, but ever intermixed with insufferable disgraces the
forerunners of a dire Catastrophe? Certainly to no other, than that he might be
wrought one way or other to approve of, and give sentence for the King's
Divorce (at least) as Archbishop Cranmer after did.

But this course not prevailing, they intend a second accusation of Treason. To
this purpose the Earl of Northumberland is sent to apprehend, and (as he was
amazed at this sudden change) The Cardinal is apprehended.
bring him to his answer to London. But by the way he fell sick of a disease,
which at Leicester-Abbey secured him from all other. Being near his end, it is
reported Sir William Kingston (who lately came thither with some of the King's
Guard) exhorted him to be of good comfort, for that the King (in whose name he
saluted him) had sent for him to no other end, but that he might clear himself
from those things, which malice and detraction had forged against him: neither
did he doubt, but that shortly he should see him more potent than ever, if out
of pusillanimity he gave not too much scope to the violence of his discontented
passions. Whereto the Cardinal in these his last words replied:

I am as truly glad to hear of his Majesty's health, as I truly know His last
words.
my death to be at hand; I have now been eight days together troubled with a
Flux accompanied with a continual Fever, which kind of disease, if within eight
days it remit nothing of its wonted violence, by the consent of all Physicians
threatens no less than death, per adventure an evil beyond death, distraction.
But grown weak, and my disease raging more and more, I do each minute expect,
when God will be pleased to free this sinful soul from this loathsome prison of
the body. But should my life be a little prolonged, do you think I perceive not
what traps are laid for me? You Sir William (if I mistake not) are Lieutenant
of the Tower, and I guess for what you come. But God has justly rewarded me
for neglecting my due service to him, and wholly applying my self to his
Majesty's pleasure. Woe is me, wretch and sot that I am, who have been
ungrateful to the King of kings! whom if I had served with that due devout
observance that besits a Christian, he would not have

More he would have spoken, but his speech failed him, and death presently
ensued. His body apparelled in his Pontifical He dicth.
Robes, after it had all that day (for he expired at the very break of day)
been exposed to open view, was at midnight without any solemnity buried in our
Ladies Chapel, in the Church of And is buried.
the Monastery. Thus unhappily ended Cardinal Wolsey, his long happy life; than
whom England, no nor I believe all Europe, if His greatness.
you except the Bishops of Rome, ever saw a more potent Prelate. His retinue
consisted of near about a thousand persons, among which were one Earl, commonly
nine Barons, many Knights and Gentlemen, and of Officers belonging to his house
above four hundred, besides their Servants, which far exceeded the former
number. His Chapel was served by a Dean, a Sub-dean, a Chanter, thirty five
Singers, whereof thirteen were Clergy, twelve Lay, and ten Choristers, four
Sextons, beside sixteen Chaplains (the most sufficient for their Learning
throughout all England) two Cross-bearers, and as many Pillar-bearers. But
nothing does manifest his wealth and greatness so much as do his stately and
incomparable Buildings. We have already spoken of his Colleges. Whitehal (then
called York-house, as belonging His buildings.
to the Archbishop) the place where our Kings do most reside, was almost wholly
built by him. Hampton Court, the neatest pile of all the King's houses, he
raised entirely from the ground, and having furnished it with most rich
housholdstuff, gave it to the King. It was a gift fitter for a King to take,
than for a subject to give. But in the opinion of the vulgar the Monument which
he intended for the King far surpassed all these: It was of solid Brass, but
unfinished, and is to be seen in Henry the Eighth his Chapel in the Church of
Windsor. That three of his Children reigning after him, none of them undertook
by perfecting it to cover the (as it were) unburied bones of their Father, what
may we think, but that the excessive charge of it deterred them? But upon a
farther inquity we may more justly ascribe it to the especial judgment of the
Divine Providence, who had decreed, that he who had so horribly spoiled the
Church, should alone be debarred the honor afforded to each of his
Predecessors in the Church. And thus much concerning Wolsey, who died the
thirtieth of November, 1530.

In the mean time in June, Anno 1529, after long debating the Louyse the French
King's Mother, and Margaret Aunt to the Emperor, these two Princes The Peace
of Cambray.
are drawn to an accord, and a Peace is concluded between them at Cambray,
thence commonly called The Peace of Cambray, but by us, The Peace of Women. The
chief Conditions whereof, and that any way concerned us were;

That the French King should give to the Emperor for the freedom of his
Children (who had been three years Hostages in Spain for their Father) two
millions of Crowns, whereof he should pay four hundred thousand (due from the
Emperor by the League made Anno 1522) to Henry and his Sister Mary Dowager of
France. Beside which huge sum he should also acquit the Emperor of five
hundred thousand, which he did owe to our King for the indemnity of the
Marriage between the Emperor and the Lady Mary the King's Daughter, whom
(having been long since contracted) he left, to marry with the Daughter of
Portugal: And that he should disengage and restore to the Emperor the
Flower-de-Lys of gold enriched with precious stones, and a piece of our
Savior's Cross, which Philip, truly called, The Good Duke of Burgoigne the
Emperor's Father being driven into England by contrary winds, had engaged to
Henry the Seventh for fifty thousand Crowns.

So that the sum to be paid to Henry amounted to nine hundred and fifty
thousand Crowns, besides sixteen hundred thousand more to be paid to the
Emperor at the very instant of the delivery of the French King's Children. The
total sum was two millions five hundred fifty thousand Crowns, which of our
money make seven hundred sixty five thousand Pounds.

Francis not knowing which way suddenly to raise so huge a mass, by his
Ambassadors entreated our King to be pleased to stay some time for his moneys.
But Henry was much moved, that he had not been made acquainted with this
Treaty: notwithstanding his secret designs made him temper his choler, nay, and
with incredible liberality to grant more than was demanded. For he absolutely
forgave him the five hundred thousand Crowns due for the not marrying his
Daughter, he gave the Flower-deLys to his God-son Henry Duke of Orleans, and
left the other four hundred thousand to be paid by equal portions in five
years. The Pope had lately by his Legates deluded Henry, who was thereupon much
discontented not knowing what course to run. And this is thought to be the
cause of his so extraordinary liberality toward the French.

The King being then in progress, and hunting at Waltham, it The first occasion
of Cranmer's rising.
happened that Stephen Gardener Principal Secretary of Estate (after Bishop of
Winton) and Fox the King's Almoner (after Bishop of Hereford) were billeted in
the house of a Gentleman named Cressey, who had sent his two Sons to be brought
up at Cambridge, under the tutelage of Thomas Cranmer Doctor in Divinity, a man
Cambridge, Cranmer with his two Pupils betook himself to Mr. Cressey their
Father his house: Where Gardener and Fox among other table-talk discoursing of
the King's Suit concerning his Divorce, which had so many years depended in the
Court of Rome undecided, Cranmer said, that he wondered the King required not
the opinions of the most famous learned men that were any where to be found (of
whom the world had many far more learned than the Pope) and and followed not
their judgments. What Cranmer had as it were let fall by chance they report to
the King, who suddenly apprehending it, said, that this fellow, whosoever he
was, had hit the nail on the head, and withal demanding his name, caused
Cranmer to be sent for, whom he commended for his (but too late) advice, which
course if he had taken but five years before, he should now have had an hundred
thousand Pounds in his Purse, which he had unprofitably in this Suit cast away
on the Court of Rome: he commands Cranmer to write a Tract concerning this
Question, wherein having drawn together what Reasons he could for the
confirmation of his advice, he should conclude with his own opinion. Cranmer
did it very readily, and is thereupon with Sir Thomas Bolen (lately created
Earl of Wiltshire) Carne, Stokesley, and Benet, Doctors of Law, with others
sent on an Embassy to Rome: Cranmer's Book is to be presented to his Holiness,
and they are commanded to challenge the Court of Rome to a Disputation, wherein
the Contents of that Book should be maintained; the Argument whereof was, That
by the authority of holy Scripture, ancient Fathers, and Councils, it was
utterly unlawful for any man to marry his Brother's Widow, and that no such
marriage could be licensed or authorized, by the Pope's Dispensation. This
being done, the King's intent was, they should procure the opinions of all the
Universities throughout Europe, by whom if he found his former Marriage
condemned, then without farther expecting the approbation of the Sea of Rome,
he was resolved to run the hazard of a second. To this the amity of the French
seeming very conducible, the King had by his former liberality sought to oblige
him. The Ambassadors came to Rome, had audience, were promised a public
Disputation, whereof they were held so long in expectation, that perceiving
their stay there to be to little purpose, they all returned into England,
except Cranmer, who with the same instructions that he had formerly been sent
to the Pope, was to go to the Emperor; whose Court was then in Germany. There
this good and learned man, hitherto no friend to Luther, while he defends his
own Book and the King's Divorce, against the most learned either of Protestants
or Papists, is thought to have been seasoned with the leaven of that Doctrine,
for which after he had been twenty years Archbishop of Canterbury, he was most
cruelly

While Cranmer thus labored abroad, the King at home deals with Langey the
French Ambassador, by whose means (with the forcible Rhetoric (says one) of
some English Angels) he obtained of the Universities of Paris, with the rest
throughout France, Pavia, Padua, Bononia, and others, this Conclusion, That the
Pope (who has no power over the Positive Law of God) could not by his
Dispensation ratify a Marriage contracted between a Brother and a Brother's
Widow, it being forbidden by the express words of Scripture.

The eighth of December the King graced three noble and Creation of Earls.
worthy men with new Titles of Honor. Thomas Bolen Viscount Rochfort, the
King's future Father-in-Law, was created Earl of Wiltshire, Robert Ratcliff
Viscount Fitz-Walter, of the noble Family of the Fitz-Walters, Earl of Sussex;
in which honor his Son Thomas, his Nephews, Thomas first, then Henry Brother
to Thomas, and now Robert the Son of Henry have succeeded him: And George Lord
Hastings was made Earl of Huntingdon, who left it to his Son Francis Father of
Henry, who deceased without issue, and George Grandfather to Henry the now Earl
by Francis, who died before his Father.

ANNO DOM. 1530. REG. 22.
VV Illiam Tyndal having translated the New Testament English, and procured it
to be printed at Antwerp, The Bible translated into English.
had secretly dispersed many copies thereof thoughout England. Whereat the
Bishops and Clergy (especially those that were most addicted to the Doctrine of
Rome) stormed exceedingly, saying that this Translation was full of errors,
and that in the Prefaces and elsewhere it contained many things contrary to the
Truth. The King being angry with the Pope, had long since determined to free
himself from his usurped power. And therefore admonished the murmuring Clergy
to correct this Book, not to suppress it: for it was a most profitable work,
and very necessary for the discovery of the deceits of the Court of Rome, the
tyranny whereof was become intolerable to all the Princes of Christendom.
Whereupon he gives order to the Bishops and some other learned men to set
forth a new Translation, which his Subjects might read with safety and profit.

The hope of prevailing with the Pope by the French King's An Embassy to the
Pope.
means had drawn Henry to send on a second Embassage to the Pope, the Earl of
Wiltshire, Doctor Stokesley Elect of London, and Edward Lee, Wolsey his
Successor in York. They found the Pope at Bononia with the Emperor, but had no
other answer to their demands, than, that his Holiness when he came to Rome,
would

Fair means not prevailing, the King runs another course. By All comnierce with
the Sea of Rome forbidden.
public Proclamation throughout the Kingdom he forbids all commerce between
his Subjects and the Bishop of Rome; commanding that no man should receive any
thing from, or send any thing (especially money) unto him, either by exchange,
or any other means, calling him Tyrant, the Harpy of the World, the common
Incendiary, and deeming him utterly unworthy of that glorious title which he
had vaingloriously usurped, Christ's Vicar. This in September.

But the wealth of the Clergy being very great, and considering how they had in
the Reigns of his Predecessors strongly sided with the Pope, the King was
somewhat jealous of them. To curb them he condemns the whole Clergy throughout
the The Clergy fined.
Kingdom in a Praemunire, for that without license from his Majesty they had
been obedient to the authority of the Pope, in acknowledging Wolsey for his
Legate. The Clergy of the Province of Canterbury, being assembled in
Convocation, buy their pardon at a hundred thousand Pounds, and in this Synod
he is (with much ado) by the Clergy of both Provinces declared next under
Christ Supreme Head of the Church of England, and all foreign The King declared
supreme Head of the Church.
power or authority whatsoever disclaimed. The Province of York is moreover
fined at eighteen thousand eight hundred and forty Pounds. So this one fault
(if it may be so accounted, it being certain that Wolsey was licenced to
exercise his authority Legantine) cost the Clergy a hundred and eighteen
thousand, eight hundred and forty Pounds.

ANNO DOM. 1531. REG. 23.
THe only public memorable occurrents of this year were, Praemunire, as the
Clergy, were by Act of Parliament pardoned. In which assembly Sir Thomas More
Lord Chancellor, and other remarkable speakers related at large the
Conclusions of the Universities concerning the unlawfulness of the King's
marriage.

And yet perhaps the notorious villainy of Richard Rose Cook to the Bishop of
Rochester, might crave a place in this History, who with poisoned broth killed
sixteen of the Bishop's servants. The Bishop himself (who was especially aimed
at) that day contrary to his accustomed diet forbearing broth, escaped. The
poisoner, according to a Law lately enacted, was thrown into a cauldron of
boiling water. But the offense deserved tortures of a most exquisite strain.

ANNO DOM. 1532. REG. 24.
ON the three and twentieth of August died William Warham Canterbury, to whom
Thomas Cranmer at that time in Germany about the King's affairs, was appointed
Successor. The death of William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury. Cranmer
(though much against his will) succeeds him.
He was not so ambitious as to aspire to such a dignity; and some reasons made
him unwilling to accept it being offered: He knew before he could be
consecrated he must swear obedience to the Pope, which with a safe conscience
he could not. He feared what would be the issue of this abrupt separation from
the Sea of Rome. He knew the King's disposition to be violent, such sudden
changes to be full of danger, and the Court (although he had not yet purchased
the acquaintance of it) to be a mere School of fraud and dissembling. The
King's pleasure must necessarily be obeyed, and if he slipped never so little,
envy, the mischievous attendant of great felicity, would help him forward to a
break-neck. Cranmer also having long since lost his Wife whom he had married in
his youth, had taken a liking to a certain maid, Niece to Osiander's Wife, whom
he intended to make his second Wife: yet he knew that the Canon Law permitted
not Priests to marry, and made them incapable of holy Orders, who had been
twice married. These considerations made him linger in Germany six whole months
after the dispatch of his business, hoping that his absence might afford means
to some other to work a way to the Archbishopric. But the times were such,
that they to whom desert might give greatest hopes of attaining it, did abhor
this still tottering and slippery dignity: and even they who were already
advanced to the like, endeavored to betake themselves to the safety of meaner
fortune; As did Sir Thomas More the Lord Chancellor, who by his continual
earnest Sir Thomas More resigns the place of Lord Chancellor.
petitions obtained leave of the King on the fifteenth of May to resign his
place; and Sir Thomas Awdley on the fourth of June was in his stead made Lord
Keeper. Cranmer having privately married his Wife at Norimberg, at length
returned into England, where the King's importunity prevailing beyond all
scrupulous difficulties, Cranmer is (though much against his will) made
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Pope also by his Bull confirming the Election. He
refusing the Archbishopric, because he must take an Oath to the Pope,
delivered the Bull to the King, protesting that he would never accept of any
Bishopric in England, but from the King, who was Supreme Head of the Church of
England; and that he would not take any Oath that should any way derogate from
the King's Authority. At length the subtle heads of the Lawyers found out a
quirk whereby to salve all: He must first by a previous Protestation except
against this Oath (which was to be taken pro forma) that it should not
hereafter be any way prejudicial to him. Thus ascended Cranmer to the
Archiepiscopal Mary the Daughter of repudiated Catharine not only thrust this
most innocent, grave, learned man out of his Bishopric, but with a barbarous
cruelty condemned him to the fire, as hereafter in its place we shall declare.

For the Treatise of a more strict League between the two Kings of England and
France, an interview is appointed between them. To this end on the eleventh
October the King with a mighty train passed to Calais. The tenth day, after
going to Boloigne, An interview between the Kings of England and France.
he was met half way by the French King and his Sons, and conducted to
Boloigne, where the two Kings divided the Abbey between them. Henry staid there
four days, and then brought Francis (in whose company were the King of Navarre,
some Dukes, and Cardinals, a great number of Noblemen, and of others at least
twelve hundred) to Calais. At St. Joquebert the Duke of Richmond (who was not
at Boloigne with the King his Father) received them. After much solemn
entertainment, and the interchangeable favors from each King to the Princes of
each others company, from Henry to the King of Navarre (or as the French write,
to Montmorency) and Chabot the Admiral by the Order of the Garter; From Francis
to the Dukes of Narfolk and Suffolk by that of St. Michael, these great
Monarchs parted.

Jealousy of the Emperor's still increasing power had now united these
Princes, and their natural dispositions wonderful agreeable had made them
always prone to a mutual love, which by this interview took such deep root,
that even in their own opinions they rested assured of each other. And indeed
had they been private persons, their friendship in all likelihood had continued
inviolable. But Princes are not so much to be swayed by their own affections,
as the consideration of the public Utility. The effect of this interview was
an agreement to repress the Turk about that time wasting Hungary, to which end
they should assemble together by their joint forces an Army of fourscore
thousand men, whereof there should be ten thousand horse, with Artillery
requisite for the said Camp: A specious pretext: For they both knew, that the
Turk had already retreated. But in private they treated of other matters. They
had both many causes of discontent. Francis not without cause was displeased
with the Pope, and Henry thinking it best to strike while the Iron was hot,
endeavored an utter alienation between them. Henry complains first of the
wrong the Court of Rome did him touching the matter of his Divorce, in the suit
whereof full six years were now spent: and yet at length after all their
deceits and mockeries, they seek to force him, either to go in person to Rome,
or in a matter of so great importance to send Deputies, who should in the
King's behalf follow the Suit. An insolent proceeding, and injury without
example, which did concern the French and all Rome. Moreover he did complain of
the intolerable exactions of the Church of Rome over the Clergy and people of
England; whereby the yoke, before too heavy, was now become insupportable:
neither did he doubt, but the same courses were taken in France. Germany had
begun the way of freedom to the rest of Christendom: why should not other
Princes follow their example? To conclude, he did instantly require, that they
two should send their Ambassadors jointly together to the Pope to summon him to
appear at the next general Council, there to answer his extortions, and by the
authority and judgment of the Council to force him to a reformation;
affirming, that there was no Nation in Christendom, which did not desire, that
the insolences of the Romanists should be repressed. To this the French
answered, that he acknowledged these things to be true, but it was not in his
power to yield to the King's request, yet for the brotherly love which he did
bear unto him, and the charitable regard of his own Country, he professed
himself ready to undergo all difficulties. He wanted not sufficient injuries
whereof to complain, considering that he having so well deserved of the
Apostolic See, but more especially of this Pope, yet he certainly found, that
Clement, all this notwithstanding, was not well affected toward him. Clement
had very lately suffered his reputation to be violated in his presence, and by
the Bishop of Verulo had secretly endeavored to alienate the Suisses his
Allies from him. France groaned under the burden of the new and undutiful
exactions of the Pope's Officers, by means whereof all the treasure was carried
out of the Kingdom, to the prejudice of his Subjects (the Clergy especially)
who grew poor, the Churches were unrepaired, and the poor neither clothed nor
fed: and if he himself levied any great sum of money, the Tributes are longer
coming in than usually they were wont. But he thought it best, before they
proceeded to that harsh course, to use some milder means, whereto there was a
fair occasion offered, the Pope having by the Cardinal of Grandmont made him a
promise of an interview at Nice or Avignon; where if he could not obtain reason
of him in the behalf of both; he would endeavor to prevail by force where he
could not by just entreaties: In the mean time he desired him to attend the
issue of their parley.

But Francis concealed the true cause of this intended interview, for fear lest
our Henry not approving it, should seek to dissuade him from it. The French was
implacable toward the Emperor, Henry Duke of Orleans (who after reigned) with
Catharine de Medices Duchess of Urbin, the Catharina de Medices married to the
Duke of Orleans.
Pope's Niece. The Pope could not at first believe this potent Prince intended
him so much honor: but perceiving the French to be real, he most eagerly
farthered it, appointing time and place for the consummation of it, which was
after done at Marseilles by Clement himself in the presence of the French King.

ANNO DOM. 1533. REG. 25.
THe King's love brooked no delays. Wherefore on the five January, privately
and in the presence of very few, he marries the Lady Ann Bolen. The King
marries Ann Bolen.


Shortly after by Act of Parliament the Marriage of the King and the Lady
Catharine was declared void and incestuous, and a Law enacted, wherein all
Appeals to Rome were forbidden, and that none should style Catharine other than
Princess of Wales, and Widow or Dowager of Prince Arthur. By virtue and
authority of the same Law, the Archbishop of Canterbury accompanied with some
other Bishops, coming to Dunstable six miles from Ampthill, where Catharine
then resided, caused her to be cited before him, next under the King chief
Judge in all Ecclesiastical causes within the Province of Canterbury, to show
what reasons could be alleged why the Marriage not lawfully contracted between
the King and her should not be disannulled, and pronounced impious, incestuous,
and consequently void. To these things by one of her Servants she answered;
that it beseemed not the Archbishop to thrust his sickle into another's
harvest: this Cause did yet depend undecided before the Pope, Christ's Vicar on
earth, whose Decree she would obey, and other Judge would she acknowledge none.
Being called fifteen days together and not appearing, she is pronounced
Contumax, and for her contumacy separated from the King's bed and company.
Whereupon the Lady Ann proclaimed Queen throughout the Kingdom, on Easter-eve
showed her self publicly as Queen; and was at Whitsontide crowned with as
great pomp and solemnity as ever was Queen. The particulars I will let pass,
excepting that prophetical Distich upon one of the Triumphant Arches purposely
erected in London where she was to pass:

Regina Anna, paris Regis de sanguine Natam,
Et paries populis aurea secla tuis.
In English,
Ann, thou a Daughter bear to our King,
And to thy people golden days shall bring.
Wafers also with the same impression were thrown about, says Stow. But I
rather believe, that this Distich was made after the Queens delivery.
Whenever it were, he that truly considers the felicity of the four and forty
years Reign of this Queens Daughter, will think this Oracle could not proceed
from any but a Delphian Apollo. For the Queen at the time of her Coronation was
great with child, (whereof the seventh of September she was delivered at
Greenwich) which was that ever famous Queen The birth of Queen Elizabeth.
Elizabeth, who after the death of her Brother and Sister so gloriously ruled
this Kingdom.

The Pope was certified of all these passages; that his authority in England
was abrogated, that the late Queen Catharine was put away, that Ann Bolen as
Queen was taken to the King's bed, that the King styled himself Supreme Head of
the Church of England, that the Archbishop of Canterbury executed all those
Offices which formerly the Pope only did, and that not as the Pope's Legate,
but as Primate of England, who under the King claimed chief authority in
Ecclesiastical affairs throughout his whole Province. Wherewith being netled,
he seemed to breath nothing but threats and revenge. But knowing himself to
have been the motive of it, and doubtful of the event, he was easily persuaded
by the French King, as yet not to proceed by Excommunication against Henry,
until he had made trial of some milder course. Whereupon Francis by Bellay
Bishop of Paris entreats Henry not to withdraw himself wholly from the
obedience of Rome, for as much as it was a matter of great danger: He would
therefore advise him once more by Ambassadors to Rome, to signify that he was
not utterly averse from a reconciliation: which if he did, he made no doubt but
all things would succeed to his mind. Henry was certain of enjoying his Love,
and let the Pope decree what he list, was resolved to keep her. He had been
formerly abused by the Court of Rome, and was loath to make farther trial of
their dilatory proceedings. Yet had Bellay prevailed so far with him, that he
would be content once more to submit himself to the Church of Rome, if he could
be assured of the Pope's intention to do him equity. The Bishop conceiving some
hopes of a peace (although it were in the Winter time) goes himself to Rome,
gives the Pope an account of his actions, and certifies him that the matter was
not yet desperate. Whereupon a day is appointed, by which a Post returning from
the King was to give notice of an intended Embassy. But the Consistory gave so
short a time to have an answer, that the Post came short two days at his
return. The term expired, they proceed hastily to the confirmation of England,
did greatly amaze those hasty Cardinals, who afterward would fain, but could
not find any means to mend what they had so rashly marred. For the matter (to
please the Emperor) was so hudled up, as that which could not ritely be
finished in three Consistories, was done in one. So the King and the whole
Realm was interdicted, the Bull whereof (the Messengers not daring to come
nearer) was brought to Dunkirk.

The report hereof coming to the King, he lays all the blame on the Lady
Catharine. Whereupon the Duke of Suffolk was sent to lessen her Household: They
who might be any way suspected to have been employed by her in this business,
are turned away, the rest are commanded to take their Oaths to serve her as
Princess of Wales, not as Queen of England. They that refuse are cashiered, and
they that are content to swear, are by her cast off; so that for a time she had
few or no Attendants.

In the mean time, on the three and twentieth of June died Mary Queen of France
dies.
Mary Queen of France, the King's Sister, and was buried in the Abbey of St.
Edmundsbury.

ANNO DOM. 1534. REG. 26.
ABout this time was discovered the grand Imposture of Elizabeth Barton, which
brought her to a deserved end. She had formerly been sick of a strange disease,
which not only afflicted The Imposture of Elizabeth Barton discovired.
her inwardly, but as often as her fit took her, so wonderfully distorted her
mouth and other parts of her body, that most were of opinion, it could not
proceed from any natural cause. But Custom growing to a second Nature, the
continuance of the disease had taught her to distort her body after her
recovery, in the same manner as when she was sick. Hoping to make a profit of
this her counterfeit Convulsion, she imparted the secret to the Curate of the
Parish: by whose device after long deliberation between them, it was agreed,
that she should often feign her self to be in an Ecstasie: and whereas she was
wont when the fit seized her, to lie still without motion, as if she had been
dead, she should now sometimes utter some godly sentences, inveigh against the
wickedness of the times, but especially against Heretics and broachers of new
Opinions; and should relate strange Holy Maid of Kent) but among the wiser
sort, such as were Archbishop Warham, Bishop Fisher, and others, her sanctity
was held in admiration. The Imposture taking so generally, her boldness
increased. She prefixeth a day whereon she shall be restored to perfect health,
and the means of her recovery must be procured forsooth by a Pilgrimage to some
certain Image of our Lady. The day came, and she being brought to the place, by
the like cozenage deceived a great number of people, whom the expectation of
the Miracle had drawn thither: and at last, as if she had just then shaken off
her disease, she appears whole and straight unto them all; saying, That by
especial command from God she must become a Nun, and that one Dr. Bocking a
Monk of Canterbury there present, was ordained to be her Confessor, which
office he willingly undertook; under pretext whereof this Nun living at
Canterbury, Bocking often resorted to her, not without suspicion of dishonesty.

The intended Divorce from Catharine, and Marriage with Ann Bolen, had much
appalled most part of the Clergy: for then a necessity was imposed on the King,
of a divorce from the Papal See, in which the Church and all Ecclesiastical
persons were likely to suffer. The apprehension whereof wrought so with
Bocking, that making others conscious of the intent, he persuaded Elizabeth
Barton by denuntiation of God's revealed judgments to deterr the King from his
purposed change. She according as she was instructed, proclaims it abroad, That
the King adventuring to marry another, Catharine surviving, should, if in the
mean time he died not some infamous death, within one month after be deprived
of his Kingdom. The King hears of it, and causes the Impostrix to be
apprehended, who upon examination discovered the rest of the Conspirators, who
were all committed to prison until the next Parliament should determine of
them. Elizabeth Barton, Bocking, Masters, (the before mentioned Curate of the
Parish) Deering, and Risby, Monks, with Gold a Priest, are by the Parliament
adjudged to die. The Bishop of Rochester, and Adeson his Chaplain, one Abel a
Priest, Laurence the Archdeacon of Canterbury his Register, and Thomas Gold
Gentleman, for having heard many things, whereby they might guess at the
intents of the Conspirators, and not acquainting the Magistrate with them, are
as accessory condemned in a Praemunire, (confiseation of their goods, and
perpetual imprisonment.) Elizabeth Barton and her Companions, having each of
them after a Sermon at Paul's Cross, publicly confessed the Imposture, are on
the twentieth of April hanged, and their Heads set over the Gates of the City.

By the same Parliament, the authority of the Convocation to No Canons to be
constituted without the King's assent. The King to collate Bishoprics.


It is also enacted, That the Collocation of all Bishoprics, the Sees being
vacant, should henceforth be at the King's dispose, and that no man should be
chosen by the Chapter, or consecrated by the Archbishop, but he on whom the
King by his Conge D'eslire or other his Letters had conferred that Dignity.

And whereas many complained, that now all commerce with The Archbishop of
Canterbury bath Papal authority under the King.
Rome was forbidden, all means were taken away of mitigating the rigor of the
Ecclesiastical Laws of Dispensation; Papal authority is granted to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the King reserving to himself the power of dispensing
in causes of greater moment. And that all Appeals formerly wont to be made from
the Archbishop to the Pope, should now be from the Archbishop to the King, who
by Delegates should determine all such Suits and Controversies.

Furthermore, the King's Marriage with the Lady Catharine is again pronounced
incestuous, the Succession to the Crown established on the King's Issue
begotten on Queen Ann. And all above the age of sixteen years throughout the
Kingdom, are to be bound by Oath, to the observance of this Law: Whosoever
refused to take this Oath, should suffer loss of all their goods, and perpetual
imprisonment.

Throughout all the Realm there were found but two, who durst refractorily
oppose this Law, viz. Fisher Bishop of Rochester, Fisher and More imprisoned.
and Sir Thomas More the late Lord Chancellor; men who were indeed very
learned, but most obstinate sticklers in the behalf of the Church of Rome: who
being not to be drawn by any persuasions, to be conformable to the Law, were
committed to prison, from whence after a years durance they were not freed but
by the loss of their lives.

But the King fearing that it might be thought, That he took Persecution.
these courses rather out of a contempt of Religion, than in regard of the
tyranny of the Court of Rome; to free himself from all suspicion either of
favoring Luther, or any authors of new Opinions, began to persecute that sort
of men whom the Vulgar called Heretics, and condemned to the cruelty of that
merciless Element Fire, not only certain Dutch Anabaptists, but many Professors
of the Truth; and amongst others, that learned and godly young man John Frith,
who with one Hewet and others, on the two and twentieth of July constantly
endured the torments of their martyrdom.

The five and twentieth of September died Clement the Seventh, Pope Clement
dies.
Pope; in whose place succeeded Alexander Farnese by the name of Paulus the
Third, who to begin his time with some memorable Act, having called a
Consistory, pronounced Henry to be fallen from the Title and Dignity of a King,
and to be deposed, reiterating Clement had sought to affright him. But this
peradventure happened in the ensuing year, after the death of Fisher and More.

A Parliament is again called in November, wherein (according to the Decree of
the late Synod) the King was declared Supreme Head of the Church of England,
and the punishment of all crimes which formerly pertained to the Ecclesiastical
Courts, is made proper to him. So the Kingdom is vindicated from the usurpation
of the Pope, who before shared in it, and the King now first began to reign
entirely.

First Fruits granted to the King. Wales united to England.
Also all Annats or First Fruits formerly paid to the Pope, are granted to the
King.

And Wales, the seat of the remainder of the true ancient Britans, hitherto
differing from us (compounded of Normans and Saxons) as well in the form of
their Government, as in Language, is by the authority of this Parliament (to
the great good of both, but especially that Nation) united and incorporated to
England. Edward the First was the first who subdued this Country, yet could he
not prevail over their minds, whom the desire of recovering their lost liberty,
animated to many Rebellions. By reason whereof, and our suspicions, being for
two hundred years oppressed either with the miseries of Servitude or War, they
never tasted the sweet fruits of a true and solid Peace. But Henry the Seventh
by blood (in regard of his Father) and birth a Welchman, coming to the Crown,
(as if they had recovered their liberty, whereto they so long aspired) they
obeyed him as their lawful Prince. So the English being freed of their former
jealousies permitted them to partake of their Privileges, since common to both
Nations, the good whereof equally redounded to both. I could wish the like
Union with Scotland: That as we all live in one Island, professing one Faith,
and speaking for the most part one Language, under the government of one and
the same Prince; so we may become one Nation, all equally acknowledging our
selves Britans, and so recover our true Country Britain, lost as it were so
many hundreds of years, by our divisions of it into England, Scotland, and
Wales.

ANNO DOM. 1535. REG. 27.
THe Coronation of the new Queen, and other passages of Henry, watchfully
attending all opportunities to do him mischief. Neither in regard that so many
sided with the Pope, were all things safe at home. The King was therefore
forced to a course seemingly rash, and England. The King begins to subvert
Religious Houses.
He is content the Nobility should share with him in the spoil, so enriching
and strengthening himself by their necessary revolt from the Popish faction. To
this end, they that were thought more especially in maintaining the Pope's
authority to withstand the King's proceedings, were condemned of high Treason;
and they that refused to acknowledge the King under Christ, Supreme Head of the
Church of England, are hanged. For this cause on the third of May were executed
John Houghton Prior of the Charterhouse Certain Priors and Monks executed.
in London, Augustine Webster Prior of Bevaley, and Thomas Lawrence Prior of
Exham, and with them Richard Reignalds a Monk and Doctor of Divinity, and John
Hales Vicar of Thistlehurst.

On the eighteenth of June, Exmew, Middlemore, and Nudigate, The Bishop of
Rochester beheaded.
all Charterhouse-Monks, suffered for the same cause. And four days after, John
Fisher Bishop of Rochester, a man much reverenced by the People for his holy
life and great learning, was publicly beheaded, and his Head set over London
Bridge. Our Histories hardly afford a president of the execution of such a man.
But the Pope was the occasion of his death, who to ease the burden Made
Cardinal unseasonably.
of his now a years imprisonment, by the addition of a new Title, had on the
one and twentieth of May created him Cardinal: The news whereof hastened him to
a Scaffold.

The sixth of July, Sir Thomas More for the same stiffness in Sir Thomas More
beheaded.
opinion with Bishop Fisher, suffered the like death. This was that More so
famous for his Eutopia, and many other Works both in English and Latin. As for
his conversation, the most censorious fault him in nothing, but his too too
jesting (I will not say scoffing) wit, to which he gave more liberty, than did
beseem the gravity of his person, not tempering himself in the midst of his
calamity, no not at the very instant of death. After his condemnation he denied
to give any thing to the Barber that trimmed him, affirming, That head about
which he had bestowed his pains, was the Kings: if he could prove it to be his
that did bear it, he would well reward him. To his Keeper demanding his upper
garment as his fee, he gave his Hat. Going up the Scaffold, he desired him that
went before him, To lend him his hand to help him up, as for coming down he
took no care. Laying his head upon the block, he put aside his beard (which was
then very long) saying, The Executioner was to cut off his head, not his heard.

The executions of so many men caused the Queen to be much maligned, as if they
had been done by her procurement, at least the Papists would have it thought
so, knowing that it stood her upon, and that indeed she endeavored, that the
authority of the Pope of Rome should not again take footing in England. They
desired nothing more than the downfall of this virtuous Lady,

Religious Houses visited.
In the mean time they who undertook the subversion of the Monasteries,
invented an Engine to batter them more forcibly, than the former course of
torture and punishment. They send abroad subtil-headed fellows, who warranted
by the King's authority, should throughout England search into the lives and
manners of Religious persons. It would amaze one to consider what villainies
were discovered among them by the means of Cromwell and others. Few were found
so guiltless, as to dare withstand their proceedings; and the licentiousness of
the rest divulged, made them all so odious to the people, that never any
exploit so full of hazard and danger was more easily achieved, than was the
subversion of our English Monasteries.

ANNO DOM. 1536. REG. 28.
THis year began with the end of the late Queen Catharine, The death of Queen
Catharine.
the eighth of January she deceased.

Queen Ann now enjoyed the King without a Rival, whose death notwithstanding
not improbably happened too soon for her. Queen Ann, the Visconnt Rochford and
others committed.
For the King upon May Day at Greenwich beholding the Viscount Rochfort the
Queens Brother, Henry Norris, and others, running a-Tilt, arising suddenly, and
to the wonder of all men departing thence to London, caused the Viscount
Rochfort, Norris, the Queen her self, and some others, to be apprehended and
committed. The Queen being guarded to the Tower by the Duke of Norfolk, Audley
Lord Keeper, Cromwell Secretary of Estate, and Kingston Lieutenant of the
Tower, at the very entrance upon her knees with dire imprecations disavowed the
crime (whatsoever it were) wherewith she was charged, beseeching God so to
regard her as the justness of her cause required.

On the fifteenth of May in the Hall of the Tower she was arraigned, the Duke
of Norfolk sitting high Steward, to whom were adjoined twenty six other Peers
(and among them the Queens Father) by whom she was to be tried. The Accusers
having given in their evidence, and the Witnesses produced, she sitting in a
Chair (whether in regard of any infirmity, or out of honor permitted to the
Wife of their Sovereign) having an excellent quick wit, and being a ready
speaker, did so answer to all objections, that had the Peers given in their
verdict according to the expectation of the assembly, she had been acquitted.
But they (among whom the Duke of Suffelk the King's Brother-in-Law was chief,
one wholly applying himself to the King's humor) pronounce her guilty.
Whereupon the Duke of Norfolk bound Tower, or The Queen condemned,
Beheaded, as his Majesty in his pleasure should think fit. Her Brother George
Viscount Rochfort was likewise the same day condemned, with her Brother, and
Norris.
and shortly after, Henry Norris, William Brierton, and Francis Weston
Gentlemen of the King's Privy Chamber, and Mark Smeton a Musician, either as
partakers or accessory, were to run the same fortune. The King greatly favored
Norris, and is reported to be much grieved that he was to die with the rest.
Whereupon he offered pardon to him, conditionally that he would confess that
whereof he was accused. But he answered resolutely, and as it became the
progenitor of so many valiant Heroes, That in his conscience he thought her
guiltless of the objected crime, but whether she were or no, he could not
accuse her of any thing; and that he had rather undergo a thousand deaths, than
betray the Innocent. Upon relation whereof the King cried out, Hang him up
then, hang him up then. Which notwithstanding was not accordingly executed: For
on the thirteenth of May, two days after his condemnation, all of them, viz.
the Viscount Rochfort, Norris, Brierton, and Smeton, were Beheaded at
Tower Hill. Norris left a Son called also Henry, whom Queen Elizabeth in
contemplation of his Father's deserts created Baron of Ricot. This Lord Norris
was Father to those great Captains William, John, Thomas, and Edward, in our
days so famous throughout Christendom, for their brave exploits in England,
France, Ireland, and the Netherlands.

On the nineteenth of May the Queen was brought to the place Her Execution.
of Execution in the Green within the Tower, some of the Nobility and Companies
of the City being admitted, rather to be witnesses than spectators of her
death. To whom the Queen having ascended the Scaffold, spoke in this manner:

Friends and good Christian people, I am here in your presence to suffer death,
whereto I acknowledge my self adjudged by the Laws; how justly I will not say,
for I intend not an accusation of any one. I beseech the Almighty to preserve
his Majesty long to reign over you: a more gentle or mild Prince never swayed
Scepter: his bounty and clemency toward me I am sure has been especial. If
any one intend an inquisitive survey of my actions, I entreat him to judge
favorably of me, and not rashly to admit of any hard censorious conceit. And
so I bid the World farewell, beseeching you to commend me in your Prayers to
God. To thee O Lord do I commend my Soul.

Then kneeling down she incessantly repeated these words, Christ have mercy on
my soul, Lord Jesus receive my soul; until the Executioner of Calais at one
blow smote off her Head with a Sword. Had any one three years before (at what
time the King so hot in the pursuit of his love, preferred the enjoying of this
Lady beyond his Friends, his Estate, his Health, Safeguard, and his Cassandra.
But much more incredible may all wise men think the unheard of crime for which
she was condemned: viz. That fearing lest her Daughter the Lady Elizabeth born
while Catharine survived, should be accounted illegitimate, in hope of other
(especially male) Issue, whereof she despaired by the King, now near fifty
years old, she had lasciviously used the company of certain young Courtiers:
nay not therewith content, had committed Incest with her own Brother. A strange
ingratitude in one raised from so low degree, even to the height of honor. I
will not derogate from the Authority of public Records: But an Act of
Parliament against her shall not work on my belief. Surely it carried so little
show of probability with foreign Princes, that they always deemed it an act of
inhuman cruelty. Especially the Estates of Germany, Confederates for the
defense of the Reformed Religion; who having often treated with Fox Bishop of
Hereford, and other Ambassadors, had decreed to make Henry Head of their
League, and had designed an Embassy by John Sturmius, who should have brought
with him into England those excellent Divines Philip Melancthon and Martin
Bucer, with one George Draco, who should endeavor that and the Reformation of
our Church. But having heard of the lamentable and unworthy (as they judged it)
end of the Queen, loathing the King for his inconstancy and cruelty, they cast
off all farther thought of that matter. I will not presume to discuss the truth
of their opinion: But freely to speak what I my self think; There are two
reasons which sway much with me in the behalf of the Queen. That her Daughter
the Lady Elizabeth was seated in the Royal Throne, where she for so many years
ruled so happily and triumphantly. What shall we think, but that the Divine
Goodness was pleased to recompense the unjust calamity of the Mother, in the
glorious prosperity of the Daughter? And then consider but the King's
precipitated Nuptials the very next day after the death of his former Wife, yet
scarce intorred, and with whose warm blood his embrued hands yet reaked:
Consider this, I say, and you shall easily be persuaded with me, that the
insatiable Prince glutted with the satiety of one, and out of the desire of
variety seeking to enjoy another, did more willingly give ear to the
treacherous calumnies of the malicious Popelings, than either befitted an
upright Judge, or a loving Husband. For it seems wonderful strange to me,
that either the fault of the one, or the pleasing conditions and fair language
of the other Wife, should so far possess the King, as that he should procure
his Daughter Elizabeth to be by Act of Lady Elizabeth difintarited.
Parliament declared illegitimate, the Matrimony contracted with both the
former Queens Catharine and Ann to be pronounced invalid, and the Crown to be
perpetually established on the posterity Fear is often times more ready than
Love, which slowly moves by apprehension of Good, as the other is quickly
forced by the apprehension of Danger.

On the twentieth of May the King married Jane Seymour The King marries Jane
Seymour.
Daughter of Sir John Seymour, who on the nine and twentieth of May, being
Whitsonday, clad in Royal habiliments, was openly showed as Queen. So that the
Court of England was now like a Stage, whereon are represented the vicissitudes
of ever various Fortune. For within one and the same Month it saw Queen Ann
flourishing, accused, condemned, executed, and another assumed into her place
both of bed and honor. The first of May (it seems) she was informed against,
the second imprisoned, the fifteenth condemned, and the seventeenth deprived of
her Brother and Friends who suffered in her cause, and the nineteenth executed.
On the twentieth the King married Jane Seymour, who on the nine and twentieth
was publicly showed as Queen.

The death of this innocent Lady God seemed to revenge in Death of the Duke of
Somerset the King's natural Son.
the immature end of the Duke of Richmond, the King's only (but natural) Son, a
Prince of excellent form and endowments, who deceased the two and twentieth of
July, for whom the King a long time after mourned.

In the mean time on the nineteenth of July John Bourchier Lord Bourchier Earl
of Bath.
Fitz-waren was created Earl of Bath, whose successors in that Honor were his
Son John, who begat John deceased before his Father, whose Son William is now
Earl of Bath. At what time also Thomas Cromwell a poor Smith's Son, but of a
dexterous wit, Cromwell's Honor and Dignity.
whose first rising was in the Family of Cardinal Wolsey, in whose service by
him faithfully performed, he grew famous, was made Lord Cromwell, many
dignities being also conferred on him, to the increase of his estate and
honor. For first he was Master of the Rolls, and principal Secretary of
Estate: then Sir Thomas Bolen Earl of Wiltshire resigning, he was made Lord
Privy Seal, and after that dignified with the unheard of Title, of The King's
Vicar general in affairs Ecclesiastical. For the authority of the Pope being
abrogated, many businesses daily happened, which could not be dispatched
without the King's consent; who not able to undergo the burden alone,
conferred this authority granted him by Act of Parliament on Cromwell, not for
that he thought a Layman fitter for this dignity than a Clergyman; but
because he had determined under color and pretense thereof, to put in
execution some designs, wherein the Clergy in all probability would have moved
very slowly, and against the hair. He was therefore England had in no preceding
Ages known the like. For indeed Henry is for that much to be commended, who
would not easily advance any one to place of Government in the Church, but whom
his Learning should make worthy. By the authority of this Synod a Book was set
forth, The beginning of Reformation.
wherein (many points of Doctrine being proposed to be by the Curates expounded
to their Parishioners) mention was made of only three Sacraments, Baptism, the
Eucharist, and Penance: some Holy Days also were abrogated, and other things
pertaining to Religion and Ecclesiastical discipline somewhat changed,
wherewith many were offended, who preferred prescript Errors before the Truth.

The same time, the Parliament assembled the fourth of January, The subversion
of Religious Houses of less note.
permitted all Monasteries, the Revenues whereof exceeded not two hundred
Pounds a year, to the King's disposal; who causing them to be suppressed (to
the number of three hundred seventy and six) entered upon their Lands, amounting
to thirty two thousand Pounds a year, and selling their goods even at very low
rates, (most men accounting it sacrilegious to set to sale the goods of the
Church) raised above an hundred thousand Pounds. These things of themselves
were distastful to the vulgar sort. Each one did as it were claim a share in
the goods of the Church: For many who being neither Monks, nor relied to
Religious persons, did receive no profit of Ecclesiastical goods, did
notwithstanding conceive, that it might hereafter come to pass, that either
their Children, Friends, or Kindred, might obtain the places yet supplied by
others, whereas of these goods once confiscated, they could not hope that any
commodity should redound unto them. But the commiseration of so many people, to
the number of at least ten thousand, who were without any warning given, thrust
of doors, and committed to the mercy of the world, was a more forcible cause of
general distaste. Which notwithstanding of it self sufficient, was augmented by
the malice of ill disposed and seditious persons, who in their Assemblies
exaggerated these proceedings, As the beginnings of greater evils; that this
was but a trial of their patience; as yet the shrubs and underwoods were but
touched, but without speedy remedy the end would be with the fall of the lofty
Oaks. While these general discontents thus vented themselves in private,
Cromwell in September sent forth certain Injunctions to the Clergy, by virtue
whereof each Curate was to expound to his Parishioners the Apostles Creed, the
Lord's Prayer, the Ave Maria, and the Ten Commandments, and earnestly to
endeavor that they might learn them in the English Tongue. This drove these
Malcontents into such extremes, that the midwifry of any occasion served to
produce the prodigious Lincolnshire the Commons being assembled about the
beginning of October, concerning Subsidies Commotion in Lincolnshire.
to be paid to the King; as if the spirit of fury had generally animated them,
they suddenly to the number of twenty thousand took Arms, forcing certain Lords
and Gentlemen to be their Leaders, and to swear to such Articles as they should
propound, such as refused were either imprisoned or put to death, as was a
certain Priest, Chancellor to the Bishop of Lincoln. The King being certified
of this Commotion, sent against the Rebels with great Forces the Duke of
Suffolk, and the Earls of Shrewsbury and Kent, either to appease or suppress
them. The rumor of an Army marching against them, so quailed their courages,
that they sent to excuse themselves unto the King, pretending;

That their endeavors tended to no other than the safety of his Majesty, and
good of the Realm: That he having followed the advice of bad Counselors, had
lately beyond the example of any of his Ancestors, changed many things in the
estate of Commonwealth and Church: That having dispossessed the religious
Inhabitants, he had demolished many Monasteries, where the poor had daily
relief, and God was wont to be devoutly worshipped by godly men: That the
Feasts of Saints instituted many years since, were profaned by his command:
That new Tenets which the Catholic Church did abhor, were every where preached
and obtruded to the people: That now in each aged person was to be seen the
Emblem of Ignorance, who having one foot in the grave, were fain to betake them
to their ABC Books, that they might learn new kind of Prayers never before used
by any Christians: That many unjust and pernicious Laws had lately been
enacted, and great Subsidies exacted both of the Clergy and Laity even in the
time of Peace, which were not wont to be demanded but for the maintenance of
Wars: That the Commons in general did distaste these things; and the rather,
for that they conceived them to be but trials of their patience, and the
beginnings of more insupportable evils. Wherefore they humbly beseeched his
Majesty, whom they could not safely petition unarmed, that the Authors of these
pernicous counsels might sit no longer at the stern, but that others who should
faithfully endeavor the amendment of the aforesaid evils, might supply their
places, and that it might not be any way prejudicial to them, that they had
taken Arms, which even with the loss of their dearest blood they were ready to
employ for his Majesty's safety, and the defense of the Realm.

The King had a Spirit befitting his greatness, and perceiving them to shrink,
could not dissemble the rage he had conceived at the presumption of this
rascally Rout, who durst capitulate with their Sovereign, and seek to curb the
unlimited power of Kings. Wherefore he roughly commands them, that without
delay one hundred of their company, such as by his appointment should be made
choice of, should be delivered up to his mercy. The performance whereof if they
but deferred, nothing but extremity Hecatomb.

This blaze was yet scarce quenched, when within six days Insurrection in
Yorkshire.
another far more dangerous, kindled by the same accidents, bewrayed it self in
Yorkshire, where no fewer than forty thousand had gathered together, naming
themselves Fellows of the Holy Pilgrimage; and that the specious pretext of
Religion might palliate their madness, they in their Ensigns on the one side
pourtraied the Savior of the World hanging on the Cross, on the other side the
Chalice, and the Host by them called the Body of our Lord. They surprised many
of the Nobility, as Edward Lee Archbishop of York, (he that wrote against
Erasmus) the Lords Darcy and Hussy, besides many Knights and Gentlemen, whom
they forced to be sworn to their party, whereto it is very probable some of
them were much against their wills, who notwithstanding suffered for it
afterward upon a Scaffold. Against these Rebels were sent the Dukes of Norfolk
and Suffolk, the Marquess of Exceter, and the Earl of Shrewsbury, who
endeavored peaceably to compose all matters, and to bring this corrupt Body to
its former temper without Phlebotomy. For they knew they were to deal with such
a base sort of people, to whom if they gave the overthrow, yet would their
Victory be inglorious; neither could they promise themselves so happy success
against the most active and hardy bodies, and most enured to Warfare of the
whole Realm: Besides, despair had cast them into the extremes either of victory
or death, resolutely determining not to fly to seek an ignominious end at a
Gallows, which if they escaped, they could expect no other than an accustomed
miserable life, more intolerable than the most horrid torturing death. These
reasons made these Nobles unwilling to hazard a Battle. But the Rebels
desperate resolution admitted no parley, wherefore by consent of both Armies
the Field was appointed on the Eve of the Saints Simon and Jude. Between both
Armies did run a little Brook, so shallow, that on the Eve of the Battle it was
in most places passable for footmen, even without danger of wetting their feet:
But that night (God abhorring the effusion of so much English blood) a rain
(and that no great one) fell, which so raised this little Brook (the like
whereof never happened there before) that it became impassable both for horse
and man, which hindered the meeting of the two Armies. This chance did so work
in the superstitious and giddy heads of this Rout, that they persuaded
themselves, God by this Prodigy did manifestly forbid their intended Battle.
Wherefore pardon being again offered (as it had formerly been) as well to the
Leaders and Gentry, as the rest who had been either authors or partakers in
this Tumult, finding it confirmed by the King, with promise moreover, that
Scarborough-Castle, then kept ScarboroughCastle befieged.
by Sir Ralph Evers of the noble Family of Evers, who without any other
Garrison than of his Houshold-servants and Tenants, and so slenderly
victualled, that for twenty days together they sustained themselves with Bread
and Water, manfully defended it against their furious attempts, and kept it
until the Commotion was appeased. For which brave service the King made him
Leader of the Forces appointed for the defense of the Marches toward Scotland;
which he with great credit performed, until he was in the year of our Lord 1545
unfortunately slain.

Neither was the Estate of Ireland more peaceable than of England. Rebellion in
Ireland.
Girald Fitg-Girald Earl of Kildare having been twelve years Lord Deputy of
Ireland, was for some slight matters removed, called into England, and
condemned to death; which punishment he through the malice of Wolsey had
undergone, had not friendship showed its effects in the Lieutenant of the
Tower, to whose custody the Earl was committed. He having received a Mandate
for the execution of the Earl, durst hazard the displeasure of the potent
Cardinal, to save his friend. Wherefore he repairs to the King at midnight,
desirous to know his Majesty's pleasure concerning the Earl; who not only
disapproved the Mandate, but also pardoning the Earl, received him into his
favor, and a few years after restored him to his former dignity of Lord
Deputy. But these garboils happening in England, he is for as slight suspicions
as before, revoked, and commanded to attend at the Council Table, where by his
answers he appeared not altogether so innocent, but that he was again committed
to the Tower. Before his departure out of Ireland, the King had commanded him
to substitute some one in his place, for whose faith and diligence he would
undertake. He had a Son named Thomas, little above twenty years old, a haughty
and stout young Lord, very ingenious, and exceedingly affecting his Father. To
this Son, as to another Phaeton, he commits the guidance of his Chariot; -- Sed
quae non viribus istis Munera convenient, nec tam puerilibus annis: which
indeed proved fatal to them both, and to almost the whole Family. For no sooner
was the Earl imprisoned, but report (raised as is conjectured by his enemies)
beheaded him, threatening the like to his Offspring and Brethren, whose
destruction the King had most certainly resolved. The author of this report was
uncertain, and the young Lord as rashly credulous, who taking Arms, solicited
the aid of his friends against the King's injustice. He had then five Uncles
Brethren to his Father, three of which Dublin to be murdered in his sight. The
poor Earl already afflicted with a Palsy, was so stricken to the heart with
the news of this Tumult, that he but a few days survived the knowledge of his
unhappiness. The King levying great Forces, quickly curbed the unruly Youth,
and after some months forced him to yield. His Uncles were either taken, or
willingly submitted themselves. All of them were sent to London, and there
brought to their answer. There goes a Story, that those three Uncles who
endeavored to restrain their headstrong Nephew, did half presume on the King's
clemency, until in the passage demanding of the Master the name of the Ship
wherein they sailed; and understanding it was called The Cow, bethinking
themselves of a certain Prophecy, That five Sons of an Earl should in the belly
of a Cow be carried into England, never to return; they forthwith despaired of
pardon. The event approved the skill of the Wizard: For some enemies to this
noble Family incensing the King, by suggesting, that he should never expect to
settle Ireland as long as any of the race of the Fitz-Giralds remained, easily
prevailed with the King for their Execution. In regard whereof I cannot blame
Girald the Brother of Thomas; who trusting not to the weak plea of his
innocence, then sick of the Measles as he was, sought by making an escape, to
set himself out of the reach of malice. Being therefore packed up in a bundle
of clothes, he was privately conveyed to one of his Friends, with whom he
lurked until he found an opportunity of escaping into France, where he was for
a time favorably received by the King. But long he could not be there secure,
the Agents of Henry pressing hard, That by the League all Fugitives were to be
delivered: wherefore he went thence into the Netherlands; where finding himself
in no less danger than before, he fled into Italy to Reignald Pool, who
maintained and used him very nobly, and at length procured him to be restored
to his Country and the Honors of his Ancestors.

The mention of Pool falls fit with our time, he being this year Cardinal Pool.
on the two and twentieth of December by Pope Paul the Fourth chosen into the
College of Cardinals. He was near of blood to the King, who first bestowed
Learning on him, and afterward finding his modesty and excellent disposition,
conferred on him the Deanery of Exceter. But traveling afterward to foreign
Universities, he was in Italy quickly bewitched with the Sorceries of the Circe
of Rome, insomuch that he became a deadly enemy Catharine, nor the abrogating
of the Authority of the Pope, and openly condemned other the King's proceedings
in Ecclesiastical affairs, refusing also to obey the King, who commanded him
home; Henry disposed of his Deanery, and withdrew the large stipend which he had
yearly allowed him. The Pope therefore intending to make use of this man as an
Engine of battery against the King (and being induced by the commendations of
Cardinal Contaren) bestowed on him a Cardinal's Hat, and was thereby assured of
him, who had of late been suspected to have been seasoned with the Leaven of
purer Doctrine. But of that hereafter.

ANNO DOM. 1537. REG. 29.
THe accidents of this year were Tragical, and England the February was Thomas
Fitz-Girald beheaded for Treason, Rebels executed.
his five Uncles hanged, drawn, and quartered, and their members fixed over the
Gates of London. The same month, Nicholas Musgrave and Thomas Gilby, for that
stirring a new Rebellion, they had besieged Carlisle, were executed.

The tenth of March was John Paslew Bachelor of Divinity and Abbot of Whalley,
put to death at Lancaster, and with him one Eastgate a Monk of the same place;
and three days after them another Monk called Haydock was hanged at Whalley.
The Abbots of Sauley and Woburn with two Monks make the like end at Woburn. And
a little after, one Doctor Macarell, another Abbot, the Vicar of Louth, two
other Priests, and seven Laymen. All these, for as much as I can any way
collect, were condemned for having been especial furtherers of the late
Rebellions. But the Chiestains and nobler sort were reserved until June, at
what time the Lords Darcy and Hussy were beheaded, the one at Lincoln, the
other at London; Sir Robert Constable, Sir Thomas Percy, Sir Francis Bigot, Sir
Stephen Hamilton, and Sir John Bulmer were likewise put to death: Margaret Lady
to Sir John Bulmer was burned at London: William Thurst Abbot of Fountains,
Adam Sudbury Abbot of Gervaux, the Abbot of Rivers, Would Prior of Birlington,
George Lumley, Nicholas Tempest Esquires, and Robert Ask, with many others, as
having been partakers in the late Insurrection, did likewise partake in
punishment for the same. And for a Commotion in Somersetshire in April were
threescore condemned, whereof only fourteen suffered.

But lest any one may wonder at these severe and unheard of courses taken
against the Clergy, I think it not amiss to relate what Sleidan writes of
Cardinal Pool, who set forth one or two Rome, about this time were spread abroad
in Germany, and came at length to the King's hands. Cardinal Pool writes
against the King.
Wherein directing his style to the King, he sharply reprehendeth him for
taking upon him the title of Head of the Church, which only belonged to the
Pope, who is Christ's Vicar on earth, etc. Then he proceeds to the matter of
his Divorce, alleging, That he neither out of terror of conscience, nor fear
of God, (as he pretended) but out of lust and blind love had forsaken the Lady
Catharine his Wife, whom his Brother Prince Arthur a weak young man, and but
fourteen years old, had left a Virgin: That it was not lawful for him to marry
Ann Bolen, whose Sister he had before used as his Concubine: And that he
himself had confessed to the Emperor and others, That he found the Lady
Catharine a Maid. He also eagerly reproves him for seeking the Opinions of the
Universities concerning his former Marriage, and triumphing in his own
wickedness, when some of them had pronounced it Incestuous; and that he might
be ashamed to prefer the Daughter of a Whore, before one that was legitimate,
and a most Virtuous Princess. Then speaking of the death of the Bishop of
Rochester and Sir Thomas More, he detests his cruelty. He then rips up what
tyranny he had exercised over his Subjects of all degrees, in what miseries he
had plunged this flourishing Realm, what dangers he incurred from the Emperor,
in regard of the injury offered to his Aunt, and the overthrow of Religion; and
that he could not expect any aid either from his own or foreign Nations, who had
deserved so ill of the Christian Commonwealth. After this, he whets on the
Emperor to revenge the dishonor of his Family; affirming that Turcism
(meaning the Protestant Religion) had found entertainment in England and
Germany. And after many bitter reproofs, he invites Henry to repentance,
persuading him, That for these evils there was no other remedy, but to return
to the bosom of the Church, in the defense whereof (a most glorious example) he
had made use not only of his Sword, but his Pen also.

Neither did the Cardinal only by Book, but by other personal endeavors
manifest his spleen against the King, being sent Ambassador from the Pope to
the French, under color of reconciling him with the Emperor; but his chief
errant was, to combine them both against Henry. Whereof he having intelligence,
did by his Agent earnestly solicit Francis, That in regard of their mutual
amity, he would cause Pool to be apprehended, as guilty of high Treason, and
sent to him, where he should undergo the punishment due therefore. But because
Religion and the Law of Nations had been violated in betraying any (especially
the Pope's) Ambassador, the French could not yield to the King's request: But
to show that he would administer no cause of offense, he refused to admit of
his Embassy, and commanded him speedily to depart out of his Dominions.

Hercules stature might be guessed at by the proportion of his and by this one
man's endeavors, Henry was taught what, if

On the twelfth of October, the Queen having long suffered the The birth of
Prince Edward.
throws of a most difficult travel, and such a one, wherein either the Mother
or the Infant must necessarily perish, out of her womb was ripped Prince
Edward, who after succeeded his Father in the Crown. The Queen only surviving
two days, died on the fourteenth of October, and on the twelfth of November was
with great pomp buried at Windsor in the middle of the Quire, on whose Tomb is
inscribed this Epitaph:

Phoenix Jana jacet nato Phoenice; dolendum, Saecula Phaenices nulla tulisse
duas.
Here a Phoenix lies, whose death
To another Phoenix gave breath:
It is to be lamented much,
The World at once never knew two such.
On the eighteenth of October the Infant was created Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, and Earl of Chester: and with him his Uncle Edward Seymour Brother to
the deceased Queen, Lord Seymour Earl of Hertford.
Beauchamp, and Earl of Hertford; which Honors only (and not those afterward
conferred on him) he left to his posterity. William Fitz-William Earl of
Southampton. Powlet and Russel rise.
Fitz-Williams Lord Admiral, was made Earl of Southampton. Then also William
Powlet and John Russel began their races in the lists of Honor; Powlet being
made Treasurer, and Russel Comptroller of the King's Household, and both sworn
of the Privy Council. Neither was here their non ultra, the one being afterward
raised to Lord Treasurer of England and Marquess of Winchester, the other to
Earl of Bedford, wherein he dying in the year 1554, his Son Francis that pious
old man, and liberal reliever of the Poor, succeeded him, who at the very
instant of his death lost his Son Francis slain by a Scot, Anno 1587. Which
Francis was Father to Edward Earl of Bedford, and Brother to William by King
James created Lord Russel. Powlet living to be a very decrepit old man, had to
his Successor his Nephew by his Son William, named also William the sole
Marquess of England.

And to end this year with death, as it began, Thomas Howard youngest Son to
the Duke of Norfolk, having been fifteen months imprisoned for affiancing
himself without the King's consent to Margaret Daughter to Archibald Douglas
Earl of Angus and Lady Margaret the King's Sister, on the first day of
November, to the unspeakable good of this Island, deceased in the Tower. For
this Margaret being after married to Matthew Earl of Lenox, Henry the Father of
King James of sacred memory, the most happy Unitor of divided Britain.

ANNO DOM. 1538. REG. 30.
IT is at length after many Ages resolved, That through the The abuse of Images
restrained.
thing might be gotten by it) thought it fit to remove this stumbling block,
and the rather, for that he conceived his Treasury would be thereby supplied.
There were some Images of more especial fame, and Shrines of reputed Saints,
whereunto Pilgrimages were made from the farthest parts of the Kingdom, nay
even from foreign Countries also; the Oblations whereto were so many and so
rich, that they not only sufficed for the maintenance of Priests and Monks, but
also to the heaping up of incredible wealth. The Shrine of Thomas Becket
Archbishop Becket's Shrine demolished.
of Canterbury was covered with plates of Gold, and laden with Gifts of
inestimable value. The blind zeal of those and former times, had decked it with
Gems, Chains of Gold of great weight, and Uniones.
Pearls of that large size, which in our Language find no proper term. This
Tomb was razed, and his Bones found entire; instead of whose Head the Monks
usually obtruded the Scull of some other, peradventure better deserving than
did their supposed Martyr. The spoil of this Monument, wherein nothing was
meaner than Gold, filled two Chests so full, that each of them required eight
strong men for the portage. Among the rest was a Stone of especial luster
called the Royal of France, offered by Lewis the Seventh, King of France, in
the year 1179, together with a great massy Cup of Gold, at what time he also
bestowed an annuity on the Monks of that Church, of an hundred Tons of Wine.
This Stone was afterward highly prized by the King, who did continually wear it
on his thumb. Erasmus speaks much of the magnificence of this Monument, as also
of the Image of our Lady of Walsingham, both which he had seen and The Image of
our Lady of Walsingham.
admired. This Image was also stripped of whatsoever worthy thing it had, the
like being also done in other the like places, and the Statues and Bones of the
dead dug up and burned, that they might be no further cause of Superstition.
Among the rest of these condemned Images there was a Crucifix in South Wales,
called of the Inhabitants, Darvel Gatheren, concerning which there was a kind
of Prophecy, That it should one day fire a whole Forest. It chanced that at
this time one Doctor Forest a Friar. Friar Forest makes good a (...)
Observant, who had formerly taken the Oath of Supremacy, was upon his relapse
apprehended and condemned of Treason and Heresy: For this Friar a new Gallows
was erected, whereon he

Great was the Treasure which the King raised of the spoils of Churches and
Religious Houses. But whether the guilt of Sacrilege (adhering like a
consuming Canker) made this ill gotten Treasure unprofitable, or that he found
he had need of greater supplies to withstand the dangers that threatened him
from abroad, not content with what he had already corraded, he casts his eyes
on the Wealth of the Abbeys that had escaped the violence of the former
Tempest: and not expecting (as he deemed it) a needless Act of Parliament,
seiseth on the rest of the Abbeys and Religious Houses of the Realm. At first
he begins with that at Canterbury, dedicated to Augustine the English Apostle,
who Saint Augustine's at Canterbury,
was there interred. This being the first fruits of Christianity among this
Nation (I mean the Saxons, for the Britans had been watered with streams derived
even from the Fountains Apostolic, far more pure than were those later
overflows of Augustine) he invades, expels the Monks, and divides their means
between his Exchequer and Courtiers. Battel-Abbey built by William the
Battel-Abbey,
Conqueror, in the same place where by the overthrow of Harold the last Saxon
King he purchased this Kingdom to himself and his posterity, did also run the
same fortune. So that it is not so much to be wondered at, if those at Merton
in Surrey, Stratford and others suppressed.
in Essex, Lewis in Sussex, the Charterhouse, Blackfriars, GrayFriers, and
White-Friers in London, felt the fury of the same Whirlwind.

At the same time among many other Reformations in this Church, that wholesome
Injunction was one, whereby the Bible The Bible translated.
translated and printed in English, was commanded to be kept in every Parish
Church, and to be conveniently placed where any that were so desirous, might
read therein.

They who were more eagerly addicted to the superstition of their Ancestors,
brooked not these proceedings, among whom were chief Henry Courtney Marquess of
Exceter, Henry Lord Mountague The Marquess of Exceter and others beheaded
Brother to Cardinal Pool, and Sir Edward Nevill Brother to the Lord
Abergavenny, who on the fifth day of November, upon the aceusation of Sir
Geoffry Poole Brother to the Lord Mountague, were committed to the Tower, for
having maintained intelligence with the (...), and conspired the King's
destruction; for which they were on the third of the ensuing January, the Lord
Audley sitting high Steward for the time, arraigned and condemned, and on the
ninth of the same month beheaded. Two Priests named Crofts and Colins, with one
Holland a Mariner, as partakers in the same guilt, were hanged and quartered at
Tyburn. This Courtney was by the Father's side of a very noble descent,
deriving himself from the Blood Royal of France, by Hugh Courtney created Earl
of Devonshire by Edward the Third. But by his Mother he far more nearly
participated of the Blood Royal of England, being Son to Catharine Daughter to
Edward the Fourth, who was Sister to Queen Elizabeth the Mother of King Henry.
The King long favored him as his Cousin-german, but at length in regard of his
near Alliance to the Crown, became jealous of his Greatness, whereof he had
lately given more than sufficient testimony, in suddenly arming some thousands
to oppose against the Yorkshire Rebels. The consideration whereof made Henry
gladly entertain any occasion to cut off this Noble Gentleman.

About the same time John Lambert a religious and learned man Lambert
convented, and burned.
was also condemned, the King himself sitting Judge. This Lambert being accused
of Heresy, appealed from his Ordinary to the King; who fearing lest he should
be accounted a Lutheran, resolved upon this occasion to manifest to the World
how he stood affected in Religion. To this end summoning as many of the Bishops
and other Peers of the Realm as could conveniently be present, he caused
Scaffolds to be built in Westminster Hall, from whence the people might be
spectators and witnesses of the Acts of that day. On the right hand of the King
were seated the Bishops, and behind them the Judges and chief Lawyers of the
Realm: at his left hand sat the Temporal Lords, and behind them the Gentlemen
of the Privy Chamber. Lambert being brought to the Bar, Day Bishop of
Chichester, by the King's appointment made an Oration, wherein he declared the
cause of this meeting; saying,

That Lambert having been accused of Heresy before his Ordinary, had made his
Appeal unto the King, as if expecting from his Majesty more favor for Heresy,
than from the Bishop. So that he now found it to be true, whereof he had been
often informed, That the credulous People were verily persuaded, that his Majesty
abhorring the Religion of his Ancestors, had embraced the new Tenets lately
broached in Germany. True it was, the tyranny of the Court of Rome had been
troublesome to his Predecessors, but to Him intolerable, and therefore had He
shaken it off: That Religion might no longer patronize Idleness, He had
expelled Monks, who were no other than Drones in the Beehive: He had taken away
the idolatrous worship of Images, had permitted to his Subjects the reading and
knowledge of God's Word, hitherto prohibited by the Church of Rome, lest their
wiles and cozenages should be discovered: And had made reformation in some
other things peradventure of less moment, which no man could deny, would much
redound to the good both of Church and Commonwealth. But as for other things,
He had determined there should be no change in the Church during his Reign:
Which his Resolution He now intended publicly to manifest. His Majesty's
desire was, That the Delinquent renouncing his Errors, should suffer himself
to be received into the bosom of the (meaning the Bishops) who by Authority and
force of Arguments should if it were possible, bring back this strayed Sheep
into the Fold of the Church. But if he perversely oppugned the Truth, and all
persuasions notwithstanding, became immovable, He would by this man's
exemplary punishment make known, what others should in the like Case expect,
and instruct the Judges and Magistrates what they ought to do therein.

The Bishop having ended, the King demanded of Lambert, What he thought of the
presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament? Whose answer being little to the
King's liking, reasons and arguments were produced, as if a Disputation in the
Schools, and not a Justiciary Session had been appointed. Five whole hours this
Disputation lasted, the King being as it were Prior Opponent, Archbishop
Cranmer also, and nine other Bishops forcibly pressing upon poor Lambert. But
neither this course, nor the battery of threats and terrors prevailing against
his constancy, the King commanded the Lord Cromwell to pass sentence of
condemnation upon him, by virtue whereof within a day or two after he was
burned. Neither this dreadful Sentence, nor his torturing death did any way
appale him, which he so little regarded, that going to his death, he merrily
took his Breakfast with some Gentlemen into whose company he chanced, as if he
had been going to some sportful Game, rather than his Execution.

ANNO DOM. 1539. REG. 31.
ON the third of March, Sir Nicholas Carew Knight of the Exceter, and the Lord
Mountague. And on the eight and twentieth of April a Parliament began, wherein
Margaret Countess of Salisbury Mother to Cardinal Pool, Margaret (...) of
Salisbury condemned.
and Daughter to George Duke of Clarence who was Brother to Edward the Fourth,
was attainted of high Treason, and condemned without hearing, and with her the
Cardinal her Son, Gertrude Widow to the Marquess of Exceter, Sir Adrian
Fortescue, and Sir Thomas Dingley. Dingley and Fortescue were beheaded on the
tenth of July, and the Countess being then aged threescore and ten years,
suffered two years after.

In the same Parliament it was Enacted, That the King might The subversion of
Religious Houses.
erect new Episcopal Sees in opportune places of the Realm. For the performance
whereof, and of some other things no less specious, the late dissolution of
those Abbeys whereon the King seized, was confirmed, and all Religious Houses
as yet unsuppressed, were granted to the King for ever. Upon notice whereof,
many Albans (the first Abbot of the Realm, as St. Alban was the first Martyr:
which Honor was conferred on this House by Pope Adrian the Fourth, whose
Father had long lived a Monastical life therein) forsake their rich Abbey
seated near the ruins of Verolamium, once a great and ancient City, and leave
it to the mercy of the Courtiers. Which dereliction afforded matter of example
to many other, few enjoying that security of conscience, that they durst lay
claim to their own. Only three were found, whose innocence made them so
regardless of threats, promises, or reward, that they could never be induced to
betray the goods of their Churches to the merciless impiety of sacrilegious
Harpies: Which three were John Bech Abbot of Colchester in Essex, Hugh
Faringdon Abbot of Some Abbots executed.
the Abbey of Reding, built by Henry the First for the place of his Sepulture,
and Richard Whiting Abbot of Glastonbury, one of the Glastonbury.
stateliest and antientest Monasteries of Europe, being first builded by Joseph
of Arimathea, who buried the Body of our Savior Christ, and is himself there
interred, as is also (beside some Saxon Kings) that most renowned King Arthur,
whose glorious Acts, had they been undertaken by a fit Historian, would have
ranked him among the ancient Worthies without the help of a fabulous Romance.
Against these men therefore, other courses not availing, that one was taken of
administering the Oath of Supremacy, which they refusing, are as enemies to the
Estate condemned of high Treason. Bech was hanged at Colchester, and Faringdon
with two Priests named Rug and Ognion at Reding. Whiting, a man very aged, and
by reason thereof doting, scarce perceiving that he had been condemned,
returning from the place of Judgment (which was in the Bishop's Palace at
Wells, distant from Glastonbury four miles) with conceit that he was restored
to his Abbey, was suddenly rapt up to the top of the Tor (a Hill that surveys
the Country round about) and without leave of bidding his Convent farewell,
which he earnestly begged, was presently hanged, the stain of ingratitude
sticking fast to the authors of this speedy execution, of whom the poor Abbot
is reported to have better deserved. With Whiting were two Monks also executed,
named Roger James and John Thorn, their Bodies all drawn and quartered, and set
up in diverse places of the Country. The punishment of these few so terrified
the rest, that without more ado they permitted all to the King's disposal. The
number of those that were suppressed is not easily cast: But the names of the
chiefest, and whose Abbots had voices among the Peers in the higher House of
Parliament, are these:

St. Peter's in Westminster, St. Alban's, St. Edmundsbury, St. Benet's of
Hulme, Berdney, Shrewsbury, Crowland, Abingdon, Evesham, Gloucester, Ramsey, St.
Augustine's in Canterbury, Selbey, Peterborough, St. Mary's in Tork, Tewksbury,
A catalogue of the Abbots who bad voices among the Peers.
Reding, Battle, Winchcomb, Hide by Winchester, Cirencester, Waltham,
Walmesbury, Thorney, St. John's in Colchester, Coventrey, Tavestock.

The King, that he might some way supply the want of the suffrages of so many
learned and wise men in the Parliament House, as also that of so great a prey
he might consecrate (if not the tenth to Hercules, at least) some part to God,
according to his promise erected some new Bishoprics; whereof one was at
Westminster, a place so near and contiguous to London, that it New Bishoprics
erected.
might rather seem a part of the Suburbs thereof, than a distinct City. But a
City it is, and so ennobled with many stately Monuments, that for Beauty it
contendeth with most in Christendom: In it are the chief Seat of the Prince,
and Palaces of the Nobility, the chief seats of Justice in the Land, the most
magnificent Church, wherein are interred most of our Kings and Nobles, whose
sumptuous Monuments render it unparalled even by the World. Another was at
Oxford, in the College founded by Cardinal Wolsey. The rest at Peterborough,
Bristol, Chester, and Gloucester. Westminster was by Queen Mary again reduced to
an Abbey, and furnished with Monks of St. Benet's Order; whom Queen Elizabeth
again expelled, and converted the Revenues of the Bishopric to the maintenance
of Scholars, and other pious uses. As for the other Sees, they remain to this
day. From those ancient Cathedral Churches wherein Monks were seated, nothing
was taken away; only Canons were placed there instead of Monks, as likewise in
the Cathedral Churches of the new erected Bishoprics. The Churches, wherein
anciently canons and Prebendaries were instituted, are

In ENGLAND,
York, London, Lincoln, Sarisbury, Exceter, Wells, Lichfield, Hereford, (...).

In WALES,
St. David's, Landaff, Bangor, St. Asaph.

The CATHEDRALS founded with Monks, were
Canterbury, Winchester, Ely, Norwich, Worcester, Rochester, Duresm, Carlisle.

The new SEES where primarily were Abbeys, are
Oxford, Bristol, Gloucester, Chester, Peterborough.

So there are six and twenty Bishoprics within this Realm, and in every
Cathedral, Archdeacons, Prebendaries, and other Ministers, as also a Dean who
governs the rest, unless it be in St. David's, where the Chanter; and Eandaf,
where the Archdeacon is Head of the Chapter.

These things thus ordered, the King still jealous lest it should be conceived
that he had forsaken the Religion of his Fathers, began to thunder out against
the maintainers of new Tenets, and much against Cranmer's will, by Parliament
enacted the Law of the Six Articles, the sum whereof was,

I. That if any one should deny the True and Real presence of the The Law of
the Six Articles.
Body of CHRIST in the Sacrament, or should maintain, That the substance of
Bread and Wine remained after the words of Consecration pronounced by the
Priest, he should be burned as an Heretic. II. If any should deny the
Sacrament to be sufficiently administered under one Species only: III. Or should
hold it lawful for Priests to be married, but much more he that having entered
into holy Orders, should presume to take a Wife: IV. Or that Chastity vowed
upon mature deliberation was not to be kept: V. Or that private Masses ought
not to be celebrated in the Church of England, or elsewhere: VI. Or that
Auricular Confession was not expedient; he should for his errors undergo loss
of life by hanging.
These Laws like those of Drace written in Blood, were the destruction of
multitudes, and silenced those who had been hitherto furtherers of Reformation.
Among whom Hugh Latimer and Nicholas Schaxton Bishops, the one of Worcester,
the other Latimer and Schaxton resign their Bishoprics.
of Salisbury, were remarkable, who that they might quietly enjoy themselves,
the Parliament being scarce dissolved, did both on one day, viz. the first of
July, resign their Bishoprics. Latimer (who for the freedom of his conscience
could as willingly resign his life, as he did this rich Bishopric, being
burned for it in Queen Mary's reign) after his Resignation taking off his
Rochet, being a merry conceited man, with a little leap lifted He felt himself
much more light and quick, now he had freed himself of so great a burden.

Henry (in regard of his wiving disposition) had long continued a Widower. And
that he should at length marry, the consideration of his Estate being
surrounded with Enemies passionate in the Pope's cause, persuaded him: Wherein
he also gave ear to Cromwell, who advised him to combine with those Estates,
whom the burden of the Pope's tyranny had forced to the same courses and like
fears. By whose assistance he might countermine the secret practices of Rome. A
counsel without doubt good and befitting the times, but producing the effects
of Ill ones, proving (as is thought) Pernicious to the Giver. For the treatise
of The arrival of certain Princes of Germany in England, for the treatise of a
Match between the King and Lady Ann of Cleve.
such a Match, in September came into England Frederick Duke and Elector of
Saxony, Frederick Duke of Bavaria, Otho Henry Count Palatine of Rhine, and the
Chancellor of the Duke of Cleve, with some others, who were for eight days
Royally entertained by the King at Windsor, where the Marriage with Ann Sister
to the Duke of Cleve being concluded, they returned to their own Countries.

This year died Margaret Queen of Scotland, Sister to King Henry, who was
buried at the Charterhouse in the Town of St. John, near the Tomb of James the
First.

ANNO DOM. 1540. REG. 32.
ON the Eve of the Circumcision, the Lady Ann of Cleve destinated Dover, was on
the third of January triumphantly received at Greenwich, and on the The King
marries the Lady Ann of Cleve.
Feast of the Epiphany ritely married to the King.

On the twelfth of March Henry Bourchier Earl of Essex, the Cromwell created
Earl of Essex, and within three months after beheaded.
antientest Earl of the Realm, thrown by an unruly young Horse which he sought
to break, brake his neck: By whose death the Inheritance was devolved to his
Daughter, and from her deceasing without Issue, to the Family of Deureux, which
Family in regard of their claim by descent, was by Queen Elizabeth advanced to
the Earldom of Essex. But in the mean time Cromwell (yet chief in the King's
favor) was on the eighteenth of April created Earl of Essex.

And here behold the frailty of Human affairs. The current of few years had
from very mean beginnings brought Cromwell to the height of Honor, insomuch
that his happiness was admired by all, envied by many: But Fortune intending a
Tragedy, he is unexpectedly apprehended sitting at the Council Table, and
committed to the Tower, where he continued until his Execution. For in this
Parliament begun the twelfth of April, he is accused of Treason and Heresy,
without being brought to his answer July beheaded. This King may well be
censured of cruel inconstancy, who could so easily dispense with the death of
those whom he had admitted to intimate familiarity, and made use of their
counsels and endeavors; as if he had advanced them to no other end, but to
depress them. Wolsey had his turn, Cromwell succeeds, whose sudden downfall
there want not those who attribute to God's Justice inflicted on him for the
Sacrilege (whereof he was reported to be the Author) committed in the
subversion of so many Religious Houses. And indeed even they who confess the
rouzing of so many unprofitable Epicures out of their dens, and the abolishing
of Superstition, wherewith the Divine Worship had by them been polluted, to
have been an act of singular Justice and Piety; do notwithstanding complain of
the loss of so many stately Churches dedicated to God's service, the goods
whereof were no otherwise employed, than for the satisfaction of private men's
covetousness: and although many have abused the Vail of Religion, yet was that
Monastical life instituted according to the pious example of ancient Fathers,
that they who found themselves unfit for the execution of worldly affairs, (as
many such there are) might in such their voluntary retirements spend their days
in Divine Writings or Meditations: and are verily persuaded, that for the
taking away of these things, God was offended both with the King and Cromwell.
But Sleidan peradventure comes nearer the matter, touching the immediate cause
of his death.

About this time (says he) the King of England beheadeth Thomas Cromwell, whom
he had from fortunes answerable to his low parentage, raised to great Honors;
repadiates the Lady Ann of Cleve, Lady Ann of Cleve (...).
and marries Catharine Howard Daughter to the Lord Edmond Howard, who was
Brother to the Duke of Norfolk. Cromwell had been procurer of the Match with
Ann. But the King loving Catharine, is thought to have been persuaded by her to
make away Cromwell, whom she suspected to be a Remora to her advancement. The
actions of Kings are not to be sifted too nearly, for which we are charitably
to presume they have reasons, and those inscrutable.

But let us see the process of this Divorce. Six months this conjugal band
lasted firm without scruple, the King and Queen giving daily testimonies of
their mutual love. On the twentieth of June the Queen is willed to remove from
London, (where the King stayed by reason of the Parliament) to Richmond, a
place pretended in regard of the situation and air, to be more for her health.

On the sixth of July Reasons are proposed by certain Lords purposely sent to
the lower House of Parliament, demonstrating the invalidity of the King's
Marriage with the Lady Ann, so that it was lawful for them both to marry where
they pleased. The same reasons are alleged in the Convocation-House, and
generally

What the allegations were is uncertain. Some relate disability by reason of
some defects to be objected to her, which seems the more probable, for that in
her Letters wherein she submitted her self to the judgment and determination of
the Parliament, she affirmed that the King never knew her carnally. Whether for
this, or for that Nature having not over-liberally endowed her with Beauty; but
a private woman she became, and as such (not enduring to return to her friends
with dishonor) she lived upon some Lands assigned her by the King, (who always
used her respectively) until the fifteenth of July Anno 1557, at what time she
ended her discontented life, and lies buried at Westminster on the South side
of the Quire in a Tomb not yet finished.

Scarce had the resolution of the Convocation-House, and the Decree concerning
it passed both Houses, when this lusty Widower with as good success as before,
marries his fifth Wife Catharine Howard. When their Nuptials were celebrated
is not The King marries Catharine Howard.
known, but on the eighth of August in Royal habiliments she showed her self as
Queen.

The fautors of Reformation were much dismayed at the sudden unqueening of Ann;
fearing (not without cause) lest it proving occasion of enmity between Henry
and the Princes of Germany, he must of necessity rely on them who misliked our
divorce from Rome. But the King proceeding still in the course he had begun,
like a torrent bearing all before him, not only caused three Anabaptists to be
burned, but also many sincere Professors of the Truth, for not subscribing to
the Six Articles. Among whom three Divines were most eminent, viz. Robert
Barnes Protestants and Papists alike persecuted.
Doctor of Divinity, Thomas Gerard, and William Jerome Bachechelors, who by
Parliament (unheard) being condemned for Heresy, were on the one and thirtieth
committed to the torments of the merciless fire. At the same time and place
three other Doctors of Divinity, viz. Powel, Able, and Fetherston were hanged
for denying the King's Supremacy; the sight whereof made a Frenchman cry out
in these words, Deus bone, quomodo hic vivunt gentes? suspenduntur Papistae,
comburuntur Antipapistae; Good God, how do the people make a shift to live
here, where both Papists are hanged, and Antipapists burned? In August the The
Prior of Dancaster and six others hanged.
Prior of Dancaster and six other for defending the Institution of the life
Monastical (a crime now become as capital as the greatest) being also condemned
by Act of Parliament, were hanged.

The same day with the Lord Cromwell, the Lord Hungerford The Lord Hungerford
executed.
was also Beheaded. As their causes were diverse, so died they alike
differently. Cromwell's conscience quietly welcomed death;

ANNO DOM. 1541. REG. 33.
THe late Yorkshire Rebellion was not so thoroughly quenched, Beginnings of a
commotion in Yorkshire.
the Conspirators were put to death; Leigh a Gentleman, Thornton a Yeoman, and
Tattershall a Clothier, at London; Sir John Nevil and ten others at York. Which
Commotion whether raised in favor of Religion, or being suspected that it had
any abettors beyond the Seas, is thought to have hastened the death of the long
since condemned Countess of Sarisbury, who on the seven and twentieth of May
was Beheaded in the Tower.

The eight and twentieth of June the Lord Leonard Gray Deputy Lord Leonard Gray
beheaded.
of Ireland, did on the Tower Hill publicly undergo the like punishment. He
was Son to the Marquis of Dorset, near allied to the King, and a brave Martial
man, having often done his Country good service. But for that he had suffered
his Nephew Gerard Fitz-Gerard (Brother to Thomas lately executed) proclaimed
enemy to the Estate, to make an escape, and in revenge of some conceived
private injury had invaded the Lands of the King's friends, he was arraigned
and condemned, ending his life with a resolution befitting a brave Soldier.

The same day Thomas Fines Lord Dacres of the South, with The Lord Dacres
hanged.
some other Gentlemen, for the death of one Busbrig slain by them in a fray,
was hanged at Tyburn. Many in regard of his youth and Noble Disposition, much
lamented his loss, and the King's inexorable rigor.

ANNO DOM. 1542. REG. 34.
BY this time Henry began to find the convenience of his change, evil, as his
former Wives were in good; who could not contain her self within the sacred
limits of a Royal marriage bed, but must be supplied with more vigorous and
active bodies, than was that of the now growing aged and unwieldy King. Alas,
what is this momentary pleasure, that for it we dare hazard a treble life, of
Fame, of Body, of Soul? Heaven may be merciful, but Fame will censure, and the
enraged Lion is implacable: such did this Queen find him, who Queen Catharine
beheaded.
procured not only her to be condemned by Act of Parliament begun the sixteenth
of January, and with her the Lady Jane Rochfort, (behold the thrift of the
Divine Justice, which made her an Instrument of the punishment of her own and
others wickedness, who by her calumnies had betrayed her own Husband and his
Sister the late beheaded Queen Ann) but two others also long since executed,
Francis Derham and Thomas Calpepper, in their double condemnation scarce
sufficiently punished. Derham had been too familiar with her in her virgin
time, and having after attained to some public Offices in Ireland, was by her
now Queen sent for and entertained as a household Servant, in which time whether
he revived his former familiarity is not manifest. But Culpepper was so plainly
convict of many secret meetings with the Queen by the means of the Lady
Rochfort, that the Adultery was questionless. For which the Queen and the
Viscountess Rochfort were both beheaded within the Tower on the twelfth of
February. Derham had been hanged, and Culpepper beheaded at Tyburn the tenth of
the preceding December.

Hitherto our Kings had styled themselves Lords of Ireland, a Ireland made a
Kingdom.
Title with that rebellious Nation not deemed so sacred and dreadful; as to
force obedience: The Estates therefore of Ireland assembled in Parliament
Enacted him King of Ireland; according to which Decree he was on the three and
twentieth of January publicly Proclaimed.

About the same time Arthur Viscount Lisle natural Son of Edward The Viscount
Lisle deceased of a surfert of Joy.
the Fourth, out of a surfeit of sudden Joy deceased. Two of his Servants had
been executed the preceding year for having conspired to betray Calais to the
French, and the Viscount as being conscious committed to the Tower. But upon
manifestation of his innocence, the King sent unto him Sir Thomas Wriothsley
Principal Secretary of Estate, by whom he signified the great content he
received in the Viscount's approved fidelity, the effects whereof he should
find in his present liberty, and that degree of favor that a faithful and
beloved Uncle deserved. The Viscount receiving such unexpected news imbellished
with rich promises and Royal tokens (the King having sent him a Diamond of
great value) of assured favor; being not sufficiently capable of so great joy,
free from all symptoms of any other disease, the ensuing night expired. After
whose decease Sir John Dudley was created Sir John Dudley made Viscount Lisle.
Viscount Lisle, claiming that Honor as hereditary in the right of his Mother
the Lady Elizabeth, Sister and Heir to the Lord Edward Gray Viscount Lisle,
Wife to the late deceased Lord Arthur, but formerly married to Edmund Dudley
one of the Barons of the Exchequer, beheaded the first year of this King's
reign. Which I the rather remember, for that this man afterward memorable for
his power and dignities, might have proved more happy in his Issue, than his
greatness, had not his own ambition betrayed some of these fair sprouts to the
blast of unseasonable hopes, and

Scotland had been long peaceable, yet had it often administered motives of
discontent and jealousy. James the Fifth, King of Scots, Nephew to Henry by
his Sister, having long lived a Bachelor, Henry treated with him concerning a
Marriage with his (then only) Child the Lady Mary, a Match which probably would
have united these neighbor Kingdoms. But God had reserved this Union for a
more happy time.

The ancient League between France and Scotland had always War with Scotland.
made the Scots affected to the French, and James prefer the alliance with
France, before that of England, where the Dowry was no less than the hopes of a
Kingdom. So he marries with Magdalen a Daughter of France; who not long
surviving, he again matcheth there with Mary of Guise, Widow to the Duke of
Longueville. Henry had yet a desire to see his Nephew, to which end he desired
an interview at York or some other oportune place. James would not condescend
to this, who could not withstanding undertake a long and dangerous voyage into
France, without invitation. These were the first seeds of discord, which after
bladed to the Scots destruction. There having been for two years neither
certain Peace, nor a just War, yet incursions from each side; Forces are
assigned to the Duke of Norfolk to repress the insolency of the Scots, and
secure the Marches. The Scot upon news of our being in Arms, sends to
expostulate with the Duke of Norfolk, concerning the motives of this War, and
withal dispatcheth the Lord Gordon with some small Forces to defend the
Frontiers. The Herald is detained until our Army came to Berwick, that he might
not give intelligence of our strength: And in October the Duke entering
Scotland, continued there ransacking the Country without any opposition of the
Enemy until the middle of November. By which time King James having levied a
great Army, resolved on a Battle, the Nobility persuading the contrary,
especially unwilling that he should any way hazard his Person, the loss of his
Father in the like manner being yet fresh in memory, and Scotland too sensible
of the calamities that ensued it. The King proving obstinate, they detain him
by force, desirous rather to hazard his displeasure, than his life. This
tenderness of him, in the language of rage and indignation he terms cowardice
and treachery, threatening to set on the Enemy assisted with his Family only.

The Lord Maxwell seeking to allay him, promised with ten thousand only to
invade England, and with far less than the English Forces to divert the War.
The King seems to consent: But offended with the rest of the Nobility, he gives
the Lord Oliver Saintclare a private Commission not to be opened until they
were England discovered five hundred English Horse led by Sir Thomas Wharton
and Sir William Musgrave, the Lord Saintclare commanded his Commission
publicly to be read, the recital whereof so distasted the Lord Maxwell and the
whole Army, that all things were in a confusion, and they ready to disband.

The opportunity of an adjoining Hill gave us a full prospect The Scots
overthrowes.
into their Army, and invited us to make use of our advantages: We charge them
furiously, the Scots amazedly fly, many are slain, many taken, more plunged in
the neighboring Fens, and taken by Scottish Freebooters sold to us. Among the
Captives were the Earls of Glencarn and Cassels, the Lords Saintclare, Maxwell
Admiral of Scotland, Fleming, Somerwell, Oliphant, and (...), besides two
hundred of the better sort, and eight hundred common Soldiers. The
consideration of this overthrow occasioned (as he (...)) by the froward
rashness of his own Subjects; and the death of an English Herald slain in
Scotland, so surcharged him with rage and grief, that he fell sick of a Fever,
and died in the The death of James the Fifth, King of Scotland.
three and thirtieth year of his age, and two and thirtieth of his reign,
leaving his Kingdom to the usually unhappy government of a Woman, a Child
scarce eight daysold. The chief of the Captives being conveyed to the Tower
were two days after brought before the King's Council, where the Lord
Chancellor reprehended their treachery, who without due denuntiation of War,
invaded and spoiled the Territories of their Allies, and committed many
outrages, which might excuse any severe courses, which might in justice be
taken with them: Yet his Majesty out of his natural Clemenoy was pleased to
deal with them beyond their deserts, by freeing them from the irksomness of a
strict imprisonment, and disposing of them among the Nobles, to be by them
entertained, until he should otherwise determine of them.

By this time King James his death had possessed Henry with new hopes of
uniting Britain under one Head. England had a Hopes of a Match between Prince
Edword and the Queen of Scots.
Prince, and Scotland a Queen, but both so young that many accidents might
dissolve a contract before they came to sufficiency. Yet this seeming a course
intended by the Divine Providence to extirpate all causes of enmity and discord
between these neighboring Nations, a Marriage between these young Princes is
proposed. With what alacrity and applause the proposition was on both sides
entertained, we may conceive, who have had the happiness to see that effected,
which they but intended. Which being a matter of so sweet a consequence, it is
to be wondered at, that the conspiracy of a few factious spirits should so
easily hinder it. The hope of it prevailed with the King for the liberty of the
Captives, conditionally, that they should leave Hostages for their return, if
Peace were not shortly concluded; which, as also the furtherance of this so
wished conjunction, they faithfully

ANNO DOM. 1543. REG. 35.
AFter their short Captivity, the Scottish Lords (having been London) on
New-years-day began The Scottish Captives set liberty. The Earl of Angus
return-eth into Scotland.
their journey toward Scotland, and with them Archibald Douglas Earl of Angus,
whom his Son-in-Law King James had a little before his death intended to
recall. Fifteen years had he and his Brother George lived Exiles in England,
Henry out of his Royal Bounty allowing to the Earl a Pension of a thousand
Marks, and to his Brother of five hundred. The sudden return of these captive
Lords caused in most as sudden a joy. Only the Cardinal of St. Andrews (who had
by forgery made himself Regent) and his Faction could willingly have brooked
their absence. They came not as freed from a Captivity, but as Ambassadors for
Peace by them earnestly persuaded, which by the happy conjunction of these
Princes might be concluded to perpetuity. But the Cardinal with his factious
Clergy, the Queen Dowager, and as many as were affected to the Flower-(...)
interposed themselves for the good of France. Yet notwithstanding the
Cardinal's fraud being detected, he is not only deposed from his Regency, and
James Hamilton Earl of Arren substituted, but also committed to custody, whence
afterward making an escape he was the author of more garboils. In the mean
time the Marriage of the young Queen and other conditions proposed to the
Estate of Scotland by Sir Ralph Sadler the King's Ambassador, are fully
assented unto, The League and Match concluded.
and Hostages promised for the performance of them. But the adverse Faction
became so prevalent, that the Hostages were not delivered at the day, neither
did the Captive Nobility render themselves in England. Only Gilbert Kenneda
Earl of Cassels, like another Regulus, had rather commit himself to the mercy
of his enemies, than prostitute his Honor to the foul taint of base
infidelity. His Brethren had become Pledges for his return: the importunity,
nay violence of his friends could not deter him from redeeming them. So to
London he came, where the bountiful King duly honoring him for his constancy,
instead of receiving a Ransom gave him one, dismissing him and his Brothers
fraught with honor and rewards. The Scots falling off from their late
Agreement, the King commands stay to be made of all their Ships, and
confiscateth their goods; sends Letters full of threats The Scottish shipping
detained.
and just complaints to the Estates at Edenborough, Blaming them for arrogantly
rejecting his Alliance; the want whereof must needs be prejudicial to them;
neither had they only rejected it, but unmindful of former benefits had sown
seeds of new War, and forced him to Arms. But Letters proving ineffectual,
Scotland is by the frontier Garrisons Scots making resistance are slain, five
and fifty Villages burned, five hundred and sixty War with Scotland.
prisoners taken, and a booty brought into England, of three thousand five
hundred head of cattle, eight hundred Horses, and seven thousand Sheep, beside
great provision of housholdstuff.

But this obstinacy of the Scots proceeded not only from themselves. France and
Scotland were ever combined against England, War with France.
so that to invade one, was to draw on a War with both. We had been often
victorious in France, whereof many portions aneiently belonged to Us: if we
should make any claim to all or part of our Inheritance, Scotland would serve
either to distract our Forces, or to transfer the seat of War nearer home. The
uniting of England and Scotland would by securing us at home facilitate our
Enterprises upon France. These were motives sufficient for Francis,
notwithstanding the long inviolate amity between him and Henry, secretly to
cross our designs in Scotland. Whereof Henry could not long be sensible, and
not revenge. Wherefore he proclaims open hostility with France, as he had
already with Scotland, and reconciles himself with the Emperor A League with
Emperor.
(before thought irreconciliable in regard of his Aunts disgrace) who
professed, that all causes of difference between them were buried with her: yet
is it certain that unto the Pope he accused Henry to have dispatched her by
poison. But now they are become Confederates, and an aid of ten thousand
English sent to join with the Imperials. Landrecy (a Town lately taken from
Landrecy besieged, but in vain.
the Emperor by the French) is the first exercise of our Arms. The Emperor
also coming in Person, it is invested with forty thousand men, is furiously
battered, and the Soldiers brought to the distress of half a provant loaf of
Bread a day, and to drink Water. Francis being certified of their wants
assembles his Forces, draws near the Emperor feeding him with hope of a
Battle, entertaining him with skirmishes relieves the besieged, and without any
more ado under the covert of the night retreats.

Let us now conclude the year at home. And to begin with the The people
licensed to eat White Meats in Lent.
Church; In February the people by Proclamation is licensed to eat White Meats
in Lent, but under a great penalty enjoined to abstain from Flesh.

The third of June, Morogh O Brien a Nobleman of Ireland, descended from the
Kings of Limrick submitted himself to the King, and was shortly after made Earl
of Twomond, which Honor his posterity at this day enjoys, having given ample
proof of their Loyalty to succeeding Princes.

The twelfth of July the King married his sixth Wife the Lady The King's sixth
Marriage.
Catharin Parr, Widow to the Lord Latimer, and Sister of William Parr lately
created Earl of Essex in the right of his Wife sole William Parr Earl of Essex.
Daughter and heir to the late Earl Henry Bourchier. At what time another of
the same name, Uncle to the Queen and the Parr, and Chamberlain to the Queen.

The eight and twentieth of July for the Profession of their Another of the
same name made Lord Parr.
Faith were Anthony Parsons, Robert Testwood, and Henry Filmer Burned at
London; Marbeck was also condemned, but afterward pardoned.

ANNO DOM. 1544. REG. 36.
THe Lord Thomas Audley Chancellor of England deceasing the April, the Lord
Wriothsley chief Secretary of Estate is designed his Successor. And the Earl
of Hertford made Lieutenant The Lord Chancellor dies.
of the North, is sent thither with an Army to repress the incursions of the
Scots.

The Viscount Lisle Admiral of England, with a Navy of two An Expedition into
Scotland.
hundred Sail entered the Forth of Scotland, landed ten thousand men, forced the
rich Town of Leith, and then marched toward Edenburg the Metropolis of the
Kingdom. The Regent was there with the Cardinal (at whose dispose he now wholly
was) and many other Nobles, guarded with six thousand Horse and a great number
of Foot, who upon sight of an invading Army betook themselves to flight, and
left the City void of defendants. The Provost craving parley, offered to yield
the City upon condition of departure with Bag and Baggage, and saving the Town
from Fire. But the breach of League, and insolences of the Inhabitants of
Leith and Edenburg had inspired us with Revenge, so that no Conditions were to
be admitted, but what the Victor should impose. This drives the Provost to a
desperate resolution of defense. The English give a furious Assault, enter at
the Canigate, put the Inhabitants to the sword, pillage and fire it. The like
calamity felt the Country round about, fire and sword cruelly feeding upon
Villages, Castles, and Noblemens Houses. Leith had hitherto been reprieved from
the like misery; but at our return to the Navy, it is made its own Funeral
pile, and the Peer of the Haven utterly consumed.

New employments call home our Admiral. Henry resolves once more to transport
his Arms into France, there to join with the Earls of Reux and Bures, Imperial
Commanders. It was agreed between the Emperor and the King, that the one
should invade Champaigne, the other Picardy, and having united their Forces
(which should amount to fourscore thousand Foot, and eighteen thousand Horse)
to march directly to Paris, thereby either to force the French to fight with
disadvantage, or to suffer the ruin of his Country. Henry lands at Calais, and
finds Picardy unfurnished of men, Francis having withdrawn his Forces toward
Champaigne to oppose them against the Emperor. He therefore sends the Duke of
Norfolk with the Earls of Reux and Bures to besiege Montrueil. The Marshal of
Biez seeing which way we turned the point of our Army, being commanded by his
King to have an especial care of that Territory, puts himself into Montrueil,
and left the Lord of Vervein his Son-in-Law, a man of small experience, to
command in Bouloign. This opportunity invites Henry to encamp before Boloign a
Town near to Calais, and many ways commodious. He causes the Duke of Norfolk
(now in danger to be surprised by the French Army) to arise from before
Montrueil; and omitting his intended Voyage to Paris (frustrated by the
Emperor's Peace with the French; to enter into which Henry was invited by the
Cardinal Bellay, Raymond President of Rouen; and Aubespine Secretary of Estate,
sent of purpose) he investeth Boloign. The Duke of Suffolk had first encamped
upon a Hill on the East of Boloign, from whence he after made his approaches
into the Valley: and the King encamping on the North, shut up the Town on all
sides. The first assault is given on the Suburbs or Base Town, which the French
under the covert of a made smoke had forsaken. They pretend it to have been
purposely fired as unprofitable, and the fire quenched by our industry. Next
the Tower of the Order (called by us the Old Man) defended by twenty Soldiers
is yielded, and the Town continually battered in four places, whereof the most
forcible was the Battery from the Hill on the East side, which beat down the
Steeple of our Ladies Church, rent the houses, and scoured the streets of the
Town. The breach made by the Cannon being not sufficient, they fall to mining,
which happily succeeding, they blow up a great part of the Wall. We give a
furious assault, and are repulsed with loss, yet did this assault carry the
Town, that brave Captain Philip Corse being slain in it, whose valor alone had
hitherto preserved it. Vervein upon the loss of this man, at his wits end,
sounds the intention of the King, and yields him the Town upon composition;
That the Soldiers and Citizens might depart with their Baggage; and that all
the Artillery, Munition, and Victuals (whereof there was great store) should
remain to the King. The Inhabitants refuse this bad composition, and the Mayor
with the Townsmen offer to keep the Town: Which had they accordingly
undertaken, Boloign in all probability had continued French. For the
Capitulation was no sooner concluded (Hostages not yet given) but a horrible
Tempest of Wind and Rain overthrows our Tents, and the soil being fat and
slippery, we should not have had any means to mount to an assault. Moreover the
Daulphin was on march with great Forces for their succor, whose approach would
have forced Henry to have changed his design. But Vervein professing that he
would keep touch even with his Enemy, continued constant in his promise, for
which he soon lost his Head on a Scaffold at Paris. The four and twentieth of
September, the City was delivered to the Duke of Suffolk, French departed to
the number of threescore and seven Horse, a thousand five hundred threescore
and three able Foot, and a thousand nine hundred twenty and seven Women and
Children, many of the infirmer sort not able to depart, staying behind. The
next day the King entered triumphantly, and caused our Ladies Church to be
demolished, and in place thereof a Fortification to be raised, and having
ordered his affairs to his mind, making the Viscount Lisle Governor, set sail
for Dover, where he arrived on the first of October.

But the King's hasty departure permitted not all things to be sufficiently
settled. Part of the Artillery, Victuals and Munition by the Capitulation left
in Boloign, were not removed from the Base Town, which was fortified only with
some small Trenches; for the surprisal whereof, the Daulphin in the night sends
some Troops, who before morning enter the place, cut all in pieces they meet,
win the Artillery and Munition, and think to have gotten an absolute Victory:
but being intent to pillage, some Ensigns issue from the higher Tower, find
them in disorder, set upon them and rout them. Many of the Enemies were slain,
among whom was Fouquessolles, another Son-in-Law of Biez, the Victory not being
without blood on our side.

Neither was our Fleet idle in the mean, which scouring the Seas brought three
hundred Prizes so fraught with Merchandise, that the three spacious Churches of
the Augustine, the Gray, and the Black Friars in London, whose Monasteries had
lately been suppressed, were stored with nothing but Hogsheads of Wine.

The Earl of Lenox lately dispatched out of France for the managing of the
affairs of Scotland, to the behoof of the French found not entertainment there
according to his expectation. The Queen Mother and Cardinal, as long as they
had need of him, deluded him with hopes of marrying the Queen Mother, and by
their secret calumnies rendered them suspected to the French. At length finding
his safety questionable, he flies for refuge into England, accompanied with
Alexander Son and Heir to the Earl of Glencarn, Walter Graham Brother to the
Earl of Montross, and Sir John Borthwick with others, and were honorably
received by Henry, who most happily repaired the Earl's losses of Revenues in
France fallen by the death of Robert Stuart of Aubigny, and of his Marriage in
Scotland, with that most successful Match that beautiful Lady Margaret, Niece
to the King and Daughter to the Earl of Angus, and an annual Pension of seven
hundred Marks. And once more he resolved to try his fortune in Scotland
attended by Sir Rice Mansell, and Sir Peter Mewtas, Wintor, Audley, and Brooks
with others, who with eight Ships set sail from Bristol, and hanging over the
Coast of Scotland like a Cloud uncertain where to disburthen it self, deterred
the Scots from enterprising anything England in the absence of the King.

The Church of late had daily felt some change or other: And this year in June
the Letany set forth in English was commanded to be used in all Churches.

ANNO DOM. 1545. REG. 37.
OUr late Expeditions had without doubt been very chargeable. Which only (says
Solomon) makes Rich: Or that a great part thereof was otherwise divided either
among his Courtiers, or for the maintenance of the ejected Religious Persons,
the Treasury was certainly very bare. To which former reasons we may add the
six new erected Bishoprics, and the like number of Cathedral Churches, as also
the Stipends conferred on both Universities for the public Professors of the
Hebrew and Greek Tongues, Divinity, Law, and Physic, to each whereof he
allotted an Annuity of forty Pounds. Howsoever it were, certain it is, that
levies being made in Germany for the King, the Soldiers disbanded for want of
Pay. The Parliament had already granted him great Subsidies, so that thence he
could expect no more. Yet Moneys must be had. Henry therefore resolves on an
honest kind of Rapine. The Entreaties of Princes little differ from Commands,
unless perhaps in this, that they work more subtly, and render them pliable
with whom Commands would not have prevailed; which manifestly appeared in the
execution of this Project. He had twenty years since commanded Money by
Proclamation, a course so far from taking as was desired, that it had like to
have been the cause of much mischief: But now by some fit Commissioners
informing his Subjects of his necessities, and desiring the richer sort one by
one to contribute toward his support, he quickly replenished the Exchequer.
The Commissioners begin first with the Citizens of London, among whom two were
more strait - laced than the rest, viz. Richard Read, and William Roch; but
their parsimony shall cost them dear. For Read being an old man and utterly
unexpert of Martial Discipline, is commanded to serve in person in the Wars of
Scotland, is taken by the Scots, and forced to ransom himself at a high rate.
Roch, as having used some uncivil language before those of his Majesty's
Council who sat Commissioners, was for some months punished with straight
imprisonment, and at length (not improbably)

In the mean time Boloign was a great eyesore to the French. They try to
regain it by stratagems and surprisals, but in vain. They betake themselves to
force with the like success. The Marshal of Biez Governor of the Boloignois
comes with a great Army to the Port, a Town two miles from Boloign, and begins
to build a Fort on this side the River upon the point of the Tower of Order,
but is by the Earl of Hertford forced away, and leaves his Castle in the Air.
His intent was by this Fort to have kept the Garrison of Boloign within their
Walls, to have commanded the Haven, so to cut off all Succors by sea, and from
Calais by land. Which being done, Francis resolved in Person to besiege
Guisnes, and there to fortify, thereby to famish Boloign, and to keep Calais
and the land of Oye in subjection. But these designs proving fruitless, he
prepares his Naval forces, giving forth, that he intended to invade England,
hoping that this Alarm would have made us have a care of the main, and neglect
those pieces abroad, so that Boloign for lack of aid should easily be reduced.
The noise of an invasion made Henry arm, who having gathered together a
sufficient Fleet, awaited the Enemy at Portsmouth, intent to all occasions.
Neither did the French only intend an Alarm, landing in three several places in
England, but were every where with loss driven aboard their Ships. Two days
after they fall down to the Channel that divides the Isle of Wight from the
rest of Britain; they seem to threaten Portsmouth, where the King then was, and
seek to draw our Fleet to fight. The French, beside a sufficient Fleet of other
Ships had twenty five Galleys, no way probably useful in these tempestuous and
rough Seas not brooking this flat kind of shipping, but by their bulk and
number to terrify us: Yet at this time an unusual calmness of the Sea without
wind or current, put them in hope of effecting wonders by their Galleys. But
our Fleet was not to be drawn to fight, much less to be forced without apparent
danger to the Enemy, who must slip down a narrow Channel, where but few Ships
could go in front, and the like number opposed might easily defend it: Where
they could not enter, but with the Tide and Wind, and the first Ships repulsed,
in their falling back would have disordered the rest of the Fleet; where of
necessity they must fight under the favor of our Forts and Cannon, which would
easily have hindered their approach. The Enemy being put off here, consult of
fortifying the Isle of Wight, where at St. Helens Point they land two thousand
men, resolve forsooth to make that the Seat of the War, and there to build
three Forts; but the valor of the Inhabitants made them change their design,
and forced them again to their Ships. Thus every where affronted to their loss,
without any memorable act they set fail for Normandy. The French Fleet
consisted of a hundred and three Sail of all sorts, Mary Rose, a Ship which
with her loss buried Sir George Carow the Captain, and seven hundred men; the
French do well to make use of casualties to their own glory: But it was not the
valor of the French, or fury of their Cannons that sunk her, but the supine
negligence of the Mariners, being wrecked in the very Haven, in the presence of
the King.

Boloign was not idle the while. Upon hope of a Fort to be built by the Marshal
of Biez, Francis had made great preparations for an Enterprise upon Guisnes,
but was diverted by the death of the Duke of Orleans his younger Son, and the
lost hopes of his intended Fort near Boloigne, and having for a while encamped
at Alias Bonlamberg.
Mont-Lambert, retired at last toward Amiens. The nearness of the King's Camp
at Mont-Lambert did daily invite both Nations to make trial of their valor,
the English sometimes, sometimes the French having the better. One day among
the rest the English hotly charging the French, the Duke of Aumale comes to
relieve them, who being struck with a Lance under his right Eye, it breaks in
pieces and leaves the Trunchion half a foot within his Head. It was a token of
an excellent spirit in this young Nobleman, that for so rough a charge he lost
not his stirrups; and endured the torture whereto they put him in drawing out
the three square head, with such an invincible constancy, as if they had picked
a Thorn from out his Finger, and beyond all expectation of the Chirurgions
recovered. The Victory remained to the English: who could not long brag of it,
afterward seeking to cut off a Convoy of the Enemies, defeated by the
Rhinegrave with the loss of sixteen Captains, and seven or eight hundred men.
The Earl of Surrey, who led them, saved himself by flight. And were it not
discourtesie in us not to requite the late visit of the French? The Lord
Admiral therefore landed six thousand men at Treport in Normandy, burned the
Town and Abbey with thirty Ships and a Barque in the Haven, and returned with
the loss of only fourteen men.

Neither were our employments less or fewer in Scotland, than among the French.
Scotland had so many enemies at home, that it needed not any abroad. But their
homebred dissentions had caused War from us, and the way to set them at Peace
was, to invade them. In the beginning of March Sir Ralph Evers, by the death of
his Father Lord Evers, with an Army entered Scotland, making all the Country
desert about Jedbury and Kelson. Thence marching to Coldingham fortified the
Church and Tower, and leaving a Garrison there, departed. The Garrison partly
out of covetousness, partly to distress the Enemy if he should lay siege to
them, pillaged and wasted all the neighboring Country. The Dunbar, which
occasioned the disbanding of the Army, and the freedom of the besieged. Our
often success having emboldened us, we adventure upon another impression, the
fury whereof disburdened it self in Merch, Teifidale, and Lauden, the
Inhabitants being either forced to yield, or fly, and leave their goods to be
seiled on by Bellonas Harbingers. The Scots at length make head, and although
of more than equal number, they betake themselves to stratagems. They
understand by their Scouts of our approach; and to deceive us, by the advice of
Walter Scot send their Horses to the adjoining Hills. Neither indeed was the
place so advantageous for Horse, as for Foot. The Horses backed by the Grooms
that kept them, did from the Hills make show of an Army, and that flying. We
advance, as loath to let our enemies escape, in the pursuit of whom we unawares
fall among the whole Army not disorderly flying, but prepared to receive us. It
is not unusual to encounter men; but if Heaven and the Elements oppose us, how
can we hope for victory? We find the number of our adverse Army great beyond
our expectation, the Sun far declining to the West darted his rays in our
faces, and a violent wind drives the smoke of the shot into our mouths, which
not only made the most necessary sense unuseful, but with a foul stench
corrupted the Air, and hindered the breathing of the already panting Soldiers.
The many advantages give them the Victory. We leave two hundred in the place,
and among them the Lord Evers; a thousand are taken, whereof Alderman Read was
one.

A little after this Victory, Francis sent into Scotland a supply of five
hundred French Horse and three thousand Footmen, under the command of the Lord
of Lorges Earl of Montgomery, not so much to cross our attempts against the
Scots, as to distract our Forces, that the violence of them united might not at
once fall on France.

This year among other accidents is also memorable through the death of the
King's Brother-in-Law Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, a man of a mighty
spirit, yet so tempering it with mildness and fair demeanor, that he was
generally beloved both of Prince and people: Who in that height of favor
carried him so evenly as to die quietly in his Bed. A happiness under this
Prince rare even to Fortunes and His Favorites.

A Parliament assembled in November granted the King the Disposal of all
Colleges, Chantries, and Hospitals, the demesnes, salaries and stipends
thereto belonging, or given to Priests to say Mass for the Souls of the
departed. The King personally gave thanks to both Houses, promising to have a
care

ANNO DOM. 1546. REG. 38, and ultimo.
WE are now come to the last year of Henry his Reign; French Wars, began at
length seriously to bethink himself of Peace. Neither was Francis less desirous
of his Friendship. To this end Deputies from both sides meet often between
Guisnes and Ardres: For Henry, the Earl of Hertford, Gardener Bishop of
Winchester, the Viscount Lisle Lord Admiral, Sir William Paget Secretary of
Estate, and Dr. Wotton the first Dean of Canterbury: For Francis, the Admiral
Annebault, Raymond first President of Rouan, and Boucherel Secretary. After
many consultations a Peace was concluded on these Conditions:

That Francis within eight years should pay fourscore hundred thousand Crowns
to the King, as well for the arrerage of his Pension, as for many other
expenses made by him in War, in the fortification of Boloign and of the
Country: And upon receipt of the said Sum, Henry should deliver unto the King
of France Boloign and all the Country belonging to it, with the ancient places
or newly edified by him, MontLambert, the Tower of Order, Ambleteul and others,
with all the Artillery and Munition in them.

For the confirmation whereof, the Viscount Lisle was sent Ambassador into
France, and from thence came the Admiral Annebault to receive the Oaths of each
King, and the Peace was Proclaimed in London.

On the sixteenth of July were burnt at London for their Religion John Lassels,
Nicholas Otterden, John Adlam, and Ann Askew a young Gentlewoman aged twenty
five, of an ancient Descent, excellent beauty, and acute wit, whose
examinations, writings, tortures, and patient suffering are at large set down
by Mr. Fox, being before their Execution by Dr. Schaxton exhorted to Recant, as
he then was forced, who some years passed had resigned his Bishopric to enjoy
his Conscience.

And here I may not omit an addition to the septenary number of Sleepers,
William Foxley a Pot-maker in London, who without any touch of any preceding
infirmity was seized with such a dead sleep, that for fourteen days and fifteen
nights no force nor invention could awake him; on the fifteenth day this
miraculous sleep forsaking him, he was as it were restored to life, and found
as sound and entire as if he had taken no more than an ordinary repose: Neither
would he believe that he had taken other, but that the building of a certain
Wall made it apparent to him how much time he had slept away. He lived above
forty years after, viz. to the year 1587.

Let us conclude this year with the death of Martin Luther that famous impugner
of the Church of Rome, who being sent for by the Counts of Mansfield to compose
some differences between them concerning their inheritance, died among them in
his Climacterical year, and after much contention for his Body, lies buried at
Wirtenberg.

ANNO DOM. 1547.
HEnry long since grown corpulent was become a burden to Power and Authority.
His Brother-in-Law the Duke of Suffolk was lately deceased: Seymour the young
Prince's Uncle was a man whose Goodness was not tempered with Severity, and
being descended of a Family more ancient than noble (as having until now never
transcended Knighthood) would be subject to contempt. They who more nearly
participated of the Blood Royal, as they any way excelled in Power or Virtue,
were the more suspected and hated by him. The Family of the Howards was then
most flourishing, the chief whereof was Thomas Duke of Norfolk, a man famous
for his exploits in France, Scotland, and elsewhere, long exercised in the
School of Experience, many ways deriving himself from the Crown, popular, of
great command and revenues. But the edge of the old man's disposition made mild
and blunted with age, administered the less cause of suspicion. Of his eldest
Son Henry Earl of Surrey, the King was certainly jealous, and resolved to cut
him off. He had lately in the Wars of France manifested himself heir to the
glory of his Ancestors, was of a ripe wit, and endued with great Learning, so
that the Elogy afterward given to his Son Henry, that He was the Learned
among the (...), and the Noblest among the Learned, might have as fitly been
applied to him, was very gracious with the people, expert in the Art Military,
and esteemed fit for public Government. These great Virtues were too great
Faults, and for them he must suffer. Treason is objected to him, and upon the
surmise he and his Father sent to the Tower. On January he is arraigned, the
chief point of his accusation whereon they insisted being, for bearing certain
Arms, which only belonged to the King, and consequently aspiring to the Crown.
Of other things he easily acquitted himself, and as for those Arms, he
constantly affirmed that they hereditarily pertained unto him; yet
notwithstanding he would not have presumed to have born them, but being
warranted by the opinion of the Heralds, who only were to give judgment in
these cases. The Judges not approving of his answer condemn him, and so the
Flower of the English Nobility is on the nineteenth of January beheaded, the
King lying in extremity, and breathing his last in Blood. The Duke was adjudged
to perpetual imprisonment, where he continued until he was by Queen Mary set at
liberty.

The King, his disease growing on him, at last makes his Will, wherein (by
virtue of a Law lately Enacted) he ordains Prince Edward his Successor in the
first place, and in the second (Prince Edward dying Issueless) substitutes the
Lady Mary begotten of Catharine of Arragon, and upon the like defect of Issue
in Mary in the third place substitutes the Lady Elizabeth. These three reigned
successively, and accomplished the number of fifty six years; at the expiration
whereof Queen Elizabeth ended her long glorious Reign, and left the Diadem to
King James, in the many regards of his Learning, Religion; Goodness, peaceable
and happy Reign the Mirror of late Ages. The next care was of his Executors,
whom he also appointed (Tutors shall I say or) Counselors to his Son, and were
in number sixteen, viz.

Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury. Thomas Wriothsley Lord Chancellor. William
Paulet Lord Saint-John. John Russel Lord Privy Seal. Edward Seymour Earl of
Hertford. John Dudley, Viscount Lisle Lord Admiral. Cuthbert Tonstall Bishop of
Duresm. Sir Anthony Brown Master of the Horse. Sir Edward Mountague Chief
Justice of the Common Pleas. Sir William Paget. Sir William Harbert. Sir Thomas
Bromley. Sir Anthony Denny. Sir Edward North. Sir Edward Wotton. Doctor Wotton
Dean of Canterbury and York.
To whom he added as Assistants, especially in matters of great

Henry Earl of Arundel. William Earl of Essex. Sir Thomas Cheny Steward of the
King's Household. Sir John Gage Comptroller. Sir Anthony Wingfield
Vice-Chamberlain. Sir William Peter Secretary. Sir Richard Rich. Sir John
Baker. Sir Ralph Sadler. Sir Thomas Seymour. Sir Richard Southwell. Sir Edmond
Pecham.
He ordained his Body should be interred at Windsor in a Monument (yet
imperfect) erected by Cardinal Wolsey, not for himself (as many falsely (...))
but for the King, as by the Inscription is manifest, which cannot be of later
date. For therein Henry is (...) Lord of Ireland without any mention of Supreme
Head of the Church, which two particles it is manifest were changed in the
Title after Wolsey his death. In the same his last Will he commanded that the
Monuments of Henry the Sixth, and Edward the Fourth (both interred in Windsor)
should be made more magnificent and stately, and other things of less moment,
most of which were neglected. This last Will and Testament he confirmed,
subscribed, and sealed the last of December, and survived a month after, dying
at Westminster the eight and twentieth of January, and that in this manner: The
King having long languished, the Physicians finding apparent symptoms of
approaching death, wished some of his friends to admonish him of his estate,
which at last Sir Anthony Denny undertook, who going directly to the fainting
King, told in few (but those plain) words, That the hope of humane help was
vain, wherefore he beseeched his Majesty to erect his thoughts to Heaven, and
bethinking him of his 'fore-passed life, through Christ to implore God's Mercy.
An advice not very acceptable to him. But finding it grounded upon the judgment
of the Physicians, he submitted himself to the hard law of necessity, and
reflecting upon the course of his Life (which he much condemned) he professed
himself confident, that through Christ his infinite Goodness all his sins,
although they had been more in number and weight, might be pardoned. Being then
demanded whether he desired to confer with any Divines; With no other (says
he) but the Archbishop Cranmer, and not with him as yet; I will first repose my
self a little, and as I then find my self will determine accordingly. After the
sleep of an hour or two finding himself fainting, he Croydon) should be sent
for in all have. Who using all possible speed came not until the King was
speechless. As soon as he came, the King took him by the hand, the Archbishop
exhorting him to place all his hope in God's Mercies through Christ, and
beseeching him, that if he could not in words, he would by some sign or other
testify this his Hope: Who then wringed the Archbishop's hand as hard as he
could, and shortly after expired, having lived fifty five years and seven
months, and thereof reigned thirty seven years nine months and six days.

Thus ended Henry the Eighth his Life and Reign, which for the first years of
his Government was like Nero's Five years, Admirable; for often Victories and
happy Success in War, Glorious; for the many Changes under it, Memorable; for
the Foundation of the Churches Reformation, Laudable; to Queens, most unhappy;
for the Death of so many (for the most) great Personages, Bloody; and for the
frequent Exactions and Subsidies, and Sacrilegious Spoil of the Church, much
Prejudicial to the Estate, Grievous and Burthensom to the Subject.

FINIS.
ANNALS OF ENGLAND.

EDWARD THE SIXTH.

The Second Book.

LONDON,

Printed for Thomas Basset, John Wright, and Richard Chiswel.

M. DC. LXXV.

ANNALS OF ENGLAND.
BOOK II.
EDWARD the Sixth.
ANNO DOM. 1547. REG. 1.
ROyalty like a Pythagorean Soul transmigrates. Henry were dead, the King was
still alive, and survived in the person of young Edward, who began his Reign
the eight and twentieth of January, then in the tenth year of his age; and
having been on the last of the same Month proclaimed King, came the same day
from Enfield (where the Court had then been) to the Tower, there according to
the ancient custom of our Kings to abide until his Inauguration at Westminster.
The next day the Council assembled for the managing of the Estate, conferred on
the King's Uncle, Edward Seymour Earl of Hertford the honor and power of
Protector of The Earl of Hertford Protector.
the King's Person and Kingdom. Who to season his new Dignity with some
memorable act, on the sixth of February, dubbed the King Knight, the King
presently imparting the same Honor to Richard Hoblethorn Lord Mayor of London.

On the fifteenth of February King Henry his Funerals were solemnized, Hing
Henry's Funerals.
and his Body Royally interred in the middle of the Quire in the Church at
Windsor.

Two days after were some of the Nobility dignified with greater Honors, some
new created. The Lord Protector Earl of Hertford, was made Duke of Somerset;
William Parr Earl of Essex, Marquis of Northampton; John Dudley Viscount Lisle,
Warwick; and the Lord Chancellor Wriothsley, Earl of Southampton. Sir Thomas
Seymour Brother to the Protector and Lord Admiral, Sir Thomas Rich, Sir William
Willoughby, and Sir Edmond Sheffeild were enrolled among the Barons. Other two
days being fled after their predecessors, the King passed triumphantly from the
Tower through London to Westminster, where he was solemnly crowned, anointed,
and inaugurated by Cranmcr The Coronation.
Archbishop of Canterbury. At what time also with incredible indulgence pardon
of all crimes whatsoever was publicly proclaimed and granted to all persons
throughout the Realm, six only being exempted from the benefit thereof, namely,
the Duke of Norfolk, Cardinal Pool, the lately beheaded Marquis of Exceter his
eldest Son, one Throcmorton, Fortescue, and Richard Pate late Bishop of
Worcester, who lest he should be constrained to acknowledge the King Head of
the Church, had some years passed fled to Rome.

On the nineteenth of June in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul in London were
celebrated the Exequies of Francis King of France. He deceased the two and
twentieth of the precedent March, The death of Francis King of France.
having been after the death of our Henry much disposed to melancholy, whether
for that he failed in the hope of strengthening their late contracted amity
with some stricter tie; or that being some few years the younger, he was by his
death admonished of the like approaching fate. They were also of so conspiring
a similitude of disposition and nature, that you shall hardly find the like
between any two Princes of whatever different times. This bred a mutual
affection in them, and as it were forcibly nourished the secret fire thereof
between them, unless peradventure when emulation or the respect of public
utility swayed them the contrary way, so that the death of the one could not
but much grieve the surviver. He therefore in the Cathedral at Paris celebrated
the Funerals of Henry, though Excommunicated by the Pope. He also left one only
Son named Henry inheritor of his Crown, whose Reign lasted but to the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth.

And now the affairs of Scotland, which have without doubt been great and
memorable, crave a part in our History. We have before made mention of our
League with Scotland, wherein it was determined concerning the Marriage between
the now King Edward and the Queen of Scots. The times since then were full of
continual (...). We at length resolved not to dally with them, but to undertake
the War with forces agreeable to the cause. The Duke of Somerset by consent of
the Privy Council is sent into Scotland with ten thousand Foot and six thousand
Horse (besides Pioners and Artificers thirteen hundred) and and fifteen pieces
of Brass Ordnance. To the Lord Clinton is assigned a Navy consisting of four
and twenty men of War, one Scotland. On the third of September the Duke of
Somerset made an hostile entrance upon the Enemies Country, and forthwith
dispatched Letters to the Earl of Arren, Regent of Scotland, much to this
effect: That he wished the Scots would consider, that this War was waged among
Christians, and that our ends were no other than a just Peace, whereto the
endeavors of all good men should tend. An occasion not only of a League, but
of a perpetual Peace was now happily offered, if they would suffer the two
differing and emulous Nations by uniting the Heads to grow together. This as it
had been formerly sought by us, so had it been generally assented to by the
Estates of Scotland. Therefore he could not but wonder why they should rather
treacherously recurr to Arms (the events of War being usually even to the
Victor sufficiently unfortunate) than maintain inviolate their troth plighted
to the good of both Nations. They could not in reason expect that their Queen
should perpetually live a Virgin-life. And if she married, where could she
bestow her self bettter, than on a puissant Monarch inhabiting the same Island,
and parlying the same language? They saw what inconveniences were the
consequents of foreign Matches, whereof they should rather make trial by the
examples of others, than at their own peril. He demanded nothing but equity;
yet he so much abhorred the effusion of Christian blood, that if he found the
Scots not utterly averse from an accord, he would endeavor that some of the
Conventions should be remitted: He would also permit that the Queen should
abide and be brought up among them until her age made her marriageable, at what
time she should by consent of the Estates her self make choice of a Husband. In
the mean time there should be a Cessation of Arms, neither should the Queen be
transported out of her Realm, nor entertain treatise of Marriage with the
French or any other foreiner. This if they would faithfully promise, he would
forthwith peaceably depart out of Scotland; and whatsoever damages the Country
had suffered by this invasion, he would according to the esteem of indifferent
Arbitrators make ample satisfaction. The Scottish Army consisted of thirty
thousand Foot, some speak a greater number. The chief Commanders whereof puffed
up with confidence of their strength (although they had lately lost eight
hundred in a tumultuary skirmish) and misconceiving our offers to proceed out
of fear, reject all Conditions of Accord: And lest upon knowledge of the equity
of our demands, the Council should incline to resolutions of Peace, they
conceal our Letters. And not only so, but upon assurance of Victory spread a
rumor, that nothing would content the insolent English, but the delivery of
the Queen, which if they could not otherwise, they would by force obtain, and
proceed to the absolute conquest of the Kingdom. This report enraged the
Soldiers, whom no motives could dissuade from present engaging themselves in
Battle. The wiser sort were not MusselburghField.
Enemy in his lodging, and endeavor to draw him to combat. But the hot-spur
Scots issuing from out their fastnesses, seemed willing to prevent us. So both
Armies entertain a mutual resolution. A little before the joining of the Armies
an accident happened, which did not a little make way to our Victory. The Enemy
marching along near the Sea-shoar, a piece of Ordnance discharged from our
Galley took away five and twenty of their men, whereof the eldest Son of the
Lord Grimes was one. Four thousand Archers terrified with so unexpected a
slaughter made a stand, and could never after be brought on. The two Armies
approaching each other, the Duke of Somerset commanded the Lord Gray with the
Cavallery to charge the Scots, and find them employment until the Infantry had
seized on an adjoining Hill, and if he could without much hazard, to disorder
the Enemy. But they were gallantly received by a strong Squadron of Pikes,
whereon some of the foremost having too far engaged themselves were cast away,
the rest retreated affirming, that it was as easy to force a Wall, as through
the Scottish Ranks. The Duke makes a second trial by the light Horse, seconding
them with the Ordnance and the Archers. The Enemy either not able to stand so
violent a charge, or (as some relate) to draw us from the favor of our Cannon,
begins to give ground, which we perceiving give a shout, crying out withal,
They fly, they fly; which so amazed them, that some began to fly indeed, and at
length the whole Army was routed. The Scots complain, that we tyrannized over
the Captives, especially the Priests and Friars (whereof many served in this
Field) because by their instigation chiefly our Conditions were so arrogantly
rejected. Of the Enemies were flain thirteen thousand, and among them (beside
the Earl of Lohemor and the Lord Fleming) the chief of the Scottish Gentry,
with their Tenants, who thought it a disgrace to survive their Lords. In the
chase were taken fifteen hundred, among whom were the Earl Huntley Chancellor
of Scotland, the Lords Hefter, Hobbey, and Hamilton, beside many other persons
of Quality. This lamentable overthrow was given the tenth of September.

The English become Victors beyond their expectation, ransacked the Country
five miles about, fortified in the Forth the forsaken Islands Keth and Haymon,
took Brocth Castle, by their terror forced the Garrisons of Humes and
Fastcastle to yield, and having Lauder, and repaired the ruins of Roxburgh, by
their departure recreated the dejected minds of the distressed Scots.

Our affairs thus succeeding abroad, the Church at home had Reformation in the
Church.
her changes. Many of the Council, but especially the Protector, much
endeavored Reformation in point of Religion. The rest, who were addicted to
the Doctrine of Rome, could for private respects temporize, fearing indeed
restitution of Church goods (wherein each of them shared) unless an
irreconcilable breach were made with that See. So that whiles some eagerly
oppose Popery, and others coldly defend it, not only what had been enacted by
Henry the Eighth concerning the abrogation of the Pope's authority is
confirmed, but many other things are added, whereby our Church was so purged
from the dregs of Superstition, that for Purity of Doctrine, and Institution of
select Ecclesiastical Rites, it excelled the most Reformed Churches of Germany.
All Images are pulled down, Priests are permitted to marry, the Liturgy set
forth in the English tongue, the (...) administered under both kinds, Auricular
Confession forbidden, no man prohibited the reading of the Scriptures, no
Masses to be said for the Souls of the departed, and many other things
ordained, so far differing from the Institution of our Forefathers, that it
administered matter to the common people (who are wont to judge not according to
Reason, but Custom) of breaking out into Rebellion. And it is somewhat
remarkable, that the same day wherein the Images, whereof the Churches were
dispossessed, were publicly burned at London, we obtained that memorable
Victory over the Scots at Musselburgh.

This year at Archbishop Cranmer his invitation came into England Peter Martyr
a Florentine, Martin Buter of Selestadt, and Paulus Phagius born in the
Palatinate: Who being very courteously received by the King and Nobles, having
reposed themselves some while at Canterbury, were sent, Martyr to Oxford, Bucer
and Phagius to Cambridge, there publicly to Read Divinity; but Phagius having
scarce saluted the University, deceased of a Quartan Ague the twelfth of
November, in the five and fortieth year of his age. Neither did Bucer long
survive him, who died at Cambridge the last of February 1551, being then
threescore years old. Martyr shortly after his coming to Oxford, maintained
publicly in the Schools, and that with solid Arguments, against Tresham and
Chedsey Opponents, that the Popish Transubstantiation was but a mere fiction;
which Disputation he after published and enlarged.

ANNO DOM: 1548. REG. 2.
THe English having this year fortified and put a strong Garrison Hadinton a
Town seated in the most fertile soil of all Scotland, did from thence and Lauder
make often inroads upon the bordering Country, burning and spoiling whatsoever
might be useful to the Enemy, from whom they expected a Siege. In the mean time
had the French sent six thousand (ten thousand say we) men into Scotland,
whereof three thousand were Lansquenets led by the Rhinegrave. The Lord of Esse
a man of tried valor, famous in the Siege of Landrecy and other Expeditions
was chief of the Army. These adventures landing at Dunbar, The Scots and French
besiege Hadinton.
march speedily for Hadinton, and joining with the Scottish Forces consisting
of eight thousand men straightly besiege it. At the Abbey near the Town they
call a Council, treat of transporting the Queen into France, and marrying her
to the Daulphin. They whom the respect of private ends had not corrupted and
withdrawn from the care of the public weal, objected, That they should so draw
on them a perpetual War from England, and betray themselves to the slavery of
the French: That the Propositions made by the English were reasonable, who
offered a ten years Truce, and sought not to entrap the Scot in any bands or
prejudicial compacts, their demands being no other than this, That if within
the ten years either the King of England, or the Queen of Scots should decease,
all things should on each side remain entire and in their former estate: Delay
had often in the like cases proved advantageous, whereas speedy repentance
commonly follows precipitated have. The Popish Faction (especially the
Clergy, to whom the amity of England was little pleasing, in regard of the
differences in Religion) and some others obliged to the French either in
respect of received benefits or future profit, with might and main interposed
to the contrary, and chiefly the Regent, bought with a Pension of four thousand
Crowns, and the Command of one hundred Lances. The French Faction prevailed for
her transportation. The Fleet from Leith, where it harbored, setting sail as
if for France, fetching a compass round about Scotland, put in at Dunbritton,
where they embarked the six-year-old Queen, attended by James her base
Brother, The Queen of Scots transported into France.
John Areskin, and William Leviston, who being put back by contrary winds, and
much distressed by tempest, arrived at length in Little Bretaigne, and from
thence set forward to the Court of France, so escaping our Fleet which hovered
about Calais to intercept them, if (as we were persuaded they needs must) they
crossed those neighboring Straights. Hadinton in the mean time being
straightly beleaguered, Sir Robert Bows and Sir Thomas Palmer are with seven
hundred Lances and six hundred light Horse sent to relieve it. Buchanan says
there were but three hundred Horse, the rest Foot. Of what sort soever they
were, it is Hadington, they were circumvented and slain almost to a man. Yet
did not the besieged let fall their courages, but bravely defended themselves,
until Francis Earl of Shrewsbury with an Army of twelve thousand English and
four thousand Lansquenets disassieged them, and forced the French to retreat.
The Earl having supplied the Town with necessaries, and reinforced the
Garrison, returned to Berwick. What they could not by force, the Enemy hopes
more easily to effect by a surprisal. To this end D'Esse with some select Bands
arrives at Hadinton about the break of day, where having killed the Sentinels
and taken an Half Moon before the Port, some seek to force the Gates, some
invade our adjoining Granaries. The noise and shouts of the assailants gives an
alarm to the Garrison, who give fire to a Cannon planted before the Port, the
Bullet whereof penetrating the Gate, makes way through the close ranks of the
Enemies, and so affrights them, that they seek to save themselves by flight.

Fortune was not so favorable to the Garrisons of Humes and Humes Castle and
Fastcastle gained by the Enemy.
Fastcastle, where by the negligence of the Sentinels, the designs of the Enemy
were crowned with success. At Humes, being conducted by some that knew all the
secret passages, they climb up a steep Rock, enter, massacre the secure
Garrison, and enjoy the place. At Fastcastle the Governor had commanded the
neighboring Husbandmen at a prefixed day to bring in their contribution of
Corn and other necessary provision. The Enemy makes use of this opportunity.
Soldiers habited like Pesants at the day come fraught with their burdens,
whereof easing their Horses, they carry them on their shoulders over the
Bridge, which joined two Rocks together, and so gain entrance: The watchword
being given, they cast down their burdens, kill the Sentinels, open the Gates
to their fellows, and become masters of the place. Neither were our Naval
enterprises fortunate, being at St. Minian and Merne repelled with loss.

In Autumn the Earl of Rutland with three thousand Lansquenets and some Bands
drawn out of the frontier Garrisons arrives at Hadington: Who duly considering
that this Town could not be kept any longer without the excessive charges of a
just Army, forasmuch as the Country about being miserably forraged, it could
not be victualled without great difficulty and danger; rased the Walls, fired
the Houses, brought away the Artillery, and finding no resistance, returned in
safety to Berwick. Buchanan refers it to the ensuing year, but I follow the
record of our own Historians.

And having thus far spent the year abroad, I at length return Gardener Bishop
of Winchester committed to the Tower.
home, where I find Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester in the Tower. He was
a man very learned, and no less subtle, adhering to the Popish Faction, yet so,
as that he would be content to Henry had employed him in many Embassages, and
that with ample authority, under whom he durst not oppose the proceedings
confirmed by enacted Laws. And under Edward he repressed himself for a time,
seemingly consenting to the commenced Reformation. But his dissimulation was at
length manifestly discovered to the Privy Council, who had commanded him in a
Sermon at Paul's Cross to signify his approbation of the present estate of the
Church; which he accordingly did on the nine and twentieth of June, but so
ambiguously and obscurely, that he satisfied them not. And being expressly
forbidden to speak any thing concerning the Eucharist, he knowing that by the
Laws nothing was definitively determined in that point, did so eargerly assert
that Papistical (I will not say Capernaitical) Corporal and Real Presence of
Christ in the Sacrament, that he wonderfully offended the minds of many, but
especially of the Lords of the Council. Wherefore he was on the thirtieth of
June committed, and obstinately refusing to acknowledge his error, was two
years after deprived of his Bishopric, and (as he was of Gardener deprived of
his Bishopric.
a turbulent spirit) lest he should practice any thing against the Estate,
detained nevertheless in prison until the death of Edward. In the mean time
Archbishop Cranmer by writing oppugned that gross and carnal assertion of the
Church of Rome concerning Christ's Presence in the Sacrament; whom Gardener
secretly answered under the fictitious name of M. Constantius.

Neither did that Blood-sucker Boner Bishop of London (who Boner Bishop of
London committed also.
in Queen Mary's Reign so heated the Kingdom with the Funeral Piles of so many
Saints) speed any better than Winchester. For being likewise enjoined to Preach
at the Cross, he did it so coldly, omitting many of those points whereof he was
commanded to speak, that he was likewise committed, deprived of his Bishopric,
and so lived until Queen Mary set them both at liberty. What the Objections
were against Cutbert Tonstall Bishop of Duresm, and George Day Bishop of
Chichester, I do not find, but that they ran the same fortune is manifest. They
were both very Learned Prelates, but especially Tonstall, a mild man, and of
most sweet conditions, in regard whereof I do not a little wonder that he was
so hardly dealt with. But the drift of the punishments of such men, who in
Henry's time were accounted the chief Lights of our Church, I conceive to have
been, that the rest of that Order might by their example be admonished, without
dissimulation either to resign their Bishoprics to others that were thought
more worthy, or be induced to conform themselves to the present Reformation of
the Church, according to the prescript of the Laws in that behalf lately
Enacted. And yet I would there were not sufficient cause to suspect, that this
was but a made opportunity, the removal of these obstacles making Tonstall was
exautorated, that rich Bishopric of Duresm by Act of Parliament was wrecked,
the chief revenues and customs of it being incorporated to the Crown, and the
rest in despite of the Tenants so gelded, that at this day it scarce
possesses the third part of its ancient Revenues. Yet did Queen Mary seriously
endeavor the restitution of those religious portions: Queen Elizabeth would
hardly consent that it should lose any of its plumes, (yet some it did) and
King James has lately enacted against the Alienation of Church Lands, yea even
to the Crown, otherwise than upon reservation of a reasonable Rent, and the
return of them to the Church after the expiration of three lives or one and
twenty years. The hungry Courtier finding how good a thing the Church was, had
now for some years become acquainted with it out of a zealous intent to Prey:
Neither could the horridness of her sacred Skeleton as yet so work on him, as
to divert his resolutions, and compassionately to leave the Church to her
religious poverty. Beside, the infancy of the King in this uncertain ebb and
flow of Religion, made her opportune to all kind of Sacrilege. So that we are
deservedly to thank the Almighty Guardian of the Church, that these Locusts
have not quite devoured the Maintenance of the Laborers in this English
Vineyard. For we yet retain that ancient form of government in the Primitive
Church by Bishops, who have for the most part wherewith to support their
honorable Function, as likewise have other those subordinate Prelates, Deans,
Archdeacons, and Canons of Cathedral Churches: And as for our Preachers of the
more polite and learned sort, we think him little befriended by Fortune, who
long lives in expectation of a competent preferment. I would the residue of
the Reformed Churches of Christendom had not been pared so near the quick by
precise hands, that but some few of them might in this kind be paralleled with
ours.

And now behold two Brothers acting their several Tragedies. Discord (...) the
Duke of Somerset and his Brother the Lord Admiral.
Jealousy, Envy, and Ambition infernal Furies, had armed them against each
other, and the Pride of the Feminine Sex prepared them for the Lists. A
lamentable exigent, wherein the loss of his Adversary must be the destruction
of each, wherein the Kingdom must groan at the loss of one, both being in the
Estate incompatible; wherein the King himself must (as most suspect he did)
suffer, that he might not suffer. Thomas Seymour Lord Admiral had married
Catharine Parr the Widow of the deceased King. What correspondence there might
be between Her (who had been the Wife of the late Sovereign) and the Duchess of
Somerset, whose Husband being Protector of the Realm, in point of command
little differed from a Sovereign, and had over his Brother the Admiral the
Advantages of Age, Dignity, and general Esteem, if any man cannot without
difficulty conjecture, Herodian, where let him observe the contentions arising
between Crispina the Wife of Commodus, and Lucilla, who had been formerly
married to L. Verus the Emperor. But in this the diverse dispositions of the
Brothers set on edge on the emulous humors of their Wives. The Duke was mild,
affable, free, open, and no way malicious; the Admiral was naturally turbulent,
fierce, ambitious, and conceived himself to be of the two the fitter for
Public Government. Presently after the death of Henry, the Admiral thrust on
by the flattery of his overweening conceits, resolved to add a luster to his
good parts, by marrying the Lady Elizabeth, as yet indeed scarce marriageable.
But the Protector wisely considering how rash and perilous this project was,
frustrated that design. By his after marriage with Catharine a most beautiful
and noble Lady, and abounding with wealth befitting her dignity, moft men were
confident, that the gulf of his vast desires would have been satisfied; but the
Law whereby he was condemned (though peradventure Enacted by strength of
Faction) will manifest the contrary. What notice I have received, and what the
public Records testify concerning this, being persuaded, that they swerve not
much from the truth, I think I may without blame relate. The Admiral having now
fortified himself with money and friends, and deeming his Brother's Lenity,
Sluggishness; began to behold him with the eye of contempt, and to cast about
how to dispossess him of the saddle, and (being of like degree of consanguinity
to the King) to enjoy the seat himself. To the furtherance of this project it
would be conducible, secretly to vilisie and traduce the Protector's actions,
to corrupt the King's Servants, especially if in any degree of favor, by fair
words and large promises by degrees to assure himself of the Nobility, to
secure his Castle of Holt with a Magazin of warlike provision but above all to
take care for money the nerves of War and assurance of Peace. These things
having been ordered with exact diligence, and for supply of coin the Exchequer
mightily pilled, he unmasks himself to some of the Nobility, signifying his
intent of settling himself at the Stern, by forcibly seizing on the King's
person. Nay his madness so far transported him, that to one of them,
conditionally that his assistance were not wanting to the advancement of his
designs, he promised that the King should marry his Daughter. In the mean time
the Queen his Wife being in September delivered of a Daughter, died in
childbed, and that not without suspicion of Poison. For after her death he
more importunately sought the Lady Elizabeth than ever, eagerly endeavoring to
procure her consent to a clandestine Marriage (as was that with the deceased
Queen) and not until after the Nuptials, to crave the assent of the King or the
Lords of the Council.

ANNO DOM. 1549. REG. 3.
But the Admiral's projects being opportunely discovered, and Tower, and
without trial condemned. The Parliament being on the fourteenth of March
dissolved, he is on the sixth day after publicly beheaded, having first
vehemently The Lord Admiral beheaded.
protested, that he never willingly did either actually endeavor, or seriously
intend any thing against the Person of the King, or the Estate. Concerning his
death the opinions of men were diverse, their censures diverse. Among some the
Protector heard ill, for suffering his Brother to be executed without ordinary
course of trial: As for for these faults proceeding from the violence of
youthful heat, they might better have been pardoned, than the King be left
destitute of an uncle's help, or himself of a Brother's. Nay (they say) there
wanted not those that before this severe course taken with the Admiral,
admonished the Protector to have a heedy regard to this action: Some
peradventure might be content to let a Brother shed tears; to shed his blood;
when they might prevent it, scarce any: it was much to be feared lest his
Brother's death would be his ruin, and the loss of such Friends, a hazard to
the King. Others highly extolled his impartial proceeding, whom fraternal
affection could not divert from righting his Country: For if Consanguinity or
Alliance to the King should be a sufficient cause to exempt them from
punishment, who should plot and contrive the change of government in the
Estate; upon what ticklish terms should we all stand, whiles nothing could be
certain and sure in the public government? Others maintained the necessity of
cutting off the Admiral, and that it stood the Protector upon so to do, if he
either regarded his own or the King's safeguard. For at what other mark did the
Admiral aim, but that having seized on the King's Person, removed his Brother
from the Protectorship, and married the Lady Elizabeth, he might by Poison or
some other means make away the young King already deprived of his Friends, and
as in the right of his Wife invest himself in the Regal Throne, whereto the
Lady Mary (although the elder Sister) as incestuously begotten, could make no
claim? And thus much was in a Sermon delivered before the King by Hugh Latimer,
who having ten years since resigned his Bishopric, had also hitherto abstained
from Preaching, until after the death of King Henry this Light was again
restored, that by his rays he might illustrate God's Church. But how true his
conjectures were concerning the Lord Seymour, I will not undertake to
determine. Whether faulty in his ambition, or overborn by his envious
adversaries, thus ended the Admiral his life, who was indeed a valiant
Commander, and not unfit for a Consultation, in whose ruin

Not long after this great man's fall, the People throughout An Insurrection
almost the whole Realm brake out into a Rebellion, whereto the frequent
usurpations and avarice of the Gentry, who in many places enclosed the common
and waste grounds for their own pleasure and private profit, had incited them.
The Lords of the Council upon notice of the Peoples discontents, and the
probability of an Insurrection unless speedy course were taken to appease them,
dispatched some into Kent (the Fountain of this general Uproar) who should upon
due examination of the causes of the Peoples grievances, admonish those that
were in that kind faulty, by throwing open the Enclosures to restore to the
People what had been unjustly taken from them; otherwise they should by
Authority Royal be forced thereunto, and by their punishments serve to deter
others from the like insolences and oppressions. The most part obey, and (a
most grateful spectacle to the People) cause their new made Enclosures to be
again laid open. Wherewith Report acquainting the neighboring Shires, the
unruly multitude enraged, that like restitution had not as yet been made to
them, not expecting the necessary direction of the Magistrate, but as if each
one were authorized in his own cause, both to judge of and revenge received
injuries, taking Arms level the Dikes, assert the enclosed the Lands, and give
hope that there their fury would be at a stand. But as the Sea having once
transgressed the just limits of its shore, by little and little eats its way to
an Inundation, and is not but with excessive toil to be forced within its usual
bounds: So these having once transcended the prescripts of the Laws, let
themselves loose to all kind of licentiousness, overrun and spoil the
Country, murder those that favor not their proceedings, and at length by the
conflux of the baser sort and malcontents so increase their numbers, that it
was not to make head against them with small Forces. And although this plague
reigned more in Norforlkshire than any where in Norfolk,
else, yet had it so spread its contagion over the most part of the Kingdom,
that it was scarce any where sincere and free from infection. For the Counties
of Kent, Oxford, Surrey, Buckingham, Essex, Cambridge, York, Lincoln, but
especially Devon and Somerset were imbroiled in these tumults. In Norfolk only
had twenty thousand assembled, who now confident of their strength; did no more
talk of Enclosures, but stretched their complaints to a higher strain; as that,
The freeborn Commonalty was oppressed by a small number of Gentry, who glut
themselves with pleasure, whiles the poor Commons wasted with daily labor do
like pack-horses live in extreme slavery. But howsoewer the calamities incident
to this present life may with a constant patience be endured, the Saul is to be
redeemed even with a thousand deaths. Holy Rites established by antiquity, are
abolished, new ones are authorized, and a new form of Religion obtruded. To
other evils death gives an end; but if they suffer their Souls to be
contaminated and polluted by this kind of impiety, what thing is there that can
equal them in miseries, to whom the end of these present ones is but the
beginning of some more horrid, namely of the pains infernal, which no death can
ever terminate. Why then should they not go to the Court, and appoint the King
yet in his minority new Counselors, removing those who now ruling as they
list, confound things sacred and profane, regarding nothing else but the
enriching of themselves with the public Treasure, that they may riot it amid
the public calamities?

This was the common complaint and resolution, especially of the Devonshire
Rebels, who having among them made choice of their Chieftains, did endeavor to
unite themselves with the rest of their fellow Rebels. But to keep them from
joining, Forces are dispatched, some into Norfolk, some into Devonshire. For
Norfolk are designed only fifteen hundred under the conduct of the Marquis of
Northampton, who for a time bravely defended that spacious but weak City
Norwich against the insolent Clowns. But his small Troops being much diminished
by the loss of the Lord Sheffeild and some others, he was at last fain to quit
the City to the Enemy, who after spoil barbarously set it on fire, and consumed
a great part of the edifices. This ill success drove the Lords of the Council
to a more serious apprehension of the danger, who thereupon sent the Earl of
Warwick with more competent Forces, who (as he was an excellent Commander) not
only forced the Rebels to relinquish the City, but also pressed them so hard in
their retreat, that he compelled them to fight. They seeing a necessity of
battle imposed, placed all their Captives (for the most part Gentlemen)
manacled and chained together, in front, that they alone might bear the fury of
the onset, and dull both the swords and courages of the Royalists. But their
loyalty was not so ill recompensed, as to suffer for it, scarce any of them
falling by the sword. The Rebels were nevertheless overthrown, and all either
taken or slain except a very few, who rallying themselves, seemed desperately
resolved to renew the fight. But the proposal of a Pardon made them cast away
their Arms, and peaceably to depart. The number of the chief authors of this
Commotion, who were hanged, was great. But Robert Ket a Tanner, who in those
times, and by that trade had gathered a fortune of a brace of thousands, was
above all as in Fault, so in Execution remarkable. He had been the Chiestain in
this Rebellion, and was not in reason to be obscured among the common sort:
Wherefore it being thought fit that he should surmount them in the glory of a
more notorious punishment, he was fairly hanged in Chains on the very top of
Norwich Castle.

While the Eastern parts of the Kingdom were thus possessed, and in Devonshire.
the Western parts were not less tormented with the same Furies. Devonshire and
Cornwall with some additions out of Somersetshire, Exceter. Forty days they
besieged it, and were repulsed by the Inhabitants, though utterly destitute of
warlike provision. On the sixth of August, John Lord Russel (after Earl of
Bedford) entering the City with forces and munition, disassieged it, pursued the
Rebels, slew some, took others, to the number of four thousand, whereof many
were after executed; but especially Humfrey Arundell Captain of St.
Michael's-Mount in Cornwall, a man of ancient descent and sufficiently ample
revenues: so that I cannot sufficiently wonder, what madness drove him to
associate himself with this desperate and unruly rabble. With him were hanged
Robert Bochin, Jo. Tomson, Roger Barret, Jo. Ulcocke, Will. Asa, James Norton,
Jo. Baron, and Richard Benet Priests, and besides them, John and James Rosogan,
Jo. Pain, Tho. Underhill, and Jo. Solman, all prime incendiaries and chief
authors of this tumult. The City of Exceter in memory of this their delivery
has ever since with an anniversary solemnity kept the sixth of August holy. As
for the other Counties infested with the relics of this Rebellion, the evil
being tempestively suppressed before it spread it self, and the ringleaders
punished, they were quickly reduced to their former temper.

Neither were our affairs more peaceable abroad than at home. Some Forts lost
in Boloignois.
For Henry King of France taking advantage of our domestic sedition, not
regarding the League concluded between us and his Father, invaded Boloignois,
where his success was such, that he was animated to greater attempts. He sets
forth a Fleet for the taking in of the Isles of Jersey and Guarnsey the sole
portions remaining to the English of the Duchy of Normandy. At these Isles the
French are with great loss driven aboard their Ships. At the landing they lost
a thousand men, and we very few. About Bouloigne, Corruptly Bonlamberg.
Mont-Lambert, Sellaque, and Ambleteul were lost. Sellaque was defended by two
Ensigns: But having been battered by the Enemy, while we unwarily parley with
Montmorency, was on the five and twentieth of August forced by them. At
Ambleteul were six Ensigns of Foot, who for some days made good the place: But
finding themselves unable long to hold out against so great forces, upon no
other terms than grant of lives, yielded the Fort to the French. The loss of
these places so daunted the Garrison at Blanconet, that having been scarce
saluted by the Enemies Cannon, upon condition of life and goods they quitted
the place. Neither was this the last important effect of our conceived terror;
for the English at Mont-Lambert not so much as attending the coming of the
Enemy, fired their lodgings, made their provision unuseful, and retreated to
Guisnes. The Fort at the Tower of Order fortified both by nature and art, gave
a period to this years success; standing resolutely upon defense until the
extremity French to raise their siege.

The loss of these small pieces set the Protector in the wane of Enmity between
the Protector and the Earl of Warwick.
the vulgar opinion, and afforded sufficient matter for Envy to work on. Among
the Lords of the Privy Council the most eminent was the Earl of Warwick, a man
of a vast spirit, which was the more enlarged by the contemplation of his great
Acts performed both abroad and at home. He had long looked a squint upon
Somerset's greatness, whom in a favorable esteem of himself he deemed far
beneath him; and was withal persuaded, that could he but remove the Duke, due
regards would cast the Protectorship on him. The consideration also of the
Duke's nakedness (disarmed of that metalsom piece the Admiral) -- (En quo
discordia Fratres Perduxit miseros) -- made his hopes present themselves in the
more lively shapes. He seeks about for sufficient matter wherewith to charge
the Duke, who could not be long ignorant of these practices against him. The
Duke finding himself aimed at, but not well discerning whether the Earl
intended a legal or military process against him, on the sixth of October, from
Hampton Court where the King then resided, sent Letters to the City of London,
requiring from thence an aid of a thousand men, who should guard the King and
him from the treacherous attempts of some ill affected Subjects. And in the
mean time presses in the adjacent Country; where having raised a reasonable
company, he the same night carried away the King, attended by some of the
Nobility and some of the Council, from thence (...) Windsor (...) (...) place,
because fortified, more safe, and convenient for resistance. But the Earl had
made a greater part of the Council, who accompanied him at London. To them he
makes a formal complaint against the Protector, beseeching them, by their
assistance to secure him from the Protector's malice, who (...) to (...) him
for his life. These Lords send a contre Letter to the (...), demanding aids of
them for the delivery of the King our of the hands of his Enemy (for so they
were pleased to term the Duke.) Then they send abroad Proclamations, wherein
they insert the chief heads of their accusation; as that By sowing seeds of
discord, the Duke had troubled that settled and peaceable (...) wherein King
Henry had left this Kingdom;) and had been the chief cause that it had lately
(...) engaged in Civil Wars to the loss of many thousand lives: That many Forts
conquered by Henry with hazard of his Person, were by the Duke's either
cowardice or treachery regained by the Enemy: That he regarded not the advice
of the rest of the Lords of the Council, and had plainly neglected King Henry's
Instructions concerning the Government of the Kingdoms of England and Ireland:
That his chief studies, and wherein he was most seen, were to rake up Wealth,
to maintain a Faction among the Nobility, and yet comply with both parties for
his own advantages, to build stately Palaces far exceeding the proportion of a
Subject, and that even in the very instant that the Estate did shrink under the
burden both of intestine and foreign Wars.

The Duke certified of their proceedings, and seeing himself forsaken (for the
Londoners being prepossessed, were so far from supplying him, that they at the
same time afforded his Adversary five hundred, and the greatest part of the
Nobility had by joining with the Earl made their cause one) at last forsook
himself also; and craving of the adverse party, that they would abstain from
violence toward him, and proceed only according to the usual courses of Legal
trial; delivered the King to their tuition, and remitted himself to their
disposal; by whom on the fourteenth of October he was committed to the Tower,
together with Sir Michael The Protector committed.
Stanhop, Sir Thomas Smith, Sir John Thin, and some others.

On the tenth of November died Paul the Third, having sat The death of Paul
the Third, Pope.
Pope near about fifteen years. The Conclave of Cardinals consulting about the
election of a new Pope, began to have regard of Cardinal Pool, in whom the
greatness of his Extract, his Virtuous Life, Gravity, and admirable Learning,
were very considerable motives. The Conclave was at that time divided, some
were Imperialists; some French, and a third Part (whereof the Cardinal Farnese
was principal) stood Neuter. These later at length joining with the
Imperialists, cast their unanimous Votes upon Pool: Who Cordinal Pool elected
Pope.
upon notice of his Election, blamed them for their rashness, advising them
again and again, that they should not in their Consultations be misled by
perturbation of mind, or do any thing for friendship or favor, but totally to
direct their cogitations to the honor of God and the profit of his Church.

Pool himself having thus put off the matter, the French Cardinals began to
allege, That in regard of the difficulties of ways and distance of places,
many of the College were yet absent, and that there was no reason why they
should with such precipitation proceed to a partial Election before the
Conclave were full. The Cardinal Caraffa (who some years after was Pope, by the
name of Paul the Fourth) a wayward old man, whose cold spirits were set on fire
by Envy and Ambition, sought to make use of Pool's Modesty to his own
advantage, hoping himself as eminent and in as fair a way as any of the
College ( Pool excepted) might be advanced to the Chair, and to lessen the
favor of the Conclave toward Pool, he betook himself to calumnies, accusing
Pool of suspicion of Heresy and Incontinency, that In Germany and his Legacy
at Trent, he had too much favored the Lutherans, had often entertained
Immanuel Tremellius, had enrolled Antonio Flaminio suspected of Lutheranism, in
his Family, and promoted him to many Ecclesiastical Dignities; and in his
Legacy at Viterbo used not that Italy it self were so barren of deserving men,
that we must be fain to send for this man out of Britain, almost the farthest
part of the known World, to invest him in the Papacy; whereof what would be the
effect, but that the Emperor, at whose devotion this man wholly was, might
once again make himself Master of Rome, now by indulgence, as before by force.

To these allegations Pool's reply was such, that he not only cleared himself,
but also quickened the almost extinguished desires of the Conclave to elect him.
The major part whereof assembling at his Chamber by night, wished Ludovico
Priulo the Cardinal's bosom-friend (between whom the correspondence of of their
dispositions had bred a mutual affection) to awake him, for that having Elected
him, they were purposely come (an accustomed ceremony) to Adore him, and
dissolve the Conclave. Priulo having signified to him with testimonies of
excessive joy, the intent of these Cardinals, was gently blamed by him, and
they dismissed with this answer, That a matter of so great consequence
(carrying with it so great a burden, that it would deterr an (...) man from
the acceptance of it) was not to be tumultuously, but upon mature deliberation
orderly to be transacted: as for the season, it was utterly unfit, for as much
as God was the God of Light, and not of Darkness: they should therefore do well
to deferr it until the next day, and if then their resolutions proved the same,
he would submit himself to their pleasures. The Italian Cardinals conceiving
these delays to proceed out of stupidity, began to contemn him; and changing
their determinations, a little after pitched upon Cardinal Montanus, whom they
created Pope, by the name of Julius the Third.

ANNO DOM. 1550. REG. 4.
THe Duke of Somerset having now for three months continued condescended, and
was on the sixth of February set a liberty, The Duke of Somerset set at liberty.
that revenge might draw the Duke to new practices, by mediation of Friends he
is reconciled to the Earl of Warwick, and that this atonement might be the more
firm and sincere, the Duke's Daughter is on the third of June married to the
Viscount Lisle the Earl of Warwick's Son, the King gracing the Nuptials with
his presence. Thuanus (I know not upon what grounds) writes, That the Earl by
a kind of counterfeit show that he was desirous of the restitution of the
Romish Religion, had settled himself in the good opinion of the vulgar, who had
not yet learned to renew themselves by casting off the old skin, but reverenced
Superstition for its reputed Antiquity: and that his dissimulation being
discovered, fearing lest he should be forsaken of them whom he had with false
hopes deluded, the consideration thereof, and of the Duke's mild and free
disposition, would endear his Adversary to them: to prevent this danger he
contrived this alliance with the Duke, and procured his liberty.

In the mean of these passages, on the nineteenth of January the Lord Russel
Lord Privy Seal, was created Earl of Bedford, William Lord Saint-John Earl of
Wiltshire, and Sir William Paget Lord Paget.

The Earl of Bedford and the Lord Paget were within three days Peace with the
Scots and French.
after with Sir William Peter's and Sir John Mason dispatched into France for
the Treaty of a Peace with the Deputies appointed by the French, who were
Montmorency Governor of Picardy, Gasper Coligny Lord of Chastillon afterward
Admiral of France, Andrew Gillar Mortair and William Boucherelle. The Lord
Paget not long before had been sent to the Emperor to signify how we were
distressed on the one side by the Scots, and on the other by the French, and
miserably rent at home by intestine dissentions, that our necessities required
speedy succors, or would force us to condescend to an inconvenient Peace with
France. But perceiving nothing was to be obtained of him, we struck hands with
the French upon these conditions.

That Boloigne and all the Forts in Boloignois should be surrendered to the
French, together with the Artillery and other military provision:

That in lieu thereof the King of France should pay unto Edward four hundred
thousand Crowns by equal portions, at two payments:

That the English should restore to the Scots, Lauder and Douglas; and (if the
Queen of Scots should desire it) should raze their Fortifications in Haymon and
at Roxburgh.

The Emperor was on both sides comprehended in the League, and the Queen of
Scots by the French. The two Kings presented each other with their Military
Orders; and (as one writes) it Edward should marry one of the Daughters of
France. For the ratification of the Articles, on the eighth of April Hostages
were given:

By Us,
The Duke of Suffolk, The Earl of Hertford Son to the Duke of Somerset, The
Earl of Arundel, The Earl of Derby, The Earl of Bath.
By the French,
John of Bourbon Duke of Anguien, Glaud of Lorain Marquis of Mayenne, Francis
Son to the Constable Montmorency, Lewis of Tremoville, Francis of Vendosme
Vidame of Chartres, Claud d'Annebalt.
This Peace between us and France was on the third of March solemnly Proclaimed
in London, and on the five and twentieth of April, Bouloigne being accordingly
furrendred to the French, our Hostages were returned.

On the thirtieth of July died the Lord Wriothsley Knight of the Garter, late
Lord Chancellor of England and Earl of Southampton. He had about the beginning
of this King's Reign delivered up the Seal, the Custody whereof was committed
to the Lord Rich. But having been about half a year past removed (as was also
the Earl of Arundel, but for what cause is uncertain) from the Council Table,
he at length (whether out of Grief or some other cause) fell sick and died. He
was Father to Henry the second Earl, and Grandfather to Henry the third Earl of
Southampton not long since deceased, who having tasted of both fortunes, did
heretofore as generously behave himself in adversity, as he did since
moderately in prosperity, whereto by the Clemency of our late Sovereign he was
restored.

ANNO DOM. 1551. REG. 5.
MEntion has formerly been made concerning the Sweating England has given a
name, as well in regard of its original, as of the known disposition of The
Sweating Sickness.
our Bodies to admit of this virulent contagion. England had been formerly
afflicted with it, but never so mortally as this present year. Shrewsbury was
now the first place acquainted with this April, and thence diffusing it self
over the most part of the Kingdom, at length it vanished away in the North
about the beginning of October. The fury of it (...) such, as if it would never
end but by its proper cruelty, when it should not have left subjects whereon to
feed. The dead whom it swept away were numberless. In London only eight hundred
was scarce a seven-nights stint. It made its first entry into this Island in
the Reign of Henry the Seventh (...) 1486, and from hence it took its progress
into other Nations. The Infected flowed away, and within the space of twenty
four hours when this malignant disease was most merciful in its execution,
peradventure within twelve, did sweat out their Souls. Women, children, and old
men it for the most part over-passed, and wreaked it self on the robustious
youth and well compact middle age, who, if in the beginning of their sickness
did but slumber, perished instantly. If it seized on any that were full gorged,
the recovery was in a manner desperate. Nay and of others whatsoever they were,
scarce one of a hundred escaped, until time had found out a remedy; the manner
whereof was thus: If any be taken in the day time, he must without shifting of
his apparel betake himself to bed: If by night and in bed, let him (...) (...)
thence, until twenty four hours be run. In the mean let the coverture be such,
that it provoke not sweat, but that it may gently distill of it self: if it be
possible for him so long to forbear, let him not eat nor drink more than may
moderately serve to extinguish thirst: But above all, let him so patiently
endure hear, that he uncover not any part of his body, no not so much as a hand
or a foot. The strangeness of this disease I do not so much admire; for that
Pliny in his twenty sixth Book the first Chapter witnesses, and daily
experience teaches us, that every Age produces new and Epidemical diseases.
But that which surpasses the search of humane reason is this, that this
Pestilence afflicted the English in what part of the World soever, without
touching the Natives, but in England alone. This dire contagion promiscuously
impoverisht the Land of people of all sorts: among those of especial note were
Henry Duke of Suffolk, and his The death of the Duke of Suffolk.
Brother, who were the Sons of Charles Brandon, the King's Cousins germane,
young Gentlemen of great and lively hopes: by the death of Henry, the Duchy was
for some few hours devolved to the younger Brother, who had the unhappy honor
but to be seized of the Title and die. The Lord Gray Marquis of Dorset having
married Frances the eldest Daughter of Charles Brandon, in the right of his
Wife made claim to the Duchy, and was on the eleventh of October invested in
it. At what time also John Dudley A creation of Dukes and Earls.
Earl of Warwick was created Duke of Northumberland; William Fowlet Earl of
Wiltshire, Marquis of Winchester; and Sir William Herbert Lord Cardif Master of
the Horse, Earl of Pembroke. The Dudley and Gray has been long since extinct:
Of the Family of the Powlets we have spoken already. The Lord The descent of
the Earls of Pembroke.
Herbert Brother-in-Law to Queen Catharine Parr, derived himself from William
Herbert in the time of Edward the Fourth Earl of Pembroke, and was (...) in the
Earldom by his Son Henry Father to william the modern Earl (whose mature wisdom
and gravity even in his greener years, long since ranked him in the sage (...)
of the Privy Council to two successive Kings) and to Philip by King James
created Earl of (...). Then also were knighted Sir John (...) the King's
Schoolmaster, Sir Henry Dudley, Sir Henry Novill, and (whom I cannot mention
but with due honor) Sir William Cecill. Cecill I say, who then Secretary of
Estate, was afterward by all Europe held in admiration for his wisdom; whom
Queen Elizabeth made Lord Treasurer of England and Baron of Burleigh, and was
whilst he lived a second prop of this Estate; who on the fourth of August 1598
piously ended his long, but for the public weals sake ever restless life,
leaving two Sons, Thomas by King James created Earl of (...), and Robert out of
the same Fountain of Royal Goodness (...) of (...) and Lord Treasurer of
England.

And now the ill cemented affections of the Dukes of Somerset (...) between the
(...) Dukes of Somerset and Northumberland revived.
and Northumberland dissolved into open enmity. In the prosecution whereof,
Somerset, otherwise of a most mild disposition (but Patience abused often runs
into the extreme of Fury) provoked by continual injuries, resolved (as some
write) to murder Northumberland. To this end, but under color of a visit,
privily armed, and well attended by Seconds who awaited him in an outer
Chamber, he comes to his Adversary at that time by reason of some indisposition
of Body keeping his Chamber, has access unto him naked as he was in his Bed,
but is so courteously entertained, and with such smooth language, that the Duke
of Somerset good man repenting himself of his Bloody Resolutions, would not
Execute what he purposely came for. At his departure one of his Conspirators is
reported to have asked him, Whether he had done the Feat? and upon his denial
to have added, Then you are undone. This his intent being by his own Party
bewrayed, a second Accusation is engrossed against him. The matter is reforred
to the Council Table, and he on the sixteenth of October again committed to the
Tower together with the Duchess his Wife, the Lord Gray of wilton, Sir Ralph
Vane, Sir Thomas Falmer, Sir William Partridge, Sir Michael Stanhop, Sir Thomas
Arundelt, and many other of his Friends.

On the first of December the Marquis of Winchester being sot that day High
Steward, he is Arraigned for Treason against the Estate, which he had not only
ill but treacherously managed; and for Conspiracy against the Duke of
Northumberland. Of Treason he cleared himself, and his Peers acquitted him. For
Hen. 7. which made the very Intent, nay Imagination of Killing a Privy
Counselor punishable by Death. But howsoever the Law (Enacted as some
conceive upon somewhat differing intents and meaning) were extended to the
highest of its rigor, yet can I not but wonder, how a man so great in the
regards of his Reigning Nephew, of his Honors, of the Popular Favor, should
be so destitute of Learned Advice, as not to exempt himself from a Felonious
Death by his Clergy. But such were the Times, such his Misfortunes in the
minority of his Prince; from whose revengeful Hand how could the adverse
Faction presume themselves secure in the future? Neither could they choose but
be somewhat terrified with that Ecchoing Testimony of the Peoples Joy, who
seeing that fatal Virge the Ax (usually marshalling Traitors to the Bar) laid
aside upon his freedom from the guilt of Treason; from Westminster Hall
certified that part of the City by their loud festival Acclamations, of the
gladsom tidings of their Favourite's conceived Absolution. And these
peradventure might be causes that his Execution was deferred.

Hitherto had the Estate patiently endured the obstinate Opposition Certain
Bishops deprived.
of some Bishops in point of Reformation, who for their Nonconformity are at
length deprived, and others substituted in their Bishoprics. Of some of them
we have occasionally already spoken, whose Censures notwithstanding fall in
with this Year. Gardener Bishop of Winchester was deprived the fourteenth of
February; Day of Chichester, and Heath of Worcester on the tenth of October;
Tonstall of Duresm on the twentieth of December committed to the Tower; and
Boner of London on the first of October 1549 had been already exautorated. All
of them for fear of practicing against the Estate were detained in Prison.

And on the last of October Francis Inglefield, Walgrave, and Rechester Some of
the Servants of the Lady Mary committed.
Servants to the Lady Mary, as also Francis Mallet Doctor of Divinity her
Chaplain, were committed. I cannot speak any thing certain of the causes of any
of their Imprisonments, excepting Doctor Mallet's only. At the Emperor's
request he was permitted to celebrate Mass, but with this limitation, In the
presence of the Lady Mary, not otherwise: for adventuring to Celebrate in her
absence, it was thought fit he should be punished for his presumptuous
Transgression. With the Lady her self all means had been used to conform her to
the Times: the King himself had taken much pains with her by often suasory
Letters, the Council had done the like, and personally to satisfy her with
Reason, diverse Learned men had been employed. But their labors were vain; for
hatred to our Religion for her Mothers, for her own sake, and some politic
respects (for by the Decrees of our Religion she was made Illegitimate, and
consequently cut

On the fourteenth of April one George Paris a German was at An Arrian burned.
London burned for Arrianism.

On the five and twentieth of May, Croydon and seven or eight An Earthquake.
other Villages in Surrey were terribly shaken with an Earthquake.

Toward the beginning of November, Mary Dowager of Scotland The Queen of Scots
in England.
arriving at Portsmouth, sent to the King and craved leave to pass through
England into Scotland. Which being granted, and she invited to London, entered
the City on the second of November, where her Entertainment was general and
Royal. On the sixth of November she departed for Scotland, and had the Charges
of her whole Retinue born until she arrived there in safety.

About the same time also the Earl of Arundel and the Lord Paget The Earl of
Arundel and the Lord Paget committed.
were (but for what causes is uncertain) committed to the Tower. In the ensuing
April the Garter was taken from the Lord Paget, and conferred on the Earl of
Warwick the Duke of Northumberland's eldest Son. As for the Earl of Arundel he
was on the third of December in the next year set at liberty.

On the one and twentieth of December was the Lord Rich removed The Bishop of
Ely Lord Chancellor.
from the Chancellorship, and Thomas Goodrich Bishop of Ely made Lord
Chancellor.

ANNO DOM. 1552. REG. 6.
THe Duke of Somerset had now continued two Months in The Duke of Somerset
beheaded.
his Enemies (notwithstanding the King's desire to save his Uncle, under whose
Tuition he had passed his Childhood) drew him to the Scaffold. Being on the
twenty fourth of January brought to the place of Execution, he in this manner
bespake the Assembly:

Being by the Law condemned, I here willingly submit my self, by exemplary
punishment to satisfy its Rigor. That God has been pleased to grant me so
long a Preparative to my End, I humbly thank his Eternal Goodness: But in that
he has been farther pleased to inspire me with the Knowledge of his Truth, and
to make me an Instrument for the propagation of the same, I can never
sufficiently magnify his Mercies. In this do I rejoice, in this only do I
triumph: beseeching him, that his Church in this Realm being now reformed
according to the Institution of the ancient Primitive, the Members thereof may
conform their lives to the purity of its received Doctrine.

More he would have said, but a strange tumult and sudden Fly quickly, fly:
insomuch that of that infinite multitude which the expectation of the Duke's
death had drawn together, as many as well could seeking to shift for
themselves, many are trodden to death, and others in the throng as unfortunately
(...); the rest amazedly expect their own destruction, when their own fears
were the greatest danger. The cause of their fears no man could certainly
speak: one said he heard a terrible crack of Thunder; another the noise of a
Troop of Horse: and some over credulous, according to the sway of their
Affections; joyfully affirmed that Messengers were come with a Pardon for the
Duke. But certain Halberdiers appointed to guard the Duke to the Scaffold; but
coming tardy, and crying to their Fellows Away, away, were more probably the
occasion of this Tumult. The true meaning of this amphibological word, which
commands haste to and from, being mistaken, and withal a company of Armed
men bending themselves (as was supposed) against the multitude, filled all with
terror and confusion. The affrighted People being at length with much ado
pacified; the Duke entreating them for a while to contain themselves, that he
might with a more settled mind depart out of this World; by Prayer commended his
Soul to God, and then suffered with admirable constancy, neither by voice,
gesture, nor (...) showing himself any way dejected or moved at the
apprehension of Death; unless peradventure you might take this for a token of
fear, that when he covered his Eyes with his Handkerchief, his Cheeks had a
little more tincture of red than usual.

That his Death was generally lamented is manifest. Many there were who kept
Handkerchiefs dipped in his Blood, as so many sacred Relics. Among the rest a
spriteful Dame two years after, when the Duke of Northumberland was led Captive
through the City for his opposition against Queen Mary, ran to him in the
streets, and shaking out her bloody Handkerchief before him, Behold (said she)
the Blood of that worthy man, that good Uncle of that excellent King, which
shed by thy treacherous machination, now at this instant begins to revenge it
self upon thee. And Sir Ralph Vane, who on the twenty sixth of February was
with Sir Miles Partridge hanged at the same place where the Duke had suffered,
at what time also Sir Michael Stanhop and Sir Thomas (...) were there beheaded;
going to his Execution said, that His Blood would make Northumberland's Pillow
uneasy to him, These four Knights being to be Executed, did each of them take
God to witness, that they never practiced any thing against the King nor any of
his Council.

To return to the Duke, such was his End. As for his Life, he was a pious just
man, very zealous in point of Reformation, very solicitous of the King's
safety, every way good, and careful Means, as of superstitious Ceremonies,
whereof not a few of our Cathedrals to this day complain.

Many Prodigies ensued his death, whereby many did presage the Calamities of
succeeding times. In August six Dolphins (a Fish seldom seen in our Seas) were
taken in the Thames, three near Quinborough, and three a little above
Greenwich, where the Water is scarce tainted with the Seas brackishness. On the
seventh day of October were three Whales cast up at Gravesend. And on the third
of August at Middleton in Oxfordshire was born a Monster, A Monster.
such, as few either Naturalists or Historians write of the like. It had two
Heads and two Bodies as far as the Navil distinct, where they were so conjoined
that they both had but one way of egestion, and their Heads looking always
contrary ways. The Legs and Thighs of the one did always ly at the trunk of the
other. This (Female) Monster lived eighteen days, and might have longer
peradventure, if it had not been so often opened to satisfy curiosity, that it
took cold and died.

This year the Monastery of the Franciscan Friars in London was converted into
a brave Hospital, wherein four hundred poor Boys are maintained, and have
education befitting freeborn men. It is at this day called Christ-Church.

In Southwark also was another like place provided for the relief of Poor sick
persons, and is dedicated to the memory of St. Thomas.

ANNO DOM. 1553. REG. 7.
THis year sets a period to young Edward's Reign, who by the The King Sicknoth.
cause of his sickness to Grief for the death of his Uncles; some to Poison,
and that by a Nosegay of sweet Flowers presented him as a great dainty on
New-years-day. But what hopeful Prince was there ever (almost) immaturely taken
away, but Poison or some other treachery was imputed? Our deluded hopes being
converted into grief, out of passion we belly Fate. Had there been the least
suspicion of any such inhumane practice, Queen Mary would never have suffered
it to have passed as an act of indifferency without an inquest. It was
doubtless a posthumous rumor purposely raised to make the Great ones of that
Reign distastful to the succeeding times. Howsoever it were, the Nobility
understanding by the Physicians, that the King's estate was desperate, began
every one to project his own ends. The Duke of Northumberland as he was more
potent than rest, so did his ambition fly higher. It was somewhat strange, that
being not any way able to pretend but a shadow of Mary and Elizabeth, two
obstacles to be removed, he doubted not by reasons drawn from their
questionable Births to exclude them. The next regard must be of the Daughters
of Henry the Seventh. But of the Queen of Scots (who was Niece to Margaret the
eldest Daughter of Henry the Seventh) he was little solicitous: For by reason
of our continual Enmity with the Scots, and thence inveterate Hatred, he
imagined that any show of Reason would put her by, especially she being
contracted to the French, whose insolent Government he was confident the
English would never brook. In the next place consideration is to be had of Lady
Frances Daughter to Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk by Mary Dowager of France
the second Daughter of Henry the Seventh, who, her two Brothers then alive, had
been married to Henry Gray Marquis of Dorset. The two Brothers (as before)
dying of the late mortality, the Marquis is in the right of his Wife created
Duke of Suffolk; and this was another stop to his Ambition. For the removal
whereof he intends this course: He imparts his designs to the Duke of Suffolk,
and desires that a Match may be concluded between the Lord Guilford Dudley his
fourth Son, and Lady Jane Gray the Duke of Suffolk's eldest Daughter. And
because, if only right of Inheritance should be pretended, the Duchess of
Suffolk were in reason to be preferred before her Daughter; he undertakes to
persuade the King not only to disinherit his Sisters by Will and Testament, but
also by the same to declare the Lady Jane his next and immediate Successor.
Suffolk biting at this bait, they complot by drawing the chiefest of the
Nobility, to contract Affinity either with the one or the other to procure the
general assent of them all. So on the same day that Lady Jane under an unhappy
Planet was married to Lord Guilford, the Duke of Suffolk's two youngest
Daughters are married, Catharine to Lord Henry eldest Son to the Earl of
Pembroke, and crouch-backed Mary to Martin Keys Groom Porter. Northumberland's
eldest Daughter also named Catharine was married to the Lord Hastings eldest
Son to the Earl of Huntington. These Marriages were in June Solemnized at
London, the King at that time extremely languishing.

Having thus brought these things to a desired pass, nothing now remained but
to act his part with the weak King. To Him he inculcates, In what danger the
estate of the Church would be, if He dying, provision were not first made of a
pious Successor, and such a one as should maintain the now established
Religion. How the Lady Mary stood affected was well known. Of the Lady
Elizabeth there might be peradventure better hopes. But their causes were so
Mary be admitted. That is was the part of a Religious and Good Prince to set
apart all respects of Blood, where God's Glory and the Subject's weal might be
endangered. They that should do otherwise, were after this Life (which is
short) to expect Revenge at God's dreadful Tribunal, where they are to undergo
the trial either of eternal Life or eternal Death. That the Duke of Suffolk,
had three Daughters nearest to him in degrees of Blood; they were such as their
Virtues and Birth did commend, and from whom the violation of Religion, or the
danger of a Foreign yoke by any Match was not to be feared, for as much as their
Education had been Religious, they had as it were with their Milk sucked in the
Spiritual food of true Christian Doctrine, and were also matched to Husbands as
zealous of the Truth as themselves; He could wish and would advise, that these
might be successively called to the Crown, but with this caution, That they
should maintain the now established Religion. And although Lady Jane the eldest
of the three were married to his Son; he would be content that they should be
bound by Oath to perform whatsoever his Majesty should decree: For he had not
so much regard to his own as the general good.

These Reasons so prevailed with the young King, that he His Will, wherein he
disinheriteth his Sisters.
made his Will, and therein as much as in him lay, excluded both his Sisters
from the Succession to the Crown, and all there is whatsoever, beside the Duke of
Suffolk's Daughters. This Will was read in presence of the Council and chief
Judges of the Realm, and by each of them confirmed, with a strict command that
no man should publish the contents of it, lest it might prove an occasion of
Sedition and Civil Tumults. The Archbishop Cranmer did for a while refuse to
subscribe to it, not deeming it any way agreeable to equity, that the right of
lawful Succession should upon any pretenses be violated: But the King urging
him, and making Religion a motive, which was otherwise likely to suffer, after
a long disceptation he was at length drawn to assent. But these delays of his
were so little regarded by Queen Mary, that under her scarce any man was sooner
marked out for destruction. Some few days after these passages, on the sixth of
July in the sixteenth year of his age King Edward He dies.
at Greenwich surrendered his Soul to God, having under his Tutors reigned six
years, five months, and nineteen days, and even in that tender age given great
proof of his Virtue; a Prince of great Devotion, Constancy of Mind, Love of the
Truth, and incredibly Studious; Virtues which with Royal Greatness seldom
concur. Some three hours before his Death, not thinking any one had been
present to over-hear him, he thus commended himself to God:

O Lord God, free me I beseech thee out of this miserable and His Prayer.
thee O Lord do I commend my Spirit. Thou know O Lord how happy I shall be,
may I live with thee in Heaven: yet would I might live and be well for thine
Elects sake, that I might faithfully serve thee. O Lord God, bless thy People,
and save thine Inheritance. O Lord God, save thy People of England, defend this
Kingdom from Popery, and preserve thy true Religion in it, that I and my People
may bless thy most Holy Name for thy Son Jesus Christ.

Then opening his Eyes, which he had hitherto closed, and seeing Doctor Owen
the Physician (from whose report we have this Prayer) sitting by, Are you
there? (quoth he) I had not thought you had been so near: who answered, I heard
you speak, but could not collect your words: Indeed (replied the King) I was
making my Prayer to God. A little after, he suddenly cried out, I faint, Lord
have mercy upon me, and receive my Soul: which words he had scarce spoken ere
he departed. Much might be spoken in praise of this Prince, but regardful of my
intended brevity, I will only give you a taste of him out of Cardan, who about a
year before traveling Cardanus Lib. de Genituris.
through England toward Scotland, was admitted to his presence. The conference
between them he thus describes. Aderant illi (speaking of the King) Gratiae;
Linguas enim multas callebat Puer, etc. He was stored with Graces; for being
yet a Child he spoke many Languages, his native English, Latin, French, and as
I hear, was also skilled in the Greek, Italian, Spanish, and peradventure some
others. He wanted neither the rudiments of Logic, the principles of
Philosophy, nor Music: He was full of Humanity the relish of Morality, of
Gravity befitting Royalty, of hopes great as himself: A Child of so great Wit
and such Expectation could not be born, without a kind of Miracle in Nature. I
write not this Rhetorically with the excess of an Hyperbole; for to speak all
the truth were to speak far more. Being yet but in his fifteenth year, he spoke
Latin as readily and politely as I could. What (faith he) is the subject of
your Books De Rerum Varietate? (I had dedicated them to his Majesty) Card. In
the first Chapter I show the long hidden and vainly sought after causes of
Comets. King. And what is the cause? Card. The concourse and meeting of the
lights of the erratick Stars. King. But being the Planets are moved with
several motions, how comes it to pass, that the Comet does not either presently
dissolve and scatter, or move with their motion? Card. It moves indeed, but
with a far swifter motion than the Planets, by reason of the diversity of the
aspect, as we see in Crystal and the Sun when a Rainbow rebound upon a Wall,
for a little change makes a great difference of the place. King. But how can
that be done without a subject? for the Wall is the subject to the Rainbow.
Card. As in the Galaxia or Milky-way, and in the reflection of lights when many
Candles lighted are set near one another, they do produce a certain lucid and
bright mean. You may know the Lion

Immodicis brevis est aetas, and rara senectus:

Immoderate growths short lived are, aged seld.

He could give you only a taste of his Virtue, not an example. When occasion
required a Majestic gravity, you should see him act an old man; in his
affability and mildness he showed his age. He played on the Lute, accustomed
himself to public affairs, was liberally disposed, etc. So much Cardan. His
Corpse was on the ninth of August with no very great pomp interred at
Westminster near to his Grandfather Henry the Seventh.

And here had I with this King's death concluded this Second Part, had not the
consideration of a memorable Enterprise of this King's occurred. To Sebastian
Cabota a Portugueze, for his admirable skill in Cosmography and the Art of
Navigation, he allowed an Annuity of an hundred sixty six Pounds. Edward by
this Cabota's persuasion on the twelfth of May set forth three Ships under Sir
Hugh Willoughby for the discovery of unknown Regions in the North parts of the
World. The main hope of this Voyage was, that way to open a shorter passage to
those vast Countries of the East, Cathay and China. Near upon the Coast of
Norway these Ships were so severed by Tempest, that they never met again. One
of these great Ships terrified with the greatness of irresistible dangers,
quickly returned home. Sir Hugh Willoughby arrived at last at a Country under
the Latitude of seventy four degrees, not inhabited, hitherto to us unknown,
and was forced to winter there, where he and all his Company were frozen to
death. The Sir Hugh Willoughby frozen 10 death.
Ship was afterward found by some the like English Adventurers, and in his Desk
a writing relating the Adventures of each day, his Will also, by which it
appeared that he lived until January. Richard Chanceller with the third Ship
making a more prosperous Voyage, after many dangers and incertainties arrived
at last among the Russes and Muscovites. To these parts some few years after he
made a second Voyage; but in his return suffered wreck on the Scottish Coast,
where seeking to save the Muscovite Ambassador, Commerce with the Muscovite.
he himself was drowned. Howsoever he were unfortunate, he opened a rich Vein
of Traffic to succeeding times, whereby we have an exact discovery of that
Country, and of the Manners of those Heathen Christians.

FINIS.
ANNALS OF ENGLAND.

QUEEN MARY.

The Third Book.

LONDON,

Printed for Thomas Basset, John Wright, and Richard Chiswel.

M. DC. LXXV.

ANNALS OF ENGLAND.
BOOK III.
QUEEN MARY.
ANNO DOM. 1553. REG. 1.
WHen the Lady Mary, long since acquainted with Northumberland's secret
practices, was also certified of her Brother's decease; not thinking it safe to
abide near London, where her Enemies were in their full strength; pretending a
fear of the Plague by reason of the suspicious death of one of her Household,
she suddenly departed from St. Edmundsbury, and came in Lady Mary flies into
Suffolk.
one day to Framingham Castle in Suffolk, distant from London fourscore miles,
and seated near the Sea, from whence if Fortune frowned on her, she might make
an easy escape into France. Here she took upon her the Title of Queen, and by
Letters to her Friends, and the Nobles, wished their speedy repair unto Her.

In the mean time Northumberland having for two days together consulted with
his Friends concerning the managing of this great business, the King's death
being not yet published, sent command to the Lord Mayor of London, to repair
forthwith to Greenwich with six Aldermen, and twelve other Citizens of chiefest
account. To them he declares the King's departure, and the seating of Lady Jane
in the Throne of Sovereignty, showing withal the King's Testament under Seal,
which did import no less than the settling the Succession on her and that
Family: He causes them either by terror or promises to swear Allegiance Jane,
with command, and that under a great penalty, that they should not as yet
divulge these secret passages. What a furtherance it might be to his Affairs if
he could assure himself of this City, he was too wise to be ignorant of: And as
for suppressing the report of the King's death; he thought it might prove a
means to facilitate the surprisal of the Lady Mary, as yet probably secure for
lack of notice of her Brother's decease. But understanding that she had made an
escape into Suffolk, Lady Jane was by almost all the Peers of the Realm
pompously conducted Lady Jane proclaimed Queen.
to the Tower, and with great Solemnity publicly proclaimed Queen. She was of
age about sixteen, of feature not admirable but handsome, incredibly learned,
very quick-witted, and wise both beyond her Sex and above her Age, wonderfully
devoted to purity of Doctrine, and so far from desire of this Advancement, that
she began not to act her part of Royalty without Tears, manifesting it to the
World, that she was forced by her Parents and Friends ambition to this high but
dangerous Ascent. At her going through the City toward the Tower, the Concourse
of the People was great, their Acclamations few, as if the strangeness of some
new Spectacle had drawn them together, rather than any intent of Gratulation.
Which Queen Mary's (for so we must henceforth call her). Friends hitherto
distrustful more of Success than the Cause, accepted of as an happy omen, and
were encouraged to assist her as occasion should invite them. But the presence
of Northumberland a man quick, watchful, and very politic, was yet a remora to
their Proceedings: Him they must send farther off, or be content to sit still.

The same day that Lady Jane entered the Tower Letters sent from Queen Mary are
read openly at the Council Table, wherein she commands the Lords to repair to
her, as being the next in Succession to the Crown, and that they at last should
take example from the general Votes of the Kingdom, she being now every where
acknowledged the lawful Sovereign. And indeed the Norfolk and Suffolk men were
become hers; and the wiser sort did easily discern, that the affections of the
People were hers. Wherefore it was thought at first expedient speedily to levy
an Army, and that, while yet the Hearts of the People were free from any
Impression, and their Minds yet equally poised in the Balance of Irresolution,
were either way to be swayed: By this course they might be peradventure too
strong for the Queen, and preventing her Plea by Arms, force her to plead more
necessarily for her Life. And an Army was raised, whereof the Duke of Suffolk
was appointed General.

But the fautors of Mary's Cause, whose main Project was to remove that grand
obstacle the Duke of Northumberland, slily insinuating themselves with Lady
Jane, persuaded her not to Northumberland for this Employment, the very terror
of whose Name (his late Victory over the Norfolk Rebels being yet fresh in
memory) would effect more, than the other could either by Policy or Arms: And
indeed to whose trust could a Daughter be better committed than to her
Father's? As for the City, the Faith and wonted Wisdom of the Council now with
her, would contain it in Obedience, and work it to her best Advantages. She
poor Lady swayed with these Reasons, earnestly beseeched Northumberland himself
to undergo Northumberland forced to be General.
this Burden, who at length though unwillingly consented. His chief fear was,
lest the advantage of his Absence might encourage opposite Practisers to raise
some Tumults: But finding either excuses or absolute denials no way available,
he prepares himself for this Expedition, and on the the thirteenth of July sets
forth from London, with an Army of six thousand. At his departure it is
reported he should say to the Lord Gray of Wilton who then accompanied him, Do
you see (my Lord) what a conflux of People here is drawn together to see us
march? And yet of all this multitude, you hear not so much as one that wishes
us Success. The Londoners stood very well affected in point of Religion, so did
also for the most part the Suffolk and the Norfolk men, and they knew Mary to
be absolute for Popery. But the English are in their due respects to their
Prince so loyally constant, that no regards, no not pretext of Religion, can
alienate their Affections from their lawful Sovereign, whereof the miserable
case of Lady Jane will anon give a memorable Example. For although her Faction
had laid a strong Foundation, and as may appear by the premises; had most
artificially raised their Superstructure; yet as soon as the true and undoubted
Heir did but manifest her Resolution to vindicate her Right, this accurate Pile
presently fell, and dissolved as it were in the twinkling of an Eye, and that
chiefly by their endeavor, of whom for their Religions sake Lady Jane might
have presumed her self assured. Neither were the People made any thing the more
inclinable by publicly impugning Queen Mary's Right in the Pulpit, a course
wherein Northumberland engaged many a Preacher. Nay, even in the City of
London, that learned and godly Prelate Nicholas Ridley upon the deprivation of
Boner consecrated Bishop of London (who I wish had not erred in this matter)
was scarce heard out with patience. As for Queen Mary, if that Rule of the
Civilians be not true, that L. qui in provincia, sect, Divus, ff. de Ris Nupt.
L. 4. C. de Incest. Nupt. and Gloss. ibid. C. cum inter. etc. ex tenore. Extr.
qui fill. sins legit.
Matrimony contracted without any conceived Impediment, although it after
chance to be dissolved as unlawful, is of such force, that the Children
begotten in such Wedlock are to be accounted lawful: Yet why they should seek
to exclude the Lady Elizabeth, I cannot but wonder, neither can I think that
any probable reason therefore could be yielded by them, who deemed Queen Mary
Illegitimate. To let pass also in the mean time Mary Queen of Scots, to whom
Henry the Eighth being extinct, the Crown properly belonged. Whatsoever the
Reasons urged by these Preachers were, they were so far from making any
impression in the minds of the People, that they every where flocked abundantly
to Queen Mary: and this not out of a vulgar levity, many of the Nobility and
other prime men having followed her Party even from the beginning; such were
the Earls of Bath and Sussex, the Heirs of the Lords Wharton and Mordant, Sir
William Drury, Sir John Shelton, Sir Henry Bedingfeild, Sir Henry Jernegam,
Sulierd, Freston, and others. But above all Sir Edward Hastings Brother to the
Earl of Huntingdon was most famous, who having Commission from the Duke of
Northumberland to raise four thousand Foot, after he had levied them, revolted
to Queen Mary: For which act she afterward created him Baron of Lowborough,
honoring also Sir John Williams with another Barony, as a reward of his
faithful Service. And Sergeant Morgan not coming short of these in his devoir,
became afterward one of the chief Judges of the Realm.

But an unexpected Accident did most advantage Queen Mary's Affairs. Six Ships
had Northumberland set forth on that part of the Kingdom, where it is confined
with the German Ocean, that he might intercept the Queen, if she sought to make
an escape, and to have them ready for all occasions. These Ships were then by
Tempest driven in at Yarmouth, when in the Town there was a Press of Soldiers
for the Queen. The Mariners and Soldiers induced partly by threats, partly by
entreaty, yield the Ships to Sir Henry Jernegam for Queen Mary's use, and
associate themselves with the new raised Companies. This was to her a matter of
great consequence, and that such she deemed it, her joy well testified. And now
encouraged with these accessions of Men, Ordnance, and Munition, she feared not
Northumberland, and resolved not so much her own defense, as the speedy
suppression of her Competitrix.

The Lords who had hitherto adhered to Lady Jane were somewhat terrified with
this adverse accident. And the Queens Friends living at Court who had reserved
themselves for opportunity, and were as yet concealed, were now so emboldened
as to reveal themselves to each other, desiring nothing more than that being
set at liberty (for yet the Tower was the Court) they might but gain entrance
into the City, that they might more freely discover themselves. But they must
either make the way, or be content to pray only for her, whom they could not
otherwise advantage. It happened that Northumberland had written for more Aids.
At his setting forth he was, besides his four Sons, accompanied with the
Marquis of Northampton, the Earl of Huntingdon, the Lord Gray, and many other
persons of note; and had when he came to Cambridge an Army consisting of eight
thousand Edmondsbury, he found that many of his Soldiers had forsaken their
Colors, and was wonderfully jealous lest of the remainder many would do the
like. Wherefore returning to Cambridge, he plied the Lords of the Council with
continual demands of supplies to fill his Companies grown thin by the departure
of so many Northumberland forsaken by his Soldiers.
fugitives. The Lords that favored Mary's Cause laying hold on this occasion,
obsequiously tendering their Services for the furtherance of the Duke's designs,
decree speedy Aids for him; but pretend, that it were dangerous to employ any
other in these Levies, than such of whose Loyalty they might rest assured, lest
the like Treachery might be committed as had been already by Sir Edward
Hastings; and proffer themselves for the execution of this Affair. So by the
Duke of Suffolk his permission they all let loose as it were out of Prison,
disperse themselves over the City. The chiefest of them that were resolved for
the Queen, were the Marquis of Winchester Lord Treasurer, the Earl of Pembroke,
the Earl of Arundell (whom after a years Imprisonment with the Lord Paget, the
Duke of Northumberland had lately set at liberty) and Sir Thomas Cheyney Lord
Warden of the Cinque Ports. By the industry of these, as many of the Lords of
the Council as were within call (excepting the Duke of Suffolk) and as many
other of the Nobility as were known to be at least not Enemies to Queen Mary's
Cause, had a meeting at Baynards-Castle, under pretense of conference with the
French Ambassador Lavall, about I know not what important business: But indeed
to consult of a mean how to reduce Lady Jane to her first original of a Private
fortune. There Henry Earl of Arundell bitterly inveighing against the Duke of
Northumberland, after he had ripped up the Acts of former times, and burdened
him with all that had been done unjustly, cruelly, or amiss in the Reign of
King Edward; he at last comes to that treacherous act of the Disherison of the
Children of Henry the Eighth, professing that He wondered how he had so
enthralled such Personages (intimating those Nobles present) as to make them
Instruments of his Wickedness: For by their consent and suffrages it came to
pass, that the Duke of Suffolk's Daughter, the same Northumberland's
Daughter-in-Law, did now personate a Queen, the gross and power of Sovereignty
remaining indeed with Northumberland, that he might freely wreak his Tyranny on
their Lives and Fortunes. Religion is indeed the thing pretended: But suppose
we have no regard to these Apostolical Rules, Evil must not be done that good
may come thereof, and We must obey even evil Princes not for fear, but for
conscience sake; yet how does it appear that Mary intends any alteration in
Religion? Certainly having been lately Petitioned unto in this point by the
Suffolk men, she gave them (and that was true) a very hopeful answer. And what
a mad blindness it is, for the avoidance of an uncertain Danger, to precipitate
our Mary the undoubtedly lawful Heir may be publicly Proclaimed. After he had
spoken to this purpose, the Earl of Pembroke readily The Lords resolve for
Queen Mary,
and generously professed that he subscribed to the Earl of Arundell's motion,
and grasping his Sword, signified his Resolution to maintain the Right of Mary
against all Opposers. The rest take after them, and decree the same. So
commanding the repair of the Lord Mayor and the rest of the Aldermen, they in
Cheapside proclaim Lady Mary Queen, with addition also of the Title of Supreme
Head of the Church. And to add more majesty to their act by some devout
Solemnity, they go in Procession to Paul's singing that admirable Hymn of those
holy Fathers St. Ambrose and St. Augustine, commonly known by its first words,
Te Deum. Then they dispatched away some Companies to seize on the Tower, And to
suppress Lady Jane.
and command the Duke of Suffolk to render himself. The Duke as easily dejected
at the news, as he had formerly been elevated by vain hope, entering his
Daughters Chamber, forbad the farther use of Royal Ceremonies, wishing her to
be content with her return to a Private fortune. Whereto she answered with a
settled countenance: Sir, I better brook this message, than my forced
advancement to Royalty; out of obedience to you and my Mother I have grievously
sinned, and offered violence to my self: Now I do willingly, and as obeying the
motions of my Soul, relinquish the Crown, and endeavor to salve those faults
committed by others, if at least so great an error may be salved by a willing
relinquishment and ingenuous acknowledgement. Having spoken thus much, she
retired into a withdrawing-room, more troubled at the Danger she had incurred,
than the defeasance of so great hopes. The Duke himself presently repaired to
the rest of the Council, and subscribed to their Decree. This Proclamation was
on the nineteenth of July published, and entertained with such Acclamations,
that no part of it could be heard, after the first mention of Queen Mary's
Name. The Earl of Arundell and the Lord Paget having thus ordered this weighty
Affair, accompanied with thirty Horse, rid post that night unto the Queen, to
certify her of the gladsom tidings of her Subjects loyal intentions.

In the mean time the Lords of the Council certify Northumberland
Northumberland proclaims Mary Queen at Cambridge.
of these Passages, commanding him withal to subscribe to the Decree, and
dismiss his Army. But he out of the Presage of his own Fortune had before the
receipt of their Letters proclaimed her Queen at Cambridge, where in a
counterfeit joy he threw up his Cap with the sincerer multitude. Then he
cashiered the rest of his wavering Companies, and almost all the Lords, who had
hitherto followed him, with a Legal Revolt Northumberland the sole author and
cause of these disloyal Distractions, were upon their Submission pardoned.

Lady Jane, having as on a Stage for ten days only personated a Queen, was
committed to safe custody, and the Ladies who had hitherto attended her, were
commanded each to their homes. The Duke of Northumberland was by the Queens
command apprehended by the Earl of Arundell, and committed to the Tower. The
manner of his taking is reported to have been thus: After so many checks
uncertain what course to take, resolved to fly, but not knowing whether, the
Pensioners (who with their Captain Sir John Gates had followed him in this
Expedition) while he was pulling on his Boots seized on him, saying, that It
was fit they should excuse themselves from the imputation of Treason by his
testimony. The Duke withstanding them, and the matter being likely to grow to
blows, at the very instant came those Letters from the Council, which commanded
them all to lay aside their Arms, and peaceably to repair to their homes. These
Letters took up the matter, and set the Duke at liberty, which notwithstanding
lasted not long. For the next morning, Northumberland, and some other Lords
taken.
as he was ready to take Horse, the Earl of Arundell intercepted him, and with
him apprehended the Earl of Huntingdon, the Earl of Warwick Northumberland's
eldest Son, and two others younger Lord Ambrose and Lord Henry Dudley, Sir
Andrew Dudley the Duke's Brother, Sir Thomas Palmer, Sir John Gates, his
Brother Henry Gates and Doctor Edwin Sands, who on the five and twentieth of
July were brought to London, and presently committed to the Tower. The Earl of
Huntingdon was, not long after, set at liberty, but his Son was presently. Sir
John Gates, whom Northumberland accused to have been the contriver of all this
mischief, and Sir Thomas Palmer were after Executed. The Earl of Warwick died
in Prison. The Lords Ambrose and Henry Dudley were Pardoned. Henry was
afterward slain with a shot at the Siege of St. Quintin; but Ambrose finding
Fortune more propitious, outlived Mary, and by Queen Elizabeth created Earl of
Warwick, long flourished in the happiness of her Favor. Sir Andrew Dudley
after his Condemnation was also Pardoned. Doctor Sands being then
Vicechancellour of the University of Cambridge had by Northumberland's command
in the Pulpit publicly impugned Queen Mary's Cause, and defended that of Lady
Jane; but with that Wisdom and Moderation, although upon the short warning of
some few hours, that he abundantly satisfied the Duke, and yet did not so
deeply incur the displeasure of the adverse part, but that his Friends
prevailed with the Queen for his Pardon. So that after a years Imprisonment he
was set at liberty, and presently fled over into Germany: After the death of
Queen Mary returning from his voluntary Exile, he was Consecrated Bishop
Worcester, from which See he was translated to London, and thence again to the
Archbishopric of York: A man for his Learning, Virtue, Wisdom, and Extract
very famous, but most especially happy in his Issue, whereof many were
admirable for their Endowments both internal and external, and of whom we have
in our Age seen three honored with Knighthood.

On the six and twentieth of July, the Marquis of Northampton (afterward
Condemned, and Pardoned) Doctor Ridley Bishop of London, (who two years after
was Burned at Oxford) and beside many others, Lord Robert Dudley that great
Earl of Leicester under Queen Elizabeth, were brought to the Tower. On the
seven and twentieth, the Duke of Suffolk (to whom the Queen with admirable
Clemency within four days restored his liberty) Sir John Cheek King Edward's
Schoolmaster, Sir Roger Cholmley Chief Justice of the King's Bench, and Sir
Edmond Mountague Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, were committed to the same
place, who were all on the third of September set at liberty.

On the thirtieth of July the Lady Elizabeth accompanied by a great train of
Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen and Ladies (to the number of five hundred, some say
a thousand) set forward from the Strand through London, and so to Wansted,
toward the Queen to congratulate her happy Success in vindicating her Right to
the Crown. Who on the third of August having dismissed her Army (which had not
yet exceeded the number of thirteen thousand) Queen Mary comes to London.
attended by all the Nobility made a triumphant entrance through London to the
Tower, where the Duke of Norfolk, Edward Courtney Son to the Marquis of Exceter
Beheaded in the year 1538, Gardener late Bishop of Winchester, and Anne Duchess
of Somerset presented themselves on their Knees, and Gardener in the name of
them all spoke a congratulatory Oration, which ended, the Queen courteously
raised them, and kissing each of them said, These are all my own Prisoners, and
gave order for their present discharge. Edward Courtney she restored to his
Father's honors, making him Marquis of Exceter. As for Gardener, she not only
reseated him in the Bishopric of Winchester, but also on the three and
twentieth of August made him Lord Chancellor of England, notwithstanding
Gardener made Lord Chancellor.
that he had not only Subscribed to the Divorce from Catharine the Queens
Mother, but had Published Books, wherein he had defended King Henry's
proceedings.

On the fifth of August, Boner and Tonstall who had been formerly Diprived
Bishops restored.
deprived of their Bishoprics, the one of London, the other of Duresm, and
shortly after Day of Chichester, and Heath of Worcester were enlarged and
restored to their Bishoprics, the present Incumbents being without due process
of Law ejected.

On the tenth of August, were celebrated the Exequies of King King Edward's
Funeral.
Edward, Day Bishop of Chichester Preaching, executing in English, and
administering the Sacrament according to the manner and Edward. For as yet
nothing had been determined concerning any change in point of Religion. So that
when Bourn a Canon of Paul's (afterward Bishop of Bath and Wells) Preaching at
the Cross did inveigh against the Reformation in King Edward's time, and did in
upbraiding manner argue the Injustice of those times, which condemned Bonor to
perpetual Imprisonment for matter delivered by him in that place that time four
year, who was now by a more just Clemency restored to his Liberty and Dignity:
The People (...) to the Protestant Religion, could hardly abstain from stoning
him, and one of them aiming a Poinyard at him, missed him very narrowly: The
affections of the Assembly may by this be conceived, that during the Reign of
Queen Mary, the Author of this bold attempt, notwithstanding the diligence of
earnest Inquisitors, could never be discovered. The uproar increasing, and
diverse pressing toward the Pulpit, Bourn protected by two Protestant Preachers
( Bradford and Rogers, who were greatly Reverenced by the People, and afterward
Burned for their Religion) was with great difficulty conveyed to the School at
Paul's.

And now at length on the eighteenth of August, the Duke of The Duke of
Northumberland, the Earl of Warwick, and the Marquis of Northampton condemned.
Norfolk sitting as High Steward of England, were the Duke of Northumberland,
his Son the Earl of Warwick, and the Marquis of Northampton Arraigned at
Westminster: where the Duke of Northumberland pleading, that he had done
nothing but by authority of the Council, his Plea being not admitted for
sufficient, he was condemned of High Treason. The Sentence being pronounced, he
craved the favor of such a Death as was usually executed on Noblemen, and not
the other: He beseeched also, that a favorable regard might be had of his
Children, in respect of their age: Thirdly, that he might be permitted to
confer with some learned Divine for the settling of his Conscience: And lastly,
that her Majesty would be pleased to send unto him four of her Council for the
discovery of some things, which might concern the Estate. The Marquis of
Northampton pleaded to his Indictment, that after the beginning of these
Tumults he had forborne the Execution of any Public Office, and that all that
while, inteht to Hunting and other sports, he did not partake in the
Conspiracy: But it being manifest, that he was party with the Duke of
Northumberland, Sentence passed on him likewise. The Earl of Warwick finding
that the Judges in so great a Cause admitted not excuse of Age, with great
resolution heard his Condemnation pronounced, craving only this favor, that,
whereas the Goods of those who were condemned for Treason, are totally
Confifcated, yet her Majesty would be pleased, that out of them his Debts might
be discharged. After this, they were all again returned to the Tower. The next
day Sir Andrew Dadley, Sir John Gates (who was thought in Northumberland's
favor to Jane) Sir Henry Gates, and Sir Thomas Palmer were likewise condemned.
On the two and twentieth of the same month, the Duke with the rest (having The
Duke of Northumberland Bheaded.
two days before received the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper) were conducted to
the place of Execution: Where Northumberland (says that excellent
Historiographer, thuanas) by the persuasion of Nicholas Heath (afterward Bishop
of York) making his own Funeral Oration to the People, acknowledged himself
guilty, and craving pardon for his unseasonable Ambition, admonished the
Assembly, That they should embrace the Religion of their Forefathers rejecting
that of later date, which had occasioned all the Miseries of the 'fore-passed
thirty years: And for prevention for the future, if they desired to present
their Souls unspotted to God, and were truly affected to their Country, they
should expel those Trumpets of Sedition, the Preachers of the Reformed
Religion. As for himself, whatsoever he might pretend, his Conscience was
fraught with the Religion of his Fathers, and for testimony hereof he appealed
to his great Friend the Bishop of Winchester: but being blinded with Ambition,
he had been contented to make wrack of his Conscience by temporizing, for which
he professed himself sincerely repentant, and acknowledged the desert of his
death. Having spoken thus much, he craved the charitable Devotions of the
Assembly, and commending his Soul to God, prepared his Body for the stroke of
Ax. This Recantation did variously affect the minds of the multitude, who
wondered that he should at last Apostatize from that Religion which he had for
sixteen years professed, and in favor whereof chiefly, he persuaded King
Edward to endeavor the exclusion of his Sisters from their lawful Succession.
Some write, that being desirous of life, he did it craftily out of hope of
impunity: but that hope being frustrated, to have repented it afterward. He
was suspected (neither were the presumptions small) to have administered a
Poisonous potion to King Edward: but in his Indictment there was no mention of
it, and that the rather, for that the Judges had authority only to inflict
Punishment on him for his Conspiracy against the Queen. At the same time and
place were also Executed Sir John Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer.

Many Bishops also, who were thought to have been too too Bishops imprisoned.
opinionate in point of Religion, were sent for to London, and there
Imprisoned, viz. Hooper of Gloucester, Farrar of St. Davies (who were both
crowned with Martyrdom) and Coverdale of Exceter, who at the request of
Christiern the Third King of Denmark was Pardoned. But the Clergy of what rank
soever, who would not forsake their Wives, or were invested in Livings, whereof
any one had been for defense of Popery deprived, or that would not by Oath
promise the defense of the Romish Religion, were generally forced to relinquish
their Benefices.

Peter Martyr was then Professor at Oxford, who presently upon Edward, was
confined to his House. But after Peter Martyr.
some time his Friends so far prevailed, that he might come to London, where he
betook himself to his Patron the Archbishop of Canterbury. But he could not
prove a Sanctuary to him. The Archbishop himself began now to totter. The
Queen, beside that she was wholly swayed by Gardener, who extremely hated him,
had resolved to wreak her self on him for the Divorce of her Mother. -- Manet
alta mente repostum Judicium latum, spretaeque injuria Matris. It is reported,
that King Henry having determined to punish his Daughter the Lady Mary with
Imprisonment for her Contumacy, was by the sole intercession of Cranmer
diverted from his Resolutions: And when she was by her Brother King Edward to
be disinherited, the Archbishop made a long suasory Oration to the contrary;
neither could he be induced to subscribe to the Decree, until the Judges of the
Realm generally affirming, that it might lawfully be done, the dying King with
much importunity prevailed with him. In ungrateful persons the conceit (I will
not say the feeling) of one Injury makes deeper impression, than can the
remembrance of a thousand real Benefits. It was now bruited, that with his
Fortune Cranmer had also changed his Religion, insomuch that to gratify the
Queen, he had promised to Celebrate the Exequies of the deceased King after the
Romish manner. To clear himself of this imputation, he by writing declares
himself ready to maintain the Articles of Religion set forth by his means under
King Edward his Reign, to be consonant to the Word of God and the Doctrine of
the Apostles: in which Resolution he being confirmed by Peter Martyr, required
him for his Second in this Religious Duel. But Words are not regarded, where
Violence is intended. His Death was absolutely determined; but how it might be
fairly contrived, was not yet resolved. First therefore they deal with him as a
Traitor. And having for some while continued prisoner in the Tower, to alienate
the minds of the People who held him in high esteem, he is on the thirteenth of
November together with the Lords Ambrose and Guilford Dudley, The Archbishop
Cranmer, Lady Jane, Lord Guilford and Lord Ambrose Dudley condemned.
and Lady Jane, condemned for Treason. But the machinators of this mischief
against Cranmer were so ashamed of their shadowless endeavor, that they
themselves became Intercessors for his Pardon, and yet afterward most
irreligiously procured him to be Burned for pretended Heresy. Before he was
committed to Custody, his Friends persuaded him, after the example of some
other of his religious Brethren, who had long since escaped into Germany, by
flight to withdraw himself from assured destruction: To whom he answered; Were
I accused of Theft, Parricide, or some other crime, although I were innocent, I
might peradventure be But we will now leave Cranmer in Prison, whose farther
Troubles and Martyrdom we will in their due places relate. Concerning Peter
Martyr, it was long controverted at the Council Table whether, having so much
prejudiced the Catholic Religion, it were fit he should be proceeded against
as an Heretic. But it was at length determined, that because he came into
England upon Public Assurance, he should have liberty to depart with his
Family. So having Letters of Pass signed by the Queen, he was transported with
his Friend Bernardine Ochinus, and came to Antwerp, from thence to Colen, at
last to Strasburg, from whence he first set forth for England.

In the mean time on the first of October, the Queen was with great pomp
Crowned at Westminster by Stephen Gardener Bishop of The Coronation.
Winchester, and that after the manner of her Ancestors.

On the fifth of the same month a Parliament is called at Westminster, wherein
all the Laws Enacted against the Pope and his adherents by Henry and Edward,
were repealed. And in the Convocation-House A Disputation in the
Convocation-House.
at the same time was a long and eager Disputation concerning the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, the Prolocutor Dr. Weston with many others maintaining
Christ's Corporal real presence in the Sacrament: Among those few who sided
with the Truth, were John Ailmer and Richard Cheyney (both by Queen Elizabeth
made Bishops, the one of London, the other of Gloucester) John Philpot
Archdeacon of Winchester, who confirmed this Doctrine with the Testimony of his
Blood, James Haddon Dean of Exceter, and Walter Philips Dean of Rochester. At
length the Truth was oppressed by Multitude not Reason. Whereupon the
Restitution of Romish Rites is again concluded, and on the Popery restored.
one and twentieth of December, Mass began to be celebrated throughout England.

The same day also the Marquis of Northampton and Sir Henry Gates not long
since Condemned, were set at liberty and Pardoned: And the Lords Ambrose and
Guilford Dudley with Lady Jane had their Imprisonment more at large, with hope
of Pardon also.

ANNO DOM. 1554. REG. 1, and 2.
THe Queen, who was now Thirty seven years old, and The Queen inclines to marry.
of such Beauty as might endear a Husband to her; her Affairs so requiring,
began at length to bethink her of an Husband. She Philip Infant of Spain the
Emperor's Son, Cardinal Pool, and the Marquis of Exceter. The two last were
proposed for their Royal Descent, and the opinion of the Love of their
Country, there being hope, that under them the Freedom, and the Privileges of
the Kingdom might be preserved inviolate. But besides proximity of Blood in
each of the three, Cardinal Pool was much affected by the Queen, for his
gravity, sanctimony, meekness, and wisdom, Courtney for his flourishing youth,
his courteous and pleasant disposition. But he I know not how, was somewhat
suspected, not to think sincerely of the late established Religion, but to have
favored the Reformed. And the Cardinal being now in his fiftieth and third
year, was deemed a little too old to be a Father of Children. But their opinion
prevailed, as more necessary, who thought this unsettled Kingdom would require a
puissant King, who should be able to curb the factious Subject, and by Sea and
Land oppose the French by the accrue of Scotland become too near Neighbors and
Enemies to us. Upon these motives the ambitious Lady was easily induced to
consent to a match with Philip. For the Treaty whereof the Emperor had about
the end of the last year, sent on a grand Embassage Lamoralle Count Egmond,
with whom Charles Count Lalaine, and John Montmorency were joined in
Commission. In January the Ambassadors arrived at London, and in a few days
conclude the Marriage, the Conditions whereof were these:

That Matrimony being contracted between Philip and Mary, it The Articles of
the Queens Marriage with Philip of Spain.
should be lawful for Philip to usurp the Titles of all the Kingdoms and
Provinces belonging to his Wife, and should be joynt-Governour with her over
those Kingdoms, the Privileges and Customs thereof always preserved inviolate,
and the full and free distribution of Bishoprics, Benesices, Favors, Offices
always remaining entire to the Queen. That the Queen likewise should be assumed
into the society of all the Realms, wherein Philip either then was, or should
be afterward invested. That if She survived Philip, sixty thousand Pounds per
annum, should be assigned for her Jointure, as had been formerly assigned to
Lady Margaret Sister to Edward the Fourth and Widow to Charles Duke of
Burgoigne, whereof forty thousand should be raised out of Spain and Arragon,
twenty thousand out of the Netherlands and the Provinces thereto belonging. And
to prevent all future Jars and Contentions about the Division of the
Inheritance of the Kingdoms and Provinces which either then were or afterward
should be belonging to either, it is agreed, That the Issue begotten by this
Marriage should succeed in all the Queens Kingdoms and Dominions, and in all
Netherlands and Burgoigne, whereof the Emperor did stand possessed: That
Charles the eldest Son to Philip by a former Marriage should likewise succeed
in all the Kingdoms as well of his Father, as of his Grandmother, and his
Grandfather the Emperor, both in Italy and Spain, and by reason thereof should
stand obliged for the Payment of the 'fore-mentioned forty thousand Pounds. If
by this Matrimony no other Issue shall be begotten than Female, the Eldest
shall succeed in all the Provinces of the Netherlands, but with this Caution,
that by the counsel and consent of her Brother Charles, she shall make choice
of an Husband either out of England or the Netherlands; if she marry from
elsewhere without his consent, she shall be deprived of her right of
Succession, and Charles be invested therein. But to her and her Sisters a
convenient Dowry shall be assigned according to the Laws and Customs of the
places. If it happen that Charles, or his Successors shall die without Issue;
in that case the Firstborn by this Marriage, although it be a Female, shall
succeed in all the Kingdoms belonging to both these Princes, as well of the
Netherlands, as of Spain, and in all the Principalities of Italy; and shall be
bound to preserve inviolate all the Laws, Privileges, Immunities 'and Customs
of each Kingdom. Between the Emperor, Philip, and his Heirs, between the
Queen, and her Children and Heirs, and between both their Realms and Dominions,
constant Amity, Concord, a perpetual and inviolable League shall be continued.
This League, Agreement, and Articles shall be renewed and confirmed at
Westminster the two and fortieth year of this Which, as I conceive, would have
(...) in the year 1588.
Seculum, and four years after on the sixteenth of January at Utrecht.

As soon as the Decree concerning these Nuptial Compacts was divulged, many out
of a restless disposition misliking the present times, but especially traducing
the intent of this Accord, as if by it the Spaniard were to become absolute
Lord of all, who should have the free managing of all Affairs, and abolishing
our ancient Laws and Customs, would impose an intolerable yoke, as on a
conquered Nation. This was the general conceit of this Action. But in private,
every one according to their diverse humors did mutter diversely: Some censuring
the Queens actions, others complaining of the change of Religion contrary to
her promise made to the Suffolk men: Some lamented the case of Lady Jane, who
had been forcibly deposed, and cruelly condemned to an ill-deserved Death. Some
were swayed by pity, some by the regard of Religion, but most by the fear of a
Spanish Servitude: And others were by their own hopes and the desire of change
animated to a Rebellion. A Chieftain only was wanting, which defect was quickly
supplied by Sir Thomas Wyat a Knight Sir Thomas Wyat's Rebellion.
of Kent. Who having communicated the matter with the Duke of Suffolk, Sir
Peter Carow of Devonshire, and some others, concluded that it would not be
expedient to attempt any thing until the arrival of Philip, that so they might
not seem to have taken Wyat into Kent a Country adjoining to London, and
disjoined from Calais by a little fret of Sea; Sir Peter Carow into Devonshire,
a part of England in the West opposite to the main of France; and the Duke of
Suffolk withdrew himself to his Place in Warwickshire, situated in the very
heart of the Realm. In these several places, they secretly furnish themselves
with Arms, Money, and all sorts of Munition, and seek to draw others to partake
in the Conspiracy. Sir Peter Carow, whether thrust on by his Fate, or thinking
delay would prove dangerous, began secretly to levy some Forces in Cornwall,
but the matter being sooner detected than was hoped, and he quickly oppressed,
he presently took Ship, and fled into France, where he lurked some time, until
at length being seemingly reconciled to the King, he was taken at Brussels, and
brought Captive into England. By what means he afterward made an escape I know
not. But he flourished many years under Queen Elizabeth, and died at Rosse in
Leinster a Province of Ireland in the year 1577, as appears by his Monument
in the Cathedral Church at Exceter erected at the costs of his Nephew Peter,
who was Brother to George, whom King James for his many Virtues not long since
created a Baron.

With Sir Peter at the same time Sir John Cheek, who had been Sir John Cheek
is taken, and dies.
King Edward's Tutour, was also taken, who came from Strasburg toward
Brussels, and that not without Public License, upon no other business, but to
visit (as says Fox) the Queens Agents there, or rather according to (...), to
marry a Wife. Whatsoever were the cause of his Journey, certain it is that he
was intercepted, on the way from Antwerp to Erussels unhorsed by some of the
Queens Servants, and tied with Cords to a Cart, at last muffled, carried on
shipboard, and conveyed to the Tower at London, not knowing all the way for
what part of the World he was bound. There, having always in Conscience
abhorred the Errors of Popery, he was forced to Abjure his Religion, for which
he afterward became so repentant, that out of extremity of Grief he languished,
and shortly died. These passages I do the more exactly describe, because there
want not some, who relate, that both Sir Peter Carow and Sir John Cheek for
their Religion suffered at a Stake on on the thirteenth of June this present
year.

But to return to Wiat; he perceiving that his intents were divulged, and that
he had nothing to trust to, no refuge but Valor; incited the People in Kent to
a Rebellion, and (as Rebels never want common pretexts to color their actions)
that,

Because the Queen relying too much upon the Advice of bad Counselors, bad
lately done, and did daily endeavor many things prejudicial to the Estate of
the Realm: That therefore to prevent farther inconveniences,

But howsoever he fed the (...) (...) with specious words, the Duke of (...) at
that time running the same course in Warwickshire, it was (...), that their
drift was to Depose Mary, and once more to (...) Captive Jane. (...) (...)
(...) (...) By the (...) twentieth of (...), Fame had (...). London with the
news of this Kentish Rebellion. For the repression whereof, the Duke of Norfolk
was the same day (...) with some small Forces, consisting for the most part of
the Queens Guard, which were a little increased by the accession of five
hundred Londoners, who were the next day sent down by Water to Gravesend, where
the Duke expected them. With these he resolves to encounter Wiat, whom his
madness had not yet carried beyond Rochester, which (notwithstanding its
weakness, being no way fortified) he intended to make good against the Duke,
and had encamped within the ruins of the Castle.

Rochester is a City seated upon the River Medway, where falling into the
Thames it is most violent, (...) and flowing like a Straight, and is made
passable by an arched stone Bridge of excellent artifice. This Bridge had the
Rebels seized, and planted on it some brass double Cannons, that they might
debar the Duke (whom they understood by their Scouts to be upon march) of
passage. But he nothing daunted with their proceedings sent a Herald to
proclaim Pardon to such as forsaking Wiat, should return to their Obedience,
resolving withal to force the Bridge and gain entrance into the City. The
Herald executed his office, but with so submiss a voice, that he was heard by
few (for indeed a Pistol held at his Breast so terrified him, that he was
content for his own safety to yield to the Rebels so commanding) and was
returned with this answer, that they knew not themselves to be so far
Delinquent, as that they should need any such Pardon. Only Sir George Harper
faining a Revolt, made over toward the Duke of Norfolk, but indeed with intent
to persuade Alexander Bret Captain of those five hundred Londoners, to partake
in this Bret with five hundred Londoners revolts to Wiat.
Action of common Disloyalty. Which he performed so effectually, that Bret,
whose Company made the Vauntguard, before he came so near the Bridge as to give
an assault, suddenly drawing his Sword turned about to his Soldiers, and thus
bespake

Valiant Contrymen, we now engage our selves in a Cause, which before we
farther proceed, would require mature Deliberation. We march, but against whom?
Are they not our Friends, our fellownatives, with whom we seek to make a deeper
mixture of our Bloods? Have they not taken Arms for the preservation of the
ancient glory of the English name, and to vindicate our common Liberties
against the Insolences of the cruel Spaniard? You whose degenerate Spirits can
brook the indignities of Servitude, continue in God's name with your brave
General, who without doubt will deserve the service of such Worthies: As for me
(who had rather undergo many the most torturing Deaths, than betray my liberty
to the Spaniard) I here (happy and prosperous may it prove) enrol my self under
Wyat's Colors, and am confident that some of you out of Affection to your
Country will follow my example.

He had scarce spoken thus much, when they all crying out a Wyat, a Wyat,
turned the Cannon against their fellows, who followed in the Rere. Which
unexpected Revolt so terrified the Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Arundell, and
Sir Henry Jernegam Captain of the Guard, who followed the Duke in this
Expedition, that they instantly betook themselves to flight. The remainder of
that small Army prepared themselves according to the example of their
Commanders, when Wyat with some Horse intercepted their flight, and seized on
eight Brass Pieces with all the Duke's Munition: Then used he some persuasions
to pervert their Loyalty, professing withal, that If any one would be an
Instrument of his own Misery by assisting the Queen, he should have free
license to depart, desiring all such, that they would certify all men, but
especially her Majesty, that Wyat calling God and men to witness did protest,
that he took not Arms any way to prejudice Her, but to maintain the Liberties
of his Country inviolate against Foreign Machinations. The five hundred
Londoners, many of the Guard, and the greatest part of the headless Army
forthwith join with Wyat, who now upon confidence of his Forces resolves to
make speedily for London.

Whiles Wyat thus acts his part in Kent, the Duke of Suffolk, The Duke of
Suffolk persuades the People to Arms in vain.
who with his Brothers Lord John and Lord Leonard Gray departed from London on
the five and twentieth of January, did every where incite the People to take
Arms against the Spaniard. But finding, that this Alarm took not, and knowing
he had waded too far to hope for a second Pardon, he determined to endeavor an
Escape by flight. But the Earl of Huntingdon sent by the Queen with three
hundred Horse to take him, made him alter his resolution. The Duke's Company
consisted not of above fifty, with which small number in a Country that no way
favored his proceedings, to oppose the Earl were desperate madness, Therefore
distributing his Money amongst them, feigns a flight, advises Underwood, whom
he had formerly made his Ranger at Astley. But Benefits oblige not Ignoble
minds, which either mercenary or timid, treacherously fail in their reposed
Trust. Such did this man prove, who having promised for a while to shelter his
Lord, until he should bethink himself of some other expedient course, either
out of fear or hope of reward, betrayed him to the Earl of Huntingdon, by whom
guarded with three hundred Horse he was brought to London, and on the eleventh
of February committed to the Tower.

In the mean time the Queen jealous of the Londoners, especially since Bret's
Revolt, on the first of February attended by most of the Nobility, came to
Guildhall, where the Commons of the City were assembled in their Liveries, to
whom she spoke after this manner:

Although We doubt not of your Loyalty, and so need not give an The Queens
Oration to the Londoners.
account of Our actions; yet having intelligence that many seduced by this
Arch-traytor's gay Pretexts, do secretly favor his Designs; We have, to give
satisfaction to all, condescended to this days meeting with the Infant of Spain
is that forsooth, that must color all his Villainies. But his Actions discover
his deeper Practices. For having now somewhat increased his members, his
madness has so transported him beyond the distaste of Our Match, that he now
resolves on the custody of Our Person, and absolute power of removing,
retaining, punishing of Our Council whom he list. In this great affair of Our
Marriage, We have done nothing but by the advice of Our Peers. We have lived
the greatest part of Our age, single. Neither do We now so long for a Husband,
but that, if the Estates of Our Realm judge it convenient, We will continue Our
Virgin estate. For, that I should seek to endanger England, and to confound all
things by an unfortunate Match, the love of Our Native soil, the long knowledge
of Our Peaceable disposition, Our endeavors for your Good, will persuade you
to the contrary. Persist therefore in your Loyal Resolutions, and assist Us in
executing Our due Revenge on these Monsters of men, who conspire to take away
the Head which was ordained to guide them, and to suffer with them: Neither are
Our demands other than We may in reason expect from you, who so maturely, so
unanimously admitted of Our Government, as deeming Us the Undoubted Successor
to Our Royal Father and Brother.

Having thus confirmed the minds of the Citizens, she arms five hundred men
(the greater part Strangers) to the choicest whereof she commits the defense of
London Bridge, and disposes of the rest throughout the City. Two days after to
London comes Wyat with an Army of three (or four) thousand, full of hope, that
having present admittance into the City, Success should crown his Actions, and
that without either peril or pains. But things answered not his expectation.
For coming to the Bridge, Southwark, hoping, that time and industry of secret
Practisers might work some alteration.

But his hopes being here also frustrated, he turns his March for Kingston,
there to gain passage over the Thames. But the wooden Bridge there was also
broken, and the opposite Bank defended by two hundred men, whom the sight of
two Pieces of Ordnance ready to be planted against them so terrified, that they
left their station, and gave Wyat liberty to find out means to waft his Army.
Having surmounted this difficulty, he once more resolves for that Queen of
Cities, and reposing all the success of this Adventure in celerity, without
suffering his Soldiers to repose themselves, makes with a round march for
London, where he hoped to arrive before day, and to surprise the secure Queen.
But God is the Protector of Princes, who more especially are his Images and
Lieutenants; so that the practices of Rebels and Traitors against their lawful
Sovereigns seldom prove successful. Wyat had (not improbably) been Master of
his desires, had not God by an unexpected accident retarded him, or rather so
blinded him, that by unnecessary delays he overslipped his opportunity. He was
now within six miles of London, when the Carriages of one of his Brass Pieces
being broken, the Piece became for the present unserviceable, because
immovable. In remounting this Piece some hours were lost, notwithstanding their
persuasions who advised him not to neglect more real Advantages, as indeed he
did: for by this means he came short of the time prefixed by those Citizens who
were fautors of his Cause. The consideration whereof made many despair of
Success and relinquish him, so that his Army was quickly contracted to a
smaller gross. Among the rest Sir George Harper partaker of all Wyat's
Stratagems, that he might wipe away the stains of Rebellion and his dissembled
Revolt by a loyal Treachery, posted away to the Queen, and revealed the whole
series of Wyat's Projects. The Queen amazed at the apprehension of this
imminent danger, gives Commission to the Earl of Pembroke for the speedy
raising of some Forces, and makes him General of the Field. Wyat hearing that
the Earl of Pembroke was in Arms, betook himself to a slower march, lest he
should be forced against these fresh Soldiers to oppose his panting weary
ones. So by Noon he approached the Suburbs, and planting his Ordnance upon a
Hill beyond St. James, left there the greatest part of his small Army to guard
them. He himself with five Ensigns made toward Ludgate, and Cutbert Vaughan
with two other Ensigns toward Westminster, leaving St. James on the left hand:
wherein I believe his chief end was, that by terrifying that part of the City,
and consequently distracting the Wyat might gain passage with less difficulty.
At Charing Cross Sir John Gage Lord Chamberlain, with part of the Guard and
some other Soldiers made head against Wyat. But at length, either the Queen
for fear of Vaughan so commanding, or not able to withstand the shock, with
more than an orderly march he made toward the Court, and filled it with terror
and amazement. The Earl of Pembroke followed Wyat, still cutting him off
behind: by which kind of fight Wyat, not turning head, lost many of his
Soldiers. The rest of the Rebels courageously marching up Fleetstreet, with
joyful Acclamations cried out, Queen Mary, Queen Mary, God save Queen Mary, who
has granted us our Petitions, and Pardon. At length they came to Ludgate, and
desired entrance; but by their feigned Acclamations they gained nothing but
reproachful language. Whereupon they intend to return the same way, but are
circumvented by the Earl of Pembroke's Horse. Then Clarencieux persuaded him to
yield, and not beyond all his former madness, to surcharge himself with the
Blood of so many valiant men. Wyat's Soldiers seemed desperately bent to make
their way, but his Courage was quailed. So he yielded to Sir Maurice Barkley,
who mounting him behind Wyat is taken.
him, carried him presently to the Court. Their Captain taken, the Soldiers
make no resistance; some few of them escape by flight, but the greater part
fill the Prisons of the City. These were the accidents of the sixth of February.

Having thus suppressed the Faction, the punishment of the The Lady Jane Beheaded.
Conspirators is next in execution. The first that was reflected on (as for
whose sake this Rebellion had been set on foot) was Lady Jane; who having been
Condemned on the thirteenth of November, had her Execution hitherto deserred,
not without hope of Pardon. But to take away all farther cause of Sedition, her
Death is now absolutely determined. Whereupon Fecknam Dean of Paul's, afterward
Abbot of Westminster, was sent unto her to admonish her to prepare for Death,
and withal to persuade her to entertain the Romish Religion. This sad message
so little moved her, that She professed her self bound in this to acknowledge
God's infinite goodness: As for discussing matters of Controversy in Religion,
her time was so short, that she could not dispense with the least loss of it;
that little that was allotted her, she knew she might better spend in her
Devotions to Heaven. Fecknam conceiving this answer to proceed from a desire of
longer date of Life, prevails with the Queen for three days more; and returning
to Lady Jane, certifies her what he had done; beseeching her to hearken unto
him, and to reform her Opinion in point of Religion. To whom she answered with
a smiling countenance; Alas Sir, it was not my desire that her Majesty should
be troubled with the report of my words: For think not that I am touched with
any desire of prolonging my days: No, I am so far from it, that ever since your
departure Life has afflicted me with its tediousness; and as for Death, being
wholly intent to the attaining of Life Eternal, I utterly despise it, and her
Majesty's pleasure being such, I willingly undergo it. Fecknam again reiterated
his persuasions, that she would embrace the Religion of the Church of Rome: To
whom her replies were such, that whosoever shall read the Conference between
them, (for it was after published) cannot without amazement wonder, how so
tender an age, especially the Sex considered, should be capable of such
Constancy, Learning, Wisdom, Wit. Her Husband Lord Guilford being first to
suffer, desired leave to see her, converse with her, and take his last farewell:
Whereto she would by no means consent, desiring him To omit this foment of
Grief, rather than Comfort, in Death; for they should shortly behold each other
more really united in a better place and more happy estate. Yet she unappalled
saw him conducted to Tower Hill, and with the same settled spirit beheld his
headless Trunk when it was returned to be interred in the Chapel of the Tower.
The Death of this innocent Lady, it was conceived, would not be without almost
a general distaste. But to decline it as much as might be, it was thought good
that she should not be publicly Beheaded; wherefore there was a Scaffold
erected within the Tower, whereon about an hour or two after her Husband, on
the twelfth of February she submitted her neck to the Ax. When she was
conducted from the place of her imprisonment to the place of her suffering, the
Lieutenant of the Tower desired her to vouchsafe him something or other which
might serve as a Monument to him, whereby to remember her; whereupon she
demanded WritingTables, and therein wrote three short Sentences in Greek,
Latin, (in which Languages she was admirably skilled) and English, wherein she
signified her Innocence; and although she confessed she had committed an
Error, which deserved Death, yet Ignorance might among men without prejudice
to the Laws sufficiently excuse it. At last saluting the People as she went,
with a countenance settled and void of fear, and commending her self to their
Prayers, she came to the place of Execution, leading (...) by the Hand, whom
she kindly embraced, saying, God I beseech him abundantly reward you for your
Kindness toward me, although I must needs say it was more unwelcome to me, than
my instant Death is terrible. Then having to the Assembly in very modest
language discoursed of her Action, she said,

I am condemned, not for having aspired to the Crown, but because I refused it
not being offered; and shall serve for a memorable Example to Posterity, that
Innocence excuses not great Misdeeds, if they any way tend to the destruction
of the Weal public; for he has abundantly plunged himself in Ill, whosoever
even perforce has become the Instrument of another's Ambition.

Having spoken thus much, and implored God's mercy, by the Mary's Cause. This
was the end of Jane, a Lady renowned for the greatness of her Birth, but far
more for her Virtues and excellency of Wit, who swayed by the Ambition of her
Father-inLaw and imperious Mother, took on her that Fatal Title of a Queen; and
being presently hurried from a Kingdom to a Scaffold, suffered for the faults
of others, having overcome all the frowns of adverse Fortune by Constancy and
Innocence.

Much more just was that Execution which within three days after ensued. Twenty
Gibbets as well for terror of others as for present punishment, being erected
in diverse parts of the City, on the fourteenth and fifteenth of February fifty
of the Kentish Rebels were hanged on them. On the eighteenth of the same month,
Alexander Bret who drew those five hundred Londoners into a Revolt from the
Duke of Norfolk, was with a multitude of others (whereof many were of the
Gentry) sent into Kent, there to undergo exemplary punishment. On the twentieth
of February, four hundred of the same Crew with Halters about their Necks, were
presented before the Queen, all humble suppliants on their Knees, whom the
Queen pardoned, and commanded their present liberty.

On the three and twentieth of February, Henry Gray Duke of The Duke of Suffolk
Beheaded.
Suffolk Father to Lady Jane, having been Condemned on the seventeenth of the
same month, was publicly Beheaded: A man whose facility to by-practices had
occasioned all the Troubles wherewith this Reign had hitherto been distracted;
whose (...) Ingratitude (the Queen having once Pardoned him beyond expectation)
diverted the current of the Queens clemency toward his Daughter, and brought
him to a deserved end.

The next turn was Wyat's, and that on the eleventh of April. Wyat Executed,
Who upon a kind of promise of Pardon, if he would detect the rest of the
Conspirators, suborned (as is conceived) by some malevolent persons, among the
rest traduced young Courtney, as that having been refused by Queen Mary, he
aspired to marry the Lady Elizabeth, to depose the Queen, and so to reign as it
were in the right of his Wife. This Accusation had procured their Commitment,
the Lady Elizabeth's on the eighteenth of March, Courtney's on the twelfth of
February. But Wyat finding himself deluded, and being touched with the
horridness of so treacherous an Accusation, going to the place of his
Execution, desired the favor of a few words with the Marquess of Exceter,
which which was granted him. Of the Marquess he on his knees Winchester Lord
Chancellor (who out of fear of change of Religion if Queen Mary dying,
Elizabeth should come to the Crown, was content to lay hold on any occasion to
cut her off) affirmed in the Star Chamber, and thereto cited the testimony of
the Lord Chandois, that Wyat a little before his Death exhorted the Marquess to
acknowledge his Crime, and to submit himself to the Queens mercy. But what
appearance of truth can there be in this, it being certain, that Wyat having
ascended the fatal Scaffold, seeing the Instruments of Death before his Eyes,
and having composed himself for another World, did with sincere protestations
and religious asseverations acquit the Lady Elizabeth and the Lord Courtney
from being any the least way conscious to his practices?

On the seven and twentieth of April, Lord Thomas Gray was And Lord Thomas Gray.
Beheaded for having by persuasions as it were thrust on his irresolute Brother
the Duke of Suffolk to partake with Wyat in his Seditious attempts.

On the sixteenth of May the Lady Elizabeth was removed from the Tower to
Woodstock, and the Marquess of Exceter to Foderingay, the place only being
altered, and nothing remitted of the strictness of their Imprisonment.

About the same time that Reverend Cranmer yet Archbishop A Disputation at
Oxford.
of Canterbury, Nicholas Ridley lately deprived of the Bishopric of London,
and Hugh Latimer who so long ago resigned his Bishopric of Worcester, were
removed from the Tower to Windsor, and thence to Oxford, there solemnly to
Dispute with the Divines of both Universities concerning the Eucharist. Their
usage was extreme almost beyond belief. Two days only were allotted them for
their preparation; and those two days were they in straight custody in several
either Dungeons or places little differing, debarred both the conference of any
but their Jailer, and the use of their own Papers and Books. In the Schools the
behavior toward them was as barbarous as their usage had been tyrannical:
Shouts and outcries were the chiefest Arguments, many opposing one, without
Order, without Manners, without Modesty. On the fourteenth of April from the
Prison they were brought to St. Mary's, and commanded to Abjure; upon their
refusal, a day is prefixed for public Dispute: Cranmer's day was the
sixteenth, Ridley's the seventeenth, Latimer's the eighteenth of April, each in
their course to answer all Opponents; which each of them performed, and that
so, that notwithstanding they were amazed with rude clamours, and distracted
with variety of Opponents, all urging and craving answer at the same time,
although they Cranmer did learnedly, and according to the dignity wherein he so
many years flourished, gravely; Ridley acutely and readily; Latimer with a
pleasant tartness, and more solidly than could be expected of a man so near the
age of fourscore. The Disputation ended, they are again on the twentieth of
April brought to St. Mary's, and demanded whether they would persist in their
Opinions; upon their reply, that they would, they were declared Heretics, and
condemned to the Fire. Their Constancy was the more manifest by their Cranmer,
Ridley, and Latimer Condemned.
contempt of Death. Latimer was scarce capable of the joy he conceived, that
God was pleased he should end his long life (whereto Nature would shortly set a
period) with so happy a clause. As for their Martyrdom, it falls in with the
next Year, and thither we remit it.

Presently after those forepassed Tumults, the Queen sends forth Summons for a
Parliament to begin the second of April. In this Parliament she proposes two
things, her Marriage and Subjection to Rome in matters Ecclesiastical; this
last she could not for a while obtain, the other was assented unto upon
conditions, That

Philip should not advance any to any public Office or Dignity in Additions to
the former Nuptial Compacts.
England, but such as were Natives of England, and the Queens Subjects: He
should admit of a set number of English in his Household, whom he should use
respectively, and not suffer them to be injured by Foreiners: He should not
transport the Queen out of England but at her entreaty, nor any of the Issue
begotten by her, who should have their Education in the Realm, and should not
be suffered but upon necessity or some good reasons, to go out of the Realm,
nor then neither but with the consent of the English: The Queen deceasing
without Children, Philip should not make any claim to the Kingdom, but should
leave it freely to him, to whom of right it should belong: He should not change
any thing in the Laws either public or private, the Immunities and Customs of
the Realm, but should be bound to confirm and keep them: He should not
transport any Jewels, or any part of the Wardrobe, nor alienate any of the
Revenues of the Crown: He should preserve our Shipping, Ordnance, and Munition,
and keep the Castles, Forts, and Block-houses in good repair, and well manned:
Lastly, that this Match should not any way derogate from the League lately
concluded between the Queen and the King of France, but that the Peace between
the English and the French should remain firm and inviolate: Only it should be
lawful for Philip out of other Kingdoms and Dominions belonging to his Father
the Emperor, to send Aids unto him, either for propelling Injuries, or taking
revenge for any already received.

All things being thus transacted, and no further impediment Philip arrivith in
England.
interposing between these Princes; Philip setting sail from the Groin on the
sixteenth of July, with a good Southern gale within Southampton with a Fleet of
one hundred and sixty Sail, whereof twenty were English, and other twenty
Flemings. Having rested himself there the space of three days attended by a
great company of the English and Spanish Nobility, on the four and twentieth of
July being a very wet day he came to the Queen at Winchester. The Feast Day of
St. James (the Tutelary Saint of Spain) was destined for the Nuptials, which
were And is married to the Queen.
Celebrated at Winchester with great pomp. There Don Juan Figueroa for the
Emperor resigned the Kingdoms of Naples and and Sicily, and conferred all his
right thereto on Philip; and the Heralds proclaimed their Titles in Latin,
French, and English. About the beginning of August these two Princes came to
Basing, and thence to Windsor, where the King was installed Knight of the
Garter. On the eleventh of August they came to London, where the Citizens
received them with most magnificent Solemnity.

On the eleventh of November another Parliament began at Cardinal Pool comes
into England.
Westminster; about the beginning whereof Cardinal Pool (who by King Henry had
been proclaimed Enemy to the Estate, was created Cardinal by Paul the Third,
had himself been Pope if he had but consented in time, and in the opinion of
many was thought a fit Husband for the Queen) arrived in England. Having been
put beside the Papacy by others default more than his own, craving leave of the
new Pope Julius, he withdrew himself to a Monastery in the Territory of Verona
called Maguzano, the Religious whereof were Benedictine Monks, of which Order
he himself while he continued at Rome had been Patron. Having decreed there to
hide himself and spend the remainder of his days, the fame of King Edward's
Death and Queen Mary's advancement to the Crown, drew him again out of the
Cloister to Rome. He was not ignorant how Mary stood affected to the Sea of
Rome, and therefore hoped (not without good cause) that Julius, who much
favored him, having by his delays attained the Papacy, would send him into his
Country with the honorable Title and Authority of a Legate. And now he feigned
to himself a double hope of a Kingdom, if not Secular, at least Ecclesiastical,
by virtue of his authority Legatine and the dignity of Archbishop of
Canterbury. Queen Mary had her Education for some years under Margaret Countess
of Salisbury the Mother of Pool (who was then a Child) and that by Queen
Catharine's means, who intended (as it was thought) to marry her Daughter the
Lady Mary to one of the Countesses Sons, thereby to strengthen her Daughters
claim to the Crown, if it should happen that Henry should decease without other
lawful Issue, the Countess being Daughter to George Duke of Clarence, who was
Brother to Edward the Fourth. The Cardinal, whether for this or some other
reasons, knowing himself to be in dear esteem Mary having obtained the Crown,
earnestly sued unto him to restore himself to his Country; and the Pope, not
ignorant how much he would advantage the Apostolic See, at the Queens request
dispatched him with most ample Authority. But the Emperor having a Project on
foot for his Son, was somewhat jealous of the Cardinal; and therefore began
seriously to treat with Cardinal Dandino the Pope's Legate with him, for the
conclusion of a Peace between him and the French, that so he might give a stop
to Pool, whose coming into England, the Emperor's affairs being not yet
settled, might peradventure make all fly asunder. Dandino to gratify Charles,
by Franciseo Commendono sends Letters to Pool, advising him not to set forth as
yet, forasmuch as this Legacy undertaken without the Emperor's consent, was
displeasing; and the English Nation for the most part, especially the
Londoners, did so hate the name of the Pope of Rome, that his Legacy would be
held in contempt among them: A Legate therefore was not to be employed unto
them, until persuasions had brought them to a better temper. Pool having
received these Letters in his Cloister, thought it fitting to expect his
Holiness pleasure. The Pope not brooking the increase of the Emperor's
greatness by the addition of such Estates, and fretting that Dandino had
presumed to stay the Cardinal, recalled Dandino, and conferred on Pool alone
the Legacy both into England for the one affair, and to the Emperor and the
French for the Treaty of a Peace. He willingly undertaking it, presently set
forward from Trent, certifying the Emperor and the French of his large
Commission. The Emperor perceiving that these devices would be no longer
availeable, sent Don Juan de Mendoza unto him with Letters, wherein he plainly
discovered his fear, that the Cardinal's premature arrival in England might
prove an obstacle to his proceedings there, which were great and hopeful:
Wherefore it was his desire, that he should either there attend his pleasure,
or if he would needs go further he might come to Liege, and there expect the
event of his designs. The Cardinal upon receipt of these Letters returns to
Dilling, (not far from Trent) certifies his Holiness of the whole carriage of
the Business, and sends expostulatory Letters to the Emperor, showing therein
what an indignity it was to Apostolic See, that his Holiness Legate sent upon a
Treaty of Peace, and to reduce a Kingdom to the obedience of the Church, should
so disgracefully, with contempt to his Holiness, and that by the Emperor's
command, be detained in the midst of Germany in the sight of the Enemies of the
Church. That great Divine Domingo Soto Ordinary Preacher to the Emperor was
then at Dilling. By him he persuades the Emperor not to hinder this England.
At length with much ado, and that not until the Emperor had intelligence, that
the Articles concerning his Son's Marriage were agreed on, he obtained leave to
come to Brussels, but on this condition, that he should there reside until the
Emperor were assured, that the Marriage between Philip and Mary were
Solemnized. So to Brussels he came, where having saluted the Emperor, who
received him very courteously, and that time might not pass unprofitably, with
him he begins to put in execution one part of his Legation, which was, to draw
the Emperor and the King of France to some indifferent terms of Peace. The
Emperor professing, that he would not reject Peace upon any reasonable
conditions, the Cardinal goes into France, to treat with Henry concerning the
same thing: Who made as fair shows as did the Emperor; but their minds
exulcerated with inveterate hate, made all his pains fruitless. Henry at his
departure embracing him, signified the sorrow he had conceived, that he had not
sooner occasion to be acquainted with his worth: For had he truly know him, his
endeavors should have been totally for his advancement to the Papacy.

A little after his return to Brussels, came the Lords Paget and Hastings
Ambassadors to the Emperor from their Majesty's of England, who signified
their joint-longing to see the Cardinal, and therefore desired he might be
forthwith dismissed, that by virtue of his Authority he might rectify the
Church of England; wonderfully out of tune by reason of the Schism wherewith it
had been afflicted. So in September he had leave to go for England, but was by
contrary winds detained at Calais until November, in which month he at length
arrived at Dover. His entertainment was most honorable, the Kings and Nobles
alike striving to manifest their joy. And because being in the year 1539 by
Parliament declared Enemy to the Estate, and by the same Law condemned to die;
the Estates then assembled in Parliament repealed that Act, and restored him to
his Blood, the Kings themselves coming to the House extraordinarily for the
confirmation of the Act before his arrival at London. A little after his
coming, both Houses were sent for to the Court, where the Bishop of Winchester
Lord Chancellor having in the presence of the Kings and the assembly spoken
something concerning the Cardinal's grateful arrival, the Cardinal himself
began a long Oration in English, wherein He acknowledged how Cardinal Pool's
Oration to the Parliament.
much he was bound to the Kings and the Estates of the Realm, by whose favor
those Laws for his Exile and Proscription were repealed, and he once more made
a Native of the Land: He was bound by the Laws of Gratitude to endeavor the
requital of this Benefit, whereto an occasion happily offered it self: The late
Schism had separated them from the Union of the Church, and made them exiles
from Heaven; by the Authority conferred on him by the Pope St. Peter's
Successor, Christ's Vicar, he would bring them back into the Fold of the
Church, the sole means of attaining their celestial Heritage. Wherefore he
exhorted them ingenuously to acknowledge the Errors of these later years, and
to detect them, with sincere alacrity of mind to accept of, and retain this
Benefit, which God by his Vicar's Legate did proffer them. For now nothing else
remained, but that he being present with those Keys which should open the Gates
of the Church, they should also abrogate those Laws, which lately Enacted to
the prejudice of the Church, had rended them from the rest of its Body.

Having spoken a great deal to this purpose, and ransacked Antiquity for
examples of our Forefathers devotion to the Sea of Rome; his grave delivery,
excellent language, and methodical contexture of his speech wrought so
effectually in the minds of those who were addicted to Popery, that they
thought not themselves until this day capable of Salvation. But many of the
lower House, who deemed it a rare felicity to have shaken off the yoke of Rome,
eagerly withstood the readmittance of it. But by the endeavors of the King and
Queen all things were at last composed to the Cardinal's liking. The Authority
which the Popes heretofore usurped in this Realm is restored, the Title of The
Realm freed from (...).
Supreme Head of the Church is abrogated, and a Petition drawn by the whole
Court of Parliament, for the Absolution of the People and Clergy of England
from Schism and Heresy is by the Bishop of Winchester presented to the Legate,
who (they all kneeling) by the Authority committed unto him absolved them. This
being done, they went to the Chapel in Procession singing Te Deum, and the
next Sunday the Bishop of Winchester in his Sermon at Paul's Cross made a large
relation of what had passed.

These things being thus settled, the Queen intends an honorable Embassy to
Rome, whereof she had at her first coming to the Crown made promise. For having
resolved to replant the Religion of Rome, she had privily written to Pool,
requiring his advice therein. The Pope was therefore pleased to send into
England Giovanni Francisco Commendono his Chamberlain (afterward Cardinal) for
the more perfect notice of the estate of the Realm. To him the Queen after much
private conference did under her Hand promise Obedience to the Sea of Rome,
desiring withal, that the Kingdom might be absolved from the Interdict, for the
obtaining whereof she would by a solemn Embassy petition his Holiness as soon
as the Estate was settled. So now about the end of this year the Bishop of Ely,
Sir Anthony Brown, and Edward Carne Doctor of Law, are by the Kings sent to
proffer their Obedience to the Sea of Rome. But these costs and pains were
fruitless. For before they came to Rome the Pope was dead. In Philip. But it
being a matter without precedent, and that might perchance to an ambitious
Prince give some color for claim to the Kingdom, they proved averse, and she
content to surcease.

The next care was of restitution of Church Lands. But Henry had so divided
them, and that among the Nobility, that nothing could be done therein. Only it
was decreed, that the First Fruits and Tenths granted to the King by the Clergy
Anno 1534, should be remitted; which Decree upon consideration of the
Treasuries poverty, and of the many Pensions granted by Henry to the ejected
Religious Persons, was quickly revoked.

About the same time an absurd (I might say ridiculous) accident The Queen
thought to be with Child.
happened by the Queens own credulity and the flattery of fawning Courtiers. By
reason of a Disease, which Physicians term a Mole, her Belly began to swell;
and some other reasons giving her cause to conjecture that she was with Child,
she not entertaining the advice of any Physicians, but of Midwives and old
Women, believing what she desired should be, affirmed that she felt the
stirring of the Embryo in her womb. To those that are affected with this
malady, that fleshy and inform substance which is termed Mola, does seem
sometimes to move, but that slowly, and with the general motion of the whole
Belly. By this and other symptoms Physicians would quickly have discovered her
Disease, which unless very maturely prevented, is commonly incurable: So that
in process of time her Liver being over-cooled, she fell into a Dropsy, which
as Fuchsius and other Physicians write, does usually happen. But these
flattering hopes betrayed her to the laughter of the World, and to her Grave.
For on the seven and twentieth of November the Lords of the Council sent some
Mandates to the Bishop of London, to disperse certain forms of Prayers, wherein
after Thanks given to God for his Mercies to this Kingdom, by giving hopes of
an Heir to the Crown, and infusing life into the Embryo, they should pray for
the preservation of the Queen and the Infant, and her happy delivery, and cause
Te Deum to be sung every where. Then by Parliament many things were Enacted
concerning the Education of the Babe; and much clutter was otherwise kept about
preparations for the Child's Swadling-clouts, Cradle, and other things
requisite at the Delivery; until in June in the ensuing year it was manifested,
that all was little better than a Dream.

This year were many Barons created. On the eleventh of March, William Howard
was created Lord Howard of Effingham, he Charles Lord Admiral and late Earl of
Nottingham; on the fifth of April, John Williams Lord Williams of Tame; on
Lords created.
the seventh of April, Edward North Baron of Chartlege; on the eighth of April,
John Bruges Lord Chandois; on the fourteenth of May, Gerard Fitz-Gerard (of
whom before) Earl of Kildare; and on the second of September, Anthony Brown
Viscount Mountague: And in September deceased Thomas Duke of Norfolk.

ANNO DOM. 1555. REG. MARIAE 2 and 3, PHILIPPI 1 and 2.
ON the eighteenth of January the Lord Chancellor coming Tower with six other
Lords of the Council set many brave Prisoners at liberty, viz. the Archbishop
of York, Sir John Rogers, Sir James Croft, Sir Nicholas Throckmorton, Sir
Nicholas Arnold, Sir George Harper, Sir William Sentlow, Sir Gawin Carew, Sir
Andrew Dudley the Duke of Northumberland's Brother, William Gibs, Cutbert
Vaughan, Harington, Tremaine, and others. The Archbishop having married a Wife,
was deprived, and Nicholas Heath sometimes Bishop of Worcester, but deprived by
King Edward, and ( Hooper being ejected and condemned to the Fire) lately
restored by Queen Mary, was substituted in his place. Rogers and Croft were
afterward Privy Counselors to Queen Elizabeth, under whom they many years
flourished in great Authority. Throckmorton (a subtle man) was thought to have
been the plotter of Wyat's Rebellion; his Head was therefore especially aimed
at. But being indicted, and ten whole hours spent in sifting him, he by such
witty answers voided the accusation of his Adversary, that the Jurors found him
Not guilty; for which they were afterward soundly fined.

About the beginning of April, the Marquess of Exceter, and Lady Elizabeth and
the Marquess of Exceter set at liberty.
a little after, the Lady Elizabeth were set at liberty. Concerning Lady
Elizabeth, it was long consulted what course to take with her, wherein the
resolutions of the Papists were bloodily bent to make her away when any
colorable occasion should present it self. The Bishop of Winchester upon any
speech concerning the punishment of Heretics, is reported to have said, We
strip off the leaves, or lop off the branches; but unless we strike at the Root
that hope of Heretics, (meaning Lady Elizabeth) we do nothing. But after long
search into her Actions, no sufficient matter of Accusation being found,
although there wanted not those who sought to persuade the Queen, that her
liberty would endanger the Queen; yet Philip aspiring to the opinion of
Clemency, by his intercession toward the end of April she had her liberty, but
so, that she was bound to admit of into her Family Sir Thomas Pope a Privy
Counselor, Gage, and some others, who should always keep

This small sparkle of Clemency was obscured by a greater flame of Cruelty, a
multitude of godly men suffering this year for their Conscience only. On the
fourth of February, John Rogers the John Rogers Burned,
Protomartyr of those times was Burned at London. He was Tindall's Companion,
after whose death fearing persecution, he would not return into his Country,
but went with his Wife to Wirtenberg, where having attained to the German
Tongue, he undertook the Cure of a certain Church there, which he faithfully
discharged, until under King Edward he was recalled from Exile, by Ridley
Bishop of London made a Prebend of Paul's, and Lecturer there. Queen Mary having
attained the Crown, the Papists endeavored to affright him, and so to have
once more forced him to a voluntary Exile, commanding him not so much as to
peep into the streets: and in this manner lived he a year, until at last
refusing to fly, he was imprisoned, and condemned to the Fire; which cruel
Death (notwithstanding that he was to leave a Wise and ten Children) he did
most constantly undergo.

The like end on the ninth of February made John Hooper Bishop and Bishop
Hooper,
first of Gloucester, and then of Worcester too, holding both Sees in Commendam,
who took much pains about Boner's deprivation, which thing now hastened him to
a Stake. For as soon as Queen Mary was enthroned, he was sent for to London,
committed to the Tower, and condemned for an Heretic. Henry reigning, he he
spent part of his life in Germany, where he took to Wife a Burguignon, and
among other devout Learned men, had intimate familiarity with Henry Bullinger,
by whom for his Learning, godly and sweet conversation he was held in dear
esteem. After his condemnation he was sent to Gloucester, there to suffer, where
he was thought most to have sinned in sowing seeds of Error: He himself not a
little rejoicing that he should by the testimony of his Blood confirm that
Doctrine before their Eyes, into whose Ears he had so often inculcated it.

The same course was taken with Ferrar Bishop of St. David's, Bishop Ferrar,
who was brought down from London to his own Diocese, there to be judged by the
new Bishop Morgan, by whom he was condemned, and Burned at Caermarden the third
of March. He was a man rigid and of a rough behavior, which procured him much
trouble under King Edward, and now I believe proved his bane. For having been
by the Duke of Somerset advanced to that Dignity, after his death this good and
learned man by his sour behavior drawing near to arrogance (which with that
Nation is a great indignity) raised against himself many accusers, two whereof
under Queen Elizabeth became Bishops, who after the death of the Duke of
Somerset easily prevailed with the adverse Faction for his Imprisonment. Being
found in Prison Mary came to the Crown, and brought before the Bishop of
Winchester, he might (I believe) by pleasing answers and a little yielding to
the season, have honestly escaped their bloody Hands, as did many others, who
having not waded too far in Lady Jane's cause, nor otherwise given any grand
affront to any of the Popish Prelates, by this means without impediment going
into voluntary exile, or being taken, had their liberty easily procured at the
intercession of Friends. But Ferrar according to his innate tartness, answering
freely (I will not say waiwardly) to his interrogatories, did so enrage the
Bishop of Winchester, that I do not much wonder at the hard proceedings against
him.

Beside these, Roland Tailor Doctor of Divinity suffered at Hadley many others,
the ninth of February, Laurence Sanders an Excellent Preacher, on the eighth
at Coventry, John Cardmaker Chancellor of the Church of Wells on the last of
May at London, where also on the first of July that godly and learned man John
Bradford underwent the tortures of his Martyrdom.

But not to go to a particular enumeration of all that suffered and Bishop
Ridley, and Latimer.
for their Faith, the number of them was almost incredible, the greater part
whereof were Executed out of Boner's butchery. But among others we cannot omit
those Worthies Ridley and Latimer, who having been condemned the year before,
were now on the sixteenth of October conducted to Execution, and at Oxford in
the aspect of the Academicks were in the Town-ditch near Baliol College tied
to a stake and Burned. Cranmer is reported from the higher part of his Prison
to have beheld this doleful spectacle, and with bended Knees and elevated Hands
to have prayed for their constancy of Hope and Faith, as also for himself who
was shortly he knew to tread their path. But his Execution was for a time
deferred by the Bishop of Winchester's means, and that not out of pity, but
ambition, and regard of his own profit.

On the four and twentieth of March died Julius the Third, The death of Pope
Julius the Third.
after whose death the Conclave elected Marcello Cervino, a man of excellent
learning, wisdom, and sanctity of life, and under whom there was great hope of
the Reformation of that Church: Whose that memorable saying was, That he did
not see how it was possible for a Pope to be saved; who having sat two and
twenty days only, died, and left the Chair to Cardinal Caraffa, of whose
contention with Pool we have spoken already, who succeeded him by the name of
Paul the Fourth. Gardener being not ignorant Paul the Fourth succeeds.
Gardener sueth to be Cardinal.
of this contention, and the differences between them, deals underhand with
this new Pope to honor him with a Cardinal's Hat, and to transfer on him the
authority Legatine by Julius conferred on Pool. The Pope in regard of his
hatred to Pool, easily condescended thereto, determining also to cite him to
Rome, there to force him to acquit himself of Heresy, and to suffer as did
Morono Pool's great Friend, whom this Pope detained in Prison as long as
himself lived. Hereby Gardener well hoped to attain to be Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Revenues of which Bishopric Pool received as a Sequestrator,
and would no otherwise as long as Cranmer lived. This was the reason that
Cranmer's Execution was deferred, to work means that Pool might not be invested
in the Archbishopric, which he himself for the former reasons hoped to attain.
But while Gardener was wholly intent to this project, Death had a project on
him, and Gardener (...).
cut him off by the extremity of a Dropsy, which swelling from his Feet and
Legs up to his Belly dispatched him on the twelfth of November, who was with
great Solemnity interred in his Cathedral at Winchester.

The Emperor Charles the Fifth having determined to resign Charles the
Emperor resigns his Crowns.
the Empire and his Kingdom, on the five and twentieth of October at Brussels,
where all the Estates of his Realms were assembled, transferred all his
Kingdoms and Dominions on his Son Philip, whom he had formerly made King of
Naples and Sicily, and betook himself to the rest of a private life.

ANNO DOM. 1556. REG. MARIAE 3 and 4, PHILIPPI 2 and 3.
TO begin the year with its first day, on the first of January, Nicholas Heath
Archbishop of York was made Lord Chancellor. The Archbishop of York Lord
Chancellor.


In March, a Comet in the twentieth degree of Libra was seen from the fifth to
the seventeenth of the same month. A Comet.


On the thirteenth of March, a counterfeit Edward, whose true A (...) Edward.
name was William Fetherstone was Executed for a Traitor: He being a Miller's
Son, in stature and lineaments of Body not much unlike the deceased King
Edward, and his Age also agreeable, had been the last year publicly whipped
through London, for affirming himself to be the King. But not sufficiently
terrified by the smart of this punishment, he again betakes him to the same
Imposture, privately affirms himself to be King Edward, and causes Letters to
be cast abroad, that King Edward was alive, for which he was at length
deservedly Hanged.

And now we are at length come to the narration of the memorable Archbishop
Cranmer Burned.
Martyrdom of the Archbishop Cranmer. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester
being dead, Cardinal Pool as yet the Pope's Legate, appointed James Brook
Bishop of Gloucester for Cranmer's Trial, forasmuch as they judged it unlawful
to punish an Archbishop but by leave from his Holiness. John Story and Thomas
Martin, Doctors of Law Commissioners for the Queen, accompanied Oxford, that
the Authority Royal might countenance the Delegates proceeding. In St. Mary's
Church they had high Seats purposely erected for them, Brook sitting under the
place, where the consecrated Host did usually hang in a Pix, beside him sat
Martin and Story, but a little lower, and Cranmer habited like a Doctor of
Divinity, not like a Bishop, was brought before them. Being told that there
were those who represented not only her Majesty's person, but also of the most
holy Father the Pope, he with due reverence saluted Story and Martin, but would
not so much as vouchsafe to cast his Eyes toward Brook, and that not (as he
afterward confessed) out of contempt of the man, whom he formerly loved, but
that he might not seem to acknowledge the Pope's Authority, he having by Oath
to King Henry obliged himself to the contrary, especially in England, where he
could make no pretense of right. Then each of them exhorted him to change his
Opinion, and return to the Union of the Church: But he not regarding their
admonition, they cite him to appear within fourscore days before his Holiness,
which with her Majesty's consent, he promised he would. But the Pope not
expecting his coming, within twenty days after by Letters to the King and Queen
commanded him to be Condemned, and committed to the Secular power. After the
intercourse of a few days, new Authority is by the Pope granted to Boner Bishop
of London, and Thirlby Bishop of Ely for Cranmer's degradation from Orders both
Presbyterial and Archiepiscopal, and he then to be delivered over to the
secular Magistrate to suffer for Heresy, which was accordingly performed on
the fourteenth of February. Those Saint-like men, Cranmer, Ridley, and Latimer,
as long as they lived did by Letters exhort each other to a generous Constancy
for the maintenance of the truth of the Christian Faith. But the other two
Champions having made their way to Heaven, and left him alone not plied with
such firm Exhortations, out of desire of longer Life his Constancy began at
length to be shaken, and that by the subtilty and daily persuasions of a
Spanish Friar. So being seduced with hope of pardon, he retracts whatever he
had before written in defense of his Religion, which Retractation was after
printed and published. But that little availed him. For whether that Pool would
not be longer excluded from the possession of the Archbishopric, or that
(which seems more probable) the Queens inveterate hate and desire of revenge
for her Mothers Divorce, which could not be otherwise satiated than with the
Blood of this grave man, were the cause: He being now confident of Life is
presently rapt to the place of Execution, and there cruelly Burned, where
Ridley and Latimer had five months before been crowned with Martyrdom. On the
day appointed for his Execution, a Sermon by the appointment of the Cardinal
was Preached by Cole. Thither was Cranmer brought, and placed conveniently near
the Pulpit, where Cole exhorted him to a constancy in that Faith, which he was
now content to acknowledge, and that even unto Death, which was now by the
appointment of the Magistrate to be inflicted on him this very day. God's wrath
for the Death of Fisher and More could not otherwise be appeased but by his
Blood. But before his Death, would he by a public Confession testify his
sincere Conversion to the Union of the Church, he should do an act most
acceptable to God and men. If with this unexpected news Cranmer were amazed, I
do not at all wonder. But he recollecting himself stood up, and without any
sign of fear, made a quick Oration to the Assembly, wherein having premised
many things concerning morality and amendment of life, he repeats the principal
points of his Doctrine, briefly explains his Faith, affirms, That under the
authority Papal the Kingdom of Antichrist was contained and established, and
lastly demonstrates how much he had offended God by the abnegation of the
Truth: He professes therefore, that he had resolved, that his right Hand,
wherewith he had so horribly sinned by Subscribing to the Doctrine proposed by
the enemies of Truth, should first feel the smart of punishment; when he would
have proceeded to speak more, the multitude of Romanists whose expectation he
had so finely deluded, with clamours and scoffs interrupted him, and hurried
him away presently to the place of Execution. There was then to be seen a sad
Spectacle, and such as would, I will not say, have extorted pity from his very
Enemies, but have expressed tears from a Flint: The chief Prelate of the Realm
lately flourishing by reason of his power and favor of Princes, a man of most
holy conversation, for his age, aspect, feature, learning, gravity and rare
gifts of mind deservedly most Reverend, clad out of intent to expose him to
mockery in an obsolete garment (for so had the Papists purposely arraied him)
and bitterly taunted at to be dragged to death, and that death by the horrid
tortures of Fire. Being now fastened to the Stake, as soon as ever the flame
began, to ascend, lifting up his left Hand to Heaven, he thrust forth his right
hand into the flame, and there with admirable constancy continued it until it
was consumed, only once drawing it in, and with it stroaking his Beard. At
length the raging flame spreading it self, lifting up his Eyes toward Heaven,
he cried out, Lord receive my Spirit, and his Body abiding as immovable as the
Stake whereto he was fastened, he patiently endured the Fires violence, until
he at last expired. His Body being consumed to ashes, his Heart was found
entire and untoucht. Had any of the Romanists found the like in any one of
their Faction, it should have been recorded for a Miracle, and that Miracle
sufficed to have Sainted him. Give me leave, though it be contrary to the
method of History, to insert a few Verses Ralph Skinner concerning this great
man's Martyrdom:

Succubuit sanctus Praesul Cranmerus, iniqua
Pontificum rabie, fraud doloque perit.
Quod Verbi invicto dejecer at Ense Papatum,
Quod docuit pura quaerere mente Deum;
Quodque Antichristi subverterat impia regna,
Regna piis Anglis heu tolerata diu;
Hinc pius and clemens crudeli addicitur igni,
Dantur and innocui membra cremenda viri.
Huc ubi jam ventum est, Dextram projecit in ignem,
Projectamque tenens talia dicta dedit:
Primum peccasti, primum and sentire dolorem
Debes, ah Christo dextra inimica meo.
Immotamque tenet dum deflagraverat omnis,
In cineres totam dum cecidisse videt.
Caetera cum pereant flamma (mirabile dictu)
Cor manet illaesum post ubi flamma perit.
Ecce, invicta fides cor inviotabile servat,
Nec mediis flammis corda perire sinit.
Which Verses may be thus rendered in English:

Through Papists rage and fraud good Cranmer died,
Because he put their Doctrine to the Sword,
The two-edged Sword of Scripture, and discri'd
Christ's Foe, instructing England with the Word:
For this, meek man, he had a Martyr's hire,
His Soul was burnt with Zeal, his Corpse with Fire.
But when he came unto the stake, he thrust
His right Hand in the flames: Thou first (he said)
Because thou first did sin, here suffer must,
Thou first thy Lord and Master have betrayed:
There held he it; his Eyes did see it fall,
Soon afterward he sent those Eyes withal.
But lo, a wonder! Heaven's sacred Oracle
Had sure decreed, that so admired a creature
Should not be put to death sans Miracle:
His Body burnt, his Heart in perfect feature
Was found unsing'd: See, see, the Faith he cherisht
Once in that Heart, preserved it still unperisht.
Beside Cranmer, the cruelty of those times did the same year This year eighty
four Burned.
devour many Professors of the same Religion. Of both Sexes no fewer than
eighty four were this year martyred by Fire. Neither did their cruelty exercise
it self on the living only: The Bones Martin Bucer and Paul Phagius long since
dead, were dug The exhumation of Bucer and Phagius.
up, formally accused of Heresy, and no man undertaking their Cause (as who
durst?) condemned, and publicly Burned in the Marketplace at Cambridge. And
Peter Martyr's Wife, who died at Oxford; was disinterred, and with barbarous
and inhumane cruelty buried in a Dunghill. To Bucer and Phagius Queen Elizabeth
did afterward with great solemnity restore their memory and honor: And as for
Peter Martyr's Wife, she caused her Bones to be translated from that unclean
place, to be reinterred in the Church, and commixed with the Relics of
Frideswid (by Papists reputed a Saint) that the like occasion of mockage might
not again be offered.

On the same day, whereon Cranmer thus ended his life, Cardinal Cardinal Pool
consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.
Pool was ordered Priest at Greenwich, and the next day, Naboth being dead,
took possession of his Vineyard, being consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.
Three days after, being the Feast of the Annunciation, accompanied by many
Nobles, Pool with great solemnity received the Pall at Bow-Church.

About the same time a notable Conspiracy was detected, some having projected
to rob the Exchequer, at that time full of Spanish coin to the value of fifty
thousand Pounds. The names of the Conspirators were Udal, Throckmorton, Pecham,
Daniel, Stanton, and (besides others that fled for it) White, who discovered
his fellows. The rest were all taken and suffered as Traitors. Sir Anthony
Kingston as partaker in their intentions was also apprehended, but died before
he could reach London.

In July, new Tumults begun to be set on foot in Norfolk were maturely
suppressed, Cleber and three Brothers called Lincoln the authors of it
suffering for their seditious attempt.

On the one and twentieth of November, John Fecknam Dean of Paul's was installed
Abbot at Westminster, which Henry the Eighth had erected to an Archiepiscopal
See. There being at that time no Monks in England, fourteen were found who were
content with Fecknam to take the Religious habit of Benedictines.

ANNO DOM. 1557. REG. MARIAE 4 and 5, PHILIPPI 3 and 4.
NOw after four or five years we found the effect of our Cabota. About the
beginning of this year arrived in England Osep Napea Ambassador from An
Embassage to Muscovia.
Basiliwitz Emperor of Russia, for the Treaty of a perpetual League between
our Kings and his Prince. On the Scottish Coast he had suffered wrack, and
beside Merchandise of infinite value, he lostthose Presents, which were from
the Emperor destinated to their Majesty's. But the loss of Richard Chanceller
was beyond all these May, Philip having about seven days before returned out of
Flanders, he was admitted into the presence of the Kings, declared the purport
of his Embassy, and continued in London, until the third of May; and having
then got a convenient season, laden with Gifts he set sail for his Country.

On the sixth of March, Charles Lord Stourton for having in his The Lord
Stourton hanged.
house cruelly murdered one Hargill and his Son, with whom he had long been at
variance, was by a wholesome example to posterity Hanged at Sarisbury with four
other of his Servants, who were not only conscious, but actors in the cruelty.
After he had beaten them down with Clubs, and cut their Throats, he buried
their Carcases fifteen foot deep in the ground, hoping by such sure work to
stop the voice of Blood crying for revenge; or if peradventure it were
discovered, the regard of his zealous persistance in the Religion of Rome would
(he hoped) procure the Queens pardon. But Murder is a sin that God has by
many memorable Examples manifested, that it shall not remain undetected: And
the Queen although blindly misled in matter of Religion, was so exact a fautrix
of Justice, that she was utterly averse from all mention of pardon. So this
Nobleman had the punishment due to his offense, only in this preferred before
other Murderers and Parricides, that he was not strangled with an Halter of
Hemp, but of Silk.

The seven and twentieth of April, Thomas Stafford landing in Thomas Stafford
endeavoring an Insurrection, is taken and Beheaded.
the Northern parts of the Realm, having raked together a small company of
Exiles and some Foreiners, surprised Scarborough Castle then, as in time of
Peace, utterly destitute of provision for resistance: Having thus seized on a
place of defense, he makes Proclamation, that Queen Mary having her self no
right to the Crown had betrayed it to the Spaniard, exhorting the people with
him to take Arms for the recovery of their lost Liberty. But by the diligence
of Nicholas Wotton Dean of Canterbury then Ambassador for their Majesty's with
the French, all his designs were revealed to the Council before his arrival in
England. So by the industry of the Earl of Westmerland he was within six days
taken, brought to London, and on the eight and twentieth of May Beheaded,
Strechley, Proctor, and Bradford the next day following him, but in a more due
punishment (being drawn, hanged and quartered) whom they had followed in their
treacherous attempts.

The Emperor Charles having bequeathed the inheritance of his hate to France
with his Crown, Mary could not long distinguish June, the Queen set forth a
Proclamation to this effect, that War against France proclaimed.
Whereas the King of France had many ways injured her by supporting the Duke of
Northumberland and Wyat in their Rebellions against her; and that his Realm had
been a receptacle for Dudley and Ashton, who with the privity of his Ambassador
had in his house contrived their treacherous designs, and after their escape
into France had been relieved by Pensions from the King; as also for having
lately aided Stafford with Shipping, Men, Money, and Munition, thereby if it
were possible to dispossess her of the Crown: She gave her Subjects to
understand, that they should not entertain Traffic with that Nation, whose
Prince she accounted her Enemy, and against whom upon farther grievances she
determined to denounce War.

Although these things were true, yet had she abstained from denunciation of
War, had not the five years Truce between Philip and Henry by the Pope's
instigation been lately broken by the French, and so War arising between them,
she would not make her self and her Husband two. For the Pope having long since
maligned the Emperor (knowing that he after the resignation of his Estates to
his Son Philip had withdrawn himself into Spain) by the Cardinal of Lorain
still solicited the French King to arms against the Spaniard, promising to
invest him in the Kingdom of Naples. Henry upon these fair hopes undertakes it,
and Mary resolves to assist her Husband.

That Mary took arms in the behalf of her Husband, Pope Paul Pool's authority
(...) abrogated,
was much displeased. And being he could not be revenged on her (who indeed was
the sole cause of our breach with France) he determined to pour out his wrath
on Pool, whom he ever hated; but now he thought he had more cause to manifest
it, because Pool knowing that this War was set on foot by the Pope, had by
Letters and Ambassadors sought to appease him, and that (though with most
humble reverence) yet roundly and according to his Conscience. Having abrogated
Pool's Legation, he repeals him to Rome, and for supply of his place he creates
one Francis Petow (a Franciscan Friar) Cardinal and Legate, and a little after
designed him Bishop of Sarisbury. The Queen having intelligence of these
proceedings, took especial care, that Pool might have no notice of them,
prohibiting not only this new Cardinal to enter the Realm, but all others whom
she suspected to bring any Mandates to that purpose, and with exact diligence
causing his Letters to be intercepted, by her Orators at Rome certified his
Holiness what a hazard the Catholic Religion not yet fully established would
incur, if he should endeavor the disgrace of so great a man, whose authority
had been much availeable for the conversion of the Nation. But while there is
this intercourse between the Pope and the Queen concerning this matter, Pool
having some way or other had an inkling of it, abstained from having the
Ormaneto the Pope's Datary in England, he was restored to his dignity. and
restored.


By this time the War was very hot on both sides, Philip besieging St. Quintin
in Picardie with thirty five thousand Foot, and twelve thousand Horse, which
number was after increased by a thousand Horse, four thousand Foot, and two
thousand Pioners out of England; under the Command of the Earl of Pembroke. For
the managing of this War Philip set sail out of England on the The French
overthrown at St. Quintin.
seventh of July. On the tenth of August, the French endeavoring to put
Succors into the Town are overthrown. The Spaniard charge the Constable
Montmorency in his retreat, routs the French, and kills two thousand five
hundred: A Victory not so great in the execution, as in the death and captivity
of many brave men. The Constable was wounded and taken Prisoner with his Son,
as also the Dukes of Montpensier and Longueville, Ludovico Gonzaga Brother to
the Duke of Mantua, the Marshal of St. Andrew, the Rhinegrave, Roche-du-Maine,
the Count Rochfoucault, the Baron of Curton, with many other men of mark. The
chief of them that were slain were John of Bourbon Duke of Anguien, the
Viscount of Turen, N. Tiorcellin Son to Roche-du-Maine, the Lords of
Chandenier, Pontdormy and many others, and in a manner all the Foot-Captains.
Philip lost only fifty men.

The eighth day after this Victory an assault is given, and the St. Quintin
taken.
Town carried by force, wherein were taken the Admiral Coligny with his Brother
d'Andelot, (who shortly after made an escape) Jarnac, St. Remy, Humes, and many
other persons of quality; the Son of the Lord of Fayette, Salevert, Ogier,
Vicques, La Bar, Estang and Gourdes were slain. Of the English in this
assault few of note were lost, beside Lord Henry Dudley youngest Son to the
Duke of Northumberland, and Sir Edward Windsore, who were the first that
advanced Ensign on the Walls.

This year is alike memorable for the extreme dearth and contemptible cheapness
of Corn. A little before Harvest Wheat was sold at four Marks the Quarter;
within the current of a month it fell to the low rate of five Shillings.
Wherein I rather admire the ensuing cheapness than the dearth, having my self
in the year 1597 paid double the former dear price.

But that which I shall now relate, I should deem far more memorable, A
nocturual Rainbow.
had I not in later times my self seen the like. On the night which ensued the
seventh day of September, almost two hours after Sunset, the Moon having risen
an hour before, a Rainbow was seen in the West. That I may relate the like
accident though of differing time, the like apparition was seen by me on the
four and twentieth of November 1604, when (the Sun having two hours before
declined to its lowest) traveling toward Colebrook,

ANNO DOM. 1558. REG. ultimo.
H Enry some way to repair his losses at St. Quintin, resolves an Calais, which
Senarpont Governor of Boutoigne persuaded him was not so fortified according
to report, Calais besieged by the French.
but that it might easily be taken. The Marshal Strossy having under the favor
of a disguise viewed the place, confirmed Senarpont's assurance of taking it.
Philip whether having intelligence of Henry's designs, or else presaging so
much, had often admonished the Queen to have an especial regard to that Town,
voluntarily offering his assistance for the security of it. But we over-wisely
jealous, lest Philip had a practice on it, it lying commodiously for his
adjoining Netherlands, neglected both his advice and proffer. But the reality
of his advice was manifested by the event. The Duke of Guise having by the King
been declared Lieutenant General in all his Dominions, levying a great Army
flies suddenly to the Siege of Calais, before which he sat down on
New-years-day, and entrenched at Sandgate. Then dividing his Army into two
parts, he at the same time assaults Newnambridge and the Risbank, two Forts
wherein the chief strength of that Town consisted, the taking whereof would
have cut off all possibility of relieving the besieged either by Land or Sea.
The Garrisons of each place terrified with so unexpected a danger, he at his
first arrival gains Newnambridge, and the next day the Risbank. The French
then batter the Wall between the Watergate and the Prison, not so much out of
hope to gain entrance that way, as to divert us from guarding that part of the
Town, where they really intended to give an Assault. Having for a while
battered that part, and we little suspecting an enterprise upon the Castle,
they suddenly with fifteen Pieces make a battery upon the Castle, and continue
it with such fury, that the thunder of the Cannon was all that day heard at
Antwerp, which is distant from thence more than one hundred English miles.
Having by that time night drew on made a sufficient breach, and yet in regard
of the deep Dikes filled with Water (wherein consisted the main hopes of the
Defendants) not able to come to an Assault, the Enemy with great toil and
labor by a cut from thence to the Sea draw the Dikes so low, that by that time
the Tide was gone out, they march not above Navil-high through the Dikes to the
Wall (which we little feared could be done) without resistance: Finding the
place void of Defendants, they easily make themselves masters of the Castle,
Anthony Ager Marshal of the Town had not with some few others made head against
them, and forced them to retreat to the Castle, in which conflict that valiant
Knight was slain. The Lord Wentworth Governor of the Town seeing little hopes
of keeping the Town, craved parley, which was granted; and at length yielded
the Town upon these Conditions: That the common Soldiers and Inhabitants
should depart without transporting or carrying away any thing with them, and
that Lord Wentworth with fifty others such as the Duke of Guise- should Calais
yielded.
appoint, should remain Captives to be put to ransom. So was Calais lost, which
had continued English above two hundred years: neither was the Siege long, the
Enemy sitting down before it on New-years-day, and having it yielded up on
Twelf-day.

Seven days after, the Duke marches toward Guisnes, which Town he took without
any difficulty, but the Castle, which the Lord Gray commanded, not so easily.
But that and Hames Castle were at length taken also and dismantled; so that of
all the Kingdom of France, the greatest part whereof was for a long time held
by our Kings, and whereof Henry the Sixth had been Crowned King at Paris, Anno
1431, nor in the Duchies of Normandy and Aquitain, the ancient Inheritance of
the Kings of England, our Kings possess nothing, but the Isles of Jersey and
Guernsey, which have proved Loyal to us ever since the Conquest. While the
French proceeded thus in Picardy, the Queen certified thereof with great
diligence prepares her Fleet to transport Succors for Calais; but contrary
winds kept them back so long, until Calais was irrecoverably lost.

You shall not easily read of any Action, wherein God has by more manifest
signs declared, how displeasing those Wars are to him, which undertaken for
Ambition or Profit do dissolve the public Peace: Philip (to begin with him)
against whom Henry and the Pope did most unjustly conspire, enlarged himself
with a double Victory, each whereof were great and memorable. The Cardinal
Caraffa and the Duke of Paliane, who for their own ends had persuaded the
doting Pope to throw the Ball of Discord between these Princes, were after for
this very thing Beheaded by Pius the Fourth, who immediately succeeded Paul.
Paul himself in the mean time, the French being overthrown at St. Quintin was
exposed to the mercy of the Spaniard, whom he had irritated, the French being
forced to withdraw his Army out of Italy. The rash violation of the League by
Mary, was punished with the loss of Calais, and through grief thereof
(according to common belief) of Life also. What happened to the French, who by
the Pope's instigation first brake the five years Truce, we have already
declared. And lest it might be conceived, that his losses at and of St. Quintin
were repaired by the taking of Calais, another Overthrow given him within few

In June the Marshal De Terms (who succeeded Strossy lately The Battle of
Graveling.
slain) Governor of Calais, breaks into Arthois and Flanders, with an Army
consisting of near about eleven thousand men, leaving Graveling and Burburg at
his back, attempts Berghes, takes it, sacks it, and so opens a way to Dunkirk,
which he also takes and spoils; and the Country all about (for they feared not
the French there, and the Towns which the Spaniard held throughout that Tract,
were ill furnished) lying open to their mercy, they ransack it most miserably,
and march as far as Newport.

Philip was affrighted with this Tempest, fearing especially, lest the Duke of
Guise then in Arms, should join with Terms: But having intelligence that the
Duke spent his time about Arlon and Vireton, he resolves to intercept the
French in their return. In this Enterprise he employs Count Egmond, (his
Lieutenantgeneral in the Netherlands) who having speedily out of the neighbor
Garrisons of Betune, St. Omer, Aires, Burburg, and others, assembled an Army of
fifteen thousand, puts himself between Dunkirk and Calais. Terms had hitherto
expected the Duke of Guise, but upon notice that the Country was up in Arms,
he somewhat too late bethought himself of a retreat. He was now every way
enclosed, and passage not to be gained but by dint of Sword. The French
therefore valiantly charge their Enemies, and overthrow some Squadrons of
Horse; indeed despair animated them to do wonders, and the Flemings were set on
fire by the desire of revenging late Injuries. The Spanish Troops renew the
fight, which was with equal order long maintained on both sides: In the heat
whereof ten English Men of War fortunately sailing by (for De Terms had for
his security betaken him to the shore, hoping that way with much less hazard to
have gained passage) upon discovery of the French Colors, let fly their
Ordnance furiously among the French, making such a slaughter, that The French
overthrown.
they began to give ground, were at last routed and overthrown.

The French in this Battle lost five thousand. Their chief Commanders were
almost all taken; the Marshal himself was hurt and taken, with d'Annebalt the
Son of Claud the late Admiral, the Earl of Chaune, Senarpont, Villebon
Governor of Picardy, Morvilliers, and many others. Two hundred escaped to our
Ships, whom they might have drowned, but giving them Quarter, they were brought
Captives into England. This Battle was fought on the thirteenth of July.

The Queen desirous by some action or other to wipe out the stain of the
ignominious loss of Calais, about the same time set forth a Fleet of one
hundred and forty Sail (whereof thirty were Flemings) the main of the
Expedition being from Breast in Bretaigne. Clinton Lord High Admiral of England
finding no good to be done there, set sail for Conquet, where he Conquet taken
and burned by the English.
landed, took the Town, sacked it and set it on fire, together with the Abbey
and the adjacent: Villages, and returned to his Ships. But the Flemings
somewhat more greedy after prey, disorderly piercing farther into the Country,
and regardless of Martial discipline, which commands obedience to their
General, being encounted by the Lord of Kersimon, came fewer home by five
hundred.

Philip about the same time lodging near Amiens with a great Army, Henry with a
far greater attended each motion of his, They encamp at last, Henry on the
North of the River Sum, Philip on the South of the River Anthy, so near to
one another, that it might be thought impossible for two such spirited Princes
commanding so great Armies, to depart without a Battle. But diverse
considerations had tempered their heat. Philip being the weaker of the two, saw
no reason why to engage himself. Henry had an Army which had twice felt the
other victorious, and was therefore loath on them to adventure his already
shaken estate. Wherefore they so entrenched themselves, and fortified their
Camps with Artillery, as if they expected a Siege from each other. Some months
thus passed without any other exploits than Inroads and light Skirmishes. At
length they mutually entertain a motion of Peace, both of them considering,
that their Armies consisting of Strangers, the fruits of the Victory would be
to the Aliens only, but the calamity and burden of the Defeat would light on
the shoulders of the Vanquished, or (which comes all to one pass) of the
Subjects. These motives drew together for a Treaty on Henry's side, the
Constable, the Marshal of St. Andrew, the Cardinal of Lorain, Morvilliers
Bishop of Orleans, and Aubespine Secretary of Estate: For Philip, the Duke of
Alva, the Prince of Orange, Puyz Gomes de Silva, Granvell Bishop of Arras and
others. Much altercation was had about the restoring of Calais, which the
French were resolved to hold, and Philip would have no Peace unless it were
restored to Mary, whom in point of Honor he could not so forsake. But this
difference was ended by the death of Mary, a little before whom on the one and
twentieth of September died also the Emperor Charles the Fifth, which
occasioned both the change of place and time for another Treaty.

And if the continual connection of other memorable Affairs The Daulphin married
to the Queen of Scot.
had not transported me, I should ere this have mentioned the Marriage
celebrated at Paris with great pomp on the eight and twentieth of April,
between the Daulphin Francis and Mary Queen of Scots. But the fruits thereof
were not lasting: For two years after died Francis (the Crown by the death of
his Father Henry having been first devolved to him) and left his Bed to a more
Henry the eldest Son to the Earl of Lenox. Of these Parents was born our late
Sovereign of ever sacred memory, who was Nephew by his Mother to James the
Fifth, by Margaret the eldest Daughter Nephew to that wife King Henry the
Seventh, who, the Issue of Henry the Eighth being extinct, as the next
undoubted Heir, most happily united the Crowns of England, Scotland, and
Ireland.

But now at length to draw nearer home, this Autumn was very full of Diseases,
Fevers (especially quartan) reigning extraordinarily in England, whereby many,
chiefly aged persons, and among them a great number of the Clergy perished. Of
the sole Episcopal rank thirteen died either a little before the Queen, or some
few months after her. Among the rest Cardinal Pool The death of Cardinal Pool.
scarce survived her a day, who having been for some weeks afflicted by this
kind of Disease, and brought to extreme weakness of Body, as if he had at the
news of the Quens death received his deaths wound, expired at three a Clock the
next morning. His Corpse enclosed in Lead, was buried in his Cathedral at
Canterbury, with this brief Elogy on his Tomb, instead of an Epitaph:

Depositum Cardinalis POLI.

He was a man admirably learned, modest, mild, of a most sweet disposition,
wise, and of excellent dexterity in the managing of any affairs, so that he had
been incomparable, if corrupted with the Religion of the Church of Rome he had
not forced his nature to admit of those cruelties exercised upon the
Protestants.

The Queen died at St. James on the seventeenth of November, The Queen diesh.
some few hours before day. She was a Lady very godly, merciful, chaste, and
every way praiseworthy, if you regard not the errors of her Religion. But her
Religion being the cause of the effusion of so much innocent Blood, that of the
Prophet was necessarily to be fulfilled in her, Blood-thirsty men, etc. shall
not finish half their days. For she was cut off in the two and fortieth year of
her age, having reigned only five Years, four Months, and eleven Days; whereas
her Sister, who succeeded her, most happily in a more mild Government ruled
nine times as long, and almost doubled her age. Concerning the cause of Queen
Mary's Death there are diverse conjectures. To relate what I find in approved
Authors, it is reported, that in the beginning of her Sickness her friends
supposing that she grieved at the absence of her Husband, whom she saw so
engaged in Wars abroad, that she could not hope for his speedy return, used
consolatory means, and endeavored to remove from her that fixed sadness
wherewith she seemed to be oppressed. But she utterly averse from all comfort,
and giving her self over to melancholy, told them, That she died, but that of
the true cause of her Death they were ignorant, which if they were desirous to
know, they should after her death dissect her Heart, and there they should find
Calais: Intimating thereby, that the loss of Calais had occasioned this fatal
grief, which was thought to have been increased by the Death of the Emperor
her Father-in-Law. But the truth is, her Liver being over-cooled by a Mole,
these things peradventure might hasten her end, which could not otherwise be
far from her, and cast her by degrees into that kind of Dropsy, which
Physicians term Ascites. This Dropsy being not discovered in time, deceived
her Physicians, who believed that she had conceived by King Philip, whereas she
alas did breed nothing but her own Death. So mature remedies being not applied,
and she not observing a fit Diet, she fell into a Fever, which increasing by
little and little, at last ended in her Death. She lies interred at
Westminster in the midst of that Chapel which is on the North side of her
Grandfather Henry the Seventh his Monument, where her Sister Queen Elizabeth
was after Buried with her, and over both by the pious Liberality of that most
Munificent Prince King James has since been erected a most stately Monument,
well befitting the Majesty of such great Monarchs.

QVEEN ELIZABETH.
ANNO DOM. 1558.
HAving thus briefly run over the Reigns of these three Princes, Queen
Elizabeth's times in the next place offer themselves; which deservedly
requiring a more accurate Style, I will here set a period to this Work, not so
much with intent to pretermit them, as reserving them for a more exact labor.
In the mean time, to give some satisfaction to the Reader, I will make this
short Addition.

Some few hours after the decease of Queen Mary, the Estates then assembled in
Parliament, on the seventeenth of November declared her Sister the Lady
Elizabeth Queen, who was Daughter to Henry the Eighth and Ann Bolen. Having
most gloriously reigned forty four years, four months and seven days, she ended
her Life and Reign on the four and twentieth of March, Anno 1603, the Crown
being by her death devolved to the renowned King Scots James the Sixth, to whom
it was so far from feeling it a burden to have succeeded so good a Princess,
that never was any Prince received with greater Applause and Gratulation of his
People. Many think their condition happy, if they exchange a Caligula for a
Claudius, or a Nero for a Vitellius or an Otho. But that any Mortal should
please after Elizabeth, may seem a Miracle; and is a great argument both of
rare Virtue in the succeeding King, and of a right Judgment in the Subject. For
this great Lady was so far beyond Example, that even the best Princes come
short of her; and they who most inveigh against that Sex, contend, that Woman
is incapable of those Virtues (in her most eminent) Wisdom, Clemency, variety
of Languages, and Magnanimity equal to that of Men, to which I add fervent Zeal
of Piety and true Religion. But in these things peradventure some one or other
may equal her. What I shall beyond all this speak of her (and let me speak it
without offense to my most Excellent Sovereign James, the Pattern of Princes,
the Mirror of our Age, the Delight of Britain) no Age has hitherto
paralleled, nor (if my Augury fail not) none ever shall: That a Woman (and if
that be not enough) a Virgin, destitute of the help of Parents, Brothers,
Husband, being surrounded with Enemies, the Pope thundering, the Spaniard
threatening, the French scarce dissembling his secret hate, as many of the
neighboring Princes as were devoted to Rome, clashing about her, should
contain this Warlike Nation not only in Obedience, but in Peace also, and
(beyond all this) Popery being profligated, in the true Divine Worship. Hence
it comes to pass, that England (which is among the rest of it self a Miracle)
has not these many years heard the noise of War; and that our Church (which
she found much distracted) transcends all others of the Christian World. For
you shall at this day scarce find any Church, which either defiled with Popish
Superstitions, or despoiled of those Revenues which should maintain Professors
of the Truth, has not laid open a way to all kind of Errors, gross Ignorance
in Learning (especially Divine) and at length to Ethnic Barbarousness. But to
what end do I insist on these or the like, they being sufficiently known even
to the Barbarians themselves, and Fame having trumpetted them throughout the
World. Which things, when and how they were done, how bountifully she aided and
relieved her Allies, how bravely she resisted, brake, vanquished her Enemies, I
have a desire in a continued History to declare, and will (God willing)
declare, if I can attain to the true intelligence of the passages of those
times, have leisure for the compiling it, and that no other more able than my
self (which I wish may happen) in the mean time engage themselves therein.

LAUS DEO.

