AN ANSWER TO A TREATISE OUT OF Ecclesiastical History, Translated from An
Ancient Greek MANUSCRIPT in the Public Library at Oxford, BY HVMFRET HODY, B.
D. etc. And Published under the Title of The Unreasonableness of a Separation
from the New BISHOPS, TO SHOW, That although a Bishop was unjustly deprived,
neither he nor the Church ever made a Separation, if the Successor was not an
Heretic. To which is added, The CANONS in the Baroccian Manuscript Omitted by
Mr. HODY.

LONDON: Printed, and are to be sold by J. Wells, near S. Paul's Churchyard,
1691.

THE PREFACE.
THat a Separation is always unreasonable on one side or the other, is without
all question; but that it is unreasonable to separate from New Bishops that are
placed in the Sees of Bishops, who are uncanonically deposed, for this Cause
only, that they are in Possession, upon what Reason and Justice soever, of the
said Episcopal Sees, is very strange Doctrine, and such as was never, I think,
heard of in the Church of England, till this Treatise was published. For in the
Sense of the Catholic Church in her Canons and Constitutions, the New Bishop
himself in such a Case makes the Separation, and to continue Communion with the
true Bishop is not to separate from the wrongful Possessor; but to keep our
former Place and Station, to adhere to the Right, and not to follow those, who
have set themselves up in opposition to it.

But the Doctrine, which this Anonymous Greek Author is brought to vouch for to
the World, is of such a pernicious Nature, and, if it be allowed, must have
such destructive Consequences in the Church, that I cannot but think, that all
Men, who have a sincere Love for the Church of England, whatever their Opinions
may be in other Matters, will not be ill pleased to see it proved, that there
is no Example to be found of this in the Practice of the Greek Church, till it
was reduced to so low and deplorable a Condition, as to be no longer a Pattern
for Imitation, but a Caution rather for us to beware of those things which
brought the Greeks into that Distress, under which they have so long groaned.

And if we will but give our selves the least leisure to consider; what is then
that can bring more certain and speedy Ruin upon a Church, than to act by such
a Principle, as makes all Ecclesiastical Authority have its sole and entire
dependence upon external Force and Power, and upon the casual Success and
Events of things?

For if, when the Civil Magistrate shall displace a Bishop for any frivolous
cause, or for no Cause at all, but with the greatest and most apparent
Injustice, all Christians shall be obliged in Conscience to submit to the
Intruder, if he be but Orthodox, and not to adhere to their lawful Bishop; this
utterly destroys all Church Authority, and gives it up wholly into the Power of
the Magistrate, who may set up what Bishop he pleases, provided they be no
Heretics, and change them as often as he pleases, and the Clergy and People
shall be bound in Conscience to take no further notice of the dispossessed, but
to live under the new ones, be they never so many, and never so bad, in all
Acts of Communion and Obedience. Now unless the Church can be ruined by nothing
but Heresy, or there be nothing that can render a Bishop unqualified for his
Station but Heresy, it is evident that this Doctrine leaves it at the Mercy of
the Prince, whether there shall long be any Church in his Dominions.

It is manifest, that these Principles make all Church Censures ineffectual,
and expose the Church to all the Mischiefs of Erastianism: For if a Prince
should prefer an excommunicated Person to the Sea of the Bishop, by whom he
stands excommunicated; supposing only that he was not excommunicated for
Heresy; this Person, tho never so justly excommunicated, must be owned and
obeyed instead of the Bishop who excommunicated him; which lodges all Church
Power in the Prince, and makes all Ecclesiastical Censures of no effect for the
Benefit and Preservation of the Church, whenever he pleases.

A Schismatical Prince, by this Doctrine, may set up Schismatical Bishops, and
the Church will have no Remedy against them. For instance, if Constantine had
been a Novation or Donatist, he might have deposed the Rightful Bishops, and
have set up Novations or Donatists in their stead; if those Sects were then
only Schisms; and they were no more at first: But whoever can imagine, that the
Clergy and People of that Age would have communicated with them, and have
deserted their true Bishop, may indeed believe all that our Author has said.
Tho the truth is, according to his Principles, no Prince can be a Schismatic,
because he may make what Bishops he pleases, and so can make what Church he
pleases, and it will be the Duty of Christians to communicate, not with their
Bishops, but with their Prince, or, which is the same thing, with what Bishops
he appoints.

A Popish Prince might set up Popish Bishops amongst us; for he could never
want Men, who at least upon as good Grounds and from as good Authorities, as
those upon which this Doctrine is propounded to us, would prove that Popery is
no Heresy.

A Prince of a Latitudinarian Faith may by these Principles give us Socinian
Bishops: For the Disciples of Episcopius and Curcellaeus will undertake to
prove that the Points in Controversy are not of necessity to Salvation, and do
not consequently involve the Assertors of them in Heresy.

And if a Prince should design never so well, for the Glory of God, and the
Interest of Religion; yet how easy it is for Princes to be mistaken and misled
in things of this nature, we may see in Constantine himself, who was deceived
by the Arians into a good Opinion of them, after the Council of Nice, even to
the sending St. Athanasius away from his See; tho he took care to keep it void
from him till his return, to prevent a Schism, which by the Practice of the
Church, could not otherwise have been avoided. But this is most of all
remarkable in the unhappy Reign of Constantius, who certainly was a very Devout
Prince, and had very good intentions in calling so many Synods, and therefore
the Fathers often mention him, with Respect and with great Compassion; but was
miserably deluded and imposed upon by the Arians, and persuaded to banish all
the Orthodox Bishops, and fill up the Sees with those of their own number. But
we must observe, that tho Constantius believed, that the Arians were not
Heretics but Orthodox, and died in his err^r, as S. Athanasius declares, tho
S. Gregory Nanianzen and Theodor^t, say the contrary: and therefore cannot be
supposed to want any inclinations to Depose Athanasius by his own Power, and
the Arians wanted no Malice against Athanasius, nor no Authority with the
Emperor to put him upon it, yet because, according to the Doctrine professed
on both sides, this could not be done, they were forced to be at all that
trouble to get a Synod of their own Party to effect it. But if it be left to
the Arbitrary Will of the Prince to Depose the Orthodox Bishops at his
Pleasure, and supply the vacancies with any whom he thinks fit, and their
Dioceses must be obliged in Conscience to acknowledge them, he will be sure in
a short time to have such Bishops as shall determine that only to be Heresy,
which he will have to be so; and it is a vain thing to say, that Heretical
Bishops must not be promoted* or that they must not be obeyed, for in a little
time by this Doctrine there will be nothing reputed Heresy, nor Schism, but to
hold a different Opinion, and a different Commanion from that of the Prince.

But to come nearer home, this Doctrine denies the Church a Power, which is
granted to be in all other Societies; own no Head but of their own choosing, or
who is, otherwise, regularly set over them according to their Charter or
Constitution; and it seems, if King James had put in new Bishops against the
consent of the Chapters, the Dioceses would have been obliged to obey them,
though the Fellows of Magdalen College in Oxford were bound in Conscience not
to acknowledge a President, who was forced upon them against their Statutes.

It may perhaps be said that we are secured from all the inconveniences that
would follow from this Doctrine, inasmuch as by the Laws of the Land no Bishop
can be forced upon us by the King; but he must be chosen by the Chapter of the
Cathedral Church of the Diocese, to which he is nominated. But first, if this
Doctrine be calculated only for our own Church, and we must be governed by a
different Rule from the rest of the Catholic Church, why then is the Practice
of the Greek Church brought to recommend it to us. But if this have been the
Doctrine and Practice of all Churches, we are not to imagine, that the Laws of
the Land can make it no sin, but a Duty to separate from intruding Bishops,
when the Laws of God and of his Church enjoin the contrary. For the Laws of our
Country must cease to oblige us in Conscience when they are inconsistent with
the Doctrine and Practice of the Church in all Ages; and if these have been
always the Principles, and this the Practice of the Church, as it is now
pretended, to own the present Bishop, whoever he be, if he be no Heretic; I
doubt it will be in vain to alledg the Laws of the Land against an Intruder,
when he is once in Possession, as long as he can keep his Possession; but we
must have Bishops de Facto, and must be bound in Conscience to submit to them,
by whatever ill means they came in at first. But suppose that the Laws of the
Land would be a security to us, (as they have hitherto been, and will be still,
if we retain our old Principles) yet how can we be sure that the Laity will be
more tender of the Honor and welfare of the Church than the Clergy themselves
are? And that, if the Clergy give up the Ecclesiastical Authority, they will
not be willing to consent to it; and be contented that a Prince should be
absolute in Ecclesiastical Affairs, if he will but act according to Law, in
Civil?

But whatever security there may be from the Secular Power to the Church, since
it is incorporated into the State; yet by these Principles the Church could not
have supported it self against the Attempts of Schismatics before the
Emperors became Christians; and if the Civil Government should withdraw its
Protection, it is plain this Scheme leaves the Church no Power to defend it
self against the Usurpation of one Bishop upon another: for by this Model of
Church Government, if a Bishop get into Possession of another Diocese by any
way whatsoever, whether by the Secular Power, or by any other means, provided
he be no Heretic* he is from thence forth to be looked upon as the true
Bishop, notwithstanding any Canon of the Church against his Vsu^pation. So that
this Notion does effectually dissolve all Church Government, and leaves no
Power and Authority in the Church to preserve it self, but leaves it at the
Mercy not only of the Civil Magistrate, but of any Invader, who is no Heretic
or does not appear to be such. Novatian, if he could have got into Possession
of the Episcopal Throne, must by these Principles have been submitted to as
Bishop of Rome, than which nothing can be more absurd, or more contrary to the
Doctrine and Practice of the Church in all Ages. And if the Cause of the New
Bishops can be defended by none, but such Principles, it is plain, that it is
not to be defended at all: for we must not contradict the Doctrine of the
Church in all Ages, to serve a present Turn; nor maintain the Church in this
Age so as to have no Church left for the next.

But I shall not here undertake further to show how dangerous and destructive
these Principles are to the Church of England, and to Religion in general, much
less is it my business to state the Case now in Controversy. I intend only to
pursue the Author of this Treatise through his Discoveries, which he pretends
to make in Ecclesiastical History: and if I can show that this Greek has put a
fallacy upon us, I hope we shall not suffer our selves to be cheated by the
impertinent and false Stories of an obscure Writer of no Name nor Authority,
but who appears to have lived in the most decayed and worst State of the Greek
Church, when their Sermons were nothing but ill digested Rapsodies, which, both
for their Style and Sense, will scarce endure the Reading; their Ecclesiastical
Histories nothing but Legends of Miracles, and all their Histories, both
Ecclesiastical and Civil, full of such idle Stories as most Men are ashamed to
tell after them; and when by their Vices and Ignorance they had rendered
themselves ripe for that Destruction, which soon after came upon them. It is to
those Ages that we owe the loss of so many of the Works of the Fathers of the
First Centuries, and the Corruption of others, to Countenance the Tenets and
Practices of their own times; and it is no wonder, that when their Bishops were
so often Deposed at the pleasure of the Emperor upon frivolous or rather upon
very unjust pretenses, some should endeavor to make it believed, that such
Proceedings must be acquiesced in, according to the Practice of former Ages in
the like cases; when the decay of all sound Knowledge and true Religion, and of
all good Orders and Discipline both in Church and State was so great, and their
Divisions so incurable, which were principally occasioned, or extremely
heightened by the frequent changes of the Patriarchs, that they at last brought
utter ruin upon the Empire, and subjected the Church to the Arbitrary Pleasure
of the Grand Seignior.

And it is worth our observation, that notwithstanding it had been so customary
for the Emperors in the Greek Church to Depose their Bishops, yet after the
Thirteenth Century, (and how long after we cannot tell) it was matter of
dispute in that Church, whether they ought to Communicate with the new Bishops;
so that this Author's whole Book is a contradiction to his very design in
writing it: for if they had constantly for so many Ages submitted to the
Intruding Bishops as often as they were put up, how came there at that time to
be any doubt about it? Or how could it then be necessary to prove, with so much
Pains and Formality, that which he would make us believe had been the constant
Practice of their Church in every Age? If what he says had been true, it could
have needed no Proof to them, and since he was forced to be at so much Pains to
prove it to the Greeks themselves, that this had ever been the Practice of
their own Church, it is a good Argument to us that it was not the Practice of
it; for if it had been all along practiced, no Man almost among them could have
been ignorant of it, since, according to his own account, there was scarce any
Age but afforded too many Instances of the Removal of Bishops.

Considering all this, I wonder that the learned Writer of the Preface should
tell us, that this Author is so unexceptionable a Judge to appeal to: for I
should be very sorry, if any exception should lie against the Authors of our
own time, that does not lie against this. Yes says he, Surely no uncharitable
Aspersions of time-serving, courting Preferment, or the like, that might be
cast upon any that should write now in this Cause, can take place against this
Author, so remote from the present Age and Controversy. I hope uncharitable
Aspersions will take place neither against this Author nor any other, but it is
too much to persuade us that Clergy men were never swayed by Interest till now
of late; this would be too great a Satyr upon the present Age, and would betray
too great ignorance of all that are past; for there is nothing more notorious
than that mankind have had the same Passions and Frailties in all Times; and if
we were to search for Examples of Prejudice, and Deceit, and Persidiousness,
and all manner of ill Practices, we should no where sooner find them, than in
those degenerate Ages of the Church. And he tells us, that our Author probably
was one of the Bishops that assisted at the new Patriarchs Consecration, for
whose sake all this was written: so that the Case was the same, and the
Controversy the same, and the difference is only in Time, and Place, and
perhaps in some other as inconsiderable Circumstances.

But I shall apply my self to the Greek Author, and in Answer to him shall
consider all that is said in the Preface to strengthen and support his
Authorities from Antiquity.

AN ANSWER TO A TREATISE OUT OF Ecclesiastical History, etc.
I Shall follow our Author in his own way, tho he does not always proceed
according to order of Time; which is no Argument of his Skill or Exactness, but
shows that he took up his Materials as he found them, and placed them without
any great Care or Method. And to show his Judgment, we shall see he has
sometimes brought Instances which are nothing to his purpose.

He begins with S. Chrysostom, and Page 1.
in the first place would insinuate that he was Uncanonically Ordained, having
received the Order of Deacon by the hands of Meletius, who was placed by the
Arians in the Sea of Eustathius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, and was
afterward Translated to Antioch, whilst Eustathius was yet living: and he
observes, that Meletius, notwithstanding, was removed to Antioch by the joint
consent of both the Orthodox and Arian Bishops, and that both S. Basil and S.
Chrysostom were Ordained Deacons by him.

By all this we are given to understand, that Eustathius of Sebastia had great
wrong done him, and that Meletius being besides made Bishop by the Arians could
never become a lawful Bishop.

As to the first point: Eustathius was condemned in two Synods for his ill
Tenets and Practices. He was first Socrat. l. 2. c. 43.
Deposed by his own Father Eulalius Bishop of Caesarea in Cappodocia, and was
afterward condemned in a Synod at Gangre in Paphlagonia, because after he was
Deposed, he had done many things contrary to the Canons. He had forbidden to
Marry, and commanded to abstain from Meats; he had caused several Men and their
Wives to depart from each other; those who would not come to Church, he had
persuaded to Communicate in their Houses. He made several Servants leave their
Masters upon pretenses of Piety. He were the Habit of a Philosopher (which was
the misdemeanor his Father at first Deposed him for) and had introduced a new
kind of distinct Habit for all of his own Sect. He caused Women to be Shorn. He
declared against the set Fasts of the Church, and appointed his Followers to
Fast on Sundays. He would not so much as admit any Prayers to be made in the
Houses of married Persons, and commanded all to avoid, as a thing abominable,
the Benediction and Communion of a Priest, who had a Wife, tho he had married
her before he entered into Orders, and he both did and taught many other things
of like nature. Sozomen relates, that besides his being Sozom. l. 4. c. 24.
Deposed at Caesarea in Cappodocia, and at Gangre, he was Excommunicated by a
Synod at Neocesaria in Pontus, and Deposed by Eusebius Bishop of
Constantinople, for his Treachery in some business that he had been entrusted
with, and was Convicted of Perjury in a Synod of Antioch. To all this I need
not add, that he was an Arian, and renounced the Nicene Creed, which he had
once professed, and that S. Basil often complains of his Basil. Ep. 72, 73, 74.
78, 79. 196.
false and perverse dealing, and besides says, that it was reported of him,
that he had reordained some of his Proselites, tho he could scarce believe it,
since no Heretic was ever known to dare to do it. These certainly are Crimes
which would justify his being Deposed, and it could be no fault in Meletius to
preside in the Sea of a Bishop, who for so just Reasons was condemned in
several Synods, and had had Anathema pronounced against his Doctrines.

The Second thing viz. That Meletius was Cons^^r^ted by the Arians, was ind^ed
a great objection against him, and had like to have been of very (...)
^onsequence to the Church of Anti^^h. For tho Meletius had shown himself a
zealous and learned Assertor of that Orthodox Faith, and was highly esteemed by
the Orthodox Bishops, who were mightily sat^sfied with his Promotion to the Sea
of Antioch: yet there was a Party of Men who still retained a Prejudice against
him upon the account of his Consecration; and during his Banishment under
Constantius, Lucifer Calaritanus coming to Antioch Consecrated Pau^inus Bishop
of that City, which, when he saw the Orthodox Bishops, and particularly
Eusebius of Vercelles, disapprove of it, gave the first occasion to Lucifer to
begin that Sect, which from him took its denomination. Meletius at his return
from Exile, under Julian, finds Socr. l. 3. c. 9. Sozom. l 5. c. 13.
the Church of Antioch divided into three Parties; one, that followed Euroius
the Arian Bishop; another that Communicated with Paulinus; and a third, that
adhered still to himself, as their lawful Bishop: the Arians had possessed
themselves of all the Churches within the City, but one of the small Churches,
which they allowed Paulinus, so that he was forced to hold his Assemblies
without the Gates. Meletius suffered a second Banishment under Valens; and when
he was restored by Gratian, Paulinus being then Ancient, Socr. l. ^. c. 5.
those who were of Meletius's Communion, endeavored to have the difference so
Composed, that both he and Paulinus might together Preside in that See. But
Paulinus refused to agree to it, alleging that Meletius had received his
Ordination from Arian Bishops. Upon this the People were in a Ferment, and
caused Meletius to resume the Throne in one of the Churches without the City.
This bred great contentions between the Parties, but at last they came to this
agreement; That whosoever of these two Bishops should die first, the survivour
should be the sole Bishop of the Sea; and there being six Men then in Antioch,
who upon the Death of them, might probably make pretensions to the Succession,
they were all sworn to this Agreement. And thus the difference was Composed,
only the Luciferians would by no means be prevailed with to Communicate with
him, but set up separate Congregations. Thus it was according to the account
Socrates gives of this Matter; but as Theodorite relates it, Sapores, whom the
Emperor had sent to inspect and regulate this Business, seeing the great equity
and condescension of Meletius, put him into Possession Theod. l. 5. c. 3.
of the Bishopric: for he makes no mention of any Agreement between him and
Paulinus, but only says, that Meletius had the Sea delivered up to him, and
Paulinuus remained Bishop only of that Party, which adhered to him.

This being the case, since Meletius was so eminent a defender of the Orthodox
Faith, as he is confessed by all to have been, and had twice suffered
Banishment for it, and during his first Banishment had one irregularly placed
in his See, and did afterward, notwithstanding so great a Provocation, use all
the Condescension that could be expected in such a Case; it could be no just
Prejudice against him, that he was at first made Bishop by the Arians, or
rather by the Semi-Arians, or Acacians, who upon occasion would subscribe Scer.
l. 3. c. 25.
the Nicene Creed, and pretended to have no exceptions to the Doctrines
contained in it, but were for taking away the word (...), as not being found in
Scripture, as if the difference had been only in Terms, contriving in the mean
time all the ways possible to undermine the Faith by their own Expositions. But
it does not appear that Meletius ever was an Arian himself; on the contrary the
Orthodox Fathers never mention him, but with the greatest commendations; and he
seems to have been imposed upon by the Acacians and Semi-Arians for a while,
who disguised and dissembled their Opinions. For when he was called to give an
account of his Faith in the presence of Constantius himself, in the Synod
Theod. l. 2. c. 31.
at Antioch, he declared himself to the entire satisfaction of the Orthodox
Bishops; and it was no more than they expected from him, and were before well
assured of, which made them so desirous to have him advanced to the Sea of
Antioch. And tho Socrates Socr. l. 2. c. 44.
says, that Meletius subscribed the Form of Faith which Acacius produced in the
Synod of Selencia; yet this seems to be a mistake, which perhaps the
partiality, which he plainly enough discovers for Paulinus, might betray him
to; for Meletius's name is not to be found among the Subscriptions to the Creed
of Acacius set down in Epiphanius. Epiphan. Haer. 73.


Now it was determined in this Case, in a Council at Alexandria (...). Athanas.
Epi^t. ad Ruhnianum inter ejus op. Tom. 2. p. 40. and apud Conc. Nicen. 2. Act.
1. Col. 75.
that the worst of Heretics, the very Principal and Leading Men among them
upon the renouncing their Errors, and reconciling themselves to the Church by
Repentance, should be received to Communion, tho not to Officiate as Clergymen;
but the less culpable, who had been abused and misled, were likewise to be
permitted the Exercise and Administration of their Function. Which is no more
than was practiced in the Council of Nice it self toward the Arian Bishops,
who renounced their Heresy, and signed the Nicene Creed, as S. Hierom urges in
his Dialogue Adversus Luciferianos, where he disputes this point at large. This
was Conc. Nic. Can. 8. Socr. l. 1. c. 9. Vales. de Schism. Donatist.
all along the Practice of the Church toward the Arians and Novations, and
Donatists, and the Meletians, who were so denominated from Meletius the African
Bishop, to admit of their Orders, upon their Reconciling themselves to the
Church, and thus it was confirmed and established in the Council of Nice. And
to the determinations of this Council of Alexandria, Lucifer Calaritanus
himself had Socr. l. 3. c. 9. Sozom. l. 5. ^. 13.
given his assent by his Deacon, whom he had sent thither for that purpose, and
Assensus est huic sententiae Occidens, and per tam necessarium concilium
Satanae faucibus mundus ^reptus est. Hieron. adv. Luciferian.
all the Western Church approved of this Decree as the only Remedy against the
Arian Heresy. For the true Reason why the Western Bishops espoused the Cause
of Paulinus against Meletius was not for any Objection they had against his
Ordination (which was made an Objection by none but the Luciferians) but
because he had been represented in the West as an Heretic, as S. Basil
complains, and Basil. Ep. 321. 349.
as it appears from S. Hierom's two Epistles to Damasus, wherein he desires to
know of him, with whom he should Communicate at Antioch: and Paulinus was
thought little better of in the East, for receiving to Communion the Associates
of Marcellus. But Meletius ^d. Epist. 74. and Epiphan. Haer. 77.
was received as Patriarch of Antioch in the General Council of Constantinople,
and dying there, S. Gregory Nyssen in the presence of that Venerable Assembly
celebrated his memory with the highest Praises in his Funeral Oration. And upon
his death Flavianus was by unanimous consent chosen Epist. Synod. C. P. apud
Theod. l. 5. c. 9. Socr. l. 5. c. 15.
Bishop of Antioch, and the choice confirmed in that General Council, tho
Paulinus was yet living, who thereupon nominated Euagrius for his Successor,
but he dying soon after Paulinus, no other Bishop was chosen in his room.

But the state of this Controversy, as it lay between the Meletians and
Luciferians, is a direct confutation of the whole design of this Authors
Treatise. For if all Christians are obliged to look no further than to the
Bishop in Possession; Paulinus was put into possession of the Sea of Antioch,
whilst Meletius was in Banishment, and he at his return was forced to hold his
Assemblies without the City; yet the Meletians never thought this any Reason
for their compliance, nor did the Adherents of Paulinus ever urge it upon them:
they urged that Meletius had been made Bishop by Arians, and that Plea was
overruled by the determination of a Council held at Alexandria; whereas if our
Authors notion had then been good Doctrine, it must soon have decided the
Question: for no Man could deny but Paulinus was actual Bishop in the absence
of Meletius, which was a better pretense than if he had been turned out to make
way for him; and so it is impo^sible, but this Argument must have been insisted
upon, if this had been then an approved Doctrine; and it had been at least a
good Argument in the Eastern Church, where our Author would make us believe, it
was always the Custom to Communicate with the Bishop for the time being,
however he came to be so: and it is incredible, that in so weighty a
Controversy, which was so long depending, no Man should once think of the
thing, which could alone decide it, when it was so obvious to all capacites,
and is supposed to have been received into the constant Practice of the Church
in all such cases. St. Chrysostom himself after the Socr. l. 6. c. 3.
death of Meletius, for three whole years would not Communicate with either
side, and at last, as all, but Socrates, testify, was ordained Presbyter by
Flavianus, that is, he espoused the cause of the Meletians, and took directly
the contrary side to that, which he ought to have taken by these Principles.
For it was a received Maxim, that regularly there could be but one Bishop of
one Church at the same time (for if a Bishop appointed his own Successor, and
took him in his life time for an Assistant to him, this was an extraordinary
case, and he retained the Authority still to himself, or it was at his own
choice, whether he would part with any of it) and if the Bishop in Possession
were to be the one Bishop, Meletius had been precluded by Paulinus, when he
re^urned from Banishment, and Paulinus was afterward left in Possession upon
the death of Meletius. It Is plain then that this Doctrine was unknown to the
whole Church at that time, and particularly to S. Chrysostom, upon whose
account this is brought, and whose Case comes now to be considered.

The Author observes that upon the Page 2.
Deposing of S. Chrysostom, Arsacius was placed in his See, who in fourteen
months time must be supposed to O^dain Bishops, Priests, and Deacons; or if he
did not, yet Atticus succeeded him, whilst S. Chrysostom was yet alive and in
Exile. Atticus sat as Patriarch twenty years, and yet all his Ordinations were
never questioned, but were received by the Church, as if they had been
Canonical. Atticus was succeeded by Sisinnius, and he by Nestorius; and both
Atticus and Sisinnius were owned as Patriarchs by Celestine Bishop of Rome in
an Epistle to N^storius; and in the General Council of Ephesus no exceptions
were made to the Promotions of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, only Nestorius
himself was Deposed for Heresy. To enforce all this yet further, the Writer of
the Preface cites some passages out of the life of S. Chrysostom written by
Palladius, to show what the Opinion of that Father was in his own Case, and how
far he was from insisting upon any Right he had to be acknowledged still, as
Patriarch, when he was once Deposed: For, says he, S. Chrysostom advised and
charged the Bishops his Friends more than once, That as they loved Christ, none
of them should leave his Church upon his account: That they must keep Communion
with his Deposers, and not rend and divide the Church. And he enjoined some
devout Women that attended there, that as they hoped to obtain Mercy from God,
they should pay the same Service and Good will to his Successor by a fair
Election, that they had done to himself: for the Church could not be without a
Bishop.

But this notwithstanding, upon examination we shall find that S. Chrysostom
was clearly of another mind, than he is here represented to be of, and that
there is nothing in his Case, which will in the least favor this Authors
Doctrine. I have already observed, how much contrary S Chrysostom acted to
these Principles in the case of Meletius, and I shall now make it appear, that
he was evidently against them in his own.

The account Palladius gives us is Pal^a^vit. Ch^^^* p. ^^.
this: S. Chrysost^m before his first Banishment, when he perceived what
violent Methods his Adversaries would take; spoke to the forty Bishops, who
were met with him: That as they loved Christ none of them would leave his
Church upon his account: For, says he, I am n^w ready to be offered, and the
time of my departure is at hand, in S. Paul 's words. I shall undergo many
Sufferings, I see, and so depart this life. And afterward; To me to live is
Christ, and to die is gain, and, am I better than the Patriarchs, Ib. p. 68.
than the Prophets and Apostles, that I should be immortal? From whence it is
plain that he was very apprehensive that his Enemies had a design upon his
life, and that they would not suffer him to live much longer: (...), etc.
Pallad p^g. 68.
For it was commonly reported that he was to be beheaded. At this one of them
expressed, how much they were troubled for the Desolation and Confusion that
would befall the Church, when wicked Men should Usurp the Government of it. Upon
which he again exhorts them not to forsake their Churches: For, says he,
Preaching did not begin with me, nor Ib. p. 69.
will it end with me: did not Moses die? And was not Joshua appointed to
succeed him? Did not Samuel die? And was not David anointed? Jeremiah departed
this life, but did he not leave Baruch behind? Elijah was taken up into Heaven,
but then did not Elisha Prophecy? S. Paul was beheaded, but did he not leave
Timothy, Titus, Apollos, and innumerable others behind him? When he had said
this, ^ulysius, Bishop of Apamea in Bithynia puts him in mind, that if they
retained their Churches they must be forced to Communicate, and to Subscribe to
the Deposing him: to which S. Chrysostom answers, that he would have them hold
Communion to prevent a Schism in the Church, but by no means to Subscribe; for
he was conscious to himself of nothing for which he ought to be Deposed, or
thrust out of his See. Just before his second Banishment, he speaks to Olympias
the Deaconess with some others, saying, I see the things concerning me have an
end, I have finished my Course, and probably you will never see my face more:
this one thing I desire of you, that none of you omit your accustomed Good Will
and attendance upon the Church; and whoever shall be Ordained without his own
seeking, and (...), Ibid. p 90.
against his desire, by a general consent, that you would obey him, as you
would do me: for the Church cannot be without a Bishop.

It is evident both from the Words themselves, and from the Circumstances in
which he spoke them, that S. Chrysostom both times looked upon himself as a
dying Man, when he used these words in taking his leave of the Bishops, and of
the Deaconesses, and therefore they cannot import, that he would have them
submit to a Bishop, who should succeed him during his life.

But if we allow the words their utmost Latitude, and take them in the greatest
extent that they will possibly admit of, they can amount to no more than this,
not that they should submit to any Bishop, who should succeed him, whilst he
was living; but to one, who should not be desirous or fond of it, but should
come in against his own inclinations, and by an unanimous consent; by which we
can understand no less, than that he means one, who was not of the Party
against him, nor had any hand in thrusting him out; and if such an one were
chosen unanimously, who was a friend to his Cause, and lamented the great
injustice done him, and who unwillingly and upon necessity only could be
prevailed upon to fill the Sea, and who therefore must have been as willing to
have given way to him, as the true Patriarch, if ever he should have returned;
if such an one were chosen; (and such an one he must he, if he were chosen by
general consent: for never any Bishops departure was more grievous to all but
the Faction that Deposed him, than S. Chrysostom's was) then, according to this
Sense of his words, he advises them not to divide the Church upon his account,
but to join in Communion with such a Bishop, since this was the only means to
preserve the Churches Peace. Which is a conditional Resignation, or a
Declaration that he would forgo his own Right upon condition that such a
Bishop were chosen as he there mentions. But, if we suppose this to be S.
Chrysostom's meaning, the Sea was disposed of to men, who were very far from
being such Bishops as he exhorted them to submit to. For all his Friends
endured great hardships under Arsacius, and Atticus had been Pallad. p. 95.
Soz. lib. 8. ^ 27. Phot. Bibli. Cod. 277.
the chief Incendiary against him. And this is the excuse which Photius makes
for some Expressions, that seemed to him a little too severe, which S.
Chrysostom used concerning Arsacius in an Epistle to Cyriacus.

And to be convinced that S. Chrysostom did not design that they should submit
to any Bishop, that should be set up, we need only consider that these very
Persons, to whom he gave this in charge, never would submit either to Arsacius
or Atticus, at least during his Life; but suffered all that they could do to
them, rather than they would comply, and S. Chrysostom wrote many Epistles to
these very Bishops and Deaconesses, to comfort and support them under the
severe afflictions, which they endured upon this account: And when Palladius
himself, and so many other Bishops, with the rest of the Clergy suffered so
much in S. Chrysostom's Cause, as is mentioned in his Life, it is past all
belief, that neither any of the rest, nor Palladius, who is supposed to be the
Author of this account of his Life, and was one of those Bishops to whom S.
Chrysostom gave these directions, should call to mind what he had said to them;
but the Bishops as well as Deaconesses should with one consent act contrary to
what S. Chrysostom in his last words required of them, and should either
mistake him, or forget what he had said, or should choose to suffer any thing
rather than observe his advice, and do what he had told them was their Duty.
But as his Friends could not have so little respect for him, or so little care
of themselves, as to forget so soon, what it would have been so much for their
own ease and safety to remember: so he would not have failed in some one of his
Epistles at least to put them in mind of it, and would never have let them
suffer so much, contrary to that Duty, which his last words inculcated to them,
taking no care afterward to remind them* what God and the Church required of
them. If he had never heard of their condition, or had never had an opportunity
to write to them about it, it is scarce possible they should misunderstand him
so, as to run themselves into such needless, and indeed sinful sufferings; but
when he held a Correspondence with them in his Banishment, and wrote so often
upon this very Subject, it is incredible that they should suffer for not doing
that, which he had exhorted them to do, and that he among all his Consolations
should forget that which would alone have given them effectual and present
relief, and should omit to tell them, that they suffered when they needed not,
and in a Cause, in which they could not suffer with a good Conscience.

But this is not all: S. Chrysostom Chrysostom. Epist. 26. 27.
does not only omit to tell them, that they needed not, and ought not to
suffer, but applauds them for suffering in so good a Cause, and exhorts them to
perseverance, and applies those Scriptures to them, which pronounce blessings
upon those, who suffer for Righteousness sake: He tells them they ought not to
value their lives in Ep. 36. 46. 71. 90.
such a Cause, being certain of a reward in Heaven. He (...), etc Ep. 83.
(...), etc. Ep. 85.
extols the Apostolical Courage and Constancy of the Bishops and Clergy, who
were in Prison, and compares them to S. John Baptist, both in their Sufferings
and in the justness of their Cause; and represents it, as a more glorious thing
to suffer so much, and so long for the Vindication of the Primitive
Constitutions and Discipline, than it was for him to be beheaded for telling
Herod, that it was not lawful for him to have his Brother Philip's Wife: S.
John Baptist suffered but once; but he bids them say, we are ready to suffer
ten thousand Deaths rather than comply with the Usurper (...). He exhorts the
Ep. 99.
Bishop and Clergy of Scythopolis to avoid, as to their own Honor, and the
Benefit of the Church they had already done, all those, who had filled the Ep
126.
World with Confusions, and had brought such divisions into the Church: and he
writes to the Bishop of Jerusalem to the same purpose, and almost in the same
words. In his Epistle to Cyriacus, (...). Ep. 143.
I have heard, says he, of Or, that Dotard, for (...) signifies the Dotage of
old Age.
that vain Man Arsacius, whom the Empress has placed in the Episcopal Throne,
that he has afflicted the Brethren, and the Virgins, who would not Communicate
with him; and many of them have died in Prison for my sake. For he is a Wolf in
Sheeps clothing, and has the Habit of a Bishop, but is an Adulterer; for as a
Woman is called an Adulteress, who is married to another Man, whilst her
Husband is living, so he is not a Carnal but a Spiritual Adulterer; for he has
usurped my See, whilst I am alive. It is doubtful, I confess, whether this
Epistle to Cyriacus be genuine; for it is rejected both by Mr. Hales and Mr.
Boys in their Notes upon it, and these expressions concerning Arsacius, are
alleged by Mr. Hales as one reason, why he thinks it cannot be S.
Chrysostom's: but Mr. Boys says, he should the rather be inclined to think it
genuine, because of these expressions, and he answers all the other Objections
against it, rejecting it himself only upon the account of the Style. I shall
only say, that there are so many Accidents, which may make any Authors style
different at different times, especially in his familiar Letters, and those
written in Banishment, and perhaps under the disorders of sickness and dangers,
which S. Chrysostom so often complains of, that this Censure from the Style
must be the less certain, especially since Photius could not discern but that
it was genuine, tho he took notice of this very passage concerning Arsacius and
defends it. But suppose it not to be genuine, yet it is very ancient, and was
written probably by one, who lived in S. Chrysostom's time, and was not
unacquainted with his sense of these things.

S. Chrysostom having put another Bishop Ep. 148.
in mind of the reward, which he would certainly receive for his sufferings in
another World, takes off that Objection, which might be made from the smalness
of their number; and tells him, that if they would show themselves courageous,
they would be too hard for those, who were more in number, and boasted
themselves in their wickedness; that God would be their help and assistance, if
they would but do their Duty, and that they were engaged in a Cause, which
concerned all the Churches in the World. But that which yet further shows S.
Chrysostom's Ep. 13. ad O^^mp.
mind in this matter is; that, the Bishop, whom he had Consecrated and sent to
the Goths, being dead, he takes care to provide another Bishop for them, and
is very sollicitous, that one should not be Ordained and sent thither by
Arsacius; or Atticus, so that he not only looked upon himself as the only
rightful Patriarch, but acted as such in his Banishment.

We see, that S. Chrysostom was very far from advising, or so much as conniving
at a compliance with the Usurpation of the Bishop, that had possessed himself
of his See. He commended, and encouraged those that would not Communicate with
him, he comforted them, with the expectation of Rewards in Heaven, for whatever
they could suffer here in a Cause, which was so pleasing to God, and upon which
depended the good of the whole Christian Church; he called Arsacius by name a
Wolf in Sheeps clothing, (if the Epistle to Cyriacus be genuine) and took upon
himself Episcopal Authority, even in his Exile; he encouraged all every where
to stand out against the Usurper, by his Epistles, which he sent to the Eastern
Bishops, and to those of the West; to the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, who
were imprisoned, and to persons of both Sexes, and of all Orders and Degrees:
for the greatest part of his Epistles are upon this Subject, and yet there is
not one word of submission or compliance; but the most earnest and passionate
Exhortations to the contrary, from all the motives which he could use, that
concern either this or another life. And there is much more to the same purpose
in Chrysostom. (...), c. 19. and 23.
a Discourse which he wrote in his Exile, to remove the scandal some took by
reason of the Persecution, the Church then lay under.

The Author of the Preface confesses, that the Western Churches did a T^eod ^
5. c. 34.
long time refuse Communion with some Bishops, that had conspired against S.
Chrysostom. He should have said, as Theodorite, whom he quotes soon after,
does, that they would not hold Communion with the Bishops of Egypt, and of the
East, nor with those upon the Bosphorus, and of Thrace, till they had
Registered the name of S. Chrysostom among the rest of the Patriarchs deceased.
But he says, that in this case the renouncing Communion was only, as it were, a
breaking off a Correspondence. Suppose it were no more; yet it cannot be shown
that it was ever thought lawful for one Patriarch to break off Correspondence
thus with another, but upon such Reasons as would justify a separation in
Bishops from their own Patriach. But it was not b^rely a not Corresponding with
A^sacius and Atticus: for the Western Church not only espoused S. Chrysostom's
Cause, but did approve of the proceedings of those who suffered for it, and
were not backward to declare that they had done well in not Communicating with
the new Patritriarchs; Sozom. l. 8. c. 26. Pallad. p. 214, etc.
they denied that these had any Episcopal Authority, or ought to be owned as
Patriarchs during the life of S. Chrysostom.

But most of the Eastern Bishops would not renounce Communion, though they
would not be accessory to that unjust Deprivation. This, I confess, Theodorit
says: and it is no wonder that in the East many, who declared for the Justice
of S. Chrysostom's Cause, and against the proceedings of of his Enemies, should
be wrought upon by Terrors and Punishments; whereas those in the West acted
unanimously, being under no such hard Circumstances to awe them to a
compliance. And this makes S. Chrysostom in one of his Epistles purposely take
off that Objection, from the smalness of their number. But though the Bishops
in the East did not so generally refuse to Communicate with the Deposing
Bishops, as they did in the West, yet that very many did refuse to do it, is
evident; for the Prisons were filled with them: and many of these who refused,
were Bishops of the chiefest Sees: for the Bishops of Jerusalem, and
Thessalonica, and in general the Chrysostom. Ep. 26, 27. 126.
Bishops of all Macedon were of the number, besides many others of lesser Note,
or whose Sees are not mentioned.

But Atticus at last began to relent, Socr. l 7. c. 25.
or was forced to relax his Rigor, and to Register the name of S. Chrysostom
in the Diptycks of the Church, endeavoring by this means to bring over the
Joannites, as they were called, who asserted his Cause. And when S. Chrysostom
had been so long time dead, and this Right had been done to his memory, it is
no wonder, that Atticus and Sisinnius should have the Titles of Patriarchs
given them, and that the Council of Ephesus should take no notice of the
Injustice, that S. Chrysostom had had done him, when both He, and those that
had done it were dead, and their names were read together in the Diptycks; when
the Joannites had had this satisfaction given them, and there was no Man now
alive, who could pretend any injury done him by the Promotion of the present
Patriarch, it could not become the Wisdom and the Charity of a General Council
to revive the memory of a thing, which after so long a time could admit of no
Remedy, but what might be of worse Consequence, and might increase and prolong
the Divisions, which now were much abated, and soon after ceased.

The Western Churches had long before Theod. l. 5. c. 34.
the Council of Ephesus renewed Communion with the Eastern, when once S.
Chrysostom's name was written among the names of the other Patriarchs deceased.
For they never took any notice of Arsacius at all, and rejected all the
Messages that Atticus sent to get himself acknowledged by them, till he had
made this amends to the Memory of S. Chrysostom. But, as Theodorite observes,
these Bishops, who were thus injurious to S. Chrysostom, were otherwise
excellent Men, and there was nothing else to be found in them, which might
deserve the Churches Censure, and therefore, after the Church had been
satisfied, as to this matter, they were mentioned with those Titles, that were
due to their Station, and to their Virtues. For the Titles which Celestine
gives to Atticus Conc. Ephesians. Part 1. col. 353. 361.
and Sisinnius in his Epistle to Nestorius, are only such as suppose, their
names to be written in the Diptycks among the other Patriarchs, and that they
were assertors of the Catholic Faith: he supposes Atticus at last to have been
the Rightful Patriarch, and consequently Sisinnius, who succeeded him by a
Canonical Election, to have been so too; and he highly commends both of them
for their zeal in maintaining the true Faith, which Nestorius, the next in
Succession, had so shamefully betrayed. Atticus, after the death of S.
Chrysostom and Sisinnius, who succeeded him, were in their times the only
Patriarchs of Constantinople, and tho Arsacius and Atticus had not come in
regularly, yet it was in the Power of the Church, upon due satisfaction made,
for the sake of Peace and Order, to pass by such a defect, and dispense with
it; and when Atticus had Registered S. Chrysostom's name in the Diptycks as
Rightful Patriarch, this was in effect to acknowledge himself to have been an
Usurper, during his life; which was accepted of by the Church as a sufficient
Declaration of his Repentance: and, as it has been already shown, Heretics
themselves upon their Repentance were to be received not only to Lay*Communion,
but according to their Order and Degree in the Church. If our Author could have
shown that Celestine had said as much of Arsacius, as he has done of Atticus
and Sisinnius, that had been to his purpose, because S. Chrysostom survived
Arsacius; but it is acknowledged, that after the death of S. Chrysostom,
Atticus was at last Rightful Patriarch, and owned by the Western Church for
such.

What is added of Maximian and Proclus that they were acknowledged as Rightful
Patriarchs by the Church, needs no other Answer, than what has been already
given; for if Atticus were Rightful, the rest who succeeded him were such too;
if no other exception lay against them, than that, concerning what had been
done to S. Chrysostom. But besides, Maximian was Conc. Eph^s. Part 3. col. 10^^.
made Patriarch in the room of Nestorius in the General Council of Ephesus; and
this surely was enough to purge all defects in the Succession of the Patriarchs
of Constantinople. For where a General Council does not only approve of, but
appoint the Successor of a Bishop Deposed for Heresy, it can no longer be
pretended, that there remains any defect upon the account of injustice done to
a Patriarch, who had been so long dead; for if the Succession had been
interrupted till now from the time that S. Chrysostom was Deposed, yet this
would put it in its due course again. Proclus who is next mentioned, and was
next in Succession to Maximian, had been bred up under S. Chrysostom, and could
little suspect that he should ever have been reckoned among his uncanonical
Successors: for as Atticus had inserted his name among the other Patriarchs, so
Proclus was zealous to make him Socr. l. 7. c. 45.
all the further reparation, that could be made, by causing his Body to be
removed to Constantinople, and there interred with all the Honors of a Funeral
solemnity.

If Severianus Bishop of Gabala, Page 4.
and Acacius Bishop of Berrhea, being afterward discovered to Pope Innocent,
were neither deposed, nor reprehended by him: The reason must be, that that
Pope did not assume to himself so much as his Successors have done, but said he
would procure a General Council to be called to redress the Grievances of the
Greck Church upon this account, and at the same time denies all Authority in
Arsacius, as being an Intruder. Nay, in an (...). Innocentii Epist. apud Sozom.
lib. 8. c 26.
Epistle written to the Emperor Arcadius, he Deposed Arsacius after his death,
or declared him never to have been Patriarch, and commanded his name to be
razed out of the Diptycks; and in the same Epistle Excommunicated Arcadius
himself, and the Em^ress Eudoxia, and both Deposed, and Anathematized and
Excommunicated Theophilus of Alexandria.

I will not suppose that this Epistle Biondell. Pseudo. Isid. p. 562 Georg.
Alex. vit. Chrysostom c. 68 Mich. Glyc. An. Part 4 p. 259. Niceph. l. 13. c. 34.
Cedren. p. 332. Conc. Tom. 2. Col. 1310.
to Arcadius deserves much Credit, for it is rejected by Blondel, because
Georgius Alexandrinus is the first that produces it, from whom Glycas and
Nicephorus had it, and before them both Cedrenus made mention of it. And
whereas Pope Innocent in this Epistle, wherein S Chrysostom is mentioned as
already dead, threatens Eudoxia the Empress with Punishments in this World as
well as in the World to come, it is noted in the Margin over against this
Epistle in Labbe's Edition of the Councils, that Eudoxia, died before S.
Chrysostom, which is a plain intimation that the Epistle is Spurious. But I
produce this Epistle to observe, that if it could pass for Authen^ick in the
several Ages in which these Authors lived, it is in vain to endeavor to make
it be believed, that the Practice of the Greek Church was all along such as our
Author pretends: for when Men would impose any Spurious writing upon the World,
they cannot hope to make it be received for genuine, but by giving it as near a
Resemblance to Truth as they can devise, and that commonly they do by copying
out some of the Customs of their own time; for what Men see done in one Age,
they are the more easily induced to think was done before: but it is too
impudent a Forgery to invent a writing, which contains things plainly contrary
to the Practice both of their own and all foregoing Ages; a M^n can never
expect to be believed in such a Story, or that any will venture to repeat it
after him. So that we must conclude, that this Epistle was agreeable to the
Practice of the Church in Georgius Alexandrinus's time, who lived in the
seventh Century, and that Glycas in the twelfth, and Nicephorus in the
fourteenth saw nothing absurd in it: but as Blondel has observed, that part of
it, which concerns the Excommunication of Arcadius and Eudoxia is not mentioned
by Cedrenus, which makes him suspect it was foisted in after his time: for all
Forgeries as they are designed commonly to serve some turn or other, so they
seldom fail to be suited to the abuses of the times in which they are made.

But it is confessed that not only Pope Innocent, but the whole Western Church
did refuse Communion with the Deposing Bishops, and it is further observable,
that when, after the death of Flavianus Bishop of Anti^ch, who had not
consented to the Deposing of S. Chrysostom, Porphyrius suceeeded Sozom. l. 8.
c. 29.
him, who agreed to it, many of Syria broke off Communion with that Church.

Our Author next observes, that P. 5, 6.
whereas Dioscorus in the second Council of Eph^sus absolved Eu^yches, and
Deposed Flavianus, and then murdered him, and Consecrated Anatolius in his
room: none of those Bishops, who concurred and acted with Dioscorus in the
unjust ejectment of Flavianus, and the unlawful Ordination of Anatolius in his
place, were rejected in the fourth General Council of Chalcedon, only Eutyches
and Dioscorus. that persisted in their Heresy. For that Holy Synod concerned
not it self about the Ordinations of uncanonical and illegal Patriarchs, but
only required of every one the Profession of the Orthodox Faith.

By this representation of the Case, he would have it believed, that no
Objection was made against the Bishops, who concurred with Dioscorus in the
second Council of Ephesus, for having concurred with him; but that the
Profession of the Orthodox Faith was only required of them, and so they were
forthwith received by the Council. Which is so far from being true, that tho
they had owned their fault in Deposing Flavianus Patriarch of Constantinople
and Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaeum, and were as forward as any to make Profession
of the true Faith, yet it was moved in the Council of Chalcedon by the Judges,
or Officers sent by the Emperor to inspect and regulate the Proceedings there,
that Juvenalis Bishop of Jerusalem, Thalassius Bishop of Caesarea in
Cappadocia, Eusebius Bishop of Ancyra, Eustathius Bishop of Berytus, and Basil
Bishop of Seleucia in Isauria, (...). Conc. Chalced. Act. 1. Col 323. Euagr.
lib. 2. c. 18. p. 313.
should be put under the same Censure with Dioscorus Patriarch of Alexandria,
and should according to the Canons be deprived of their See's: which was
assented to by the Bishops of the East, who said it was a just (...). ib. Conc.
Ch^^c. (...), Euagr. ib.
Sentence; they agreed that it was just to reject those Bishops, whose names I
have now recited, and who are the same, that on^ Author by name sets down as
not rejected in the fourth General Council, only he has left out Eusebius
Bishop of Ancyra, and inserted Photius Bishop of Isauria in Epirus, or, as the
Publisher has Corrected it, Photius Bishop of Tire. If he means, they were not
finally rejected, he says true, but then he ought not to have concealed, that
they were not received in the first Actions of that Council, nor upon what
grounds they were at last admitted; but these are such as will not be at all
serviceable to his Cause. They took their places indeed among the rest of the
Bishops at the opening of the Council, but so did Dioscorus himself too, tho it
was objected against by the Bishop of Rome's Legates, who were overruled, it
being thought reasonable that they should retain their Places till their Cause
was heard; for to displace them before might seem to be a Prejudging them. But
upon examination it appeared, that the case of these Bishops could deserve
nothing but commiseration from the Council: some of them, S. Basil of Seleucia
by name, had Conc. Chald. Co^. 137. 229.
made profession of the true Faith in the Synod of Ephesus it self, wherein
Dioscorus presided; and at last what they did in concurrence with him, was by
compulsion: for they were surrounded with armed Soldiers, who offered violence
to them, and forced them to Subscribe a Blank Paper, which was afterward
filled up; (...) Euagr. ib. p. 311. Conc. Chald. Act. 1. Col 129. 251.
as they pleaded for themselves, and as Eusebius Bishop of (...), (Dio^.)
Euagr. p 314 Con. Chal Act. 3. Col. 382.
Dorylaeum likewise testified. So that when this affair came again under
debate, the Council was very compassionate to these offending Bishops, in
consideration of the hard Circumstances, in which the Offense C^nc, Cha^ced.
Act. ^ Col. 509. E^^^. ib. p. 324.
was committed; and therefore they desired that they might be suffered to
receive the Five Bishop^ as Members of the Council, and the Emperor being
first acquainted with their request, by his permission they were restored.

What then can we conclude from hence more than that the Authority of a General
Council may be sufficient upon so reasonable Motives to restore Bishops, who by
the Canons have for^eited their Sees? But it is a very wrong account of this
matter, to say barely, that none of those Bishops were re^ected in the fourth
General Council of Chalcedon: for they were rejected at first, or else there
would have been no debate concerning their Case, when once they would Subscribe
the Orthodox Faith; but tho they proffered to do this, they had like to have
lain under the same condemnation with Dioscorus, so far as it concerned his
being Deposed from his See: and it was upon considerations peculiar to their
Case, and which in all equity ought to be admitted of in abatement to the
Rigor of the Letter of the Canons, that they were at last accepted: for if
there had been no more in their Case than what our Author has thought fit to
take notice of, they had, as it appears, been absolutely rejected.

But he says, that Anatolius was uncanonically advanced to the Sea of
Constantinople, and the Synod concerned not it self about such Matters,
requiring only of every one the Profession of the Orthodox Faith.

He seems to suppose here, that Ana^olius was constituted Patriarch by
Dioscorus in the second Council of Ephesus in the room of Flavianus; Liberat.
Breviar. c. 12.
which cannot be true; for he was not Patriarch till after the death of
Flavianus, and Flavianus died in Prison after the Synod. If it had been
otherwise, Leo Bishop of Rome could not have been uncertain, as he writes to De
Ordinatione ejus, qui Constantinopolitanae Ecclesiae coepit praesidere nihil
interim in alterutram partem temere rescribendum putavi, non dilectionem
negans, sed manifestationem Catholicae veritatis expectans. Epist. Leon. ad
Theodos. Conc. Chalc. Col. 59.
Theodosius, he was, whether the Promotion of Anatolius were uncanonical or no;
it being notorious that all must be uncanonical, which was done in prejudice to
an Orthodox Patriarch's Right, by an Heretical Bishop in an Heretical Synod:
And besides, if he had been made Patriarch in the second Council of Ephesus, he
had been Deposed by the Council of Chalcedon in which himself presided: for all
the Acts of that Council of Ephesus Euagr. ib. p. 328.
are declared void in the General Council of Chalcedon, excepting only the
Ordination of Maximus Bishop of Antioch.

But because this Author says, that that Holy Synod concerned not it self about
the Ordinations of uncanonical and illegal Patriarchs. I shall bring a
remarkable instance to show, that that Council did concern it self about
uncanonical Ordinations, which may convince us, that if Anatolius had been
uncanonically Ordained, it would have been insisted upon: For there was at that
time a contest between Bassianus and Stephanus concerning the Bishopric of
Ephesus; and the Council upon examination finding that the Pretensions of both
of them were contrary to Conc. Chal. Act. 11, 12.
the Canons, Deposed them both and appointed a third Bishop to be Consecrated,
tho Bassianus had been in Possession of that See four years; which shows how
little our Author's Principles were thought of in that Council. And to make it
yet further manifest, how little this Author knew of the Council of Chalcedon,
when he says, that only Eutyches and Dioscorus were rejected there, who
persisted in their Heresy: Anatolius expressly declared in the Council, that
Dioscorus was not Deposed for Heresy, but because he Euagr. l. 2. cap 18. p.
327.
had Excommunicated Leo Bishop of Rome, and had refused to appear, when he was
thrice summoned.

The next Instances, which he brings, Page 6.
are in Reign of the Emperor Anastatius, who, he says, Deposed three
Patriarchs of Constantinople, which when he proceeds to give an account of, he
insists upon his Deposing of Euphemius and Macedonius only, saying that the
great Elias Bishop of Jerusalem Page 7.
embraced the Communion of all these three Patriarchs, when all were alive
together, that is, he embraced the Communion of Euphemius, M^cedonius, and
Timotheus, the two last being preferred to that See contrary to the Canons; but
if Timotheus was uncanonically Deposed too, as he said, why did he not inform
us how he behaved himself toward his Successor? tho indeed it is to little
purpose to concern our selves what uncanonical Bishops did: for they could have
no pretense to break off Communion from their Successors, who came in by as
good a Right, as they had done themselves.

However he tells us, that when As^atius had Deposed Euphemius, because he
would not embrace the Heresy of the Acephali, and Anathematize the the fourth
General Council, and Communicate with Severus Bishop of Antioch, and had set up
Macedonius, in his room; Euphemius did not depart from the Communion of his
unlawful Successor, because he held the Catholic Faith; and so likewise that
Macedonius, when he was Deposed for the same Reasons, held Communion with
Timotheus, who succeeded him, because he was Orthodox. He says that Elias
Bishop of Jerusalem held Communion in like manner with all these three
Patriarchs, and that when the same Emperor had Deposed and Banished the said
Elias, because he would not be brought over to his Heretical Opinions, and
constituted John in his place, Elias continued Communion with him, because he
proved Orthodox, as did likewise the two famous Monks Theodosius and Sabas.

I answer, it does not appear, whether Euphemius did Communicate with his two
Successors or not; but it is this Authors custom to make his advantage of the
silence of Historians, and to conclude that the Deposed Bishops did Communica^e
with their Successors* only because the Historians do not positively say the
contrary, whereas no such thing ought to be concluded* as I shall afterward
show. And it is not p^obable that Eup^^mi^s did Communicate with Macedonius:
for Euphemius had lately assembled a Synod purposely to confirm the fourth
General Council, whereas Macedonius Subscribed Zeno's Henoticon, the design of
which was to lay aside the Authority of the fourth General Council, which was
next to the condemning it.

But supposing that Euphemius did Communicate with both his Successors, as
Cyrillus of Scythopolis informs us, Elias did; yet if we consider the
extraordinary Circumstances of that time, and the peculiar Reasons, that might
induce them both to it, this will not prove the general Assertion, which this
Author lays down, That not one of those Bishops that were unjustly deposed, did
ever separate himself from the Communion of the Church, upon the account of his
being dep^sed, provided that he that was uncanonical^y promoted after him, was
Orthodox. But this will only be an Exception to the general Practice, and so
will prove the quite contrary, to what he would prove by it.

The Church at that time was miserably Sabae Vit. per Cyrill. S^ythop. c. 50.
Euagr. l. 3. c. 30.
overrun with Heresies and Schisms; and the Emperor himself being a zealous
Heretic, the Othodox Bishops we^e forced to be contented to submit to great
Inconveniences, and not to insist upon their Right and Authority, so they
could but secure an Orthodox Succession in their Sees; they saw, it was
impossible for them to keep in themselves, and the next thing they desired was
to have an Orthodox Successor, who probably never would have been prevailed
with to assume the Throne, without the rightful Patriarchs consent, and when he
was in it, still owned the former, as him who had the just Title to it: Which
might make Euphemius, when he was to be sent into Banishment, desire that
Macedonius would undertake for his safe conduct; and when Macedonius, by the
Emperors leave, went to give him assurance of it, he commanded his Deacon
Theodor. Lect. l. 2.
first to take off his Episcopal Robe, and so he went into the Baptistry to
Euphemius; and besides borrowed Money to present him with for himself and his
Attendants. This is a sufficient evidence both of his respect for Euphemius,
and of his acknowledging him to have the Authority still, notwithstanding his
own advancement to the Sea. And in these Cases it was scarce greater force upon
the Bishop that was deposed, than upon him that was promoted; but they by
consent did what they saw most advantageous for the Church i^ those difficult
Circumstances, thinking it no time for the Orthodox to divide from one another,
when their Number was so small in compa^ison of the Heretics, who had a
zealous Emperor at the head of them.

The case was the same in the Deprivation Vit. Sabae, c. 56.
of Elias Bishop of Jerusalem; John, his Successor, had promised the Emperor to
anathematize the Council of Chalcedon, but was prevailed upon by the Orthodox,
to make profession of the True Faith; for which he was cast into Prison, and
was to have been banished, but the Sabas and the rest of the Monks petitioned
the Emperor to keep him in the Sea, knowing that it was impossible to get Elias
restored, and that if John were cast out for being Orthodox, the next in
Succession must of consequence be an Heretic.

This then only proves, that there has been such a Case, when, to prevent
Heresies in the Church, Bishops have resigned their Sees, or at least have
consented that others should succeed them; but this is so far from being an
Argument, that in all Cases, and without their consent, an Usurper ought to be
communicated with, in prejudice to the Authority of the true Bishop, that it
plainly proves the contrary. St. Gregory Nazianzene for the like Reasons
resigned the Bishopric of C. P. saying, that he was contented to be the Jonas,
who should be thrown overboard, to all^y the Storms that threatened the Church:
But can we from hence conclude, that Nectarius, his Successor, would have been
owned by the Church as Patriarch of C. P. if St. Gregory had not resigned? Or
must we not rather conclude, that the Church would never have acknowledged him.
And like this seems to have been the Case of the Jews under the Romans; the
High Priest by right of Succession receding, and being glad upon any terms to
preserve the true Religion and Worship of God, rather than with the whole
Jewish Nation to be deprived of it, under Heathen Governors.

Hitherto our Author has spoken only of the Patriarchs of C. P. excepting that
he occasionally mentioned Meletius upon the account of St. Chrys^stom and
Elias, on occasion of Euphemius. But after he has proceeded thus far, he takes
a large step back again to inform us, that St. Cyrill, Bishop of Jerusalem came
into that See contrary to the Canons, being by Arians put into the room of
Maximus, who was thrust out, for having taken part with St. Athanasius. Now St.
Cyrill, says he, was, notwithstanding upon his Conversion to the Orthodox
Faith, acknowledged for Patriarch of Jerusalem, and even Maximus himself did
not withdraw from Cyrill's Communion.

For the proof of all this, he refers to the Life of St. Athanasius, whereas
Vit. Athan. p. 48.
the Author of his Life only says that Acacius and Patrophilus thrust Maximus
out of the Sea of Jerusalem, and placed Cyrill there, but says nothing of
Maximus's holding Communion with Cyrill afterward: Yet he saying nothing to
the contrary, our Author takes it for granted, that Maximus did communicate
with Cyrill; whereas he mentioning Maximus upon the account only of St.
Athanasius, had no occasion to take any further notice either of him, or of
Cyrill, than St. Athanasius was concerned in Socr. l. 2. c. 38.
it.

I confess Socrates agrees with this anonymous Author of the Life of St.
Athanasius, in relating that Maximus was turned out of his Bishopric Hieron.
in Chron.
by Acacius and Patrophilus to make way for Cyrill: But St. Hierom on the
contrary says, that Maximus was dead before St. Cyrill came into his See; and
Theodorite, (...). Theod. lib 2 c. 2.
that Maximus being translated to an immortal Life* Cyrill succeeded him, who
was a vigorous defender of the Catholic Faith; and to put this matter out of
all di^pute, besides St. Hierom and Theodoret, we have the express Testimony of
the (...). Synod. Ep. Conc. C. P. apud Theod. lib. 5. c. 9.
General Council of C. P. that he came in c^nonically, being ordained by the
Bishops of the Province, and had in diverse places signal^zed himself in
maintaining the Catholic Faith against the Arians.

But there being one Cyrill an Arian, who, soon after Maximus, was made Bishop
of Jerusalem, and was the next Bishop but one to St. Cyrill, the great
Uncertainty and Confusion that there is in the Catalogue of the Bishops of this
See at that time, as may be seen by comparing the different accounts of their
Names in St. Hierom, Epiphanius, Hieron. in Chron. Epiphan. Haer. 66. Niceph.
and Nicephorus; might easily occasion the Aspersions, which have been cast
upon this Father by some Writers, who supposed St. Cyrill the Arian was that
Cyrill, who was next in Succession to Maximus. But it is abundantly See the
Life of S. Cyrill, by Dr. Cave.
sufficient in his Vindication, that a general Council by their united
Suffrages have attested both to his being Orthodox, and to the Canonicalness of
his Consecration. But I must not omit here to take notice, that tho Socrates
and the Author of the Life of St. Athanasius do both say, that Cyrill was made
Bishop of Jerusalem by Usurpation, during the Life of Maximus; yet they mention
this as done under Constantius, and it is a Mistake peculiar to our Author to
place it under the Reign of Constantine the Great, in contradiction to all
History.

The Author now returns again to Page 9.
Constantinople, and says that when Eutychius was deposed from that See, and
John preferred to it, in the Reign of Justinian, Eutychius continued to
communicate with John: Which he could bring no Proof of, but there is
undeniable Proof of the contrary. For Eustathius, who was an Eye Witness to all
this business, and a constant Attendant upon Eutychius Subjecit omnes canonicis
paenis, donec resipiscerent. Vit. Eutychii c. 5. Auctore Eustathio Presbytero,
Domestico familiari.
, has left it written in his Life, that Eutychius pronounced Excommunication
against the Synod, which was called to depose him, till they should repent of
it, and restore him.

All that he says concerning Anthimus, Page 9.
Sergius, and others, whose Ordinations, tho they were Heretics, were allowed
of as valid, needs no Answer, enough having been already said on that Point, in
the Case of Meletius.

Callinicus, he acquaints us, after he Page 10.
was deposed by Justinian Rhinotmetus, did not depart from the Communion of
Cyrus, who was appointed his Successor. He might as well have said, that
Callinicus saw and conversed with Cyrus, after the loss of his Eyes, when he
was as far from him as Rome is from Constantinople: For this had Cedren. p.
446. Theophan. p. 313. Niceph. Constantinop. p. 28.
been more agreeable to the way of writing Legends, and has altogether as much
foundation in History as that. For the Historians only say, that the Emperor
caused his Eyes to be put out, and then banished him to Rome, but what became
of him there, or with whom he communicated, they do not inform us.

The next Instance which he dwells Page 11.
longer upon, than any other in his whole Treatise, is nothing at all to his
purpose. For what if Theodorus Studites were in fault for separating from the
Patriarchs Tarasius and Nicephorus, because they had admitted Joseph the
Steward of the Church to Communion, who had officiated in an unlawful Marriage?
How does this prove, that although a Bishop was unjustly deprived, neither he
nor the Church ever made a Separation, if the Successor was not an Heretic?
Were Tarasius and Nicephorus Intruders? Or did Theodorus separate upon that
account? No such thing is pretended; but Joseph had been guilty of a scandalous
and wicked Action* and yet was suffered to continue in Communion, and hereupon
Theodorus withdraws himself from the Church, for which he is blamed, and very
justly: But this only shows, that private Christians ought not to forsake the
Church, tho the Discipline of it should not be so duly administered as they
could wish, but must take care of their own Duty, tho the Church Governors
should be negligent of theirs.

After so much said in so short a Page 17.
Book beside the Subject, he at last comes again to the Point, but falls upon
such an Example as is alone enough to disparage his whole Performance, with any
one almost, that has ever heard of the Names of Ignatius and Photius. For what
can be more notorious than that Ignatius did not Communicate with Photius,
after he was displaced, and Photius got into the Sea? can we imagine he
Communicated with one, by whom he stood himself Excommunicated? with one, who
was Excomunicated by his best Friend and Advocate Pope Nicholas? and who in
return had Excommunicated the said Pope? (...). Conc. Constantinopol. 4. Col.
1268.
For Photius had not been Consecrated forty days before he openly Deposed and
Anathematised Ignatius, as we have it related in an account, that Ignatius sent
to Pope Nicholas to acquaint him how Photius had dealt with him. Ignatius was
soon after sent into Nicet. vit. Ignat. p. 1222.
Banishment, where he was kept under so close Confinement, that he was not
suffered to perform any part of his Function, and as he was not allowed to stir
out, so no body was permitted to come to him. And if there be any thing of
certainty in all the History of those affairs, nothing can be more certain,
than that Ignatius and Photius did not hold Communion with each other, for
nothing occurs more frequently than the Anathema's, which they pronounced one
against the other.

But all the Reason our Author seems to have in this and some other Instances,
to conclude that the Deposed Patriarch did not refuse Communion with the
Intruder, is because both their names were read in the Diptycks: whereas this
one instance of Ignatius and Photius is enough to convince us that this is no
good Argument: for it is certain that these two Bishops did not hold Communion
with one another; and yet after these differences were composed, which had been
occasioned in the Church by setting up Photius, both their names were Recorded
in the Diptycks; and probably neither Party being to be wrought upon to recede
from their Pretensions in behalf of the Patriarch, whose Right they had
maintained, this was found to be the only Expedient, to do the same honor, to
both of them, which might without difficulty be agreed to, since the Synod,
which restored Photius after the death of Ignatius, had cancelled all the Acts,
against Photius, of that Council which Deposed him, and restored Ignatius: and
this Council which restored Photius, is by the Greeks reckoned the eighth
General Council.

Concerning the Deposing of Photius P. 18, 19.
a second time, and the Deposing of Nicholas, Zonaras, whom our Author Zon.
Tom. 3. p. 113.
quotes, says nothing, from which it may be collected that Photius continued
Communion with Stephen, and Nicholas with Euthymius, who were put into their
rooms. But because Zonaras says nothing to the contrary, he concludes, that
they did hold Communion with them, which is a very fallacious way of arguing,
to make Inferences from a Negative, without any other Reason or Circumstance;
especially in so short an account as Zonaras gives of these things, who only
says, in as few words, as he can well express himself in, that the Emperor
picking a quarrel with the Patriarch sent him into a Monastery, and appointed
his Brother Stephen to be Patriarch; and that Nicholas was likewise put into a
Monastery; and Euthymius constituted Patriarch in his stead. And the same
Author in S. Chrysostom's Case takes no notice of that separation, which was
occasioned by his Banishment, for thirty five years together in the Church,
which the more ancient Historians enlarge so much upon, and set forth in so
many particulars. And to be convinced that nothing ought to be concluded from
the silence, especially of these latter Historiars and Annalists, we need only
compare what these write, with the account which Theodorite, and Socrates, and
Sozomen give of the same Actions, and when it is notorious, that they commonly
omit things as material as those they take notice of, nothing more need be said
to show, how little regard is to be had to their omission of things; it is well
if we may depend upon what they relate, but to say such a thing never was,
because they do not relate it, is such a way of arguing as only betrays the
weakness of the Cause, and shows how great want there is of better Arguments.

And as for the Ordinations of Euthymius, Page 20.
which he says, were not rejected after Nicholas was restored again, I have
shown how insignificant an Argument that is, when even after Heretics were
received into the Church upon their Conversion, their Orders were not
disallowed.

But his account of Cosmas Atticus (...).
is the boldest stroke we have had yet, for, when Nicetas Choniates, whose
Authority he alleges. says in express terms, (...). Nice^. Choniat. de
Imperat. M^nuel. lib 2. p. 54.
that he Excommunicated some of the Courtiers, and the Synod too, which Deposed
him, this Author has the confidence to quote Nicetas to vouch for him, that
Cosmas Atticus never separated from the Communion of his Deposers. But we have
had experience enough of our Author by this time, not to wonder much now at
whatever he is pleased to say.

Of the Deposing the Patriarchs Basilius, Page 21.
Camaterus, and Nicetas, we have only a bare Narrative in Nicetas Choniates,
but upon the Promotion of Dositheus in the room of Leontius, he expressly says,
that the chief Bishops, looking upon his Translation from Jerusalem to
Constantinople to be contrary to the Canons, (...). id de Jaac. lib* 2. p. p
260.
held separate Assemblies.

Our Author has observed that in the space of nine years the Emperor Isaacius
Angelus made five Patriarchs successively, who were all alive together; but he
might have spared his Admiration, that they did not separate from one another
Communion: for if this had been the approved and constant Practice of the
Church as he pretends, what great matter of Admiration could it be, that five
Patriarchs should do as all their Predecessors had done in the like Case? B^t
the only wonder is, how this Author comes to know, that they did not separate,
when the Historian, whom he quotes, says no such thing.

It is plain indeed; that if the Emperor had but any pretense (and it was hard
if he could find none) the Greek Church in these Ages was so low, and the
Clergy of so base and abject Spirits, that they were prepared to comply with
any thing: and if they expressed their Resentments it was in such a manner, as
could become the Zeal only of these degenerate times. Thus when Euthymius was
Deposed, to make Cedren. p. 607.
way for the Restoration of Nicholas to his See again, the Clergy, who were of
Nicholas's Party, fell upon Euthymius like mad Men, and beat him with their
Fists, and plucked him by the Beard, and flung him down, calling him Usurper,
and Adulterer: and if it should be granted that Men who could show such
barbarous usage, should notwithstanding keep in Communion with the Usurper,
whom they could think to deserve such usage from them; I suppose their examp^e
will be thought of no better Authority in the one than in the other.

But upon the whole matter, after a full examination of all the Instances,
which this Author has brought to maintain his Assertion; I must conclude in
contradiction to it, that very few, if any, Examples can be produced of
Bishops, who were unjustly Deposed, that did hold Communion with the Intruders;
and that therefore upon the account of any thing, which is offered in this
Treatise, a Separation is not Unreasonable.

REMARKS UPON THE Greek and Latin Edition.
SInce my writing this, I have met with the Greek and Latin Edition of this
Author, and besides Mr. Hody's Preface, there are some few things in the Book
it self further to be observed.

In the English Preface to this Treatise we are told, that there is no Name
prefixed before it; nor any Characters in it that may lead, us to a probable
Conjecture; about the Author: But Mr. Hody, in his Preface to the Greek and
Latin Edition, thinks he has discovered the Author to be Nicephorus Gallistus;
that which he grounds his Conjecture upon is, that this Discourse is in the
same Volume with several other Manuscripts, which have the Name of Nicephorus
Callistus to them, but he does not acquaint us that this is written in the same
hand with the rest, nor that it has the least Connection or Affinity with them;
nor that all the other Tracts in that Volume have his Name before them; and
when the other Treatises have his Name prefixed, and this has it not, it is
most probable that this is not his; for if it were, it would bear his Name as
well as the rest: Indeed, if some of the most remarkable Tracts only had his
Name to them, and others, which were known to be his, were among them without
his Name, it would not be unlikely that this might be his too; but when the
rest have his Name, and this has none, what can be more reasonably concluded
from it, than that there was as much cause why his Name should be omitted in
this, as why it was pre^^xt before the ^est? Mr. Hody himself observes, that
there is no e^^ct agreement in the Catalogue of the Patriarchs of C. P. by
Nicephorus, and the account of them in this Author. But there is a much greater
and more obvious Difference between them than that, for Nicephorus Callistus
writes in an easy flowing style, and with great Elegancy, considering the Age
in which he wrote; but our Author is heavy and unpleasant, and scarce able to
express that little he has to say; and the best thing that can be said of his
style is, that it is as good as the Subject deserves, and it is great pity that
such Stuff should be put into any better Language. But there is another
Difference between these two Authors yet more remarkable; for Nicephorus,
giving an account of (...), Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 20.
St. Chrysostom's parting Words to his Friends, makes their holding Communion
with the succeeding Bishop to depend wholly upon his Permission; he says, that
St. Chrysostom did an extraordinary thing, which was without example, and had
something more than Humane in it, when he gave leave to his Friends to live in
communion with Bishops, by whom he had been so ill used: Whereas our Author
makes it not to depend upon any Permission of the rightful Bishop, but to be
the constant practice of the Church, and the indispensable Duty of all
Christians to submit to every Intruder, if he be no Heretic.

But if there were as much reason to believe that Nicephorus Callistus was the
Author of this Treatise, as there is to think that he was not, yet his Name
would give no great Credit to it, but a Suspicion rather, that it is not to be
credited: For, excepting Malela, lately published by Mr. Hody, there is scarce
any Author more fabulous than Nicephorus. But this Manuscript outgoes even
Malela, and may have the Reputation of being the worst Greek Author extant,
'till Mr. Hody is pleased to publish some other.

Both the Latin and the English Preface suppose this Tract to have been a
Sermon or Homily, or at least, as it is added in the Latin, to have been a
Lecture in the Schools of some Professor of History, because in two places he
bespeaks his Auditor, and not his Reader. I have no mind to maintain a
Controversy about a thing of no moment, but this Reason does not satisfy me;
for I find that (...), Epiph. Her. 64. n. 5. (...), ib. (...), Epiph. de
Mensur. Ponderib. n. 2. (...), ib. n. 17.
Epiphanius addresses himself to his Auditors in his Book against Heresies, tho
no Man can therefore imagine, that that Book consists of as many Homilies, as he
treats of Heresies; and he writes in the same manner in his Book of Measures
and Weights, tho it appears, that that Book was neither an Homily, nor a
Lecture. I rather believe, that Copies of Books being dear and scarce, before
the Invention of Printing, it was customary to recite other Discourses as well
as Homilies or Lectures, and that therefore such Expressions might either be
used at first by the Author, or be afterward inserted by him that recited it.
Besides, the style of this Treatise does not seem at all like to that of an
Homily; for their Homilies, after the decay of Learning, were full of
Hyperboles, Anti^heses, Tautologies, and frequent Repetitions of the same
Words, and all the Affectations of a false Eloquence; but our Author uses few
Words, without any show of Eloquence, or pretense to it; for to do him right,
he seems to have understood his own Talent better, than to pretend to any thing
in that way.

Having said thus much of the Author, Mr. Hody comes now to give an account of
his Reasons for the Publication, and here he informs his Reader in very
tragical Terms, that the Church of England being all in Flames, he, for our
comfort, has found out this new Engine to quench the Fire. I desire to be as
apprehensive of the Mischiefs of Schism as any Man, and therefore must beseech
all Christians seriously to consider, whether this Treatise be not more likely
to promote Schisms in the Church, than to prevent or remove them.

His next business is to set down some Examples from Antiquity, which he puts
our present Bishops in mind, it is their duty to follow. The first is that of
S. Chrysostom, but he has said no more of him than we had before in the English
Preface, excepting that he has framed a new Speech for him; which makes me
begin to suspect that perhaps Palladius took the same liberty, that Mr. Hody
has done; for Declamations are as usual and altogether as proper in a Dialogue
as in a Preface.

His next Instance is of St. Augustine and the rest of the African Bishops in
the Conference at Carthage lib. de Gestis cum emerito.
. The account S. Augustine gives us is this, that before they held this
Conference with the Donatists, the Catholic Bishops made a Proposal, that if
the Donatists could convince them, that they were in the wrong, they would be
contented to be received by the Donatists, not as Bishops, but to Lay-Communion
only, as private Christians; but the Donatist Bishops, if they were convicted
of Error, should be permitted, upon their Repentance, to preside in the same
Sees together with the Catholic Bishops, and the Survivors to be the sole
Bishops of the Sees; or if it would not be approved of, that there should be
two Bishops at once of the same Church; that both the Catholic and Donatist
Bishops should resign, and that new Bishops should be appointed in all such
Churches, where the Donatists had their Bishops, as well as the Catholics. And
St. Augustine says, that of almost Three Hundred Bishops, th^re were but Two who
made any scruple or demur upon it, all besides were earnest and zealous for
this Expedient; and these Two were soon brought over to be of the same mind
with the rest. This is the full of what St. Augustine relates, and I need not
tell the Reader, tho I must tell Mr. Hody, that it is nothing to the present
Subject: But it is observable that the Schismatical Bishops were so refractory
in the Conference at Carthage, that they gave little encouragement for the
Rightful Bishops to make any such Proposals to Intruders afterward.

St. Gregory Nazianzen's Case has been spoken to already: And as for the Advice
which St. Dionysius of Alexandria gave to Novatian, when he pretended that he
was unwillingly made Bishop, that this would be best seen by his desisting from
his Usurpation; it is admirable Advice, and I hope, all will take notice of it,
who are concerned.

Another Citation he produces from the first I pistle of St. Clement to the
Corinthians, to show, that that Father exhorted the Presbyters, who were
ordained by the Apostles themselves, rather to recede from their Right, when
they were ^urned out by a Faction; than to occasion any Division in the Church.
But it seems plain to me, that St. Clement gives this Admonition, not to the
Rightful Presbyters, but to those who had stirred up and fomented the
Differences: For not long before he exhorts (...), c. 51.
all who had been the principal Authors and Abettors of Sedition and
Dissension, to regard the common Good more than their own private Interest; for
those who lived in Charity, would rather condemn themselves, than destroy the
Order and Discipline of the Church; and it was better for Men to confess their
Sins, than to harden their Hearts, as Corah and his Associates did, who raised
a Sedition against Moses; and as Pharaoh and the Egyptians had likewise done:
Then he exhorts them to the Confession of c. 52.
their Sins from several Passages out of the Psalms, and afterward sets before
them the Example of Moses, who in a c. 53.
wonderful Ecstasy of Zeal and Charity for the People, who had sacrificed to
the molten Calf, desired rather to be himself blotted out of God's Book, than
that they should perish; and then says, that if there were any among them of a
generous and charitable and c. 54.
truly Christian Spirit, he would depart; and go whither they pleased, if so
be, the People would live quietly and peaceably under the Presbyters
constituted over them. And besides c. 55.
the Example of Moses, he proceeds to take notice, that among the Gentiles
themselves, Kings and other Magistrates had often exposed their own Persons to
danger and ruin for the Preservation of their People, and others had left their
Country rather than they would be the occasion of any disturbance in it; nay,
that many Christians had to his own knowledge delivered themselves up into
Captivity to redeem others, and many had sold themselves for Slaves to feed
others with the Price of their own Servitude: And among the Jews, Judith and
Esther refused no Dangers for the Deliverance of their Nation. (...), etc. c.
56.
Let us then, says he, pray for those who are in fault, So it must be
translated, if we read (...), as it is in the Text, and not (...), as it is, by
conjecture only, put in the Margin.
that Meekness and Humility may be given them, that they may yield, not to us,
but to the W^ll of God. And because this might seem a hard saying to many, and
too difficult to be put in practice, he shows them that they ought patiently to
receive Admonition, and to submit to that Correction and Chastisement, which
God should be pleased to inflict either by his own Hand upon them, or by the
Discipline of the Church: You therefore that have laid the Foundations of
Sedition, submit your selves to the Presbyters, in order to your Repentance,
and be humble, c. 57.
and learn to be obedient; laying aside the proud and boasting Arrogance of
your Tongue; for it is better to be one of the little ones, who are approved of
in the Flock of Christ, than by aspiring too high, to fall short of your hope;
or, 16 (...). marg.
to be cast out of the Fold. The Force of St* Clement's Discourse seems to be
this, that if Moses was so indulgent and affectionate toward the People who
had sinned so heinously against God; this ought to be a powerful Motive to
those, who had been themselves criminal, to resign up all particular Interests
for the Peace of the Church; and if it had been so usual for the most innocent
and worthy Persons to sacrifice their own Safety and Honors to the public, it
might much rather be expected from such as had themselves given the first
occasion to the Divisions in the Church. His Design is the same that Dionysius
afterward had in his Letter to Novation, and that he might persuade them the
more effectually to desist from their Pretensions, he tells them that this was
no more than the most worthy and heroic Persons had done before them; not
upbraiding them too severely with their past Miscarriages, and presing it upon
them as a Duty, which in justice they were bound to, and which was the least
satisfaction they could make to the Church, to forbear those Practices which
had caused so much Disturbance* but proceeding in a more gentle Method; and yet
in the mean time not failing to let them know, that he required them not to
resign any Right, but to desist from an unjust Claim, which was the least that
could be expected of them; but if it should seem grievous to Men who had been
so long puffed up with vain Expectations, and high Conceits of themselves, to
be thus humbled at last, he acquaints them, that they must consider, that the
Chastisements of God must be born with patience in much severer instances than
this affliction, which they had brought upon themselves, and that however
irksom it might now seem, it would bring Peace and Joy to them in the end.

But if we understand St. Clement, as Mr. Hody does, to exhort those, who were
the lawful Presbyters to resign their Right, rather than be the occasion,
through the Wickedness and Injustice of others toward them, of Trouble and
Disorder to the Church, we must necessarily suppose some extraordinary
Circumstances, which made St. Clement advise them to this Condescension in
their particular Case. For it is not to be imagined that he should lay it down
as a general Rule in all Cases, that a Bishop or Presbyter, whenever he is
molested or dispossessed, must give way to the Intruder for Peace sake; but we
must of necessity understand this Precept and Admonition in some such qualified
sense, as we do those Commands of our Savior himself, Whosoever shall Mat. 5.
39, 40.
smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if any man will
sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have thy cloak also. For
to oblige all honest Men to suffer themselves to be abused, and to give up
their Rights of any kind for the sake of Peace and Quietness, would be so far
from being a means to procure Peace, that it would be the readiest and most
effectual way to all manner of Confusion in the World. So that the utmost that
this Quotation from St. Clement can amount to, is only thus much, that for some
special Reasons, and in some extraordinary Cases, it would be an act of great
Charity and worthy of a Christian, for a Bishop to condescend so far, as to
recede from his own Right; which affords nothing in proof of that Doctrine, that
this Greek Author is published to advance, That although a Bishop was unjustly
deprived, neither he nor the Church ever made a Separation; if the Successor
was not an Heretic.

The Quotations from St. Irenaeus, and from the Apostles Constitutions are
excellent Cautions and Persuasions against Schisms in general, but do not in
the least concern the Cause before us. And I heartily pray, that either their
Authority or any other may have the effect, which it ought, upon those, who are
most concerned seriously to take notice of them, toward the preventing a
Schism, which seems to threaten the Destruction of the best Church in the
World; to the Ruin whereof nothing can more contribute, than to teach that a
Bishop, when once deposed, tho never so Ego actus ab episcopatu, quantumvis per
injuriam summam. cesso esse vester Episcopus, etc. Mr. Hody 's Preface.
unjustly, ceases to be any longer Bishop of his See: Which are Words now put
into St. Chrysostom's Mouth; but how much against all reason and probability
has been already shown.

In the Book it self, where it is said, that Meletius was p. 1.
translated from Sebastia to Antioch, Eustathius being yet in Banishment; in
the English Edition this Eustathius is supposed to be Eustathius late Bishop of
Sebastia: But in the Greek and Latin Edition, Eustathius late Bishop of
Antioch; p. 4.
and a Note is subjoined to inform us, that both Socrates and Sozomen say, that
Eustathius Bishop of Antioch lived till the Reign o^ Valens, and that the
Arguments which Baronius and Valesius bring to the contrary, are not of weight
enough to be set against the Authority of these two Historians.

Baronius argues, that Eustathius of Antioch never lived to be recalled from
Banishment by Jovian, but died in exile under Constantius: For if he had been
recalled, it cannot be supposed, that no mention should be made of him in the
Synod of Antioch, which was held at that time by the Orthodox; and besides
neither Meletius nor Paulinus would have been suffered by the People of Antioch
to be confecrated, and reside there as their Bishop, if he had been still
living, without their dividing into Parties about it; since a great part of the
Orthodox from their great Zeal and Affection for him were denominated
Eustathians. And if Eustathius had survived his Banishment, there is no
question, but both Meletius and Paulinus would have resigned the Sea to him at
his return. For Meletius was put into that See at the earnest desire of the
orthodox Bishops after the Banishment of Eustathius, and he who was so
condescending to Paulinus, would have yielded much more to Eustathius himself:
For all the pretense that Paulinus could have, was to be Bishop over a Party of
Men, who for the great Veneration they had for Eustathius, were called
Eustathians; and who would not live in communion with Meletius, because he had
been ordained by Arians: And it is absurd to think that Paulinus, the chief of
the Eustathian Party, would retain his Bishopric, if Eustathius himself had
been yet living; unless perhaps we say, that Eustathius had wholly relinquished
his See to him, and that he lived concealed at Constantinople, or in some other
place from the time of his first Banishment (as Socrates and Sozomen say, he
did, in the Reign of Valens) till he was a second time banished. But to put
this out of all Controversy, Theodorite expressly (...). Theod. lib. 3. cap. 4.
says, that Eustathius was dead before Meletius succeeded him in the Sea of
Antioch, and his Authority alone, without any concurring Evidence, is
sufficient to oppose to that of Socrates and Sozomen: But if it were not,
besides what has been already said, their Account, as Valesius observes,
disagrees from what St. Hierom Vales. ad Socr. l. 4. c. 15.
and Theodorus Lector, and Theophanes relate concerning this Eustathius: So
that we must conclude, that Eustathius of Sebastia is meant by the Greek
Author, or else that this is another of his Mistakes.

In the Greek it is said, p. 5.
that Arsacius because of the Jealousy of his Brother Nectarius toward him,
had formerly sworn, that he would never accept of the Sea of Constantinople.
But in the English this is omitted in the Text, and set down only in the
Margin, with this Note; that p. 2.
the Manuscript in this place is written erroneously. Mr. Hody in the Greek and
Latin Edition takes no notice, that this is an Error, being more tender now, it
seems, of the Credit of his Author, and perhaps of Palladius too, from Pallad.
p. 94.
whom he had it.

I wish Mr. Hody had been as careful of his Author's Reputation, and of his own
too in all other Respects as in this. And after such Protestations of sincere
and charitable Intentions in publishing this Manuscript, it could hardly be
imagined that he had omitted any thing, which belonged to this wonderful
Treatise, which he so much values and so highly magnifies: But it is an unlucky
thing to be engaged in a Cause, which no Author ever yet had enough of the
Greek in him to maintain; and therefore, as I am well assured, he has left out
a Collection of Canons at the end of the Manuscript written in the same hand,
and by the same Author; which shows that the Author is to be understood of
synodical Deprivations: For, since there were no synodical Proce^dings in the
present Deprivations, that part of the Manuscript must be suppressed, lest it
should make all the rest impertinent to the Controversy arising from the
present state of our Church, tho it were all as true, as I have shown it to be
false. The Canons annexed are a sufficient Answer to the Book, as far as we are
concerned in it, and therefore it was great Prudence to conceal them. This
looks as if Malela were not only fabulous, but infectious too, and will be apt
to make Men suspect, that Malela himself is worse in the Print than in the
Manuscript.

And this is all that I shall say, and I think a great deal more than was
necessary to be said, of a Book, which instead of being sent into the World
with so much Ostentation and Triumph, would have been in danger of a public
Censure at any other time but this, since the Reformation; excepting only that
Interval, when we had all our Bishops deposed at once. And to endeavor to
maintain a Cause by such Arguments and such Au^horities, as are both
notoriously false, and of so pernicious consequence, that they would have been
suffered at no other time, and any other Cause would have been ashamed of them;
and then to be forced too upon such Arts, as may be very necessary in an ill
Cause, but would never surely be used in a good one, is no less than a
Confession of the badness of a Cause; and is so far from being a Defense, that
it is an evident sign, that it cannot be defended.

The CANONS in the Baroccian Manuscripts omitted by Mr. Hody.
(...). The XXXI. Canon of the Holy Apostles, by a Mistake for the XXXII.
IF any Presbyter, contemning Can. Ap. 32.
his own Bishop, shall hold a separate Meeting, and erect an opposite Altar,
having nothing wherewith to charge the Bishop in Matters of or Faith.
Piety and Justice, let him be deposed, as an ambitious Affector of Government;
for he is an Usurper. In like manner, as many of the Clergy that shall join
with him, shall be deposed, and the Laics excommunicated: But all this ought
to be done after the first, the second, and third Admonition of the Bishop.

(...). The VI. Canon of the Synod of Gangra.
If any Man hold a private Meeting Synod. Gangr. Can. 6.
out of the Church, and despising the Church, shall presume to perform the
Offices of the Church Note that in the Original it is (...). for (...), instead
of (...) as the printed Canons have it.
, the officiating Presbyter not being thereunto licensed by the Bishop, let him
be Anathema.

(...). The V. Canon of the Synod of Antioch.
If any Presbyter or Deacon* despising Syn. Antioch. Can. 5.
his own Bishop has withdrawn himself from the Church, and set up an Altar in
a private Meeting, and shall disobey the Admonitions of the Bishop, and will
not be persuaded by him, nor submit to him, exhorting him again and again, he
is absolutely to be deposed; and ought no longer to be treated as a curable
Person, neither as one who can retain his Honor; and if he shall persevere to
make Tumults and Disturbances in the Church, he is to be turned over, as a
seditious Person to the secular Power.

(...). The XV. Canon of the same Synod.
If any Bishop accused of any Crimes Eiusd. Synodi Can. 15.
be condemned by all the Bishops of the Province, who have all with one accord
denounced the same Sentence against him, such a one by no means ought to be
judged again by others; but the concordant Sentence of the Provincial Bishops
ought to remain firm.

(...). The X. Canon of the Synod of Carthage.
If any Presbyter being puffed up Syn. Carth. Can. 10.
against his own Bishop, shall make a Schism, let him be Anathema.

(...). The XIII. Can. of the Syn. of Constantinople, called the 1st. and 2 d.
Synod.
The Devil having sown the Seeds I^ (...) Ca^. 1^.
of Heretical Tares in the Church of Christ, and seeing them cut up by the
roots by the Sword of the Spirit, has betaken himself to a new way and method.
viz to divide the Church by the madness of Shismaticks: But the holy Synod
being also willing to obviate this Stratagem of his, has decreed as follows;
If any Presbyter or Deacon, under the pretense of accusing his own Bishop of
any Crimes, shall presume to withdraw from his Communion, and not mention his
Name in the holy Prayers of the Liturgy according to the Tradition of the
Church (...).
, before Synodical Judgment and Trial, such a one shall be deposed and deprived
of all sacerdotal Honor; for he that is in the Order of a Priest, and shall
usurp the Power of Judging belonging to the Metropolitans, and as much as in
him lies shall condemn his own Father and Bishop, before Sentence pronounced by
them, he is worthy neither of the Honor nor Appellation of a Presbyter, and
those who are Followers of such a one, if they are in holy Orders, even any of
them shall be degraded from his proper Honor; but if they are Monks, or
Laics, they shall by all means be excommunicated from the Church, until
abhorring the Conversation of Schismatics they shall return unto their proper
Bishop.

(...). The XIV. Canon of the same Synod.
If any Bishop, pretending an Accusation (...). Synodi (...). 14.
against his Metropolitan (...).
, before Synodical Judgment, shall withdraw himself from communion with him,
and shall not recite his Name according to custom in Divine Service, the holy
Synod has decreed that such a one shall be deposed, if after private or
Conviction.
Admonition he shall depart from his own Metropolitan, and make a Schism: For
it behooves every one to know his own proper bounds, and that neither the
Presbyter despise his own proper Bishop, nor the Bishop his own Metropolitan.

(...). The XV. Canon of the same Synod.
These Decrees concerning Presbyters, (...). Synodi (...).
Bishops and Metropolitans, agree also to Patriarchs; So that if any Bishop or
Metropolitan shall presume to depart from Communion with his own Patriarch, and
shall not mention his Name in the Divine Offices, as is decreed and ordered,
but shall make (...).
a Separation * before Synodical Conviction, and final Condemnation of him; the
holy Synod has decreed, that such a one be absolutely deposed from all sacred
Orders, if he offend in this kind after private or Conviction.
Admonition. And these things are decreed and enacted concerning those who
under pretense of any Accusations revolt from their own Superiors, and make a
Schism, (...), In the printed Canon.
and break the Unity of the Church. But if any shall separate themselves from
Communion with their Superior for any Heresy condemned by the holy Synods and
Fathers, he publicly preaching the same Heresy to the People, and teaching it
barefaced in the Church, such shall not only be free from Canonical Censure
for separating themselves from Communion with the Bishop so called (...).
before Synodical Condemnation, but they shall be thought worthy of the Honor
that is due to the Orthodox, because they have not condemned a Bishop, but a
false Bishop, and a false Teacher, and have not divided the Unity of the Church
by Schism, but have studiously endeavored to preserve the Church from Schisms
and Divisions.

FINIS.

