The Unreasonableness of Anger.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, AT WHITE HALL, JVLY xxix. 1694.

By Lancelot Blackburne, M. A. Chaplain to the Right Reverend Father in God
Jonathan Lord Bishop of Exon.

Published by Her Majesty's Especial Command.



LONDON, Printed by Tho. Warren, for Thomas Bennet, at the Half Moon in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCXCIV.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
Ephesians. iv. 31, 32. Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil-speaking, be put away from you, with all malice; and be ye kind one to
another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
has forgiven you.


IN this Epistle to the Ephesians St. Paul seems to propose to himself these
Two things. First, The confirming their Faith, by laying open the whole Mystery
of their Salvation, and comparing it with the Misery of their former
Heathen-state, in the three first Chapters; And then the persuading 'em to
express their Gratitude to Almighty God for so great a Deliverance, by the
Exercise of all those Christian Virtues, which that most Holy Dispensation was
designed to introduce.

This latter part of his Design he enters on in this Chapter, and opens it with
an earnest Persuasion to Meekness, Unity, Charity, and Condescension; enforcing
it all along with great strength of Reason, from their being Members of one
Body, from their being governed by one and the same Holy Spirit, having one
Hope of Eternal Life, one Lord Christ, one Faith in him, one Baptism in his
Name, one God, one Father of all; from the several Gifts of Christ to his
Church, all tending to preserve and advance this Unity among 'em: and at last,
to strike at the very Cause of those Disorders, which hindered its Increase, He
concludes, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and
evil-speaking be put away from you, with all malice: and strengthening that
Exhortation with the Example of our merciful God, that unexhausted Fountain of
infinite Goodness, he adds, And be ye kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven you.

The drift of the several Expressions in the Text, is to persuade us to Acts of
Concord and Charity, and to dissuade us from all the Obstacles to it, which
that unruly Passion of Anger lays in our way.

The general Head of Charity is of too large, and too nice a Nature, to be
stated at length, in its several Particulars, within the compass of a
Discourse; and therefore, after opening further in a word or two the difficulty
of that Task, I shall choose to fix our Inquiries more particularly on that
Vice, or Passion of Anger, which chiefly opposes it. I shall endeavor to show
you the folly and unreasonableness of it in its Rise, its Nature and Effects;
with regard to private Men, and public Communities; and afterward back these
Reasonings with the several Rules and Examples to this Purpose, that are to be
met with in the Gospel. I shall, in the Close, point the force of what has been
said immediately upon Our Selves; and show, of what present Use and Advantage
the Argument is to us.

It is not so hard to persuade Men that Charity is a Duty, as it is to fix the
Bounds and Limits of it; not many, I think, who own themselves Christians, will
dispute their Obligation to mutual Forbearance and Condescension, though few,
if any, can agree in its Measures and Extent. Besides those Prejudices, which
an obstinate Bigotry and false Zeal, or Fear and worldly Interest may raise in
our Minds, and so pervert our Judgments, in applying this Duty to particular
Cases; there is difficulty enough in the nature of the thing. The very
different Judgments, even cool and thinking Men frame, of the same Action
sufficiently speak it. What by some may be judged but a necessary steadiness,
by others is interpreted an obstinate stubborness, a peremptory stifness, and a
streightness of bowels: and what appears to one as necessary a tenderness and
forbearance, is esteemed by others a base and treacherous compliance. The
Apostles themselves found it no easy task to adjust this Matter. The stiff
adherence of the Jewish Converts to the Mosaical Ceremonies, which they thought
unchangeable, and their obstinate desire of keeping up the partition wall
between them and the Gentiles, which they would not understand to be broken
down, raised no small Trouble and Dissension in the Church at Antioch: and when
the Apostles and Elders came together at Jerusalem, to decide the Question,
Whether the Gentile Proselytes should be obliged to Circumcision, 'twas not
till after there had been much disputing, (as we learn from St. Luke) that they
came to the Resolution of not laying any new burden upon them, nor putting a
yoke upon the necks of the disciples, which neither their own fathers, nor they
themselves were able to bear. And even after this Decision, (which, one would
have thought, had settled the Point) St. Peter coming to Antioch did eat with
the Gentiles; but when certain came from James, tender of giving scandal to
Them, he withdrew and separated himself, fearing them which were of the
Circumcision. This, St. Paul, withstanding him boldly to the face, called
dissembling, and walking not uprightly according to the truth of the Gospel;
whom St. Peter it is plain by his practice judged as much too stiff and
inflexible to those of the Circumcision. So different have been the Judgments
even of the best assisted and most enlightened Persons concerning the measures
of this Duty, when it came once to be applied to a particular Case.

But yet how difficult soever it may be to state this nicely in its full
extent, thus much, which is more to our present purpose, both from the Writings
of the Apostles, and from their Practice, seems to lie plain before us: That
the Unity of the Church, and the Charity we owe to our Neighbor, obliges us
not to do or say any thing however innocent in it self (unless engaged to it by
Duty, or something like Necessity) which by reason of his unhappy Temper, or
Prejudices, may put him out of the way to Heaven, or hinder his Advancement in
it; much less, how different soever our Opinions may be, or on either hand, how
well soever grounded, are we to give way to bitterness, anger, wrath, clamor,
evil-speaking, or malice; so as either to employ 'em our selves, or be provoked
by 'em to revenge, when they are used against us: but rather ought we to be
kind one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for
Christ's sake has forgiven us.

If the violence of Anger were not of it self in perfect Opposition to the Law
of Christ, and that Meekness it injoins, yet its mischievous Effects, both on
our selves and others, are enough to make it justly be detested; and convince
us it can never be well employed but on it self: that It alone calls for all
that Bitterness and ill Language it usually breaks out in; and truly merits
that most implacable Revenge it generally animates; which is never satisfied
but in reducing its Object below the power of doing us an Injury. The Disorder
it causes in our Minds, our Blood, and our Spirits, deserves indeed all the
Resentment it raises; but the Passion is too irregular to be so well directed,
and we are too much heated to judge so truly of its Application: we blindly
mis-place it on our innocent Neighbor, and lay the weight of that on our
Brother, which is only due to our own Pride or ill Nature.

For it is an Anger, which is Wrath, that is here forbidden, an Anger of Revenge
or of Reproach; which owes its Rise either to an over-fond opinion of our
selves, or too mean a one of other men.

Man is but too apt to be full of himself, to love Dominion and Independance;
That Bosom-flatterer, Self-love, enlarges the Prospect of all his good
Qualities, and lessens the View proportionably of his Weaknesses or Faults: but
turns the Glass to look on those of other Men, and augments or diminishes the
Representation, as suits best with the Interests of that Pre-eminence he would
establish for himself. Hence he naturally grows captious and quarrelsome. If
others (as well they may) resist this Usurpation: if they not only refuse to
submit to it, but look upon the very Pretense to it as unreasonable and
ridiculous; and return it with Contempt, or Injury, or the like Attempts in
their own Favor; the sense of this diminution goes deep into his heart; he
trembles, and looks pale at the danger of those Designs his Revenge suggests to
him: or, if the execution of that Revenge seems out of his power, he breaks out
into loud and passionate clamours, into hasty threats, and bitter revilings;
confessing his impotence, by the very means he would appear formidable, and
defeating the utmost efforts of his malice, by discovering its aims.

Now what temper can there be, which is less able to justify it self, either
to Reason, or to the Principles of the Gospel? The Foundation it is built upon
is as weak, as the Passion is violent; and the one does not disorder and
confound our Reason, more than the other shocks and contradicts it.

There is an Equality in Men as such, whereon all the natural Duties are
founded, that make us easy or useful to one another; an Infringement of this,
is an Usurpation on Mankind; and whoever draws too large a share to himself of
a common Right, will be justly looked upon by others as a general Invader. It Is
this unjust preference of our selves makes us touchy and captious: we think
more due to our selves than others in reason can allow us; and that makes us
fret at the Disappointment: if we insist on our Demand, Others have as good a
Right to make it upon Us; and if Both continue obstinate, this can end in
nothing but continual War and Confusion: before we can possibly treat, we must
reduce our selves to this Equality; for when a Superior dictates, it is rather
an Imposition than an Agreement.

But (to suppose a Case which rarely happens) should we think soberly of our
selves, and justly of our Neighbors; should our Anger not have those unequal
Grounds of Vanity and Presumption; were We wholly blameless, and They the
faulty Aggressours; yet neither in This Case can Anger ever reconcile it self
to Reason. For whatever fine things some Philosophers may have said of it to
the contrary, how it is a necessary Weapon to defend us from Injuries, and a
useful Spur to many Virtues: it is a strange sort of Weapon which governs the
Man who weilds it, and a very dangerous Spur which drives him down a Precipice.
Whoever pretends to govern it by Reason, must either change its Nature, or lose
his Aim; it must be subdued and broken, before it can be quiet. It Is the proper
Character of Anger, not to listen to Reason; impetuous it is and turbulent in
all its Motions, rash and violent in all its Resolutions, bitter and revengeful
in all its Designs: let our Anger be abated to ever so low a degree, so long as
it is Anger, 'twill be a Desire of Revenge, and a Passion that delights it self
in the Prospect of the Ruin of the Offender: a Pleasure, that is as much below
the Goodness of a Virtuous Man, as it is beneath his Wisdom, to give his Enemies
the mischievous Pleasure, of thinking, they can offend him.

They give us a very wrong notion of Justice, who make Anger its Assistant; and
as ill a one of Courage, who derive the force of it from thence. No reasonable
Man would desire to have his Cause come before a Judge that is in wrath; it may
blind him indeed, and leave him the chance of doing Right, but can never make
him discerning and impartial. There Is a coolness of Temper absolutely necessary
to Justice, that may allow it the leisure of looking into both sides; and
Courage too requires a sight of the Danger: It Is a mad Fury that transports a
Man, when he rushes on, without Sight or Knowledge of the Danger he casts
himself into; his Mind is hurried away in the Storm from all thoughts of his
Defense, and he falls on his Enemy without Sense or Design; like a weighty
Ruin, only to break himself, on him, to pieces. It Is a noble Generosity and
Constancy of Mind, which affords the most substantial defense against Injuries,
and gives the manliest Vigor to our Courage. Whoever is above the resentment
of an Injury, has placed himself out of the reach of its force; and he that is
unmoved at the sight of his Danger, will never shrink in the Conflict with it.
He that takes no notice of an Enemy, gives him the libetry of forgetting he is
so. Opposition only and a dread of Revenge, keep up in him the memory of the
Difference, and make it so very difficult for Him to Forgive an Injury, who has
been so hardy as to Do one.

In a word, the very first motions of Anger in their own Nature directly tend
to the subverting our Reason: Give it ever so little head, it soon becomes
irresistible; and, when once entire and absolute Master, can end in nothing but
Rage and Madness. When aggressor, partial, and unjust; when defendant, blind,
and insufficient; if noysie and clamourous, mean and false to its own ends; if
sullen and malicious, full of Displeasure, and inwardly tormenting; if bitter
and revengeful, adding weight to Injuries already received, and provoking yet
more, to fill up the measure of its Punishment. There are some sorts of Anger
indeed not so mean, or so extravagantly transporting, and less mischievous than
others; but there is none which raises not a great Disturbance in the Mind,
which does not drive out of it all sweetness and humanity, and rob a Man of the
best part of himself: it may have some slight and transient risings indeed in
the Breast of a wise Man, but it rests only in the Bosom of Fools.

But still these are the Mischiefs of this violent temper only between Man and
Man: They are much more extensive, if we consider him as a Member of Society.
In That state, they never fall on a particular person, but at the same time
they threaten and offend the whole Community. For this reason, all Laws how
much soever they connive at and overlook the Excesses of some other Passions,
have taken special Care to bridle this, as peculiarly tending to the
destruction of Government it self: they have reserved the avenging of Injuries
to the Magistrate alone, and not abandoned the Security of Men's Persons and
Interests, and all the Conveniences of Life, for the sake of which they entered
into Society, to the Cruelty and Violence of furious Men, by leaving the Sword
of Justice in their hands. The Revenge therefore which Anger suggests to a
private Man, is an Outrage to the Laws, and a breach of all those sacred Bonds
which unite Men in the several forms of Government; and where those Laws are
vigorously executed, 'twould be as great a Madness and Folly to attempt it, as
to think to fight it out with a whole Nation: For the will of the whole centers
in that of the Magistrate, His Judgment is the Judgment of the Community, and
the Execution of it is attended with their United Force.

Neither is that Punishment, which Governors inflict for the breach of their
Laws, in a strictly-moral sense to be called, a Revenge, though figuratively
it is often even in Scripture styled so; for proper Revenge is a cruel brutish
and malicious Motive, to reap our Satisfaction from the Pain and Vexation the
Offender suffers: But Laws carry no Passion or ill Nature along with 'em; the
Good and Quiet of the Community, is the whole aim of their Sanction, whether as
they are a Rule to the Virtuous, or a Terror to evil Doers.

And if Anger in all its several Degrees and Dresses, whether of Malice or
Clamor, Evil-speaking or Revenge, be at such mighty odds with Reason and
Society; how much greater then must the Opposition be between That and
Christianity, whose Doctrine is the most exalted Reason, and whose State the
most perfect Society that Man is capable of?

If Reason forbids it, as contrary to our temporal Interest, and the procuring
that Peace which is necessary to our Own Preservation, as the Laws of Society
do, with relation to That of the Public; Christianity adds a much stronger
inforcement to the Prohibition, from the regard we owe to our Own, and our
Neighbor's Eternal Salvation, and to the Glory of God in both; which is the
ultimate End of Us, and of all our Faculties, and Actions.

This last and fullest Revelation of the Will of God to the Sons of Men, as it
gives them clearer Views of the Divine Perfections, and thence more distinct
and suitable Conceptions of that Honor, and Worship which they justly
challenge; so it heightens, and enlarges the Prospect of those Duties which
concern our Conversation toward one another; proposes in them nobler Aims,
imploys more convincing Motives, and more eminent Examples; assures more
excellent Rewards, and more powerful Assistances to attain them, than any other
Dispensation could discover, or afford.

It Is too narrow a Consideration for a Christian, to keep down that Vanity and
Presumption, which makes Men touchy and captious; by the Right that is in
others to equal Pretensions. Not only the deep sense of his own Meanness and
Misery makes him acknowledge before Almighty God, That he is nothing but
Darkness in his Understanding, Weakness and Inconstancy, if not Perverseness,
in his Will; that his Life is a vapor that passes away: and to cry out to him
with the Prophet David, (as the LXX. translate it) My being is nothing before
thee: but he is taught also to prefer others before himself. Let nothing, says
St. Paul, Phil. 2.3. be done through strife or vainglory, but in lowliness of
mind let each esteem other better than themselves.

That Notion of Equality leaves room for insisting on its Rights; and our
Hearts may be too partial in adjusting Our proportion: but to esteem each other
better than our selves, is the sure way to avoid doing any thing through strife
or vainglory.

Christian Charity always gives us a high Opinion of our Neighbor, as the
Humility that attends it does a low one of our selves: and Provocation is as
inconsistent with Esteem, as Resentment with a sense of our ill-deserving. The
Humble Man knows that Weakness or Fault, he is despised or reproached for, is
but one of those many he sees in himself; that God sees yet infinitely more
than he does; and that there is no comparison to be made between what he is,
and what he justly might be condemned for; even when he is injured without
ground, the Case is still the same with him. He knows indeed, there is a Mistake
in the particular Foundation of that slight, which is thrown upon hi^; but the
Error is of too much Advantage to him, to move him to Anger: If he, who
injures him now, saw the whole mass of his real Failings; what he suffers
wrongfully, would be the least part of the Contempt he must expect to lie
under. In a word, Charity suffers long, and is kind; Charity envieth not,
vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, does not behave it self unseemly,
seeks not her own, is not easily provoked, thinks no evil, bears all
things, believes all things, hops all things, endures all things. Charity
is so far from wronging others, that it teaches Forbearance; makes a Man
patient, and not revengeful of Injuries: abases all foolish Elation of Mind,
Ambition and Ostentation, Pride and Insolence, in overvaluing Our Selves, and
despising Others; and permits not a Man to fall into immoderate violent
Distempers of Anger, upon whatever Provocation. Charity behaves not it self
unseemly, breaks not out into opprobrious Contumelies, and disgraceful ill
Language. As Anger, under the Gospel, is interpreted Murder, so there is a
Murder of the Tongue, as well as of the Heart or Hand; and both are brought
under the breach of the Sixth Commandment, as our Savior interprets the
obligation of it.

It Is certainly against reason to be transported beyond it, as it is against
our Interest to provoke new Injuries by revenging old ones: 'twere more for our
advantage to overcome an Enemy by a softer management, than to make him more
implacably so, by the bitterness of our Opposition. But these are Motives
shallow and temporal, that concern only This Life and the quiet of it: The
Gospel considers us with relation to Eternity; looks on us as Members of a
Society which is to have no end, and by that means joined to Christ who is the
head of it; as Heirs of the same Hopes and Promises, and united to one another
by so many Relations resulting thence, as leave no room for our reflecting on
those petty Circumstances wherein we differ, or being exasperated by those
trifling short-lived Interests, wherein our Passions would concern us, or which
our unenlighten'd reason might provoke us to set a value on: all the
provocation it allows us, is to love and to good works, and all the Victory it
recommends to us, is to overcome evil with good. The desire of revenge is such
a Sin as cannot ask to be Pardoned, nor has our Lord's own Prayer (though the
fullest and most comprehensive) any Petition for forgiveness of our trespasses,
but as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Indeed the whole scope and aim of the Law of Christ, is to take away all
Enmities and the Seeds of 'em out of the World; to reconcile Man to God, to
himself, and to all Men: To God, by appeasing His Anger, with the blood of his
Son; to Himself, by freeing him from the dominion of his turbulent and unruly
Passions; and to Men, by inspiring him with that perfect Charity, which must
needs tame and soften the most bitter Spirits. 'Twas easier for the Son of God
to die, then that the Anger of his Father should be unaton'd; and his whole Life
was one continued Example of Meekness and Patience, and forgiveness of
Injuries: Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered he
threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. And all
this he suffered for us, leaving us an Example that we should follow his steps.
He suffered all the contradictions of Sinners; and received, without
disturbance, all the Affronts, and Reproaches, that the Malice, or Rashness, or
Folly of Man could throw upon him: and even at his Death put up to his Father
such earnest Prayers for his Persecutors, as in a very small time after brought
many thousands of 'em to a State of Salvation; according to that most Excellent
Precept of his own. Matt. 5.44. Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you,
do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use and
persecute you.

The Motive, which the Gospel employs even here in the Text, is such, as
methinks, no Reason or Humanity is able to resist; Be ye kind one to another,
tenderhearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven you. What can induce us to Forgiveness, if Forgiveness cannot? Are we
higher than God, that we should be more implacably offended than He? Is the
distance between us Fellow Creatures comparable to that between GOD and the
mightiest of Men, that the Indignity should make the Affront more unpardonable?
Is our Brother more under our Power, than We are under that of the Almighty? Or
are his Offenses more numerous, or less capable of Reparation? Do we owe Ten
thousand Talents to our Lord, and can we take our Fellow Servants by the throat
for a Hundred Pence? We must unavoidably own, as well as suffer, the Justice of
his Sentence, if he deliver us over to the Tormentors till we pay the utmost
farthing: for there is no denying, but that we ought to have had compassion on
our fellow servants, even as our Lord had pity upon us.

St. Paul indeed had reason to press this Argument, as being most sensibly
under the force of its Conviction. Of all those, whom, out of his great Mercy,
God had called to the Knowledge of his Truth, no one was found in such
provoking Circumstances: He was a professed and bitter Enemy to the Name of
Jesus, many of the Saints did he shut up in prison, and when they were put to
death, he gave his voice against them; punished them often in every Synagougue,
compelled them to blaspheme; and, being exceedingly mad against them, he
persecuted them even unto strange Cities. He was taken even in the Fact,
breathing out threatening and slaughter against the Disciples of the Lord. In
the very height of his Rage against God and his Church, when he was going to
Damascus, with Letters from the High Priest, impowering him to bring such as he
found professing that Way bound to Jerusalem; God, by an astonishing Voice from
Heaven, softens his Heart, pardons his Sins, and calls him to preach that
Pardon to the Gentiles; himself being an amazing Instance of it, and a pressing
Evidence of their Obligation to forgive one another.

Nor could that Exhortation of his in the Process of his Mission have so much
force out of any other Mouth. By the Rage he was transported with before his
Conversion, we may perceive his natural Temper was none of the meekest; and
after it, no Man, according to the Principles of Flesh and Blood, had more
Reason to be provoked to Resentment than He had. No Man was more outragiously
affronted, or more cruelly and unjustly persecuted; by his own Nation, by false
Brethren, even by Them, whose Eternal Salvation he was spending himself to
advance; in stripes above measure, in prisons frequent: so that if Advice can
have any force from the Disinterestedness of it, surely this has strength
enough for our Conviction; for there is no Man, according to all humane
Appearance, could have more Reason to preach the contrary Doctrine, had it been
true; to give the reins to his Anger, in returning those Injuries, or to
maintain the Lawfulness of doing so. In this Light his Exhortation needs no
additionary Strength. Let me beg leave only, by way of Application, to bring it
home to Our Selves.

And in the Name of God then, let us consider, to what good end we can employ
these unruly Passions, We, who give our selves up so intitely to their
boisterous Conduct, that there is scarce any thing else we can be said to agree
in? It Is observed by One, of some Note among our Enemies, who very well knew
the measures that were taking for our destruction, and proposes the great
facility of effecting it from the truth of his observation; That we hate one
another, and are in continual division, either about Religion, or about the
Government. Since it is Now our Happyness to have those two very great and
concerning Interests united, which so long have driven different ways; we have
a double tie upon us, to defeat the Hopes of our Adversaries, by laying aside
our Animosities about Either, least they prove in the end the ruin of Both.
For, as to Religion, there are no greater Enemies in the World to its Life and
Force, than the bitter Contentions we have raised about it. We have quarreled
so long and eagerly on the Subject, that the very substance of it is almost
lost in the scuffle: and have started such Multitudes of Disputes and
Controversies, as have left almost nothing clear or certain, especially to such
as would fain not have reason to Believe those Doctrines, which they would fain
have no reason to Obey.

The fierceness and virulency wherewith these Disputes have been carried on,
are no less the Scandal than a Breach of our common Christianity, nay even of
Humanity it self. No Reproaches have been too scandalous or impertinent to the
Question, no Revilings too severe and contemptuous, no Calumnies too false and
spiteful, nor any Language or Arts too foul and unmanly to be employed in these
Religios Conflicts: as if the very Pretense to Religion were a Dispensation
from all the Ties of it; and an impudent Affectation of Concern for its Truths,
were a sufficient Excuse for the Breach of its Duties. Even where the strictest
Regard to Decency would be expected, where even good Manners to the Lookers on
should make Men stanch and reserved in the Treatment of an Adversary, that has
any Pretense to Learning or Virtue: In the Combats of the Pen, a bitter
Malignity reigns without control, fights the Devil's Battles under the Banner
of our Savior; and, not content to poison the present Age, with an unexampl'd
Barbarity, raises lasting Monuments of Scandal to those which are to come. This
sort of Management may make sport enough to the Enemies of all Religion, but I
know not how They can be thought any Friends to it, who afford 'em the very
unseemly and ill-natured Diversion.

There will always be different Thoughts of Religion, as long as there are
different Apprehensions among Men; and whoever duly considers the great
Difficulty of attaining that strength and firmness of Attention, that entire
Liberty of the Mind, by which its Assent is suspended, till a clear and certain
Evidence shall justly claim it; In a word, that Freedom from Passion,
Prejudice, and Interest, which is necessary to ground a certain Conclusion in
any thing that is disputed; will see more reason to pity, than be angry at the
Errors of other Men: and where they are of consequence to any of the
Fundamentals of the Gospel, in meekness to instruct those that oppose
themselves, if God peradventure will give them repentance to the acknowledging
the truth.

Men are so naturally wedded to their own Opinions, that it is generally a
shrewd Mortification, to show them they are mistaken; and there are very few
can take any pleasure in the Discovery: if we have a Love for Truth, or the
Souls of Men, we ought to soften that Aversion which indisposes them to receive
it, by all the artful Gentleness and Condescension, that it is capable of being
proposed with. A Railer cannot convince, nor an angry Man persuade, neither
will Men be jeered or hectored out of their Errors and Mistakes. When we
indiscreetly or furiously exasperate their Minds, we shut 'em against the
Truth, and their Hearts against, our selves, and so destroy all Charity, which
is the Life of Religion.

Nor are our Civil Dissentions less scandalous and prejudicial to Government,
than our Religious Bickerings to Piety and Virtue; or the means of carrying 'em
on, less bitter and malicious. Some are not content to accept of Deliverance,
but even quarrel and fall out with their Preservation; and even of those who
would be thought to receive it with Acknowledgment enough, there are but too
many who seem desirous to lessen the Number. Every Party among us would pretend
to engross all the Merit of Obedience to it self, exclusive of all others; and
the Disputes on this Head are not more common, than they are eager and
provoking. 'Twere well the Pretense were as honest as it would seem, though
surely it is not much, the wiser for being so confining. But it is rather to be
feared, that particular Interest, and a mutual Oppression are the only real
Aims at the bottom of such Distinctions; while the very Name of Party is
industriously and very revengefully kept up among us, to the apparent Hazard of
reducing us back again to all that Disorder and Confusion, from which we have
been so wonderfully rescued. In the mean time, the Common Enemies of both our
Religious and Civil Rights, are intent more than enough to widen our
Differences, and watchful to find their Account in our Divisions. When the
Enemy is at the Gate, it is time, one would think, to be united; but we have
never had the sense to do so, till he was entered the City.

God grant that we may all know, and do in this our day, the things that belong
to our Peace; to the Quiet and Security both of our Religion and Government:
That we may be slow to anger, ready to forgive, overcoming evil with good,
speaking evil of no man, and, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for
Glory, and Honor and Eternal Life, through the Merits of Jesus Christ our Lord.
To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be ascribed, as is most due, all
Glory, Honor, Power, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, now and for ever.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Bennet in St. Paul's Churchyard.
AThenae Oxonienses: Or, An exact History of all the Writers and Bishops, who
have had their Education in the University of Oxford; from 1500 to the end of
1690. Representing the Birth, Fortunes, Preferments, and Death of all those
Authors and Prelates; the great Accidents of their Lives; with the Fate and
Character of their Writings: The Work being so Complete, that no Writer of Note
of this Nation, for near two hundred Years past, is omitted. Two Volumes in
Folio.

A New Historical Relation of the Kingdom of Siam, by Monsieur de la Loubere,
Envoy Extraordinary from the French King, to the King of Siam, in the Years
1687, and 1688. Wherein a full and curious Account is given of their Natural
History, as also of their Arithmetic and other Mathematick Learning. In Two
Tomes. Illustrated with Sculptures. Done out of French by A.P. Fellow of the
Royal Society. Fol.

Dr. Pocock's Commentary on the Prophets Joel, Micah, and Malachi. Folio.

A Critical History of the Text, and Versions of the New Testament; wherein is
firmly Established the Truth of those Acts on which the Foundation of Christian
Religion is laid: In Two Parts. By Father Simon, of the Oratory. Together with
a Refutation of such Passages as seem contrary to the Doctrine and Practice of
the Church of England. Quarto.

A Defense of the Church of England, from the Charge of Schism and Heresy, as
laid against it by the Vindication of the Deprived Bishops. Quarto.

Twelve Sermons upon several Occasions, by R. South, D.D. Six of them never
before Printed. Octavo.

Sermons and Discourses on several Occasions, by G. Stradling, D.D. late Dean
of Chichester. Never before printed: together with an Account of the Author.
Octavo.


