NEW ATLANTIS. A Work unfinished,

Written by the Right Honorable, FRANCIS, Lord Verulam, Viscount St. Alban.

To the Reader.
THis Fable my Lord devised, to the end that He might exhibit therein, a Model
or Description of a College, instituted for the Interp^eting of Nature, and the
producing of Great and Mavelous Works, for the Benefit of Men; Under the Name
of Salomons House, or the College of the Six Days Works. And even so far his
Lor^ship has proceeded, as to finish that Part. Certainly the Model is more
Vast, and High, than can possibly be imitated in all things; Notwithstanding
most Things therein are within Men's Power to effect. His Lordship thought also
in this present Fable, to have composed a Frame of Laws, or of the best State
or Mould of a Commonwealth; But foreseeing it would be a long Work, his Desire
of Collecting the Natural History diverted him, which He preferred many degrees
before it.

This Work of the New Atlantis (as much as concerns the English Edition) his
Lordship designed for this place; In regard it has so near Affinity (in one
part of it) with the preceding Natural History.

VV. Rawley.

NEW ATLANTIS.
WE sailed from Peru, (where we had continued by the space of one whole year)
for China and Iapan, by the South Sea; taking with us Victuals for twelve
Months; and had good Winds from the East, though soft and weak, for five Mo^ths
space and more. But then the Wind came about, and settled in the West for many
days, so as we could make little or no way, and were sometimes in purpose to
turn back. But then again there arose Strong and Great Winds from the South,
with a Point East; which carried us up, (for all that we could do) toward the
North: By which time our Victuals failed us, though we had made good spare of
them. So that finding our selves, in the Midst of the greatest Wilderness of
waters in the world, without Victual, we gave our Selves for lost Men, and
prepared for death. Yet we did lift up our Hearts and Voices to GOD above, who
shows his Wonders in the Deep; Beseeching him of his Mercy, that as in the
Beginning He discovered the Face of the Deep, and brought forth Drie-land: So
he would now discover Land to us, that we might not perish. And it came to
pass, that the next day about Evening, we saw within a Kenning before us,
toward the North, as it were thicker Clouds, which did put us in some hope of
Land: Knowing how that part of the South Sea was utterly unknown: And might
have ^slands or Continents, that hitherto were not come to light. Wherefore we
bent our course thither, where we saw the appearance of Land, all that Night.
And in the Dawning of the next Day, we might plainly discern that it was a Land
Flat to our sight, and full of Boscage: which made it show the more Da^k. And
after an Hour and a halfes Sailing, we entered into a good Haven, being the Port
of a fair City. Not great indeed, but well built, and that gave a pleasant view
from the Sea. And we thinking every minute long, till we were on Land, came
close to the Shore, and offered to Land. But straight ways we saw diverse of
the People, with Bastons in their hands, (as it were) forbidding us to land:
Yet without any Cries or Fierceness, but only as warning us off, by Signs
that they made. Whereupon being not a little discomforted, we were advising
with our selves, what we should do. During which time, there made forth to us a
small Boat, with about eight Persons in it, whereof One of them had in his Hand
a Tip-staffe of a yellow Cane, tipped at both ends with Blew, who made aboard
our Ship, without any show of Distrust at all^ And when he saw one of our
Number, present himself somewhat before the rest, he drew forth a little Scroul
of Parchment (somewhat yellower than our Parchment, and shining like the Leaves
of VVriting Tables, but otherwise soft and flexible,) and delivered it to our
foremost man. In which Scroul were written in Ancient Hebre^, and in Ancient
Greek, and in good Latin of the School, and in Spanish, these words; Land ye
not, none of you; and provide to be gone from this Coast, within sixteen days,
except you have further time given you: Mean while, if you want Fresh Water, or
Victual, or help for your Sick, or that your Ship needs repair, write down
your wants, and you shall have that which b^longeth to Mercy. This Scroul was
signed with a Stamp of Cherubims Wings, not spread but hanging downwards; And
by them a Cross. This being delivered, the Officer returned, and left only a
Servant with us to receive our Answer. Consulting ^^reupon amongst our Selves,
we were much perplexed. The Denial of Landing, and Hasty Warning us away,
troubled us much: On the other side, to find that the People had Languages, and
were so full of Humanity, did comfort us not a little. And above all, the Sign
of the Cross to that Instrument, was to us a great Rejoicing, and as it were a
certain Presage of Good. Our Answer was in the Spanish tongue; That for our
Ship, it was well; For we had rather met with Calmes and contrary winds, than
any Tempests. For our Sick, they were many, and in very ill Case; So that if
they were not permitted to Land, they ran in danger of their lives. Our other
Wants we let down in particular, adding; That we had some little store of
Merchandise, which if it pleased them to deal for, it might supply our Wants,
without being chargeable unto them. We offered some Reward in Pistolets unto
the Servant, and a piece of Crimson Velvet to be presented to the Officer: But
the Servant took them not, nor would scarce look upon them; And so left us, and
went back in another little Boat which was sent for him.

About three Hours after we had dispatched our Answer, there came toward us, a
Person (as it seemed,) of place. He had on him a Gown with wide Sleeves, of a
kind of Water Chamolet, of an excellent Azure Color, far more glossy than
ours: His under Apparel was green, and so was his Hat, being in the form of a
Turban, daintily made, and not so huge as the Turkish Turbans; And the Locks of
his Hair came down below the Brims of it. A Reverend Man was he to behold. He
came in a Boat, gilt in some part of it, with four persons more only in that
Boat; And was followed by another Boat, wherein were some Twenty. When he was
come within a Flight-shot of our Ship, Signs were made to us, that we should
send forth some to meet him upon the water, which we presently did in our
Ship-Boat, sending the principal Man amongst us save one, and four of our
Number with him. When we were come within six yards of their Boat, they called
to us to stay, and not to approach further, which we did. And thereupon the
Man, whom I before described, stood up, and with a loud voice in Spanish,
asked, Are ye Christians? We answered, We were; fearing the less, because of
the Cross we had seen in the Subscription. At which Answer the said Person
lift up his Right Hand toward Heaven, and drew it softly to his Mouth (which
is the Gesture they use, when they thank GOD;) And then said: If you will
swear, (all of you) by the merits of the SAVIOR, that ye are no Pirates; Nor
have shed blood, lawfully, nor unlawfully, within forty days past; you may
have License to come on Land. We said, We were all ready to take that Oath.
VVhereupon one of those that were with him, being (as it seemed) a Notary, made
an Entry of this Act. Which done, another of the Attendants of the Great
Person, which was with him in the same Boat, after his Lord had spoken a little
to him, said aloud: My Lord would have you know, that it is not of Pride, or
Greatness, that he comes not aboard your Ship: But for that, in your Answer,
you declare, that you have many Sick amongst you, he was warned by the
Conservatour of Health, of the City, that he should keep a distance. We bowed
our selves toward him, and answered: We were his humble Servants; And
accounted for great Honor, and singular Humanity toward us, that which was
already done^ But hoped well, that the Nature of the Sickness, of our Men, was
not infectious. So he returned; And a while after came the Notary to us aboard
our Ship; Holding in his hand a Fruit of that Country, like an Orange, but of
color between Orenge-tawny and Scarlet: which cast a most excellent Odor. He
used it (as i^ seems) for a Preservative against Infection. He gave us our
Oath; By the Name of Jesus and his Merits; And after told us, that the next day
by six of the Clock in the Morning, we should be sent to, and brought to the
Strangers House, (so he called it) where we should be accommodated of things,
both for our Whole, and for our Sick. So he left us; And when we offered him
some Pistolets, he smiling, said: He must not be twice paid for one Labor:
Meaning (as I take it) that he had Salary sufficient of the State for his
Service. For (as I after learned) they call an Officer that takes Rewards,
Twice paid.

The next Morning early, there came to us the same Officer, that came to us at
first with his Cane, and told us: He came to conduct us to the Strangers House:
And that he had prevented the Hour, because we might have the whole day before
us, for our Business. For (said he) If you will follow my Advice, there shall
first go with me some few of you, and see the place, and how it may be made
convenient for you: And then you may send for your Sick, and the rest of your
Number, which ye will bring on Land. We thanked him, and said: That this Care,
which he took of desolate Strangers, GOD would reward. And so six of us went on
Land with him: And when we were on Land, he went before us, and turned to us,
and said; He was but our Servant, and our Guide^ He led us through three fair
Streets; And all the Way we went, there were gathered some People on both
sides, standing in a Row: But in so civil a fashion, as if it had been, not to
wonder at us, but to wel^om us; And diverse of them, as we passed by them, put
their Arms a little abroad, which is their Gesture, when they bid any welcome.
The Strangers House is a fair and spacious House, built of Brick, of somewhat a
blewer Color than our Brick: And with handsome Windows, some of Glass, ^ome
of a kind of Cambrick oyled. He brought us first into a fair Parlour above
stairs, and then asked us: What number of persons we were? And how many sick?
we answered, We were in all (sick and whole) one and fifty Persons, whereof our
sick were seventeen. He desired us to have patience a little, and to stay till
he came back to us; which was about an Hour^ after; And then he led us to see
the Chambers, which were provided for us, being in number nineteen. They having
cast it (as it seems) that four of those Chambers, which were better than the
rest, might receive for of the principal Men of our Company^ And lodge them
alone by themselves; And the other fifteen Chambers were to lodge us, two and
two together. The Chambers were handsome and cheerful Chambers, and furnished
civilly. Then he led us to a long Gallery, like a Dorture, where he showed us
all along the one side (for the other side was but wall and window) seventeen
Cells, very neat ones, having partitions of Cedar wood. Which Gallery, and
Cells, being in all 40^ (many more than we needed,) were instituted as an
Infirmary for sick Persons. And he told us withal, that as any of our Sick
waxed well, he might be removed from his Cell, to a Chamber: For which purpose
there were set forth ten spare Chambers, besides the number we spoke of before.
This done, he brought us back to the Parlour, and lifting up his Cane a little
(as they do when they give any Charge or Command) said to us; Ye are to know
that the Custom of the Land requires, that after this day, and to morrow,
(which we give you for removing your People from your Ship,) you are to keep
within doors for three days. But let it not trouble you, nor do not think
your selves restrained, but rather le^t to your Rest and Ease. You shall want
nothing; and there are six of our People appointed to attend you, for any
Business you may have abroad. We gave him thanks with all Affection and
Respect, and said; GOD surely is manifested in this Land. We offered him also
twenty Pistolets; But he smiled, and only said; What? Twice Paid! And so he
left us. Soon after our Dinner was served in; Which was right good Viands,
both for Bread and Meat: Better than any Collegiate Diet, that I have known in
Europe. We had also Drink of three sorts, all wholesome and good; wine of the
Grape; A Drink of Grain, such as is with us our Ale, but more clear: and a kind
o^ Sider made of a fruit of that Country; A wonderful pleasing and Refreshing
Drink. Besides, there were brought in to us, great Store of those Scarlet
Orenges, for our Sick; which (they said) were an assured Remedy for sickness
taken at Sea. There was given us also, a Box of small gray, or whitish Pills,
which they wished our Sick should take, one of the Pills every nigh^ before
sleep; which (they said) would hasten their Recovery. The next day, after that
our Trouble of Carriage, and Removing of our Men, and Goods out of our Shipp,
was som^what settled and quiet, I thought good to call our Company together; and
when they were assembled, said unto them; My dear Friends, Let us know our
(...), and how it stands with us. We are Men cast on Land, as Jonas was, out
of the Whales Belly, when we were as buried in the Deep: And now we are on
Land, we are but between Death and Life; For we are beyond, both the Old World
and the New; And whether ever we shall see Europe, GOD only knows. It is a
kind of Miracle has brought us hither: And it must be little less that shall
bring us hence. Therefore in regard of our Deliverance past, and our danger
present, and to come, let us look up to GOD, and every Man reform his own
ways. Besides, we are come here amongst a Christian People, full of Piety and
Humanity: Let us not bring that confusion of ^ace upon our selves, as to show
our vices, or unworthiness before them. Yet there is more: For they have by
Commandment, (though in form of courtesy) Cloystred us within these Walls for
three days: Who knows, whether it be not, to take some taste of our manners
and conditions? And if they find them b^d, to banish us straightwaies; if good,
to give us further time. For these men, that they have given us for Attendance,
may withal have an Eye upon us. Therefore for Gods love, and as we love the
weal of our Souls and Bodies, let us so behave our selves, as we may be at
peace with GOD, and may find grace in the eyes of this People. Our Company with
one voice thanked me for my good Admonition, and promised me to live soberly
and civilly, and without giving any the least occasion of Offense. So we spent
our three days joyfully, and without care, in expectation what would be done
with us, when they were expired. During which time, we had every hour joy of
the Amendment of our Sick; who thought themselves cast into some Divine Pool of
Healing; They mended so kindly, and so fast.

The Morrow after our three days were past, there came to us a new Man, that
we had not seen before, clothed in blew as the former was, save that his Turban
was white with a small red Cross on the Top. He had also a Tippet of fine
Linen. At his Coming in, he did bend to us a little, and put his A^ms abroad.
We of our parts saluted him in a very lowly and submissive manner; As looking
that from him we should receive Sentence of Li^e, or Death. He desired to speak
with some few of us; VVhereupon six of us only stayed, and the rest avoided the
Room. He said; I am by Office Governor of this House of Strangers, and by
Vocation I am a Christian Priest; and therefore am come to you, to offer you my
service, both as Strangers, and chiefly as Christians. Some things I may tell
you, which I think you will not be unwilling to hear. The State has given you
License to stay on Land for the space of six weeks: And let it not trouble you,
if your occasions ask further time, for the Law in this point is not precise;
And I do not doubt, but my self shall be able to obtain for you such further
time as shall be convenient. Ye shall also understand, that the Strangers
House, is at this time Rich, and much aforehand; For it has laid up Revenew
these 37 yea^^: For so long it is since any Stranger arived in this part: And
therefore take ye no care^ The State will defray you all the time you stay:
Neither shall you stay one day less for that. As for any Merchandise you have
brought, ye shall be well used, and have your return, either in Merchandise, or
in Gold and Silver: For to ^s it is all one. And if you have any other Request
to make, hide it not. For ye shall find, we will not make your countenance to
fall, by the answer ye shall receive. Only this I must tell you, that none of
you must go above a Karan, (that is with them a mile and an half) from the
Wa^ls of the City, without special leave. We answered, after we had looked a
while upon one another, admiring this gracious and Parent-like usage; That we
could not tell what to say: For we wanted words to express our Thanks; And his
Noble free Offers left us nothing to ask. It seemed to us, that we had before
us a Picture of our Salvation in Heaven: For we that were a while since in the
Iaws of Death, were now brought into a place, where we found nothing but
Consolations. For the Command^ment laid upon us, we would not fail to obey it,
though it was impossible but our Hearts should be enflamed to tread further
upon this happy and Holy Ground. We added; That our Tongues should first
cleave to the Roofes of our Mouths, ere we should forget, either this Reverend
person, or this whole Nation, in our Prayers. We also most humbly besought him
to accept of us as his true servants, by as just a Right, as ever men on Earth
were bounden; laying and presenting, both our Persons, and all we had at his
feet. He said; He was a Priest, and looked for a Priests reward; which was our
Brotherly love, and the good of our Souls and Bodies. So he went from us, not
without Tears of Tenderness in his Eyes; And left us also confused with joy
and kindness, saying amongst our selves; That we were come into a Land of
Angels^ which did appear to us daily, and prevent us with Comforts, which we
thought not of, much less expected.

The next day about ten of the Clock, the Governor came to us again, and after
Salutations said familiarly; That he was come to visit us; And called for a
Chair, and sat him down: And we being some ten of us (the rest were of the
meaner sort, or else gone abroad,) sat down with him: And when we were set, he
began thus. We of this Island of Bensalem (for so they call it in their
Language) have this: That by means of our solitary Situation, and of the Laws
of Secrecy, which we have for our Travelers, and our rare Admission of
Strangers; we know well most part of the ^^bitable World, and are our selves
unknown. Therefore because he that knows least is fittest to ask Questions,
it is more reason, for the Entertainment of the time, that ye ask me Questions,
than that I ask you. We answered, That we humbly thanked him, that he would
give us leave so to do: And that we conceived by the taste we had already, that
there was no worldly thing on Earth, more worthy to be known, than the State of
that happy Land. But above all (we said) since that we were met from the
several Ends of the world, and hoped assuredly, that we should meet one day in
the Kingdom of Heaven ( for that we were both Parts Christians) we desired to
know (in respect that Land was so remote, and so divided by vast and unknown
Seas from the Land where our SAVIOR walked on Earth) who was the Apostle of
that Nation, and how it was converted to the Faith? It appeared in his face,
that he took great Contentment in this our Question: He said, Ye knit my heart
to you, by asking this Question in the first place: For it shows, that you
First seek the Kingdom of Heaven: And I shall gladly, and briefly, satisfy
your demand.

About twenty Years after the Ascension of our SAVIOR, it came to pass, that
there was seen by the People of Renfusa, (a City upon the Eastern Coast of our
Island, (within night,) the Night was Cloudy and Calm,) as it might be some
mile in the Sea, a great Pillar of Light; Not sharp, but in form of a Column,
or Cylinder, rising from the Sea, a great way up toward Heaven: and on the top
of it was seen a large Cross of Light, more bright and resplendent than the
Body of the Pillar. Upon which so strange a Spectacle, the People of the City
gathered apace together upon the Sands, to wonder; And so after put themselves
into a number of small Boats to go nearer to this Mavelous sight. But when
the Boats were come within (about) sixty yards of the Pillar, they found
themselves all bound, and could go no further, yet so as they might move to go
about, but might not approach nearer: So as the Boats stood all as in a
Theater, beholding this Light, as an Heavenly Sign. It so fell out, that there
was in one of the Boats, one of the Wise Men, of the Society of Salomons House:
which House or College (my good Brethren) is the very Eye of this Kingdom; who
having a while attentively and devoutly viewed, and contemplated this Pillar
and Cross, fell down upon his face: And then raised himself upon his knees,
and lifting up his Hands to Heaven, made his Prayers in this manner.

LOrd God of Heaven and Earth, thou have vouchsafed of thy Grace, to those of
our Order, to know thy Works of Creation, and true Secrets of them; And to
discern (as far as appertains to the Generations of Men) between Divine
Miracles, Works of Nature, Works of Art, and Impostures, and Illu^ions of all
sorts. I do here acknowledge and testify before this People, that the Thing we
now see before our eyes, is thy Finger, and a true Miracle^ And for as-much, as
we learn in our Books, that thou never workest Miracles, but to a Diviue and
Excellent End, (for the Laws of Nature are thine own Laws, and thou exceedest
them not but upon good cause) we most humbly beseech thee, to prosper this
great Sign, And to give us the Interpretation and use of it in Mercy; Which
thou do in some part secretly promise, by sending it unto us.

When he had made his Prayer, he presently found the Boat he was in, moveable
and unbound; whereas all the rest remained still fast; And taking that for an
assurance of Leave to approach, he caused the Boat to be softly, and with
silence rowed toward the Pillar. But ere he came near it, the Pillar and
Cross of Light brake up; and cast it self abroad, as it were into a Firmament
of many Stars; which also vanished soon after, and there was nothing left to
be seen, but a small Ark, or Chest of Cedar, dry, and not wet at all with
water, though it swam. And in the Fore-end of it, which was toward him, grew a
small green Branch of Palm; And when the wise man had taken it with all
reverence into his Boat, it opened of it self, and there was found in it a
Book, and a Letter; Both written in fine Parchment, and wrapped in Sindons of
Linen. The Book contained all the Canonical Books of the Old and New
Testament, according as you have them; (For we know well what the Churches with
you receive;) And the Apocalypse it self; And some other Books of the New
Testament, which were not at that time written, were nevertheless in the Book.
And for the Letter, it was in these words.

I Bartholomew, a Servant of the Highest, and Apostle of JESUS CHRIST, was
warned by an Angel that appeared to me, in a vision of Glory, that I should
commit this Ark to the floods of the Sea. Therefore I do testify and declare,
unto that People, where GOD shall ordain this Ark to come to Land, that in the
same day is come unto them Salvation, and Peace, and Good Will from the
Father, and from the LORD JESUS.


There was also in both these Writings, as well the Book, as the Letter,
wrought a great Miracle, Conform to that of the Apostles, in the Original Gift
o^ Tongues. For there being at that time, in thi^ Land, Hebrews, Persians, and
Indians, besides the Natives, every one read upon the Book, and Letter, as if
they had been written in his own Language. And thus was this Land saved from
Infidelity; (as the Remain of the Old World was from Water) by an Ark, through
the Apostolical and Miraculous Evangelisme of S. Bartholomew. And here he
paused, and a Messenger came, and called him forth from us. So this was all
that passed in that Conference.

The next Day, the same Governor came again to us, immediately after Dinner,
and excused himself, saying; That the Day before be was called from us somewhat
abruptly, but now he would make us amends, and spend time with us, if we held
his Company and Conference agreeable; We answered; That we held it so
agreeable and pleasing to us, as we forgot both Dangers past, and Fears to
come, for the time we heard him speak; And that we thought a Hour spent with
him, was worth Years of our former life. He bowed himself a little to us, and
after we were set again, he said; Well, the Questions are on your part. One of
our Number said, after a little Pause; That there was a Matter, we were no
less desirous to know, than fearful to ask, lest we might presume too far.
But encouraged by his rare Humanity toward us, (that could scarce think our
selves strangers, being his vowed and professed Servants,) we would take the
Hardness to propound it: Humbly beseeching him, if he thought it not fit to be
answered, that he would pardon it, though he rejected it. We said; We well
observed those his words, which he formerly spoke, That this happy Island,
where we now stood, was known to few, and yet knew most of the Nations of the
World; which we found to be true, considering they had the Languages of Europe,
and knew much of our State and Business: And yet we in Europe (notwithstanding
all the remote Discoveries, and Navigations of this last Age) never heard any
of the least Inkling or Glimpse of this Island. This we found wonderful
strange; for that all Nations have Enterknowledge one of another, either by
Voyage into Foreign Parts, or by Strangers that come to them: And though the
Traveller into a Foreign Country, does commonly know more by the Eye, than he
that stayed at home can by relation of the Traveller; Yet both ways suffice to
make a mutual Knowledge, in some degree, on both parts. But for this Island, we
never heard tell of any Ship of theirs, that had been seen to a^ive upon any
shore of Europe; No, nor of either the East, or West Indies, nor yet of any
Ship of any other part of the World, that had made return for them. And yet the
Marvel rested not in this. For the Situation of it (as his Lordship said) in
the secret Conclave of such a vast Sea might cause it. But then, that they
should have Knowledge of the Languages, Books, Affairs, of those that lie such
a distance from them, it was a thing we could not tell what to make of; For
that it seemed to us a condition and Propriety of Divine Powers and Beings, to
be hidden and unseen to others, and yet to have others open, and as in a light
to them. At this speech the Governor gave a gracious smile, and said; That we
did well to ask pardon for this Questi^n we now asked; For that it imported, as
if we thought this Land a Land of Magicians, that sent forth Spirits of the Air
into all parts, to bring them News, and Intelligence of other Countries. It was
answered by us all, in all possible humbleness, but yet with a Countenance
taking Knowledge, that we knew that he spoke it but merrily. That we were apt
enough to think, there was somewhat supernatural in t^is Island, but yet rather
as Angelical, than Magical. But to let his Lordship know truly, what it was
that made us tender and doubtful to ask this Question, it was not any such
conceit, but because we remembered, he had given a Touch in his former Speech,
that this Land had Laws of Secrecy touching Strangers: To this he said; You
remember it aright: And therefore in that I shall say to you, I must reserve
some particulars, which it is not lawful^ for me to reveal; but there will be
enough left to give you satisfaction.

You shall understand (that which perhaps you will scarce think credible) that
about three thousand Years ago, or somewhat more, the Navigation of the World
(specially for remote Voyages) was greater than at this Day. Do not think with
your se^ves, That I know not how much it is increased with you, within these
threescore Years: I know it well^ And yet I say, greater then, than no^:
Whether it was, that the example of the Ark, that saved the Remnant of Men,
from the universal Deluge, gave Men confidence to adventure upon the waters; Or
what it was; but such is the truth. The Phoeniceans, and specially the Tyrians,
^ad great Fleets. So had the Carthaginians their Colony, which is yet further
West. Toward the East the Shipping of Egypt, and of Palestina, was likewise
great. China also, and the great Atlantis, ( that you call America) which have
now but Iunks, and Canoas, abounded then in tall Ships. This Island, (as
appears by faithful Registers of those times) had then fifteen hundred
strong Ships^ of great content. Of all this, there is with you sparing Memory,
or none; But we have large Knowledge thereof.

At that time, this Land was known and frequented by the Ships and V^ss^^s of
all the Nations beforenamed. And (as it comes to pass) they had many times
Men of other Countries, that were no Sailors, that came with them; As Persians,
Chaldeans, Arabians; So as almost all Nations of Might and Fame r^sorted
hither; Of whom, we have some Stirps, and little Tribes with us, at this day.
And for our own Ships, they went sundry Voyages, as well to your Streights,
which you call the Pillars of Hercules, As to other parts in the Atlantique and
Mediterrane Seas; As to Paguin, ( which is the same with Cambalaine) and
Quinzy, upon the Oriental Seas, as far as to the Borders of the East Tartary.

At the same time, and an Age after, or more, the Inhabitants of the great
Atlantis did flourish. For though the Narration and Description which is made
by a great Man with you, that the Descendents ^f Neptune planted there; and of
the Magnificent Temple, Palace, City, and Hill; and the manifold streams of
goodly Navigable Rivers, which (as so many Chains) environed the same Site, and
Temple; And the several Degrees of Ascent, whereby Men did climb up to the
same, as i^ it had been a Scala Coeli; be all Poetical and Fabulous: Yet so
much is true, that the said Country of Atlantis; As well that of Peru then
called Coya, as that of Mexico, then named Tyrambel, were mighty and proud
Kingdoms, in Arms, Shipping, and Riches: So mighty, as at one time; (or at
least within the space of ten years,) they both made two great Expeditions;
They of Tyrambel through the Atlantique to the Mediterrane Sea; and they of
Coya, through the South Sea upon this our Island: And for the former of these,
which was into Europe, the same Author amongst you (as as it seems) had some
relation from the Egyptian Priest, whom he cites. For assuredly, such a thing
there was. But whether it were the Ancient Athenians, that had the glory of the
Repulse, and Resistance of those Forces, I can say nothing: But certain it is,
there never came back either Ship, or Man from that Voyage. Neither had the
other Voyage of those of Coya upon us, had better fortune, if they had not met
with enemies of greater clemency. For the King of this Island, ( by name
Altabin) a wise Man, and a great Warrier; Knowing well ^oth his own strength,
and that of his Enemies; handled the matter so, as he cut off their
Landforces, from their Ships, and entoyled both their Navy, and their Camp,
with a greater power than theirs, both by Sea and Land: And compelled them to
render themselves without striking stroke: And after they were at his Mercy,
contenting himself only with their Oath, that they should no more bear Arms
against him, dismissed them all in safety. But the Divine revenge overtook not
long after those proud Enterprises. For within less than the space of one
Hundred Years, the Great Atlantis was utterly lost and destroyed: Not by a
great Earthquake, as your Man says; (For that whole Trac^ is little subject to
Earthquakes;) But by a particular Deluge, or Inundation; Those Countries
having, at this Day, far greater Rivers, and far higher Mountains, to pour
down Waters, than any part of the Old World. But it is true, that the same
Inundation was not deep; Not past forty foot, in most places, from the Ground;
So that although it destroyed Man and Beast generally, yet some few wild
Inhabitants of the Wood escaped. Birds also were saved by flying to the High
Trees and Woods. F^r as for Men, although they had Buildings in many places,
higher than the Depth of the Water; Y^^ that Inundation, though it were
shallow, had a long Continuance; whereby they of the Vale, that were not
drowned, perished for want of Food, and other things necessary. So as marvel
you not at the thin Population of America, nor at the Rudeness and Ignorance
of the People; For you must account your I^habitants of America as a young
People; younger a thousand years, at the least, than the rest of the World: For
that there was so much time, between the Universal Flood; and their Particular
Inundation. For the poor R^mnant of Humane Seed, which remained in their
Mountains, Pe^pled the Country again slo^ly, by little and little; And being
simple and a savage People (Not like Noah and his Sons, which was the chief
Family of the Earth) they were not able to leave Letters, Arts, and Civility to
their Posterity; And having likewise in their Mountainous Habitations been
used, (in respect of the Extreme Cold of those Regions) to cloth themselves
with the Skins of Tigers, Bears, and great Hairy Goats, that they have in
those Parts; When afer they came down into the Valley, and fo^nd the
intolerable Heats which are there, and knew no means of lighter Apparel; they
were forced to begin the custo^e of Going Naked, which continues at this day.
Only they take great Pride and delight, in the Feathers of Birds; And this al^o
they took from those their Ancestors of the Mountains, who were invited unto
it, by the infinite Flight of Birds, that came up to the high Grounds, while
the Waters stood below. So you see, by this main. Accident of Time, we lost our
Traffic with the Amercians, with whom, of all others, in regard, they lay
nearest to us, we had most Commerce. As for the other Parts of the World, it is
most manifest, that in the Ages following, (whether, it were in respect of
Wars, or by a Natural Revolution of Time,) Navigation did every where greatly
decay; And specially, far Voyages, (the rather by the Use of Galleys, and
such Vessels as could hardly brook the Ocean) were altogether left and omitted.
So then, that Part o^ Intercourse, which could be from other Nations, to sail
to us; you see how it has long since ceased; Except it were by some rare
Accident, as this of yours. But now of the Cessation of that other Part of
Intercourse, which might be by our Sailing to other Nations, I must yield you
some other Cause. For I cannot say, (if I should say truly,) but our Shipping,
for Number, Strength, Mariners, Pylots, and all things that appertain to
Navigation, is as great as ever; And therefore why we should sit at home, I
shall now give you an account by it self; And it ^ill draw nearer, to give you
satisfaction, to your principal Question.

There reigned in this Island, about 1900 years ago, a King, whose memory of
all others we most adore; Not superstitiously, but as a Divine Instrument,
though a Mortal Man: his Name was Salomona: And we esteem him as the Lawgiver
of our Nation. This King had a large heart, inscrutable ^or good; and was
wholly bent to make his Kingdom and People Happy. He therefore taking into
consideration, how sufficient and substantive this Land was, to maintain it
self without any aid (at all) of the Foreiner; Being 5600 Mile in Circuit, and
of rare Fertility of Soil, in the greatest part thereof; And finding also the
Shipping of this Country mo^ght be plentifully set on work, both by Fishing,
and by Transportations from Port to Port, and likewise by Sailing unto some
small Islands that are not far from us, and are under the Crown and Laws of
this State; And recalling into his Memory, the happy and flourishing Estate,
wherein this Land then was; So as it might be a thousand ways alte^e^ to the
worse, but scarce any one way to the better; thought nothing wanted to his
Noble and Heroical Intentions, but only (as far as Humane foresight might
reach) to give perpetuity to that, which was in his time so happily
established^ therefore amongst his other Fundamental Laws of this Kingdom, he
did ordain, the Interdicts and Prohibitions, which we have touching Entrance of
Strangers; which at that time (though it was after the Calamity of America) was
frequent; Doubting Novelties and Commixture of Manners. It is true, the Like
Law, against the admission of Strangers without License, is an ancient Law, in
the Kingdom of China, and yet continued in use. But there it is a poor thing;
And has made them a curious, ignorant, fearf^ll foolish Nation. But our
Lawgiver made his Law of another temper. For first, he has preserved all
points of Humanity, in taking Order, and making Provision for the Relie^ of
Strangers distressed; whereof you have t^sted. At which Speech (as reason was)
we all rose up^ and bowed our selves. He went on. That King also still desiring
to join Humanity and Policy together; And thinking it against Humanity, to
detein Strangers here against their Wills; and against Policy, that they should
return, and discover their knowledge of this Estate, he took this Course: H^
did ordain, that of the Strangers, that should be permitted to Land^ as many
(at a^l times) might depart as would; But as man^ as would stay, should have
very good Conditions, and Means to live, from the State. Wherein he saw so
far, that now in so many Ages since the Prohibition, we, have memory, not of
one Ship that ever returned, and but of thirteen Persons only, at several
times, that chose to return in our Bottomes. What those few that returned, may
have reported abroad, I know not. But you must think, Whatsoever they have
said, could be taken where they came, but for a Dream. Now for our Traveling
from hence into Parts abroad, our Lawgiver thought fit, altogether to restrein
it. So is it not in China. For the Chinese sail where they will, or can; which
shows, that their Law of keeping out Strangers, is a Law of Pusillanimity and
fear. But this restraint of ours, has one only Excep^ion, which is admirable;
Preserving the Good which comes by communicating with Strangers, and avoiding
the Hurt: And I will now open it to you. And here I shall seem a little to
digress, but you will by and by find it pertinent. Ye shall understand, (my
dear friends,) that amongst the Excellent acts of that King, one above all has
the preheminen^e. It was the Erection, and Institution of an Order, or Society,
which we call Salomons House; The Noblest Foundation, (as we think,) that ever
was upon the Earth: And the Lanthor^e of this Kingdom. It is dedicated to the
Study of the Works and Creatures of GOD. Some think it bears the Founders
Name a little corrupted, as if it should be Solamon's House. But the Records
write it, as it is spoken. So as I take it to be denominate of the King of the
Hebrews, which is famous with you, and no stranger to us; For we have some
Parts of his Works, which with you are lost; Namely that Natural History, which
he wrote of all plants, from the Cedar of Libanus, to the Moss that grows
out of the Wall. And of all things that have Life and Motion. This makes me
think that our King finding himself to Symbolize, in many things, with that
King of the Hebrews (which lived many years before him) honored him with the
Title of this Foundation. And I am the rather induced to be of this Opinion,
for that I find in ancient Records, this Order or Society is sometimes called
Salomons House; And sometimes the College of the Six Days Works; whereby I am
satisfied, That our Excellent King had learned from the Hebrews, That GOD had
created the World, and all that therein is, within six Days; And therefore he
instituted that House, for the finding out of the true Nature of all things
(whereby GOD might ^ave the more Glory in the Workmanship of them, and Men the
more Fruit in their Use of them,) did give it also that second Name. But now to
come to our present purpose. When the King had forbidden, to all his People,
Navigation in any Part, that was not under his Crown, he made nevertheless
this Ordinance; that every twelve years there should be set forth, out of this
Kingdom, two Ships, appointed to several Voyages; that in either of these
Ships, there should be a Mission of three of the Fellows, or Brethren of
Salomons House, whose Errand was only to give us Knowledge of the Affairs and
State of those Countries, to which they were designed; And especially of the
Sciences, Arts, Manufactures, and Inventions of all the World; And withal to
^ring unto us, Books, Instruments, and Paterns, in every kind: That the Ships,
after they had landed the Brethren, should return; And that the Brethren should
stay abroad till the new Mission. The Ships are not otherwise fraught than with
store of Victuals, and good Quantity of Treasure to remain with the Brethren,
for the buying of such Things, and rewarding of such Persons, as they should
think fit. Now for me to tell you, how the vulgar sort of Mariners are
contained from being discovered at Land; And how they that must be put on shore
for any time, color themselves under the Names of other Nations; And to what
places these Voyages have been designed; And what places of Rendezvous are
appointed for the new Missions; And the like circumstances of the Practique; I
may not do it; Neither is it much to your desire. But thus you see we maintain
a Trade, not for Gold, Silver, or Jewels, Nor for Silks, Nor for Spices; Nor
any other Commodity of Matter; But only for Gods first Creature, which was
Light: To have Light (I say) of the growth of all Parts of the World. And when
he had said this, he was silent; And so were we all. For indeed we were all
astonished, to hear so strange things so probably told. And he perceiving that
we were willing to say somewhat, but had it not ready, in great Courtesy took
us off, and descended to ask us Questions of our Voyage and Fortunes, and in
the end concluded that we might do well, to think with our selves, what time
of stay we would demand of the State; And bad us not to scant our selves: For
he would procure such time as we desired. VVhereupon we all rose up and
presented our selves to kiss the skirt of his Tippet, but he would not suffer
us; and so took his leave. But when it came once amongst our People, that the
State used to offer Conditions to Strangers, that would stay, we had work
enough to get any of our Men to look to our Ship; And to keep them from going
presently to the Governor, to crave conditions. But with much ado we refrained
them, till we might agree what course to take.

We took our selves now for freemen, seeing there was no danger of our utter
Perdition; And lived most joyfully, going abroad, and seeing what was to be
seen, in the City and places adjacent^ within our Tedder; And obtaining
acquaintance with many of the City, not of the meanest Quality; at whose hands
we found such Humanity, and such a Freedom and desire to take Strangers, as it
were, into their Bosom, as was enough to make us forget all that was dear to
us, in our own Countries: And continually we met with many things, right worthy
of Observation, and Relation: As indeed, if there be a Mi^our in the World,
worthy to hold Men's Eyes, it is that Country. One day there were two of our
Company bidden to a Feast, of the Family, as they call it. A most Natural,
Pious, and Reverend Custom it is, showing that Nation to be compounded of all
goodness. This is the manner of it. It is granted to any Man, that shall live
to see thirty Persons, descended of his Body, alive together, and all above
three years old, to make this Feast, which is done at the cost of the State.
The Father of the Family, whom they call the Tirsan, two days before the
^east, takes to him three of such Friends as he likes to choose; And is
assisted also by the Governor of the City, or Place, where the Feast is
celebrated; and all the Persons of the Family, of both Sexes, are summoned to
attend him. These two days the Tirsan sits in consultation, concerning the
good Estate of the Family. There, if there be any Discord or Suits between any
of the Family, they are compounded and appeased. There, if any of the Family be
distressed or decayed, order is taken for their Relief, and competent means to
live. There, if any be subject to vice, or take ill Courses, they are reproved,
and Censured. So likewise, Direction is given touching Marriages, and the
courses of life, which any of them should ^ake, with diverse other the like
Orders and Advices. The Governor assisteth to the end, to put in Execution, by
his Public Authority, the Decrees and orders of the Tirsan, if they should be
disobeyed, though that se^dome needs; Such Reverence and obedience they give,
to the Order of Nature. The Tirsan does also then ever choose one man from
amongst his Sons, to live in House with him: Who is called, ever after, the Son
of the Vine. The Reason will hereafter app^^^. On the Feast day, the Father, or
Tirsan, comes forth (...) Divine Service into a large Room where the Feast is
celebrated; Which Room has an Half-Pace at the upper and. Against the wall, in
the middle of the Half-Pace, is a Chair placed for him, with a Table and Carpet
before it. Over the Chair is a State, made Round or Ovall, and it is of Ivy; An
Ivy somewhat whiter than ours, like the Leaf of a Silver Aspe, but more
shining; For it is green all winter. And the State is curiously wrought with
Silver and Silk of diverse Colors, broiding or binding in the Ivy; And is ever
of the work, of some of the Daughters of the Family; And veiled over at the
Top, with a fine Net of Silk and Silver. But the Substance of it is true Ivy;
whereof, after it is taken down, the Friends of the Family are desirous to have
some Leaf or Sprig to keep. The Tirsan comes forth with all his Generation or
Lineage, the Males before him, and the Females following him; And if there be a
Mother, from whose Body the whole Lineage is descended, there is a Traverse
placed in a Loft above on the right hand of the Chair, with a privy Door, and a
carved VVindow of Glass, leaded with Gold and Blew; where she sits, but is
not seen. When the Tirsan is come forth, he sits down in the Chair; And all
the Lineage place themselves against the Wall, both at his Back, and upon the
Return of the Half-pace, in Order of their years, without difference of Sex,
and stand upon their Feet. When he is set, the Room being always full of
Company; but well kept, and without Disorder; after some pause there comes in
from the lower end of the Room, a Taratan, (which is much as an Herald) ^^d on
either side of him two young Lads; whereof one carr^^^h a Scrowl of their
shining yellow Parchment; And the other a cluster of Grapes of Gold, with a
long foot or Stalk. The Herald, and Children, are chothed with Mantles of
Seawater green Satin; But the Heralds Mantle is streame^ with Gold, and has
a train. Then the Herald with three Courtesies, or rather inclinations, comes
up as far as the Half-pace; And there first takes into his Hand the Scrowl.
This Scrowl is the Kings Charter, containing Gift of Revenew, and many
Privileges, Exemptions and points of Honor, granted to the Father of the
Family; And it is ever styled and directed, To such an one, Our well-beloved
Friend and Creditour: Which is a Title proper only to this Case. For they say,
the King is Debtor to no Man, but for Propagation of his Subjects; the Seal set
to the Kings Charter, is the Kings Image, Imbossed or molded in Gold; And
though such Charters be expedited of Course, and as of Right, yet they are
varied by discretion, according to the Number and Dignity of the Family. This
Charter the Herald reads aloud; And while it is read, the Father or Tirsan,
stands up, supported by two of his Sons^ such as he chooses. Then the Herald
mou^teth the Half-Pace, and delivers the Charter into his Hand: And with that
there is an Acclamation, by all that are present, in their Language, which is
thus much; Happy are the People of Bensalem. Then the Herald takes into his
Hand from the other Child, the Cluster of Grapes, which is of Gold; Both the
Stalk, and the Grapes. But the Grapes are daintily enamelled; And if the Males
of the Family be the greater number, the Grapes are enamelled Purple, with a
little Sun set on the top; If the Females, then they are enamelled into a
greenish yellow, with a Cressant on the top. The Grapes are in number as many
as there are Descendants of the Family. This Golden Clusture, the Herald
delivers also to the Tirsan; who presently delivers it over to that Son,
that he had formerly chosen, to be in House with him: Who bears it before
his Father, as an ensign of Honor, when he goes in Public ever after; And is
thereupon called the Son of the Vine. After this Ceremony ended, the Father or
Tirsan retireth^ And after some time comes forth again to Dinner, where he
sits alone under the State, as before; And none of his Descendants sit with
him, of what Degree or Dignity so ever, except he hap to b^ ^f Salomons House.
He is served only by his own Children, (...) as are Male; who perform unto him
all service of the Table upon the Knee; And the Women only stand about him,
leaning against the Wall. The Room below his Half-pace, has tables on the
sides for the Guests that are bidden; who are served with great and comely
order; And toward the end of Dinner (which in the greatest Feasts with them,
lasts never above an Hour and an half) there is an Hymn sung, varied
according to the Invention of him that composed it; (for they have excellent
Poesy,) But the Subject of it is (always) the praises of Adam, and Noah, and
Abraham; Whereof the former two Peopled the World, and the last was the
Father of the Faithful. concluding ever with a Thanksgiving for the Nativity
of our Savior, in whose Birth, the Births of all are only Blessed. Dinner
being done, the Tirsan retireth again; And having withdrawn himself alone into
a place, where he makes some private Prayers, he comes forth the third time,
to give the Blessing; with all his Descendants, who stand about him as at the
first. Then he calls them forth by one and by one, by name, as he pleases,
though seldom the Order of Age be inverted. The person that is called, (the
Table being before removed,) kneeleth down before the Chair, and the Father
lays his Hand upon his Head, or her Head, and gives the Blessing in these
words; Son of Bensalem, (or Daughter of Bensalem,) thy Father says it; The Man
by whom thou have Breath and Life speaks the word; the blessing of the
Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, and the Holy Dove be upon thee, and
make the days of thy Pilgrimage good and many. This he says to every of them;
And that done, if there be any of his Sons of eminent Merit and Virtue, (so
they be not above two,) he calls for them again; and says, laying his Arm
over their shoulders, they s^anding; Sons, it is well you are born, give God
the pra^se, and persevere to the end. And withal delivers to either of them
a Jewel, made in the Figure of an Ear of Wheat, which they ever after wear in
the front of their Turban, or Hat. This done, they fall to Music and dances,
and other recreations, after their manner, for the rest of the day^ This is the
full order of that Feast.

By that time, six or seven days were spent, I was fallen in^to straight
Acquaintance, with a Merchant of that City, whose Name was Ioabin. He was a Jew
and Circumcised: For they have some few stirps of Jews, yet remaining among
them, whom they leave to their own Religion. Which they may the better do,
because they are of a far differing Disposition from the Jews in other parts.
For whereas they hate the Name of CHRIST; and have a secret inbred Rancour
against the People among whom they live; these (contrariwise) give unto our
SAVIOR many high Attributes, and love the Nation of Bensalem, extremely.
Surely this Man, of whom I speak, would ever acknowledge, that CHRIST was born
of a Virgin, and that he was more than a Man; And he would tell how GOD made
him Ruler of the Seraphims, which guard his Throne; And they call him also the
Milken way, and the Eliah of the Messiah; and many other high Names; which
though they be Inferior to his Divine Majesty, yet they are far from the
Language of other Jews. And for the Country of Bensalem, ^hi^ Man would make no
end of commending it, Being desirous by Tradition among the Jews there, to have
it believed, that the People thereof were of the generations of Abraham, by
another Son, whom they call Nachoran; And that Moses by a secret Cabala
ordained the Laws of Bensalem which they now use; And that when the Messia
should come, and sit in his Throne at Jerusalem, the King of Bensalem should
sit at his feet, whereas other Kings should keep a great distance. But yet
setting aside these Jewish Dreams, the Man was a wise Man, and learned, and of
great Policy, and excellently seen in the Laws and Customs of that Nation.
Amongst other Discourses, one day I told him, I was much affected with the
Relation I had, from some of the Company, of their Custome^ in holding the
Feast of the Family; For that (me thought) I had never heard of a Solemnity,
wherein Nature did so much preside. And because Propagation of Families,
proceeds from the Nuptial Copulation, I desired to know of him, what Laws and
Customs they had concerning Marriage; and whether they kept Marriage well; and
whether they were tied to one Wife? For that where Population is so much
affected, and such as with them it seemed to be, there is commonly permission
of Plurality of Wives. To this he said; You have reason for to commend that
excellent Institution of the Feast of the Family; And indeed we have
Experience, that those Families that are Partakers of the Blessings of that
Feast, do flourish and prosper ever after, in an extraordinary manner. But hear
me now, and I will tell you what I know. You shall understand, that there is
not under the Heavens so chaste a Nation, as this of Bensalem; Nor so free from
all Pollution or foulness^. It is the Virgin of the World. I remember, I have
read in one of your Europaean Books, of an holy Hermit amongst you, that
d^sired to see the Spirit of Fornication, and there appeared to him, a little
foul ugly AEthiope: But if he had desi^ed to see the Spirit of Chastity of
Bensalem, it would have appeared to him, in the likeness of a fair beautiful
Cherubine. For there is nothing, amongst Mortal Men, more fair and admirable,
than the Chaste Minds of this People. Know therefore, that with them there are
no Stews, no dissolute Houses, no Curtisans, nor any thing of that kind. Nay
they wonder (with detestation) at you in Europe, which permit such things. They
say you have put Marriage out of Office: For Marriage is ordained a Remedy for
unlawful Concupiscence; And Natural Concupiscence seems as a spur to
Marriage. Eut when Men have at hand a Remedy, more agreeable to their corrupt
Will, Marriage is almost expulsed. And therefore there are with you seen
infinite Men, that mary not, but choose rather a libertine and impu^e single
life, than to be yoaked in Marriage; And many that do mary, mary late, when the
Prime and Strength of their Years is past. And when they do mary, what is
Marriage to them, But a very Bargain; Wherein is sought Alliance, or Portion, or
Reputation, with some desire (almost indifferent) of Issue; And not the
faithful Nuptial Union of Man and Wife, that was first instituted. Neither is
it possible, that those that have cast away so basely, so much of their
Strength, should greatly esteem Children (being of the same Matter) as chaste
Men do. So likewise during Marriage is the Case much amended, as it ought to be
if those things were tolerated only for necessity; No, but they remain still as
a very affront to Marriage: The Haunting of those dissolute places, or resort to
Courtezans, are no more punished in Married men, than in Batchelers. And the
depraved Custom of Change, and the delight in Meretricious Embracements,
(where sin is turned into Art,) makes Marriage a dull thing, and a kind of
Imposition, or Tax. They hear you defend these things; as do^e to avoid greater
Evils; As Advoutries, Deflouring of Virgins, Unnatural Lust, and the like. But
they say, this is a preposterous Wisdom; and they call it Lots offer, who to
save his Guests from abusing, Offered his Daughters: Nay they say further, That
there is little gained in this; For that the same Vices and Appetites, do still
remain and abound, Unlawful Lust being like a Furnace, that if you stop the
Flames altogether, it will quench, but if you give it any vent, it will rage;
As for Masculine love, they have no touch of it; And yet there are not, so
faithful and inviolate Friendships, in the World again, as are there; And to
speak generally, (as I said before,) I have not read of any such Chastity, in
any People, as theirs. And their usual saying is^ That whosoever is unchaste
cannot reverence himself: And they say, That the Reverence of a Man's self, is,
next Religion, the chiefest bridle of all Vices. And when he had said this, the
good Jew paused a little; Whereupon I far more willing to hear him speak on,
than to speak my self; yet thinking it decent, that upon his pawse of Speech, I
should not be altogether silent, said only this; That I would say to him, as
the Widow of Sarepta said to Elias; That he was come to bring to Memory our
Sins; And that I confess the Righteousness of Bensalem, was greater than the
Righteousness of Europe. At which speech he bowed his Head, and went on this
manner. They have also many wise and excellent Laws touching Marriage, They
a^low no Poligamie. They have ordained that none do intermary or contract,
until a Month be past from their first intervie^. Marriage without consent of
Parents they do not make void, but they mu^ct it in the Inheritors: For the
Children of such Marriages, are not admitted to inherit, above a third Part of
their Parents Inheritance: I have read in a Book of one of your Men, of a
Feigned Commonwealth, where the Married couple are permitted, before they
Contract, to see one another Naked. This they dislike: for they think it a
scorn, to give a Refusal after so fam^liar Knowledge^ But because of many
hidden Defects in Men and Women's Bodies, they have a more Civil way: for they
have near every Town, a Couple of Pools, ( which they call Adam and Eves Pools)
where it is permit^ed to one of the Friends of the Man, and another of the
Friends of the Woman, to see them severally bath Naked.

And as we were thus in Conference, there came one that seemed to be a
Messenger, in a rich Huke, that spoke with the Jew: whereupon he turned to me
and said; You will pardon me, for I am commanded away in have. The next Morning
he came to me again, joy^ull, as it seemed, and said; There is word come to the
Governor of the City, that one of the Fathers of Salomons House, will be here
this day Seven^night: We have seen none of them this Dozen Years: His Coming
is in State; But the cause of his Coming is secret. I will provide you, and
your Fellows of a good standing to see his Entry. I thanked him and told him: I
was most glad ^f the News. The day being come he made his Entry. He was a Man
of middle Stature, and age, comely of person, and had an Aspect as if he pitied
Men. He was clothed in a Robe of fine black Cloth, with wide Sleeves, and a
Cape. His under Garment was of excellent while Linen down to the Foot, girt
with a Girdle of the same; And a Sindon or Tippet of the same about his Neck.
He had Gloves, that were curious, and set with Stone; And Shoes of
Peach-coloured Velvet. His Neck was bare to the Shoulders. His Hat was like a
Helmet, or Spanish Montera; and his Locks curled below it decently: They were
of Color brown. His Beard was cut round, and of the same color with his Hair,
somewhat ligher. He was carried in a rich Chariot, without wheels,
Litter-wise, With two Horses at either end, richly trapped in blew Velvet
Embroydered; and two Footmen on each side in the like attire. The Chariot was
all of Cedar, gilt and adorned with Crystal; save that the Fore-end had
Pannels of Sapphires, set in borders of Gold, and the Hinderend the like of
Emarauds of the Pe^u Color. There was also a Sun of Gold, Radiant upon the
Top, in the Midst; and on the Top before, a small Cherub of Gold, with VVings
displayed. The Chariot was covered with cloth of Gold ^issued upon Blew. He had
before him fifty attendants, young Men all, in white Satin loose Coats up to
the Mid Leg, and Stockings of white Silk; and Shoes of blew Velvet; and Hats of
blew Velvet; with fine Plums of diverse Colors, set round like Hatbands. Next
before the Chariot, went two Men, bare headed, in Linen garments down to
thefoot, girt, and Shoes of blew Velvet, who carried the one a Crosier, the
other a Pastoral Staff like a Sheep-hook; Neither of them of Metal, but the
Crosier of Balm-wood, the Pastoral Staff of Cedar. Horsemen he had none,
neither before nor behind his Chariot: As it seems, to avoid all Tumult and
trouble. Behind his Chariot, went all the Officers and Principals of the
Companies of the City. He sat alone upon Cushions, of a kind of Excellent
Plush, blew; And under his Foot curious Carpets of Silk of diverse Colors, like
the Persian, but far finer. He held up his Bare Hand as he went, as blessing
the people, but in Silence. The Street was wonderfully well kept; So that there
was never any Army had their Men stand in better Battel-Array, than the People
stood. The Windows likewise was not crowded, but every one stood in them, as
if they had been placed. When the show was past, the Jew said to me; I shall
not be able to attend you as I would, in regard of some Charge the City has
laid upon me for the Entertaining of this great Person. Three days after the
Jew came to me again and said; Ye are happy men; For the Father of Salomons
House takes knowledge of your being here, and commanded me to tell you, that
he will admit all your Company to his presence, and have private Conference
with one of you, that ye shall choose: And for this has appointed the next
day after to Morrow. And because he means to give you his Blessing, he has
appointed it in the Fore-Noon. We came at our Day and Hour, and I was chosen
by my Fellows for the private access. We found him in a fair Chamber, richly
hanged, and carpetted under Foot, without any Degrees to the State, he was set
upon a Low Throne richly adorned, and a rich cloth of State over his head of
blew Satin Embroidered. He was alone, save that he had two Pages of Honor, on
either Hand one, finely attired in White. His Under-Garments were the like
that we saw him wear in the Chariot; But instead of his Gown, he had on him a
Mantle with a Cape, of the same fine Black, fastened about him. When we came
in, as we were taught, we bowed Low at our first Entrance; And when we were
come near his Chair, he stood up, holding forth his Hand ungloved, and in
Posture of Blessing; And we every one of us stooped down, and kissed the Hem of
his Tippet. That done, the rest departed, and I remained. Then he warned the
Pages forth of the Room, and caused me to sit down beside him, and spoke to me
thus in the Spanish Tongue.

GOD bless thee, my Son; I will give thee the greatest Jewel I have. For I
will impart unto thee, for the love of GOD and Men, a Relation of the true
State of Salomons House. Son, to make you know the true State of Salomons
House, I will keep this Order. First, I will set forth unto you the End of our
Foundation. Secondly, the Preparations and Instruments we have for our Works.
Thirdly, the ^^veral Employments and Functious whereto our Fellows are
assigned. And fourthly the Ordinances and Rites which we observe.

The end of our Foundation is the Knowledge of Causes, and Secret Motions of
things; and the Enlarging of the bounds of Humane Empire, to the Effecting of
all Things possible.

The Preparations and Instruments are these. We have large and deep Caves of
several Depths: The deepest are sunk 600 Fathom: And some of them are dug
and made under great Hills and Mountains: So that if you reckon together the
Depth of the Hill, and the Depth of the Cave, they are (some of them) above
three miles deep. For we find, that the Depth of an Hill, and the Depth of a
Cave from the Flat, is the same Thing; both remote alike, from the Sun, and
Heavens Beams, and from the open Air^ These Caves we call the Lower Region. And
we use them for all Coagulations, Indurations, Refrigerations, and
Conservations of Bodies. We use them likewise for the Imitation of Natural
Mines; And the Producing, also of New Artificial Metals, by Compositions and
Materials which we use and lay there for many years. We use them also
sometimes, (which may seem strange) for Curing of some Diseases, and for
Prolongation of Life, in some Hermits that choose to live there, well
accomodated of all things necessary, and indeed live very long; by whom also we
learn many things.

We have Burials in several Earths, where we put diverse Cements, as the
Chinese, do their Porcellane. But we have t^em in greater Variety, and some of
them more fine. We also have great variety of Composts, and Soils, for the
Making of the Earth Fruit^full.

We have High Towers; The Highest about half a Mile in Height And some of them
^ikewise set upon High Mountains: So that the Vantage of the Hill with the
Tower, is in the Highest of them thr^e Miles at least. And these Places we call
the Upper Region; Accounting the Air between the High Places, and the Low, as a
Middle Region. We use these Towers, according to their several Heights, and
Situations, for Insolation, Refrigeration, Conse^vation, And for the View of
diverse Meteors; As Winds, Rain, Snow, Ha^l; And some of the Fiery Meteors also.
And upon them, in some Places, are Dwellings of Hermits, whom we visit
sometimes, and instruct what to observe.

We have great Lakes, both Salt, and Fresh, whereof we have use for the Fish,
and Fowl. We use them also for Burials, of some Natural Bodies: For we find a
difference in things buried in Earth, or in Air bel^w the Earth; and things
buried in Water. We have also Pools, of which some do strain Fresh Water out
of Salt; And others by Art do turn Fresh Water into Salt. We have also some
Rocks in the Midst of the Sea; And some Bays upon the Shore for some Works,
wherein is required the Air and Vapor of the Sea. We have likewise violent
Streams and Cataracts; which serve us for many Motions: And likewise Engines
for Multiplying and Enforcing of Winds, to set also on going diverse Motions.

We have also a Number of Artificial Wells and Fountains, made in Imitation of
the Natural Sources and Bathes; As tincted upon Vitrioll, Sulphur, Steel,
Brass, Lead, Nitre, and other Minerals: And again, we have little Wells for
Infusions of many Things, where the Waters take the Virtue quicker and better,
than in Vessels or Basins. And amongst them we have a Water, which we call
water of Paradise, being, by that we do it; made very Sovereign for Health and
Prolongation of Life.

We have also Great and spacious Houses, where we imitate and demonstrate
Meteors; As Snow, Hail, Rain, some Artificial Rains of Bodies, and not of
Water, Thunders, Lightnings; Also Generations of Bodies, in Air; As Frogs,
Flies, and diverse Others.

We have also certain Chambers, which we call Chambers of Health, where we
qualify the Air as we think good and proper for the Cure of diverse Diseases,
and Preservation of Health.

We have also ^air and large Baths, of several Mixtures, for the Cure of
D^seases^ and the restoring of Man's Body from Arefaction: And other for the
Confiming of it in Strength of Sinews, vital Parts, and the very Juice and
Substance of the Body.

We have also large and various Orchards, and Gardens; Wherein we do not so
much respect Beauty, as Variety of Ground and Soil, proper for diverse Trees and
Herbs: And some very spacious, wh^re Trees and Berries are set, whereof we make
diverse Kinds of Drinks, besides the Vine-yards. In these we practice likewise
all Conclusions of Graf^ing, and Inoculating, as well of Wild-Trees, as
Fruit Trees, which produces many Effects: And we make (by A^t) in the same
Orchards, and Gardens, Trees, and Flowers, to come earlier or later than their
Seasons; And to come up and bear more speedily than by their Natural Course
they do. We make them also by Art greater much than their Nature; And their
Fruit greater, and sweeter, and of differings Taste, Smell, Color, and Figure,
from their Nature. And many of them we so Order, that they become of Medicinal
Use.

We have also Means to make diverse Plants rise, by Mixtures of Earths without
Seeds; And likewise to make diverse New Plants, differing from the Vulgar; and
to make one Tree or Plant turn into another.

We have also Parks, and Enclosures of all Sorts of Beasts, and Birds^ which we
use not only for view or Rareness, but likewise for Dissections and Trials^
That thereby we may take light, what may be wrought upon the Body of Man.
Wherein we find many strange Effects; As Continuing Life in them, though diverse
Parts, which you account Vital, be perished, and taken forth; Resuscitating of
some that seem Dead in Appearance; And the like. We try also all Poisons, and
other Medicines upon them, as well of Surgery, as Physic. By Art likewise
we make them Greater or Taller, than their Kind is; And contrariwise Dwarf them
and stay their Growth: We make them more Fruitful and Bearing than their Kind
is; And contrary wise Barren and not Generative. Also we make them differ in
Color, Shape, Activity many ways. We find Means to make Commixtures and
Copulations of diverse Kinds; which have produced many New Kinds, and them not
Barren, as the general Opinion is. We make a number of Kinds of Serpents,
Worms, Flies, Fishes, of putrefaction; whereof some are advanced (in effect) to
be perfect Creatures, like Beasts, or Birds; And have Sexes, and do propagate.
Neither do we this by Chance, but we know before hand, of what Matter and
Commixture, what Kind of those Creature will arise.

We have also Particular Pools, where we make Trials upon Fishes, as we have
said before of Beasts and Birds.

We have also Places for Breed and Generation of those Kinds of Worms, and
Flies, which are of Special Use; such as are with you your Silkworms and Bees.

I will not hold you long with recounting of our Brew-houses Bake-houses, and
Kitchins, where are made diverse Drinks, Breads, and Meats, Rare and of special
Effects. Wines we have of Grapes; And Drinks of other Juice, of Fruits, of
Grains, and of Roots; And of Mixtures with Honey, Sugar, Manna, and Fruits
dried and decocted: Also of the Tears or Woundings of Trees; And of the Pulp of
Canes. And these Drinks are of Several Ages, some to the Age or Last o^ forty
years. We have Drinks also brewed with several Herbs, and Roots, and Spices;
Yea, with several Fleshes, and VVhite-Meats; whereof some of the Drinks are
such as they are in effect Meat and Drink both: So that Diverse, especially in
Age, do desire to live with them, with little or no Meat, or Bread. And above
all we strive to have Drinks of Extreme Thin Parts; To insinuate into the Body,
and yet without all Biting, Sharpness, or Fretting^ Insomuch as some of them
put upon the Back of your Hand, will, with a little stay pass through to the
Palm, and yet taste Mild to the Mouth. We have also Waters, which we ripen in
that fashion, as they become Nourishing; So that they are indeed excellent
Drink; And many will use no other. Breads we have of Several Grains, Roots, and
Kernels; Yea, and some of Flesh, and Fish, Dried; With diverse kinds of
Leavings, and Seasonings: So that some do extremely move Appetites; Some do
nourish so, as Diverse do live of them, without any other Meat; Who live very
long. So for Meats, we have some of them so beaten, and made Tender, and
mortified, yet without al^ Corrupting, as a VVeak Heat of the Stomach will turn
them into good Chilus; As well as a Strong Heat would Meat otherwise prepared.
We have some Meats also, and Breads, and Drinks, which taken by Men, enable
them to Fast long after^ and some other, that used make the very Flesh o^ Men's
Bodies, sensibly more Hard and Tough; And their Strength far^ greater, than
otherwise it would be.

We have Dispensatories, or Shops of Medicines. Wherein you may easily think,
if we have such Variety of Plants, and Diving Creatures, more than you have in
Europe, (for we know what you have,) the Simples, Druggs, and Ingredients of
Medicines, must likewise be in so much the greater Variety. We have them
likewise of diverse Ages, and long Fermentations. And for their Preparations, we
have not only all Manner of Exquisite Distilla^ions, and Separations, and
especially by Gentle Heats, and Percolations through diverse Strainers, yea, and
Substances; But also Exact Forms of Composition, whereby they incorp^rate
almost as they were Natural Simples.

We have also diverse Mechanical Arts, which you have not; And Stuffs made by
them; As Papers, Linen, Silks, Tissues, dainty Works of Feathers of wonderful
Luster; excellent Dies, and many others: And Shops likewise as well for such
as are not^^rought into Vulgar use amongst us; as for those that are. For you
must know, that of the Things before recited, many of them are grown into use
throughout the Kingdom; But yet, if they did flow from our Invention, we have
of them also for Patterns, and Principals.

We have also Furnaces of great Diversities, and that keep great Diversity of
Heats: Fierce and Quick^ Strong and Constant; So^^ and Mild^ Blown, Quiet Dry,
Mo^st; And the like. But above all we have Heats, in Imitation of the Sunns and
Heavenly Bodies Heats, that pass diverse inequalities, and (as it were) Orbs,
Progresses, and Returns, wher^by we may produce admirable effects. Besides, we
have Heats of Dungs; and of Bellies and Mawes of Living Creatures and of their
Bloods, and Bodies; and of Hayes and Herbs laid up moist; of Lime unquenched;
and such like. Instruments also which generate Heat only by Motion. And
further, Places for Strong Insolations; And ^gain, Places under the Earth,
which by Nature, or Art yield Heat. T^ese d^vers Heats we use, As the Nature of
the Operation which we intend^ requires.

We have also Perspective-Houses, where we make Demonstration of all Lights,
and Radiations: And of all Colors: And out of Things uncoloured and
Transparent, we can represent unto you all seve^all Colors; Not in Rain-bows,
( as it is in Gemms, and Prisms,) but of themselves Single. We represent also
all Multiplications o^ Light, which we carry to great Distance: and make so
Sharp, as to discern small Points and Lines. Also all Colourations of Light.
All Delusions and Deceits of the Sight, in Figures, Magnitudes, Motions,
Colors: All Demonstrations of Shadows. We find also diverse Means yet unknown
to you, of Producing of Light, originally, from diverse Bodies. We procure means
of Seeing Objects A-farr off; As in the Heaven, and Remote places: And
represent Things Near as A-farr off; And Things A-farr off as Near; Making
^e^igned Distances. We have also Helps so the Sight far above Spectacles and
Glasses in use; We have also Glasses and Means to see Small and Minute Bodies,
perfectly and distinctly; As the Shapes and Colors of Small Flies and Worms,
Grains, and Flaws, in Gemmes, which cannot otherwise he seen, Observations in
Urine and Blood not otherwise to be seen. We make Artificial Rain-Bows, Helo's,
and Circles ab^ut Light. We represent also all manner of Reflections,
Refractions, and Multiplication of Visual Beams o^ Objects.

We have also Precious Stones, of all kinds, many of them of great Beauty and
to you unknown: Chrystals likewise; And Glasses of diverse kinds; And amongst
them some of Metals Vitrificated, and other Materials, beside those of which
you make G^asse. Also a number of Fossiles, and Imperfect Minerals which you
have not. Likewise Loadstones of Prodigious Virtue: And other rare Stones, both
Natural and Artificial.

We have also Sound Houses, where we practice and demonstrate all Sounds, and
their Generation. We have Harmonies which you have not, of Quarter-Sounds, and
lesser Slides of Sounds^ Diverse Instruments of Music likewise to y^u unknown,
some sweeter than any you have^ With Bells and Rings that are dainty and sweet.
We represent small sounds as great and Deep; Likewise Great sounds, ^xtenuate
and sharp; We make diverse tremblings and VVarblings of Sounds, which in their
Original are Entire. We represent and imitate all Articulate sounds and
Letters, and the Voices and Notes of Beasts and Birds. We have certain Helps,
which set to the Ear do further the Hearing greatly. We have also diverse
strange and Artificial Echoes Reflecting the Voice many times, and as it were
tossing it: And some that give back the Voice Louder than it came, some
shriller, and some Deeper, Yea some rendering the Voice, Differing in the
Letters or Articulate Sound, from that they receive. We have all means to
convey Sounds in Trunks and Pipes, in strange Lines and Distan^es.

We have also Perfume-houses; wherewith we join also Practices of Taste. We
Multiply Smells, which may seem strange. We Imitate Smells, making all Smells
to breath out of other Mixtures than those that give them. We make diverse
Imitations of Taste likewise, so that they will deceive any Man's Taste. And in
this House we contain also a Confi^ure House; where we make all Sweetmeats
Dry and Moist; And diverse pleasant Wines, Milks, Broaths, an^ Sallets, far in
greater Variety than you have.

We have also Engine-Houses, where are prepared Engines and Instruments for
all sorts of Motions. There we imitate and practice to make Swifter Motions,
than any you have, either out of your Muskets, or any Engine that you have: and
to Make them, and Multiply them more Easily, and with Small Force, by Wheels
and other Means: and to make them Stronger and more Violent, than yours are;
Exceeding your greatest Cannons and Basilisks. We represent also Ordinance and
Instruments of War, and Engines of all Kinds and likewise new Mixtures and
Compositions of Gunpowder, Wild-Fires burning in Water, and Unquenchable: Also
Fireworks of all Variety, both for Pleasure, and Use. We imitate also Flights
of Birds; We have some Degrees of Flying in the Air. We have Ships and Boats
for Going under Water, and Brooking of Seas; Also Swimming-Girdles, and
Supporters. We have diverse curious Clocks; And other like Motions of Return:
And some perpetual Motions. We imitate also Motions of Living Creatures, by
Images of Men, Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and Serpents; We have also a great Number
of other Various Motions, strange for Equality, Finenesse^ and Subtility,

We have also a Mathematical-House, where are represented all Instruments, as
well of Geometry, as Astronomy, exquisitely made.

We have also Houses of Deceits of the Senses; where we represent all manner
of Feats of Juggling, False Apparitions, Impostures, and Illusions; And their
Fallacies. And surely you will easily believe that we that have so many Things
truly Natural, which induce Admiration, could in a World of Particulars deceive
the Senses, if we would disguise those Things, and labor to make them more
Miraculous. But we do hate all Impostures, and Lies: Insomuch as we have
severely forbidden it to all our Fellows, under pain of Ignominy and Fines,
that they do not show any Natural Work or Thing, Adorned or Swelling; but only
Pure as it is, and without all Affectation of Strangeness.

These are (my Son) the Riches of Salomons House.

For the several Employments and Offices of our Fellows, We have Twelve that
Sail into Foreign Countries under the Names of other Nations ( for our own we
conceal;) Who bring us the Books, and Abstracts, and Patterns of Experiments
of all other Parts. These we cal^ Merchants of Light.

We have Three that Collect the Experiments which are in all Books, These we
call Deprepators.

We have Three that Collect the Experiments of all Mechanical Arts^ And also
of Liberal Sciences; And also of practices which are not Brought into Arts.
These we call Mystery-men.

We have Three that try New Experiments.

Such as themselves think good. These we call Pioneers or Miners.

We have Three that Draw the Experiments of the Former Four into Titles and
Tables, to give the better light for the drawing of Observations and Axioms
out of them. These we call Compilers^

We have three that bend themselves, Looking into the Experiments of their
Fellows, and cast about how to draw out of them Things of Use, and Practice for
Man's life, and Knowledge, as well for Works as for Plain Demonstration of
Causes, Means of Natural Divinations, and the easy and clear Discovery of the
Virtues and Parts of Bodies. These we call Dowry-men or Bene^actors.

Then after diverse Meetings and Consults of our whole Number, to consider of
the former Labors and Collections, we have three that take care, out of them,
to Direct New Experiments, of a Higher Light, more Penetrating into Nature than
the Former. These we call Lamps.

We have Three othe^s that do Execute the Experiment, so Directed, and Report
them. These we call Inoculators.

Lastly, we have Three that raise the former Discoveries by Experiments, into
Greater Observations, Axioms, and Aporismes. These we call Interpreters of
Nature.

We have also, as you must think, Novices and Apprentices, that the Succession
of the former Employed men do not fail; besides a great Number of Servants and
Attendants, Men, and Women. And this we do also: We have Consultations, which
of the Inventions and Experiences, which we have discovered shall be Published,
and which not: And take all an Oath of Secrecy, for the concealing of those
which we think meet to keep Secret: Though some of those we do reveal sometime
to the State, and some not.

For our Ordinances and Rites^ We have two very Long, and Fair Galleries: In
o^e of these we place Patterns and Samples of all manner of the more Rare and
Excellent Inventions: In the other we place the Statuaes of all Principal
Inventours. There we have the Statua of your Columbus, that discovered the
West Indies: Also the Inventour of Ships: Your Monk that was the Inventour of
Ordinance, and of Gunpowder: The Inventour of Music: The Inventour of Letters:
The Inventour of Printing: The Inventour of Observations of Astronomy: The
Inventour o^ Works in Metal: The Inventour of Glass: The Inventour of Silk
of the Worm: The Inventour of Wine: The Inventour of Corn and Bread: The
Inventour of Sugars: And all these, by more certain Tradition, than you have.
Then we have diverse Inventours of our Own, of Excellent Works; which since you
have not seen, it were too long to make Descriptions of them; And besides, in
the right Understanding of those Descriptions, you might easily err. For upon
every Invention of Value, we erect a Statua to the Inventour, and give him a
Liberal and Honorable Reward. These Statuaes are, some of Brass; some of
Marble and Touchstone; some of Cedar and other special VVoods gilt and adorned;
some of Iron; some of Silver; some of Gold.

We have certain Hymns and Services, which we say daily, of Laud and Thanks to
God for his Mavelous Works: And Forms of Prayers, imploring his Aid and
Blessing for the Illumination of our Labors; the end turning them into Good
and Holy Uses.

Lastly, we have Circuits or Visits, of diverse Principal Cities of the
Kingdom; where as it comes to pass, we do publish such New Profitable
Inventions, as we think good. And we do also declare Natural Divinations of
Diseases, Plagues, Swarms of Hurtful Creatures, Scarcity, Tempest,
Earthquakes, Great Inundations, Comets, Temperature of the Year, and diverse
other things; And we give Counsel thereupon, what the People shall do, for the
Prevention and Remedy of them.

And when He had said this, He stood up: And I, as I had been taught, kneeled
down: and he laid his Right Hand upon my Head, and said; GOD bless thee my
Son, and GOD bless this Relation, which I have made. I give thee leave to
Publish it, for the good of other Nations; For we hear are in GODS Bosom, a
Land unknown. And so he left me; Having assigned a value of about two Thousand
Ducats, for a Bounty to me and my Fellows. For they give great Largesses,
where they come, upon all occasions.

The rest was not perfected.

MAGNALIA NATVRAE PRAECIPVE QVOAD VSVS HUMANOS.
THe Prologation of Life. The Restitution of Youth in some Degree. The
Retardation of Age. The Curing of diseases counted Incurable. The Mitigation of
Pain. More Easy and less Loathsome Purgings. The Increasing of Strength and
Activity. The Increasing of Ability to suffer Torture or Pain. The Altering of
Complexions: and Fatness, and Leanesse. The Altering of Statures. The Altering
of Features. The Increasing and Exalting of the Intellectual Parts. Version of
Bodies into other Bodies. Making of New Species. Transplanting of one Species
into another. Instruments of Destruction, as of War and Poison. Exhilaration
of the Spirits, and Putting them in good Disposition. Force of the Imagination,
either upon another Body, or upon the Body it self. Acceleration of Time in
Maturations. Acceleration of Time in Clarifications. Acceleration of
P^trefaction. Acceleration of Decoction. Acceleration of Germination. Making
Rich Composts for the Earth. Impressions of the Air, and raising of Tempests.
Great Alteration; As in Induration, Emollition, etc. Turning Crude and Watery
Substances, into Oily and Unctuous Substances. Drawing of New Foods out of
Substances not now in Use. Making New Threads for Apparel; And New Stuffs, Such
as are Paper, Glass, etc. Natural Divinations. Deceptions of the Senses.
Greater Pleasures of the Senses. Artificial Minerals and Cements.
FINIS.

