New England Judged, Not by Man's, but the Spirit of the LORD: And The SUM
sealed up of NEW-ENGLAND'S PERSECUTIONS.

Being A Brief Relation of the Sufferings of the People called Quakers in those
Parts of AMERICA, from the beginning of the Fifth Month 1656. (the time of
their first Arrival at BOSTON from ENGLAND) to the later end of the Tenth
Month, 1660.

Wherein The Cruel Whippings and Scourgings, Bonds and Imprisonments, Beatings
and Chainings, Starvings and Huntings, Fines and Confiscation of Estates,
Burning in the Hand and Cutting of Ears, Orders of Sale for Bondmen, and
Bond-women, Banishment upon pain of Death, and Putting to Death of those
People, are Shortly touched; With a Relation of the Manner, and Some of the
Other most Material Proceedings; and a Judgment thereupon.

In Answer To a Certain Printed Paper, Entitled, A DECLARATION of the General
Court of the Massachusetts holden at Boston, the 18. October, 1658. Apologizing
for the same.

By GEORGE BISHOPE.

Therefore, also, says the Wisdom of God, I will send them Prophets, and
Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and Persecute, That the Blood of all
the Prophets that was shed from the Foundation of the World, may be required of
this Generation, From the Blood of Abel, to the Blood of Zecharias, which
perished between the Temple and the Altar. Verily, I say unto you, it shall be
required of this Generation.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

NEW ENGLAND Judged, etc.
HAD the Government of the Massachusetts in New England stated in their Printed
Apology, any Particular matter of Fact whereby the Servants of the Lord,
William Robinson, and Marmaduke Stevenson, (whom they caused to be put to
Death) were Legally convicted; Or, any Power from Old England to enable to such
Executions; and that according to the Merit of the One, and the Justice of the
Other they had Legally proceeded, it had been something like Men of Reasonable
Understandings, whom the Prince of the Air had not darkened into a blind
accusing of Themselves by the things they offer in their Justification; But
when their Apology (which carries in the very name of it an Implication of
Guilt, for, Nihil Opus Justitia Ciceronis -- Justice needs no Apology) has
no such thing (and something as such, no doubt, it would have had as it is
chiefest concern, could they have produced it) but only Generals (which
signify little but a Design to slander, For, -- Generalia nihil probant --
Generals prove nothing, as is the Maxim in Law, which is grounded upon Equity,
and -- Dolus versatur in Universalibus -- Deceit lurks, or is conversant in
Generals -- as is the received Axiom of the Ancients) It is Evident, That in
this Affair of so high a Nature as of Blood, and that for Conscience, they are
wanting (by their Own Prescription) both as to Matter of Fact deserving, and
Power enabling to such Executions; And so their Own Vindication (for They have
not so much as saved to themselves The Common Law gives no such Liberty, but
requires a Man to choose the Particular unto which he will stand, but the
Civil, and Proceedings of State allows and uses it upon a particular Salvo in
the first Exhibition, and not afterward.
Liberty hereafter to Exhibit what they may have further to offer in their Own
Justification, a Salvo for which, if it could, or is intended at all, ought, at
first, to be inserted) condemns Themselves, and makes Them appear not only
Legis Culpae -- Transgressors of the Law -- but -- Rei Sanguinis -- Guilty of
Blood. -- For, when the life of any Man, (and here is of Two, and a Woman) is
taken away, be the Pretense what it will, without a Legal Conviction by Plain,
and Particular mattter of Fact, and Do Process of Law, and Power of
Determining (I speak of inferior Ministers of Justice (and no such Matter of
Fact, and Due Process of Law, or Power to Determine have they shown in this
their Declaration, which concludes them as aforesaid) there the Life of such a
Man (or of such Men and Women) is Violently taken away; and those who thus
Violently take it (or the lives of them) away are Guilty of Blood, or, of that
Man (or Men and Women) are the Trucidatores, or Murderers: And this being done
by Men who sometimes Suffered because of Conscience, and who for Conscience
sake pretended to fly their Native Country, to Men and Women (even of their
Country) barely for their Conscience to God, and the Exercise thereof in
Obedience to the Lord (as is the Case) aggravates the Offense beyond
Comparison, and renders them the most Unreasonable of Men, as it leaves them
without Excuse.

Having given this short View, and State of the Case, which (I suppose) is
clear to all Men of sober Understandings, I shall descend more Particularly to
the Declaration it self, and therein to the Order of the Proceedings of these
Men of Blood, and the Gradation of their Laws from Imprisonment unto Death, as
themselves have set it, and Convince through all what I have Asserted in the
Title, and these first Pages of my Book.

Declaration. -- We thought it requisite to Declare (for, for Your Preamble or
Beginning, I shall Answer it in the End) That about Three Years since, diverse
Persons professing themselves Quakers (of whose Pernicious Opinions and
Practices, we had received Intelligence from good hands from Barbados to
England (I suppose Ye mean from England and Barbados) arrived at Boston) whose
Persons were only secured to be sent away the first Opportunity, without
Censure or Punishment, although their professed Tenets, Turbulent and
Contemptuous Behavior to Authority, would have justified a Severer
Animadversion, yet the Prudence of this Court was Exercised only in making
Provision to Secure the Peace and Order here Established against their
Attempts, whose Design (we were well assured by Our own Experience, as well as
by the Example of their Predecessors in Munster) was to Undermine and Ruin the
same.

Answer. That about Three Years before the Date of this Your Declaration, that
is to say in the beginning of the fifth Month called Mary Fisher, Ann Austin.
the Fifth Month, 1656. Mary Prince. Sarah Gibbens. Mary Weatherhead. Dorothy
Waugh Christopher Holder. Thomas Thirstone. William Brend. John Copeland. The
Seventh day of the Sixth Month, 1656.
July, 1656. Diverse Persons in scorn by You and the World called Quakers, Viz.
Mary Fisher, and Anne Austin, arrived at Boston, and after them in the Month
following, viz. the 7. day of the 6. Month, 1656. Mary Prince, Sarah Gibbens,
Mary Weatherhead, Dorothy Waugh, Christopher Holder, Thomas Thirstone, William
Brend and John Copeland; And upon their Arrival, Ye did secure and send them
away after so tedious a Passage by Sea, as some Thousands of Miles in, Love to
Visit You; and the many Inconveniences which attend on such a Voyage) is Truth,
and what is Truth I freely Own, and readily acknowledge: But that They
professed themselves Quakers, (the Term which in reproach ye cast upon Them)
Or, That ye [onely] secured them to send them away the first Opportunity; Or,
That ye sent them away the first Opportunity, and that without Censure or
Punishment; Or, That they are a People of such Opinions and Practices as ye
call Pernicious; Or, of turbulent and contemptuos behavior, especially to
Authority; Or, that their Professed Tenets, or behavior to Authority, which Ye
call turbulent and contemptuous, did deserve any such Animadversion, much less
a Severer than they received at your hands; Or, That Ye were or could be [well]
assured, either by Your own Experience (who had none) or the Example of those
Ye mind in Munster, that their Design was to Undermine and Ruin the Peace and
Order established among You, in the way of Munster; Or, That they at Munster are
their Predecessors, Is a heap of Lies and Calumnies forged out of Your own, and
the Brains of Your Priests, on purpose to asperse the Innocent, (whose Blood Ye
have spilt) and to cover Your Guilt.

For First, They may have Owned, and do Own themselves to be such whom the
World and Ye, in scorn, call Quakers, and so they do, and did Profess themseves
to be such, Esteeming the Reproaches of Christ greater Riches than the
Treasures of Egypt, for that they have respect unto the Recompense of Reward;
But that they professed themselves Quakers, so Owning the Brand, which Ye put
upon them; that is Your Own, and I must return it to You again to be laid up in
the Treasury of Wrath against the Day of Wrath, and Revelation of the
Righteous judgment of God, which shall destroy the Adversary.

Secondly, That Ye did [only] secure them to send them away (as Ye say) the
first Opportunity, and that Ye sent them away the first Opportunity without
Censure or Punishment is of the same nature with the former, and with the
former must be turned upon You.

For, First, before Ye had seen them (viz. Mary Fisher and Ann Austin, the
first that came) or heard them, or knew them, or any of the People called
Quakers (for those were the first that came among You) or what they had to say,
or, had sent to know what was their Errand; and wherefore they came into Your
Parts; Before that they had sent to You, or, that Ye (by them) had a Certain
Information of their Business, or Principles, before they were come on shore,
or had signified to You for certain, that they would there land; Yea, before Ye
had a Law, or any Court sitting that could make a Law against those People, Did
not Richard Bellingham Your Deputy Governor, much unlike a Man, much more a
Christian, a Christian Magistrate (as You would have him and Your selves to be
accounted) cause them to be rifled for Books and Papers on board the Ship,
after that he had Commanded Them Prisoners there until he had sent for them?
And took not your Officer forcibly away about One Hundred Books from them?
(their Proper Goods) And did he not detain such their Goods, and refuse to
re-deliver them, though they sent to him for that purpose? Or, has he, or You
given Them any Satisfaction to this Day for such their Goods? (which are as
Properly Theirs, and as Protectible by the Law, as the Clothes they had upon
Them.) Nay, Did not a Council of You, (afterward assembled at Boston) instead
of doing them Right against the Rape of the Deputy Governor, do them Wrong,
and cause the said Books (their Goods) to be burnt in the Marketplace of Boston
by the Common-Hangman? And did Ye not the same to Them who came afterward?
that is to say, Did Ye not cause their Boxes, Chests, Trunks, etc. to be
searched and risted before they came on Shore and after? And were not such
their Books as were found, taken away and burnt? (the Spanish Inquisition) Yea,
did not your Jailer rob them of their Bible, and so debarred them the use of
the Scriptures? And were not these things done by Order, by Order of some of
You, bearing Date the 11th of July, 1656, and the 27th of September following?
the first being an Order in the General, the second in Particular to the Jailer
to do it, as often as he should see meet.

Again, After Your said Deputy Governor had Commanded Them on Shore, and to be
brought in Custody before him, and had Committed Them to Prison by a Mittimus,
as Quakers, against whom Ye had No Law, and upon this Proof only, that they
were such, viz. -- The saying of One of them to him, [Thee] (which is the
Natural Distinction (in Word) of One Man from Many, and as Proper as is the
Name of One Man to Distinguish him from Another, and as Generally used [Thou
and Thee] to a Single Person in all Languages, and the Scriptures of Truth, and
to the Lord the Maker of all, in the most Solemn Addresses; For Languages are
but the Demonstrations of Natural Distinctions, which whosoever Opposes, does
(what in him lies) Overthrow the Order of Nature; and he that Overthrows the
Order of Nature brings in Confusion; and Natural Distinction is the Ground or
Measure of Demonstration or Speech; Not Demonstration or Speech of Natural
Distinction) Whereupon he said, -- He needed no more, now he saw they were
Quakers -- (an Ignorant Speech, and a shameless of a Magistrate, who should
uphold the Order of Nature, and not make it a Ground of Punishment in such as
Do) I say, after he had commanded them on Shore, and Committed them, and upon
the Ground as aforesaid, Did Ye not haste together in Council? (such of You as
were near) and being met together before the time of the Court General, Did Ye
not Order them (and their other Friends aforesaid) to be kept close Prisoners,
and none to come at them, Or to have Communication with them (in Express Words)
without Leave from some of You? until such time as they should be delivered by
Authority on board some Vessel to be transported Oat of the Country (as are the
Words of Your Order to the Keeper, July 18. 1656.) Yea, are not the Words of
Your Order to the Keeper, August 18. 1656. to keep their said Friends close
Prisoners, and not to suffer them to speak, or confer with any Person, Nor to
permit them to have Paper and Ink? And in Your Order September. 17. 1656. Do Ye
not empower him to search their Boxes, Chests, etc. for Pen, Ink and Paper,
Papers and Books, and take Them away? And did not Your Jailer Execute Your said
Warrants precisely? And further, Did he not take away their Candle, and not
suffer them to have Light in the Night-season, lest (as himself said) they
should see to Write? And, did Ye not lay a Fine of Five pound on any one that
should otherwise come at, or speak with Them, though but at the Window, than by
your Leave? and gave Ye Leave to any that Ye thought might be Convinced by
them, Or, that were not of your Own Spirit and Principle? Yea, Did Ye not Order
the Prison-Yard to be made close? and was not a Board nailed up before the
Window that looked out to the Door of the Jayl where people used to come at
them, that none might visit them? With many more Cruelties, which were Ordered
and done for the present Distress (as ye call it) of Two Poor Women arriving in
Your Harbor, which so shook ye to the Everlasting shame of you, and of your
Established Peace and Order, as if a formidable Army had Invaded Your Borders)
and made You not this Order to be in force till the sitting of the next Court
General? And, did not the next Court General confirm the same? And are not all
these unmanly and base Proceedings more than an [only] securing of their
Persons? Are they not Censures and Punishments, and that relating to their
Persons?

Besides, Did Ye send them away by the first Opportunity? Did ye not detain,
after the manner aforesaid, the two former for the space of about Five weeks,
and the latter about Eleven? And was there no Opportunity, during those long
spaces of time, to have shipped them away sooner by the Way of Barbados, or
otherwise? Or, staid Ye not for the Return of the Ships that brought them, that
so their Passages might be on the Charge of them that brought them, on whom Ye
laid this Unreasonable Burden, they being ignorant before they came from
Barbados or England, of (nor was there any) such Law of Yours? And, did Ye not
Compel Robert Lock (a Master of One of the Ships) to Robert Lock
carry them back on his own Charge, being Eight of them? and bind him in Bond
so to do, and to land them no where but in England, (a strange Usurpation Over
Other Countries and Your Own, and the Master and them) And did Ye not Imprison
him, till he became so bound, and so Undertook? And, did Ye not bind William
Chichester (the Master of the Vessel whom you got to carry them) in One Hundred
Pound Bond, to carry the Two Women that came first away, and not to suffer any
to speak with Them after that they were forcibly by Your Order, put on board
her, or to land them in any Part of Your Jurisdiction? And during the Long
seasons of their Imprisonments aforesaid, Did Ye take Care for their
Maintenance? as Ye ought to have done, having Imprisoned them as aforesaid, and
closely, so that none could come at them; for Ye knew not that they had any
Money, or Friend to help Them: Or, Was not Nicholas Nicholas Upshall.
Vpshall (a Member of Your Church, a Long-liver in Boston; an Ancient Old Man,
and full of Years, of whose sore Sufferings at your hands more particularly in
their Place) denied Liberty to send Provisions to Them, out of his Regard to
Strangers, lest they should have starved, till he Purchased it at the rate of
Five shillings a week of Your Jailer (another of Your Church Members) And
whilst they thus lay under Your Merciless Cruelty, Did Ye not seek all the
ways and means Ye could to Ensnare them, and to draw something out of them
(who had none besides) wherewithal to Reproach and charge them, and the Truth
they witnessed? Examining them single and apart, as to the same things, to see
if Ye could catch them in any Untruth; or, as to the Matters of their Faith,
Who had not declared any thing Publicly, nor were suffered so to do; Or to
speak with any One, as has been said. But, blessed be the Lord (who was near,
and preserved them) You missed your Expectation, and neither did, nor could
find any thing against Them wherewithal to charge them, or the Truth, though Ye
labored it hard; And had Your High Priest Norton (who said, The Justice of God
was the Devil's Armor) and his Brethren (the very Shop and Forge of most of
these, and the Cruelties to be rehearc'd, of whom more anon) to Your
Assistance, even in Your Court General, (to the shame of your selves, who took
upon You a Jurisdiction you were not able to manage without the help of a
Priest, as it is of his Profession to meddle with Civil Jurisdiction) and when
Ye could get no Advantage against them by this way of working (the Witness of
God in him and you answering to the Truth they spoke, and so were disappointed,
Were Ye not sorely vexed within you? (having nothing from your selves or others
as any breach of Your Laws, wherewithal to cover Your Proceedings against Them)
And did not John Endicot your Governor (with whom I have a large Reckoning ere
I have done) sufficiently manifest it, when he blood-thirstingly said to them,
-- Take heed ye break not Our Ecclesiastical Laws (who thought the Bishops so
hard who put none of them to Death) for then Ye are sure to stretch by a Halter
-- (the thing that lay then in Your Bosoms, which you have since accomplished)
and did he not further manifest it, when he told them, -- They should not have
a Copy of those Laws (a most Tyrannical Reply) when they desired it thereupon,
that they might know on what ground they went; to the grieving of the People
then present, who said Openly in the Court, -- How shall they know then when
they Transgress? -- And did he not manifest it yet further, when (being at
Salem, when Anne Austin and Mary Fisher were dealt withal, as aforesaid,
against whom there was no Law) he said, -- If he had been there (viz. at Boston
when they were so mis-used) he would have had them well Whipped? And after all
these Censures, Punishments and Tyrannical Proceedings (which were more than an
[only] securing them, in Order to be sent away the first Opportunity) Did ye
not Condemn them to Banishment from that part of their Country unto which they
have a Natural Right, and some of them, a Municipal, having served an
Apprentiship therein. Who had broken no Law, and so were by the Judgment of the
Law persons Innocent? And after ye had so Ordered their Causeless Banishment,
Did ye not Authorize Michelson your Marshal General, to Leavie upon the Goods
of some of them a Certain Sum of Money, and Deliver it to the Jailer for his
Fees, from those whom you had so Unjustly Imprisoned? Who had no other Goods
than their wearing Apparel, and the Beds they lay on, which they brought out
of the Ships: Yea, Did not Your Jailer take away the Beds they lay on (than
which they had no other to ease them on in their Passage to England) for his
Fees? And, Did he not keep them after those People were sent on Board, till
Capt. Oliver, and some of the Country, being ashamed of a Cruelty so manifestly
contrary to the Countries standing Law, (which is, not to take away the nether
Millstone, etc.) gathering Money among themselves (unknown to those People) paid
his Demand? And, did Ye not Execute upon Them this Cruelty of Banishment, in
sending them to England? for which You are to Answer, and all your o her Laws
and Proceedings Repugnant to the Laws of England. Yea, not only unto them, but
to Richard Smith (an Inhabitant of Long Richard Smith.
Island, who came in the Ship with them, and whom Ye called their Proselyte)
did not your Unreasonableness extend, because he was their Proselyte, as ye
said? Had ye not him up before your General Court with the Later? and Committed
ye not him to Prison also? and did ye not detain him there about Three Weeks
from his Wife and Children? And when, by Leave from the Jailer, he went to your
Meeting on a First Day of the Week, and after the Priest had done, said, -- It
was the saying of the Governor, that he should have Discourse with some of the
Godly Ministers, to Convict him of his Error, and that he was deluded; and that
if there were any such Godly Ministers that could so Convict him, he was ready
to hear what they could say -- Did not your Governor hereupon declare, That his
intent was it should be private (a sorry Shepherd that cannot lead a straggling
Sheep into the (pretended so to be) right way before the rest of the Flock) And
when the said Richard desired it might be otherwise, and that at that present
it might be, were ye not Enraged at him, and sent ye not him away to the Prison
again, and from thence by Water to his own Habitation, not suffering him to
pass through the Country (so great were your Fears) lest he should infect it
(as was your slander) with his Poisonous Doctrine? And did not your Council for
the present Distress upon the Arrival of the Two Women asoresaid, lay a great
Fine upon such Masters of Ships as should bring any of those People into your
Jurisdiction, as they required Simon Kempthorne who Simon Kempthorne.
brought them, to Transport them, or Cause them to be transported directly to
Barbados from whence they came, and to Desray all the Charge of their
Imprisonment; and to give Security to your Secretary in a Bond of One Hundred
Pounds Sterling, for the effectual persormance thereof; and upon his Refusal to
give such Security, to send him to Prison, till he did it? And did he not do
it, though ye had no such Law before he arrived, against those People, as has
been declared?

Yet I have not done with you.

Fourthly, (to add no more) Did ye not shamelesly cause Two of the Women
asoresaid, viz. Mary Fisher, and Anne Austin, to be stripped stark naked, and so
to be searched and mis-used, as is Mary Fisher, Anne Austin.
a shame to Modesty to name? and with such Barbarousness, as One of them, a
Married Woman and a Mother of Five Children, suffered not the like in the
bearing of any of them into the World? And when there was no Token found upon
them but of Innocence, Were ye satisfied therewith? Or, did ye not afterward
continue them close Prisoners, and banish them as asoresaid?

And yet, how say ye, that ye [only] secured their Persons in Order to be sent
away the first Opportunity, without Censure or Punishment? Are not these
Censures and Punishments, and very sore ones too, and, next to Life, some of
the greatest (all Circumstances considered?) Is not this more (yea, in many
particulars) than an [only] securing their Persons to be sent away the first
Opportunity? Can ye (who in cool blood, and so deliberately, and as by Order of
the Court, and under Your Secretaries Hand (a Chief Instigator of Your
Iniquity) and in Defense of your selves, as to the Blood of the Innocent, which
ye have spilt) have vented so many Lies and Falsehoods, blush, or be ashamed? Is
this your Entertaining of Strangers, your Civility, your Manhood to those who
traveled so many Thousands of Miles to Visit You in the Movings of the Lord?
Whom at least Ye should have well entreated (and Ingenuity would have done it)
for their Love sake, though they had been (as these were not) mistaken in their
End, and rather have prayed them (as the Gadarens did their Master (whose
Inhospitality ye Exceed, though they meddled not with your Swine) to have
departed, instead of Expelling them your Coasts, and imprisoning, and close
imprisoning, and dealing with them not as Men and Women of the same Generation
as you, and (reation, but as Beasts of Prey.

O ye Rulers of the Darkness of this World! whose and is come, and the Measure
of your Iniquity; Unto what shall I liken You? Whereunto shall I compare You?
Whither shall I go to fetch your Judgment? unto what Nation to Condemn you?

Shall I take a View of the Indians near you? Their Kindness to those People in
Entertaining them in their Wig-wams (or Tents) as their Inns upon their Travels
in the Night (where otherwise, nothing but the Open Wilderness must have lodged
them) in Cold and Rain, in Hunger and Thirst, and Weariness in their Journeying
to you, and being banished from you; their readiness to take off (of
themselves) the Upper Garments of those People, and hang them up about the
fire, when these came in Wet; their making ready warm Meat (such as they had)
and good Fires for them; their furnishing them with Provisions, and freely too,
and guiding them scores of Miles in the Woods (who otherwise, as to Men, might
have perished; for their Travelings were harder than their Sufferings, though
their Sufferings were very hard, (as you will hear by and by, and do know in
part who inslicted it upon them) their lying in Woods; the hardness to find the
Way; the foordings of Rivers, yea, when somewhat frozen with the Ice; the
danger of falling into great Rivers ere they were aware in the Moonlight
through the Thickets: with much more, too long to relate) does sufficiently
speak it:) Their discovering of the Workings of some of your Priests, when they
were got amongst them, to destroy them, and for the Indians to do it, which
they refused; Their Commisserating the Sufferings which these People received
at your hands, and being glad of their Deliverance; and Crying out against your
Cruelty exercised upon these Servants of the Lord, about the Worship of their
God, does sufficiently condemn you.

Shall I pass from Them Over the Globe, the Tropicks of Cancer, and Capricorn,
the Line Equinoctial? Shall I return to Europe, to Ultima Thulae, the Utmost
North, and make Search among those Nations? There I shall find them passing
quietly through Sweden, and Denmark, bearing their Testimony amongst Calvinists
(so called) and Lutherans, Yea, John Hall.
the King of Denmark himself friendly receiving Books from One of them with his
Own hand at Coppenhagen his Royal City, and Suffering him to pass in Safety,
who gave them him after some Discourse together with his Head Covered; thus
Reproving You.

Shall I pass the Sound, and tread the weary Steps of a Traveller, through
Jutland, Gluckstadt, Hamborough, Embden, and other Towns and Countries in the
East of Germany, and so to Heidelberge, the Chief City of the Palatinate; and
there set up a little; There I shall understand of a quiet Passage in and
William Ames.
through them all, and of the Prince Elector Palatine of the Rhine, his sending
to William Ames (who first Ministered and gathered a People in those Parts) and
of his Own Accord taking off the Fine of Twelve pound laid upon Whosoever
should Entertain William, by his chief Magistrate, and giving him free Liberty
to Declare against Evil in his Dominions. I shall there also Understand of the
said Prince Elector's forbidding him to go to the High Council of the Church
(as it is called) upon their summoning him to appear, saying, That he (the said
Prince) would take him off; And when the said Council notwithstanding summoned
him again, the Prince understanding that he was in the City; (viz. at
Heidelberge where his Palace was, and the Convocation of the Priests) I shall
find that he sent two of his Servants one after the other for him to come and
dine with him the said Prince, and when he came, that he told him that he knew
not of his being in the City before; That the Priests had not so much Power as
to send for him, nor should have such Power; That he had reproved the Priests
for what they had done; and bad him if ever they sent for him again, not to
obey them; That he rebuked one of the chiefest of the Priests of that Council
for saying, That they (viz. the Priests) would give out Queries in Writing to
him to Answer -- and that he charged the said Priests in the presence of the
said W. Ames, that they should give forth none, (though William was as ready to
answer as the Priests to give forth) That the Prince used much Moderation, as
did also his Sister; That she received very friendly what was spoken by him in
way of Exhortation to her; That neither of them were offended at what was
spoken by him to them, nor at the Hatt, nor with plain Language, Thou and Thee.
I shall there also Understand, that when about the space of a year after, he
and another friend (viz. John Higgins) came to Visit him, that he very lovingly
received them; John Higgins
That the Captain of the Prince his Life Guard told the said William, that his
Prince was very glad that he (the said William) was come into the Country
again; That he had given him (the said Captain) order to supply them (though
they neither wanted, nor asked, nor received) with what ever they wanted,
either Money or Clothes, in which his Love was seen and accepted; That he very
sriendly received diverse Books from them, both then, and at times before; And,
that when at another time Samuel Fisher. John Stubbs.
Samuel Fisher and John Stubbs were there from England, and had given notice to
the said Prince his Secretary, that they had something in Writing to present
the said Prince, That he (the said Prince) sent for them into the Presence
Chamber, (where was also his said Sister) and received it gladly from them, and
a Book enclosed, (their Hatts being on) Expressing much Desire after Friends
Books, and receiving at another time a Great Book of George Fox's, and a Letter
from William Ames, by the hands of John Higgins, and charging him (the said
John) to thank the said William for that his Book. Moreover I shall find that
he had much Discourse with them; That he told them that he took their coming in
Love; That he believed they spoke in love to their Souls; That he gave them
thanks for their Love; That after a while being called to Supper he took them
with him; that he showed them his House; that he stayed them by him whilst he
did eat; That they had Discourse with his Chaplains, and diverse of his Great
Men whilst they did eat; That neither He nor any of them, during all that time
(though it was a season of greater Pomp and State than ordinary, the Prince and
his Nobility being met about the Choice of a New Emperor) manifesting any
Offense at their Discourse, or at their Hatts, or at their standing Covered,
though (according to their Custom) the Prince and his Nobles sat with their
Hats off, but on the contrary the Prince mauifesting much satisfaction with
what they said; and enquiring after William Ames (who also had the same liberty
with him, at his time of eating, and with and before his great Men) and how he
did, saying he was not well when he was last with him; That in friendliness and
love they departed; That they had free Liberty to Meet in any part of his
Dominions, in the very heart of which there is a Meeting of Friends gathered
into the Truth by the said William as aforesaid, who Meet together with the
said Prince's knowledge; Whose Meetings are Peaceable.

Lastly, I shall there find, That when John Stubbs and Samuel Fisher were
afterward in Germany, that the Land-Soriver, (the next Officer in Power under
the Prince, and diverse of their Ministers sent to them to give Him and the said
Ministers a Meeting; That Samuel Fisher Met them alone (John Stubbs not being
well) that he had much moderate Discourse with them and Liberty a pretty time,
and that he quietly passed away, after that the Land-Soriver and Ministers had
expressed much thankfulness to him for his Love, who were not offended at his
Hat, nor plainness of speech. All which make ye manifest.

Shall I journey hence into Lower Germany, the United Provinces, and into the
Cities thereof, and make an Inquisition through some of the Principal of them,
as Amsterdam, Schedam, Leiden, Rotterdam, Zutphen, Middleburgh? In Amsterdam I
shall find a People gathered, Meeting in Peace, and free Liberty of Passing up
and down in those Provinces, for the Declaring of Samuel Fisher.
Truth. And at Middloburgh, in Zealand I shall find a Friend speaking in a
Steeplehouse after their Minister had done, and a quiet Reasoning there for the
space of half an hour in the presence of one of the Heers or Lords of that
place, who was very Moderate and in English Discoursed with that Friend for
some space of time without offense taken at his Hat or plain Language; and then
desired further Discourse with him at the Ministers house, and went with him to
the said Ministers house, he the said Here on the one hand of him, and the said
Minister on the other, to conduct him; and I shall also find that there they
had very moderate Discourse in the presence of many Persons of Quality, who
neither were offended at his being Covered, nor with his plain Language, but
were very courteous to him, and when they had done, sent two with him to
accompany him to his Lodgings. And in the same City of Middleborgh, another
Christopher Brickhead.
Friend being in Prison (C. Brickhead of Bristol in England; by Name) an
Information being given thereof by some Friends to the States General Lord
Ambassador Newport, then Resident in England; I shall find that the said States
General Lord Ambassador wrote to the Magistrates there, and the Magistrates
thereupon setting him at Liberty; thus Condemning Ye.

Shall I take shipping from Flushing, and pass to Calais on the one hand, and
return back to Holland and so to Geneva, and Switzerland on the Other, and foot
it through some of the chief Cities of France, viz. Lions, Paris, Valence,
Orange, Rochel, Morliax, and to Tyrole in the Alps, and so into Italy, to
Legorn in Tuscanny, to Venice and to Rome (time would fail me to instance all)
There I shall meet with Friends Possing and Repassing Safely, continuing in
diverse Cities sometimes, and passing through them, even in Italy, (the most
Complemental of any) and returning into England, though they were Examined
before diverse in Authority in those complemental Places, who neither scrupled
at their Pussage, nor at their Hats. At Paris one of them being in the Bastile
in Prison, was served daily with the same Provisions as was a Noble Man of
theirs then in the same Prison at the Kings charge, and afterward set at
Liberty. At William Salt.
Morliax another of them being in Prison for reproving their Maskings which are
tolerated by Law, and his Life vehemenely sought after by the Bailiff of that
Town for so doing, I shall find the King upon Information thereof by the
Engilsh Ambassador Lockart (by means of a Merchant of that Town, whom the Lord
stirred up in the thing) I say, I shall find the King sending a Letter under
his hand and seal to set him presently at Liberty, taking notice in the said
Letter, that he was Imprisoned for so Reproving of Maskings, tolerated by the
Law; and when the King was informed that he was not yet set at Liberty, I shall
find him sending another Letter to the Duke of Meillerai to see it effected,
and that upon it he was free, he being (as it were) become but as the Shadow
of a Man thorough the hardship of his sufferings. At Rochel I shall find the
Judge of the Criminals working the Liberty of Christopher Brickhead.
another after he had been examined by the Bishop, and continued a pretty space
of time against the Judge of the Civels, and Discharging him, though he both
spoke and wrote against the Popish Religion. At Legorne in Tuscany. John
Perrot. John Love.
John Perrot and his Companion John Love, being had to the Inquisition
(otherwise called the Popes Holy-Office) and examined there by three Friars, I
shall there find, That upon John Perrots giving an Account of his Call and
Service, and of the Books that he had sent to the Governor (One of which was
to the Great Turk which he had wrote in that place, and another to the Jews)
and of what they had further to say to them, that they set them at Liberty, and
discovered to them a Plot that some English had to Murder them, and bad them
beware of their Countrymen; That the Governor of that City not only received
willingly several Books and Papers, which they sent him by an Ancient Merchant
there (One Origin) who was very friendly, but expressed much tender regard of
their safety, saying, -- That he would not have them come to any hurt in that
Land; -- And making no question at their Gesture, nor finding any dislike at
their not being conformable to their Customs when they were brought before
them; And that the English Agent there Resident for England was very friendly
to them, and off-times became himself Interpreter in the Disputes between them
and the Jews, at whose Synagognes they were, and there reasoned with them;
whom, to their Chamber from the Synagogue some of the Jews followed, where
they were some of them Convinced, and some Confounded. At John Perrot. John
Love. Samuel Fisher. John Stubbs Mary Fisher Mary Prince.
Venice I shall also find several of them Discoursing and reasoning on the
Exchanges, and having much Intercourse and freedom in that City (where none
were Imprisoned) and this with men of all sorts, Jews and Papists; and I shall
find John Perrot speaking there with the Duke of Venice in his Palace, and
delivering to him several Papers, and so departing with his Friend John Love
from, thence to Rome, being sent from Smyrna by the English Ambassador (as were
diverse others) who would not suffer them to pass to Constantinople from thence,
whitherto they were moved of the Lord, for fear of the Great Turk, At Rome I
shall find some of them, viz. Samuel Fisher. John Stubbs John Perrot John Love.
Samuel Fisher and John Stubbs to have been there for certain days, and to be
departed; Others of them, viz. John Perrot and John Love to be Imprisoned; and
one of them, viz. John Love to be dead there, and the other well entreated, as
a Prisoner of whose welfare we have lately by Letters under his own hand
understood. All which pass sentence upon you.

Shall I take upon me a long Journey from Rome to Constantinople, John Perrot.
John Love.
from the Pope to the Turk, and wade through the difficulties of such an
Undertaking? Shall I Traverse the Morea, or that part of the Tarks Dominion
which is called Grcece, from Patra (on the Sea shore toward Zaunt) to
Vestreetshaw, and from thence to Corinth, Eneca and Athens? (where Paul
preached) Shall I cross the Hellispont to Egrippa in the Island Negropoint, and
so to Sco, and the other Isles, to Smyrna in Asia, and so back again to Venice?
Shall I return to Zaunt, and the Morea again, and Travel about 600. Miles from
the Morea shore to Adrianople, and from thence to the Turkish Army Encamped
near it, and through the Army to the Grand Seignior himself, and tell you of
one Passage for all to Conclude ye for Ever?

Mary Fisher a Servant of the Lord, a Maiden Friend, being Mary Fisher
moved of the Lord to go and deliver his Word to the Great Turk, who with his
Army lay Encamp't near to Adrianople, went thitherwards to Smyrna, but being
hindered in Her Passage that way by the English Ambassador, who sent her back to
Venice, passed by Land from the Sea Coasts of the Morea to Adrianople
aforesaid, very Peaceably without any abuse or injury offered her in that long
Journey of about five or six hundred miles. Being come to Adrianople, near unto
which was the Great Turk, and his Army, she acquainted some of the Citizens
with her Intent; and desired some of them to go with her, but when none of them
durst to go fearing his Displeasure, she passed alone, and coming near the
Camp, procured a man to inform at the Great Viziers Tent (or chief General of
the Army) that there was an English woman had something to declare from the
Great God to the Great Turk: Who soon sent her word that she should speak with
him the next Morning. So she returned to the City that night; and the next
morning came to the Camp, and so to the Great Turk, who being with his great
Men about him, as he uses to be when he receives Ambassadors, sent for her in;
and she coming before him, he asked her, Whether it was so as he had heard,
(sc*) That she had something to say to him from the Lord? She answered him Yea
-- Then he bad her speak on (having Three Interpreters by him) and when she
stood silent a little, waiting on the Lord when to speak, he supposing that she
might be fearful to utter her mind before them all, asked her, Whether she
desired that any might go forth before she spoke? She answered, Nay; Then he
bad her speak the Word of the Lord to them, and not to fear, for they had good
hearts and could hear it -- and strictly charged her to speak the Word she had
to say from the Lord, neither more or less, for they were willing to hear it,
be it what it would Which she speaking what the Lord had put into her mouth to
say, They all gave dilligent heed with much soberness and gravity till she had
done, and then He asking her, Whether she had any more to say? She asked of
him, Whether he understood what she had said? He replied, Yes, Every word; and
further said -- That it was Truth -- and desired her to stay in that Country,
saying -- That they could not but respect such a One as should take so much
pains to come to them so far as from England with a Message from the Lord, --
and proffered her a Guard to bring her unto Constantinople, whither she
intended, which she accepting not (trusting in the Arm of the Lord which had
brought her thither to bring her back, who had prospered her Work.) He told
her, It was dangerous Traveling, especially for such a one as she, and wondered
that she had passed so safe so far as she had; Saying, It was in respect to
her, and kindness that he proffered it, and that he would not for any thing she
should come to the loast hurt in his Dominions: (A Worthy Expression of so
great a Prince) They were also desirous of more words than she had freedom to
speak, and asked her, What she thought of their Prophet Mahomet? She Replied,
That she knew him not, but the Christ, the true Prophet, the Son of God, Who
was the Light of the World, and enlightneth every man that comes into the
World, Him she knew: -- And further concerning Mahomet, she said, That they
might judge of him to be true or false, according as the Words and Prophesies
he spoke were either true or false; Saying, If the Word that the Prophet
speaks come to pass, then shall ye know that the Lord has sent that Prophet,
but if it come not to pass, then shall ye know that the Lord never sent him --
To which they confessed and said, It was Truth. And so she departed through
that Great Army to Constantinople without a Guard, whitherto she came without
the least hurt or Scoff, to the Commendation and praise of the Discipline of
that Army; the glory of the great Turk, and his great Renown, and your
Everlaging shame and Contempt.

Shall I yet draw near to Death and the gates of the Grave, and steering my
Course from Smyrna to Jerusalem; There I shall find the Turks at Ramla taking
George Robinson, (a tender Youth of London) out of the hands of the Friars, who
by their Party, coming from Jerusalem, having heard a Report of him there,
assaulted him in the Street, as he was passing through it to Jerusalem, unto
which he was moved of the Lord: There I shall also find a Man of Great Account
among the Turks, coming to the said George Robinson when he was at the place of
Execution, near to the Mosco (or their Place of Worship or Temple) to be burnt
with Camels Dung (as is their manner, a most lingering death) unto which he was
sentenced, for being in their Temple, and not turning Turk; it being a Custom
among them, That who-ever comes into their Temple, and turns not Turk, must
die: and thither he was brought against his will, on purpose to put him to
Death: and the Priests of Mahomet, and much people were expecting when he would
turn Turk, and using many Arguments and fair Promises to that purpose,
supposing that for that End he came thither, but he was brought thither for
another, which when the said Man in Reputation amongst the Turks understood,
and a division arose between the Friars and the Turk concerning him, which was
of the Lord, who stirred among them for his Deliverance, and how they were in
order to the bringing of him thither, and how that it was not in his own
voluntary will that thither he came, but as he was compelled and carried; he
being quiet in the Will of the Lord, and given up unto Him to dye, I shall find
that the said Chief Man among the Turks had him to his House, and entertained
him at his House for several days (he being a sickly youth, as I have said,
and impossible it was for him, (according to men) ever to reach Jerusalem) and
said, Whether he would turn Turk or not, he should not die: And when the
Friars, being disappointed of their End, went to Gaza to the Bashaw there, who
was their friend, with Many false Informations, on purpose to incense him
against the said young Man, and whom they to incensed him, that he sent for
him, swearing that he would kill him with his own hands, I shall find the Town
of Ramla making a Reprosentation to the Bashaw of the Truth of the Matter, and
of the many Injuries the said Friars had offered to the young Man; and some of
themselves going with it and him; which the Bashaw understanding and the Truth
of the Matter, I shall find him the said Bashaw sining the Friars in One
Hundred Dollars, to be paid to the said Town for the Injuries done there, and
requiring the Friars to carry him back from Gaza to Ramla, and from thence to
Jerusalem; and back again upon the Friars own charge to the Part from whence he
came: So to Jerusalem he was brought, and before the Caddee (or Turkish
Governor) and there I shall find him examined by the said Governor, concerning
diverse things appertaining to Religion, and his Coming thither, and his
Business; And the Governor hearing his Answers with much Moderation and
Gravity, and also what he said did lie upon him from the Lord to that People;
and dismissing him, though he was much instigated by the Friars to the
contrary; and after two days (having had much speech with the Friars who
rejected his Message, and being clear in the sight of God of that place) I
shall find the Friars constrained to return him on their own charge, according
to the Bashaw's Order, as aforesaid; And when he was returning through the said
Town of Ramla, I shall find the People of the Town following after, and asking
the Friars whether he had been at Jerusalem? Who, though they said he had, yet
would they not believe them, till they heard it out of his own Mouth (for it
was their intent if he had been brought thither to have staid him, and
constrained them to have carried him) which they understanding from his own
Mouth, let him pass; Thus rising up in Judgment to Condemn You.

Shall I yet Cut through the Straits from one end to the other, and pass it also
to the Kingdom of Portugal, and there Attempt the Popish Inquisition? There I
shall find Anne Gargil passing through Lisbone (where she arrived from
Plimmouth in England) to the Palace of the King, there looking for him, and
meeting there with an Irish Jesuit, who told her the King was not at home; I
shall find her discoursing with him, and other Jesuits and People about their
Religion; and Returning to the Ship, where I shall find her writing a Paper,
and giving it to an English Merchant; and the Inquisition commanding it out of
his hands, and sending for her from on board the Ship by the King's chief
General of his Forces by Land, and High Admiral at Sea, and his Great
Chamberlain and Keeper of his Privy Seal, with an English Jesuit, and the
King's Boat; and the Master of the Ship, whom, with her they brought on shore,
and took them into the Kings Coach, and conducted them (through many Guards
after the Manner of Entertaining Ambassadors) to the Inquisition House, a fair
Palace; the said Anne Gargil and the English Jesuit sitting at the one end of
the Coach, and the Chief General and Admiral, and Great Chamberlain at the
other: Being come to the Palace of the Inquisition through Three Gaurds, as
aforesaid, there I shall find Twenty five Bishops (as they were said to be)
sitting, Twelve on the one side of the Table, and Twelve on the other, in a
large Room, with Three-corner'd Caps, and One at the Upper End with Six, and
more richly arrayed than the rest, and three Chairs set at the other End of the
Table, for the said Anne, the Master of the Ship, and the English Jesuit; who
being come into the Room, I shall find the said Twenty five arising from their
Seats, and standing with their Caps in their hands, till upon their beckning
the said Three were sat down; and then sitting down also, and examining her of
her Age, Nation and Business, and bidding her speak her mind freely in what she
had to say, for that whatsoever she said she should not receive any prejudice
-- Which when she answered, and had spoken freely what she had to say from the
Lord, and with boldness, and they had took it in writing, I shall find them
reading to her what they had written from her Mouth, and the Paper which she
had before given into the hand of an English Merchant, as aforesaid, which from
him they had received; in which she had declared against them and their
Idolatry, and called them Babylon and Antichrist; And having demanded, whether
she owned the things there written and read unto her? and she owning them very
boldly, I shall find them causing Her and the Master of the Ship, and the
Jesuit to withdraw; which they doing, and being called in again, I shall find
them tendering to her a Paper to sign to this effect (sc.) -- not to come on
shore again to that place, or to Discourse with any of that Nation; which she
refusing, or to promise any such thing, I shall find them dismissing of her and
the Master (after they had been there the space of Two Hours) and the said
Great Officers of State taking them into the Coach again, and Conducting them
in it to the Rivers side, and giving a Charge to a VVaterman to convey them to
the Ship again, and defraying the Charge: To the Praise of the Discretion of
the Inquisition, and to your Confusion.

Being thus clear of these other Parts of the World, shall I cross the Main
again to America, and in an Untrodden Path by any English hitherto (as has
been heard of) seek out Death, and make my Way five or six hundred Miles on
foot from Virginia to New England, through Uncouth Passages, Vast Wildernesses,
Uninhabited Countries for near Two hundred Miles together, and there finish
your Account? There I shall find Thomas Thirstone aforesaid (one of those whom
ye so barbarously used) Thomas Thirstone. Josiah Cole, Thomas Chapman.
and Josiah Cole of Winterburne near Bristol, his Companion, and Thomas Chapman
of Virginia, traversing the said Ground from Mary Land to the Susquehanoes (the
most Warlike of those Indians; who also are reported to drink the blood, and
eat the flesh of their Enemies) and receiving from them the most Courteous
Entertainment, not only in Lodging and Provisions (such as they had) but some
of them accompanying them, even to the Dutch Plantation (close by you) in some
hundred of Miles off, which they met not with a Man or Tent; And so tender were
they over them, as that they not only sought out Provisions and killed Deer, as
they could come at it, for them, but spared their own Provisions, when they had
none left for themselves, to the said Thomas Thirstone when he was sick on the
Way (who was scarce one hour well during the Travel of Three or Four hundreds
of Miles, and sometimes very ill) After which, being come to another Nation of
the Indians, and Thomas Thirstone being sick amongst them many days, and that
near unto Death, I shall find them very friendly to them all, and taking what
Care they could of him in all things; and one of the Susquehano's (whom the
rest left behind them, when he lay so long sick) conducted them to the Dutch
Plantation, after Ten Weeks time from their first setting out; and so came to
You to bear their Testimony against a stiff-necked People, as the Lord had said
to the said Thomas, when he lay so weak and desired Death; viz. -- I who have
brought thee hither by my Mighty Arm, will carry Thee through to Witness for Me
against a Stiff-necked People in New England -- And some of the Susquehano's
came to visit him Thomas Thirstone.
when they heard he was in Prison afterward in Virginia. Thus finishing your
Account, which will be sore in the Day of the Lord, which is even coming upon
you, who will Cut ye off, and give you your Portion with Hypocrites and
Sinners, and such will be his Hand upon You, and so manifest his Judgments,
because of what ye have done to his People, That as to what he shall do
therein, Men shall glorify God and say, -- Righteous art Thou, O Lord; Just
and true are thy Ways, O thou King of Saints; Who would not fear and tremble
before Thee, because Thy Judgments are made manifest?

And so after a long Descent and Travel in the Deep, and an abiding there;
After a diligent Inquisition through all Religions, Calvinists, Lutherans,
Papists (so called) Protestants, Jews, Mahometants; After a Narrow Search among
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; Swedes, Danes, Germans, Dutch, French,
Italians, Jews, Turks, Portuguez, Indians, Whereunto to liken Ye, unto what to
compare you; from whence to fetch your Judgment, and from what Nation to
condemn You? After a long course from the South-west toward the North-west,
fromwards the North-west to the East, and from the East back to the South-west
again; Of what I have found this is the Sum, That when they were but few in
number, yea, very few and strangers in those Lands, when they went from one
Kingdom to another People, He suffered No Man to do them harm; Yea, he reproved
Kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine Anointed, and, Do my Prophets no
harm. And of their Entertainment, what has been said is the Sum; But as for
Ye, ye Men of New England, ye Rulers of Boston, of Plymouth Patent, of
New Haven, Ye Shame of Men, Ye Refuse of Mankind; Higher than the Highest in
Profession; Lower than the Lowest in Power; far beneath the worst of Men, whom
the Lord has tried in this his Day, by his Messengers; Ye Serpents, Ye
Generation of Vipers, what have Ye done to the Innocent, and with what Despite
to those whom He has sent to gather You, and to turn You unto God?

But to proceed.

What are the Opinions and Practices of these People which ye call Pernicious,
and of which ye say, ye received Intelligence from Good hands, (and what are
they?) from Barbados and England? What is Your Intelligence (or Hearsay?) and
from whom did ye receive it? Seeing that upon this you have grounded all your
Illegal and Barbarous Proceedings aforesaid against them: What are their
Tenets, which Ye call Professed? and what is it they did profess? What their
behavior to Authority? which Ye term Turbulent and Contemptuous, and say, it
would have justified (and it must have been very Contemptuous and Turbulent) a
Severer Animadversion? What were the Attempts, which ye say they made (and
they must be very great ones then, and of a Hostile Nature, such as they were
never guilty of, for they have resisted none) against the Peace and Order
established among you, in making Provision to secure which (ye say) the
Prudence of your Court (and what Prudence it was to be so frightened by the
coming of two poor Innocent Women without Sword or Stick, Relation or
Acquaintance, in a strange-place, some thousands of Miles from their Outward
beings; and so to manifest it, as the whole Country ring'd out: And what was
Your Peace and Order, and how established, that the shadow of two Worms, or the
Hearsay of their moving should so shake you, that you were forced to such
Unmanly Proceedings, so base and cruel (as ye pretend to) let Reasonable Men
judge) was only Exercised. And how came Ye to, or could Ye be [well] assured,
(seeing the whole Charge is a Lie, and Ye prove it not, nor produce a
Particular either) by your own Experience (who had none, nor did Ye ever see
them before, or any of those People, Or) the Example of those of Munster, whom
Ye call their Predecessors) that their Design was to Undermine and Ruin the
same. Now in these things Ye ought to have been particular (as I have said) if
Ye meant any thing that might satisfy the Understandings of Men, or clear Your
Guilt; and not to go and put Men to Death, and cruelly exercise them, as a
Court of Justice, and then Apologize for what Ye have done; and so submit it to
the Judgment of others, which should have none to judge it had it been Truth,
but the Judgment should lie in the Justice of the thing, which is higher than
all, and cannot be submitted; and when ye have so done, and submitted it to
charge only in the general, and so ridiculously too, that any wise man may see
through it before it is opened, as if so be You were not to account; So working
backwards and forwards, up and down, now here and now there, as Men drunk
indeed with the Blood of the Innocent, whom Guilt suffers not to be silent; and
yet when Ye speak, Ye manifest Your Guilt: For, as I have said to You, Justice
needs no Apology, but its Defense lies in the Justice of the thing that
arraigns the Malefactor; which answers to God, and that of Him in every Man's
Conscience, which is the highest; Not in the Declaration or Apology, which
arraignes the Justice. So, had ye been wise men, ye would have been silent, and
have let the thing alone to have wrought as it would, and not as Cain (who slew
his Brother about Religion, the state of You) have snatched and caught at every
thing to save You, who thereby show that ye are afraid of every thing. Behold,
thou have driven me Out this day (said Cain when he had slain his Brother, his
Guilt spoke in him) from the face of the Earth, and from thy Face shall I be
hid, and I shall be a Fugitive and Vagabond in the Earth, and it shall come to
pass, that every One that finds me shall slay me. Who put Ye upon this
Apology? Who called Ye to account? Who disturbed You? What Is the matter? When a
Superior Power had called ye to an Account for the Blood of the Innocent, and
the Cruelties of the Oppressed, then it had been a time for You to have
Produced Your Cause, and brought forth Your strong Reasons, and to have shown
(if ye could have told how) Ground for Your Work, and Justice for Your Doings;
But thus to Apologize, to beg, to beseech for a right understanding, or such an
Understanding as Ye would have, as is the English of such a Declaration, when
Ye seem to be in the height of your Blood, and of the Pinnacle of Your Throne,
and thus pitifully to do it, and to Cut your own Throats, shows ye much below
the Understanding of Men, as it manifests your Guilt. Thus much in Answer to
this part of your Declaration.

Declaration. -- And accordingly a Law was made and Published, Prohibiting all
Masters of Ships to bring any Quakers into this Jurisdiction, and themselves
from coming in, on penalty of the House of Correction, till they should be sent
away --

Answer. Hitherto I have had to do with you as to that part of the Sufferings
of those People as were by you inflicted before the sitting of your Court; Or,
that any Law was made by You against them; Also, as to the Ground or Reason of
those your Proceedings, who made them suffer without a Law. All which I have
answered in the beginning, because ye have placed it so, and in regard it
contains the sum of your Charge against them, Or, the Cause of their
Sufferings; For, that which follows is but the gradation of your Proceedings
from Imprisonment to Death, and rather demonstrates that Ye. did such and such
things, than the Grounds (or that ye had Grounds) on which ye did them, and so
Your Declaration is a Charge against your selves. Now, as to your Laws, and the
Grounds of them, and the Sufferings as to each. And because Every Determination
of Man is Justifiable, or not, according to the Ground on which it stands, I
shall begin with your Grounds, which I find to be Two, and then proceed to the
rest.

The First is Hearsay, -- Of whose Pernicious Opinions and Practices we had
received Intelligence, etc. say ye in your Declaration, as aforesaid.

Answ. Now this is so poor and slender a Foundation (or rather none at all) on
which to ground, or by which to warrant what ye have done, and the Laws ye have
made; and so Abominable, that I shall need no further to Evince it than in the
saying of Virgil (a Heathen Poet so accounted) viz.

Fama Malum quo non aliud Velosius ullum.
Mobilitate Viget, Vinesque acquiret Eundo.
(i. e.) Fame (Report, Hearsay) is an Evil, than which there is none more
Swift, It lives by Motion, and by going gets strength.

The Second, is Generals -- Pernicious Opinions and Practices -- Professed
Tenants, -- Turbulent and Contemptuous Behavior -- -- Attempts -- Design --
with such like, which I shall repeat as I proceed to the following parts of
your Dectaration.

Answ. Now Generals are but the Casts of a Cause, they prove nothing (as I have
said) and signify little but a Design to slander, and in them lurks (and is
conversant) Deceie.

And yet upon these Two (and no other) Foundations (as to Matter of Fact) are
your Laws builded, unto which I proceed.

Declar. -- And accordingly a Law was made and Published, prohibiting all
Masters of Ships to bring any Quakers into this Jurisdiction, and themselves
from coming in on Penalty of the House of Correction, till they could be sent
away --

Answ. -- And accordingly -- According unto what? Surely to your Grounds, for
unto them it must needs refer, to that which went before, or it stands for
Naught; and what they are I have showed, and according to the Proverb, -- Malus
Corvus, Malum Ovum -- a Bad Crow, a Bad Egg -- as is the Tree, so is the Fruit;
and a sweet Fountain cannot cast out bitter steams, nor a Bitter sweet; As are
your Grounds, so are your Laws; Your selves have Connected them, and given the
Construction Accordingly (say you) a Law was made --

Answ. And why such a Law? May not any free Denizen of England, reside or be,
so journ or inhabit in any of the Dominions thereof, not being chargeable to
the Place; or, if the Place will bear them, that is to say, can live in it? for
all cannot live together, as the Law of England provides. Is not England and
its Dominions, as an English-man's house, there to be where he thinks best to
accommodate his Affairs? I pray, how came you into New England, and by what
Right and Title do ye claim Privilege to so ourn there, and to Rule as Lords?
Is it not by Right of Nature, into which the Law investeth you, as Natural
Englishmen, into its Natural Habitations? Did Ye not think so when ye removed
thither? and thought ye it not a Privilege inseparable from Nature? how came
ye then so to forget your selves, as being possessed of, or having placed your
selves in that Jurisdiction or Part of England, or of its Dominions, ye make a
Law, or a Law is provided, to Prohibit, or Prohibiting all Masters of Ships to
bring any Quakers (as ye reproach them) into that Jurisdiction, and themselves
from coming in upon Penalty of the House of Correction, till they can be sent
away, as faith your Declaration? Can that which is Natural, or General, on
Common to all, as much to one Man as another, be managed into Particular? Can
it be broken without a Force to Nature? Or, is it not broken when it is made
Particular? and is it not made Particular when some are excluded the Common
benefit? and are not some excluded, when they are not suffered to enjoy the
Common benefit? Or, Do they enjoy the Common benefit, who are excluded? And, is
not this to force Nature? And can Nature be forced without the Violation of
Nature? Which is accounted Murder, (the same that said, He that sheddeth Man's
Blood, by Man shall his Blood be shed, for in the Image of God made he Man, the
same gave Man Dominion over the Beasts of the Field, and the Fowls of the Air,
and the Fishes of the Sea, and bad him subdue it, and made all Men of one Blood
to dwell on all the face of the Earth; and he that Violates the One, Commits
the Other, for things that are Natural are of the same Quality; and the offense
done against One thing that is so, is of the same Nature, as is done unto the
rest, which no Law can tolerate, nor no Judge make (that is to say) that to be
Law which is against Nature, because it Voids the Law (be it what it will) That
is to say, that which against Nature is. And the Reason is plain, because Law
is to preserve Nature, or that which is Natural, or Common unto all, and is an
Efflux, or a fruit of that, or that which is the Ground of Law, which were it
not for, or to serve, defend, or preserve (and where it needs it not, there is
no need of the Law) the Law would not be, for it stands in Nature, and when it
deviates therefrom, or seeks to destroy it, it is from its Ground, and must be
reduced to Nature, not Nature unto it; Nature must be the measure of Law, not
Law of Nature, and this is manifest: What would become of all the Dissenting
Persons in the World, if they who have Power in their hands should let none
breath where they have Power who from them Dissent? What had become of you
after this Rate? Had not the Bishops as much right to have cast ye out of all
England's Dominions, and to have prohibited all Masters of Ships to bring you
thither, or your selves from coming in on the Penalty of the House of
Correction or worse, as ye have done, who Dissented from them? For, if it be
lawful for you, being seated in a Place, and having Power (and yet yours is but
relative, and Dependant on England) so to Prohibit and Restrain all that you
like not; It is Lawful for all who are so seated to do the same; and New
England is under England, as are the Isles of VVight, and the English Fishing
Places in New Foundland. And if it be lawful for all to do so (and your Law
Establishes it) where then will ye go at your next Remove, or into what Corner
of the Earth, seeing that there is scarcely an Inhabited Spot that is One with
You?

But why not into your [this] Jurisdiction? Are you intailed thereunto, you and
your Heirs for Ever? How came ye so to be? and by what Right? Is it because ye
came out of Old England? So did these. Is it because you are English Men? So
are they. Is it because ye Dissented from the Government Established, and so
sted from the Trial of your Principle? These stand to their Principle, and
through all Sufferings come to you to Convert thereunto. If ye say, We are a
People Independent of Our selves, and so may make Laws within our own
Jurisdiction; Then ye are not Dependant on England: If that from Old England ye
have such a Power, Then show it, for (I think) I have the Copy of your Charter
by me, and there is no such thing, but the Condition of it runs it more than
Once (sc.) -- Provided that they (to wit the Laws it gives ye Power to make) be
not Repugnant to the Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of this Realm. --

Yea, Why not into [this] your Jurisdiction above all other, seeing that above
all other your Jurisdiction is most suitable? If ye say, We agree not with them
in Matters of Religion; Nor did, nor do ye now with the Bishops, nor they with
you; and yet no Law turned ye Out, nor did they Procure a Law for that Purpose,
nor was a Law made (as you have done who have no such Power) nor suffered to be
so, nor was their Motion thereunto, (as far as I have heard I am sure there is
no Law) and so you are without Excuse; Your Remove was of your selves, nor were
ye kept out thence by any Law when ye moved, Nor from returning again to
England, as ye minded a Removing; and ye have returned unto England, and have
been suffered so to do, as if ye had not Removed. Yet a Law ye have made,
Prohibiting all Masters of ships to bring in of your Brethren among you (who
were not prohibited your selves) and themselves from coming in on such a
Penalty. Which leads me to the next Particular (viz.) The Sufferings by this
your Law. And accordingly (say you) a Law was made and Published. --

Answ. This Law is put as the Port or Entrance into this Scene of Blood, and
Cruel Sufferings, and the very Publication of it Enters it, and shows the
Spirit by which it was made, and the Ground on which it went; and poor Nicholas
Upshall (a VVeakly Old Man) of your Town of Boston bore the Brunt of it;
Nicholas Upshall.
For, he hearing it proclaimed, and being grieved at the heart for your sakes,
and the Countries, that such a thing should be done which he looked upon as a
sad forerunner of some heavy Judgment, gave his Dissent; Which ye took so ill
at his hands, that though he was a Member of your Church, and of good Repute
among you, for a man of a sober and unblamable Conversation, and though in much
tenderness and love he spoke to you the next day when ye had him before you,
desiring you to take heed, lest ye should be found fighters against God, and
some sudden Judgment follow it on the Land, which was the Counsel which wise
Gamaliel gave the chief Priests and Pharisees, and which they received at his
hands, and it would have been your Wisdom so to have done; Yet you fined him
twenty pounds, (which ye Enacted, I Will not bate him one groat, said your cruel
Governor, John Endicot) and three pounds more by another Court for not coming
to your Meetings, (and this after he was Imprisoned) and into Prison ye cast
him; and banish him ye did out of your Jurisdiction, allowing him but One
Months space (of which the time of his Imprisonment was part) for his Remove;
neither regarding his old years (who had scarce a Tooth in his head to eat his
meat, and bread and cheese and other Sustenance was scraped into a spoon when
he received it) nor the weakness of his Body; nor the state of his aged Wife
and Children which were amongst ye, nor the season of the year, (it being in
the beginning of Winter, which with you is very cold, and he might have
perished therein, as some have done in passing but from Town to Town, though
but of Three Miles distance) but Out he must go, and when he was departed into
Plimmouth Patent Jurisdiction, which was the next adjacent, the Governor
thereof (One Bradford, since dead) to help on the matter, hearing of his coming
(for after your Pipe danced that Plantation, as will appear by and by in the
Cruelties that Ensue which they inflicted on the Innocent) issued forth a
Warrant, that none of Sandwitch (whereunto he was come) should Entertain the
poor Man; which not Availing (for their hearts were more tender then to cast
him Out (such an Aged Man) in time of VVinter, he sent for him to Plimmouth by
a special Warrant, which was Twenty Miles distant, but he not being able to go,
and writing to him, that if he perished his Blood would be required at his
hands, through the Moderation of some of the (then) Magistrates he was
permitted to stay till the Spring; but then was he banished thence, who there
had done nothing, but came into their Jurisdiction for a little shelter in the
VVinter Season) to Rhoad Island; and this so earnestly pressed in the early time
of the year, that he was like to have been cast away in his going thither. A
Piece of Cruelty able to soften a heart of Flint and Draw it into tears at the
sense thereof, and which drew such Compassion from a Sagamore (or Indian
Prince) That he told the Old man, if he would live with him he would make him a
warm house, calling him Friend, and further he said, -- What a God have the
English who deals so with one another about the Worship of their God? -- Or
words to that purpose. But from you it drew no Relentings, but the spirit of
Iniquity having got over you, it hardened ye the more, by how much the more you
were Exercised therein, yea upon this very Old Man, as in its place I shall
show; and by and by make manifest. Even the Sea Monsters draw forth their
Breast, and give suck to their Young, but the Daughter of my People is become
Cruel like the Ostrich in the Wilderness.

Thus Entered (as I have said) this Scene of Blood, and what follows answers
unto it.

For, the Eight aforesaid, viz. Christopher Holder, Thomas Christopher Holder.
Thomas Thirstone. John Copeland. William Brend. Sarah Gibbens. Dorothy Waugh
Mary Weatherhead. Mary Prince. Nicholas Vpsh.
Thirstone, John Copeland, William Brend, Mary Prince, Dorothy VVaugh, Sarah
Gibbens, and Mary VVeatherhead, who were Committed before this Law was made,
and kept close Prifoners for the space of about Eleven Weeks, the very Day that
Nicholas was cast into Prison (as aforesaid) were they by virtue of this Law
conveyed on board a Ship, the Ship they came in, and sent for England, and
Nicholas came into their Room; Which Prison ye have supplied with the bodies of
the Saints, and Servants of Jesus for the most part ever since; scarce One
taken Out, but some One or other put into his Rome; of which in its Place.

But how came Nicholas Upshall to be concerned in a Law for Strangers who was
an Inhabitant? In a Law for Quakers (so called) who was a Member of your
Church? In a Law for Masters of Ships who shall bring into your Jurisdiction
any People that are called such, and for any such People who themselves shall
come into your Jurisdiction, when as he is neither Master of a Ship, nor
brought in any such, nor came in, but is an Inhabitant a Freeman of Boston? How
comes he to Suffer and to have inflicted upon him a Punishment [above] the
Penalty of the Law? How came those Eight to be sent away the Day after the
Publication of a Law, and by Virtue thereof, who were imprisoned before the Law
was made? These things would be Enquired into, and how Repugnant they are to
the Laws of England?

Declaration. -- Notwithstanding which by a Back door they found Entrance, and
the Penalty inflicted on themselves proving insufficient to restrain their
Impudent, and insolent obtrusions, was increased by the loss of the Ears of
those who offended the second time; Which also being too weak a defense against
their Impetuous Frantic Fury, necessitated us to endeavor our security, and
upon serious Consideration after the former Experiments by their incessant
Assaults, a Law was made, That such Persons should be banished upon pain of
Death, according to the Example of England in their Provision against fesuites;
Which sentence being regularly pronounced at the last Court of Assistants
against the Parties abovenamed, and they either returning or continuing
presumptuously in this Jurisdiction after the time limited, were Apprehended,
and owning themselves to be the Persons banished, were sentenced by the Court
to Death according to the Law aforesaid, which has been Executed upon two of
them. --

Answer. As the former was the Entrance into, so this is the Scene of this
Bloody Tragedy, the most Inhumane and cruel that Ever Age knew, or preceding
Generation.

Declara. -- Notwithstanding which by a Back Door they found Entrance.

Answ. And, Why a Backdoor? Was not the way by which they came as much before
ye as the Sea from England? Is Sixty Miles distance by Land from Rhoad Island
(the Place from whence they came) become further then England? One would think
that Properly and indeed, the Land it is that is before you, which ye came to
Inhabit, and that the Sea it is that is behind you, from whence ye came. How
come ye then to say a Backdoor? By a Backdoor they found Entrance -- Is it
because you mistin your Understandings, and so have put the fore for the back,
and the back for the fore? Surely then ye were not wise in your Generation to
bind the Sea, and leave the Land at Liberty. Is it because ye had journeyed far
enough from Old Enland (the House of Bondage, so accounted) into New (a Land of
Liberty) and now were returning from the Land of Liberty to the House of
Bondage? Surely then ye are in a bad state, to become Persecutors your selves
who fled Persecution. Or, is it because Rhoad Island is the Place into which ye
banished those that differed from you in Matters of Religion (who your selves
were not banished who differed in Religion) and so having turned your Backs on
their Oppression, would not hear their Cry, as did Joseph's Brethren, when they
sold him into Egypt? Then Just is the Lord to bring your Condemnation from the
Place of those whom ye Oppressed.

Declar. -- Notwithstanding which (say ye) by a Back Door they found Entrance.
--

Answ. And Why not? Are ye Lord's Propriators of the Creation? May not the Lord
of Heaven and Earth send His Messengers among ye, without your leave? May not
an English man come into an English Jurisdiction? What Insolency is this, and
high Obtrusion on the Creator of Heaven and Earth, who gave you your beings
upon the Nation from whence ye came, and in which ye first drew your breath,
and the Right of Nature from which ye are derived, and from whence ye spring?

Declar. -- They found Entrance. --

Answ. And Why should they not, seeing the Lord of all is He that sent them.

Declar. -- Notwithstanding Which --

Answ. Notwithstanding What? Why the Law prohibiting all Masters of Ships from
bringing in any, and themselves from coming in. Coming in! From whence? Why
From or by Sea, for as for the Land that Door was not Shut, the Backdoor (as
ye call it) but the Fore was. Notwithstanding which, viz. the Law aforesaid
(say ye) by a Backdoor they found Entrance -- Then how come they to be
concerned in a Law which was not fitted for them? It was for them that came in
at the fore door by Sea, and Ship-Masters that brought them, who were
Prohibited from bringing in any such, and themselves from so coming in; I say,
how come they to be concerned in a Law which was not for them, and you to
inflict upon them the Penalty of a Law which concerned them not (might they not
come in at the back door, it being open, when the fore door was shut?) yea a
Greater? For so say ye -- And the Penalty inslicted on themselves proving
insufficient to restrain their Impudent, and Insolent Obtrusions, was increased
by the loss of the Ears of those that offended the second time. --

Answ. Insufficient indeed (and well might it be) and too weak a defense (as ye
afterward spoke of cutting off Ears, and therefore proceed from Banishment to
Death) against Him who made the Earth and the Sea, and all that therein is, Who
gives unto Man, Life, and Breath, and Moving; Whose time being come for the
sounding of His Everlasting Gospel to those who sat in Darkness, and Region of
the shadow of Death in your Jurisdiction; he armed his Messengers against the
force of Death and the strength of Darkness, with his Eternal Spirit, and
enabled them to endure what the strength of the One and the Gates of the Other
could inflict upon them; Whom ye have killed and put to Death, whipped and
scourged, burnt in the hand, and cut off their ears, and so they bear in their
Bodies the marks of the Lord Jesus, and the dying of Jesus is made manifest in
their mortal flesh, that they might not trust in themselves, but in him that
raised up Jesus from the dead; And a Crown of Life they shall receive, who
loved not their lives unto the death for the sake of Jesus Christ.

Lastly, Insufficient against what? Against a few innocent Lambs among Wolves;
a few simple People, Men and Women, who came to you not with Swords or with
spears, but in the Name of the Lord, whom the Lord God of Life sent to you
through Deserts, and Wildernesses, and Necessities, and Straits, and Hunger and
Thirst, and Cold and Heat, and Perils by Sea, and Perils by Land, and
Temptations, and Distresses, to turn ye unto God; Whom ye have Imprisoned, and
Whipped, and burnt, and cut off their ears, and put to Death. That all the
righteous Blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of Righteous Abel, unto the
blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, who was slain between the Temple and
the Altar, may come upon you; and verily it shall come on this Generation. And,
the time is at hand, yea, near to be revealed, wherein the Righteous God will
render unto you according to your Deeds; yea, according to your Deeds will he
recompense you, Fury to his Adversaries, Recompense to his Enemies; yea, to his
Adversaries will he repay Recompense; And the Lord God will Thunder out of
Heaven upon you, and the whole Earth shall be filled with his Glory, when he
shall have thrown ye down from your Seats, and Exalted the Humble and Meek;
Even when he shall have turned to hear the Prayer of the Desolate, and help him
to Right that has no Helper, and the Poor from him who is too strong for him,
and the Needy amongst men. This shall be written for the Ages to come, and the
Children that are unborn shall praise the Lord: And your Carcasses shall fall
upon the Earth, and ye shall leave your Name a Curse unto my Chosen, says the
Lord.

Declar. -- Which proving Insufficient --

Answ. What proving Insufficient? Why the Penalty inslicted; so says your
Declaration, (sc.) And the Penalty inslicted proving Insufficient. --

Answ. What was the Penalty? and what did ye inflict? O Ye shameless Men! who
make so slight of so heavy Punishments! whose Cruel strokes pierced the Air,
and whose Bloody Draughts the hearts and souls of those who saw it, as they did
the Bodies of them whose Flesh ye tore, and whose Blood ye drew. Yet this is
insufficient, -- the Penalty inslicted proving Insufficient -- Never Blood
Enough to the spirit of Wickedness when once it lanches out, and dips its foot
in the Blood of the Innocent; So it was, and so it has been with men in your
state from the beginning. But the Righteous God will fill to you again, yea,
double in the Cup that ye have filled, and ye shall surely have your Reward.
Therefore, deceive not your selves; for, as you have sown, so shall ye reap; as
you have done, so shall it be done unto you; and ye shall know that I am the
Lord, when I have taken Vengeance upon You, and rendered unto you according to
your Deeds. Then shall you see, and be ashamed for your Envy at My People;
Shame shall cover you, who have said unto them, Where is now the Lord thy God?
and ye shall be a Perpetual Desolation; the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has
spoken it, who also will do it, and perform it in its season; and the time is
near.

Now, as to the Sufferings; What were they, and your House of Correction, that
ye make so slight of them, and say of them, -- which proving Insufficient.

The First Two that came Over after this your Law, were Anne Burden and Mary
Dyar, her whom ye afterward put to death, after that ye had reprieved her (of
which in its place) The One's business was (viz. Anne Burden's) to gather up
some Debts in the Country (her Husband being dead, who was a long Inhabitant
therein) for the maintenance of her and her children, who had lived about
Sixteen years in Boston and those parts, and was unblamable before them with
whom she lived; Nor had ye any thing wherewithal to charge her now, but that
she was a Plain Quaker, as Richard Bellingham said, and that she must aside
your Law, who came for her Debts; Mary Dyar's to pass that way to Rhoad Island,
having before she arrived there, no knowledge of what ye had done: These Two ye
imprisoned, and kept close Prisoners that none might come at them; and though
William Dyar came for his Wife from Rhoad Island, after he heard that she was
there, and in Prison; yet ye suffered him not to have her, until he became
bound in a great Penalty (so great was your fear) not to lodge her in any Town
of your Colony, nor to permit any to have speech with her (an unmanly thing) in
her Journey. But as for Anne Burden ye held her to it, and when she was very
sick in Prison, ye suffered not her Friends to come and visit her; Yea, your
Jailer shut her up in a close Room in the heat of Summer, upon the Visit of Two
Friends at the Window as they came from your Meetings. And as for her Debts,
though some Tenderhearted People were moved to look after them whilst she was
in this Restraint, and had procured to the value of about Thirty Pounds of it,
and desired that she might have her Liberty, when ye sent her away, to pass to
England by Barbados, because the Goods so gathered for that part of the Debt
were not fit for England, which was so reasonable, that you seemed at first as
if it might be, if any Voluntarily would receive her, for that ye could compel
none so to do, but He that brought her thither; and they upon this seeming
Liberty of yours had procured such a Passage, Yet ye suffered her not to go,
but most unreasonably compelled the Master of the Ship that brought her
thither, to carry her back for England without any of her Goods with her, nor
had she so much as One Penies-worth of her Husband's (except to the Value of
Six shillings, which an honest man sent her upon an old Account) whilst she was
in New England; but ye returned her Empty to her Fatherless Children, though
they were born in the Country; and after that ye had kept her there for the
space of about Twelve weeks close Prisoner, and put her to the charge of her
abiding there and going back; and when the Master of the Ship asked who should
pay for her Passage; Ye advised him to take so much of her Goods as would
answer it; which he refusing to do so wicked a thing, and rather trusting to
her Honesty, of which he was persuaded that she would not let him be a loser,
though he could not compel her to pay, seeing she went not of her own will (and
which she paid him in London upon that Account) ye let him go. And when he that
had the first trust from her husband with the Estate, was to convey what was
gathered to Barbados after she was gone; Ye stopped to the value of six pounds
ten shillings of it for her Passage (who so went upon her own, and paid it in
London, aforesaid) and of seven shillings for Boat-hire to carry her on
Sihpboard (though the Master proffered John Endicot your Governor to carry her
in his own; but Richard Bellingham your Deputy Governor would not, but sent her
with the Hangman in a Boat that he had pressed) and of Fourteen pounds for the
Jaylon (to whom she owed nothing) and as for the rest, she heard of some that
was sent to the Barbados, by the honest man that stirred to have it in; but of
him that was entrusted, she neither heard when, nor what, nor has she any
thing of it come to her hands (25th of the 2d Month, 1660.) to relieve her and
her Children; and as for the Remainder of the Estate left in the Country, which
should have been a Livelihood for her and hers, and for which she came, what is
become of it she knows not, nor cannot go over to Enquire without a Prison.
And this is your Mercy, your way to pay Debts; your Tenderness, your Regard to
the Widow and the Fatherless, your Justice and the Execution of your Laws, when
the Reason of your Law has no place: And for this Expect that ye shall have
your Reward from Him who is the Father of the Fatherless, and the Husband to
the Widow; who is no Respecter of Persons, but will render to every man
according to his works.

Mary Clark is the next, whose tender Body (being a Mother 29th of the 6th
Month, Mary Clark. John Clark a Merchant-Taylor in London.
of Children, and having a Husband in England whom she left, being moved of the
Lord to come unto you) ye unmercifully tore with Twenty stripes of a Whip with
Three Cords laid on with fury, after she had delivered her Message to you,
which she had from the Lord, which ye turned your backs upon, and said, -- Ye
would not hear -- like those Proud men to whom the Prophet Jeremiah spoke in
the Word of the Lord. So she turned her Back to you, and ye smote it as
aforesaid, and having detained her Prisoner about Twelve weeks after in the
Winter season, ye turned her out of your Jurisdiction, Who now is not. And this
is your House of Correction, and the beginning of the inslicting of the Penalty
which ye say was Insufficient.

Christopher Holder and John Copeland are the next, who being moved of the Lord
to go to Salem, a Town in your Colony, Christopher Holder. John Copeland.
and speaking a few words (viz. Christopher Holder) in Your Meeting after the
Priest had done, was haled back by the hair of the head, and his Mouth
violently stopped with a Glove and Handkerchief thrust thereinto with much
fury, by One of your Church Members and Commissioners, and they both thrust
out, 21 day, 7th month, 1657
and had to a house, and continued there till the next day, and then had to
Boston, where Ye laid it on with Thirty stripes a piece at Once, with a knotted
Whip of Three Cords, as near as the Hangman 23 day, 7th month, 1657
could in One place measuring his Ground, and fetching his strokes with the
greatest strength and advantage he could to Cut their Flesh, and to put them to
suffering; The Cruelty of which was so great, that a Woman seeing of it, fell
down as dead; Yet it had not End, for that Night, and Three days after your
Jailer kept them without Food or Water (lying on the Boards, without Bed or
Straw, after so cruel Execution) and so close that none might come to speak
with them, so they might have perished, but the Lord preserved them under your
Merciless Cruelty; and when all this would not do, Ye kept them Nine weeks
Prisoners without Fire in the Cold Winter season, and then turned them forth:
And the Friend of Salem (Samuel Shattock by Samuel Shattock.
Name) who pulled away the hand of the said Church-Member's and Commissioner,
when he thrust the Glove and Handkerchief into the Mouth of Christopher Holder,
lest it should have choked him, being not able to behold so barbarous an Act;
ye sent to Boston (though an Inhabitant of Salem, and a man of good repute
amongst ye) and there ye kept him Prisoner (whom since ye have whipped and
banished upon pain of Death) as a Friend to Quakers (though ye had no Law so to
do) who only did this friendly Act, till he had given in Bond of Twenty Pounds
to answer it at the next Court, and not to come at any of the People called
Quakers at their Meetings. And this was the second Progress of your House of
Correction, and the further Infliction of your Insufficient Punishment, which
ye laid on without Compassion or Pity, and yet call it Insufficient. -- The
Penalty inflicted proving Insufficient -- say ye, who are thus Drunk in Blood,
and filled with Madness, that ye care not what ye do to the Innocent, nor what
Cruelty ye inflict, nor how your Rage reaches up to Heaven in causing them to
suffer; but being Mounted in Blood, ye ride on with speed, and No Consideration
of Tenderness or Bowels can stop your Career, No not the sad Condition of your
Neighbors (the Inhabitants) who had lived long amongst ye, and were Partakers
of the same distance from their Country, and other Inconveniences, and were
known to you to be of sober Conversations; your Eye pitied not, neither did ye
spare them, the Cry of their Oppressions came not into your Ears, neither did
your hearts relent, but as Men given up to a Reprobate sense, Implacable,
Unmerciful, without natural Affection: So ye proceeded with the Inhabitants, as
with the Strangers, and more cruelly too, neither regarding Age nor Sex,
neither the Hoary head, nor him that stoopeth for Age; Neither Child nor Old
woman; Neither Infant of Days, nor the Man of Riper Years; Neither a Man and
his House, nor a Man and his Heritage; Neither Many Men and their Houses, nor
Many Men and their Heritages, Wives, Children, Families, Relations, Estates,
Goods, Lands, Persons, Beings; as I shall set in Order before you by and by,
(though therein You are silent) and the Righteous Judgments of God, who will
not spare you for your Iniquities, and Hard-heartedness to the Poor; Neither
will His Eye pity You, nor will He spare You; But the Reward of your Hands
shall be given ye, and the Fruit of your Doings; Because ye spared not, neither
have had Mercy: And this the Lord will fulfill, whose Word it is, who is a God
of Faithfulness and Truth: Blessed are all they who put their Trust in Him.

And here Cassandra Southick and Lawrence her Husband (an Law. Southick and his
Wife.
Aged, Grave Couple, Inhabitants of Salem, and Members of your Church) come to
be considered; Who, because they Entertained the Two Strangers aforesaid,
(viz.) Christopher Holder and John Copeland (who are required to Entertain
Strangers, Forget not to do it, says the Apostle to the Church of Christ; for
thereby some have Entertained Angels) were committed to Prison, and sent to
Boston (your Metropolis of Blood) where Lawrence ye released, to be dealt
withal by them who reputed him of their Congregation;) but Cassandra ye kept
Seven weeks a Prisoner, and then fined her Forty shillings for owning a Paper,
written by the Strangers aforesaid, in reference to Truth and the Scriptures
(what Blasphemers are ye, who persecute for this?) which your Governor put to
her wherewithal to Ensnare her, and to bring her under your Law, who had none
before, after ye had detained her as aforesaid; and which she Owning (for that
she could not deny, unless she had denied the Truth) ye fined her as aforesaid;
though even that Law by which Ye fined her, fineth only for Heretical Papers,
which this was not, nor proved ye it so to be.

Richard Dowdney was the next who felt your hand, upon Richard Dowdney.
whom there being a Necessity laid from the Lord to come from England to you,
Ye apprehended at Dedham, and brought to Boston, where he never was before, nor
in that Country, and having given him Thirty stripes at Once, with such a Whip
as aforesaid, and laid it on with as much Cruelty as the former, and searched
for his Papers and Books, and took from him what Ye would (all which in the
space of Three hours after his Coming to Town, to the wounding of the hearts of
many who heard and saw so Innocent a Man so inhumanely abused) Ye continued him
Twenty Days a Prisoner, and then sent Him away with the Four former, after ye
had threatened him and them with the loss of their Ears, if they came there
again, viz. into your Jurisdiction; Which leads me to the next step of your
Proceedings, mentioned in your Declaration; viz. the Cutting off Ears -- was
increased (to wit, the Penalty) by the loss of the Ears of those that offended
the second time -- The Whole runs thus, -- And the Penalty inflicted proving
insufficient to restrain their Impudent and Insolent Obirusions was increased
by the loss of the Ears of those that offended the second time --

Answer. Before I come to the particular Execution of this Increase of your
Cruelty, I must necessarily turn aside to show the Reader the Effect of the
former upon the Inhabitants, and what it produced as to them, and your
Proceedings thereupon.

These Your Violent and Bloody Proceedings so affected the Inhabitants of
Salem, and so preached unto them, that diverse of them could no longer Eat of
your Sacrifices of Blood, nor partake with you who mingled Blood with your
Sacrifices, but choosing rather Peace with God in their Consciences, whose
Witness in them testified against such Worships, than to Join with You,
whatsoever they might therefore suffer, withdrew from Your Public Assemblies,
and met together by themselves on the first Days of the Week quiet and
peaceable in One another houses, waiting on the Lord.

This Ye soon found out (for it could not be long hid) and it grieved You sore,
and William Hathorn (One of your Commissioners) having information thereof,
sent forth his Warrants to bring in all before him, who were taken together,
the next Morning; before whom being brought, he read unto them an Old Law, made
in 1646. to Convict them which should absent from their Public Meetings, after
the Rate of Five shillings a Week (now the Bishops was but Twelve pence in the
Days of Queen Elizabeth) with which Ye Convicted them (a Practice never used
by Christ nor His Apostles, nor by the Jews of Old) which yet satisfied him
not, but this Capt. Hathorne sent for them again, and asked them Ensnaring
Questions concerning the Sufficiency of the Light which convinced of Sin, and
had the Clerk of the Court to write what they said; which Light that convinced
of Sin being the Light of Christ, which Enlighteneth every Man that comes into
the World; who says, -- I am the Light of the World -- and John -- That that
is the true Light that lights Every Man that comes into the World; In whom
was Light, and the Light was the Light of Men: They owning it to be that which
was (as it is) to be minded by all, He sent Three of them to You at Boston,
viz. the said Lawrence Southick and Cassandra his Wife, and Josiah their Son,
(all of a Family, to Lawrence Southick Cassandra his Wife. Josiah their Son.
terrify the rest) whom ye sent to your 3d day 12th Month, 1657.
House of Correction (as ye call it) and caused to be whipped in the coldest
season of the Year with Cords, as those before, though two of them were aged
People; and having kept them Eleven days in Prison, and commanded them to work
for the Jailer, who had Families of their own, and business to attend upon,
from which ye detained them, and caused them to work for another, under the
Penalty of your Law, as if they were Rogues or Vagabonds, and such as would not
work nor have regard to their Families, but wander up and down to beg and
steal, as is the Law of England, and as it provides; and then set them at
Liberty, nothing in a Legal way: For, as for the Informations, the said
Hathorne sent them in a Private way (as his manner was) sealed up to Your
Governor, which he produces not. Nevertheless with this the said Hathorne was
not satisfied, but being filled with Cruelty and Blood, sent forth his
Warrants, and caused several of the Beasts of the said Lawrence and Josiah to
be destrained, to the Value of Four pounds Thirteen shillings, that is to say,
for Six weeks absence of the said Lawrence and Cassandra, Three pounds Six
shillings, and the rest for Josiah their Son, being Two young Beasts, and a fat
Hogg.

Neither with this was the said Hathorne satisfied, nor with Edw. Harnet and
his Wife.
the Departure of some out of that Jurisdiction, because of your Cruelty; but
one Edward Harnet (aged about Sixty nine years, and his Wife Seventy three) and
another aged Family, he caused Another aged Family.
Thirty seven shillings to be taken, for not coming to your Meetings, though
they were Low in the Outward, and had more need to have been ministered unto,
than to be taken from.

And William Shattock an Inhabitant of Boston, ye * Committed William Shattock.
First Month, 1658.
to Your House of Correction, and cruelly whipped him at his first Entrance,
because he was found alone in his Own house by your Constable, on a first Day,
Where ye kept him to work (which was making of Shoes) and the Jailer took his
Labor from his Wife and Children; which putting him on straits to think what
he should do for their Sustenance, though he could have well endured the thing
as to himself, yet in regard Your Deputy Governor told his Wife (in part of
whose house his Family then was) that in regard he was poor, and could not pay
them Five shillings a week for not coming to your Meetings, you would continue
him still in Prison; he desired to depart your Jurisdiction, which to do ye
gave him but the next days time; and your said Deputy Governor endeavored to
make a Separation between him and his wife, seeking to persuade her that she
should never hear of him more, and when he was gone to seek out a Place for
them in another Jurisdiction; and that what William had done was to be rid of
her and her Children (which were Four) and told her, That if she would disown
him, and persuade his Children to it (a Cursed work) neither she, nor her
Children should want: for Two of them he intended to keep himself, his son
being (as your said Deputy said) fit to keep his sheep, whom he took from the
place where the said William had appointed him to abide, lest he the said
Deputy should make a Prey of him. And so he had but three days time to depart
your Jurisdiction, and to provide for his Family, and to pay his Debts, and to
receive them, which he was necessitated to accept, because ye had concluded to
keep him still in Prison, and to take of his Children to be your Servants, and
to make his Wife to do your wills, or perpetually to banish him, as he
understood by his Wise, and had committed him, and ordered him to be severely
whipped at his first Entrance, according to Your First Law, entitled, a Law
concerning Quakers, and there to be kept, and none suffered to converse with
him whilst he was in Prison. And this is the Justice of the Court of the
Massachusetts, and the Religion toward God of your Deputy.

But to proceed, and to let Others see, as well as Your selves, what a
Generation Ye are, and a Heap of Evildoers, whom no Consideration will tie,
nor Mean or Medium: There were about this time three of the Inhabitants of
Salem going to Rhoad Island to see the Place, and to provide a Being for
themselves John Burton. Josiah Southik John Small.
and Families, whose Names are John Small, Josiah Southick, and John Burton;
who coming to a place called Dedham, in the way thither, about Thirty Miles
from Salem, the first Night as they were going into the Ordinary to lodge, One
of the Chief Men of that Place, Capt. Lusher by name, was sent for, who
examined them about Religion; and your Ministers, on Purpose to ensnare them;
which they perceiving, and refusing to answer unto such his Questions, though
they gave him an Account of their Journey, which was as much as he could
reasonably expect, he told them that he would send them where they should; and
so the next morning the Constable came with more Aid, and with a Halbert and
Brazen headed staff conveyed them like Murtherres through the street to
Boston; where your Deputy Governor reviled them (as is his usual manner to the
Servants of the Lord) and told them that they should go to Prison, and to
Prison they had gone had they not desired to go to the Governor, who
understanding the Case did more like a man of Understanding (if he had so held)
and set them-free; Saying, -- That they could not hinder men from Travailing on
their Journeys. And yet the same Governor and Deputy Governor Signed a Warrant
to levy Twelve Shillings on the said men, who were so brought back (to pay the
men for the aiding them) So levying Fines to force some away, and to keep
others Back; neither suffering them to Live in Quietness, or to Depart in Peace.

Sarah Gibbens and Dorothy Waugh were the next on whom ye Sarah Gibbens.
Dorothy Waugh. 13th. 2d. Month, 1658.
laid your Bloody cruelty; For, they coming to Boston being moved of the Lord,
and being found in your Meeting Place, speaking a few Words after your Lecture
was ended; Ye caused them to be had to your House of Correction, where your
Jailer (a Member of your Church) kept them Three days without food in a close
Room, though they tendered Money for Provisions, not having eaten One Morsel of
Bread, during all that time: Then ye sent for them to your Court, and asked
them many Ensnating 1. d. Month. 1658.
Questions, to get matter against them, in which having not prevailed (for the
Lord was with them) giving them a Mouth and Wisdom which ye could not resist)
ye sentenced them to Prison to be [severely] Whipped, (Two Young Women) and not
spared (such was your cruelty) which was as Cruelly executed the second day of
the week following with a Three-fold-Corded-knotted Whip, with which ye gave
them Ten Lashes apiece, to the tearing of their Flesh, and beating it to
pieces, and then shut them up (your usual manner) and stopped the Windows to
prevent them from Air and all manner of Refreshment for Eight days together,
so that Provisions they had not, nor could have any brought them; during that
space of time after their fore Whippings, and Three days before they were so
whipped, and Perished they must, had not the Lord wonderfully kept them, beyond
what man could have been able to undergo; as he did enable them to give him
thanks for his presence, after they were so sorely whipped to the astonishment of
the People. And the Jailer being asked why he would not let them have food for
their Money, and what he meant to keep them without food? He answered, -- They
should famish if they would not eat the Prison food, (which was for their Work,
which they could not do in your Wills, who were not Idle persons, and who had
Money of their Own, and how could they work when their Backs were torn?) And
your Governor John Endicot, being asked by Sarah Gibbens (when they were had
before you after the first Three days as aforesaid) Whether it were Justice or
Equity, to keep them so up, and not to suffer them to have food for their
money, that being the Third day they had been so kept, and had not eaten One
Morsel of Bread? And further, that ye might all see that God was with them,
that they were so preserved without food; and that they came well into the
Town, as hundreds could witness, and that if they perished their Blood would
fall heavy on them who were the occasion thereof. He answered, -- He Mattered,
or it matters not. And when he had set them at Liberty to be sent out of the
Country, Your Jailer detained them certain days after all this for their fees,
and had kept them longer, had not the Lord by another way wrought their
Deliverance.

Horred Gardner is the next, who being the Mother of many Horred Gardner.
Children, and an Inhabitant of Newport in Rhoad Island, came with her Babe
sucking at her Breast, from thence to Weymouth, (a Town in your Colony) where
having finished what she had to do, and her Testimony from the Lord, unto which
the Witness of God Answered in the People, she was hurried by the Baser sort to
Boston before your Governor John Endicet; who after 11th. 3d. Month, 1658.
he had entertained her with much abusive Language and the Mary Staunton.
Girl that came with her to help bear her Child, he committed them both to
Piron, and Ordered them to be whipped (a young Woman, and a Mother with an Infant
at her Breast) with Ten Lashes a piece, which was cruelly laid on heir Naked
bodies, with a Three-fold-knotted Whip of Cords, and then were continued for
the space of Fourteen days longer in Prison from their Friends, who could not
Visit them. The Woman came a very sore Journey, and (according to Man) hardly
accomplishable, through such a Wilderness of above Sixty Miles, as it is
between Rhoad Island and Boston; (as did Sarah Gibbens and Dorothy Sarah
Gibbens. Dorothy Waugh.
Waugh through the same, in Storms of Frost and Snow, wherein they lodged Night
and Day, and came to Salem, whitherto through all those hardships, and wadeings
over Rivers, and Impossibilities as to Men, the Lord brought them, who moved
them to go thither, and from thence to you, who cheerfully underwent it for
his, and his Seeds sake, and worse from you, who had Famish't them for want of
Bread, but the Lord preserved them, and kept them from sinking under your
Cruelties, and Scourgings, Praising the Lord at the Post, after their
Scourgings was over, to the astonishment of the People; as he did Horrid
Gardner and the Girl, as aforesaid, and the Tender Babe, who, through the
Sufferings of its Mother, and her being kept up, after the Martyring of their
bodies, might have died; but you had no Consideration of this or of them,
though the Mother had of you; Who after the savage, inhumane, and bloody
Execution on her of your Cruelty aforesaid, kneeled down, and Prayed -- The
Lord to forgive you -- which so reached upon a Woman that stood by, and wrought
upon her that she gave Glory to God, and said, That surely she could not have
done that thing, if it had not been by the Spirit of the Lord. --

After these comes Thomas Harris from Rhoad Island into your Thomas Harris of
Barbados.
Colony, who Declaring against your Pride and Oppression, as he could have
Liberty to speak in your Meeting Place at Boston after the Priest had Ended,
and Warning the People of the Dreadful, Terrible Day of the Lord God, which was
coming upon that Town, and Country; Much unlike to Niniveh, he was Pulled
down, and out of your Meeting, and a hand was put on his Mouth to keep him from
speaking farther, and he haled by the hair of his head, and had before your
Governor, and Deputy, and many People, with several Magistrates, and committed
to Prison, without Warrant or Mittimus, that he saw, and there shut up in a
close Room, and none suffered to come at him, nor him to have Provisions for
his Money; and the next day Whipped without showing him any Law that he had
broken, though he desired it of the Jailer, with Ten Cruel stripes with such a
whip as aforesaid, to the sore cutting of his Flesh, and bruising of his Body,
and then shut up again for Eleven days more; Five of which he was kept without
Bread (for your Jailer would not suffer him to have any for his Money, and
threatened One of the other Prisoners very much for bringing him a little Water
the Day of his Execution) and all this, because he could not work for the
Jailer (who had money of his own) and let him have Eight Pence in Twelve of
what he should Earn; and starved he had been in all probability to death, had
not the Lord kept him those five days, and ordered it so after their End, that
Food was conveyed him by Night (by some tender People, who though they came not
into the Profession of Truth openly, by reason of your Cruelty, yet felt it
secretly moving in them, and so were made serviceable to keep the Servants of
the Lord from Perishing, and causing their Liberties, who shall not go without
their Reward) in at a VVindow. And though he was in this state of Weakness, for
want of Bread, and by reason of the torturing of his Body with Cruel Whippings
as aforesaid; and though the Day after he was whipped the Jailer had told him,
that he had now suffered the Law, and that if he would hire the Marshal to
carry him out of the Country, he might be gone when he would; yet the next
Sixth day in the Morning, before the Sixth hour, the Jailer required him to
work at his will, which he not answering for the Reasons aforesaid, he gave his
weak and fainty Body Two and Twenty Blows with a Pitched Rope; 19th day, 5th
Month, 1658.
and the Nineteenth of the Fifth Month following, Fifteen cruel stripes more
with a Threefold-corded Whip, knotted as aforesaid.

Now upon his Apprehension Your Governor sought to know of him who came with
him (as was Your usual manner) that so ye might find out the rest of the
Company, on whom ye might execute Your Cruelty and Wickedness, and Your
Governor said, he would make him do it, but his Cruelties could not.
Nevertheless they were soon found out (who hid not themselves, but were bold in
the Lord) viz. -- William Brend and William Leddra, William Brend. William
Leddra
who coming to Salem, unto which they were moved of the Lord, and having
Conference with a Priest at Newberry, after they had passed thence, and after
that Capt. Gerish (sometimes of Bristol in Old England) before whom the
Conference was, had promised the People that they should not suffer (for at the
Desire of the People was the Conference) he the said Capt. Gerish (one of your
Commissioners) sent for them back, as they were on their way, and had them
before the Court; and though the Court confessed, that they found nothing that
was Evil in them (the Witness of God so far answering) yet the Court committed
them (as did Pilate Him who went before them) and kept them at Salem that
Night, and the next Day Prisoners, during which time they called in question
several of the Inhabitants of Salem for meeting with them, (for ye had made a
Law, viz. That of Cutting off Ears, as aforesaid, -- That whosoever of the
Inhabitants should directly or indirectly cause any of the said People to come
into your Jurisdiction, he should forfeit an Hundred Pounds to the Country, and
be committed to Prison there to remain till the Penalty should be satisfied,
And whosoever should Entertain them, knowing them so, should forfeit Forty
shillings to the Country for every hours Entertaining or Cancealment, and be
committed to Prison till the Forfeiture should be fully paid and satisfied. --
And further, That all and every of those People that should arise among your
selves should be dealt withal, and suffer the like Punishments, as your Laws
provided for those that came in, which was, That for the first Offense (or
coming in) of any such who had suffered what your Law required, if a Male, One
of his Ears should be cut off, and he kept at work in the House of Correction,
till he could be sent away on his own Charge: For the second, The other Ear,
and be kept in the House of Correction, as aforesaid. If a Woman, then to be
severely whipped, and kept as aforesaid, as the Male, for the first; and for the
second Offense (or coming in as aforesaid) to be dealt withal as the first:
and for the third, He or she should have their Tongues bored through with a hot
Iron, and be kept at the House of Correction close at work, till they be sent
away on their own charge. -- This is Your Law, and this the Offense. Such a Law
as Bonner never made for the Coming in of an Heretic (so called) into the
English Jurisdiction; Nor for a Man's barely being such an One as was called an
Heretic, without Conviction of Herisie, (and ye have convicted none of One
Opinion, or Practice that may be called Heresy) nor Canterbury for you) I say,
during the time Law Southick. Cassandra his Wise. Josia their Son Sam Shattock,
Joshua Buffum. Sam Gaskin.
of the Detaining of the said W. Brend and W. Leddra, they called before them
several of the Inhabitants of Salem, for meeting with those aforesaid, and Six
of them, viz. Lawrence Southick and Cassandra his Wife, and Josiah their Son
aforesaid (whom Ye whipped as aforesaid, and imprisoned and fined) and Samuel
Shattock (whom ye also had before Imprisoned) and Joshua Bussum and Samuel
Gaskin, they sent with W. Brend and W. Leddra to you at Boston, where your
Jailer 2d day, 5th Month, 1658.
received them about Six of the Clock in the Evening, and shut them up apart,
and in Rooms which he had provided on purpose to make them (as he said) bow to
your Law; and stopped up the Windows, so, as he left not a hole for Convenient
Air, and all ways of Conveyances for Air and Diet, which he kept from them
(except such as he laid before them, as a little Pottage and a Piece of Bread,
for which he would have made them work, if they had eaten, as he threatened, but
Money he would not take, and work for Meat in his will they could not, so they
did not eat) and suffered none to come at them, and continued them so from the
sixth day of the former week, to the fourth day of the week following, the
second day of which, though they had no Food from the time aforesaid, yet Will.
Brend. Will. Leddra Samuel Shattock. Sam. Gaskin Josh. Buffum Cassandra
Southick. Law. Southick Josiah his Son.
he called them down to be whipped, and to whom was given (whilst they were in
that state of weakness of Body) and to Samuel Shattock, Joshua Buffum, Samuel
Gaskin, and Cassandra Southick (for being a Woman ye could not have her Ear by
your Law, though ye whipped her) Ten stripes a piece, with a knotted,
threefold-corded Whip, with the Cruelty as aforesaid, upon the account of your
former Law, as being such as were called Quakers, and as owning such (the other
Two Inhabitants, viz. Lawrence Southick and Josiah his Son, ye reserved for the
loss of their Ears, though therein ye mist too, for Your Law was for such as
came into your Jurisdiction, but they were of it, and so could not be said to
come into it) and having whipped them, your Jailer William Brend. William Leddra
locked * them in a close Room (being dark) and without Air, in the hot Summer
season, which was the Room he prepared to bow, alias, to destroy them, for so
his Carriage manifests in keeping them up there, and from Food, and whipping
them so, and locking them up again in the same place, and there keeping them
till the fourth day following from Food or Friend (enough reasonably to have
smothered them) Then He told them they were clear, paying their Fees (who owed
him none) and hiring the Marshal to Convey them out of the Country (which they
could not do in Obedience to the Lord who sent them thither, or as English men
in their own Country) so he kept them close Prisoners, and the next morning the
Jailer put William Brend (a Man of William Brend.
Years) into Irons, Neck and Heels locked so close together, as there was no
more room between each than for the Horse-Lock that fastened them on; and so
kept him in Irons for the space of sixteen hours (as himself (viz.) the Jailer
confessed) for not working as he said; and all this, whilst without meat, and
whilst his back was torn with the whipping the day before, as aforesaid; which
did not satisfy your Bloodthirsty Jailer (not all these Cruel Usages, which
were a few of them, Enough (according to Men) to have dispatched him) But as a
Man resolved to have his Life, and by Cruelties to kill him, he had him down
again the next Morning to work, who had been so many days without Meat, whose
Back was so beat, whose Neck and Heels were laid so long together, and because
he could not bow to his will, he laid him on with a Pitched Rope Twenty blows
over his Back and Arms, with as much force as he could drive; so that with the
fierceness of the Blows the Rope untwisted, and his Arms were swollen with it,
being so cruelly whipped but Two days before, and locked up; presently after
this Your Jailer having either mended his Old, or got a New Rope, came in
again, and having haled him down stairs with greater fury and Violence than
before, gave his broken, bruised and weak Body (which had received no
Sustenance for Five days before, and was whipped and beaten, and locked as
aforesaid, Fourscore and Seventeen Blows more, foaming at the Mouth like a
Madman, and tormented with Rage, unto which great number he had added more,
had not his strength and Rope failed him, for now he cared not what he did do;
And all this, because he did not work for him, which he could not do for a
World, being Unable in body, and unfree in mind; So he gave him in all One
Hundred and Seventeen Blows with a Pitched Rope, after the manner and with the
violence as aforesaid, so that his flesh was beaten black, and as into a Jelly,
and under his Arms the bruised flesh and blood hung down, clodded as it were in
baggs, and so into One was it beaten, that the sign of a Particular Blow could
not be seen; Yet your Cruel Jailer threatened to give him as many more the next
Morning, and his Friend William Leddra with him, and as he went away, locked
them up in a close Room again, and then went to his Morning Sacrifice with his
hands thus defiled with Blood: But William Brend having been without Food for
Five days together, and having been so cruelly whipped, and locked and beaten,
and in a close Room without Bed or Food, or Sustenance, soon fainted away,
lying upon the Boards with his torn, bruised, weary, fainty, broken Body (bowed
indeed (by all this Extremity of Cruelty) in his Body by your Cruel Law, but
his Life was free) Whereupon a Cry was made, and the Prison doors were thrown
Open, and all Means used to save his Life, if possible, and your Governor sent
his Son and his Chyrurgeon to see what might be done (such fear was fallen upon
you, lest Ye should suffer for his Blood) who thought it impossible (according
unto Men that he should live, but that his Flesh would rot from off his Bones
ere the bruised Flesh could be brought to digest (this was the Judgment of your
Governors Chyrurgeon) and such a Cry was made by the People that came in to see
him, that Ye were constrained for the satisfaction of them (for, as for your
particulars it will appear by and by how you were, and how far, in Order to,
and One with this thing) to set up a Paper at your Meeting-house-Door, and up
and down the Streets, that the Jailer should be dealt withal the next Court;
but it was soon taken down again upon the Instigation of John Norton (your
High Priest) unto whom, as the Fountain or Principal, most of the Cruelty and
Bloudsheds herein rehearsed, is to be imputed) it was taken down again, and the
Jailer let alone; For, said the said John Norton (but how cruelly let the Sober
judge) -- W. Brend endeavored to beat Our Gospel Ordinances (what Ordinances
are they that can be so beaten, seeing the Ordinances of the Gospel are like
those of Heaven, which cannot be broken, yet he lied in the thing, for he came
not so to beat them) Black and Blue; if he was beaten Black and Blue (and even
unto Death as aforesaid; And wherever did the true Ministers of the Gospel of
Jesus Christ ever exercise such weapons, or seek to uphold the things of His
Kingdom with the Weapons of this World, whereby the things of this World are
sought to be upholden, whose Kingdom is Spiritual?) It was Just upon him (see
how he appears in his Colors) and he would appear in his behalf. -- But the
Lord appeared (when nothing else could) wonderfully to raise up this His
Servant, and to heal his Body beyond Expectation; and Ye appeared (when ye
could do nothing else) to justify the Action; which when Blood was like to lie
upon you, ye would have cast upon the Jailer, who did but execute your Wills;
But now Life appearing in William, ye rose likewise and ordered (viz. your
Governor and Deputy Governor, and Rawson your Secretary, a chief Instigator of
all this Cruelty) -- That the Quakers (by which name you reviled them) in
Prison be whipped twice a week, if they refused to work, (whom ye had used as
aforeiaid;) and the first time to add five stripes to the former (which were
Ten, and now were made up Fifteen) and each time to add Three to them (that is,
to the Fifteen, and so forwards, as the Stripes should be increased thus by the
times of whipping) -- Which Order ye sent to the Jailer (as a Salve for his
Sore, and a Box of Balsom for his VVound, and to strengthen his hands to do
more cruelly again, whom the fright of the other had so weakened) and which he
executed, as by and by will appear. And because the Jailer was under the
Censure (and that justly) of the People for his Cruelty on William Brend
(which he did in madness and heat of spirit, being a very passionate and hasty
spirited man) Ye in cool Blood, and after all this Cruelty, and the noise
thereof, and the Proclaiming by your Papers, when you were afraid William would
not have lived again, Ordered, That each time he should warn Two Constables of
that Town to see the Execution; which he read to them the 7th day of the week,
and told them it should be executed on the second day of the week following,
and which on the second day he Executed accordingly with much Cruelty on the
Strangers, viz. on Humphry Norton and John Rouse (who by that time were Humphry
Norton. John Rouse. Will. Leddra Tho. Harris.
had there, as by and by I shall show) and William Leddra (of Barbados
aforesaid) and Thomas Harris of Barbados, of whom I have spoken) with Fifteen
cruel Lashes a piece, laid on at Once with the Threefold-corded Whip as
aforesaid, so adding Five to the First Number of Ten as aforesaid; Which Bloody
Cruelty so moved the Inhabitants of Boston, and so affected them to see New
stripes (and the addition of Three each time to be made) on the Old sores (much
unlike the Mercy of the Dogs to Lazarus, who licked his sores, not made more)
And some of the Old sores were upon them when they came to be whipped the second
time, who were whipped a fortnight before) I say, it so affected them, that they
paid the Charge required for them (which was about Six or Seven pounds) as they
usually did as to all that were in Prison, that they might be set free. But as
for You, This you added and did, that it might be made appear (and the hand of
the Lord was in it to suffer it to be so) how One ye were with, and approved of
the Jaylor's Deed, though because of the Cry of the People, and the fear of
Blood, ye seemed to the contrary. This is another Experiment of the Penalty
inflicted, which ye say, proved insufficient. But as for the Inhabitants then
in Prison, (upon whom Ye made this Law, as on Strangers without Distinction,
and this after they were Prisoners both Strangers and Inhabitants, and executed
it on the Strangers, though made after they were Prisoners; and notwithstanding
they sent you a Paper, wherein they declared, That they could not work for You,
or hire Conduct (the things for which ye detained them in Prison; for they had
suffered your Law before for Coming into the Country, which ye made them more
cruelly to suffer for, than for the Breach of your Law) for that it was against
their Consciences, having not broken or transgressed any Law of God, or wholesome
Law of the English Nation) I say to the Inhabitants, though they made ready
their Backs for the Post, and were putting off their Clothes to receive the
like as their Brethren, ye did nothing.

And now, as to them, viz. Samuel Shattock, Lawrence Southick, Sam. Shattock.
Lawrence Southick, Cassandra his Wife, Josiah their Son. Joshuah Buffum. Samuel
Gaskin.
Cassandra his Wife, Josiah their Son, Samuel Gaskin, and Joshuah Buffum (whom
I have been constrained promiscuously to touch at, because they have been
intermixed with Others in their Sufferings.) They were at a Meeting, with as
many more of their Neighbors and Friends as made up Twenty or upwards, at
Nicholas Phelps his house, a little off Salem (about Five Miles) in the Woods,
with the said Two Friends, William Brend and William Leddra, waiting on the
Lord; Unto which one Batter (a bloody man, and a Commissioner of your own)
came, and a Constable with him, and required them to assist the Constable (a
most Unreasonable Demand, those two being their Friends, and they all in the
same Condition, had he had power so to demand them) which they refusing (he
having neither a Warrant, nor a Constables-staff of Office) he went his way
after the using of some Violence to the Strangers, but the next week, the Court
sitting, he gave their Names into the Court, who caused them to be Apprehended
for so small a Matter, and kept them in Prison in a Neighbors house Two days
from their Own, till the latter end of their Session, and then had the
aforesaid before them, and accused them, for being from their Public Meetings,
and at a Meeting by themselves, and with their Enemies (so they accounted the
Servants of the Lord, who came in Love to them, as being moved of the Lord) and
their great business was to prove them such as are called Quakers. It was
demanded by one of them, How they might know a Quaker? Simon Broadstreet (one
of the Magistrates) answered, Thou art One for coming in with thy Hat on. He
replied, -- It was a Horrible thing to make, such Cruel Laws, to whip, and cut
off Ears, and burn through the Tongue, for not putting off the Hat -- Then they
charged them with Blasphemy, and said, That they held forth Blasphemies at
their Meetings -- One of them desired them to make any such thing to appear, if
it were so, and that they might be convinced; and told them, they might do well
to send some to their Meetings, that they might hear, and give account of what
was done and spoken, and not conclude of a Thing they knew not. Said Major
General Denison (of whose Cruelty I have much to say in this Relation) -- If ye
meet together and say any thing, We may conclude that ye speak Blasphemy; (a
bad Speech from a Judge, whose Place is not to accuse any either truly or
falsely, much less to draw Unrighteous Conclusions from his own spirit, and then
to prosecute them without Law or Equity, as has been this Denison's manner,
and of Others so to do; but to judge according as Witness does present,
Secundum Allegata and Probata -- according to the Things alleged and proved,
as is the Law of England.) So to Prison they were had, and the next morning
sent away to Boston (viz. those Six as aforesaid that were Inhabitants, and the
said Two Strangers) as Felons and Murderers, and there put into the House of
Correction, apart from the Two Strangers, whom the Jailer had put into the
Common Jayl, and in a close Room provided on purpose to bow them, as aforesaid,
that they might not come together; and this in the heat of Summer, from their
Husbandry and Tillage, which it was the season of the year for them July 1.
1658.
to follow. The VVarrant bore Date, July 1. 1658.

And indeed, these Cruel Proceedings so sunk down into the hearts of many of
Salem, that they withdrew more and more from your Public Meetings, though they
knew they should suffer, upon which the Court then entered them into Pay, at
Five Shillings a Week, each that abstained by an Old Law made in 1646. as
aforesaid, which they cruelly Extorted, as they did the other Fines of Forty
shillings each hours entertaining of such a one as ye call a Quaker, and Ten
shillings a time for being at Meetings of their Own, with the rest of the
Penalties as Occasion presented; yea, even from the Women whose Husbands came
to your Meetings, to the Value of some Scores of Pounds from first to last, on
the Poor Inhibitants of Salem, whose Cattle ye let them keep all the hard
Winter, till the Spring, that so they might consume their own Fodder, and then
took them; with other Acts of Cruelty too long to mention. So that what by long
and sore Imprisonments from their Houses and Callings, and Business, and
Relations, in the heat of Summer and the cold of Winter; and Cruel Whippings,
and Beatings, and Fines, and Amercements, and Searchings, and Huntings, and
such like, (as I shall show more particularly by and by, Their Lives (as to
men) became worse than Death, and as Living Burials, though they thought not
any thing too much, nor their Lives too dear (as anon will be made manifest)
for the Truth, and the Testimony of it.

The next day after W. Brend was so used, and laid for dead, Humphery Norton.
John Rous.
Humphry Norton (on whom the sense of Blood lay much, and the Weight thereof
pressed him sore for several days, and cried in him, so that he travailed Night
and Day with his Friend John Rous) came to Boston, where, in your Meeting
House, on your Lecture day, (notwithstanding the Cry of the Town of your
Cruelty and Blood, and the speaking of some to the said Humphry, that if he
loved his life, he should depart the Town, for otherwise he was but a Dead man,
they having been looking for him some Months, which could not hinder them, nor
all the World, such was the sense and weight upon them) they appeared, and
having heard the Earth speaking, and the Grave uttering her voice, and Death
feeding Death, through your Painted Sepulcher John Norton, Humphry Norton,
stood up and said, (after the other had ended) Verily this is the Sacrifice
which the Lord God accepts not, for whilst with the same Spirit that ye sin, ye
Preach and Pray, and Sing, that Sacrifice is an Abomination to the Lord --
Whereupon (yea before he had spoke out all these words, but all these words he
spoke) he was haled down, and both of them had out, and in the same fury had
before ye, and H. Norton ye charged with Blasphemy for those words he had
spoken. They spoke to you to Act according to the Law of God, or the Wholesome
Laws of the English Nation, and spare them not. But neither of these ye would
come nigh. Then they Appealed to England, and to the chief Magistrate there, or
whom he should appoint, to whom they said they would freely refer their Case,
which they did once and again, thereby to leave you without excuse; but neither
would ye yield to this, but slighted and disregarded such their Appeal; Your
Governor and Deputy Governor with one lip saying, -- No Appeal to England, No
Appeal to England -- with other words of Dirision; and sorthwith sentenced them
to be Appeal to England denied in open Court.
whipped, though charged with Blasphemy, and to John Rous ye gave smooth words,
seeking to ensnare him because of Your knowledge of his Father, Lieutenant
Colonel Rous of Barbados, who formerly lived amongst Ye, of whom some of You
then spoke; but he knowing Your Deceit and Wickedness, and Cruel usuage of the
Innocent, and seeking by close Rooms, and Denial of Food for several days
together to Consume and strangle them, he required in the audience of the
People, convenient Food for their money, Or, otherwise if they perished, their
Blood would be upon you. This ye could not well deny before the People, who had
heard of much of Your Cruelty in this kind, and who were likely to have risen
up against Ye should Ye have denied it; so Ye granted this, when Ye could not
help it, to the breaking of Your Law, but the seventh day of the week following
(this being the fifth) Ye broke their Bodies (in Revenge thereof) with Ten
Cruel stripes a piece, according to Your wonted Cruelty, and then tendered them
to depart if they would hire a Convoy, which they not doing (for as to the Lord
they could not, who moved them thither) Ye detained them there the week
following, and then Whipped them Fifteen stripes Each, with the same Cruelty as
before, by virtue of the Law aforesaid, of Five to be added to the Ten, and to
the Five, Three, each time they should be whipped, and to be whipped twice a Week,
upon their old sores, with the rest of their Brethren, of which I have spoken.

Now about Three Weeks after the said Court at Salem, the Court sat again, at
which several of the Inhabitants were presented for not coming to Meetings, and
the Law read for Five shillings a Week for them as should refuse, each to pay
for not Coming, and many were listed under that Pay, which ye Exacted when ye
pleased; but as for the Six aforesaid, they were continued still in your Prison
at Boston, and no Course taken for their Release; neither was it so much as
offered them (upon the Suffering of your Law) to go home, paying the Fees, as
ye used to do to the Strangers, which Occasioned a Paper to be sent by them to
the Court in these Words.

This to the Magistrates at Court in Salem.

Friends,
WHereas it was your Pleasures to Commit us, whose Names are underwritten, to
the House of Correction in Boston, although the Lord the Righteous Judge of
Heaven and Earth is our Witness, that we had done nothing worthy of Stripes or
of Bonds; and we being Committed by Court to be dealt withal as the Law
provides for Foreign Quakers, as ye please to term us, and having, some of
us, suffered your Law and Pleasures, now that which we do expect is, that
whereas we have suffered your Law, so now to be set free by the same Law, as
your manner is with strangers, and not to put us in upon the account of one
Law, and Execute another Law upon us, of which according to your own manner, we
were never convicted as the Law expresses; If you had sent us upon the account
of your new Law, we should have expected the Goalers Order to have been on that
account, which that it was not appears, by the Warrant which we have, and the
Punishment which we bare, as four of us were Whipped, among whom was One that had
formerly been Whipped, so now also according to your former Law. Friends, Let it
not be a small thing in your Eyes, the exposing, as much as in you lies, our
families to Ruin. It Is not unknown to you the Season, and the time of the Year
for those that live of Husbandry, and what their Cattle, and Families may be
exposed unto, and also such as live on Trade: We know if the Spirit of Christ
did dwell and rule in you, these things would take impression on your spirits.
What our lives and conversations have been in that Place, is well known, and
what we now suffer for, is much for false Reports, and ungrounded Jealousies of
Heresy and Sedition. These things lie upon us to lay before you: As for our
parts, we have true Peace and Rest in the Lord in all our Sufferings, and are
made willing in the Power and Strength of God, freely to offer up our Lives in
this Cause of God, for which we suffer; Yea and we do find (through Grace) the
Enlargements of God in our Imprisoned state, to whom alone we Commit our selves
and families, for the disposing of us according to His Infinite Wisdom and
Pleasure, in whose Love is Our Rest and Life.

From the House of Bondage in Boston, wherein we are made Captives by the Wills
of Men, although made Free by the Son, John 8. 36. In which we quietly rest,
this 16th. of the 5th. Month, 1658. Lawrence Southick. Cassandra Southick.
Josiah Southick. Samuel Shattock. Joshua Buffum.



Hereupon the Court sent to release Two (for Samuel Gaskin he was released
before, by reason of the working of his Friends) but the other Three ye
detained in Order to a second Punishment upon account of a Later Law, although
they were all Committed upon a Former, that is to say, Three of them on the
First, and Three of them on a Second. Now those that ye detained, ye kept upon
an Account of a Third Law, made whilst they were in Prison, which they had not
transgressed, for they were in Prison whilst it was made as aforesaid. And yet
ye continued them about Twenty weeks from their Families and Employments the
chief of the year, as minding to destroy them; whose Names are Lawrence
Sowthick, Cassandra Southick, and Josiah their Lawrence Cassandra and Josiah
Southick.
Son.

Nor did these things satisfy You, nor the Cruelties ye did Exercise on the
Innocent; but as Men given up to a Repobate sense, to commit Iniquity with
greediness; The more Blood ye drew, the more ye thirsted after Blood, and the
more Cruelty ye Exercised, the more ye delighted to Exercise Cruelty; as is
usual with men in such Cases, who are given over to a Reprobate sense to Commit
Iniquity with greediness, and whose hearts are hardened from the fear of the
Lord, and estranged from him, as the Sequel manifests.

For, Nicholas Phelps of or near Salem, being One of those Nicholas Phelps.
who were Presented to the Court for not Coming to your Meetings, and Entered
upon Pay at Five shillings a week, hearing at the Court some of them say, That
they (viz. the People called Quakers) denied Magistrates and Ministers, gave
them a Paper to show the Contrary; Which the Court asked of him Whether he
would Own? He Answered Yea; Then they fined him Forty shillings (a strange
Penalty for the Owning of that which they had charged him and those People to
Deny) and Forty shillings for the Meeting of those People at his House, and
sent him to Ipswitch Goal, as (One called) a Quaker, because he put not off his
Hat. Where he was Cruelly Whipped at his first Entrance (though he was a Weak
man, and One whose Back was Crooked) which yet drew no Compassion, but in the
space of Five days he was Whipped Three times with Ten cruel strokes each time,
with a Threefold Corded Whip with Knots, because he did not Work, whom they
took from his Husbandry, his Hay and his Corn, after which it was the season of
the Year to look, he Occupying a Farm, which suffered in his absence, and yet
they Whipped him for not working, and drove it on with a Three Corded knotted
Whip, as aforesaid, and detained him there from his Work. And in this Cruelty
Daniel Denison your M. General aforesaid, bore the Greatest sway, and was the
Chief Execution; Yet all their Cruelty could not bend his Spirit whom the Lord
upheld, who bowed unto him, but not unto them, but his bowed Back bore it all,
and Overcame. So that on a certain day One that had been an acquaintance of his
came and had him out of Prison to his House, and after a while got him to walk
out into the Field, where his said acquaintance told him he thought he would be
set at Liberty ere long, but which way it would be accomplished Nicholas could
not tell, for to Work at their Wills that he could not, and had suffered for
it. So after a while the man fell to work about a stone-Wall, and meeting with
a stone he could not list, Nicholas friendly helped him, which was the Pitiful
shift then used to set him at Liberty, as doing Work, and this was the Work,
the helping of this his Friend up with a stone (the Design, no doubt, laid for
the accomplishing of this thing) as his Friends speaking intimated, but did not
at all answer your Law, Nor such manner of Work as it required; Because he
could not do which, Ye cut his Body with Cruel stripes as aforesaid; During
which and his long Imprisonment he was constrained to hire men about his own
Harvest, from which ye took him. Simon Broadstreet and William Hathorn,
aforesaid, were assistants to Denison in these Executions: Whose Names I Record
to Rot and Stink (as of you all) to all Generations, unto whom this shall be
left as a Perpetual Record of Your Everlasting Shame, as they shall not escape
(nor shall you) the Righteous Judgment of the Lord for this, and their (and
your) other Cruelties and Sheddings of the Blood of the Innocent. And when the
Judgments of the Lord shall be made manifest upon you, This shall Remain as a
Witness for the Lord, and that He has not without Cause brought these things
on you, who will be glorified on you when his Judgments are made manifest; The
mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it, who will do it, and the time is near
for all they that trust in him.

After this, the People ye wot of were more Joined together and confirmed by
your Cruelty, for it returned as a Testimony to them who suffered, that they
were of God, and so they met together at Salem, waiting upon the Lord, whose
Presence there with them was more precious than Life; Therefore they laid down
Life, and their All, to enjoy His Presence, who has been better to them than
Life, and made up all their Loss and Sufferings with that which is Eternal; and
His Peace has been more to them, than your Trouble; Yea, in the midst of their
Sufferings bath He made them more than Conquerors through Him who loved them,
and gave himself for them, who have given up to Him: Therefore it is that they
gave their Backs to the Smiters, and their Cheeks to the Nippers and the
Pullers off of the Hair, and endured what has been, and shall be expressed. And
though they knew your Cruelty, and tasted thereof, and were upon your Roll for
not being at your Meeting, and knew your Fines for having Meetings of their
Own, and your other Fines, and how ye had and would Exact them; Yet they feared
not your fears, neither were they afraid of your Threats, but sanctified the
Lord God of Hosts in their hearts, and made Him their Fear, and made Him their
Dread; who became a little Sanctuary unto them, and kept them in the midst of
all, and was good unto them; who never fails them that put their Trust in Him.

So meet they did, and ye pursued them, and Capt. Hathorne was a chief, who,
like a Dog called the Bloodhound, never left scenting after them, till he found
them out, and had his will on them in Person and Estate; whom once he tendered
as his good Friends (as they were) when he sought not the Bread of a
Magistrate, but now to have it, when otherwise he saw none, he turned against
them and became their Enemy; and the Constable of the Town of Salem was the
next who made such search, and was so eager in it, that he took an Ax and broke
open the Door of a House wherein they were met (who might have had it opened if
he would have staid) and took their Names, and sent them in (by the Advice of
the said Hathorne, as the said Samuel Shattock. Nicholas Phelps. Joshua Buffum.
Constable said) to the Court at Ipswitch, which sat shortly after; whereunto
Four of them were summoned (for it was not usual with them to deal with too
many at once, lest the People should take notice) and three of those whom the
Constable so brought, viz. Samuel Shattock, Nicholas Phelps and Joshuah Buffum
(for the fourth, viz. Anne Needham, she was in Childbed, and could Anne Needam.
not be brought) the Court kept much ado, especially about their Hats (that
being the only Character ye could make of such a One as ye called a Quaker, and
upon which you proceeded, for other ye proved none) They waited for their
Charge to know what it was, and wherefore they were sent for thither; and it
was for not coming to your Meetings, and for meeting by themselves, contrary to
your Law. And Simon Broadstreet put Questions to them about the Trinity, and
Christ's Body, etc. They were glad of this Opportunity to clear themselves
before the People (for those of them who were sent to Boston (viz. those of the
Six aforesaid) knew not for what it was, yet thither were they sent, and there
were they whipped and detained as aforesaid, since which time they had not
Opportunity to speak with those that sent them, Who punished them by a Law made
against a cursed Sect of Heretics (as the Law expresses them) that speak and
write Blasphemous Opinions; whose Doctrines (as it says) are Diabolical, etc.
When as no such thing was proved against them; Nor were they tried upon one
Question thereabouts, but did deny such People as the Law expresses, or that
they were such a People. And this they judged to be very hard, and to be wrong
dealing with them, That under color of a Law they should be proceeded with,
contrary to, and against all Law. -- Answer was made, That they appeared so by
their Hats and Company, and that they might appeal -- (now they knew well
enough that themselves should be of the Court of Appeal, which was to You) So
They appealed -- You must do it by Petition (said the Court) -- which they
could not, but Justice they desired, and no Mercy, according to their Law; and
so spoke, and required them again to Prove them to be such as the Law
expresses. -- The Hat was brought up again -- Then let it be Recorded so, said
they, That we have been thus punished for not putting off the Hat. -- But this
the Court would not. -- Still they required Evidence to prove them such
Blasphemers, Heretics, and holding such Diabolical Doctrines; or, of being
such a Cursed Sect as the Law speaks, by which they were punished. -- Brend
said so and so, (said the Court) and that they did own it. -- None of us heard
it (said they) for none of us were there (yet VV. Brend said nothing to them,
but what was savory and Truth, and if he had, he should have heard of it, and
they would have produced it, no doubt, to satisfy the People, who were so
troubled about his Suffering; but as to the absent, men may say any thing, and
they were so kept in the Wisdom of God as not to heed it, and to give them (and
it was reasonable enough, and turned a Lie upon them, viz. In saying they owned
what he said, when none of them were there; and they were bold enough in it,
thus to put it in charge to the Men's faces who witnessed against them) No other
Answer. -- Then the Court put Questions to them, whereby to clear themselves,
and Daniel Denison was Chief in it. -- Evidence (said the Prisoners) Produce
your Evidence: We desire nothing but a fair Trial, the Privileges of Men; We
are not afraid nor ashamed to declare what we hold, whether before the Court or
elsewhere, and offered it before all the People; But first (said they) we
desire to have a fair Trial before a Jury of Twelve Men, according to Law, by
Proof and Evidence as to what ye have done to us; till which We shall not
answer; It being an Unreasonable thing (said they) for the Magistrates to be
both Accuser and Judge. So (said they) Ye may accuse us of Sodomy, and Murder,
or any other Crime, and A Trial of 12. men, according to the Law of England,
and of that Country, when demanded, denied.
execute your Law causlesly upon us. -- But this the Court denied (contrary to
the Law of England, and in the express breach of Magna Charta, and of Your
Charter) and instead of proving any thing against them, or producing any thing
in order thereunto (except some Questions to gain something out of their own
Mouths wherewithal to accuse them, which they answered not) They were sentenced
to pay Each of them Ten shillings apiece, for being at Meetings by themselves,
and Five shillings each for not being at Yours; that is to say, Samuel Shattock
and Nicholas Phelps, for being at Two such Meetings, and absent twice from
Yours, Thirty shillings apiece; and Joshua Bussum for Once of each, Fifteen
shillings; and for being Quakers (as they said, but proved them not so, that is
to say, such as the Law makes so, and qualifies) to the House of Correction to
answer the Law (Who were not proved to have transgressed it, and were denied a
Trial, when they demanded it as aforesaid, according to the Law of England and
the Country; and yet now were made to suffer as Breakers of that Law, as they
were before; such Monstrous Illegallity, and Great Injustice was never heard
of) And Daniel Denison told them, in scoffing sort (after all these
Punishments, and what they had suffered before, unto which they were sentenced
and thus illegally too) that they had left off being Doctors of Divinity, and
were turned Lawyers, (when they spoke in their Own Case like Men of
Understanding.) Thus making a Mock of their Sufferings; for which he will have
his Reward. But more speech they were denied, after the Sentence was past
(without a Trial, and with the Denying of it) which the Court rose up to
consider of, and then sat down, and Gave. Only, they had the Liberty so much to
say, as to bid the People The People called upon to bear witness that they
could not have Justice.
take notice, That they could not have Justice -- And so they were had to
Prison upon account of your Third Law, and there dealt with contrary to Law, by
receiving Ten strokes apiece at One time with a knotted-Cord-Whip within half
an hour after, who were not tried by the Law, and who had received your Law
before (and yet were not tried) and so were not to be whipped again by your own
Law, but otherwise to be proceeded with as that Law provides, as aforesaid:
(What Heaps of Injustice and Illegalities are here altogether by your own Law?)
So your Laws are but Covers for your Cruelty, Who, so to deal with these People
ye had determined, and therefore so deal will you with these People: and
therefore, when they have not broken your Law, you can execute it upon them;
and also without the due Proceeding of Law, as thinking ye may do as ye will,
and that ye shall never account for it to God or Man: as the said Daniel
Denison said, -- This Year ye will go and complain to Dan. Denison's account of
the Reason of your, Proceedings so illegally against those People, and with
such Cruelty.
the Parliament; and the next Year they will send to see how it is; and the
third Year the Government is changed -- and this in Open Court. But be not
deceived; As sure as ye have acted all this Violence and Outrage upon the
Innocent, So will the Lord (if Man should not, yet Man shall do His Will)
Execute His Righteous Judgments upon You; yea, sevenfold more, and with
grievous Indignation will He require it of You: And this the Lord has spoken,
and He will fulfill his Word, and the time is near.

Now, as this Sentence was the Action of the Night; so within Night, after the
Moon was up, was the Execution: Your Jailer was desired to let them see by what
Order he did it, but he would not, having learned it of You; but the next day
he came, and required them to work; They were willing so to do for their
Families, from whom they had been so violently taken, if they might have the
benefit thereof, and so they told him; but this would not do, Except he might
have Eight Pence out of the Shilling (his usual demand) So they refused to
work, and he threatened them the Post and the Whip again, but did it not (the
Execution already done upon such Peaceable Men, who had Families, from which
they were taken, and of good Reputation, so affecting the People of the Town,
who were so taken therewith, and muttered so much, that it was forborne) but
after Three weeks and Three days they were sent for by You at Boston (being
sat in a Court General) and delivered to the Master of 27th day, 8th Month,
1658.
your house of Correction (there to be sure to be dealt surely with) and from
thence were brought before You; Who, (several of You, as Denison, and
Broadstreet (who had been twice their Judges, and had now wrongfully accused
them, and yet sat as Judges a Third time upon them) Your Deputy Governor and
others) laid to their charge many grievous things, but proved A Trial by 12 men
again demanded of the Court General; or by the Court Genesis according to Law Such
a Trial denied by the Court General.
nothing -- They desired a fair Trial, either by a Jury of Twelve Men, or the
Court General according to Law, and for this purpose put in a Paper to You,
showing also how they had been wrongfully twice Imprisoned and whipped as before.
This You would not grant; but One of your Simon Broadstreet. The Hat made a
Character of One called a Quaker, when no Principle or Practice could be had,
upon which they are put to Death. The First of this Nature that the Ea^^^ has
heard of.
Magistrates (seeing where they were, which was indeed, there where they should
be, and that they could not prove them such as the Law makes Quakers) said, --
That the Court would find out an Easier way to find out a Quaker, than by
Blasphemy (who could find out no such way, as ye did afterward, viz. -- The
not putting off the Hatt, upon which ye Banished and put to Death (for matter
of Doctrine, ye had not, nor Principle, nor Practice) of which in its place) So
they suffered not for a Law already broken, but for one that was intended to be
made (What shall I say whereby to express these your illegal and wrong
Proceedings?) -- They pressed for a hearing, and argued the Reasonableness
thereof, and demanded, -- Whether their Law was made against a Name, or a
Thing? -- Dan. Denison (to whom the Question was put) answered, -- Against a
Thing -- If so (said they) Then let us be tried by the Things contained in the
Law -- as Blasphemy, Heresy, Devilish Doctrines, with such like, as are the
words of the Law, upon which was the Penalty -- He replied, -- That the Court
did not punish them for Error in Judgment, but for Fact. -- They desired to
know the Fact. -- He said, -- It was -- Entertaining the Quakers, who were
their Enemies; Not coming to their Meetings, and meeting by themselves. -- They
Adjoined, That as to those things they had already fastened their Law upon them;
as, Forty shillings every hour for Entertaining such a One, as they called so;
Five shillings Absence from their Meetings; and Ten shillings for meeting by
themselves. So Ye had nothing left but the Hat, for which (then) ye had no Law.
-- They answered, -- That they should not have offered Ye that in coming
thither, (for they must come to you in their Clothes, if they came decently, of
which the Hat is part) for it was not their Manner to have to do with Courts;
And as for withdrawing from their Meetings, or keeping on their Hats, or doing
any thing in Contempt of them, or their Laws, They said, the Lord was their
Witness (as He is) that they did it not. So Ye rose up, and bid the Jailer take
them away.

The next day, was Your Lecture at Boston, whereat Charles Chansey (Master of
your College or University) preached; The Priest Chansey, Divinity, the Master
of your College, and Way, to Put Men to Death after the nature of Wolves;
indeed then he must go for one and bear the Penalty, who to be one, has so
manifested himself.
work of whose Sermon was to destroy them, and to set ye on so to do, when ye
could prove nothing against them: And thus he put it, -- Suppose (said he) ye
should catch Six Wolves in a Trap, (now these Friends were Six, all Inhabitants
of Salem, to whom he alluded) and ye cannot prove that they killed either Sheep
or Lambs (so they are Innocent, at least, unto Men) and now ye have them they
will neither Bark nor Bite (so they were without occasion of Offense) Yet they
have the plain Marks of Wolves (and yet before they were Wolves, wherein lay
the Matter, which was yet to be proved, and prove it he could not, nor could
you, and therefore he stepped in to help You in the Case (i. e. to knock them in
the head) and for this he lays his Supposition, and takes the Case for
granted, viz. that they are Wolves: -- Suppose (says he) ye should catch Six
Wolves, etc. which it is not, for here lies the Controversy, and then argues
thereupon (Just like your Proceedings with them at Law; take them for Quakers
(such whom ye call so) and punish them by the Law, which knows them not: And
then he comes to Marks, and here is none but the Hat, which your Law marked not)
Now I leave it to your Consideration (said he) whether Ye will let them go
alive, yea, or nay? This was as to the Case of those Friends in Custody, whose
Blood he and you thirsted ofter, but could not tell how to come at it by any
color of Law, nor to work their Sufferings, nor justify what ye had already
done unto them; for Proof of which they had already put you, but ye could not
make it; or that they were such that your Law took notice of. Therefore Your
High Priest came to do it, and to show you a Way, which is the most Devilish
that ever was heard of, viz. -- To cause a Man to suffer, not for what he is,
but for what he may be; -- To Judge a Man to Death without Proof; -- To kill
him lest he may do so and so; To Execute Law, where there is no Fact; -- To
deal with a Man as with a Beast; -- To put Man, who was made after the Image of
God, of whom God says, He that sheddeth Man's Blood, by Man shall his Blood be
shed; for after the Image of God made he Man -- into the state of a Beast, who
is known by his skin, but a Man is not but by the spirit that is in him; nor by
that neither, so as to judge unto Suffering, but by the Effects, or some Overt
Act (as the Law of England terms it, and it is a good word upon something
done, as is the Interpretation) and that upon Proof, -- To make a Man as a
Beast, as a Beast of Prey, whom any Man may kill; and it is lawful so to do; --
To judge of Fact by Hereafter, and of what a Man may do for time to come, but
as yet it cannot be said of him: -- To kill a Man for hereafter, and for Ages
to come -- Yet this is Priest Chansey's, and the Doctrine of your Priests, and
the Practice of You, as the Sequel makes manifest; for You had a great
Consultation again; and your Priests were put to it, how to prove them as your
Law had said; And Ye had them before you again, and your Priests were with you
every One by his side (so came ye to Your Court) and John Norton must ask them
Questions on purpose to ensnare them, that by your standing Law for Heretics
you might condemn them (as your Priests before consulted) And when this would
not do (for the Lord was with them, and made them wiser than your Teachers) Ye
made a Law to banish them upon Pain of Death, Even all such, as having suffered
your Law, should offend again; that is to say, Come into your Jurisdiction, or
be such a One as is called a Quaker, whom ye so distinguish by the Hat in that
Law, viz. The not observing the Laudable Custom of the Nation (that is, the
putting off the Hat) and the Contempt of Authority (that is, keeping it on in
the Court) and these having suffered your Law again and again, and that without
Cause or legal Proceeding, ye banished (after all this ado) whilst Ye could
have nothing against them, either to justify what ye had already done by
virtue of your Law, which said not so; or, for what ye did so do unto them,
under color of a Law made by you whilst they were under your hands, by a Law a
Postea, made after they were Prisoners, because they had wrongfully suffered
your Law twice before; (What Abominable Injustice is this, and hard to be
paralleled?) And so they suffered, whose Names are Lawrence Southick, Cassandra
his Wife, their Son Josiah (see a Man and his House, yea a Man and his
Heritage) Samuel Shattock, Nicholas Phelps, and Joshua Buffum; of which more
hereafter when I come to your Law of Banishment.

After this the Constables of Salem by the Instigation of William Hathorne made
diligent search after their Meetings; sometimes Twelve more had before the
Court at Salem of the Inhabitants thereof, and fined 40 l. 19 sh. for Absenting
from your Meetings.
on Horseback, sometimes on Foot (for Money ye wanted) with Power to break open
Houses, where they should not be let in (who resisted not) and Twelve more of
them were had to your Court at Salem, and fined Forty pounds Nineteen shillings
for absenting from your Meetings; which as the Spring grew on, your Marshal
gathered up for your Treasuries, by Attaching Cattle and Land; and great Fines
ye took of some Men for their Wives absence, though they themselves came to
your Meetings, Fines to the value of 100l. or upwards laid by that Court.
William Marston of Hampton. 8th Month, 1658.
(of which I have touched) to the Impoverishing of many Families, who had but
little in the Outward; the Fines then taken amounting to One Hundred Pounds and
upwards. And William Maston of Hampton in your Colony, for Two Books found in
his House, viz. John Lilburn's Resurrection (so entitled) and VV. Dusberies
mighty Day of the Lord, was fined Ten Pounds, and the Books took away; and for
not coming to your Meetings, Five Pounds, and for your Priest, Three Pounds;
for which certain Barrels of Beef were seized on, and You took to the value of
above Twenty Pounds: And because whilst the aforesaid were in Prison, coming
through Salem, he took some A Horrible Cruelty.
Provisions for Lawrence and Cassandra Southick of their Children, and for
Josiah of his Wife; he was sent for by your Governor, and Committed to Prison,
and continued there about Fourteen days, in the Cold Winter season, though
aged about Seventy years.

Thus have you made a Prey of the Innocent, and added Affliction to their
Bonds, and stopped your Ears at the Cry of their Oppression: Therefore the Lord
will not hear your Cry in the Day of your Calamity, which shall suddenly come
upon you, nor deliver you; His Eye will not spare you, but ye shall fall, and
never rise again; the Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

But to return to your House of Correction, and to lay in Order before you the
Sufferings of the Strangers as well as of the Inhabitants, and to relate what
ye did unto them, and the Ears ye cut off, as says Your Declaration -- viz.
The Penalty was increased by the loss of the Ears of those that offended the
second time -- that is to say -- that came into your Jurisdiction (for that was
the Offense) and so to seal up your Sum.

About the beginning of the Sixth Month, 1658. Christopher 6th Month, 1658.
Christopher Holder. Jo. Copeland.
Holder and John Copelan^d were moved of the Lord to go again to Boston (where
they had suffered so cruelly before) and on the Third of the said Month went
thitherwards, and came as far in their way, as a Town called Dedham, where they
lodged that Night, intending the next Morning to move to Boston; but they were
prevented of so doing (as of themselves) for the Constables came early in the
Morning, and told them that they had a Warrant to carry them to Boston; whither
they brought them before your Governor, who, being tormented in spirit, said in
a Rage, -- Ye shall be sure to have your Ears cut off -- and after asking them
many Questions, sent them to Prison, and the next day had them before the
Court, where he sought to ensnare them: but they told him, They should not
answer him, because he sought so to do. Whereupon he had the Impudence to say,
-- That they sought to ensnare them sure enough -- And so at the Motion of
Rawson your Secretary, they were committed to Prison, and ordered to be kept
close at Work, with Prisoners Diet only, till their Ears were cut off; which
your Jailer sought to put in Execution (though your Law of Cutting off Ears
spoke no such thing) and threatened them with your former Law of whipping them
twice a week, and every time to increase Three from Fifteen stripes (the first
time) to Eighteen, and so forwards, and showed them the Order whereby Four of
Ten Friends were so used; and would have reasoned them into the thing, and why
they would put their Bodies to such Torture, he asked them, as if he had pity
of them, who sought to destroy them. But they could not answer him, whose
Demand was as well besides your Law, as it was against the Lord. So he shut
them up in a close Room, where they were kept without any Food that he knew off
(for he thought to starve them, if they would not do his Work, and so Eat) for
the space of Eight days, after which his Wise came, (fearing what might become
of them) and tendered them Milk, or what they would for their Money; So that
from that time Friends were suffered to put into them at the Window what they
needed. So through hard suffering they brake your Law, and his Cruelty.

Sometime after this, John Rous aforesaid was commanded of the Lord to go to
Boston, and thither came the 25th of the sixth John Rous, 25. Sixth Month, 1658.
Month, 1658. where he honestly discovered himself to the Man of the House
whereto he came (after he had set up his Horse) what he was, that so he might
not suffer through an Ignorant Entertaining of him, who shortly after fetched
the Marshal, who brought him to your Governor, who after an Impertinent
Examination, committed him to Prison.

So on the Seventh of the Seventh Month, 1658. they Three, viz. Christopher
Holder, John Copeland, and John Rous (all single Christop Holder Joh. Copeland,
John Rous, their Ears cut off, 7th of the 7th Month, 1658. 10th 7th Mon. 1658.
young men) were had before you; and because they had been before You once
before, and suffered your Law (which should have cleared them from further
suffering (for by the Law of England a man having suffered the Penalty is
clear, as if he had not transgressed the Law) after a first and second time
being at your Court; viz. on the Tenth of the Seventh Month aforesaid, (wherein
your Governor and Deputy Governor showed their Rancour and Unreasonableness of
spirit: The said Dan. Denisons second Speech, demonstrating their Resolution to
root out those People, because they were the stronger.
Denison saying, -- We are the stronger, and so look to your selves (which was
a base word he often used) and Master Rous (for so I may call you, having heard
of your Father, that he is a Gentleman) (yet ye cut off the Gentleman's son's
Ear) and threatening to Gag them, if they would not be silent when they were
speaking for themselves in such a Case as the loss of a Member, and such a one
as an Ear, and so to be marked as Rogues) (which all Law Another Solemn Appeal
(in Case of their Ears) made to England, and Denied.
allows, viz. to speak for themselves) and Denying their Appeal to England
(which they solemnly made) after that the Governor had said unto them, -- It is
the Sentence of the Court, That you Three have each of you his Right Ear cut
off by the Hangman -- I say, after the Sentence Ye hastened the Execution; and
the Jailer to that purpose, and on the Sixteenth of the 16th of the Eight Month
the Execution done.
said Month, sent Your Marshal's Deputy, who came with a Company of
Blood-thirsty men (such as sitted his turn, and served his end) to the Prison,
on the Executions of Punishment as to Whipping and loss of Limb, etc. done in
Private, contrary to the Law of England, and of God, which orders them that are
truly so (that is, Punishments) to be otherwise, that all may hear and sear;
And which is like to Justice, which seeks no Corner. And the Bishops cut off
the Ears of W. Prynne, Henry Burton and Dr. Bastwick in the Palace-yard at
Westminster, and upon a Scaffold before the People, though it was done by Order
of the Star Chamber.
Day aforesaid, and shutting of the Door (whereas the Executions of Justice
ought to be Public, but so it was not with Yours, nor for the space of Two
years and a half before were any of Your Executions so done to those People) He
caused the Right Ear (the Left it seems would not serve) of the said
Christopher Holder, John Copeland, and John Rous to be cut off, as aforesaid;
which being done, the said Servants of the Lord, whose Ears you had caused so
to be cut off, said, -- They that do it Ignorantly, We desire the Lord from our
hearts to forgive them; but for them that do it Maliciously, Let our Blood be
on their Heads: and such shall know in the Day of Account, that every one of
these Drops of Our Blood shall be as heavy upon them as a Millstone -- And your
Marshal (with those that came with him) slunk away, as a Dog that is discovered
sucking the Blood of a Lamb: Who also was so cowardly, and the sense of Guilt
so upon him, that when the Execution began on Christopher Holder (who was the
first whose Ear was cut) he turned from it, till John Rous said, -- Nay, Turn
about and see it done, as was his Order.

The same day that these were the last time had before You, Lawrence Southick,
Cassandra his Wife, and Josiah their Son, Lawrence Southick. Cassandra. Josiah.
were had before you also, whom ye thought to have proceeded with, as with the
Others, viz. the Two Men (for with the Women you did by Cruel Whipping,
according to your Law) but your Law was short as to them; Which was for every
One that came into your Jurisdiction the second time, such should have their
Right Ear cut off (Ye cannot give a Member to any, and yet can in your wills
destroy, for which God will blot your Names out of the Book of Life; it is
Eternal, and you shall witness it) So take your Sentence, which shall assuredly
come upon you as you have done the thing (for ye did it wickedly) the Lord has
spoken it. So you will find it sad cutting off Ears, and dealing thus Cruelly
as you have by the Innocent, whose Cry the Lord has heard, and the Cry of
their Blood and Sufferings, and He is near to Avenge it) But for those that
were of the Jurisdiction, it provided not: so they escaped the loss of that
Member, but not your other Cruelty; for you still kept them in the House of
Correction, notwithstanding they were clear of your Law, and had suffered
wrongfully what they had suffered before upon account of your last Law, which
was, -- That every such Person and Persons (that is to say, such as ye call
Quakers) arising among your selves, and professing any of their Pernicious
ways (as ye reproach, but prove not) by speaking, writing, and by meeting on
the Lords Day, or at any other time (a sore Punishment, for a Man to dye for
meeting with the People of the Lord, to wait upon Him; yet this in the
consequence is your Law, for this characterizeth him to be such a One as ye
call a Quaker, and being a Quaker, he must be whipped, and then depart the
Jurisdiction; and if return, suffer as in the Case of Strangers, viz. be put to
Death. See whether the Earth ever had the like since the Sun shone upon it. Its
too long to inculcate Every Particular, the Reader may in his own
Understanding; and the Lord God of Heaven and Earth will do it upon your
Consciences, ye most unreasonable of Men, and the most Brutish of the Nations,
whom the Lord God will cut off, and make you an Example to all that hereafter
shall dare to do such things against the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, who
gives to all Life and Breath and Moving, and against those that meet together
to wait on Him; as He has said it, so He will do it, and this shall come to
pass, the Lord has spoken it) shall incur the Penalty ensuing, viz. Every
Person so meeting, shall pay to the Country Ten shillings; and every One
speaking in such Meeting, Five pounds a piece: And in case any such Person has
been punished by Scourging (ye speak broad that ye may frighten, but the Hand
of the Lord will come as large upon you as ye have spoken) or Whiyping the
first time, according to the former Laws (which was the Case of these Three)
shall be kept at work in the House of Correction, till they put in Security by
two sufficient men, that they shall not any more Vent their hateful Errors (who
were convicted of none, nor of venting) nor use their sinful Practices (who
feared the Lord, and did nothing but in obedience to Him) Or shall depart this
Jurisdiction at their Own charge. And if any of them Return again [then] each
such Person shall incur the Penalty of the Laws formerly made for Strangers
(which they had not transgressed) I say, though they escaped the loss of their
Ears, (that is to say, the Two Men (as I have said) for the Woman Cassandra
Southick.
ye cruelly whipped with Ten stripes (the Penalty of that your Law, which ye say
in this concerned them not) yet ye kept them in Prison upon the Account of the
said Law for Strangers, when that Law for Strangers did not concern them; and
so they were wrongfully. Imprisoned and detained, and not set at Liberty, till
you had made a Fourth Law, viz. That of Banishment upon Pain of Death; and so
those Three (with Three more of the Inhabitants, of which more in its place) Ye
banished the Father, Mother, and Son, with either of whom No Proceedings have
been had according to Law.

And Katherine Scot of the Town of Providence in the Jurisdiction Katherine
Scot.
of Rhoad Island (a Mother of many Children, one that had lived with her
Husband the space of Twenty years, of an Unblamable Conversation, and a grave,
sostor, ancient Woman, and of good Breeding as to the outward, as Men account)
coming to see the Execution of the said Three, as aforesaid, whose Ears ye out
off, and saying upon their doing of it privately, and keeping her and others
from coming in, who desired to see it, -- That it was evident they were going
to act the Works of Darkness, or else they would have brought them forth
Publicly, and have declared their Offense, that others may hear and fear -- Ye
Committed to Prifon (though she was moved of the Lord so to do, and to come and
bear Testimony) and gave her Ten cruel stripes with a Threefold-corded-knotted
Whip, with that Cruelty in the Execution as aforesaid to others, on the second
day of the Eight Month, 1658. 2d day, 8th Month, 1658.
Though ye confessed when ye had her before you, That for ought ye knew, she
had been of an Unblamable Conversation, and though some of you knew her Father,
and called him Mr. Marbery, and that she had been well bred (as among Men) and
had so lived (as Men account) and that she was the Mother of many Children; yet
ye whipped her for all that, and moreover told her, -- That ye were likely to
have a Law to hang her (what bloody words do ye wrap out!) if she came thither
again -- To which she answered -- If God call us, woe be to us if we come not;
and I question not, but He whom we love will make us not to count our Lives
dear unto our selves for the sake of his Name. -- To which your Governor John
Endicot replied (and with what wickedness may be judged) -- And we shall be as
ready (said he) to take away your Lives, as ye shall be to lay them down -- as
what follows makes manifest, viz. Your Law of Banishment upon pain of Death,
which this leads me unto.

-- Which also (viz. that of cutting off Ears) being too weak a Defense
against their Impetuous Frantic Fury, necessitated us to endeavor our
Security, and upon serious Consideration, after the former Experiments by their
incessant Assaults, A Law was made that such Persons should be banished upon
Pain of Death, according to the Example of England in their Provision against
Jesuits. --

Answ. The Consideration of what I have already said, as to your Laws and the
Grounds of them, and the Cruelties sustained by the Innocent, though it be
enough to lay you on the Ground with all sober and unbyassed People, and to
make you appear to be the worst of Men, as you are of those who pretend
themselves Christians; and though on this foot I need not add further weight to
this Matter, it being so comprehensive of it self; Yet in regard you have cut
out my way, and by adding Blood unto Bonds, Whippings, Cutting off Ears, etc.
laid a Necessity upon me, to bring upon You the Blood of the Innocent, as you
have their other Sufferings; And because ye seem to lay the stress of your
Proceedings upon the Example of England, in their Provision against Jesuits,
and so seem to bottom what you have done, as to the Lives of these People
thereupon: for so are your words, viz. -- According to the Example of England,
in their Provision against Jesuits. -- I shall there put you to it, and if ye
there cannot hold (as You will see ye cannot by and by) then ye will fall into
Blood, as you are into the rest of the Sufferings of the Innocent.

Thus then, The Law of England in its Provision against Jesuits, is laid upon
these Grounds or Considerations.

First, That the Pope pretends unto a Supreme Right over all Nations and
Kingdoms in things Civil and Religious, as the Successor of Peter.

Secondly, That by Virtue of this his Supremacy he may Excommunicate Princes,
Absolve Subjects from their Obedience, Arm Subjects against their Princes,
Change their Dominions, Degrade their Royalties, Pull down as he pleases.

Thirdly, That the Jesuits, or those of the Order of Jesus, (as they
Blasphemously term it) are the Sworn Servants of the Pope, and are sent out by
him into all Nations to Exert this his Authority, and to hold forth his
Dominion.

Fourthly, That in Order hereunto, The men of that Order, or Jesuits (so
called) have come into England, and have sought, by Virtue of the Supremacy
aforesaid, to Draw Subjects from Obedience to their Princes, Levy Arms, Plot,
Contrive, Raise Rebellions, yea to Murder their Princes; And this Ex Officio,
and Virtute Ordinis, by Virtue of their Order or Office.

Fifthly, That the Pope has taken upon him to Excommunicate Princes in
England, To Absolve their Subjects from Obedience unto them, to Change, Altar,
Pull down, and Set up as he pleases.

Sixthly, That the Jesuits (so called) have been hereof Convicted, and to have
wrought in Order hereunto as the Principal Emissaries.

Seventhly, That the Nation of England has oft-times Endured, and Suffered,
Conflicted with and Traveled through much Blood and War, Trouble and Misery,
to the Breaking of the Peace thereof, and the Hazarding of its Government to a
Foreign Vassallage, because and by Reason hereof.

In Consideration of All which, and that the English Nation is Naturally
Obliged to its Right and lawful Prince against all Foreign Invasion, or
Obtrusion; and that the Men of the Order aforesaid, are Obliged Virtute Ordinis
and Officii, By their Order or Office to the Contrary, and have come into
England (and many of them English, who have gone beyond the Seas, and received
Orders of the Pope as aforesaid) and have so been proved through a long Tract
of Time; Therefore it Provides, as in the said Act is at large Expressed, unto
which I refer, and to the Preamble of the said Act, and the other Laws, and
Acts of the Nation which relate thereunto, for the Sevenfold Ground on which
the Provisions in that Law are made and Bottomed as aforesaid, and on which
they Stand.

Now what is this to the People called Quakers, or, in Justification of your
Proceedings against them, as to Banishment and Death?

Are they Papists or Popishly affected? Did ye ever find them so? or has the
least shadow thereof been laid to their charge by you, or found against them?

Have you ever found them Raising of Arms, or Plotting or Contriving in order
there unto? Or seeking to withdraw the People in your Jurisdiction from their
Allegiance unto England (its well if some such thing be not found upon you) or
to you in order to England? Or, has it not been manifest that their Principle
is otherwise? Viz. To Lead out of Wars, and the Occasion of them (sc.) the
Lusts that are in Men from whence they come.

Did they ever put the Nation of England into Wars and Confusion to Exert their
Principle, or any other Nation on the face of the Earth? Or, on the Contrary,
has not Peace been that which they have Endeavored among men? and is not
their Gospel Good Will toward men?

Are they men of Blood, of Assassinations, and Murders? has any man fallen by
their hands? or, have they stretched out their hand against any man?

Have they not Endeavored, and is it not their Principle to bring out of Blood
and Confusion, out of War and Destruction, out of Desolation and Calamity? And
have they not subjected themselves to the Spoiler, and their Estates to the
Robber, in order hereunto?

Can any of the Seven Particulars aforesaid, on which the Law of England in its
Provisions against Jesuits (which you take to as your Example in the Case) is
grounded, or any thing Congruous or Suitable thereunto be Justly attributed to
those People? Or, have ye charged them with any such in Particular, and found
it upon them? How come ye then to say, In Example of the Law of England in
their Provisions against Jesuits? Surely, ye thought to skare Ignorant People
therewith, as Children are with the Name of Jesuits: So that if ye name but
Jesuit, and speak of a Law made against them, it is Enough; In Example of the
Law of England in their Provisions against Jesuits -- say ye. But the Law of
England has no such Ground for its Provisions against that Order of Men, as
yours against these People, which indeed is none at all, nor warrants your
Proceedings. So your Warranty being gone, where is your Hold?

Thus are ye taken in the Snare which you have laid for others, and in the Pit
which ye have dug are your selves fallen; And the Law of England is not for,
but against you; is not an Example to you in this Case, but the Contrary. So
henceforwards take heed how you shed Blood, and then seek to cover your selves
under the Laws of England, (who would not be under its Law) or seek to that for
shelter which will not save you. Thus much as to the Example of England in
their Provisions against Jesuits, and what you have built thereupon. Now as to
those who Suffered by Virtue of your Law.

And these in the First place are Lawrence Southick, his Wife Lawrence,
Cassandra and Josiah Southick, Samuel Shuttock, Nicholas Phelps. Joshua Buffum.
Banished, 3d. Month, 1659.
Cassandra, and Josiah their Son (whom I have often mentioned for your Cruelty,
by reason you have given me often the Occasion) Samuel Shattock, Nicholas Phelps,
and Joshua Buffum; All Inhabitants of Salem as aforesaid, against whom in no
One Particular had ye proceeded according to Law; but having tortured their
Bodies, and broken their Estates, and distracted their Families, and often
wearied them (though in the Lord they had rest) Ye Banished them from All, even
from their Country; the very Court of Election, in the Month called May
following, giving them but a very little time to Depart, on pain of Death;
which put them to much straits and hardships, yet go they must, there is no stay;
ye had now got your Law to rid the Land of them (as ye thought, but were
mistaken) or to take the Lives of them from the Land of the Living; Your Tugg
was Over, and ye had Some of the Passages of Proceedings in the procuring and
passing that Law of Banishment upon Death. Capt. Edward Hutcheson, Capt. Thomas
Clark, a Merchant of Boston, Enter their Dissents under the Law of Banishment
upon pain of Death.
carried it, of them that stood stiff a while against the Passing of that Law,
but Two came to Enter their Dissents viz. Capt. Edward Hutcheson, and Capt.
Tho. Clark, (whose Names I mention to remain upon Record as a good Savor to
the Lord and his People through all Generations, which shall witness for them)
Indeed there was a great ado, and hard work it Cost ye to get it about, John
Norton and the rest of your Prests being not able to Convict the Persons
aforesaid either by Law or Otherwise, or by Ensnaring Questions to bring them
under the Law, as has been Declared, Petitioned the Magistrates the next day
to set forward the Court to make some Law to Banish them upon pain of Death (so
see, the Spring and Fountain of this Work of Darkness, and who it was this
Bloody Law First moved in) and they prescribed Particulars, as matter upon
which to proceed, (I could set down all, that all might see their Bloody
Spirits, and what Cruelty lodged in them, but I leave the Particulars to rot
with themselves, seeing the Court thought fit to make it a Law) and much
struggling there was, on the one hand to get it, on the other to oppose it. The
Court of Deputies could by no means be brought to Consent thereunto. The
Priests and Rulers were all The Court of Deputies oposite to the Passing of the
Law The Court of Magistrates for it; of these Two, as of Two Houses, is the
Court General made up. Provision in the Law as to Death without Trial of a
Jury. The Court of Deputies oppose it. The Priests set it on.
for Blood, and they pursued it, and the Court of Magistrates Voted it without
Trial of a Jury, and in Express words, to be put in Execution by a County
Court, which Three Magistrates made up, the Majority of which might hang at
pleasure without a Jury (a Thing not heard of in these Dominions, but it served
the Priests purpose, who set it on.) This the Deputies withstood, and it could
not pass, and the Opposition grew strong, for the thing came near: Deacon
VVozel was a Man much affected therewith, and being not well at that time that
he supposed the Vote might pass, he Earnestly desired the Speaker and some of
the Other Deputies to send for him when it was to be, lest by his Absence it
might miscarry; The Deputies that were against the Passing of that Law,
thinking themselves strong enough (being indeed the most Reasonable, and the
more Moderate men of the Court) to cast it out, forbore to send for him. The
thing came to it, and the Vote was put, and carried in the Affirmative for The
Law passed for Life without Jury in the Court of Deputies by One Vote. Thirteen
for it. The Speaker and Eleven against it. Deacon Wozell sorely troubled that
his Absence should occasion such a Law to pass.
the Law to Pass without Trial of a Jury, and by a County Court; The Speaker
and Eleven being in the Negative, and Thirteen in the Affirmative; So One Vote
Carried it, which troubled Deacon Wozel so when he heard it, that he got to the
Court in great grief of Spirit, desiring to have his Vote, and Wept for grief
that his absence should Occasion such a Law to Pass, and said, If he had not
been able to go, he would have Crept upon his hands and his knees rather than
it should have been -- but it would not be granted; the miscarriage being (as
was said) by reason of One Russel (formerly of Bristol in Old England) and One
Collins (of Misticke) not standing to it, and being wrong in the Vote; which I
mention that their Names may Remain who were for, and against it. For how ever
it may be thought (yet this shall stand a witness against them, unto all
Generations, for such a wicked Law, and the Blood of the Innocent may not be
forgotten) Yet a great Difference there was, and the Court broke up, and the
Twelve aforesaid, resolved to Enter their Dissents under the Law, (it being
also so Repugnant to the Laws of England, to put to death without Jury, than
which there is nothing more Repugnant) which the Magistrates seeing, and how
such a number of Dissents would weaken their Law; To be tried by a special Jury
added to quallifie the Dissents.
Admitted this Addition to the Law, viz. -- To be tried by a special Jury (and
all this Trial when it came to it, was but Whether they were Quakers? which
they Judged by their Coming in Covered, and that they had been in the Country
before, and suffered the Law, and had been Banished (as I shall anon make
appear) not of any particular principle, or matter of Fact, by a Legal
Conviction, more than aforesaid, from first to last) and a Court of Assistants,
which consists of Seven Magistrates at the least (This being according to a
standing Law of the Country, Viz. That none be sentenced to Death or
Banishment but by a special Jury, and a Court of Assistants; which the other
was against, as it was against the Law of England as I have said) So this
reconciled the matter, and but only the Two former Entered their Dissents as
aforesaid, and the Law passed, and ye proceeded thereupon (as I have said) and
followed it hard in the Execution, as ye did in the Making, and Your Priests
set ye on, from whom it proceeded, and no Consideration of the Age of Lawrence
and Cassandra, nor of their Family on whom ye had laid hands; nor the State of
the Rest, nor of their Wives, Children, Relations, Families, nor of their
Estates, which had suffered much in their many, long, and fore Imprisonments,
some of them Ten Weeks at a time, and some Twenty, in the chief time of the
Summer when they should have been at Liberty to look to their Hay, and Grass,
and Provisions for the Winter to keep their Cattle from starving, and their
Families from perishing; Nor the State of Joshua Buffum's Father, who was a
weakly Aged Man, and had neither Son nor Servant to help him, but the said
Joshua; nor the Season of the Year then, it being the Spring, and a time for
them a little to look out for the Preservation of what was left, that they
might not be utterly destroyed; nor their being so sorely Whipped, some of them
Twice Each, and some Four times (all which they told the Court) being Convicted
of nothing, but for not coming to your Meetings, and for Meeting by themselves,
for which you were satisfied upon their Goods according to your Law. As they
sent you notice in a Paper to this Purpose, viz. -- That seeing the chief
offense ye had against them was the not putting off the Hat; They desired to
know if their Punishments had not been sufficient for their Offenses, (as some
of them had been twice Imprisoned Ten weeks, and twice Whipped; One had been
Twice Imprisoned and Four times Whipped; Three had been Twice Imprisoned and
Whipped, and the last time kept Prisoners Twenty weeks, the chief time of all the
Summer, such as lived on Husbandry; Their Hay and Harvest lying on the spoil,
and nothing to charge them with, but their Meetings on the First Days of the
week by themselves, and their not coming to Your Meetings, and not putting off
their Hats, (for the Two former of which Your Law was satisfied on their Goods
--) I say, none of these Considerations, nor such like (though they were very
tender to hearts that had any softness) no nor of your Governor, being Struck
in the Court of Commissioners at the end thereof, when they sought to have this
Bloody Law passed, the Rest of the Collonies; So that for some Weeks he could
not go home to his Own House, which was but a little ways from it, but lay in a
Tavern from his Own Habitation, who strove so much (and Rich. Bellingham with
him) to Banish others; But his heart being hardened like Pharaoh's, instead of
Considering, he was in a great Rage against them, and poured forth what his
fury and wicked Spirit could bring forth, and told them, They all deserved to
be hanged, and that they were Blasphemers, and Heretics (who had never any
such thing proved against them as has been said, when they desired it, and to
be tried for that purpose) He said, That they worshipped another God, and
looked to be saved by another Christ then they did; (who Worship no other God
but him of whom are all things and look to be saved by no other Christ, than
him by whom are all things) and Say what ye will, we will not believe you: (a
hard case indeed, and manifests that in him, Judgment was turned Backward, and
Equity could not Enter; But the Just Lord sees it, And ye all were without
Bowels of Compassion, and would not hear them (your Governor seeming as if he
loathed their Persons) but Banish them ye did upon pain of Death after ye had
appointed them to depart the Jurisdiction by the Court of Election in the
Month called May as aforesaid; (which they did not) and ye gave them but a
fortnights time to depart, and when after sentence was given, some of them who
intended for England, desired that they might have leave to take shipping at
Boston to pass for England, their being never another Convenient harbor in
that Colony out of which to Pass: Ye were so shut up in your Bowels, that ye
would not grant that, but your Governor Samuel Shattock-Josiah Southick.
Nicholas Phelps. Pass to England. Lawrence, Cassandra Southick to Shelter
Island and there die in three days of each other. Joshua Buffum, to Rhoad Island
said, Beware you are not here after the Eight day of June, (which was about
Fourteen days after) so they were constrained, viz. Samuel Shattock, Nicholas
Phelps, and Josiah Southick, (who were for England) to take the opportunity
that presented in Four days after to pass to England by Barbados, having but
Four days time of Remove; So they passed for England, and Lawrence Southick
and Cassandra to Shelter Island (a place near, where shortly after, in three
days of each other they both died, leaving their Blood on your heads) which the
Lord will Visit when He comes to make Inquisition for Blood) and Joshua Buffum
to Rhoad Island) and you sat down to Eat and to Drink, and rose up to Play,
Over the Ruins of the Innocent.

Now, when ye had not as yet sentenced them as aforesaid, they asked your
Governor what it was ye sought for of them? The Honor of God, or your selves.
He answered, -- They that honored those that God had set over them, honored
God. -- They answered, -- It was true, but that it was in Obediente to the Law
of God, that they had suffered as they had, and further asked You, whether it
were that for that Fault they were committed to Prison before the Law had a
being, that they were Banished, or when was it? But ye were silent. One of them
also desired of the Governor, that he would be pleased now to Declare before
the People The Grounds wherefore you proceeded thus against them, mentioned by
your Governor
the Real and True Causes (as in Truth they were) of all Your (thus)
Proceedings against them. -- He answered, It was for Contemning Authority, in
not coming to the Ordinances of God, (see the Priest in the Bottom to keep up
his Audience, and Authority; For, as for the Apostles of Christ they used no
such thing, but to draw men by reaching to that of God in every man's
Conscience, thereby to lead them, and not by the Outward Sword which is the
Weapon of Antichrist; But the Weapons of our warfare (said Paul) are not
Carnal, (Prisons, Whipps, Cutting off Ears, Fines, Famishings, Stocks,
Burnings, Beatings, Banishment, Death) but mighty through the Spirit. So Ye
show where ye are, and they what they are upon, and whose Kingdom they seek,
and what they build up, and whose they are, who seek to Compel that which is
the Seat of God, (viz. the Conscience the Dominion of God, which He only can
reach) by the Sword of man) And that they had kept Meetings of their Own. -- It
was Answered, that for all this Your Law had taken hold of them; That they
stood not out against the Authority of the Country in not submitting to their
Laws; That then (very lately) they had taken from them about Fourscore Pound,
on that Account, (which they since find to be Upwards of One hundred -- Your
Governor said, They had Rebelled against the Authority of the Country, in not
Departing according to their Order (who as they told them, had no otherwhere to
go, and had Wives, and Children, and Families, and Estates, to look after, and
were Conscious of nothing that they had done, that was Worthy of Death, or of
Banishment, or of Bonds, or of any of the things which they had Suffered) M.
General Denison told them (and see his Command, and what a Man he is to fight
with them that do not Resist; should an Enemy, indeed, come to put him to it,
he and several others, its very like would hardly be so forwards (they have
been hardly found overforward at that work) viz. That they stood out against
the Authority of the Country in not submitting to their Laws (but upon what are
they grounded) That he should not go about to speak much concerning the Error
of their Judgments, who convinced them of none, nor could ever he or you, and
yet see how ye make them suffer?) but as he had before told them. -- That they
and you were not able well to live together, D. Denison's Athiestical Principle.
(what an Athiestical Speech is here, as if there were no God that made the
World, and placed Man in it, to dwell upon all the face of the Earth, as well
one as another, and made the Conscience of Man for himself, or that would
require of Man an Account of what he did to his fellow Creature, who because he
had Power in his hand, would not suffer another (whom God had made) to live by
him; So No Man should live by another on the face of the Earth, where the other
was the stronger, and where would this end, but in the rooting out Mankind from
off the face of the Earth, as it believes there is No God) and that at present
the Power was in your hand (but how long may it be can ye tell? Could not the
Bishops have said so? yet they turned not you out as I have said, nor do they
keep ye out) and therefore the strongest must fend off -- Than which what can
be said more wicked? or, what a more destructive Principle, and a more
dangerous can there be in the World? Yet this has been his word in all Courts;
and this is the Principle on which ye go, Because Ye have Rower in your hands;
to whom the Woe is, Who devise Iniquity, and work Evil upon your Beds, and when
the Morning is light ye practice it, Micah 2. 1.
because it is in the power of your hand. So see your Portion, and your
Judgment from the Mouth of the Lord. Then ye put them forth a little while, and
called them in again, and pronounced their Sentence of Banishment upon Pain of
Death; and constrained them to, and who departed as aforesaid. Their Sentence
was dated, May 11. 1659. without a Legal Conviction of one May 11. 1659.
Principle or Practice that was contrary to Law, but because they were such as
were called Quakers. And this is New England, and the Justice of the Court of
that part of it as is called the Bay of Massachusetts.

Yet ye were not satisfied with what ye had done to Lawrence and Cassandra, and
Josiah Southick; but (as I have touched) you must be dealing with the rest of
the Family; and they having (viz. the Old man and woman) that were Friends of
Truth, to wit, Daniel and Provided; the Courts at Ipswitch and at Salem Dan
Southick Prove. Southick Ordered to be sold for their Fines. Order of the Court
General for selling for Bondmen and Bondwomen.
fined them Ten pounds, for not coming to your Meetings, but they having no
Visible Estate so as you could find to lay hold upon, to satisfy it according
to your Law; and your Resolution in the Case being desired, Ye Ordered them to
be sold for the Payment thereof: Your Order runs thus, -- Whereas Daniel
Southick and Provided Southick, Son and Daughter of Lawrence Southick, have
been fined by the Courts at Salem and Ipswitch, pretending they have no
Estates, Resolving not to work (that is to the Treasurer to answer the Fines;
It seems you had rather have moist Meat, or Money to buy it, or to answer your
other Lusts, and you will sell the Innocent: But you will have it rather than
give Dry Blows, where there is nothing to be had; as those did, who sold the
Righteous for Silver, and the Poor for a Pair of Shoes; that pant after the
Dust of the Earth, on the head of the Poor, and turn aside the way of the Meek,
and lay themselves down upon Clothes laid to pledge on Every Altar, and drink
the Wine of the Amos 2. 4. to the end.
Condemned in the house of their god: Because of which the Lord said by the
Prophet Amos, He would not turn away the Punishment thereof (even from Israel,
where these things were found (Nor will he from You) but the flight should
perish from the Swift, and the Strong should not strengthen his force, neither
should the Mighty deliver himself; Neither should he that handled the Bow, and
he that is swift of foot deliver himself; neither should he that rides the
Horse deliver himself: and he that is courageous among the Mighty should flee
away naked in that day. So says the Lord of You, as he did unto them, and it
shall come to pass.) So read your Punishment and take your Judgment ye who have
done this, and have not feared the Lord) And others likewise have been sined
for siding with the Quakers (What English is here? any thing serves whereby to
dispatch those People) and absenting themselves from the Public Ordinances, In
Answer to what should be done for the satisfaction of the Fines; The Court upon
perusal of a Law (which was made upon the Account of Debts) in Answer Resolves,
That the Treasurers of the several Counties are and shall be fully Empowered to
Sell the said Persons to any of the English Nations, as Virginia or Barbados,
to Answer the said Fines, etc. -- Edward Rawson, Secret. -- -- Yet, when the
Israelites (those of the Ten Tribes) had fought with them of Judah, and brought
Two hundred Thousand Women, Sons and Daughters Captives toward Samaria, in the
days of Pekah the son of Remaliah, King of Israel, and of Ahaz the son of
Jotham, King of Judah, The Prophet of the Lord was there, whose name was Obed,
and he went out before 2 Chronicles. 28. 8. to the 16th.
the Host that came to Samaria, and said unto them, Behold, because the Lord
God of your fathers was worth with Judah, he has delivered them into your
hand, and ye have slain them in a Rage that reaches up to Heaven: And now ye
purpose to keep under the Children of Judah and Jerusalem for Bondmen and
Bondwomen unto you: but are there not with you, even with you, sins against the
Lord your God? Now, hear me therefore, and deliver the Captives again, which ye
have taken captive of your Brothren; for the fierce wrath of God is upon You.
Then certain of the Heads of the Children of Ephraim, Azariah the son of
Johanan, Berechiah the son of Meshillemoth, Jehizkiah the son of Shallum, and
Amasa the son of Hadlai, stood up against them that came from the War, and
said unto them, Ye shall not bring in the Captives hither: for whereas we have
offended against the Lord already, ye intend to add more to our Sins, and to
our Trespass: for our Trespass is great, and there is fierce Wrath against
Israel. So the Armed men left the Captives and the Spoil, before the Princes
and all the Congregation. And the men which were expressed by Name, rose up,
and took the Captives, and with the Spoil clothed all that were Naked among
them, and arrayed them, and shod them, and gave them to Eat and to Drink, and
Anointed them, and carried all the Feeble of them upon Asses, and brought them
to Jericho, the City of Palm Trees, to their Brethren: then they returned to
Samaria. For of the Children of Israel the Lord had said, They are my Servants,
whom I brought out of the Land of Egypt, they shall not be sold as Bondmen;
Thou shall not Rule over him with Rigor, but shall fear thy God; both the
Bondmen and the Bondmaids which thou shall have, shall be of the Heathen that
are round about you, of them shall ye buy Bondmen and Bondmaids. Moreover, of
the children of the strangers that do sojourn among you, of them shall ye buy,
and of their families that are with you, which they begat in your Land, and
they shall be your Possession; and ye shall take them as an Inheritance for
your Children after you to inherit them for a Possession, they shall be your
Bondmen for ever: But over your Brethren the Children of Israel, ye shall not
rule One over Another with Rigor, Levit. 25. 42, 43, 44, 45, 46.

But Ye have ordered to be sold of your Brethren, of their Sons and their
Daughters, Not among your selves, but into other Plantations; not as Servants
in your Houses, but as Slaves to others: And yet you cry out, Are not we the
People of the Lord? is not the Lord in the midst of us? -- The Ordinances of
God; for not coming to the Ordinances of God, and Contemning Authority therein,
therefore have we done thus and thus unto you, said your Governor in answer to
them, as aforesaid, when they desired him before the People, to declare the
Real Cause wherefore you dealt thus with them. And yet here is an Ordinance of
God, and a very positive one too, yet how contrary is this your Order unto
that? and how have ye ruled over them with Rigor (and the height of Cruelty)
which the Lord said ye shall not do, Ye shall not rule one over another with
Rigor; They shall not be sold for Bondmen. But the Just Lord is in the midst
thereof (indeed) He will not do Iniquity: Every Morning does he bring his
Judgments to light, He fails not; But the Unjust knows no shame. Said the
Lord to the Filthy and Polluted (yea, Woe to her) to the Oppressing City; She
obeyed not the Voice; she received not Correction, she trusted not in the Lord,
she drew not near to her God: Her Princes within her are Roaring Lions, her
Judges are Evening Wolves, they gnaw not the bones till the Morrow. Her
Prophets are Light and Treacherous Persons: her Priests have polluted the
Sanctuary, they have done Violence to the Law. I have cut off the Nations:
their Towers are Desolate, I have made their Streets waste, that none passes
by; their Cities are destroyed, so that there is no man, there is no
Habitation. I said, Surely thou will fear me; thou will receive Instruction; so
their Dwelling should not be cut off, howsoever I punished them: but they rose
early, and corrupted all their doings, Zeph. 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. your Case
at this day.

Nor will that Pretense in your Order cover you, viz. the Paying The Case of
Selling to pay Debts, weighed in the Balance of the Sanctuary.
of Debts, -- which was made upon the account of Debts, say you: And these
being Debts (say you the Fines) and they having not wherewithal, Therefore We
Sell them for their Debts. -- For, to sell for Bondmen and Bondwomen, in no
Case were the Israelites; nor to Rule over one another with Rigor, thou shall
not, etc. Ye shall not, etc. as aforesaid. And as for the selling that the
Israelites might do, it was thus. If a Thief be found breaking up, and be
smitten that he die, there shall no Blood be shed for him: If the Sun be risen
upon him, there shall be Blood shed for him, for he should make full
Restitution: If he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his Theft, Exodus 22.
2, 3. Were these such? Did ye take them breaking up, and stealing? then ye had
something to say, and some pretense why ye should sell them; for that which
they are found breaking up, and so stealing, if they should not have to make
Restitution; for if the Thief that is so taken has wherewithal, he is but to
make Double Restitution, and his Blood is to be required if it be shed after
the Sun is risen upon him. Here is the Case for Selling for Theft, and such
Theft as this: But for Selling for Debt, I know none.

Now what is this as to the Justification of your selling of these to answer
your Fines, which you laid upon them, when the Law of God lays none? and for
Meeting together, which they that feared the Lord often did, and spoke often
one to another; and the Lord hearkened and heard, and a Book of Remembrance was
written before him for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his
Name: And they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts in that day, when I make
up my Jewels, and I will spare them as a man spares his own son that serves
him. And this was when the Proud were called Happy; yea, when they that worked
wickedness were set up; and they that tempted God were even delivered, Mal. 3.
15, 16, 17. Read the Place, and your selves, and them therein. And not
forsaking the Assembling of Your selves together, as the manner of some is
(said the Apostle to the True Church of Christ which is in God) but Exhorting
one another, by how much the more as you see the day approaching, Heb. 10. 25.
And they met every first Day of the Week at Corinth. And at Troas on the first
Day of the Week. And the same Day at Evening, being the first Day of the Week,
when the Doors were shut where the Disciples were assembled for fear of the
Jews, came Jesus and stood in the midst, and says unto them, Peace be unto
you: and when he had so said, he showed them his Hand, and his Side, Joh. 20.
19, 20. And they withdrew from the Temple, after Jesus was risen, and met
together from house to house, and denied the Temple, which was commanded of
God; And those among the Gentiles that were converted, denied the Idols
Temples, and met not in them; Yet were not the One or the Other fined, and
after such a manner as ye have done to the Servants of the Lord, and for
speaking one to another as aforesaid; and for meeting together, ransacking
their Estates, breaking open their Houses, carrying away their Goods and
Cattle, till ye have left none; then their wearing Apparel, and then (as in
Plymouth Government) their Land; and when ye have left them nothing, sell them
for this which ye call Debt. Search the Records of former Ages, go through the
Histories of the Generations that are past; read the Monuments of the Ancients,
and see if ever there were such a thing as this, since the Earth was laid, and
the Foundations thereof in the Water, and out of the Water. But it is first
found on you to a People who are harmless, who are Innocent, who defraud not,
nor oppress, nor do others wrong; Your Brethren, of Your selves, of the same
Nation and Country, at the same distance from your Native Country, Inhabitants
long together in the Country, where ye are known one to another, and to be of
unblamable Conversations, Fellow Sufferers, and in the same Condemnation. O Ye
Rulers of Boston! Ye Inhabitants of the Massachusetts! What shall I say unto
you? whereunto shall I liken ye? Indeed, I am at a stand, I have no Nation with
you to compare, I have no People with you to parallel, I am at a loss with you
in this Point; I must say of you, as Balaam said of Amalek when his Eyes were
open, Boston, the first of the Nations that came out thus to war against, to
stop Israel in their way to Canaan from Egypt: but your latter end shall be,
that ye Perish for ever; So is your Judgment from the Lord.

And now I have done with You as to this, only I shall declare the Execution of
your Warrant on the said Daniel Southick and Daniel and Provided Southick
Provided, whom Edmond Batter (a bloody wicked man, one fit for your purpose,
who has hunted, haled, and ransacked the People of the Lord with the highest
Cruelty) sent your Marshal for, who fetched them accordingly, and sought out
for Passage to some that were bound to Barbados to send them there for Sale, as
men sell Goods, to fill his Purse who was your Treasurer; but the Man to whom
he spoke would not carry them on that account (a thing so horrible!) and One of
them to try Batter said -- That they would spoil all the Vessels Company --
saying that as an Argument why he would not carry them: Oh no (said Batter) you
need not fear that, for they are poor harmless Creatures, and will not hurt any
body (or words to this purpose:) Will they not so (said the Ship-master) and
will ye offer to make Slaves of so harmless Creatures? So Batter sent them home
again to live of themselves (as he used to let their Cattle which he took for
Fines feed upon them all the Winter till the Spring, when they should make
benefit of them, to answer their chargeable being in the Winter) till he could
get a Convenient Opportunity to send them away.

And whilst I am hereupon, let me give you the Instance of Two more, viz.
Edward Wharton and Samuel Gaskin, who were Edw. Wharton Sam. Gaskin.
Arrested for not coming to Your Meetings, and had to Ipswitch Court, and
fined, the One Five pounds Ten shillings, and the Other, Eight pounds; One of
which being a young man, and having no Visible Estate appearing, William
Hathorne advised (though he was but an Assistant in the Court) and gave
Judgment against him, That if he had not to, nor would pay, they must send him
to Barbados, and sell him to pay it; and this was when the Court knew not on
what to levy the Fine. And this the said Hathorne, of whom I have before
spoken, who turned from the Tenderness that was once in him, to please you, to
get an Employment whereby to live, and having got it, thus turned against his
tender Principle, and his Friends, to whom once he was tender, to sell them for
Slaves, as he did in other Particulars. One of which I shall instance in a
Warrant under his Hand, sent to the Constable of Salem, in these words, -- You
are required by Virtue hereof, to search in all suspicious houses for Private
Meetings; and if they refuse to open the Doors, you are to break open the Door
upon them, and return the Names of all ye find to Ipswitch Court. William
Hathorne. -- But at this time he mist, though he shall not miss his Judgment
from the Hand of the Lord, who will assuredly meet with him, and give him his
Portion with the rest of those who persecute his Truth, who once had a Tender
Principle in them, and now turn against it (the Case of all you at this day)
yea, it will be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the Day of Judgment
than for You. So take your Judgment together, ye who have been together in
causing the Innocent to suffer.

Thus have I traced you through this Long and Crooked Path of Cruelty and
Blood, as well for the clearing of the Innocent (viz. those among you who have
not consented to, but in their Place have opposed and withstood, and testified
against your Proceedings unto Blood, That the Righteous may be separated from
the Wicked in the Great Day of the Lord, which is near at hand, who will render
to every man according to his Deeds; and that the Struggle this thing met
withal in its bringing forth, and who were the Fathers, Fountains, and bringers
of it on, and through (the Priests and You) may be made manifest. I shall now
proceed to what Ye did to the Strangers as well as to the Inhabitants, and how
ye did not only Banish, but indeed, Put to Death.

These were the Men of the Country (whom I mentioned before) with whom ye
proceeded as to Banishment upon Pain of Proceedings unto Death.
Death, and upon whom ye began; But these were not all, but with others,
Natives of England, accounted Strangers by you, ye proceeded as with the
Inhabitants, yea, and also put to Death, as I shall show by and by; for the
Lord God of Life and Power, who gives unto all Men Life, and Breath, and
Moving, who is the Lord of Heaven and Earth, and does whatsoever He pleases in
them both, And who shall say unto Him, What do Thou? Who says to the
North, Give up, and to the South, Keep not back, etc. Bring my Sons from far,
and my Daughters from the Ends of the Earth, Could not be limited by you, whose
Breath is in your Nostrils, who are but Dust, and whom in a moment He can turn
into Dust; Nor be restrained by your Laws, which were made in your Wills, to
persecute the Just; But the stronger ye made your Laws, and the more Cruel ye
became, the more He weakened you by his Power in his Servants, who went through
Banishment and Death; And the more ye sought to keep Him under, the more He
rose up amongst you in His Servants, and broke your Bonds and burst your Cords
assunder; and ye were mistaken who thought, that by such things His Purpose
could be disannulled, or His Counsel be kept from being brought to Pass, Though
He suffered ye thus to do for the filling up your Measure, and the making bare
his Arm, and the manifesting of the Glory of his Power, who is bringing great
and mighty things to pass: to whom be Glory and Praise, and Dominion for ever.

So Death was the Thing ye aimed at, and their Blood ye would have, and their
Blood ye had, and the Lord suffered ye so to do, to try you and to prove you,
and to let the World see how far Profession will go without the Power of
Godliness. So says your Declaration, -- Which Sentence (viz. of Banishment
upon Pain of Death) being regularly pronounced at the last Court of Assistants
against the Parties above named, and they either returning, or continuing
presumptuously in this Jurisdiction, after their time limited, were
Apprehended; and Owning of themselves to be the Persons banished, were
sentenced (by Court) to Death, according to the Law aforesaid, which has been
Executed upon Two of them, Mary Dyar (upon Petition of her Son, and the Mercy
and Clemency of this Court) had liberty to depart within two days; which she
has accepted of --.

Answ. Now I am come to the Bottom of your Work, and the W. Robinson, M.
Stevenson, Mary Dyar banished, and afterward put to Death.
Height of this your Gradual Proceeding from Banishment unto Death, and in the
Instance of these Three Servants of the Lord, viz. William Robinson, Marmaduke
Stevenson, and Mary Dyar (Two of whom, viz. William Robinson and Marmaduke
Stevenson ye confess to have Executed, and the Third, viz. Mary Dyar, to have
sentenced to Death, but Reprieved, whom since ye have put to Death) the
Relation of whose Sufferings I shall proceed unto, and the Merits of their
Deaths, and then reason with you for the Price of their Sufferings.

William Robinson of London, Merchant, and Marmaduke Stevenson of the East
part of Yorkshire, Countryman, being 4th Month, 1659.
moved of the Lord in the Fourth Month, 1659. to go from Rhoad Island into Your
Jurisdiction, came thither accordingly, whom ye soon apprehended, and with them
one Nicholas Davis (who Nich. Davis banished on pain of Death.
came from Plimmouth Patent (of which he was) to reckon with those with whom he
traded in Boston, and to pay some Debts) and Patience Scot (a Girl of about
Eleven years old, whose business Patience Scot, a Girl of about 11 years old,
Daughter to Katherin Scot aforesaid. Mary Dyar.
to you-wards from her Father's house in Providence, was, to bear Witness
against your persecuting spirit) and sent them to Prison, there to remain until
the sitting of the Court of Assiststants; during which time Mary Dyar
aforesaid, was moved of the Lord to come from Rhoad Island to visit the
Prisoners, whom ye Imprisoned also; and at the sitting of the said Court of
Assistants, banished (together with VV. Robinson and M. Stevenson, and Nicholas
Davis, upon Pain of Death (the Child it seems was not of years as to Law so as
to deal with her by Banishment, but otherwise in Understanding, for she
confounded ye all; and some of ye confessed that ye had many Children, and they
had been well Educated, and that it were well if they could say half so much
for God, as she could for the Devil (so ye Blasphemed the Holy Ghost, the
Spirit of Truth that spoke in her, saying it was an Unclean Spirit: For says
the Son of God, All Sins shall be forgiven unto the sons of men, and
Blasphemies wherewithsoever they shall blaspheme: But he that shall blaspheme
the Holy Ghost has never forgiveness, but is in danger of Eternal
Condemnation, Because they said he had an Unclean spirit. (For they said He
cast out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils, and that he had a Devil)
Mark 3. 22. to the 31.) If after the Fourtcenth of the Seventh Month following
they should 14th day 7th Month, 1659.
be found in your Jurisdiction. And Nicholas Upshall (the Old Man whom ye
imprisoned, and fined, and banished with such Nich. Vpshall.
Cruelty as aforesaid) returning after the space of Three years Banishment to
Boston again to his Wife and Family, about the time of the sitting of this
Court, as it was laid upon him by the Lord, ye cast into Prison there to remain
till he acknowledged his Offense (who only bore a sober Witness against your
Persecuting Law, as a Freeman of Boston) after that your Deputy Governor
charged him with denying Relations, in not coming to his Wife and Children in
all that space of time (when as ye had banished him from them upon pain of
perpetual Imprisonment, if he came back again: a wicked thing so to charge him
for the suffering of that which ye had done unto him; to make him to suffer,
and then to charge him for so doing) To which he answered, -- Was not thou,
and the rest of you here, the cause of it? who banished me so, that if I did
return I must be kept in Prison till I did acknowledge my Offense, which was
for bearing witness against a wicked and unrighteous Law, made to persecute the
Saints of Jesus Christ: Then ye sent me to the Genesis Court, where I declared
unto you, That the Prosecution of that Law would be a Forerunner of a Judgment
on the Country. Therefore I said in tenderness of Love which I bear to the
People and Country, I did humbly desire you to take heed what ye did, lest ye
should be found fighters against God; and it had been good for ye that ye had
attended to it. And so it had, and you will find it so in the End, when that
Day is come upon You, and the things are fulfilled which he in the Spirit of
Prophecy spoke to you; Then ye will know that he spoke not in Vain, and that it
had been your Wisdom to have Hearkened whilst ye had time: but now (as I have
said unto you in the Word of the Lord, Your Day is Over, and the things that
are coming upon you make haste. The Blood of the Innocent cries loud against
you, and the Lord is near to avenge it; the Fruits of that Law, which took so
with the Old Man, and which he bore Testimony against, and spoke so of, and
whose Sufferings the Lord will recompense on you, who have cast him now into
Prison again, where he remains to this day, born up by the Lord to bear your
Cruelty, that your Measure may be filled to the full: For, such a thing has
been hardly heard of, that Men should take such an Aged Man as he who has
scarce a Tooth (if any) in his Head, whose Provision of Meat is scraped into a
Spoon for him to receive (as I have said) wherewithal to Nourish him; and to
Fine and Banish him, as aforesaid, in such a season of the year, as the
beginning of Winter, from his Aged Wife, and his Children, and upon his Return
(after Three Years or thereabouts) to charge him for denying of Relations, in
not Coming unto his Wife and Children in all that space of time, when ye had
banished him from them; and being come unto them, to take him from them whom ye
had so charged, even as soon as ye had charged him, and to keep him in Prison;
and all this for no other thing than for bearing Testimony, and speaking to you
as aforesaid (for which, as I have said, what Law have you?) What Cruelty is
this, and how scarcely to be paralleled in former Ages? But these things are
found upon you, whom no Mercy moves, nor Bowels melt, who are as hard as the
Adamant; who have sold your selves to do wickedly; whose End (as I have said)
is come, and the Measure of your Iniquity.

Thus of the Old Man. But as for the Four asore-mentioned, 12th day, 7th Month,
1659.
on the Twelfth day of the Seventh Month (two days before the Expiration of
the Time limited by you, after which, if found in your Jurisdiction, they
should suffer Death (What hard measure is here, to allow a Man but Two days to
remove for his Life, and upon so slight an Account, or rather none at all?) Ye
caused to be turned out of Prison to try your Law upon them; Two of whom (viz.
Nicholas Davis and Mary Dyar) sound freedom to Nichol Davis, Mary Dyar.
depart your Jurisdiction, the One to Plimmouth Patent, the Other to Rhoad
Island; but the other Two (viz. VV. Robinson, W. Robinson, M. Stevenson.
and M. Stevenson were constrained in the Love and Power of the Lord, not to
depart, but to stay in your Jurisdiction, and to try your bloody Law unto
Death: So they passed out of Prison on the Thirteenth to Salem, and Remained
there, and at Pitscattaway, and the parts thereabouts in the Service of the
Lord, till ye took them up: Your Cruelty toward them when ye sentenced them to
Banishment, being such, and your Monstrous Inhumanity, that a Handkerchief was
put into one of their Mouths to keep them, W Robinson stopped from speaking for
himself by a Handkerchif thrust into his mouth, and attempting yet to speak,
was had down and given Twenty cruel Lashes with a Threesold Corded Whip.
from Speaking for themselves (which all Law allows) and when he yet attempted
to speak (viz. VV. Robinson) ye caused him to be had down in a great Rage, and
to be given him Twenty cruel stripes, with a Threefold Corded Whip with Knots,
on his naked Back, and then had him up, and sent him to Prison, together with
his fellow-sufferer M. Stevenson in Order to Death, if they were found again in
your Jurisdiction after the Limitation of the days set them by you to go
forth: Such Inhumanities as these have hardly been heard of in any Generation
where men have pretended to Law or Truth, but are found upon thee, O New
England! and the Head of thy Colonies, the Bay of Massachusetts!

Now the same Day that the Four aforesaid were put out, Christopher 13th. of
the 7th. Month, 1659. Christopher Holder.
Holder aforesaid was cast into Prison, whom (coming to seek a Passage from
Boston to England, which he was moved to of the Lord) ye there kept. One while
Banishing men out who come into your Jurisdiction upon pain of Death, and
another while keeping some in Prison, and Banishing them afterward, who come
to Pass out. Such Monstrous Contradictions are hardly found among Men who
pretend to understanding, and are not worse than Beasts, who know not when they
go forwards, or backwards; So greatly has Envy blinded your minds, and Rage
your Judgments. Him (viz. the said Christopher) so come in as aforesaid) Your
Deputy Governor Committed, and him you Detained in Prison till the middle of
the 9th. Month following, and Banished him upon pain of Death, if he should be
found within your Jurisdiction Three days after the next Ships departure for
England from your Harbor, who came to Pass from your Harbor unto England; and
this because he asked ye not first, leave so to come in; (a hard sentence for
such a Misprision, Suppose he should have done so) who had no Law to keep him
out from Passing to England.

Not long after, (viz. the 8th. of the 8th. Month following) 8th. of the 8th.
Month, 1659. Mary Dier. Hope Clifton.
Mary Dier aforesaid (whom ye Banished upon pain of Death) came to Boston (see
how the Lord brought them together) and Hope Clifton, both of Rhoad Island; Who
coming to visit Christopher Holder, then in Prison, on the First day of the
Week (being the next morning after they came in) they were soon espied standing
at the Window, and carried to the house of Correction by the Constable; who
coming again after your Worship was ended (having no doubt had his
Instructions) charged the Keeper Body for Body, Life for Life with Mary Dier
till further Order. So Mary was continued without being sent for, but Hope
Clifton was the next Morning had before your Deputy Governor, who recommitted
her, and one M. Scot, Daughter Mary Scot.
to R. Scot, and Katherine of Providence aforesaid, who came also to visit the
said Christopher in Prison, whom the same Constable apprehended as she was in
the Prison to Visit her Friend; And Robert Harper of Sandwitch (though he came
about his Robert Harper.
Outward Occasions) your Governor Committed also the One to the Prison, the
Other to the House of Correction.

And now the time drawing near of the sitting of your Court, 13th of the 8th.
Month, 1659. W. Robinson. M. Stevenson. Alice Cowland Daniel Gold. of
RhoadIsland W. King. Hannah Phelps Mary Trask. Margaret Smith. Prove. Southick
wherein you acted this Bloody Tragedy, W. Robinson and M. Stevenson came to
Boston, viz. on the thirteenth of the eighth Month, and with them Alice
Cowland, (who was moved of the Lord to bring Linen wherein to wrap the dead
Bodies of them who were to Suffer) and Daniel Gold from Salem; and William
King, Hannah Phelps, (the Wife of Nicholas aforesaid) and Mary Trask, and
Margaret Smith of the same Town. These all came together, as aforesaid, in the
Moving and Power of the Lord, as One Man, to look your Bloody Laws in the face,
and to try them, and to accompany those who should suffer by them; Whom ye
apprehended and sent to Prison, as aforesaid, and Provided Southick Daughter to
Lawrence and Cassandra Southick aforesaid; Who coming to see her sister then in
Prison, and being met with all in the street, and known by your Deputy
Governor, and asked by him, Whether she was a Quaker, and she Replying, That
she was one that was so called; He Committed her also.

So your Prisons began to fill, and the time drew near of the 19th of the 8th.
Month, 1659. W. Robinson. M. Stevenson. M. Dier. had before the Court.
sitting of your Court, as aforesaid, before whom on the nineteenth of the same
Month, W. Robinson, and M. Stevenson, and Mary Dier were had before your
Court, and Demanded by you Why they came again into your Jurisdiction, being
Banished upon pain of Death? To which having severally Answered, and Declared
the Ground or Cause of their coming in as from the Lord, and in Obedience to
him (upon your Governors saying, that he desired not their Death, and that they
had Liberty to speak for themselves, why they should not be Proceeded with as
to the giving sentence against them) He bad the Jailer take them away.

The next day after your Worship was ended, being heated by 20th. of the 8th.
Month, 1659.
your Priest, and prepared to shed the Blood of the Innocent, you sent for them
again, and (speaking faintly as a man whose Life was Departing from him, for
the hand of the Lord was upon him) Your Governor said to this Effect, We have
made many Laws, and endeavored by Several ways to keep ye from us, and neither
Whipping, nor Imprisonment, nor cutting off Ears, nor Banishment upon pain of
Death, will keep ye from among us: -- And he said, I Desire not your Death, --
Yet presently he said, Give Ear and Hearken to your Sentence of Death, and then
made a stop. Whereupon W. Robinson desired that he might be suffered to Read a
Paper amongst them, (which was a Declaration of his Call to Boston, and the
Reason why they staid in that Jurisdiction after your Sentence of Banishment)
which your Governor denied, and said in a great Rage -- You shall not read it,
nor will the Court hear it Read -- Then William laid it on the Table among
them, and it was handed to your Governor, who Read it to himself, and after he
had done, said, -- VV. Robinson you need not keep such an ado to have it Road,
for ye spoke Yesterday more than here is Written (which was not so, and if it
had been, yet a man may be permitted to speak the same Words over again, and
the Law Allows it, viz. for a Man to speak for himself ere Sentence is given,
and the Clarks of the Court usually Proclaim that Liberty, but you would not)
VV. Robinson said, Nay, he had not, and desired again it might be Read, that
all the People might hear the Cause of their Coming, and of their stay there,
and wherefore they were put to Death, -- which was (as I have said) what the
Law Allowed; But you would not suffer it (a very hard Case, you would not be so
dealt with, yet so ye have dealt with the Innocent,) and your Governor said to
him, -- Hearken to your Sentence of Death, -- You shall be had back to the
Place from whence you came, and from thence to the place of W Robinson
sentented to Death.
Exeoution to be hanged on the Gallows till you are Dead. --

Then M. Stevenson was called, and your Governor said to him; -- If you have
any thing to say you may speak -- Who standing still, and giving him no Answer
(for the Lord had shut him up) your Governor Pronounced the Sentence of Death
against him. Saying, -- You shall be had to the Place from whence you M.
Stevenson sentenced to Death also.
came, and from thence to the Gallows, and there be hanged till you are dead,
-- Which being Pronounced, M. Stevensons Mouth was opened by the Lord, and he
said, Give ear ye Magistrates, and The Sentence of the Lord by him, upon those
who should be guilty of their Blood in putting them to Death.
all who are guilty, for this the Lord has said concerning you, Who will
perform His Word upon you, That the same day ye put His servants to death,
shall the Day of your Visitation pass over your heads, and you shall be Cursed
for evermore. The mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it. Therefore in love
to you all, I exhort you to take warning before it be too late, that so the
Curse may be removed; For assuredly if you put us to death, you will bring
Innocent Blood upon your own heads, and swift destruction will come upon you,
-- After he had spoken which he was had to Prison.

Then Mary Dier was called, and your Governor said to her, to this effect, --
Mary Dier you shall go to the Place whence you Mary Dier sentenced to Death.
came, namely the Prison, and from thence to the Place of Execution, and be
hanged there until you are dead; -- To which she Replied, The will of the Lord
be done. -- Then your Governor said, Take her away Marshal; she Answered, Yea
joyfully shall I go, -- So she was brought to the House of Correction again,
and there continued 27th. of the 8th. Month, 1659. The People flock to the
Prison. A Guard set on it by Night, and Irons on William and Marmaduke. They
are caled forth.
with her other Two Friends in Prison, till the 27th. of the same Month;
during which time many People resorted to the Prison windows (for the thing
struck among them) which struck such a fear in you, where no fear was (for they
would not have broken a Thread to have gone out, nor pushed down a straw) that
ye set a Guard about the Prison by Night lest they should be taken away, and on
W. Robinson, and M. Stevenson, ye put Chains of Iron. And on the 27th. of the
8th. Month aforesaid, Ye Caused the Drums to beat to gather your Soldiers
together for the Execution, and after your Worship was ended, your Drums beat
again, and your Captain James Oliver came with his Band of men, and the
Marshal, and some others to the Prison, and the Doors were Opened, and your
Marshal, and Jailer called for W. Robinson, and M. Stevenson, and had them out
of the And take leave of their fellow Prisoners.
Prison, and Mary Dier out of the House of Correction, who having parted from
their Friends in Prison, full of the Joy of the Lord who had counted them
worthy to suffer for his Name, and kept them faithful to the Death, and having
Embraced each other with Fervency of Love, and gladness of heart, and peace
with God, and praises to the Lord; Went out of your Prisons like Innocent Lambs
out of the Butchers Cub to the Slaughter; and your Captain with his Band of Men
led them the Back way (it seems and are led to place of Execution,
you were afraid of the Fore, lest it should touch too much the People) to the
Place of Execution, and caused the Drums to beat when they attempted to speak
(hard work) and placed them near the Drums for that purpose, that when they
spoke the People might not hear them, who in great multitudes flocked about
them (as ye used to Imprison any that you took looking in at the Prison Window,
when they were there, to visit them, thinking thereby to keep the Seed of God
under, and them from having a Place in the People, but the more ye strove to
hinder, the more it went under (to wit, the Message that they brought) and had
place in their hearts, and the more Cruel ye were, the Deeper it took place,
which in due time will come forth, and make manifest it self, after the
first fruits are tried, and found to Praise and Honor, who shall be as Leaders
to his People, and as those that go before to show that Immortallity is able to
bear through the Sufferings of the Mortal, and that which changes not, that
which fades away, and withers) I say, your Capt. caused his Drums to Beat
when they sought to speak, and his Drums he would not cease, though they spoke
unto him, whilst they ceased not to speak, (A Barbarous Inhumanity never heard
of in the English Nation to be used to Suffering People) and as he led them to
the Place of Execution, Your Old Bloody-Priest And are met with in the way by
Priest Wilson, etc.
Wilson, Your High Priest of Boston (who was so Old in Blood, that he would
have had Samuel Gorton, (to go no higher) and those with him, long agon to be
put to Death, for their differing in Religion; and when but One Vote parted it,
was so mad, that he openly inveighed against them, who did it, Saying in the
Pulpit, Because thou have let go the man, whom I have appointed to Destruction,
Thy life shall go for his lise, and thy People for his People, Preaching from
that Text. Who said, -- He would carry Fire in One hand, and Faggots in the
Other, to Burn all the Quakers in the World. -- Who ^^^^^g some of those
Peoples Books in his hand, as they were burning the Books of Friends by Your
Order, threw them in the Fire, saying, -- From the Devil they came,
(Blasphemous Wretch!) and to the Devil let them go; -- He who said to ye when
ye sat on the Blood of these men, -- Hang them, or else (drawing his finger
athwart his Throat) so making Signs for it to be cut if ye did it not) I say
this your Bloody Old High Priest with others of his Brethren in Iniquity, and
in persecuting the Just, met them in your Train Field, and in stead of having a
sense upon him suitable to such an Occasion, and as is Usual with men of any
tenderness; he fell a Taunting at W. Robinson, and shaking his hand in a light
scoffing manner, said, -- Shall such Jacks as you come in before Authority with
your Taunted by him.
Hats on? -- with many other wicked words. To which W. Robinson Replied -- Mind
you, Mind you, It is for the not putting off the Hat we are put to Death. --
And when W. Robinson went cheerfully up the Ladder, to the Topmost Rung above
the Gallows, and spoke to the People, -- That this they suffered not as Evil
Doers, but as those who Testified and Manifested the Truth, and that this was
the day of their Visitation, and therefore desired them to mind the Light that
was in them, the Light of Christ, of which he Testified, and was now going to
Seal it with his Blood. -- This Old Priest in much Wickedness said, -- Hold thy
tongue, be silent, Thou art going to Die with a Lie in thy mouth. -- When he
spoke of the Light of Christ within, of which he had Testified, which testified
against evil, as that which was sufficient to bring unto God, and for the
Testimony of which he then Suffered.

So being come to the Place of Execution, hand in hand, all Three of them, as
to a Wedding Day, with great cheerfulness of heart; and having taken Leave of
each other with the dear Embraces of one another Love in the Love of the Lord,
Your Executioner put W. Robinson to Death, and after him M. Stevenson, And are
Executed, viz. W. Robinson and M. Stevenson.
who died both of them full of the Joy of the Lord, and steadfast in him, and
have received a Crown of Life, Sealing their Testimony with their Blood, (which
was the most that could be done) their Countenances not changing (though the
Priests thought to have found it Otherwise, and had some of them spoken to this
purpose, that they should see whether they would change countenance, when they
had a Halter about their necks) but remained as fresh (in a manner) even after
they were dead, as they were before, (as was observed by some) unto whose
Bodies being dead your Executioner was so Barberous, and your Officers, and so
wicked your said Priest; That when their dead Bodies were cut down, they were
suffered And their dead Bodies cut down, and let fall to the breaking of one of
their skuls. And cast naked into a Pit without a covering.
to fall to the Ground, with which the skul of W. Robinson was broke, his Body
it being stiff ere it was cut down; and when they were down, their shirts were
ripped off with a knife, and their naked Bodies cast into a hole of the Earth,
which was dug, without any Covering; and when some friends came and desired
their Bodies to be put into Cossins, and so into some enclosed Ground where
Beasts might not turn them up, your Executioner suffered them to take them up,
and to wrap them in Linen, and to put them in again, but to take them away he
suffered them not, saying, -- He was strictly charged by you (which was worse
than Pilate, who gave unto Joseph the Body of Jesus, when he desired it) to the
contrary: And when a Friend had caused Pales to be brought, to sense the Place,
into which they were cast, that so their Bodies might not be preyed upon by the
Bruit Creatures, seeing you would not suffer them to be removed, And there left
in a Pit in the open Field, whose Coverin was soon of Water. And then Priest
Wilson made a Song of them.
he would not suffer it; but there left their Bodies together in a Pit in an
open Field, which was soon covered with Water; and to make up all, when they
were thus Martyred by your Order, Your said Priest Wilson made a Ballade of
those whom ye had Martyred.

Thus have I led you through your Deeds of Darkness, and laid your
Blood-guiltiness in Order before you, and your other Cruelties, and Monstrous
Barbarism's to the Innocent, which shall not depart from your House for Ever,
the Lord has spoken it, but shall be visited upon you, when time shall be no
more, for the Hour of your Visitation is Over, as was told ye by M. Stevenson,
(after you had past this sentence it should, if ye put them to Death, (in the
Word of the Lord) and ye have put them to Death, and in that Despite, and with
that Cruelty as aforesaid; And after that Barbarous manner, and the Hour of
your Visitation is past (You who had to do in the thing) I speak it from, and
in the Word of the Lord; The Decree is sealed, it is done it cannot be revoked.

And because Fury rose up in your Governor, and the Form of his Vissage was
changed like Nebuchadinezzar's, when W. Robinson desired his Paper might be
Read, as what he had to say as to the Cause of his Coming, and abiding in your
Jurisdiction, when he was bid to speak if he had any thing to say, wherefore
you should not proceed to give Sentence against him, for his so coming in, as
to Death; Unto which your Governor said, It should not be Read, and that ye
would not hear it, and so in effect forbad that, which he bad him. I shall set
down the Contents thereof, and of M. Stevenson's Call into your Parts, for
which ye put him to Death, as a Perpetual Record to after Ages, of that for
which they Suffered, and your shame Everlasting. For it shall rise up in You a
Worm that shall never Die, and a Fire that shall never go out: The mouth of the
Lord of Hosts has spoken it.

William Robinson's Paper to the Court before he was Sentenced to death,
concerning the Cause of their coming into those Parts, for which they were put
to Death, which the Governor in a great Fury said, should not be Read, and that
the Court would not hear it. Which was in these Words.
ON the Eighth Day of the Eighth Month, 1659. in W. Robinsons Paper to the
Court.
the after part of the day, in Traveling betwixt Newport in Rhoad Island, and
Daniel Gold's House, with my dear Brother, Christopher Holder, The Word of the
Lord came expressly to me, which did fill me immediately with Life and Power,
and heavenly Love, by which he constrained me, and commanded me to pass to the
Town of Boston, my Life to lay down in His Will, for the Accomplishing of His
Service, that He had there to Perform at the day appointed. To which Heavenly
Voice I presently yielded Obedience, not questioning the Lord how he would
bring the Thing to pass, being I was a Child, and Obedience was Demanded of me
by the Lord, who filled me with living Strength and Poner from his Heavenly
Presence, which at that time did mightily Overshaddow me, and my Life at that
time did say Amen, to what the Lord required of me, and had Commanded me to do,
and willingly was I given up from that time to this day the Will of the Lord to
do and perform, what ever became of my Body: For the Lord had said unto me, My
Soul shall rest in everlasting Peace, and my Life shall enter into Rest for
being Obedient to the God of my Life; I being a Child, and durst not question
the Lord in the least, but rather willing to lay down my Life, than to bring
Dishonor to the Lord; And as the Lord made me willing, dealing gently and
kindly with me, as a tender Father by a Faithful Child, whom he dearly Loves,
so the Lord did deal with me in Ministering his Life unto me, which gave and
gives me strength to Perform what the Lord required of me, and still as I did
and do stand in need he Ministered and Ministers more Strength, and Virtue, and
Heavenly Power, and Wisdom, whereby I was and am made Strong in God, not
fearing what man shall be suffered to do unto me; Being filled with Heavenly
Courage, which is Meekness, and Innocence, for the Cause is the Lord's that we
go in, and the Battle is the Lord's, and thus says the Lord of Hosts, the
Mighty and the Terrible God, Not by Strength, nor by Might, nor by Power of
Man, but by my Spirit, says the Lord of Hosts, I will perform what my mouth
has spoken through my Servants whom I have chosen, mine Elect in whom my soul
delights. Friends the God of my Life, and the God of the whole Earth, did Lay
this thing upon me, for which I now suffer Bonds near unto death; He by his
Almighty Power, and Everlasting Love constrained me, and laid this thing upon
me, and truly I could not deny the Lord, much less Resist the Holy One of
Israel. Therefore all who are Ignorant of the Motion of the Lordin the Inward
Parts, be not hasty in Judging in this matter, least ye speak evil of the
things ye know not; For, of a Truth the Lord God of Heaven and Earth Commanded
me by his Spirit, and spoke unto me by his Son, whom he has made Heir of all
things; and in his Life I live, and in it I shall Depart this Earthly
Tabernacle, if unmerciful men be suffered to take it from me. And herein I
rejoice that the Lord is with me, the Ancient of days, the Life of the
Suffering Seed, for which I am freely given up, and singly do I stand in the
will of God, for to me to live is Christ, and to die is Gain; and truly I have
a great desire, and will to die herein, knowing that the Lord is with me, what
ever Ignorant men shall be able to say against me; for the witness of the
Spirit I have received, and the Presence of the Lord, and his heavenly Life
does accompany me, so that I can say in Truth and from an upright heart;
Blessed be the Lord God of my Life, who has counted me Worthy, and called me
hereunto, to bear my Testimony against ungodly and unrighteous men, who seek to
take away the Life of the righteous without a Cause, as the Rulers of
Massachusetts Bay do intend, if the Lord stop them not from their Intent. Oh
hear ye Rulers, and give ear and listen all ye that have any hand herein to put
the Innocent to Death; For, in the Name, and Fear, and Dread of the Lord God I
here Declare the Cause of my staying here among ye, and continuing in the
Jurisdiction after there was a Sentence of Banishment upon Death, as ye said,
Pronounced against me without a Just Cause, as ye all know, that we that were
Banished, committed nothing worthy of Banishment, nor of any Punishment, much
less Banishment upon Death. And now ye Rulers, Ye do intend to put me to Death,
and my Companion, unto whom the Word of the Lord God came saying, Go to Boston
with thy Brother W. Robinson: Unto which Command he was obedient, who had said
unto him, he had a great Work for him to do; Which thing is now seen, and the
Lord is now a doing of it, and it is in Obedience to the Lord, the God of the
whole Earth, that we continued amongst Ye, and that we came to the Town of
Boston again, in Obedience to the Lord the Creator of Heaven and Earth, in
whose hand your Breath is; And will ye put us to Death for Obeying the Lord,
the God of the whole Earth? Well, if ye do this Act, and put us to Death; Know
this, and be it known unto you all, ye Rulers and People within this
Jurisdiction, That whosoever has a hand herein, will be Guilty of Innocent
Blood. And not only upon your selves will ye bring Innocent Blood, but upon
the Town and the Inhabitants thereof, and every where within your Jurisdiction,
that had the least hand therein. Therefore be instructed ye Rulers of this
Land, and take Warning betimes, and Learn Wisdom before it be hid from your
Eyes.

Written in the Common Goal, the 19th. of the 8th. Month 1659. in Boston. By
One who fears the Lord, who is by Ignorant People called a Quaker, and unto
such am I only known by the Name of William Robinson, yet a new Name have I
received which such know not.


Marmaduke Stevenson's Paper of his Call to the Work and Service of the Lord.
Given forth by him a little before he was put to Death, and after he had
received his Sentence.
IN the beginning of the Year, 1655. I was at the Plough M. Stevenson's Account
of his Call to Boston, for which he laid down his Life to be upon Record for
all to know the Ground thereof, and therefore wrote by him, and left in the
words within written.
in the East Parts of Yorkshire in Old England, near the Place where my
Outward being was, and as I walked after the Plough, I was filled with the Love
and the Presence of the Living God, which did Ravish my Heart when I felt it;
for it did increase and abound in me like a Living Stream, so did the Love and
Life of God run through me like Precious Ointment, giving a pleasant Smell;
which made me to stand still, and as I stood a little still with my heart and
mind stayed on the Lord, the Word of the Lord came to me in a still small
Voice, which I did hear perfectly, saying to me in the secret of my Heart and
Conscience, -- I have Ordained Thee a Prophet unto the Nations. -- And at the
hearing of the Word of the Lord, I was put to a stand, being that I was but a
Child for such a Weighty Matter. So at the time appointed Barbados was set
before me, unto which I was required of the Lord to Go; and leave my dear and
loving Wife, and tender Children: for the Lord said unto me immediately by his
Spirit, That He would be as a Husband to my Wise, and as a Father to my
Children, and they should not want in my absence, for He would provide for them
when I was gone. And I believed that the Lord would perform what He had spoken,
because I was made willing to give up my self to his Work and Service, to leave
All, and follow Him, whose Presence and Life is with me, where I rest in Peace
and Quietness of Spirit (with my dear Brother) under the shadow of His Wings,
who has made us willing to lay down Our Lives for his Own Name sake, if
Unmerciful Men be suffered to take them from us; and if they do, We know We
shall have Peace and Rest with the Lord for ever in His Holy Habitation, when
they shall have Torment night and day. So in Obedience to the Living God I made
preparation to pass to Barbados in the Fourth Month, 1658. So after some time
I had been on the said Island in the Service of God, I heard that New England
had made a Law to put the Servants of the Living God to Death, if they
returned, after they were sentenced away, which did come near me at that time;
and as I considered the Thing, and pondered it in my Heart, immediately came
the Word of the Lord unto me, saying, -- Thou know not but that Thou may
go thither. -- But I kept this Word in my Heart, and did not declare it to any
until the time Appointed. So after that a Vessel was made ready for Rhoad
Island, which I passed in. So after a little time that I had been there,
visiting the Seed which the Lord has blessed, the Word of the Lord came unto
me, saying, -- Go to Boston with thy Brother William Robinson -- And at His
Command I was obedient, and gave up my self to do His Will, that so His Work
and Service may be accomplished: For He had said unto me, that He had a Great
Work for me to do, which is now come to pass: And for yielding Obedience to,
and Obeying the Voice and Command of the Everliving God, which created Heaven
and Earth, and the Fountains of Waters, Do I with my dear Brother suffer
Outward Bonds near unto Death. And this is given forth to be upon Record, that
all People may know who hear it, That We came not in our Own Wills, but in the
Will of God.

Written in Boston-Prison in the 8th Month, 1659. Given forth by me, who am
known to men by the Name of Marmaduke Stevenson. But have a New Name given me,
which the World knows not of, written in the Book of Life.


Thus they, and thus you, but as for Mary Dyar when she had Mary Dyar had to
the Gallows, her Arms and Legs tied, face covered, and Halter about her Neck,
then Reprieved and pulled down, because she came not presently down, being
willing to dye, and ready and near to it.
parted joyfully with her Friends, between whom she came hand in hand joyfully
to the Place of Execution (though your Marshal Michaelson was troubled thereat,
and asked Whether she was not ashamed to walk hand in hand between two young
men? (not knowing her Joy in the Lord) To whom she answered, -- It is the
greatest Joy, and Hour, I can enjoy in this World -- With these words, -- No
Eye can see, No Ear can hear, No Tongue can speak, No Heart can understand the
sweet Incomes and Refreshings of the Spirit of the Lord which now I enjoy. -- I
say, after she had parted joyfully with her Friends at the Foot of the Ladder,
determined to dye, and saw her Two Friends dead, and hanging so before her, and
had her Arms and Legs tied, and the Halier about her Neck, and her Face covered
with a Handkerchief, which your Priest Wilson lent the Hangman for her
Execution; and was even with the Lord in Joy and Peace, and so as it were, out
of the Body, an Order came from You for her Reprieve upon the Petition of her
Son, unknown to her, which being read, and the Halter taken off her Neck, and
she loosened, she was desired to come down; which she not answering (because
she staid to wait on the Lord to know his Pleasure in so sudden a Change, she
having given up her self to dye as aforesaid, and being so near to it) the
People cried (for her Death they were against) -- Pull her down; nor could she
Prevail with them to stay a little (so earnest were they) whilst she might
consider and know of the Lord what to do, but Ladder and she they were pulling
down together: In which they were stopped, and your Chief Marshal and others took
her down by her two Arms, and had her to Prison; From whence she wrote to you,
when she understood upon what Account she was Reprieved, Denying your Reprieve,
and the Ground of it; and the next Morning tendered She tenders to die the next
day again, but is resused, and forcibly carried (in stead thereof) out of the
Prison, and with Horses and Horsemen toward Rhoade Island.
her Life again for the Abrogating of your Law; but she was not suffered, for
some came presently, and took her forcibly in their Arms, and put her on
Hourseback, and with four Horses; besides Men, conveyed her away Fifteen Miles
toward Rhoad Island, and then left her with a Horse and Man to be conveyed the
rest; which she soon sent back, when she saw she might do it freely, and as of
the Lord; for she was sensible how that her sudden Reprieve had served your
End, in turning the People to you, who were turning from you in the Death of
the From whence she came again in the Will of the Lord, and suffered Death, as
hereafter is to be shown.
Other, which was in your Bottom, but the Lord otherwise ordered it afterward
in suffering you to put her to Death after a Reprieve, and such a One as this,
and after such a manner, and when she was so near the Execution, and as to her
self, even Out of the Body in the Joy of the Lord (of which I shall speak more
anon, and of your Cruelty) therefore He suffered this to be, and gave her
Liberty to go from those parts to Newport in Rhoad Island from whence she came.

But as for the People they returned from the Execution of the The Demeanor of
the People heavy and sad after the Execution of the Two former.
other Two, sad and with heavy hearts (those of them who were not sold unto
wickedness) as VV. Robinson had said unto them they should before his Decease;
and a Drawbridge rose up (the one end of it, and fell upon many, and some were
hurt, especially a wicked Woman, who was an Enemy to those People, and Two
Examples of the Judgment of the Lord on their Enemies. The one a Woman that
reviled them at the Execution, on whom a Drawbridge fell, upon her return, and
she dyed miserably. The other, 3. Grandchildren of Priest Wilsons, who dyed
shortly after.
was observed to have Reviled those Servants of the Lord at their Death; Whom
it greatly bruised, and her Flesh rotted from her bones, and her stink was so
noisome, that People could hardly come at her, in which miserable condition she
remained till she dyed. A sad Example of the Vengeance of the Lord, who renders
to every man according to his work. Three also of Priest VVilson's
Grandchildren died within a short time after ye had put these Two Servants of
the Lord to Death; as something upon his head, who cared not how he bereaved
the Mother of her Son, and the Children of their Father, and the Wife of her
Husband. The Judgment of the Lord in both of which is to be taken notice of.

Thus have I gone through the Executions ye made of the Innocent, and the
Relation of your shedding of the Blood of those who feared the Lord, who were
in a Capacity by your Laws (as ye judged), for such Executions; I shall now
return from your Field of Blood to your Bloody Prison, and there take an
Account of what ye did to the rest of their Brethren, whom they there left
behind.

And here by the way you may see the Insufficiency of your Gallows to restrain
the Spirit of the Lord in this Remarkable Passage, to wit, of one John
Chamberlen, one of your Inhabitants of Boston, being at the Execution of these
aforesaid; who beholding of their Faith and Constancy, and Comfort at their
Death, in the Innocence of their Cause, whose heart there the Lord opened, to
receive and embrace the Truth for which they suffered, and in whom Love was
raised toward the Sufferers, that it drew him to visit those then left in
Prison; for the which he was Apprehended and put in Prison, and soon tasted of
your Cruelty, who has been much and long Imprisoned by You; and although still
you have sorely shot at him, yet his Bow abides in strength, who was enabled to
bear all your Cruelty, and stands a faithful Witness for the Lord, against You:
By which you may see how insufficient your Endeavors are to stop the way and
course of the Spirit of Life, which neither Your Whips nor your Gallows is able
to reach.

There was one Edward Wharton of the Town of Salem in the Edw. Wharton, 31. 8th
Month, 1659. Apprehended.
first place, whom ye had Committed for going up and down from Town to Town
with those two Servants of the Lord whom Ye had Murdered, Upon whom ye fastened;
and because he could by no means own the Guilt of their Blood; Nay, not for
Committed.
all the World, as he said, when ye charged it upon him, and sought by
Consequence to prove it; because (said you) he traveled with them; and because
he said, The Guilt thereof was so great and heavy that he was not able to bear
it, ye drew his Blood 3d 9th Month, 1659. whipped with 20 lashes, and fined 20 l.
with Twenty fore Lashes with your Whip of Cords as aforesaid, and his Purse
with Twenty Pounds Fine, as a Peremptory Fellow, (for so speaking as aforesaid
to clear himself) and an Enemy to the Country, ye laid upon him, though he had
formerly taken the Oath of Fidelity (as you call it:) And this was on the third
day of the Ninth Month, he being apprehended the last day of the Month before
at Salem, and brought to Boston, where he was continued Prisoner till a Friend
of his against his Will, and at the Peril of his said Friend (as he told him)
paid it for him.

And as for the rest of the Prisoners there, of whom I have 11th 9th Month,
1659. Therest of the Prisoners called before the Court.
spoken; On the Eleventh of the Ninth Month following, viz. Christopher Holder,
Daniel Gold, Robert Harper, and W. King in the Forenoon; and in the Afternoon,
Alice Cowland, Margaret Smith, Mary Trask, Hannah Phelps, Hope Clifton, Mary
Scot, and Providence Southick, whom having Examined, and said to Them what ye
would, ye sent to Prison again; And on the Morrow having them before ye, Rawson
your Secretary read 22d 9th Month, 1659. Whipped with cruel stripes, 30 Dan
Gold. 15 R. Harper. 15 W. King. 10 Mar. Smith. 10 Mary Trask. 10 Provided
Southick.
to them their Sentence, which was, -- Daniel Gold to be Whipped Thirty stripes,
Robert Harper Fifteen, William King Fifteen, Margaret Smith Ten, Mary Trask
Ten, Provided Southick Ten (which your Executioner soon laid on them with great
Cruelty in the Open Street, (and till now your Executions were done in Private,
but having gone over the Lives of the Innocent in the Open Field, Ye were bold
to Declare your Sin as Sodom, and stuck not to draw the Blood of the Rest in
the Sight of the Sun) beginning with Daniel Gold, whose Clothes he stripped off,
and having tied him to the Wheel of a Great Gun, stripped off the Skin from his
Back, and beat his Flesh on his Bones, with the number of stripes as aforesaid,
and so he dealt by the Rest) So having drunk this other Draught of Blood, and
delivered over Alice Cowland, Hannah Phelps, Mary Scot, and Hope Clifton to
your Alice Cowland, Han. Phelps, Mary Scot, Hope Cliston, Admonisht. Christo.
Holder Banished.
Governor to be admonished, and sentenced Christopher Holder to Banishment upon
Pain of Death, for coming into your Jurisdiction to pass for England, as
aforesaid; Ye ended this your General Court, the Prisoners being returned from
whence they came, to answer your Jaylors Fees, and there continued till some
friendly People Engaging for it of their Own Accords, gained their Liberty.

And so I have walked step by step through the cruel and merciless Order of
your gradual Proceedings from Imprisonment to Death, to see if I could find any
thing of Law, any thing of Fact, any thing of Justice; any Regular Proceeding
according to either, on which ye might ground, and by which ye might warrant
what ye have done; but I find none, and let the sober Reader see if he can, or
any other thing than the monstrous shape of Cruelty and Blood, under the
Profession of Religion, and the greatest Inhumanities and most barbarous Acts,
as has been produced by any Age in the Earth. For, this let me say, That
though more Blood has been shed, and with greater Executions, and in some
sense more cruel, by those who have not pretended to Religion, at least to
Liberty of Conscience, from whom no other thing could be expected, being
delivered to their Wills; Yet, from Men pretending to Religion and to
Conscience; who suffered for Religion, and their Consciences; who left their
Native Country, Friends and Relations, to dwell in a Wilderness for to enjoy
their Conscience and Religion; From Professors, who have made so much ado about
Religion, and for their Conscience, and set themselves up as the Height of all
Profession of Religion, and the most Zealous Assertors of Liberty of
Conscience; and for that Cause have expected to be had in Regard, viz. Because
of Conscience and Religion; (as is your Case) For Men who are Relative to
Another Country, whose Government does depend upon Others; Who receive their
Commission elsewhere, and are in Subordination to the Power of which they
receive their Commission; Thus to Exceed all Bounds and Limits of Moderation,
Law, Humanity and Justice upon a People, barely for their Conscience, and the
Exercise of their Religion (as ye have done in the Instances aforesaid; and
much more which could be brought, were it not too burdensome to the Reader, for
I am forced to take but the Minutes of many things for the Readers
satisfaction) And for You to do it, who your selves are the Men (not Another
Generation) which so fled, which so suffered, is beyond a Parallel: And yet
after all these your Illegal and Unrighteous Proceedings in Blood and Cruelty,
ye are not ashamed to say.

Declaration. -- The Consideration of our gradual Proceeding will vindicate us
from the Clamorous Accusations of Severity, Our Own Just and Necessary Defense
calling upon us (other Means failing) to offer the Point, which these Persons
have violently and wilfully rushed upon, and thereby become Felons de se;
which, might it have been Prevented, and the Sovereign Law, Salus Populi, been
preserved, Our former Proceedings, as well as the sparing Mary Dyar upon an
Inconsiderable Intercession, will manifestly Evince that We desire their Lives
absent, rather than their Deaths present. So ends your Declaration.

Printed by their Order.

Edw. Rawson, Secret.

Answer. Had ye not Foreheads of Brass, and Faces of Flint, and Hearts harder
than the Adamant, and Consciences Seared with a hot Iron, It were wonderful to
think that you should dare to utter such Abominable Untruths before God and
Man, much less to put your Justification of All upon the Consideration of what
ye here call, Your Gradual Proceedings.

For, First, Your Gradual Proceeding, is not from the Merits of the Fact, (for
here is none) Nor from the Warranty of the Law, (for that is Grounded upon
Fact) Nor from the Bottom of Justice (for it is founded upon Law) But from One
Irregular Proceeding to Another. For, You have proved nothing (as I have
showed) and there being no Proof, there is no Ground for Law; and there being no
Law, there is no Justice; and so Your Gradual Proceeding contrary to Law, serves
to Convince You of the Transgression of the Law; And the more you have rose up
from a Bottom that is wrong, and the farther ye have proceeded from step to
step, and not on a Right Foundation, the more ye have swerved from the Right,
and are from a Right Foundation; And so the Consideration of Your Gradual
Proceeding from One Punishment to another, is but the Consideration of your
Gradual Proceeding from One Cruelty to another, from Imprisonment to Whipping,
from Whipping to Cutting off Ears, from Cutting off Ears to Finings and
Confiscation of Estates, from Finings and Confiscation of Estates to Selling
for Bondmen and Bond-women, from Selling for Bondmen and Bond-women to
Banishment upon pain of Death, from Banishment upon pain of Death to Death it
Self; And manifestly Evinces that ye desire their Deaths Present, rather than
their Lives Absent; and is so far from Vindicating you from the Accusations of
Severity that it charge it (yea the greatest) upon Ye.

Secondly, Ye were put upon no other manner of Defense than that which is not
of this World, then that which is Spiritual; For, They came not to you with
Swords, nor with Staves, neither with Staff, or with Spear; But in the Name of
the Lord, and with the Word of Truth, as did the Apostles and Disciples of Old,
and as ye did to the Bishops; And only sought by the Demonstration of Truth to
be made Manifest to that of God in every Man's Conscience; and they were sent
of the Lord in Love to turn you from darkness to the Light, and from the Power
of Satan unto God; that ye might receive Remission of Sins, and an Inheritance
which is Incorruptible amongst them which are Sanctified, by Faith which is in
Christ. And this was the End of their Coming, and the Intent thereof, and no
Other; And no other thing did they do, nor have ye Convinced them of any Other.
Now what is this to that which ye pretend, and seem to Insinuate by all this
Clamor of your Just and Necessary Defense -- and all other means failing -- and
which might it have been prevented, and Salus Populi, the Sovereign Law been
Preserved -- As if the whole Country, and Every Individual therein, and your
selves in particular were in danger as by a Hostile Enemy? Were ye in the
Truth, or of the Truth, the Truth is able to defend its own, and its Weapons
are not Carnal and Spiritual, Mighty through God, to the casting down of strong
holds, and every Imagination that exalts it self against the kingdom of Jesus
Christ; And it needs not man, nor the arm of man to defend it. But in that ye
have not warred with these, but with other weapons, and by Cruelty and Blood
which the Truth is against) have sought to Support your Religion, and by such
Proceedings as these, and Loud Acclamations, have endeavored to Preserve your
Religion, and to bespeak your Justification with the People; It is manifest and
it plainly shows that your Religion is not Truth, that your Clamor is not
Right, that ye that cry out of Wrong are the greatest Wrong-doers, and that
there is no such thing as ye pretend; and that ye are as Ridiculous in your
Fears as ye are Cruel in your Wills.

Thirdly, The other means you mention to have used are Imprisonments,
Whippings, Cutting off Ears, Fines and Confiscation of Estates, Selling for
Bondmen and Bond-women for the Payment of Fines, where ye had taken all, or
that there was no other thing to satisfy you, which you are Silent in, Or ye
may pretend ye did it by Virtue of Old Laws; but New Fines you laid, and
whether ye did it upon New Laws or Old, that is not the Point, but do them you
did, and are some of your other Means, and Cruel Ones too as I have showed,
Banishment upon pain of Death; These are your Means, your [all] other Means
(yet all they are not) And all these your other Means failing, (you say) you
offered them the Point, which they coming upon wilfully and Violently (as you
say) but I say (and it is so, and time will make it manifest, the Lord will
make it appear that it was in the Will of God (as has been declared) they came
into your Jurisdiction, and in the Moving and by the Command of Him who is
above your Laws, and will dash you too pieces) Or rushing upon, (as ye allege
but soberly they came in, and in the fear of God) thereby became Felons de se
(or were Guilty of their own Blood, of which you are Guilty) and must know the
price of it, for this shift will not serve you before the Judge of all, who is
drawing near to Judgment, and will render to you according to your deeds,
before whom ye are naked and bare, and who sees your Hearts, and knows the
bottom of your Intents against these People, and accordingly will Judge you,
whose Judgments are Just) You put them to Death. These are your Means your
[all] other Means, but these are none of the Means which the Spirit of Truth
Prescribes in the Scriptures of the Apostles, for the Convincing Gainsayers;
But Exhortation, Reproof, Admonition, the Word of Truth, the Sword of the
Spirit; and these the Apostles used, and with these they warred, and they
wrestled not with Flesh and Blood, but with Principallities and Powers, and
Spiritual Wickednesses in high Places; and in Meekness they Instructed them who
Opposed themselves, if God Peradventure would give them the Knowledge of the
Truth. And the Son of God tells ye, That he came not to destroy men's Lives, but
to save. And when his Disciples would have Fire come down on the men of
Samaria, He said, Ye know not of what Spirit ye are. Now these Means failing,
or you having failed in the using of these Means, or, you not knowing how to
use these Means, or you being not in that which would teach you how to use
these Means, which are the Means ye should have used, and would have directed
you thereunto; Ye betake your selves to other Means, Means that you should not
have used, Means which the using of them cannot Convince the Heart and
Conscience of Man, nor Instruct the Ignorant, nor bring to the Knowledge of the
Truth those that Oppose themselves; Nor Overcome Principalities, and Powers,
and Spiritual Wickednesses in high Places; Nor Subdue the Spirit though it may
bring under the Body, and through fear of him that can Kill the Body, make to
Blaspheme Him who can Kill both Soul and Body, and cast both into hell fire
(which was not the Case of these, for they feared not you who did Kill the Body
and could go no further, but Him who can Kill both Soul and Body and cast into
hell fire, him they feared; And Sanctified him in their hearts, and made him
their Fear and their Dread, and he kept them who trusted in Him, because they
trusted in Him, who never failed them who put their trust in Him; And Delivered
them, and they have obtained a good Report, and have finished their course with
Joy, (those whom ye have put to Death) and kept the Faith, and henceforth is
laid up for them a Crown of Righteousness which the Lord the Righteous Judge
will give them in that day, and not only unto them, but to all those who love
the Lord Jesus Christ and his appearing.) I say, these Means failing, you
betake your selves to Other Means, to the Means which the World uses, as
aforesaid, (to show that you (...) of this World) which never reaches the
Spirit, but the Body, and because they cannot reach the Spirit they kill the
Body; When as the Spirit it is that Offers up the Body, and presents it a
living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is its reasonable service; and
by which they offered up their Bodies on the Point which ye offered unto them,
and on the Tree triumphed over ye all, and showed that Greater was he that was
in them, then he that is of this World, and that they could [die] to do the
will of God; And that nothing could separate them, no not Death it self, from
the Love of God which is Christ Jesus. And so, as your [all] other, so this
Means of Cruelty (viz.) Death it self has failed you, in thinking thereby to
Overcome the Saints of the most High God, or to keep them from the doing of his
Will.

Fourthly, The Point ye offered them was without Ground in Law, or that the Law
allows ye to put. For, as I have said Valuable Considerations, must precede,
and such as will weigh down that of taking away of a man's Life, which the Law
esteems a most precious thing. Now here is no such produced by you, nor are
there any such, The utmost is, that they are such as are called Quakers, who
are proved to be another manner of People in this Nation, than you Reproach,
and are so with you, whom you have not Convicted of one Principle or Practice
that is contrary to Godliness; Only the Hat ye stumble at (which is their
Reasonable Apparel) and by the Hat ye Judged them to be such, and put them to
Death. And this was the Point which ye offered, and this was it against which
ye offered it, and in this they came (in their reasonable Apparel) in the Will
of God upon your Point, and passed through it. Now where Valuable
Considerations are not the Ground, neither is Law nor Reason: For, as I have
said, it is Lawful for any English man to reside, come in, or be in any of the
Dominions appertaining to England, and as Natural it is for One as for Another;
For it is an English man's House, and where shall a man be if he shall not be
in his House? And it is not the Name of a Thing; Or the Distinction of Word or
Habit (put by men) that must cut a man off from this his Privilege which is by
Nature; Nor should Names of Distinction (much less of Reproach) be given
whereby to raise One Part of a Nation against Another, for this Ministers
Division, and is an Occasion thereof, and tends to the Dissolution of
Government and is contrary to Law. Therefore they who come into a Country unto
which they have a Natural, and Legal Right (as these had, and any English man
has to come in amongst you) and have not done any thing by which by the Law of
their Country they are justly made incapable of that Right (as these had not,
for you are in Subordination to England, Your Laws are not to be Repugnant
unto it) There for such to come, reside, or to be, is no Valuable
Consideration, or Legal Ground (as to his Country) to be put upon the Point,
or the Point to be offered unto him, and if the Point be offered to such, and
they come upon it, and they be killed therewith, such cannot be said to be
Fellons de se; For the Law will say, -- Quo Warranto, -- On what Ground? And
the Ground is short as has been Declared, and made to appear; Nor Violently or
Wilfully to rush upon the Point, but those who without Law or Ground (as to
the Law of their Country and your Country is England) shall so offer the
Point, and run them through who come upon it, Such are Ingulatores de se,
Cutters of their own Throats, or Shedders of Blood in their own Wrong (your
Case in this Particular) and the Violence and wilfulness will be attributed
unto them by the Law, who set the Point not to those that come upon it; As of
one who sets the Sword where another man may lawsully Pass, and he that so
Passes is Executed thereupon; For he that so comes, comes upon his Right.

Lastly. Oh ye wretched Hypocrites, and Murderers! Did ye Mary Dyar put to De
th after the Reprieve.
not put the same Mary Dier to Death, when she came again into your
Jurisdiction after your Reprieve, and when she was as near the Execution as the
turning off the Ladder, she being ready, and having signified to your
Executioner, that he might do it when he would? So Putting her twice to Die, a
Cruelty beyond Once putting to Death; (A Comely grave Woman, and of a Goodly
Personage, and well bred as among men, and one of a Good Report, having an
Husband of an Estate, fearing the Lord, and a Mother of Children) Did ye Pity?
Did ye Spare? Had ye Compassion? Were Bowels in you? Ye Cruel Murderers! Was
it an Inconsiderable Intercession that moved ye to Reprieve her? Or was it not
your own Deceit to bring the People back to you upon a seeming show of Mercy
upon Pretense of Bowels moving at; or taking advantage of an Inconsiderable
Intercession whom your Bloodiness had turned from you, and made them to abhor
you? Let the Witness of God in you be heard to speak, for I am sure it will,
and will be heard in you one day, when it shall arise in you, as to this very
thing, a Worm that shall never die, and a fire that shall never go out. And
this your Cruelty speaks it against you, and the Lord God Eternal has tried
you by this, and your Bloody Laws, and snapt them asunder by a Woman, and
Triumphed over them and you again and again, who by his Eternal Arm was made
twice to look Death in the Face, and overcame, rejoicing to die in the Will of
God; and finishing her Course, her Testimony in the face of ye All; Trampling
upon you, and your Laws, and your Halter, and your Gallows, and your Priests,
and is sat down at the Right hand of God. Ye bloody Butchers! Ye Monsters of
Men! Ye Cruel Murderers! whom nothing satissies but the Blood of the Innocent.
Besides did not John Wintrope the Governor of the Jurisdiction of Cannecticote,
labor with you, that ye would not put them to Death? and did he not say unto
you, That he would beg it of you on his bare knees, that ye would not do it? --
And did not Colonel Temple go to your Court and tell ye, -- That if according
to your Declaration ye desired their Lives absent, rather than their Deaths
present, He would beg them of you, and Carry them away at his own Charge, and
give them a House to live in, and Corn to feed on, and Land for them and their
heirs to Plant on, that so once within a Year, they should be able to provide
for themselves, and if any of them should come amongst ye again, he would again
fetch them on his own Charge? And was not this Motion of his well of liked by
the Magistrates, except Two or Three, and did not they propound it to the
Deputies the next day? but did not the Deputies, and those Magistrates,
Over-Vote it the next day? and Ordered they not present Execution to be done
upon them that afternoon, as soon as your Worship was ended; which was your
Thursdays Lecture? And so did ye not put them to Death, and Murder them as
aforesaid? And yet nowsee how ye come and smooth over the Matter, like the
Harlot mentioned by Solomon, as if ye had done no Evil? O ye Impudent
hypocrites! As if it were far from you to desire their Deaths, or that you did
not desire it, but rather their Lives? And that such Clemency, and Mercy lodged
in you, and such Compassion and Bowels, that you took notice of the least
opportunity, that might give ye the occasion to make it manifest; And that ye
did it upon an Inconsiderable Intercession, (viz. Mary Dier, whom
notwithstanding these Considerable Intercessions of such Considerable Men among
ye, and this other Inconsiderable One (as ye term it) which was of her Son,
(and that is something considerable, and more than ye would make of it, for a
Child is near, and its Intercession of a prevailing nature, ye put her (as I
may so say) the second time to Death. And yet see how ye bring this (when ye
have done all) as a Demonstration; which (ye say but oh how Impudently!) will
manifestly Evince that ye desired: heir Lives absent, rather than their Deaths
present, when as ye put them to Death; yea this very Woman, your Instances,
notwithstanding the several Intercessions aforesaid, which proved
Inconsiderable. And then ye say,

Declaration and Answer. Although the Justice of our Proceedings against
William Robinson, and Marmaduke Stevenson, and Mary Dier, supported by the
Authority of this Court, the Laws of this Country, and the Law of God (which
are All Lies, for you have no such Authority, nor can your Laws support where
Authority you have none, and the Law of God is against you; for it puts not to
Death the Innocent, or gives ye Power so to do, in Matters of Religion) which
are from Man's Cognizance, and in which he has not to do) may rather persuade
us to expect Encouragement, (from such as you are, and who are of your Spirit,
but no other) and Commendation from all Prudent and Pious men, (who, those who
are truly so, will do the Contrary) than Convince us of any necessity to
Apologize, (yet why do ye do it, seeing that the very Name of an Apology marrs
your Justice) for the same; yet forasmuch as men of weaker Parts, out of Pity
and Commiseration, a commendable and Christian Virtue, (why then have ye not
followed it? How come ye to Condemn it in an Apology, and yet ye set it above
ye, as Apologizing to it?) yet easily abused, and susceptible of sinister and
dangerous Impressions (and yet a Christan Virtue, and a Commendable; Can Virtue
be mixed? is it susceptible of sinister and dangerous Impressions?) for want of
a full Information (may be less had been better, for this satisfies not) may be
less satisfied (what Justice is that which reaches not that of God in the
Conscience which should be the full Information to witness for you? Which your
Justice wanting your full Information signifies nothing, and which you wanting,
you come to give full Information.) and men of perverser Principles (so must be
all those who Join not with you) to Calumniate us, (Truth is no slander) and
render us as Bloody Persecutors, (who certainly are such) to satisfy the one,
(which will never be) and stop the Mouths of the other, (which can he never)
for it is the witness of Truth) We thought sit to Declare, That about Three
years since Diverse Persons professing themselves Quakers, etc. as in the
Beginning, which I have already answered, and do make an End with your
Beginning in the End. And so have finished my Answer to your Declaration.

Having thus gone through your Declaration, and Related the Sufferings of
Friends as they have come under the several heads thereof, and as occasion has
been given me by your said Declaration, I shall now proceed to what was done in
the other Colonies through your Example, and what since Friends have suffered
in your Own, and so finish up your Sum.

No sooner had ye began your Persecution, and drawn the blood The Sufferings of
Friends in Plimmouth Patent.
of the Innocent, for which you must answer unto the Lord, and your time is
near, but the other Colonies, viz. that of Plimmouth Patent (chiesly) and
Newhaven, for as for Cannecticote the Fourth and Last, there was little done,
as I shall manifest, the Governor, being so tender a man as has been declared,
and what was done, I shall show in its place) soon followed after you, and
Plimmouth Saddle (as one that was Magistrate of that Colony, in a Letter wrote
in the sense of the Sufferings of these People in that Country, hereafter
mentioned, has expressed it) being put on the Bay (or Red) Horse, (viz. Boston)
that Patent rides on the Career, though not as to Banishment upon pain of
Death, Death and Ears, Yet other Cruelties as to Fines, Whippings,
Imprisonments, etc. And Newhaven will Exceed in Cruelty, all the former, in
Burning in the Hand and other Cruelties.

And here in the First Place, Old N. Upshal challenges the Pre-eminence, for
the time of his Banishment being as Early as the Proclamation of your Law of
Blood, and coming from you Nicholas Upshal.
(being Banished) into that Jurisdiction for a little Shelter in the Winter
Season, the Governor thereof (one Bradford, since Dead in the Reward of his
Iniquity) forbad him to be received by the Town of Sandwitch, whitherto he was
come, and when the tenderhearted People of that Town could not be so
Inhospitable as to turn him out, He sent his Warrant for him to come to
Plimmouth (which was about twenty miles from thence) which he not answering,
being so stricken in Years, and the Season such, that to have gone thither was
as much as might have cost him his Life, as he signified to the Governor in a
Letter, and that if he Perished his Blood would be required at his Hands, he
was suffered to stay (by the Moderation of some of the Magistrates) till the
Spring of the Year, in which so Early he was Posted away, that he had like to
have Perished in his Passage to Rhoad Island, as I have already Declared.

Nor did John Copeland and Christopher Holder meet with better Usuage at their
hands, for they having been at Martins Vineyard John Copeland. Christopher
Holder. 16th day 6th Month, 1657. Martins Vineyard.
(a Place between Rhoad Island and Plimmouth Colony) and speaking there a few
Words in the Movings of the Lord (who moved them to go thither) after that
Priest Maho (the Governors Son) had ended his Divination in their Meeting
House, they were both thrust out of the Meeting House Door by the Constable,
and delivered the next day by the Governor and Constable to an Indian (where
were many on that Island) in order to be carried in a small Cannoo (or hollowed
piece of Timber) to the Main Land over a Sea nine Miles broad (dangerous
enough any to Pass over) having first took their money from him to Pay the
Indian; Who taking the Custody of them showed himself more hospitable, (as did
the rest of the Indians) and supplied them freely with all Necessaries
according to what the Indians had, during the space of those Three The kindness
of the Indians in Martins Vineyard
days they stayed there waiting for a Calm season) and refused to take any
Consideration, he who had them in Custody, Saying, -- That they were strangers,
and Jehovah taught him to Love strangers. -- (Learn of the Heathen, ye who
pretend your selves A Savory speech of an Indian.
Christians) and an Opportunity presenting, set them on shore on the Main
Land, where they were soon set upon, at New-Plimmouth, (to which they came from
Sandwitch) by the Governor and Magistrates there; And several of your
Church Members; and after a Long Dispute, were required to be gone; yet they
were loath to let them go, but the next Morning the They being commanded to
depart out of Plimmouth and returning again, were apprehended.
Marshal's Deputy came for them, and brought them before Thomas Southworth, and
John Alden (Two notorious Persecutors and men of Blood, as I shall show by and
by) who examined them (after they had been Committed) and required them to
depart the Colony (there being nothing found against them) telling them they
had a Law for that purpose (but would not show it them, when they desired it,
being strangers) and so let them go. Nevertheless the next Morning, a Constable
was sent to the Inn where they Lodged to keep them from going to Sandwitch,
(whereto they were bound, their Testimony there being received by many with
Gladness of heart, and the rest were troubled, and unto which they said they
must pass ere they departed the Country, it being required them of the Lord.)
who seized upon them, viz. the Constable as they were passing thither, and
Carried them six Miles onwards to Rhoad Island out of the Liberties of the said
Town as he was required. But they Obeying the Lord rather than man, soon
returned to Sandwitch after he left them; Where the Priests cried to the
Governor, help, help, against these men -- who answered their Cry, and sent
his Warrant, and caused them to be Apprehended in the Name of the (then)
Protector, as Extravagant Persons, and Vagabonds (who are the Lord's Freemen,
and have in him an Habitation; and a Portion in the Earth, and about his Work,
out of all Liberty to Evil in the fear of the Lord) and brought them to
Plimmouth, where a W. Newland Fined 20 s. for demanding a Copy of their
Warrant of the Deputy Constable, and sent the second time out of that Colony.
2d. of the 7th. Month, 1657.
Friendly Man, for but demanding of the Deputy Constable (who had them in
Custody) a Copy of the Warrant, (which is usual in such Cases, and should be
given) was sined 20. s. and the two Prisoners required to Depart, and forced so
to do by the Deputy Marshal, who brought them out of that Colony fifty miles,
and so left them near Rhoad Island, the 2d. day of the 7th Month 1657. and this
by Order of T. Prince the Governor, (the other being Dead) and John Alden, and
Josiah Winslow, and Thomas Southworth, Magistrates, Dated at Plimmouth, the
31st. of August, 1657. who assigned the Warrant, and caused the Execution
though they refused to show their Law, to which they pretended, for so doing,
and though they also said, that they believed that they (viz. the said
Prisoners) did not know that they had such a Law; and threatened Threatened if
they return.
them with their Law for Vagabonds (that is to say Whipping) if they came
again. How Exactly these have learned of you in the Beginning, and walked after
your Unrighteous steps, the Reader may perceive by being as early in the
Consideration of what ye have done, as in the Perusal of this part of their
Suffering.

The next is Humphrey Norton who fared no better then the rest, for he coming
to that Colony in the Drawings of the Lord Hump. Norton.
to Visit his seed, and to speak at the Court, was apprehended at Sandwitch,
before the Court sat, and had to Plimmouth, and there Detained a Prisoner till
he sent a Paper to the Court, when he saw they were likely to End, and he was
not sent for, in these Words, viz. -- I require of you a Public Examination,
and if found guilty publicly punished, if not cleared. -- Upon which he was
had before them, and sentenced to Banishment, although what they Banished.
laid to his charge as being an Extravagant Person, was not (nor could be)
proved against them, nor any thing else of which he was Accused. Thus as to
Banishment, next as to Fines.


The First occasion taken against the Inhabitants, who Entertained Suffering as
to Fines.
Friends, and had Meetings of those People at their Houses was that of Swearing
under the Pretense as serving as Jury Men, whereunto they were summoned, and
Ralph Alden, and William Ralph Alden W. Newland of Sandwitch 8th Month, 1658.
Newland (both Inhabitants of Sandwitch) are the first pitched upon for that
purpose, Ralph Alden was summoned to serve on the High and Petty Juries at one
and the same time that he might not miss, and W. Newland on the Petty Juries,
and this Twenty Miles from the Town where they lived; Notwithstanding thither
they come, and manifest their willingness to serve, if it might be without
Swearing, for that they could not do, it being contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ; But that was not accepted, it being besides their purpose, which was
upon occasion of that, to Question them about having Meetings in their Houses,
which they called Disorderly and Riotous, though it was in Peace, and was only
of Neighbors and Friends, to wait upon the Lord. For which they were fined
Twenty Shillings a piece, W. Newland Ten shillings for not serving on the Jury,
which he refused not to do but swear he could not, and Ten Shillings for
procuring a Copy of the Warrant of the Deputy Constable by which C. Holder and
J. Copeland, were Apprehended as aforesaid, when they first came to his House
as aforesaid; (which is a thing the Constable should do, and which the Deputy
Constable said he thought he might do safely (what havoc is here of Men's
Liberties, by those who so much pretend to Freedom, and came into a Free
Country for that purpose? The Governor saying to him afterward at the first
Month Court, at which he was set free (as hereafter is to be Expressed) that He
looked upon it as a very gross thing) and required they were to find Sureties
in Eighty Pounds Penalty each, for the Good Behavior for Six Months; Which
they refusing to do, it being against a good Conscience, and appertaining unto
the Worship of God, not having misbehaved themselves at all as to God on Man in
the thing; they were committed to the Marshal, and sentenced by the Governor
to pay sive Shillings at their Commitment, and sive Shillings at their Release,
and sive Shillings every Day during the time of their Imprisonment, which was
till the Court in the first Month 1658. (of which more by and by) being
continued for the space of near sive Months Prisoners, from their Wives, and
Children, and Occasions, and Relations, which were many, and between twenty and
thirty Miles Distance from their outward Beings, part of it in the depth of
Winter, and Distresses they took of W. Newland, for thirty Shilling, (being a
Heifer) better worth than so much) and of the other for his fine, but as for
the Marshal he was more Moderate, and Exacted not what he might have done by
the Order of the Governor.

Thus Entered the Scene of Cruelty, and Wickedness in these Parts, which ceased
not here, but proceeded from one Cruelty to another, till such time as they had
filled up a great measure of Iniquity, and became much like you in Persecuting
of the Just.

For presently after the Release of these, the very same Court which sat in
the first Month and set them at Liberty, had Peter Peter Gaunt. Dan. Wing. Ra.
Allin. W. Allin. of Sandwitch.
Gaunt, Daniel Wing, Ralph Allin, and William Allin before them (all of
Sandwitch) upon Pretense of Felony in breaking forceably into another man's
House (as they had done before by VV. Newland, when they summoned him to be a
Jury man as aforesaid, but indeed, to have occasion against them, (as they took
occasion against him) and to make them otherwise to suffer for their
Consciences; But the man of the House (viz. Nathaniel Fish) having cleared them
of the pretended Felony (for all the matter was that they came into his House
to see the Prisoners aforesaid, (viz. Christopher Holder and J. Copeland) which
were there in his House, the Door being open, (a Pitiful shift and manifesting
the depth of Envy, and Wickedness, and how they designed the same occasion not
that they gave it, They proceeded to fine them twenty Shillings a piece for not
putting off Fined for not putting off the Hat.
their Hats, and Distress to the Value of Five Pounds was taken from them for
to satisfy it. And at this Court they Enacted, That no Inhabitant Entertain
any person commonly called a Quaker Laws against Friends made by the Court. 1.
Month, 1658.
under the Penalty of five Pounds, or Wipping. That if any such Person come
into any Township within that Government, he that knows, or suspects him to be
such a One shall acquaint the Constable or his Deputy upon pain of Presentment,
and being liable to Censure in Court, and upon which the Constable or his
Deputy shall diligently endeavor to apprehend him, and Command him to depart
the Township or Government; if he delay or refuse to Depart, the Constable
shall bring him before the Magistrate of the Township, if there be any, and
where there is none, to the Select men appointed by the Court for that purpose,
who shall cause him to be Whipped or Pay five Pounds; and to be conveyed out of
the Township, and the same course to be taken with them, as often as they
transgress this Order; and that no Person or Persons be suffered to resort to
them whilst in Custody. That no Meetings of such persons (whether strangers or
others) be kept by any Person in any Place within that Government, under the
Penalty of forty shillings a time, for every Speaker, and ten shillings a time
for every Hearer, and forty shillings a time for the Owner of the Place that
permits them so to speak together; and if any Meet together, and are silent,
every Person so Meeting together shall pay ten shillings a time, and the Owner
of the Place forty shillings a time; and that no public meeting be from thence
forth, set up, but such as the Court shall approve off And that they might be
sure to have advantage enough against those People, and to Impoverish their
Estates, and undo their Families, and to wear them out, They ordered all to
take the Oath of Fidelity to their Government, who were not Freemen upon the
pain of five pounds -- And that they might be sure to keep out all such for the
future from being Inhabitants in their Government. They ordered That for the
future none be so suffered, but such as shall be allowed of by the Governors
and Two of the Assistants. By reason of which unrighteous Laws, so contrary to
Right and Liberty, and many others made on purpose to Ensnare and Oppress the
Innocent; Such Cruelties have been Exercised, as is hard to relate, and too
long to mention in all the Particulars, only take a general View of them (for
Unto you they appertain both in Example and Punishment) in a Letter wrote by a
sometimes Magistrate and Commander of theirs to his friend in England (formerly
of that Jurisdiction also, and a Magistrate there) written from the sense
thereof in the following Words, and then I shall touch at some of the
Particulars as they are come to my hands.

The Letter follows.
AS for the State and Condition of things amongst us, it is Sad, and like so to
continue; The Antichristian Persecuting Spirit is very active, and that in the
Powers of this World; He that will not Whip and Lash, Persecute and Punish men
that Differ in matters of Religion, must not sit on the Bench, nor sustain any
Office in the Commonwealth. Last Election, Mr. Hatherly and my self left off
the Bench, and my self Discharged of my Captainship, because I had Entertained
some of the Quakers at my House (thereby that I might be the better acquainted
with their Principles) I thought it better so to do, than with the blind World
to Censure, Condemn, Rail at, and Revile them, when they neither saw their
Persons, nor knew any of their Principles: But the Quakers and my self cannot
close in Diverse things; and so I signified to the Court, I was no Quaker, but
must bear my Testimony against sundery things that they held as I had occasion
and opportunity; But withal, I told them That as I was no Quaker, so I would
be no Persecutor. This Spirit did work those two years that I was of the
Magistracy, during which time I was on sundry occasions forced to Declare my
Dissent in Sundry actings of that Nature, which although done with all
Moderation of Expression, together with due respect unto the Rest, yet it
wrought great Dissaffection, and Prejudice in them against me; So that if I
should say some of themselves set others on work to frame a Petition against
me, that so they might have a seeming Ground from others (though first moved
and acted by themselves) to lay me what they could under Reproach) I should do
no wrong. The Petition was with Nineteen Hands; It will be too long to make
Rehearsal; It wrought such a Disturbance in our Town, and in our Millitary
Company, that when the Act of Court was Read in the Head of the Company, had
not I been present, and made a Speech to them, I fear there had been such
Actings as would have been of a sad Consequence. The Court was again followed
with another Petition of fifty four hands, and the Court return the Petitioners
an Answer with much plausibleness of speech, carrying with it great show of
Respect to them, readily acknowledging with the Petitioners my Parts and Gifts,
and how useful I had been in my Place, Professing they had nothing at all
against me, only in that thing of giving Entertainment to the Quakers, when as
I broke no Law in giving them a Nights Lodging or two, and some Victuals; For,
our Law then was, -- If An Account of more Laws against Friends, and how
wicked they are, read.
any entertain a Quaker, and keep him after he is warned by a Magistrate to
depart, the Party so entertaining shall pay Twenty shillings a week for
entertaining them -- Since has been made a Law -- If any entertain a Quaker,
if but a quarter of an hour, he is to forfeit Five pounds. -- Another, -- That
if any see a Quaker, he is bound, if he live six miles or more from the
Constable, yet he must presently go and give notice to the Constable, or else
is subject to the Censure of the Court (which may be hang him) -- Another, --
That if the Constable know, or hear of any Quaker in his Precincts, he is
presently to apprehend him, and if he will not presently depart the Town, the
Constable is to whip them, and send them away. -- And diverse have been whipped
with us in our Patent; and truly to tell you plainly, that the whipping of them
with that Cruelty as some have been whipped, and their Patience under it, has
sometimes been the occasion of gaining more Adherence to them, than if they had
suffered them Openly to have Preached a Sermon.

-- Also another Law -- That if there be a Quakers Meeting More wicked Laws.
any where in this Colony, the Party in whose House, or on whose Ground, is to
pay Forty shillings; the Preaching Quaker Forty shillings; Every Hearer Forty
shillings: Yea, and if they have Meetings, though nothing be spoken when they
so meet, which they say, so it falls out sometimes -- Our last Law -- That now
they are to be Apprehended, and carried before a Magistrate and by him
committed to be kept close Prisoner, until he will promise to depart, and
never come again; and will also pay his Fees -- (which I perceive they will do
neither the one nor the other) and they must be kept only with the Countries
Allowance, which is but small (namely, Course Bread and Water) No Friend may
bring them any thing; None may be permitted to speak with them; Nay, if they
have Money of their own, they may not make use of that to relieve themselves.
--

In the Massachusetts (namely Boston Colony) after they have whipped them, cut
their Ears, have now at last gone the furthest step they can, They banish them
upon pain of Death, if ever they come there again. We expect that we must do
the like, We must dance after their Pipe: Now Plimmouth Saddle is On the Bay
Horse, (viz. Boston) we shall follow them on the Career; For, it is well if in
some there be not a desire to be their Apes and Imitators in all their
Proceedings in things of this nature.

All these Carnal and Antichristian ways being not of God's Appointment,
effect nothing as to the obstructing or hindering of them in their way or
course. It is only the Word, and Spirit of the Lord that is able to convince
Gainsayers; they are the Mighty Weapons of a Christian's Warfare, by which
Great and Mighty things are done and accomplished.

They have many Meetings and many Adherents, almost the whole Town of Sandwitch
is adhering toward them; and give me leave a little to acquaint you with their
Sufferings; which is grievous unto, and saddens the hearts of most of the
Precious Saints of God; It lies down and rises up with them, and they cannot
put it out of their minds, to see and hear of poor Families deprived of their
Comforts, and brought into Penury and Want (you may say, by what means? and to
what End?) As far as I am able to judge of the End, it is to force them from
their Homes and lawful Habitations, and to drive them out of their Coasts. The
Massachusetts have banished six of their own Inhabitants, to be gone upon pain
of death: and I wish that Blood be not shed; but our Poor People are pillaged
and plundered of their Goods, and happily when they have no more to satisfy
their unsatiable desire, at last may be forced to flee, and glad they have
their Lives for a Prey.

As for the Means by which they are impoverished; These in The manner of their
Proceedings to weary out Friends by Fines, as to the Oath of Fidelity.
the first place were scrupulous of an Oath, Why then we must put in force an
Old Law, -- That all must take the Oath of Fidelity -- This being tendered,
they will not take it; and then we must add more force to the Law, and that
is, -- If any man refuse, or neglect to take it by such a time, shall pay Five
pounds, or depart the Colony -- When the time is come, they are the same as
they were, Then goes out the Marshal, and fetches away their Cows and other
Cattle. Well, another Court comes, They are required to take the Oath again, --
They cannot -- Then Five pounds more, On this Account Thirty five head of
Cattle, as I have been credibly informed, has been by the Authority of our
Court taken from them, the latter part of this Summer, and these People say, --
If they have more right to them, than themselves, Let them take them -- Some
that had a Cow only, some Two Cows, some Three Cows, and many small Children in
their Families, to whom in Summer time a Cow or two was the greatest Outward
Comfort they had for their subsistence. A Poor Weaver that has Seven A
Remarkable instance in a poor Weaver of their Cruelty.
or Eight small Children (I know not which) he himself lame in his Body, had
but two Cows, and both taken from him. The Marshal asked him what he would do?
he must have his Cows. The Man said, -- That God that gave him them he doubted
not, but would still provide for him. --

To fill up the Measure yet more full, though to the further emptying of
Sandwitch Men of their outward Comforts. The last Court of Assistants, the
first Tuesday of this Instant, the Court Fines as to Meetings.
was pleased to determine Fines on Sandwitch Men for Meetings, sometimes on
First Days of the Week, sometimes on other days, as they say: They meet
ordinarily twice in the week, besides the Lords Day, One Hundred and Fifty
pounds, whereof W. Newland is Twenty four pounds for himself and his Wife, at
Ten shillings a Meeting. W. Allen Forty six pounds, some affirm it Forty nine
pounds. The poor Weaver before spoken of, Twenty pounds. Brother Cook told me
One of the Brethren at Barnstable certified him, that he was in the Weavers
house, when Cruel Barloe (Sandwitch Marshal) came to demand the Sum, and said
he was fully informed of all the Poor Man had, and thought if all laid
together, it was not worth Ten pounds. What will be the End of such Courses
and Practices the Lord only knows. I heartily and earnestly pray that these and
such like courses, neither raise up among us, nor bring in upon us either the
Sword, or any devouring Calamity, as a Just Avenger of the Lord's Quarrel for
acts of Injustice and Oppression, and that we may every one find out the Plague
of his own heart; and putting away the Evil of his own Doings, and meet the
Lord by Entreaties of Peace, before it be too late, and there be no Remedy.

Our Civil Powers are so exercised in things appertaining to the Kingdom of
Christ in matters of Religion and Conscience, that we can have no time to
effect any thing that tends to the Promotion of the Civil Weal, or the
Prosperity of the Place; But now we must have a State-Religion, such as the
Powers of the World will allow, and no other; A State-Ministry, and a State-way
of Maintenance: And we must worship and serve the Lord Jesus as the World shall
appoint us: we must all go to the Public Place of Meeting in the Three or
fourscore presented at One Court, for not coming to Public Meetings.
Parish where he dwells, or be presented; I am informed of Three or Four score
last Court presented, for not coming to Public Meetings; and let me tell you
how they brought this about: You may remember a Law once made, called Thomas
Hinckley's Law,- That if any neglected the Worship of God in the Place where he
lives, and sets up a Worship contrary to God, and the Allowance Tho. Hinckleys
Law for not Coming to Meetings.
of this Government, to the public Profanation of Gods Holy Day and
Ordinance, shall pay Ten shillings. -- This Law would not reach what then was
aimed at: Because he must do so and so; that is, all things therein expressed,
or else break not the Law. In March last a Court of Deputies was called, and
some Acts touching Quakers were made, and then they contrived to make this Law
serviceable to them, and that was by putting out the word [and] and putting in
the word [or] which is a Disjunctive, and makes every A Notable Juggle or
Sophistication of a Law made 7 years before to serve the present turn, as if it
were not then made.
Branch to become a Law. So now if any do neglect, or will not come to the
Public Meetings, Ten shillings for every Defect. Certainly we either have less
Wit, or more Money than the Massachusetts; For, for Five shillings a day a man
may stay away, till it come to Twelve or Thirteen pounds, if he had it but to
pay them; And these men altering this Law now in March, yet left it Dated, June
6. 1651. and so it stands as the Act of a General Court; they to be the Authors
of it Seven years before it was in being; And so you your self have your part
and share in it, if the Recorder lie not. But what may be the Reason that they
should not by another Law, made and dated by that Court, as well effect what
was intended, as by altering a word, and so the whole sense of the Law; and
leave this their Act by the date of it charged on another Courts account?
Surely the chief Instruments in the business being privy to an Act of
Parliament for Liberty should too openly have acted repugnant to a Law of
England; but if they can do the thing, and leave it on a Court as making it six
years before the Act of Parliament, there can be no danger in this. And that
they were privy to the Act of Parliument for Liberty to be then in being is
evident, That the Deputies might be free to act it. They told us, That now the
Protector stood not engaged to the Articles for Liberty, for the Parliament had
now taken the Power into their Own hands, and had given the Protector a new
Oath, Only in General to maintain the Protestant Religion; and so produced the
Oath in a Paper in writing; Whereas the Act of Parliament, and the Oath are
both in one Book in Print; So that they who were privy to the One, could not be
ignorant of the Other. But still all is well, if we can but keep the People
ignorant of their Liberties and Privileges, then we have liberty to Act in Our
own Wills what we please.

We are wrapped up in a Laborynth of Confused Laws, that the Freemens Power is
quite gone; and it was said last June-Court by one, -- That they knew nothing
the Freemen had there to do -- Sandwitch-men may not go to the Bay, lest they
be taken up for Quakers; William Newland was there about his Occasions some
Will. Newland.
Ten days since, and they put him in Prison Twenty four hours, More Wickedness
against those People.
and sent for diverse to witness against him; but they had not Proof enough to
make him a Quaker, which if they had, he should have been whipped: Nay, they may
not go about their Occasions in other Towns in our Colony, but Warrants lie in
Ambush to apprehend and bring them before a Magistrate, to give an Account of
their business. Some of the Quakers in Rhoad Island came to bring them Goods to
trade with them, and that for far Reasonabler terms than the Professing and
Oppressing Merchants of the Country; but that will not be suffered: So that
unless the Lord step in to their help and assistance, in some way beyond Man's
Conceiving, their Case is sad, and to be pitied; and truly it moves bowels of
Compassion in all sorts, except those in place, who carry with a high hand
toward them. Through Mercy we have yet among us worthy Mr. Dunstar, whom the
Lord has made boldly to bear Testimony against the spirit of Persecution.

Our Bench now is, Tho. Prince, Governor; Mr. Collier, Capt. Willet, Capt.
Winslow, Mr. Alden, Lieut. Southworth, W. Bradford, Tho. Hinckley. Mr. Collier
last June would not sit on the Bench if I sat there, and now will not sit the
next Year, unless he may have Thirty pounds sit by him. Our Court and Deputies
last June made Capt. Winslow a Major. Surely we are all Mercenary Soldiers,
that must have a Major imposed upon us. Doubtless the next Court they may
choose us a Governor, and Assistants also. A Freeman shall need to do nothing
but bear such Burdens as are laid upon him. Mr. Alden has deceived the
Expectations of many, and indeed lost the Affections of such, as I judge were
his Cordial Christian Friends; who is very active in such ways, as I pray God
may not be charged on him to be Oppressions of a high nature.

Thus far the Letter. It was written by James Cudworth in the Tenth Month,
1658. What he was as to them, the thing mentions; what as to Tenderness also,
in reference to Conscience-Persecution, which he could not do, he could not
persecute; for which, and for Entertaining some of them a Night or two, and
giving them Provisions during that time, against which there was no Law as
aforesaid, he was turned out. I shall not need much further to particularize,
only a little I shall mention of the Occasion, which was the coming of W. Brend
aforesaid (on whom you exercised your Noted Cruelty) and John Copeland into a
Plantation in that Patent called Situate; and W. Brend. J. Copeland.
being entertained by this friendly man, and for the ends therein expressed by
himself in the Winter season (which you know is very cold, and hard to travel
in; and even Cruelty it self (if I may so speak) would be gentle to the most
inconsiderable, the vilest of men in such times as those, that they might not
perish) One came with a Warrant, which he had fetched several Miles in a Cold
Night, from the said Major VVinslow (something was in the matter he was so
promoted) and with others pulled them out of the House; and Sarah Gibbens also
(whom your Cruelty to her gives me cause to remember) not having respect Sarah
Gibbens.
unto the Season, that so his will he might have; (and for that purpose
pretermitted the two Magistrates that were in the Town, and passed to the said
VVinslow for that purpose. One of which Magistrates out of Tenderness when he
saw the Warrant, said, -- Mr. Envy had procured that -- and in lieu thereof,
gave the Strangers this Protection, in these words,- These are therefore to any
that may interrupt these Two men in their Passage, that ye let them pass
quietly on their way, they offering no wrong to any. --

Timothy Hatherlie. --


And now I am thus come unto Particulars, I must lay unto your Charge (for
through your Example and Encouragement it was that these things were done) the
further suffering of the Innocent in the Particular, as you have heard
something of it in the General, and that as to Cruel Whippings and Scourgings,
as well as to Fines, Imprisonment and Banishment, choosing rather to observe the
order of time when the things were done, than the distinction of Punishments.

First, then, These very Two, viz. W. Brend, and John Copeland (whom the said
tender Gray Headed Hatherly protected W. Brend. J Copeland.
from Wrong, instead of doing it, as aforesaid) coming through the Town of
Plimmouth in order to their Passage, in which they were protected as aforesaid,
were pursued by Lieut. Southworth, and brought before his Fellow-Magistrates;
who, because they could not promise (for they waited in the Will of God, in
which all Promises are to be made, that they might know what to do) in Forty
Eight hours to depart the Colony, the weather being also very unseasonable and
wet in the Winter season, caused them both to be whipped with Rods of Twigs, VV.
Brend (a man of years) with Ten Lashes, in which Four Rods were broken, Whipped
cruelly with Rods, 9th day, 12th Month, 1657.
and John Copeland with Twenty two backwards and forwards, on Breast and Back
and Arms, and that with such Fury, that as it drew the Blood on all, so it wore
out Six Rods in the laying of it on: and this without Law, and in the bitter
wet cold snowy Winter season; being the Ninth of the Twelfth Month, 1657. and
in the Snow and Rain; Out of their Coasts in which they would have had them to
depart through a Vast Wilderness of Sixty Miles (in which were many Rivers)
where the VVeather was so thick, and the Wilderness so close, that they could
not see their way; and because they did not so, to the apparent hazard of their
Lives, as many did confess (should they have departed) therefore dealt they
with them as aforesaid; and Thomas Willet, Tho. Southworth, and Will. Collier
saw the Execution, which so struck on the standers-by, that one Edward Perry in
the presence of the Magistrates gave Testimony, Edw. Perry.
and said, -- That he was there an Eyewitness that day of the Sufferings of
the People of the Lord -- For which Will. Collier called him their Fool -- No
marvel that James Cudworth so wrote, as aforesaid, of their Cruel VVhippings,
and that it preached more than a Sermon, though it cost Dear those Servants of
the Lord.

Thus they began, and so they proceeded; and having none before, they now
proceed to make Laws after that they have done the Executions. This is the
Justice and Law of Plimmouth Patent, which Mischief makes, and Blood acts, of
which many of the Servants of the Lord have born the smart on their Bodies, but
you must in your Spirits (the Indignation of the Lord) if not in Soul and Body
too, which will on you and them certainly fall, and divide you your Portion
with Hypocrites and Sinners. And the time is near wherein the Lord will do it,
and fulfill the Word which he has spoken by me, and Avenge the Blood and
Sufferings of his Servants, and Plead their Cause, and Execute Judgment for
them upon You, and that in the sight of the Heathen, who, because of it, shall
say, Verily there is a Reward for the Righteous: Verily there is a God that
judges in the Earth.

-- With this they are not satisfied, but as Men in a Fire, the more they
drink, the more they thirst; for the Fire being stronger than the Drink turns
that into its own nature: So the more they drank of Blood, the more the Desire
of it did inflame them, and so Humphrey Norton and John Rous aforesaid found it
soon, Hump. Norton John Rous whipped.
on whose Backs they laid, viz. on Humphrey Nortons Three and Twenty Lashes,
and on John Rouses Fifteen, which as it drew store of Blood, so it took much
with the Spectators, who beheld them in the Stocks, first praying, then
saluting each other, and bidding the Executioner have patience a little, when
he came to take off their Clothes, and he should see they could give their
Backs to the Smiter. And this they received for no other thing, but for Coming
into that Colony in the Will of God, upon the Grounds and Reasons, expressed in
a Paper unto the Magistrates, which they gave to them, when they were demanded
wherefore they came in; and which the Magistrates did neither receive, nor
would suffer to be read. And so Envious were they, that for taking John Rous by
the hand, they put Three of the Inhabitants of Sandwitch in the Stocks when he
came from before them.

Neither were they satisfied, But Christopher Holder, and John Copeland being
apprehended by the Marshal Barloe and Constable, Chr. Holder. John Copeland.
23d day, 4th Month, 1658,
on the Twenty third of the Fourth Month, 1658. as they were going to a Meeting
at Sandwitch, were Apprehended; and because the Select men, who were appointed
at Plimmouth to see the Execution, would not do it, he had them to Barnstable,
where they, being tied to an Old Post, had Thirty three cruel They are whipped
with 33 lashes.
stripes laid upon them with a New tormenting Whip, with Three Cords, and
Knots at the Ends of them, made by the Marshal and brought with him. At the
sight of which cruel and bloody Execution, one of the Spectators (for there
were many that witnessed against it, cried out in the Grief and Anguish of her
spirit (the Execution so pressing her, being a Woman) said, A Woman crying out
to see the Execution.
-- How long, Lord, how long shall it be ere Thou avenge the Blood of thine
Elect? and afterward bewailing her self and lamenting her loss, said, -- Did I
forsake Father and Mother, and all my dear Relations, to come to New England
for this? Did I ever think that New England would come to this? Who would have
thought it? -- And this Thomas Hinckley saw done, to whom the Marshal repaired
for that purpose, he being the man who brought in that Law of sining for not
coming to their Public Meetings, which bears his Name; and none but he was
bloody enough for the Marshal's turn to see it done; and which being done, and
he having glutted himself with the Blood of the Innocent, the Marshal had them
back to Sandwitch (where he had kept them from the Twenty third to the Twenty
ninth of the said Month in his own house, before he brought them to Barnstable,
because none there would see them whipped) and the John Copeland. Josiah Coal,
5th day, 9th Month, 1658.
Morrow after, out of the Jurisdiction. After this John Copeland and Josiah
Coal, being in a Friends house at Sandwitch, were haled out by Violence and so
imprisoned.

Thus as to VVhippings and Scourgings. Now as to Fines and Confiscation of
Estates, and particularly of the Inhabitants of Suffering of Friends in
Sandwitch as to Fines and Confiscation of Estates.
Sandwitch, whose sufferings have been very great, so that it is much that they
subsist to this day, or have any Bread for themselves and Families; But it
manifests the Eternal Arm of the Lord, and that his Almighty Power it is that
is underneath and bears them up, and his Tender Compassion that they sink not.
And what sense the Country has had of it, even all of all sorts, except the
Bloody Persecutors themselves, and such as are in their spirit, I have shown
already in the Letter before rehearsed; should I go further I should be too
tedious. The Lord has seen it, and He regards it, and He will visit it.
Upwards of Nine Hundred Pounds we have had an Account of that they have
suffered in this kind, in that One poor Town, besides others. What since they
have suffered we know not: Yet they are alive, and the Lord keeps them, and
they are fresh unto God, and He bears them through and over All, to the
Astonishment of their Enemies; who see that something is with them more than
Man to bear them up; yet they suffer Cruelty to go over them, and go on
therein, and will know no shame: but the Day is near, wherein they shall see
and be ashamed for their Envy to His People, and their great Oppression; who
have Oppressed not only a Man and his House, yea a Man and his Heritage, but
Men and their Houses, Men and their Heritages; yea (as it were) a Township of
Men, a Township of Heritages: Therefore has the Lord devised an Evil against
You, ye Rulers of A wicked Speech of Tho. Prince, the Governor as to these
People.
Plimmouth Patent, and Thou Governor Thomas Prince, who said, -- That in thy
Conscience (and what Conscience have thou that speak so wickedly of an
Innocent People, who fear the Lord?) They were such a People that deserved to
be destroyed, they, their Wives and Children, their Houses and Lands, without
Pity or Mercy (who are the People of the Lord, and are innocent as to You, and
whom the Lord will own) and have acted in Order thereunto, Thou and Thy
Companions (as Dan. Denison in Boston, (who would often say, that those People
and They could not well live together, and that they were the stronger, and
that others must fend off; and this in Open Court: plainly intimating their
Intent to root them up, as the End of all their Cruelty and Blood) I say to You
all in the Word of the Lord, whose Word He will fulfill, and the Eyes of those
who are living shall see it, That against you, even against You, against the
whole Family of You, ye wicked and bloody Persecutors of the Innocent People of
the Lord, who are your Neighbors and Countrymen, who suffered with you
because of Conscience, and with you came into that Country for their
Consciences; whom Ye would destroy, root out, pluck up, and against whom ye act
all these Outrages and Violences for that purpose, without Compassion or Mercy;
who your selves were not so dealt with: but the Lord has tried You, and
enabled poor People to bear what ye could do, whilst He has suffered Ye thus
to do for your Trials sake: I say once more to ye all in the Name and Authority
of the Eternal God, who lives for Ever, who is in me and with me, whose Word is
in my mouth and in my heart, whose Word it is, and it shall not fail, That
against You has the Lord Devised an Evil, from which Ye shall not remove Your
Necks, neither shall Ye go haughtily, but as Ye have done, it shall be done
unto You, and in the Cup which You have filled unto Others, it shall be filled
to You again; and the Lord will out ye off, and give ye Your Portion with
Hypocrites and Sinners. And His People, whom Ye have sought to root out, and
thus cruelly to kill, shall dwell in the Land, and great shall be the Increase
of His People; and He will plant them, and they shall not be plucked up; and He
will build them, and they shall not be pulled down; and they shall long enjoy
the Works of their Hands, the Plant of His planting, the Work of His Hands,
that He may be Glorified: And a Blessing shall they be to the Nation, and Men
shall say of it, Blessed be thou, O Habitation of Justice, O Mountain of
Holiness! And Nations shall flow unto Thee, and Kings to the Glory of thy
Rising; and they shall call thee the Blessed of the Lord, and thine Offspring
with thee: And the Devourer shall no more enter into thy Land, nor him that
does oppress; but I will make thy Officers Peace, and thine Exacters
Righteousness, says the Lord. And as for Thee, O thou Town of Sandwitch, and
my People in it, who have suffered joyfully the spoiling of your Goods, and
endured as seeing Him who is Invisible, and have manifested it by your not
Returning again, though you had many an Opportunity great and pressing, that
You seek another Country, whose Builder and Maker is God. Thus says the Lord,
-- Thou art a pleasant smell to me, and a cluster of Grapes that hang together
on the stem, in which is new Wine. Thou shall not be broken, neither shall thou
be rooted up; but men shall say of thee, Destroy it not, for there is a
Blessing in it. And I will delight in Thee to do Thee Good; I will build Thee,
I will plant Thee, I will rejoice over Thee with Joy; yea, I will joy over Thee
with shouting; and mine Arm shall be made bare in the midst of Thee, and I will
recompense thy Sufferings, says the Lord; and Thou shall be a Crown of Glory
in the hand of the Lord, and a Royal Diadem in the hand of thy God; and thy
Walls shall be before me night and day, and I will watch over Thee for Good,
and will nourish Thee, and great shall be the Increase of thy Peace: I will
build Thee, and Thou shall be builded; I will plant Thee, and thou shall be
planted; I will cause my Love to rest upon Thee, and Thou shall be Mine, says
the LORD, the Mighty God of Jacob.

Now as to Them who suffered, some of their Names are --

Robert Harper, of whose was seized Rob. Harper.
l. s. d. 5th Month, 1658. Two Oxen (all that he had sit to work) One Heifer,
and One Bull 14 00 00 12th Month, 1658. Five Cows (all the Cattle he had) His
House and Land 30 00 00 44 00 00 For not Swearing, etc. The Marshal when he
went to take some of the Cattle, passed by him, and told him not what he was
going about: So they have all, yet they turned him not out of Doors, but left
him One Cow, which was so poor, that she was ready to dye; and this was all
they left him for the Relief of himself and Family.

Ralph Allen the elder, from whom they took Ralph Allen the elder.
l. s. d. Two Kine, and One Steer 12 00 00 One Mare, and One Colt 20 00 00 One
Horse, with a Bridle and Saddle 09 10 00 One Ox, and Two Kine 14 10 00 More,
Two Oxen 12 00 00 68 00 00 Having not Convicted him personally, for he was
absent, yet took from him as aforesaid, for not Swearing and Meetings, and for
45 s. pretended to be in Arrears, the Marshal marked One Ox and One Cow; and
when they came to drive away the Cattle, took One Cow more unmarked, giving no
account wherefore they took her; and the Marshal said to him that he never
would --.

Joseph Allen, who was plundered of Joseph Allen.
l. s. d. Two Pair of Wheels 02 16 00 One Cloak (being as good as New) which
cost him 02 16 00 05 12 00 So they take away their Coats and their Cloaks, and
their other Clothing (as by and by will be made more to appear) when they have
nothing else for their Obedience to the Lord.

Thomas Greenfeild, from whom they Tho. Greenfeild
toook -- l. s. d. One Cow 04 00 00 with all the Corn that was in his House,
and other Goods not known how much, which they seized on after he was gone out
of the Colony, (as they also Convicted him) to take Shipping for England,
George Barloe, the Cruel Marshal came and Thresh't out the Corn, and made waste
thereof, and carried away the Goods for fifteen Pounds Fine for not Swearing,
and nine Pounds for Meetings, and three Pounds for Resisting the said Marshal,
(as they pretended whose Principle is otherwise) and not assisting him who came
into his House late in the night, when he was in his Bed, and three men with
him, and asked him for strangers, (or such as they call Quakers) and required
him to go with him (the said Marshal) to look after Quakers, (a most unnatural
thing being his Friends and fellow Sufferers; which he refusing to do (as was
right) he used much Violence to him, and halled him out of his Bed, and then
accused him for Resisting him, or striking of him, which those in bed with him
affirm to be a false Accusation. Nevertheless he to whom Violence was thus
used, was Accused of Violence (who offered none) and fined for it, and for
other things, as aforesaid, and the Goods found in the House and Corn (after he
was gone away) thus taken, though Two men Justified to the Marshal that it was
neither his Corn, nor Goods.

Edward Perry, whom they Deprived of -- l. s. d. Edw. Perry.
Three Kine, two Heifers 18 00 00 Six Hides, five half Hogsheads of Tarr 09 10
00 A Hogshead of Feathers 01 10 00 Five Cowes, and four Steers 39 10 00 A two
years and the Vantage Steer and Heifer 06 00 00 His best Working Ox 06 00 00
Two Firkins of Butter 02 18 00 A Box with Writings and Money in it 06 10 00 89
18 00 Which the Cruel Marshal took from him for Meeting together, 10th Month,
1658. 1. Month, 1659. 4th. Month, 1659. 7th. Month, 1659.
and refusing to Swear, etc. notwithstanding that when the Magistrates came to
Sandwitch, to Convict those that Met together to wait upon the Lord, he was not
at Home: Nevertheless thus they dealt with him, though not personally
Convicted, and left him but one Cow, which the Marshal seized upon afterward,
and so wickedly he proceeded with him, that he would drive his Cattle from him,
and pass by him with them as if they were not his, or that he were not
concerned so much as to be taken notice of as to what he had done; One Ox he
drove away and told him not of it till about a week after (see how the poor
Innocent Lambs are put to it in their Patience) And his Beef he would take away
out of his Tubb (about a Bushel at one time) and make merry with it with his
Companions, Saying, It was the Countries Beef; And because he had killed a sat
Cow ere the Marshal seized her, he made a great ado about it, and as good a
Cow was required of him that killed her, and John Alden the Treasurer, sent a
Warrant to the Constable to apprehend the man, and bring him to Plimmouth, and
deliver him to the Marshal, there to be kept till the first Month 1659. this
being the ninth Month, 1658. (thinking thereby to constrain another Cow, so
greedy were they) whither he was brought and bound by John Alden, and W.
Collier, to let them have as good a Cow, and to answer it the next Court,
though he was but as Servant to Edward Perry in what he did, and the Cow was
not seized, before he had knocked her down. So another Cow was seized on of
Edward Perry's, and two before, which made it three, for Five Pounds, worth
Eleven. And when the Marshal had taken his Box, and Writings, and Money, and
Plate therein, to hide his Theft he raised a Report, as if the Papers
discovered some design to cut them off by the Morrow night (who were thus
sought to be destroyed, who destroy none) and Men he would needs Press to
secure Edward, when as it was no such thing; and this he did when he was so
Drunk, that he could hardly forbear Vomiting in the bosom of him whom he
pretended to Press. And so Vile and wicked was this Marshal, that when a friend
of Edward Perry, (whom he took with him on Purpose) asked him, How he could
wash his hands of the Box of Writings, and Plate, etc. which he had taken out
of the said Edward's House without a VVarrant, and sought to Conceal (for he
would not confess to the Particulars when Edward demanded the Particulars of
him) He in a Scoff said, -- I will wash my Hands, -- and so rubbed them one in
another. And when Edward's friend Replied again, -- Yea, George thou may wash
thy Hands, but thou can not wash thy Heart. -- He Answered still laughing and
jeering, and said, -- Yes, One Dram of the Bottle will do it. -- and clapped his
hand on his Bosom. Unto which kind of washing (it seems) he is used to much,
viz. to be Drunk, and then to be mad, and to beat his Wife and Children like a
Mad man, and to throw the things of the House from one place to another. And
yet this is the extraordinary Marshal of the Court of Plimmouth Patent, made on
purpose for Three Townships, viz. Sandwitch, Barnstable and Yarmouth, to Vex,
Rob, Spoil, and Undo those Innocent People (whose heart was hard enough for
that purpose, and his hands Bloody) and to hunt after their Meetings, which he
uses to do up and down in the VVoods, Tracking them by the Print of their
Feet, as Dogs do Beasts of Prey, and Disturbing them there, and haling and
pulling them, when he finds them Meet, and treading Disturbances of Meetings by
the Marshal George Barloe, and his Huntings after them.
on their Feet, and turning up their Hatts, pretending he does not know them,
and threatening them with the Stocks, and smoking Tobacco among them (he and
his Companions, and sometimes summoning them in their Meetings to appear at
Court (Fourteen he Summoned at one time as they were Met together waiting on
the Lord on a First Day of the Week, to appear at Plimmouth (Twenty Miles
distant) the next Day; where they were sined five Pounds a piece for refusing
to Swear. At another time he summoned Ten more, to appear at the Eighth Month
Court, 1658. at Plimmouth, to take the Oath of Fidelity, and this is part of
the Disturbance the Innocent Lambs of Christ have had in their Peaceable
Meetings, waiting on the Lord, by this Woolf, but in the Lord they have Peace)
and asking their Names (on purpose to Molest them) though known to be of that
Township; and then Presenting them for Meeting (whom in their Meetings he thus
disturbed) and Executing the Fines on them for Meeting, in that Cruelty as is
already, and shall be mentioned, and far more than here is room to express;
Imprisoning them, and haling them to Prisons and their Friends, and Whipping of
them, and Searching of their Houses by day, and by night; and when they are
forth, prying into their Houses to see what they have there, and stealing away
that which he should not. A Whoremonger, that abused an Indian Woman (on whom
the Terrors of God fell, but he got off them, and so is hardened to the purpose)
a Liar, a False-Swearer, a Man of a Seared Conscience, without Remorse, a
Member of their Church, a sit Person to Hunt and Vex the Servants of the Lord
(which he used before he was chosen to that Office, and so was approved unto
them before they took him in) and Samuel Nash, the Country Marshal, and Richard
Cadwel his Assistant. He took a Horse that was none of Edward Perry's forceably
away for Edward Perry's fine, which Edward Perry had the use of the Horse to
carry a bag of Corn to one to whom he Owed it; which he finding at the door,
forceably took it away as aforesaid, and one Edward Fish assisted him (but the
Country would not, seeing it so manifestly unjust) and this he did, though
Edward Perry often told him that the Horse was none of his.

Richard Kirby, and his Son Richard, Richard Kirby and his son Richard. 14th
day 7th Month, 1659.
from whom was taken -- l. s. d. Eight Kine (one having a Bell about her neck
as the Leading Cow for the rest of the Cattle) two Oxen, one Calf. 47 00 00 Two
Steers, three bushels of Corn 07 12 00 One Steer and a Calf 03 00 00 54 12 00
Also the Marshal seized all his Corn and said, if he would thresh it out for
him the Week following, he would leave him enough to pay his Rent, and some to
Eat. After which he took away the three Bushels of Wheat as aforesaid, and all
this for not Swearing, (being fined Court after Court) and for Meetings, and
refusing to go with the Marshal, to assist him in the search for Friends, for
which Richard the Younger was fined 20 s. (a most unreasonable thing, and
betokening the height of Devilish wickedness) but as for the last Cow and Calf,
they know not wherefore he took them away, for he had said before, that he had
seized on as much as would satisfy the fine. George Allin, from whom they took
-- George Allin.
l. s. d. One Cow; three Heifers 11 10 00 Two Oxen, and two Calves 14 05 00 25
15 00 For refusing to Swear, etc. though he had told them he had taken the Oath
in England, etc.

William Allin, who was Robbed of -- l. s. d. W. Allin.
Four Kine, one Steer, a Heifer 20 00 00 Two Oxen, five Kine, two Calves 38 10
00 One Mare, and half of a Horse 19 10 00 About eight bushels of Corn and a
Hogshead 01 07 00 Three young Cattle, Vallued at 06 00 00 Corn taken away,
esteemed worth 01 10 00 86 17 00 His Fines were Forty Pounds for having Twenty
Meetings of the People called Quakers in his House. Four Pounds for being at
Meetings abroad. Five Pounds for Entertaining those People, but he Entertained
none. Twenty five Pounds for not Swearing (they Summon them three times a year,
as often as they have Courts for that purpose, and Fine them Five Pounds Each, so
to make an end of them) They left him but one Cow, which they pretend is out of
Pity, but what their Pity is more than a Robbers on the high way, that takes
away all a man has, and then gives him a Penny, I leave to be Judged. Also
they took from William Allin, One brass Kettle worth twenty five Shillings, for
twenty Shillings fine which the Governor put upon him for his Hat, though the
Summons, or the Occasion was upon pretense that he should break into another
Man's house (upon which pretense they also summoned others to have occasion
against and to Reproach them, who were well known to be other manner of People)
which was because he went (as did the others aforesaid) to see two Friends
there in Prison, the door being open of which the man of the house cleared him,
(as he did them all.)

Matthew Allin, from whose Family they Matthew. Allin. 18th. of the 1st. Month.
1659.
have plucked -- l. s. d. One Heifer, seven small Cattle 13 00 00 Five Kine, two
Oxen 31 00 00 One Bull 03 00 00 Corn unmeasured esteemed worth 01 16 00 48 16
00 The Marshal left him but one Cow, who when he came from work with his Ox in
his hand, and found the Marshal driving away his Corn in a Cart, he stepped
before the Oxen, and stopping them demanded their Order, and what they had to
do to take away the Corn his Family should Eat? (for it is not there as in Old
England, where a man may easily have what Corn he please, but every man in
Summer provides for his Winter fare, of which being deprived, it may prove a
hard matter for him to be supplied) whereupon the Marshal took away his Ox, but
showed no Order. And all this for refusing to Swear (for which he demanded of
him ten Pounds, after that he and Samuel Nash (the Country Marshal aforesaid)
had seized on three Cows in Consideration thereof) And for Meeting together to
wait upon the Lord (for which they had marked seven Yearlings, and two Working
Oxen (which were all the Working Oxen he had) three young Cows, and a Bull of
three years old, (a parcel of them which he took out of the VVoods unknown to
the said Matthew and drove them away) and then asked him for more, for that
there was not enough to satisfy the fine. And when the said Matthew made up
the Fence, which the Marshal had thrown down, that so the Cattle he had took
from the said Matthew might eat up his hay, The Marshal asked him if he knew
what he did? Adding moreover, -- That the House and Ground was his, if he
would, -- (so what could he have more) and Richard Cadwel (his Companion in
Cruelty as aforesaid) said We must suppress you, or you will go to Hell alive.
-- A Desperate speech, and as Desperate a Course, which is that, A Desperate
speech, of R. Cadwel, one of the Marshal's Assistants.
which they and (and you) take for the saving of their Souls as ye pretend,
(put the case they were deceived, which they are not, but are in the Truth, out
of which you out of which you are who take such courses to Convince as to
Truth) by the destruction of their Bodies, and all that they have. Indeed were
I to choose I should never love such a Religion, which would destroy my Body
for my Conscience. Yet this is the Religion of New- England.

William Gifford, from whom they W. Gifford. 10th Month, 1658. 1st. Month,
1659. 8th. Month, 1659.
have taken, -- l. s. d. Four Steers, two Heifers, one Bull, 25 05 00 Three
Kine, and half a Horse, 17 10 00 Five young Cattle, and half a Swine, 15 04 00
57 19 00 For 10 l. Fine for refusing to Swear, the Marshal took 5. head of
Cattle, (viz. Two Heifers and Three Steers) prized at 13 l. 04 s. 00 d. and a
Calf, and a half Swine at 2 l. In all, 15 l. 04 s. And for coming to Meetings,
he was Convict by the Magistrates (though properly so it cannot be called) when
he was not there, and the Distress leavied by the Marshal, who came into his
House, and into his Chambers, and viewed his Corn, and said that was not enough
for them, he must abroad, and abroad he went (that is, into the Woods, where
his Cattle were) and the said Nash, and Cadwel with him, and took of his Cattle
what they pleased; and made use of such of them as he (the said Marshal) would
at Plough and Cart. For, no other Cause (as I have said) but for Meeting (he
and his wife) with the People of the Lord; and for that in Conscience to the
Command of Christ he could not Swear.

Thomas Ewer, who was wronged of -- l. s. d. Tho. Ewer. 17th. of the 10th.
Month, 1658.
In Money which the said Cadwel owed him for his hard Labor and detained in
his hand. 07 13 00 In Money taken out of his House 06 17 00 In a Chest,
Clothing, New Cloth with other Goods 10 10 00 In another Chest Valued at 00
08 00 25 08 00 For twenty Pounds, ten Shillings, for refusing to Swear, and for
being at Meetings, which the Marshal and the said Cadwel took from him, viz.
his Chest with 6 l. 17 s. in Money in it, a Suit of Clothes even as good as
New, a New Bed and Bolster Tick, ten yards of Canvas, a New Blanket, about 18
l. of Sugar, four yards of Kersey, a pair of Stuff Breeches, a yard and a half
more of Stuff, about half a pound of Thread, four yards of Binding, three or
four dozen of Buttons, with other small things, he knew not how much. The New
Cloth the Marshal cut out, and put upon his Own Back, which Tho. Ewer seeing
him have On in the Court, he asked them, Whether they owned George Barloe in
wearing of his Cloth? (When they sent for him (the said Thomas) to take the
Oath of Fidelity) The Governor Replied, -- That if he could prove that George
Barloe had wronged him he might seek his satisfaction. -- And sentenced him
(the said Thomas) to be laid neck and heels together, which was the Injustice
he received at their hands in stead of Satisfaction: And the said Cadwel told
him when he demanded his money aforesaid earned of him by his hard labor, viz.
Seven Pounds thirteen Shillings. -- That he was a Transgressor of the Law. --
Cruel Men, who thus keep from him the Laborers hire, which cries out against
them, and because of which is the Woe, Spoken of by the Prophet, Mal. 3. 5.
Even that the Lord will come near to judgment and be a swift Witness against
those that Oppress the Hireling in his Wages, and fear not me says the Lord of
hosts. And, Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor neither Robb him; The wages of
him that is hired, shall not abide with thee all night until the morning, Lev.
19. 13. Also his Axe was taken away with which he wrought, worth three
Shillings, for ten Pence charge to the Country; and for another ten pence Rate
to the Country, ThomasToby the Constable finding the said Thomas Ewers Bag of
Corn at the Mill (what narrow Inquisition do they make, and what huntings are
here even for the Bread of the Oppressed, and the Instruments of their labor
Bread Corn taken from the Mill, for their fines, and their working tools.
by which they get their Bread? when as it is said, No man shall take the
Nether or the Upper millstone to Pledge, for he takes a man's Life to Pledge,
Deuteronomy. 19. 16.) And it is said to be the standing Law of the Country; yet how is
it gone against, and the very express Law of God, to Oppress and take from him
(which is more than to Pledge) that which the Law of God says is his Life?)
took half a Bushel out of it, which was worth Eighteen Pence.

William Newland was Pillaged of --. W. Newland.
l. s. d. One Mare, one Horse, two Kine, 36 00 00 For not Swearing, and being
at the Meetings, and for Entertaining of, being with, and adhearing to those
People; and for these Things, he and his Brother Henry of the Town of Duxbury,
Hen. Howland of Duxbury.
were Disfranchized. They were summoned for this in the Eighth Month, 1659.
and in the Record of their Disfrancizement, William (is said) to be Entered
first, and then two others, who were so sentenced, the one for Drunkenness, the
other for some evil of another kind, and Henry last. So numbering them among
Transgressors.

Daniel VVing, from whom they took -- Dan. Wing.
l. s. d. Three Kine, 12 00 00 For the Hat fined twenty Shillings and for not
Swearing.

Ralph Allin the Younger, from whom they also took -- Ralph Allin. the younger.
l. s. d. Four Cows, 18 00 00 One Weather Sheep for 20. s. for the Hat.

Peter Gaunt, from whom was taken -- Peter Gaunt.
l. s. d. Five Kine, two year Heifers 30 00 00 One Mare, two three year Steers
12 00 00 Eight Bushels of Pease (as some said) 01 04 00 Four Bushels of Indian
Corn, And Half a bushel of Wheat. 00 10 06 43 14 06 For his, and his Wifes
being at Meetings, and for having a Meeting in their House, and for Taxes to
the Country, which he could not pay, viz. to maintain the Table of that Court
which sat to make Laws against them, and to rob them of their Goods. And Barloe
the bloody Marshal was hard at it again; and got two Men and threshed out his
Pease, and took them, and Marked his Cattle, and let them run, till near the
later end of the third Month, (which was some time) and then took them up;
During which Interval of time, one of the Cows dying, the Marshal demanded the
Hide, and also marked a living Cow, in the dead Cows stead, which he had
marked, and not took away, but died in the time that he left the said Cow, and
the rest of the Cattle that he had marked, a pretty space of time, on the said
Peter's hands. -- And this they did to him though he had lived at Sandwitch
about two and twenty Years; and was one of the first setters up of their
Public Church Worship; And a (sometime) Member of their Church, and never
Excommunicated by them, but left them for Truth's sake, and One that had
formerly taken the Oath of Fidelity: And for not Training (though he was a man
of great years, and by reason thereof might require a Dismiss) they fined him
10. s. and Destrained Pewter for it as they pleased, with which sort of
household Goods a man cannot easily be supplied again. Yea so unreasonably, and
with Cruelty was he used, that they compelled this old man to appear before
them at Plimmouth, (20 Miles distant) and there the Governor fined him 20. s.
for not putting off his Hat, (and for this they Destrained a young beast worth
35. s.) Indeed Captain Willet aforesaid, said to his Wife, that He took God to
witness, that he desired not a farthing of their Goods, nor the aching of one of
their singers; -- but how he has had to do with their Goods, in taking it
from, and Impoverishing their Families, is more than manifest, and is hereafter
Declared, and his falsehood therein, and his being bold with the Lord, in taking
him to witness, whose witness is against him, and he will know it is so when it
rises up in him (and rise it will) a worm that will never die, and a fire that
will never go out. For this man has had more than a little share in the
Sufferings of the Innocent, not only in this Plantation, but in that of the
Dutch, where Robert Hodson (and others) suffered the most unheard of Cruelties
in the English Nation, and for which I must reckon with him anon, whose Father,
and he, sled into Holland, and so to New England for Liberty of Conscience.

John Jenkins was plundered of l. s. d. John Jenkins.
Two Cows and one Steer 11 10 00 Money attached in James Skiff's hands, (here is
hard work indeed) 08 00 00 19 10 00 Also of his Pot wherein he boiled his
Victuals, being not able to get another, till about a Year and a half
afterward; and was forced to borrow during that space of time; which in Malice
was done unto him, for his Wife threw down a New Piece of Cloth, double worth
the sum; but nothing would satisfy but the Pot from him, who lived about Sixty
Miles from the Market where he should supply himself again, and it was thus
long ere he came to be supplied. And this was for not Training: and though he
had lived at Sandwitch about Ten years, and had Three Children; and though the
very first year he came he was made a Freeman, and had his Vote in
Town-meetings and Common-Priviledges; The Common Privilege of Freemen denied.
yet he was denied his share in Whale-Oyl, which, as a Freeman, fell to him:
And the Constable said, he must not speak, for he was no Freeman -- And for
not Swearing he was fined, and distrayned, as aforesaid: And for coming to
Meetings, and for having a Meeting (or Meetings) at his house, Thomas Prince
the Governor, Capt. Willet, Thomas Hinckley, and Josiah Winslow, were the Men
that came and sat at the House of Rich. Bourne, and fined him and others (to
the number of Sixteen) the sum of Five pounds apiece, for refusing to Swear;
and, because they did not presently depart the Court, the Governor cast Three
of them into Prison, and there kept them several days in the Cold weather from
their Families) the said Josiah (or Major) Winslow, (who for his Devilish
Cruelty The Extreme Madness of Major Winslow against them.
to the People of the Lord gained this Promotion) showing much Vehemence and
fierceness of spirit against them, sometimes starting up and smiting the Table
with his Stick (he would hardly stand to strike an Enemy so in the Field; these
are brave Fellows (as the Proverb is) at a Cudgel or Trencher where no Enemy
is) then with his Hand, then stamping with his Feer, like a Madman, saying --
he could not bear it, and why? Because Robert Harper aforesaid desired to know,
or that it might be made appear, that that was the Countries Cow that Edward
Perry aforesaid had killed before she was attached by the Marshal. And because
Thomas Ewer spoke of the Marshal's wearing of his Clothes, which he had upon
his back: and because the Marshal was charged with robbing Edward Perry of his
Goods, and with seizing on their Cattle, and taking them away, when the Owners
were abroad, and saying nothing to them when they pass by to take them. And
further he the said Winslow said, -- Let them have the Strapado; who never knew
(its like) what really belonged to Soldier. Yet such as these are the Cruel
Executioners of the Innocent.

Michael Turner is the next, from whom they took, Mich. Turner.
l. s. d. Nine Ewes 13 10 00 And from John Newland, One Beast, worth 02 06 00

These are part of the Sufferings of the Innocent, and of the John Newland
Men of Sandwitch, and of the People of Plimmouth Patent Jurisdiction; which I
have set down, to the End that all may see what they have suffered, and what
are the Sufferings of the People of the Lord in that Colony. I have not set
down all, nor is all come to my hands; but by what I have done as to the
Inhabitants of one Town; and to some of them, and that in a short space of time
the rest may be judged; and in what a Condition (as to Men) those Servants of
the Lord, and the rest are, who and their Wives, Children and Families, lie
under the Cruelty of such Oppressors, both as to their Persons and Estates; And
how to be considered and tendered; Though as to their Inward man they are free
in the Lord, and rejoice that they have any thing to lose for the Lord, and for
the sake of His Truth, who has showed unto them Mercy, and raised them out of
their Graves, and given them Faith in God, through the Resurrection of the
Dead. Whose is the Praise and the Glory, and the Dominion for ever, for this
His visiting of His Inheritance, and giving them to be able to suffer for his
Name.

Now (as I said) these are not all that might be brought into this Account:
For, Thomas Johnson had his House and Land Tho Johnson.
seized on; and the Marshal's daughter gathered the Fruits of his Orchard; and
when he demanded her Order, she said her Father would bring it (but he brought
none) and other words she said, viz. -- That the Apples, and House and Land was
not theirs; and when the Peaches were ripe, she would come and gather them
also, (A sore Provocation, and enough to have put a Man on the Rack; but he was
preserved quiet in the Will of the Lord, which to him was enough, and gave him
Content, though he was a Cripple, and his Orchard and Garden, and the Fruits
therein, was that which he made use of for the maintenance of him and his
Family.) It was the 25th of the Sixth Month, 1659. that she came to gather the
Fruits.

And, Arthur Howland (a man of near Seventy years of age, Arth. Howland
who had waited for the Salvation of God) living in a Town called Marsfield in
that Patent, and bearing Testimony against the Ministry of Man, now that the
Son is come; They distrained his Iron Furniture belonging to his Draught, which
quite disinabled him from making use of the same, and this for the Priest. And
because he delivered not up Robert Hedgshone (a Servant of the Lord, who so
barbarously suffered in the Dutch Plantation, as hereafter is to be expressed) to
the Constable, who had no Warrant, they sined him Five pounds, and for that
took away (the 28th of the 3d Month, 1658.) a Steer and a Bull, for 28th day,
3d Month, 1658.
that which he conceived himself bound in Conscience to do, and the Instrument
of O. P. (then in force) allowed to be done. Yet this would not satisfy them,
but such was their Rage at the Old Man, that to Prison they would have, and to
Prison they committed him in the depth of Winter, which as to men was as much
as his Life, as was his coming thither, though he Appealed to the Chief
Magistrate in England; for it was his An Appeal to England Denied.
Life they sought, and his Life they would have had (through such hardships as
these, if those hardships to him by reason of his Age would have done it, I
speak as to men) had not his Brother and Friends (who could not bear it)
entered into a Bond for him. Thus (as you) neither regarding the Old man, nor
the Young; neither the Hoary head, nor him that leans on his staff by reason
of Age.

I might also speak of Henry Howland of Duxbury aforesaid, Hen. Howland.
who for having a Meeting of Friends in his House, and not Swearing to make him
a Jury-man, was sined Thirty shillings, which was levied upon him.

Further I might go, and relate of those who bore Testimony to your Faces in
your Courts, against your Unjust Proceedings, and oppressing of the Innocent,
whom ye imprisoned; as Nicholas Davis, who being by at the Court in the 4th
Month, 1659. Nich. Davis.
when so many of the Friends of Truth were had before them, and sentenced for
their refusing to swear in obedience to the Lord; and seeing how slight they
made of the Marshal's Cruelty, and his wicked and unjust usages of them as
aforesaid, and destroying their Cattle, and vexing of them; Spreading his Arms
abroad, spoke in the Testimony and Zeal of the Lord -- That he was a Witness
for the Lord against their Oppression -- and would have declared wherein, but
they suffered him not to speak, and for speaking what he did, committed him to
Prison. About which time also you imprisoned Will. Leddra and Peter Pearson,
Will. Leddra. Peter Pearson.
and continued them Prisoners about Ten Months in Plimmouth.

But in these things (as I have said) I may not be too particular, lest these
few Sheets of Paper (which are already thus many) should be increased into a
Volumn; There being so much, and of such varieties to speak, What I have said,
being sufficient to evince to any sober men and of reasonable understandings,
That never since the Earth was made, and the Foundations thereof laid, was
there (all things considered) such Abominable Wickedness and Cruelty acted
under the vizor of Religion.

And here I may not only be confined, but to the next Plantation Sufferings in
New Haven Colony.
I must pass, to wit, That of New Haven, and there account with you (sor
through your Encouragement it was (as I have said) and by your Instigation,
that these things have been done) for what was done in that Colony.

Humphry Norton, coming into Southhold in his way to the Dutch Plantation,
whither he was going to visit the Seed of the Humph. Norton
Lord, was that Evening apprehended, without being asked Apprehended,
which way he traveled, or whither, and committed to the Committed,
Marshal, and conveyed by Water to New Haven, and there cast into Prison, and
chained to a Post, and kept night and day Cast into Prison, Chained to a Post.
12th Month, 1657. 11th day, first Month, 1658.
for the space of Twenty Days, with great Weights of Iron in an Open Prison,
without Fire or Candle, or any suffered to come to visit him, in the bitter
cold Winter (being the 12th Month, 1657.) Enough (reasonably) to have starved
him: And on the 11th of the first Month, 1658. was had before their Court, and
there was their Priest John Davenport (to whom Humphry had sent some Queries)
And this Priest spoke as he pleased before the People, and that in Answer to
the Queries. And H. A Key tied athwart Hump. Nortons mouth whilst the Priest
was speaking. The Priests Security.
Norton endeavored to make a Reply, but was not suffered so to do, but instead
thereof, had a great Iron Key tied athwart his Mouth, till the Priest had done
(see what shifts the Priests make to secure what they say) who then sled away.
After this H. Norton was had to Prison, and there detained for the space of Ten
days, and then sentenced to be severely whipped, and to be burnt in the hand
with the Letter [H] for Heresy (who was convicted Sentenced to be severely
whipped, and to be burnt in the hand etc. and Banished.
of none) and to be sent out of the Colony, and not to return upon pain of the
Utmost Penalty they could inflict by Law; and to pay Ten pounds toward the
Charge of the Court and Colony; And this to be done that Afternoon, as said the
Judge. And the Drum was beat, and the People gathered, and he fetched, and
stripped to the Waste, and set with his Back to the Magistrates, and given The
Sentence Executed.
(in their view) Thirty six cruel Stripes; and then turned, and his Face set to
them, and his Hand made fast in the Stocks (where they had set his Body before)
and burnt very deep with a Red hot Tron; And then let loose, and had to Prison
again, and tendered his Liberty, upon paying of the Fine and Fees, and there
kept, till paid by a Dutch man (whose face he never saw before) viz. Twenty
Nobles, which he paid for his Fine and Fees, out of Bowels of Compassion, when
they had none engaged unto them to pay (without his consent) and which they
wickedly received, not any one else appearing with him, or for him (so great
was their Cruelty) only the Marshal would have forced Salves upon him for the
killing of the Fire in his Hand; the which he refused: whereupon the Marshal
asked him the reason why? being much tormented (for he was a very wicked man)
-- He answered, I cannot suffer a Dog to lick my Sores -- (besides, the Lord
healed him) Am I a Dog then? said the Marshal. When they had whipped Humphry with
that Cruelty as asoresaid, and burnt him in the Hand, and had let him loose
from the Stocks, he kneeled down and prayed to the Lord, uttering his Voice
toward Heaven; to the Astonishment of them all.

To this Colony also came William Brend (of whom I have Will. Brend, Mary Dyar.
spoken) and diverse other Servants of the Lord, as Mary Dyar, who coming
thither, was forced away; being set on a Horse by them, she cried out, Woe be
unto you for Humphry Nortons sake, woe be unto you because of the Cruelty done
to him! But they turned away the Ear, and would nothearken; Mary Weatherhead,
and Mary Weatherhead and others.
others: but they were not suffered to speak, or to discharge their
Consciences, or to unburthen themselves of the Weight of the Word of the Lord,
which lay upon them; but were threatened, and sent away in the nature of
Banishment; and Mary Weatherhead finished her Work in the Sea, and returned not
to the place from whence she came. A true Figure of the state of the What her
sinking in the Sea signified.
Men of this place, who refused the Loving Kindness of the Lord, and the Tender
Visitation of his Love by his Messengers, whom he raises early and sends, whom
they thus evil-entreat, and abuse; and so judge themselves unworthy of Eternal
Life, and provoke the Wrath of the Lord to come upon them to the Uttermost. So
the Lord is clear of their Blood, whether they will hear or forbear, and they
shall know that his Prophets have been amongst them, in the Day wherein the
Lord will judge the secrets of all hearts by the Man whom He has ordained
thereunto, whereof He has given Assurance unto all men, in that He has raised
him from the Dead; who is King of kings, and Lord of lords; who only has
Immortality and Eternal Life; to whom be Glory, and Praise, and Dominion
Everlasting: who comes in Clouds, and every Eye shall see Him; those also who
have pierced Him; and all Nations shall wail because of Him; even so Amen: Who
is Alpha and Omega, the first and the last; He that was, and which is, and
which is to come; the Lord God Almighty; who was dead, and is alive, and behold
He lives for evermore, and has the Keys of Hell and of Death; who will render
to every man according to his Works, Amen, Hallelujah, Blessing, Honor, Glory
and Power be unto Him that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and
ever.

So see where you are, and in what case, ye Blood-thirsty Enemies of God; Ye
Men of Boston, of Plimmouth Patent and New Haven; Ye Rulers of Sodom and
Inhabitants of Gomorrah, who are hardened against the hour of your Visitation;
whose Day is over; who delight in Blood, in the Blood of the Saints of the Most
High God; to whom Blood will be given, for ye are worthy; The Lord will come
upon ye, you that put his Day afar off, and say, he delays his coming: I say,
He will come upon you in a day that ye think not of, and in an hour of which ye
are not aware; and will cut you assunder, and appoint you your Portion with
Hypocrites and Sinners, and ye shall be cast into the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone, there to be tormented with the Devil and his Angels; which
is the second death. It is so, it must be fulfilled; the Judgment is gone
forth, it may not be revoked; Your Day is done, The Measure of your Iniquity is
near at the full; The Deliverance of his People is at hand: You shall all of
you receive according to your works: The Night is far spent, the Day is at
hand, even the Day which shall not have an end, the Everlasting Day, the Day of
the Lord, which will be Darkness unto you, and not Light; a Day of Gloominess
and thick Darkness unto you; a Day of Sorrow and of the Shadow of Death: But a
Day of Joy to the Righteous, and of Gladness of heart, a Day of Singing and of
making Melody; a Day of Shouting, and of great Joy, which shall last for
evermore, Amen; it is done. These Things are Faithful and True; the true
sayings of God, who lives for ever, who is Great and Terrible; whose Day is
come, wherein He will be avenged on you, for the Blood of his Saints, and the
Sufferings of his Servants, who have laid down their Lives, and suffered for
his Name; who have the Testimony of Jesus, which is the Spirit of Prophecy;
whom Ye have done Despite unto, and to their Message, and to Him that sent
them; and shed their Blood, and have thought Ye could never do Enough against
that Name; and have persecuted them from Town to Town, and from Colony to
Colony, those who have born it; and evil-entreated them, and sought to have cut
them off; (and have cut off some, He suffering ye so to do, that ye might show
what ye would do, and that it may appear that it is his Arm that stops ye, that
suffered ye so to do) and their Name and their Remembrance from the Earth; and
to leave them neither Name or Remnant; whom ye can never destroy (mind what I
say) nor wear out, though ye have tried it as ye could, and may be suffered yet
a little longer to fill up your Measure: But then shall your Destruction come,
and that in a Moment, and the Righteous shall have Dominion over you in the
Morning; Everlasting Joy shall be upon their heads, and Sorrow and Sighing
shall flee away. And this I testify from the Mouth of the Lord, who has moved
me to speak, and to write this in his Name, that your Judgment ye may bear in
this World, as well as in that which is to come; and be an Example of his
Vengeance to the Ages to come, as ye have been in Wickedness and Oppressing the
Just, and making sad the heart of the Righteous, whom the Lord has not made
sad; and destroying his Heritage, and laying waste his Pleasant Place in which
he delights to dwell for ever and ever; by your Cruelty and Blood, and grinding
of the faces of the Poor, and eating up the Needy, as one would eat Bread; The
Lord God will come swiftly upon you, and will remove you, and overturn you, and
be glorified in what He shall bring upon you, and ye shall know that He is the
LORD, and that He has done all these things unto you for your manifold
Transgressions, and your mighty Sins; who afflict the Just, and hate him that
reproves in the Gate, and abhor him that speaks uprightly; whose Treading is
upon the Poor, and who take from him Burdens of Wheat, and turn aside the Poor
in the Gate from their Right: I say, Ye shall know that He is the LORD, and
that He is in these People, whom ye have set at naught and reviled, and abused
and evil-entreated His Witnesses, and those He has sent amongst ye to turn ye
unto Him, who is Lord and King; and that there is Salvation in no other, nor
any other Name under Heaven given among Men whereby we must be saved; who is
the Light of the World, the true Light that lights every man that comes into
the World; who will judge ye for ever; whose Judgment is just; whose Judgment
this is; who is King of Righteousness, and King of Peace; of the Increase of
whose Government and Peace there shall be no end upon the Throne of David to
order it, and stablish it with Judgment and with Justice, henceforth even for
ever.

And thus have I dealt with you together, and together wrapped ye up, like as ye
have been folden together as Thorns, and drunk as Drunkards; and while ye be
folden together as Thorns, and while ye are drunk as Drunkards, ye shall be
overtaken, and your Day shall come upon you, and you shall fall, and rise no
more, says the Lord; and you shall leave your Name a Curse unto his Chosen, who
shall dwell in the Land and inherit it; and He will be unto them a God, and
they shall be to Him a People (those that ye have thus set at naught and
abused, and sought to root out, and cared not what Cruelty ye caused them to
undergo for that purpose, without Mercy, or Bowels or Compassion) And Judgment
without Mercy ye shall have, that have showed no Mercy; And the Lord God shall
stay you, and call his Servants by another Name, And ye shall be for a Taunt,
and a Reproach, and a Hissing, and a Proverb, and a perpetual Desolation, says
the Lord; and my Hand shall be stretched out against you, I will not spare you,
nor pity you (as ye have showed none) nor will I have Mercy, but my Judgment
shall take hold on you, and my Terror shall seize upon you, and Fear shall be
round about you; Your young men shall fall by the Sword, your Wives shall be
Widows, and your Children fatherless, they shall be continually Vagabonds, and
beg, and seek their Bread also out of their Desolate places; and I will
accomplish my Wrath upon you in your Destruction; and your Carcasses shall
fall, and be as Dung on the face of the Earth; and the Worm shall be spread
under ye, and the Worms shall cover you. They shall not say of you, Ah, Lord!
nor, Ah! his Glory, but ye shall be cast forth without the Gates, and be buried
with the Burial of an Ass, The Mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken it. And
ye shall know that I am the Lord, when I have finished the Thoughts of my Heart
upon you, and have laid you low, even in the Dust; and Men shall fear because
of you, and what I will do unto you, says the Lord: And mine Indignation shall
smoke against you; and a fire shall be kindled in my Wrath, which shall burn to
the nethermost Hell; and it shall devour you as Stubble fully dry; and your
Iniquity shall lie upon your Bones, and you shall descend into the Pit, and
there your Iniquity shall be visited upon you, says the LORD, the Mighty God,
the Holy One of Israel, and his King, who lives for ever; to whom is the
Glory, and the Praise, and the Dominion for ever. The Burden of New England is
ended.

Yet have I not done with you, but must have another Reckoning Sufferings of
Friends in the Dutch Plantation by occasion of the New English. Rob. Hodgshone
for what the Servants of the Lord have suffered by occasion of You, in other
as well as these Plantations.

Robert Hodgshone, a Servant of the Lord being at Hempstead in the Dutch
Plantation in America near to New England, and waiting there for Friends coming
together in a Meeting, as he was walking in the Orchard, an Officer came and
violently laid hold on him, and brought him before one Gildersleave an
Englishman, and a Magistrate there, who committed him to Prison, and rode to
the Dutch Governor and acquainted him therewith, and came from him with a Guard
of Musketeers, and the Fiscal, who laid hold of him and searched him, and took
away his Knives and Papers, and Bible, and so pinioned him all the Night and
the next Day, that he could hardly help or refresh himself any ways; and made
diligent Enquiry after those that had entertained him, and took into Custody
Two Women upon occasion thereof; One of whom had two small Children, the one
sucking at her Breast; and got a Cart and conveyed the Women away in it, and
Robert also, whom they fastened to the hinder part of the Cart, pinioned, and so
drew him and them through the Woods in the Night season, whereby he was much
torn and abused: And at the Town called New-Amsterdam, loosed him, and led him
by the Rope with which he was fastened to the Cart, to the Dungeon, into which
he was Cast (a filthy, miry, unholsom place, and full of Vermin) and the Two
Women to another place, and there continued them during their pleasures.

Their Court coming to sit, they called him before them, and took his
Examination in writing, and committed him to the Dungeon again, and afterward
had him forth, and read this Sentence to him in their own Language, which the
aforesaid Capt. Willet of Plimmouth Patent (who was much the occasion of his
Sufferings, by incensing the Governor against him, and those People with Lies
and Falsehoods, who before was moderate to them, and Robert was with him) which
was to this Effect -- It is the General's Pleasure that you work two years at
the Wheel-barrow with a Negro, or pay, or cause to be paid Six hundred Gilders.
--

To this he attempted to make his Defense in a sober Reply, but he was not
suffered to speak, but was had away, and returned to the Dungeon again, and
there kept; and no English suffered to come to him for several days. Then they
took him out, and pinioned him, and set his Face toward the Court-Chamber, and
took off his Hat, and read another Sentence to him in Dutch, which he
understood not; but many of that Nation who heard it, shook their heads; and
when it was done, cast him into the Dungeon again.

Out of which, after certain days, they drew him betimes in a Morning, and
chained him to a Wheelbarrow, and commanded him to work -- he answered, He was
never brought up, nor used to that Work. -- Upon which they caused a Negro to
take a Pitched Rope, nigh four Inches about, and to beat him; Who beat him with
it till Robert fell down. Then they took him up, and caused the Negro to beat
him with the said Rope until he fell down the second time: It was judged that
he received about One hundred blows with the Rope as aforesaid. Then they
forced him up with the Barrow to the Fort before the Governors House, and
complained to him, that they could not make him work; and continued him chained
to the Barrow all that day till about the Seventh or Eighth hour at night
(about the middle of which the Sun shining very hot, and his Body being much
bruised, and swelled with the Blows, and kept without Food, he was very faint,
and sat upon the Ground, waiting on the Lord, who was near unto him, and
refreshed him, and made him whole) and then they loosed him, and put him in the
Dungeon until the Morning, and then had him forth about the 6th hour, at which
time they locked him to the Barrow, as before, and a Sentinel set over him, that
none might come so much as to speak with him, and there kept till the 7th at
night, and then had to the Dungeon, and the next day had forth and chained in
like manner, and then loosed, and had before the Governor, who demanded of him
to work, Otherwise (he said) he should be whipped every day. Robert asked the
Governor, What Law he had broken? and called for his Accusers, that he might
know his Transgression; and told him, that if he were called to that work of
the Lord, he should not refuse it -- Then he was chained to the Barrow again,
and threatened, that if he spoke to any one, he should be punished worse. Yet
his Mouth was opened to such as came to him, as he found it of the Lord. Then
they seeing that they could not keep him silent, put him into the Dungeon
again, and kept him close there several days, and two nights, one day and a
half of it, without Bread or Water.

After this they took him sorth very early in the Morning into a private
Chamber, and stripped him to the waste, and hung him up by the Hands, and tied
a great Log of Wood to his Feet, so that he could not turn his Body, and set a
strong Negro with Rods to whip him, who laid many stripes upon him both
backwards and forwards, which cut his Flesh very much, and drew much Blood.

Then they let him down, and put him into the Dungeon (too bad a place for
Swine, being a stinking hole, full of Vermin) not suffering any to come to him,
or to wash his stripes.

Within Two days after they had him forth again, and hung him up as before,
and the Jailer being very drunk, forced another Negro to lay many more stripes
upon him, who seeing no End of their Cruelty, but in his Life, which they
sought after, and being weary and faint; for it was hard to bear, but the Lord
was near him, who suffered them not to take away his Life, which they drove at,
and which was very near the taking away, He enabling him to bear, to see how
far they would go; and being near, that it might not be taken away, gave him
freedom to desire some time to consider, and to suffer some English to come at
him; Which was granted, and an English Woman came, and washed his stripes; who
seeing him brought so low in Body through those cruel Sufferings, was so in the
sense thereof that she thought he would not live till the next morning, and so
she told her Husband; which took such Impression upon him, that he went to the
Fiscal, and proffered him a fat Ox to suffer him to be at his house until he
was well: But the Fiscal would not, unless the whole Fine was paid; which many
gladly would have done, but he could not suffer it. And within Three days
after he was thus whipped, was he made whole, and as strong as ever, and free to
labor.

This his freedom to labor was a great Torment to them on the other hand,
whose Aim by their Cruelty, was to get Money; and a great Trouble it was to
many both Dutch and English, that he could not Consent for the Fine to be paid
(for they tendered his Sufferings) but rather would work, that he might not be
burthensom to any; Nor could he eat the Governors Bread, except he Wrought for
it; Notwithstanding that little besides was brought to him, being not suffered
so to be; and that which he Wrought for was so course, that it troubled tender
People that he should eat it, being such as they gave their Slaves; he choosing
rather from a Contented Mind (being strong in the Lord, who had made him whole)
so to do, than to put any to charge; being unfree so much as to receive of them
to whom he ministered (the English that live there) because he saw how the Dutch
sought to ensnare them; under whom they are in great Servitude, who went
thither from the Plantations in New England to enjoy their Consciences.

So his Life grew over them, and the Lord was with him; And after that he had
accomplished the measure of his Sufferings for the Seeds sake there, which the
Lord suffered them to inflict upon him, to try how far they would go, and to
disappoint them in their End; in a very short time he was delivered out of
Prison, contrary to the Expectation of his Enemies, without paying One Penny,
or any One for him. In their wills be could not work, and suffered for it; in
the Will of the Lord he wrought, and was delivered for his Faithfulness to Him:
The Governors Sister was instrumental in his Liberty, whom his Sufferings took
deep upon, and being very sad, he asked the Cause, which she told him, and he
set him free. Nor was the said Willet without his sense, but it was the Guilt
which was upon him, because he was the occasion of his Sufferings by Lies and
Wickedness to advance his Merchandise the better, who was there a Factor, and
to get in with the Governor, and that he was guilty was well known to the
People.

Much more might be said of the Sufferings of these People in the Dutch
Plantation (who are too much enclining to Cruelty themselves) through your
Encouragement: For the Governor was very moderate before, when Robert was with
him, and his Sister was the Means in which the Lord moved to work his Liberty,
as I have said: but this Willet it was of Plimmouth Patent (who had his hand so
deep there in the Sufferings of the Innocent as aforesaid) that made him Wrath,
and so incensed him, that he grew very fierce and into great Enmity against
them, and made a Law (through Example of You) That those who received any of
them into their Houses, should pay Fifty Pounds Sterling; one Third part to the
Informer, who should be concealed (the better to Encourage them in their
Wickedness) And that if any Vessel should bring any of them into that
Jurisdiction, it should be forfeited with the Goods (a high Imbargo) And so set
he was against Liberty of Conscience, that he said, -- That the Liberty of his
Brother Henry' s Conscience was in his Breast, striking his hand upon it; And
if but One were Entertained, and that but One Night, it was Fifty pounds
Sterling (a sore Imposition, and full of Cruelty, taught by You)
Notwithstanding there were that entertained them willingly, for which some were
imprisoned, and some sined; as John Tilton, and Joan Chatterton, and Henry
Townsend, who was fined Five hundred John Tilton. Joan Chatterton. Hen.
Townsend. 7th day, 6th Month, 1658. Tobias Foak. Edward Heart.
Gilders, and threatened to be sent out of the Jurisdiction, about the Seventh
of the Sixth Month, 1658. And Tobias Feak, and Edward Heart (Englishmen and
Officers in the Town of Ulissing (or Flushing) in New-Netherlands, on Long
Island) were cast into Prison, because they could not prosecute the Dutch
Governors Orders against these People in that Town. And the said Henry Townsend
being called before the Governor and Court, Hen. Townsend
and demanded to pay the Fine, and he answering, -- That his Person and Estate
was under their hands, and they might take it if they would, but he could not
pay the Fine. They suffered him not to speak any more, but forthwith cast him
into Prison, even into a miry Dungeon in the Winter season, about the middle of
the Eleventh Month, 1657. Nine days after which he wrote to the Governor and
Fiscal, -- That he could not pay the Money 11th March, 1657.
upon that Account, although he lay in an Irkesom Prison, and was of a weak
Constitution, and sickly; and prohibited his Wife and Friends from giving them
any thing, Notwithstanding the Cry of her and her small Children, who could not
bear his sore Sufferings. But the Season being so cold, and his Wife and
Friends in such fear that he would by reason thereof there perish, and they
apprehending such a Necessity of his Presence at home, they came under, and
gave his Persecutors Two young Oxen and a Horse, (which was all he had) for his
Liberty, who had it thereupon. And Mary Weatherhead, and Dorothy Waugh Mary
Weatherhead. Dorothy Waugh
(Two Maidens) who came out of England) for speaking in the Streets of
New-Amsterdam, were cast into a Miry Dungeon, and there kept for the space of
Eight days; In which it was supposed they could not have lived; And then were
had through the Street to a Boat with Rods tied at their Backs, and sent for
Rhoad Island.

And this is the Entertainment which the Servants of the Lord met with in the
Dutch Plantation, the New-Netherlands (as it is called) near New England, when
they went to Visit the Seed of God there, and which their Brethren, the English
that resided there, who endure much servitude for their Conscience sake under
them to enjoy it, and went thither formerly (as I have said) out of the New
English to Enjoy it, who watch all Occasions against them, and took this for
One, and so dealt with them through the Example of you, and the Instigation (in
particular) of Captain Willet aforesaid, who were not content to bring them
under Sufferings, in New England, so as to force them to quit the Land to Enjoy
their Conscience and Live with Strangers who came out of England with you to
enjoy their Conscience, but followed them there, and incensed the Strangers
against them, who before let them (and they might have so done to this day)
live in peace, which has produced the Effects aforesaid, for which you must
Answer to the Lord in the Day which is near, wherein he will Judge every man
according to his Works.

Yet a little more, and then I have done with You; for I am now coming back
again, to your own doors, and there sealing up your sum in relation to the
Sufferings of your own Jurisdiction, whom ye have caused to suffer since the
time of your putting those to death, and to the Sufferings in the Colony of
Canecticote, of which I have spoken.

Several of Salem Friends ye Committed and have continued Edw. Warton, Mary
Trask. John Smith. Marg. Smith of Salem. Robert and Deborah, Harper. of
Sandwitch. W. Christison. W. King. Marth. Standly. Mary Write. W. Ledra.
Banished.
them long Prisoners at Boston, as M. Trask, John Smith, Margaret Smith, Edward
Wharton and others; Robert Harper also of Sandwitch, and Deborah, ye Committed
likewise; And these were in your Prison the Thirtieth of the Tenth Month 1660.
Several ye Banished upon pain of Death, as VVinlock Christison, and Will. King
of Salem, and Martha Standly, a Maid belonging to England, and Mary Write of
Oyster Bay in Long Island; who gave her Testimony against You for your Cruelty
in putting Mary Dier to Death, whose Blood ye also thirsted after because of
it: Amongst which William Ledra is one (upon whom your Cruelry has often
Exceeded) he was then in your hands, as having returned into your Jurisdiction
after Banishment; yet to try your Bloody Law as to Death, whom by a Chain ye
have fastened to a Logg.

Joseph Nicholson and his Wife came in the Movings of the Joseph Nicholson and
his Wife.
Lord to Sojourn with you; and of you to Sojourn amongst ye they demanded it,
as they in right might on as good terms as you came thither first to Inhabit,
but it they could not have, but instead thereof were committed to Prison, and
Banished upon Pain of Death; (whose business from England was to Sojourn among
you, and against whom you had nothing; yet so ye did unto them though she was
great with Child, and her Condition such therewith, that she could not go forth
of Prison, till the last day limited by you, nor he from her, she being in that
Condition) after which day if found in your Jurisdiction, they were to die by
your Law; after whom ye sent, and apprehended he was at Salem, whither he went
that day with his Wife, who there fell in Travel, and suffered he was not to
stay to see how it might be ordered as to his Wife, but had to Boston he was,
in the way whereunto he was met with an Order sent on horseback, by your Deputy
Governor, Richard Bellingham, to have him thither, and thither he was had, and
there Committed, and his Wife with him after she was Delivered, and was come
thither, and both of them ye had before you after ye had Condemned Mary Dier,
the second time to Death, even that very Day, and in the time that ye had Mary
Dier to the Execution, and in which she was Executed; ye had them both before
ye again, to see if the terror that might have been in such a thing could have
frighted them. But the Power of the Lord in them was above you all, and they
feared not your Fears nor were afraid of your Threats, but boldly stood it out
with you, in his Eternal Power (as did also Mary Dier first and last, as I have
Declared) and bad you do it when ye told them of the thing, that is to say, of
putting of them to Death, thinking to fear them; but yet ye could not do it,
though fain ye would, and your Desire was so to do, and your Wills, (for which
you shall Answer as if ye had shed their Blood, for it was in your heart so to
do, and there ye Murdered them) but you feared the Consequence, they coming to
Sojourn among you as Freeborn English, and you denying of them their
birthright, and instead of admitting them to live amongst ye (which you could
not deny, they having not done any thing whereby to cut them off from such
their Privilege) having Imprisoned them, and Banished them upon Pain of Death
as aforesaid, and in that Barbarous manner, and with the greatest
hard-heartedness, halled him from his Wife, when she was in Travel, in Order to
put him to Death, and which might have cost her (in that condition) according
to men) her Life also, and of the Little One with which she was in Travel to
bring it into the World. (Such Inhumanities as these, and Cruel Workings,
England has not heard of, to have been before done in any of her
Jurisdictions, for to have destroyed them all ye thought, Father, Mother, and
Infant, at once, but could not by this way, nor dared by the other because of
your Own Necks, should ye have done it) So ye set them at Liberty, who over all
your heads Departed your Jurisdiction in the Will of God, having tried you, to
try the rest, and to Plimmouth Patent they went (where VVinlock Christison
Winlock Christison.
had been Imprisoned, and Suffered twenty seven cruel Stripes on his naked body
at one time, laid on with Deliberation (so was the word of the Magistrates, who
stood to see it) in the Cold Winter season, who bad the Jailer so to do, and to
lay it on hard, who laid it on as hard as he could) and then Robbed him of his
Wastcoate (though in that Cold time of the year he was to pass through hardship
in going through a Wilderness) and of his Bible, which the Jailer took for
Fees; Who came about Midnight, much in Drink, the night before, and had them
away though his Demand was but five Shillings; (So Depriving him of the
Scriptures, as your Jailer did some of those that came to you, of which I have
spoken) and then turned him out in the Morning in the Cold, having not Clothes
sufficient left him by you to keep him from it, after ye had kept him without
food from the time of his said Cruel Whipping to his said turning out, (as he
was five Days upon his first Commitment not suffering him to have any for his
Money) nor letting others to supply him, but stopping up the very holes to
hinder any supply, the Jailer saying when he stopped them up, that at such places
he might be supplied with Provisions; and keeping it so until he asked them,
Whether they meant to Starve him? And the Power of the Lord was in it, and
constrained them to allow him Provisions of three Pence a day, for five weeks,
such as the Jailer would give him, who took away his Waste-coat and Bible as
aforesaid, as Blood-thirsty Barloe robbed him of his two other Coats, and Hat,
and bag of Linen, worth upwards of four pounds, when he Apprehenden him at
Sandwitch, a little after he came thither from your Prison in Boston, after ye
had Banished him upon Pain of Death, and kept him fourteen Weeks and two Days
there, in the coldest time of the Winter season, and committed his two Friends
of Salem that came with him to Boston. And thus was he Whipped, and thus was he
Robbed, and thus was he turned out after that Tho. Prince the Governor and
Magistrates, had caused him to be tied Neck and Heels for speaking for himself
in the Court, (most Cruel Tyranny) who denied him Satisfaction for his Goods
Robbed by Barloe as aforesaid, when he was had to the Whipping Post, and with
much ado, had obtained so much Moderation of the Governor, as to hear him
thereabouts (such was their Rage in Whipping of him) who said in Answer, --
That he must first pay for his Preaching, (this is the Justice of the men of
Plimmouth Patent, in place to do Justice, Thieves and Robbers, and Abettors of
such; In stead of causing Satisfaction to be made, and causing the Innocent
cruelly to suffer who demand Satisfaction, even by the hand of them who
Committed it on them, which God will Reward who is near to render unto them
according to their Deeds; and all this matter was but for coming into their
Jurisdiction, when he was banished out of yours. Was ever the like
hardheartedness heard of, or Barbarous Cruelty?) I say, Joseph Nicholson and
his Wife being thus turned out of your Jurisdiction, and denied to Sojourn
there, and dealt with as aforesaid, were to demand it of Plimmouth Patent;
(This another Habitation of Cruelty, and Persecuting the Just) and thither they
came, and Demanded to Sojourn in that Jurisdiction, but neither there could
they be admitted, (the same Spirit ruling in Plimmouth Patent as in Boston) and
so the Magistrates caused them to understand, when they told them, -- That if
they had turned them away at Boston, they would have nothing to do with them,
-- (how exactly do they Write after your Copy?) And his Wife had much to do
with them, and they threatened to Whip her, (if they had ever a Cage) and send
her away; and One of them said, -- That if she had not been a Witch, she could
not have known that he that was with his son was a Priest, -- whom by the
Spirit of the Lord she knew to be such, and so spoke to him, (thus does the
blind World judge of the Revelation of the Spirit, by which the Prophet Ahijah
knew when the Wife of Jeroboam came in disguise to him, and he said, Come in
thou Wife of Jeroboam, why feignest thou thy self to be another? And by which
the Prophets knew and foretold things to come; and Jeroboam might have said,
had not he been a Witch, he could not have told that it was his Wife when she
came to him so disguised, on the very same ground as did this Magistrate; but
these things I spare, being so plain and manifest) So they passed away in the
Moving of the Lord to Rhoad Island, after they had been twenty four Weeks
Prisoners in your Slaughterhouse at Boston, that is to say, Joseph Nicholson,
twenty four Weeks, and his Wife eighteen; And after they had received your
Cruelty as to her Life, who might have perished in her Travil (as aforesaid)
but this was the thing ye desired as to her and the rest, as your Words and
Deeds have made manifest, so that it might be with safety to your selves, which
was your wariness indeed, not that it was your Love to those People, whom ye
sought to Destroy, but therein had not your Wills, though ye have been suffered
to put some of them to Death, that what ye would do, and what was in your
hearts might be made manifest. And eight more when Joseph and his Wife passed
from Boston, were in Prison, who by Your bloody Law were in condition of
Banishment upon Pain of Death, so to root them out; This being the often
Expression of some of Dan. Denison aforesaid in Particular.
you, -- That they or you must give way, (and why cannot ye Live together,
seeing ye were made of One Blood, and to breath in one Air, and the Bishops
might with as much Justice have used the same Argument as you.) And your M.
General Denison often said in Court (as I have alleged) That they and you
could not well live together, (Your minds are very great, that would swell
bigger than the Ordinance of the God of Heaven, who has made mankind to dwell
on all the face of the Earth) and that at Present the Power was in your hands,
(but Know ye how long it will be? Wisdom would have tought ye, had ye kearkened
unto it, to have done by Men Whilst ye are in Power, as ye would have done to
your selves when ye are Out, and as it was not done unto you when ye were
under, who even now are under another Jurisdiction.) and the rest must fend off
(as I have said) said he. So mind your State, and how ye have given Law against
your selves; A Law making it death directly or indirectly, to seek the
Alteration of the Government.
You should have been absolute first, had ye been wise Men, and made your
selves so, viz. Independent from England, as your Action bespoke your Mind in
making it Death Directly or Indirectly to seek the Alteration of Your
Government, which was upon the endeavoring of some by Petition to England, to
have their Grievances redrest, before any of the People called Quakers came
into Your Jurisdiction, whom You used at Your pleasure, and to prevent them,
formed this Law, that all things might be secure in your hands; and so far ye
proceeded further, That neither Oliver, nor his Son Richard were Proclaimed
Protectors, not that Ye liked them not, but that ye thought them so much your
Friends, as that by the Indulgence of them ye might get clear of England,
though ye pretended something else, viz. the Danger of some Body, who which
that some Body was, it may be judged; And One Rogers Priest of Rowley.
One of your Priests said, by such as Endeavored by Petition to England to
have Redress, -- That if they had their due they should be led up Windmil-Hill,
that is, to the Gallows, in plain English to be Hanged; For on Windmil-Hill
stood the Gallows at Bostow: And some of the said Petitioners were taken and
Imprisoned, and Fined, in great sums of Money for so doing. As Doctor Child,
Samuel Maverick, David Yeal, Doctor Child. Sam. Miverick David Yeal, etc.
Imprisoned for endeavoring to Petition to England, for redress of their
grievances. This was before friends came to New England* and those this Priest
for so doing would have had hanged.
and others that were Merchants, whom ye Sought to find out (viz. the
Petitioners) by putting some to an Oath (in the Nature of that Ex Officio) to
accuse any but themselves, which one of them resolving not to take, and yet
afterward doing, was so tormented in his Spirit, that he died miserable. And
this is something of the Provision ye have made against your Dependency on
England; and upon which none durst from that time upon their Lives Petition to
England for Redress of any Grievance whatsoever; And this is the Tyranny under
which does lie the People of New England, and upon Account of this, Appeals to
England have been denied, of which I have spoken. Now this was upon a Petition
wherein they desired to be ruled according to the Laws of England, and that
they might have the Liberty of English men, or else they intended to Petition
to Enland, which was put into the Court at Boston, where it kindled a great
fire against the Petitioners, and most of the Pulpits rang of it (see how the
Priests are in all Places the Trumpeters of Rebellion, whose Interest (as it
appears) is to be severed from England) and to make some of them Examples (that
is to hang them) the Magistrates were set on by the Priests, and the said
Priest for One. So they made their Law as aforesaid; And Richard Bellingham,
your Deputy Governor (who deserves not to be named amonst men; Who when in
England, in that day of the Bishops, hid himself under a Bed for fear of an
Appariter, but is now thus Cruel to the Innocent) said to the said Joseph and
his Wife; after that ye had pronounced on them, the Sentence of Banishment upon
Pain of Death. -- That their Law was too strong R. Billinghams wicked speech.
for them, and that they should be Hanged assuredly, (if they should be taken
again after Banishment (in which he lied, for they were before you several
times after their said Banishment, and the time Limited was expired, and yet
they were not Hanged) as they were whom ye had already put to Death, (but the
Lord delivered them out of your hands) and that they would take a Course with
his wife hereafter, (which was after she should be delivered, for she was great
with Child when she was Banished, and this was said when ye Banished her) And
Your Jailer Rejoiced when he met Joseph, as he was in the Way to the Prison
after his Banishment. The Jailer rejoiced that Joseph was come again to be put
to death The Beast of the Court.
Telling him, -- That he (viz. the said Joseph) was come again to see whether
the Gallows would hold him; (as he rejoiced at the sight of some other Friends,
who were sent to Prison for that purpose, of which I have spoken.) And it was
boasted in Court, -- That ye had men in Arms to maintain your Laws, and to
defend your selves, (And what Laws are they? Against Conscience, or for
Religion? and what Religion is it which Men in Arms must maintain? and against
whom are your Arms? Those who do not resist you, and who are few in Number, a
few Men and Women: What Defense is this? If Men in Arms should come to try
you, Would you thus maintain it? I could never find that cruel men dare much to
sight.) -- Such a Generation of Blood-thirsty men, Ravening after the Prey,
after Blood, the Blood of the Innocent, who have been Ancient in your Cruelty,
and have long been filling up your measure, who as soon as you had escaped the
hands of those you feared in England, and gotten large Farms about you, you
sat down at Rest, and then soon began to exrecise Dominion, and became Lords
over the Faith of others, as your Cruel Dealings with Anne Hutcheson and that
Company, stands as a perpetual Record before the Lord against you; Who, because
they differed something from you, nothing would serve your turn, but presently
to Devour them; Who after you had long Imprisoned her many Months, and set men
to keep her: Did you not take away very much from her Husband, to pay the men
wages, and then Banished several of them in the sore Cold Winter season, into
the Wilderness, where was no Habitation, who some of them were forced to dig a
Cave in the Ground on Rhoad Island, to preserve their Lives, the place then
being not Inhabited; and did you not cruely deal with J. Collens, who because
he differed from you in Principle, took him up as he passed through your Colony
not meddling with any, and Imprisoned him, and fined him 100. l. And when he
went but to make his Defense in your Meeting, saying, Men, Brethren and
Fathers, hear ye my Defense, etc. ye would not suffer him to speak further for
himself, but had him to Prison; And after that some of your Patents endeavored
to get in that place (to wit, Rhoad Island) under some of your Governments,
which occasioned some of their farther remove under the Dutch Government, where
they (to wit) Anne Anne Hutcheson and others Murdered.
Hutcheson and her Son Francis, and this Collens abovesaid, her Son in Law,
with others, were Murdered by the Indians; The guilt and weight of whose Blood
lies upon you, as done by you who were People of an honest Life and good
behavior, only differing from you; And it is like Governor John Wintrope,
Senior (who was an honest man, and had some hand in this being drawn to it by
your Priests) was made sensible of it on his Deathbed, when old Dudly, a man
of Blood, and the rest of you, sent to the said John Wintrope to set his hand
to a Paper for the Banishment of one Matthews a Weltch Man, a Priest; which he
refused, telling them he had his hand too much in such things already; but
nothing of all this will work on you, who have more and more gone on in that
Spirit, to the molesting, Whipping, Fining and Imprisoning many honest People,
upon the account of Baptism, and the like: Whose dealings are and have been so
Inhumane, so Barbarous, so Cruel, so Unmerciful, as the like has not been
heard of, nor can be Paralleled by the Records of former Ages in this Nation;
Whose Judgment shall be as are your Presidents. The Lord has spoken it, who
will fulfill it. Sufferings in Canect. Colony. J Copeland. John Rous. Will.
Leddra. W. Brend. Sara Gibbens.


Now as to Canecticote, I have little to say, (as before I have intimated)
only John Copeland, John Rous were put under restraint, and not suffered to
pass the Colony, W. Brend and W. Leddra were also there but not suffered to
abide; Sarah Gibbens and Dorothy Waugh, at Hartford in that Colony (whitherto
Doro Waugh. Joseph and Jane Nicholson New Haven Colony.
they were moved of the Lord) were Imprisoned several days; and some of their
Clothes sold to pay their Fees; and denied to sojourn there the said Joseph
Nicholson and his Wife were; (who went thither from Rhoad Island, being moved
of the Lord to place their Sojourning upon all the Colonies) and the
Commissioners of the Four united Colonies were there, and D. Denison in
particular, who denied them, (though the Governor was Moderate) as did those of
Newhaven, any being amongst them.

And so I have done with you, and the other Colonies and roled ye up and down
in the Blood of the Innocent, as ye have roled your selves up and down in
Innocent Blood; and clothed you with their Sufferings I have, as ye have had
to do in their Sufferings. And the Cup I have filed to you, which ye have
filled unto them, and have doubled it upon you, in the Word of the Lord, who
will fulfill it upon you, and you shall not go haughtily for this time is Evil.
For the Lord my God shall come and all his Saints with Him. A devouring fire
shall go before him, and it shall be very Tempestuous round about him; He shall
call to the Heavens-above, and to the Earth, that he may Judge his People, and
the Heavens shall declare his Righteousness, for God is Judge himself, Selah.
And he will Reprove you, and set your sins in Order before you, and will tear
you in pieces, and there shall be none to Deliver you. So shall ye know that
the Lord he is God, and that there is no other, that his Judgments are true
and righteous altogether. That these are His People, and His Truth they
Witness; That in all their Afflictions He has been Afflicted with them, and
that the Angel of His presence has gone before them; That He has seen their
Afftiction, and heard their Cry, and is come to Deliver them. That you are
Recompensed justly according to your Deeds; That the hour of your Visitation is
over; That your night is come which shall never have end; That Depart ye Cursed
into Everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, Ye must Receive
from the King when he comes in his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him,
then shall he sit upon the throne of his Glory, and all Nations shall be
gathered before Him; and He shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd
does his Seep from the Goats, and He shall set the Sheep on his right hand, but
the Goats on the left. And the King shall say to them on his right hand, Come
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the
Foundation of the World. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat, I was
thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me in, naked, and
ye clothed me, I was sick, and ye Visited me, I was in Prison, and ye came
unto me. Then shall the Righteous Answer him saying, Lord, when saw we thee an
hungered and fed thee? and thirsty, and gave thee drink? when saw we thee a
stranger, and took thee in? or naked and clothed thee? Or, when saw we thee
sick or in Prison, and came unto thee? And the King shall Answer, and say unto
them, Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my Brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say unto
them on the left hand, Depart from me ye Cursed into everlasting fire prepared
for the Devil, and his Angels: For I was an hungered, and ye gave me no meat, I
was thirsty and ye gave me no drink; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in;
naked, and ye clothed me not; sick and in prison, and ye Visited me not; Then
shall they Answer him saying, Lord, When saw we thee an hungered, or a thirst,
or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister unto thee?
Then shall he Answer them, saying, Verily, I say unto you, in as much as ye did
it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these shall go
away into Everlasting Punishment, but the righteous into Life Eternal. And so I
have sealed up your Sum.

THE END.
A Few Words to the KING, and both Houses of PARLIAMENT, and the Rulers and
People of these Nations, as a WARNING from the LORD.
AND now, Ye Inhabitants of these Nations, Ye Princes and Rulers thereof, and
Thou King CHARLES, and Thy Two Houses of Parliament; be ye all warned in the
Word of the Lord, Whose Word and Warning it is, how ye tread the steps of
these, or of the Men that have gone before you; Meddling with Conscience (the
Dominion of God) Persecuting Men for their Conscience to God, and causing them
to suffer for their Consciences, as has been in these Nations; For if you do,
and Forget the Lord, and be Unmindful of Him that formed you, of the Rock that
begat you; who has done great Things for you, and Wonderful Things and
Terrible, and change your Glory into the Similitude of an Ox that eats
Grass, and persecute His People, Who are Innocent as to you, and have suffered
with you, and Desire your Welfare; Against whom ye have no occasion of fault
but as to the Law of their God, which they may not transgress, lest Evil come
upon them from the Lord, and his Hand be upon them. Who are Meek and Patient,
and Resist not Evil, because of Him that said it; but bear All things, and
suffer all things; and you have tried, and found it so, as have those that went
before you; whom the Lord has Plucked up much because of what was done unto
them; of which they were warned in the Day of their Deliverance, which was
fulfilled upon Them; (viz.) That which they were warned of, as of that which
should come if they took not Warning; And has made way for you, and has done
for you as it is at this Day, beyond what ye could ask or think, Without your
Sword or Bow, or Spear, or your Habergeon; When your Hopes were almost gone,
and you were Disappointed in your Stratagems, and Overthrown in your Power, and
even at a stand to Consider, Whether ever a Return of your Captivity should be?
Which He has turned again as the Streams in the South; and you are as it were
in a Dream, now, that the Lord has turned again your Captivity, and as those
who are so filled with the Apprehension of the thing they have, and which they
long desired to enjoy, and were long kept out of, that they are in Doubt
whether it be a Dream or the Thing. Thus has the Lord done for you, and He
that has done it can undo it again, and overturn you, as He has done them
that have gone before you, and that without Sword or Spear, even by the Spirit
of the Lord; Who has moved Me to write to You, and to warn you of these
things; For if you do (as from the Mouth of the Lord I have said) and meddle
with Conscience (the Dominion of God) and impose upon it in Matters of Religion
(the Worship of God, who will be worshipped in Spirit and Truth, and the Father
seeks such to worship Him, who is Lord of the Conscience) and so entrench
upon his Dominion, which is an Everlasting Dominion, and His Kingdom which
shall never have end; His Hand will be against you, and John 4. 23.
his Fury will come upon you, and He will visit you; and your Day He will turn
into Night, and your Joy into Sorrow, and your Rejoicing into Heaviness; and
you shall know that the Most High rules in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it
to whomsoever he will. So in Bowels of Love, and Tenderness of Heart, as One
that desires your Prosperity for ever, and the Wel-being of you, and your
Posterity after you, I beseech you take heed of striking against the Rock of
Ages, or meddling with His Kingdom, which is an Everlasting Kingdom, or with His
Dominion, which is for ever and ever, or persecuting His People; for if ye do,
Know assuredly from the Lord, It will dash you to Pieces; and by how much the
more his Kindness has exceeded toward you, will be your Judgment. Therefore,
my dear Friends, Take heed what ye do; be Advised and Cool; Refuse not the
Counsel of One that is your Friend; On whom the sense of these things lies, Who
would not have God your Enemy; Who would have it well with you; For here have
splitted All that have gone before you, and here You will be split, the Lord
has spoken it. And so I have Discharged my Conscience of what the Lord has
laid on Me; and manifested my Love and Good Will to You: If ye take it well, it
will be the better for you; if otherwise, I am Clear.

Bristol, 11th day, 4th Month, 1661. GEO. BISHOP.

AN APPENDEX To the BOOK, Entitled, New England Judged: BEING Certain
WRITINGS, (never yet Printed) of those Persons which were there EXECUTED.

Together With a SHORT RELATION, of the TRIAL, SENTENCE, and EXECUTION, OF
WILLIAM LEDDRA.

Written by Them in the time of their Imprisonment, in the Bloody Town of
BOSTON.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmil, in Martins Le Grand, 1661.

An Appendex To the BOOK, Entitled, New England Judged.
This concerns all such Rulers, Priests and People in New England, who have
joined hand in hand to Persecute the Saints, but especially the Rulers and
Priests of Masachusets Bay in New England; who are become more Bloody and
Cruel, Bold and Impudent in their Wickedness, than the rest of their Brethren,
who have attempted to make a Bloody Law and Unrighteous Decree, to Banish the
Children and People of God, upon Death, out of their Jurisdiction; and by an
unrighteous Decree, have made a Law to put the Servants of God to Death, if
they return again into their Patent: Therefore mark the Cruelty which is the
fruits of New-England's Professors, all you that Read this Paper.

HEarken and give Ear thou Town of Boston, lend an Ear O ye Rulers, chief
Priests, and Inhabitants thereof! Listen all you that dwell therein, Rich and
Poor, Small and Great, High and Low, Bond and Free, of what sort so ever, Give
Ear; be attentive to the Words of my mouth, which proceed from the Spirit of
the Lord, and from the Power of the Almighty within me.

I have often considered your Conditions, and your Actings have often come into
my remembrance, which has caused me often to Lament, because of the hardness
of your hearts, who do thus slight the Almighty, and requite the Most High; Oh
foolish and unwise, ye who do not regard the Lord that made you, who has often
sent to you his Servants, to give you warning of the mighty day of the Lord of
Hosts, of the terrible day of the Lord God Almighty, which draws near, it
hastens apace; the Lord has said it for His Elects sake, and for His own Names
sake, will the Lord arise, and plead with all His Enemies, in this the day of
His Eternal Power. Oh ye children of Men, who are the Workmanship of His hands;
will ye resist the Lord, the Lord God Almighty, the Holy One of Israel, the
Strong and Mighty God, who is arising in his Saints, and coming forth in His
Strength, to Scatter His Enemies, and to Destroy Pharaoh and all His Hosts and
Chariots in the Red Sea, after the Seed is come out of Egypt, and to turn the
pride and haughtiness of men backwards, that rises to withstand the Lord? Oh
consider ye Potsherds, who are as unstable as the Waves of the Sea, and are as
the Wind in His hand, which he turns and causes to blow which way it
pleases Him, who will confound and destroy you in your Imaginations, that you
have imagined against Him and His Saints. Oh man! What art thou that stand
to resist the Lord, the mighty God of Jacob? Did ever any of your Fathers, the
Persecutors of old prosper? Did not the Lord consume them with the breath of
His nostrils, and with the Word of His mouth? Who will tear you to pieces, that
rise up in Rebellion against Him. Consider, was it in vain that one said in a
certain place, That Rebellion is as the sin of Witchcraft? Consider O ye that
inhabit the Earth, whose dewlling place is beneath; Does not the Lord behold
all your Actions, and all your unrighteous Doings? Oh ye Rulers and chief
Priests, are ye combining together? are ye joined together? are you in league
together, as the Rulers and chief Priests were in former ages? Consider their
Ends, and consider what you are doing? Are you so blind that you cannot see you
are Persecuting the Saints of the most High? You who are seeking the Life of
the Righteous, and that nothing but Blood will satisfy; The Lord will give you
blood to drink, you that thirst for it, you shall have enough of it; you who
spill and drink the Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus; Are not your
Brethren gone before you, in whose steps ye are treading? and the fruits of the
Devil you are bringing forth, Ye uncircunicised in hearts and ears, who do thus
resist the Lord of Life: As your Fathers did, so do ye resist the holy Ghost
and the Spirit of Truth, which is now appeared in the Saints of the most High;
who are sent into your borders in love to your Souls, and in tender mercy and
compassion to the Captive that is within your gates, and to the Prisoner. Oh
why will you strive any longer with the Lord that made you? Who is coming in
ten thousand of his Saints to render vengeance in flames of sire, upon all the
ungodly: Who has said, Vengeance is mine, I will repay it, says the Lord God
of hosts: Who will recompense into your bosoms, the Reward of your doings. Oh
People and Inhabitants hereof, Why will ye die in your sins? And whither Christ
goes, thither you cannot come: Oh! Why will ye put the day of the Lord asar off
you? who has waited long to be gracious, and has born with you, as a man does
with his only Son that serves him; So has the Lord spared you: And do you
thus requite the Lord for his loving kindness, to whip, to imprison, and cut
off the Ears of his Servants, that are sent unto you? Is this your Preaching
forth of Christ? Are these your good Examples to others? Come, let us reason
together; Have you not lost natural affection? have you not lost tenderness and
compassion? Woe is me, for thee, Oh thou New England, who have made such a
noise among the Nations: Is thy Religion come to no more than whipping,
imprisoning, burning in the hand, and cutting off Ears, and banishing upon
death? What will be the next Law that thou will make, Oh New England, against
those that thou scornfully call Quakers? terming them the Cursed Sect of the
Quakers. If they were a Cursed Sect, as thou have termed them, it seems they
should be so for thee, and so die for thee; For thou have made a Law, to put
them to Death, if they come the second time within thy borders: But I say, the
Lord has blessed the People called in scorn Quakers, and they are blessed, and
shall be blessed for evermore. Oh ye Rulers and chief Priests, will you proceed
no further, than putting to Death the Innocent? Is thy Praying, they Preaching,
thy many Sacrifices, and vain Oblations, come to this? and will not thy
Sacrifices, and Prayers, and solemn Meetings, become Abomination? is it not the
greatest Abomination that thou committest? Do thou think that this will
pacify the wrath of the Almighty God? who is coming forth against thee, and
will overtake thee, and strip thee naked, and uncover thee in that day, and
take all thy Ornaments from thee. Oh consider! Have thou forgot? although thou
would cover the Altar with tears, and come before Him with ten thousand of
Rams, and with a thousand Rivers of Oil, and offer-the Fruit of thy Body, for
the sin of thy Soul; Would it be accepted, being offered in that nature wherein
thou live? Much more when thou art become so Bloody, and so hard-hearted,
that in stead of covering the Altar with tears, do thou intend to cover it
with blood if thou can? Blush and be ashamed, hide thy self in the dust for
ever, because of the presence of the Almighty, who is now appeared and is
coming to set thy sins in order before thee; who will not blot out thy sins,
nor cover thy Iniquities which are many, unless thou speedily repent, and
forsake thy unrighteousness; for thy Destruction hastens apace, thou art
running headlong to Destruction; as the horse rusheth into the Battle, so do
thou into Blood. How do thou think to expect any thing from the Lord, but a
Sore: Destruction, a Famine, and a Plague, which is hastening upon thee, if
thou continue still in Rebellion; in Persecuting his Servants. This has the
Lord said, and this will the Almighty perform upon thee in the day of his
righteous Judgments, which will overtake all bloody-minded men, and blind
Persecutors.

Oh I am full of the Spirit of the Lord, and of the Power os him that made me,
who has said unto me, Fear not man whose breath is in his Nostrils, nor the
Son of man that must die; For the Lord has said unto me, For this end have I
called thee, and for this cause I have ordained thee, Fear them not, neither be
dismayed at their looks, nor be afraid of their threatening words; I the Lord
that created, thee am with thee; Therefore fear not what man shall do unto
thee, for I have made thee as a Wall of Brass, whereat the bloody-minded men
shall shoot their Arrows; but shall not touch thee as to offend thee; Therefore
the Lord has said unto me, Let not thy heart faint because of what I shall
suffer them to do unto thee; but let thy hands be strong in the Lord thy
Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel; for thy adversaries shall be confounded, and
the Enemies of the Lord shall be destroyed in that day.

Oh ye Hypocrites! how can you sing and keep such a noise concerning Religion,
when your hands are full of blood and your hearts full of Iniquity? Wash you,
make you clean, put away the Evil of your doings, cease to do Evil, learn to do
good, cleanse your hands you siuners, and your hearts you Hypoorites, for your
Prayers are abomination to me, says the Lord of Hosts; your singing is as the
howling of a Dog in the Streets, such are the Songs you sing in your Temple
unto me says the Lord; my Spirit is weary with bearing, and my Soul is vexed
day after day with your abominations. Woe, woe to thee thou Bloody Town of
Boston, and the Rest that are Confederate with Thee, and it thou can not
escape; Thou who have shed the blood of the Innocent People called Quakers, and
Imprisoned and Fined them, and taken away their Goods, and they have become a
Prey unto thee, for thee to exercise thy Cruelty upon them, and thou boasts in
thy wickedness, and thinks thou do God good Service to hang and put to Death
the People called Quakers; Verily this is the Thoughts and Intents of the
hearts of many of you in this New England; but especially within thee, and
within thy Jurisdiction that belongs unto thee, Oh thou Town of Boston: for
these words following did one say (in the Governors House) whose name is
Edward Rawson, called Secretary, who did Threaten me with these words following
(on the 18th of the 4. Month 1659) That if I came again after I was sent away,
or banished, he said, he would write a Warrant with his own hand to send me to
the Gallows to be hanged. Are these your Fruits, your corrupt speeches, to
Threaten the Innocent with your Gallows, to hang them thereon? Oh that ever
such words should proceed out of a man's mouth! to say that he would write a
Warrnat with his own hand, to send an Innocent Person to the Gallows to be
hanged. Well, all this we can bear, the Lord has brought forth his Suffering
Seed, and through Suffering must the Lamb and his Saints overcome and get the
Victory, and the wicked must be destroyed, and such who have been guilty of
Blood. Was ever the like heard before, That men Professing to have so much of
the Knowledge of God, and Professing to Fear God, that such should become so
Bloody! and become so great Persecutors of a People who are despised of the
World, but loved of God; and the Presence of the Lord is with them, whom you
Persecute, and you must fall before them, for the Lord God is with them and
among them that are the Sufferers under you. The Lord God of Heaven and Earth
is now among such, which causes the Heathen to Rage, and the People of the
Earth to Imagine a Vain Thing: For the Lord's Presence and Power, in some
measure, was ever among such as Suffered and were Persecuted for Consoience
sake, and Suffered with them, and in them by the Persecutors of Old, in former
Ages and Generations, as he does at this day in his Saints and Children, for
the overthrow of the Powers of Darkness, and Kingdom of the Devil; who has
had his Seat in the sons of men for these many Ages and Generations; Wherein,
and whereby the Beast has made War against the Lamb and His Saints, for many
Generations. But the day does draw near and hastens apace, that the Lamb and
the Saints must get the Victory: And the Beast and his Followers, at that day;
must be Consumed, and Destroyed, because of the Presence of the Lord God in his
Saints.

Oh what cruelty is acted now in these days! That men who Profess God, and
make such a noise concerning Religion, that such should become so hard-hearted,
to Imprison a Child of Eleven or Twelve Years of Age! Was ever the like done
among the greatest Tyrants, or Bloody-minded-men, that are mentioned in the
Scriptures! Did they ever Imprison a Child that was sent unto them, to Warn
them of their unrighteousness! Oh what will become of you! Do you think, Oh
you Heads and Rulers of this Town of Boston, who are become so Brutish, and so
Dark in your Understandings, and so unlike Men in your Actions: You that cast
the Innocent into your Dens, Holes, Prisons, and will not suffer their Friends
and Acquaintance to come to visit them, not to minister unto them. Surely
bitter will your Cup be, and your Portion will be sad to Surely the sober and
tenderhearted cannot but grieve and lament, to hear of the Cruelty that is
acted by you. Oh ye Rulers and chief Priests, who are the Beginners of
Mischief, and the Leaders of them who are the chief Actors of all this Cruelty!
For well was it spoken by the Prophet, The Leaders of this People, cause them
to Err; and they that are led by them, are destroyed for lack of true
knowledge. Well, a little further you shall proceed, to fill up the measure of
your Iniquities; and then shall you have your Reward with the rest of the
Uncircumcised: For, I know it is Blood you thirst after, O ye Rulers and chief
Priests, is it not our Lives ye thirst for, come, tell us plainly? Or, have you
made this Law of yours, only to see if you can make the People, called Quakers,
afraid of you? Well, however, being I am allowed of God, I shall tell you
plainly, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth is now drawing near and coming
upon you speedily to try you, whether you will exercise your inhumane Law upon
us, who are now sent among you from the Lord for this very end and purpose; I
say, will you put us to death for only coming into your Jurisdiction, or Patent
(as you call it) after we have been once sent away, or commanded by you to go
out of it? Now, we say, being the Lord God has commanded us to the contrary,
Is it meet and just to obey God, or man, judge ye? to obey your bloody Law, or
to obey God's Righteous Law, which He has writ in our hearts, and placed
within us, which judges and condemns your unrighteous Law, that you have made
to banish the Righteous? Well, you that call your selves Christians, if you do
this bloody Act, to show your selves so unlike men, I must tell you plainly,
for constrained by the Lord God I am to tell you, O ye bloody-minded men, That
if you do put us to death, this Action of yours will proceed from the Devil,
who was a Murderer from the beginning, who seeks to destroy men's lives, as you
do at this day; For as it was then, so it is now, he that is born after the
flesh, persecuteth him that is born after the Spirit.

Now you that say you are Christians, Come, let us reason together concerning
this inhumane Law that you have made, to put the People, called Quakers, to
death: Did ever any true Christians make such Laws, as you have made against a
People, whom you in scorn and derision call Quakers, since they came among you?
Are you not ashamed that the Nations about you should hear of your Actions? to
hear of the cruel Laws that you have made against an innocent and harmless
People; What, was not the Law that you made at first strong enough, but you
must disanul it, and proceed to a more bloodier? Come, tell us plainly (if you
be not ashamed to speak) of whom did you ask Counsel? or, to whom did you seek
for Instruction? I am sure the Lord (in whose hand your breath is) did never
give you Counsel to make these bloody Laws, that you have made against the
People who are scornfully called Quakers. Come let us further reason together,
that you may appear unto all, that have any Moderation in them left, as men;
that surely you are not the true Christians, nor Disciples of Christ, for they
used no such weapons to War withal as you do: So that a great deal of
difference there is betwixt your Practices and theirs, your Weapons and theirs;
For their Weapons were and are Spiritual, and yours are Carnal. The difference
is great every way, as great as there is betwixtLight and Darkness. Again,
that you may see that in every thing you are altogether unlike them; their War
was against Spiritual wickedness in high places. The Apostles wrestled not with
flesh and blood; mark, not with the Creatures, not to destroy men's Lives, but
made War in Righteousness, with the spiritual Weapons, having on for an helmet,
the breast plate of Righteousness, whereby they subdued the Powers of darkness,
and spiritual wickedness that ruled in high places. Now you that call your
selves Christians, you war against flesh and blood, your war is against the
Creatures; and not against spiritual wickedness; you seek to destroy that which
Christ came to save, and seek not to destroy that which Christ came to destroy:
He was made manifest to destroy the works of the Devil, but you make your
selves manifest (you intend) to destroy the work of God. Mark and take notice,
you unbelievers; The Creature is the workmanship of God; the spiritual
wickedness is the fruit and work of the Devil, which Christ came to destroy,
and was made manifest for that end, to destroy the sin which is the fruit of
the Devil. Take notice, ye, unlike Christians, the fruits, and works of the
Devil, live and remain still among you undestroyed; who seek to destroy the
workmanship of God, when Christ came to save men's lives, and not to destroy
them, but to destroy the works of the Devil; but you seek to destroy, that
which Christ came to save, and to save alive that which Christ came to destroy.
So see if it does not appear plainly by your Actions, and by your corrupt
fruits, that you are making war against Christ, and his Saints, whom you seek
to destroy from off the face of the Earth; As let your actions that you have
acted already against God and his Servants, bear witness against you, that you
are become more Bloody, and more hard-hearted than Pharaoh of old. See, and
search the Scriptures of Truth, and consider whose children you are, and whose
works you are a doing, and whom it is you are serving: For, his servants you
are to whom ye obey. Did ever God send any of his Servants into a Country or
Nation, to destroy his workmanship, the Creature? Is this your gaining many
People into your Church? Is this your Converting of others? Is this your way of
adding many to your Church? What, by compelling of people to come to your
Meetings? What, By Fining People, and taking away their Goods? What, by
Imprisoning, Whipping, and Stocking and burning in the hand, and cutting off
the Ears of those that come to bear witness against your Cruelty and Idolatry?
Is this your way of convincing gainsayers? What, by making of a Law to bannish
such upon pain of Death? have you no other weapons to fight withal against the
Truth? Have you no other means nor way, ye Idolshepherds, to stop the mouths
of them ye call gainsayers, than Imprisoning, Whipping, Burning in the Hand,
Fining and taking away their Goods, and Banishment upon pain of Death? Have you
no other way, nor word to convince those you call Heretics, and Deceivers, but
to take away their lives? Surely this was not the way, nor means, nor power,
which the Apostles used to convince the Gentiles and Jews, unto whom they were
sent. This power which you make use of, is not the power, neither does it
proceed from the power which ruled in the Saints, Prophets, Apostles, and
People of God, whereby their Souls were converted to God, which turned them
from Darkness to Light; But the power that rules you, and that you act by, is
of another nature, than the power the Apostles were in; for their power was,
and is given to save, but yours is to destroy men's lives, which the power of
God was given for to save; which must be set a top of all unrighteous Powers,
from whom all bloody and unrighteous Laws do proceed. So, behold what power it
is that leads you, and what power ye are under, ye merciless men; that many of
you are become past feeling, whose Consciences are seared as with a hot Iron;
who have given your selves over to work wickedness, and are become as great
Persecutors, as any that worship the Beast, who have given their power unto the
Dragon, who thirsts after the blood of the Innocent, as the Lion does after his
prey; so greedy, and hasty are you to spil the blood of the Saints, and to take
away the Life of the Upright from the face of the Earth. Well, ye Rulers and
Magistrates (so called) take heed, and take warning, I lay it upon you, while
you have time, and a day given unto you to consider these things; So before the
thing come to pass, and before you do it, weigh the matter. Come, let us
farther reason together; Can you convince us of the transgression of any Law of
God? and if you cannot, (which we know you cannot) nor have the least
transgression of the Righteous Law of God to lay to our charge, who are now
coming among you in obedience to the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, for this
very end, to try you, O ye children of men: And if you put us to Death, because
we cannot obey your Commandment, but choose rather to obey the Commandment of
the Lord; and for so doing will you put us to Death? Well, this know, and be it
known unto the Sons of Men, and Inhabitants within this Town of Boston, and
elsewhere within your Jurisdiction; That the Commandments of the most High must
we obey, and your Commandment we must disobey, and disanul it, and make it of
no effect, because it is against, and contrary to that of God in all men's
Consciences; which is of the nature, and according to the Righteous and Royal
Law of God; therefore we must obey the Command of the Lord, because it is
according to the Righteous and Royal Law of God, which is according to that of
God in every man's Conscience; which says, It is more just and meet, to obey
God than man. So being that your Law that you have made, is unequal, and
contrary to the Law of God, which he has writ in our hearts, which is equal,
just and righteous; for your Law, that you have made, against the Innocent
People called Quakers, is unjust, and unrighteous, and contrary to that of God
in all men's Consciences, and contrary to the righteous and Royal Law of God:
Therefore we say, we cannot obey such a Law, that does not agree with the Royal
Law of God; but herein shall we obey the Lord, choosing rather to suffer, what
you shall be suffered to do unto us, than to fulfill the Commandment and
unrighteous Law of unrighteous men, in flying at your Command, when the Lord
has Commanded us to stay; Whereby that he may show his Power in us, that his
Command, and his Righteous and Royal Law is of more power, virtue and force in
us, and with us, than your unrighteous Laws and Commands can be against us. So
this know, if you put us to death, when we return, that you will bring innocent
blood upon you, by so doing, which shall not depart from your houses, nor from
that seed that is guilty thereof. So these things we speak, that you may no
more be guilty of Innocent blood, for assuredly know, that nothing shall fail
of what the Lord has spoken by us, and through us concerning you, if you go on
still in Rebellion and stiff-neckedness, and refuse to hearken to the Voice and
Counsel of the Lord God: And this know, that you have been warned from the Lord
of these things before they came to pass; For this we know, if we disobey the
Command of the Lord, to fly from you, because you have made a Law to put us to
Death, if we disobey the Lord in this thing, he can cut us off, and take our
Lives from us in his anger and fury; Therefore be it known unto you, that the
Lord has made us willing to lay down our Lives among you, if you be suffered
to take them from us; and in this thing we know we shall have peace, when you
shall have sorrow and torment night and day: And this shall you certainly know
one day, that the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, whom we serve, sent us among
you, if you see our faces again, after we have been Banished from you; and that
which we have spoken, you shall know to be truth, whether you will hear or
forbear. Well, if you say, we are transgressors of a Law, in not obeying your
unrighteous Law: It is your own, and not God's Law; For his Law is holy, just,
and good; but yours is altogether unholy, unrighteous, unjust, and wicked, and
is to be set at naught, and condemned by the servants of the Lord: For this Law
of yours, which you have made, to put the Righteous to death, has not
proceeded from the Spirit of the Lord, which is meek, and lowly, and easy to
be entreated; which does judge and condemn you, and your Law. Now if you would
know from what spirit this wicked and unnatural Law of yours has proceeded:
Well, we shall speak plainly, it has proceeded from the murdering spirit which
reigned and ruled in the Persecutors of Old, from whence all such Laws did and
do proceed.

Now ye Rulers, chief Priests and Inhabitants of New England, this we shall say
unto you in the fear of the Lord and Spirit of the Almighty, and in the Power
of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you nor your Law is not to be regarded herein,
and your Law is to be broken, and must be broken by the Power of the Lord God,
and you must be judged and condemned by the same Power for making such a Law;
For the Lord of Hosts is coming up against you, and your Power must be subdued
and taken from you by the Prince of Peace, even by Him who is come, and coming,
to rule the Nations with a Rod of Iron; who is come and coming; whose Right it
is to Rule, and subdue all Powers and Authorities unto Himself, and to take the
Government into his Own hand, unto whom it belongs; who will dash you to
pieces, ye Rulers, that rebel against his Righteous Power and his Holy Law,
that He is Establishing in the Earth, in the hearts of the sons of men, that
obey his Voice, and that hearken unto his Counsel, his Righteous and Holy Law
must be established, and his Righteous Government and Kingdom must be set up;
and your Unrighteous and Unholy Kingdom and Government must be overturned and
destroyed by the Power of the Everlasting God, in this day of his Eternal
Power; who is come, and coming, to make void all your ungodly, inhumane and
bloody Laws, and to reward you according to your works: The Lord God has
spoken it, and by Him it shall be accomplished upon you: for the Decree of the
Most High is gone out against you, ye unmerciful men, whose Wickedness and
Unrighteousness does exceed the Nations about you, for barbarous Cruelty and
unmanlike Actions: Have you not altogether lost your Senses, Reason and
Understanding, that you are become so brutish and so unlike Christians? You
are gone so far in your Cruelties and unnatural Actions, that you are a stink
and a loathsome smell to all People, that have the least measure of Uprightness
and of the honest Principle ruling in them, and your barbarous and cruel
actions and bloody deeds they abhor, and at your Cruelty that you have acted
against the People of the Lord (who are by you in scorn called Quakers) many of
the common sort of People do stand amazed and wonder to hear of such Cruelty to
be acted by such a Generation of men, that have made such a noise concerning
Religion, concerning a Church, concerning Ministry and Magistracy, and
Church Government and Ordinances, Preaching, Praying, Singing, Morning and
Evening Sacrifices, Family Duties (as you call them) that such should become so
bloody and so cruel, it does astonish many that are called Heathens; that all
your Preaching, Praying, Singing, making such a noise concerning Religion, that
it should come to no more, and to produce no better fruits than Imprisoning,
Whipping, Stocking, Burning in the Hand, Cutting off Ears, Banishing upon
Death, as you have banished Six already from their Wives and Children, and from
their outward beings; So that you do not only intend to destroy the Souls, but
Bodies also. Come, let us know what have they done; what Law of God have they
transgressed, that you should banish them upon pain of Death from their
Families? What, was it because their Conversations and Actions were honest and
upright, and yours are evil? What, was it because their Practices condemed
yours? What, was it because they owned a People that are by you in scorn called
Quakers, whom you evilly entreat? and such as owns them you banish and
despitefully use them.

Surely these things will be remembered. Come, let us ask you what Rule or
Example have you that you walk by? let us hear what you can say for your
selves: What Orthodox men were they that counseled you to these barbarous
actions? what Counselors were they, that would give counsel to Magistrates to
do these bloody actions? of whom did you learn it? Come, let us hear your
strong Reasons, for the day is drawing near that you must be further tried; for
the Almighty God has put it into the hearts of his Servants to try you,
whether you will put us to death for disobeying your unrighteous Law. We that
are freeborn Englishmen, we demand our Liberty for the exercise of our pure
Consciences in this Country, as well as other Englishmen; we being freeborn
Englishmen, we may by the Law of God claim our Liberty before many other
People: We who are not transgressors of the Law of God, neither of any Law or
Decree that is according thereunto, what is the Reason that we should be
banished upon Death out of your Jurisdiction more than any other people? What,
is it because we are turners of the World up-side down? What, is it because we
are termed Ringleaders of a People, that are in scorn called Quakers? What, is
it because the Laws of our God, which we obey, are different from all the
unrighteous and bloody Laws of New England? What, is it because we cannot obey
the Commandment of the Rulers of New England, that have commanded us to bow to
the spirit that ruled in Haman, which now rules in these bloody Rulers of
Boston, and elsewhere in New England? Nay, I say, the Lord our God has raised
and is raising the Royal Seed and Spirit that ruled in Mordecai, that could
not, nor cannot stoop nor bow to the spirit that ruled in proud Haman: I say,
see and behold if the same spirit rules not in you, ye Rulers, chief Priests
and Inhabitants of Boston, and elsewhere; mark, if the same spirit does not
rule you that ruled in Haman; who sought not only the destruction of Mordecai
alone, but sought to destroy all the Seed of the Jews: Are you not of Haman's
offspring, and ruling in his nature, who was so cruel and so bloody? who did
give a sum of money for destroying the Seed of the Jews: Mark, what was it for?
Because Mordecai could not bow to him, nor do him reverence. Mark, it was not
for the transgression of any Law of God: yet he disobeyed the Commandment of
King Ahasuerus, who reigned from Judea even unto Ethiopia, over an hundred and
twenty and seven Provinces. Or, is your Law and Commandment of more force than
his was, who had commanded that they should reverence Haman? for so had the
King commanded. Are you greater than he was? Read the Third of Esther
throughout. And yet did not Mordecai transgress his Commandment, in not bowing
to Haman? at which Haman was full of wrath. Is it not so with you? are not you
mad and sull of wrath against the People called Quakers, because they testify
to your faces that your deeds are evil? Are not you now full of wrath and envy,
because the Quakers will not obey your unlawful Commands and unrighteous
Decrees? Now you that are in Haman's nature, and ruled by Haman's spirit, in
Cruelty seeking and laboring to destroy the Royal Seed and True Jew from off
the Earth in this Country of New England; as Haman did labor to destroy the
Seed of the Jews, the People of Mordecai, within the Kingdom of Ahasuerus, so
do ye seek to destroy the People of God, called Quakers, that are come, or
comes into your Jurisdiction; Is it not because they cannot bow to you? Now,
did Mordecai in disobeying the King's Commandment, disobey the higher Power,
yea or nay? unto which every soul is to be subject for Conscience sake: And
such as disobey this Power, disobey the Ordinance of God. Give us in your
Answer ye Rulers and chief Priests, you that seek and receive Honor from man;
How can you believe that receive Honor one of another, and seek not that
Honor that comes from God only? Well, is your Commandment and Decree of more
force to us, than the King's was (concerning Haman) to Mordecai, seeing they
are of one nature? We can obey your Commandment no more than Mordecai did bow
to Haman, though the King had commanded it. Now we say, are not you preparing a
Gallows to hang us thereon, as Haman did for Mordecai? But take heed, We warn
you in the Name of the Lord God, consider what you are going to do; In the Name
of the Lord we demand that we may have Liberty for the Exercise of our pure
Consciences within your Jurisdiction, as well as other Englishmen, seeing that
you cannot lay to our charge the transgression of any Law of God, we being men
that fear the Lord God of Heaven and Earth; and we come not for any thing of
yours, God is our Witness, it is not for any thing that you have that we come
for; for we do not lack any outward thing: for many of us have both Houses and
Land of our own, and Silver also in Old England, so that we seek not any thing
that you have (God is our Witness, whom we serve in the Spirit of Truth, who
has constrained us to leave all, and to follow Him) that it is not the World
(that does perish with the handling thereof) that we seek or labor for; but
the Good and Eternal Welfare of the sons of men, for the Seed's sake which is
oppressed in New England, and other parts of the World, do we labor, and
travel, and suffer all manner of hardships; for Christ's sake are we become
fools, and do suffer all manner of Evil to be done unto us, as Christ said unto
his Disciples, they shall do all maaner of Evil to you for my Name sake; but
those that did it, and those that do it, know neither God nor his Son Jesus
Christ, neither have they the Love of God abiding in them: For such as love not
him whom they have seen, how can they love God whom they have not seen? and
such have not Eternal Life abiding in them, but are of the Devil, as their
fruits do make manifest, and are the thorns of which men cannot gather Grapes,
except it be such Grapes as Sodom and Gomorrha did bring forth, which provoked
the Holy One, the Most High, to arise in his Wrath, and consume them in his
Anger.

Come, ye Rulers, let us further ask you a Question: Of whom did you receive,
or from whence had you your Rule, to Imprison any for coming to visit one
another? did you find any such Example in the Scripture, which you call Your
Rule? did ever any Magistrate do such a thing, to imprison any of the Prisoners
Acquaintance or Friends, for only coming to visit them? Had not Paul's Friends
and Acquaintance liberty to come and visit, and to minister unto him? Now you
do not only hinder that which the Heathen granted, but exceed such in Cruelty
which imprisoned Paul, who did let his Friends and Acquaintance come to him,
and minister to him: Now this you hinder, and will not suffer any of our
Friends nor Acquaintance to come to visit us, nor to minister unto us; much
more when your Cruelty is become so great, to imprison such as come many miles
to visit us, as you have done Mary Dyar, who came from Rhoad Island to visit
us, and to minister to our Necessities, if we stood in need: Now you do not
only hinder any for coming or ministering to us, but shut such up in Prison (to
be kept close Prisoners) as remember Joseph's Afflictions, whose bowels are
opened to such whom you dispitefully use: Is this your doing as you would be
done by? O shameless men! Are you without all natural affection? What Rule is
it you walk by? You say that she affirmed, That the Light within her is the
Rule: But I say, The Light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the
World, which condemns the World for evil deeds and unnatural actions, this
Light which is the Saints Rule is the Worlds Condemnation; this Light was not
your Rule for what you have done; ye took not counsel at this Light which is
the Quakers Rule: for this Light which shines in the heart of man, beholding
all his actions, this Light does condemn all blind Persecutors and Judges, such
to be worse than they that imprisoned Paul, who would suffer him to speak for
himself; which many times you are so mad you will not suffer the Quakers to
speak for themselves, but you will call to your Officers, to take them away to
Prison.

Again, It is written in the Warrant whereby we were committed to Prison, that
we shall be tried according to Law. We desire no more than to be tried
according to Equity, Truth, and true Judgment, to be tried according to the Law
of God; but your Law, you unjust men, we deny to be tried by it; for you are
both our Accusers and Judges: which is not according to the Law of God; for
Equity and Truth judges and condemns all unsound Judgment, Unrighteousness,
Partiality and respecting of Persons: Therefore all you Magistrates and Rulers
(so called) stoop to the Witness of God, and bow to the Light of Jesus Christ,
own the Light of the Son of God; for until you own and be led by the Light of
Jesus Christ, which leads into Union with God, you cannot judge aright of the
things of God. So take heed how you do; for the Line of true Judgment is
stretched over you all, with which you are measured, weighed and tried in the
just Balance of Truth, and according to true Judgment you are found wanting,
and are found, tried and judged by the Spirit of Truth, to be too light:
Therefore be awakened all ye Rulers and Inhabitants of Boston, and elsewhere
within your Jurisdiction, and give over persecuting the Saints of the most high
God.

This is a Warning to you all in New England who have had a hand in persecuting
the Saints and Children of the Lord, (who are by you in scorn and contempt
called Quakers) Give over your Cruelty, and cease from oppressing the Innocent;
for the Lord God has regard unto their Sufferings, and the Lord God is risen
and arising to plead their Cause against all their Enemies, and all their
Adversaries must fall before them; for the Lord is with them, and the shout of
a mighty Prince is among the Innocent People, called Quakers, and this is the
day of their Suffering, and the day of your Cruelties and Persecution upon them
within this New England: but the day of their Deliverance draws near, and the
day wherein they shall rejoice in the Lord, the God of their Salvation, who is
mighty to save and able to deliver them out of the hands, and out of the
mouths of Devourers, and from the Jaws of the Ungodly and Cruel men; who will
take Vengeance at that day upon all bloudy-minded men and blind Persecutors:
And at that day you shall find that the Lord will be too hard for you, though
you now boast in your Wickedness. And thus far I am clear, and have cleared my
Conscience to you at this time: And whether you will hear, or forbear, I am
clear of your Blood; I who am now a Sufferer under you, with my Brother and
Companion; whose Lives are not dear unto us to lay them down as a Witness
against such a Bloody, and Unrighteous and hypocritical Generation; and this We
are ready to seal with our Blood for the breaking of your Bloody Law.

The Sixth Month, 1659. In the Common Goal in the Bloody Town of Boston. From
us, who are in scorn called Quakers, who are Sufferers under Zions Oppressors.
William Robinson. Marmaduke Stephenson.


The 28th. of the 8th. Month, 1659.
ONce more to the general Court assembled in Boston, speaks Mary Dyar. Even as
before, my Life is not accepted, neither avails me, in comparison of the
Lives, and Liberty of the Truth and Servants of the living God; for whom, in
the bowels of Love and Meekness I sought you: Yet nevertheless, with wicked
hands have you put two of them to Death; which makes me to feel that the
mercies of the wicked, are cruelty. I rather choose to dye than live, as from
you (who are guilty of their innocent blood) Therefore seeing my request is
hindered, I leave you to the Righteous Judge, and Father of all Hearts; Who,
with the pure measure of Light He has given to every man to perfect withal,
will in His due time let you see whose Servants you are, and of whom you have
taken Counsel; which I desire you to search into: But all his Counsel has been
slighted, and you would none of His Reproof. Read your Portion, Prove. 1. 24, to
the 32. For verily, the night comes on you apace, where in no man can work, in
which you shall assuredly fall to your own Master. In obedience to the Lord,
whom I serve with my spirit, and pity to your poor souls, which you neither
know nor pity, I can do no less than once more to warn you to put away the
Evil of your Doings, and Kiss the Son (the Light in you) before His Wrath be
kindled in you; for where it is, there is nothing without you can help, or
deliver you out of His hands at all. And if these things be not so, then say,
there has been no Prophet from the Lord sent amongst you: Though we be
nothing, yet it is His pleasure to bring to naught things that are.

When I heard your last Order read, it was a disturbance to me, that was so
freely offering up my Life to Him that gave it me, and sent me hither so to do:
Which Obedience, being His own Work, He gloriously accompanied with His
Presence, Peace and Love in me, in which I rested from labor; till by your
Order, and the People, I was so far disturbed, that I could not retain any more
of the words thereof, than that I should return to Prison, and there remain
forty eight hours: To which I submitted, finding nothing from the Lord to the
contrary: that I may know what His Pleasure and Counsel is, concerning me, in
whom I wait therefore; For, He is my Life, and the length of my days: And as I
said before, I came at His Command, and go at His Command.

MARY DYAR.
This was given them at the first time, after she returned from the place of
Execution.



To Friends in New England, or where this may come, Greeting.
IN your meeting together, and attending at the footstool of the Altar,
waiting to be fed with the Bread of Life, which through death to all things
that the carnal mind has fed upon, or delighted in, either in corruption or
birth, either in thought or action, whether things in Heaven, or things in
Earth; for verily all old things must be dissolved before the eternal Spirit,
which as a devouring fire and everlasting burning, is now entered into the
Regions of the Earth, and has manifested it self unto you, that thereby you
might profit, and be had and instructed in the way of holiness, and as an
earnest of the glorious Inheritance, that never fades away, has from time to
time ministered comfort, joy, and peace in the holy Place within the Vail, as
you have patiently waited, through pangs of death, to the old nature, and in
meekness and content, when darkness was over the Land, have endured the shaking
of the Earth, and terrible rending of the Vail. I say, as you, in any measure,
have come through these things, even so in measure have every one of you tasted
of the Bread of Life, and hidden Manna which within the Ark is laid up for all
the followers of the Lamb, through great Tribulations, which plentifully you
will meet withal in the worldly Regions, both within and without. And although,
my dear Friends, the fruits of Sodom and Egypt, as they do outwardly appear in
many, as pride, wantonness, revilings, and the like, are done away; yet you
will find many dangerous and hurtful lusts, arising out of the nature of
spirtual Sodom within, which will strongly assault you when the light of the
Sun is but a little withdrawn, and passing under a cloud; through which if ye
wait patiently for the next appearance, it will shine more glorious and higher
than before. Yet diverse ways will the enemy of your soul appear at such a
time, to draw you aside from the hope of the Gospel, and expectation of
enjoying the righteousness and heavenly treasure, which therein was revealed,
when the glorious Light in full power shined in the earthen Vessel, and will
strive to make void all that you have received, as the earnest of the purchased
Possession; by presenting before you the hardness of the way, and bringing to
mind, things you were formerly in bondage to; yea, and to tell you, ye may eat
and not die. These things and more unutterable, will the spirit, (whose
progress is to and fro in the earth) present to your view, and feed the carnal
withal: yet behold them all in the Light Eternal, and in their most glorious
apperance, they are all but dust, which is his own meat, whom you are to resist
steadfastly in the power of the Spirit of Faith, which overcomes the World; and
remember how the Lord did deliver you wonderfully in your former journeys,
wherein you perfectly saw the naked Arm of Gods salvation; and He remains the
same in Himself, yesterday, and to day, and for ever; although the enemy, while
the cloud was over the Ark, (for that is his time to work) goes about, in the
airy part, seeking whom he may devour, did strongly tempt to prevail, as if you
were in the wilderness of sin, to lead you back again, in your hearts, into
spiritual Egypt; for it is within he thus subtly works; and I well knowing
it, cannot forbear to exhort you in the clean fear of the Lord God, that you
with the eye of your mind, retired out of all things visible, there to wait
still and quiet, and ceasing from all self-working, may with meekness receive
Power, Might, Dominion, and perfect Strength, against all that ever the enemy
did appear in; and in this condition of the free saving Grace of God, which is
appeared for your Deliverance and Teacher, you may learn to grow from grace to
grace, into the knowledge of the wonderful works of God, which your forefathers
saw, and many things happened them for our Ensamples, and are written for our
learning Spiritually, and the same way you are to travel, as they did who were
baptized into Moses, and so proceeding, you will find the same spiritual meat,
from the least to the greatest of you; and he that gathers most, will have
none over; and behold I testify (as the least among many Brethren) that he
that gathers little has no lack, but in his father's house feeds on the
Bread of Life; the nourishment and virtue of it will make the least, as strong
as David, and give power over all spiritual enemies, though every one in the
Camp were as great as Goliath. And thus to this day has the Lord preserved me
in the Power of the endless Life, where, like a Beacon on a Hill, the Watchers
fired and filled with Zeal to give others warning of the nigh approaching of
the Enemy, who lies lurking in the nature of Transgression, ready upon all
opportunities to appear in evil thoughts, lusts, etc. and so to desile the
Temple, if not resisted in the first motion. And as the Creature gives way to
the Temptation of the Destroyer, he will grow cold, and his Zeal toward God,
and love to his People will wither, and sometimes be hardly drawn to their
Assemblies; And all this while he may walk under covert of an outward
profession of Truth, yet grow not at all; for having joined with that in the
motion, although not brought forth into the act that hides from the presence of
the Lord, and keeps from sweet Nourishment of the Vine, which causes all that
abides in it to bring forth fruit; as the heat of the Sun causes the tender
herb to spring. And whoever comes into this condition, the single Eye discerns
him, and the Faithful goes about mourning, and saying, How have such desiled
the Bed of Virginity, who once in a great measure had escaped the Corruptions
that are in the World through lust; and although I am persuaded better things
of you, yet my Beloved Friends, who are dear unto me, as you abide in that
which crucifies you to the World, wherein I dearly exhort you to abide, as it
arises in you, and put it on as a garment of of Righteousness, wherein from
faith to faith you may pass on, and so preach Righteousness, to the old World,
and in it you will be preserved, as in an Ark, from the Destruction, like a
flood, that will assuredly come upon the World of Ungodly: And in all your
trials and troubles, look and wait for the Power that once delivered you, and
again and again it will deliver you from the power of the Dog, and work
mightily in you; that with willing mind you deny all for its sake, until the
Image of the Beloved be formed in you, and you in Him, where in Love ye will be
accepted, and the knowledge of his Mystery, manifested in flesh, in every
measure of it, is and will be so far above all the Glory, Treasure, and
Pleasure of the Land of Darkness, that it will wholly take the Meditations out
of them, as if they were not worth the minding no more than dross or dust;
yea, or whatsoever else may attend or can come upon those that follow the
Light, as Persecution, Distress, Affliction, Famine, Nakedness, Perils in the
Wilderness, in the Sea, in the City, yea, or Death it self; I am persuaded that
Gods Armor of Light, as it is lived in and loved, will preserve them. And I
further testify in the Fear of the Lord God, and witness with a Pen of
Trembling, That the noise of the Whip on my Back, all the Imprisonments and
Banishing upon pain of Death, and after returning, the loud threatening sound of
an Halter from their mouths, who, Jezebel- like, sat on the Imperious Throne
of Iniquity, did no more affright me, through the strength of the Power of God
in me, than if they had threatened to have bound a Spiders Web to my Finger;
which makes me say with unfeigned lips, Wait upon the Lord, O my soul for ever,
who has made known unto me his loving kindness, when I even thirsted for Him,
and kept my feet upon the Rock, whilst the raging Waves of the Sea went over my
back; whilst for the Truth and Cause of God's People I have been freely offered
up, and am not at all straightned to be baptized for the dead, whether into
Death, or otherwise; following his Example, who laid down his Life for his
Enemies: And herein the Record in Heaven knows I lie not, and the Witness in
Earth is bearing Witness to me, that I yet do not (as I have not hitherto) seek
to withdraw my Cheek from the Smiter, nor to turn aside my feet from the
footsteps of the Flock; as witness this Chain and Log at my Leg: but do desire,
so far as the Lord draws me, to follow my sorefathers and Brethren in Suffering
and in Joy: Wherefore my spirit waits and worships at the feet of Emmanuel,
unto whom I commit my Cause, who may work my bodies deliverance; if not, yet
the Freedom, Peace, Joy and Patience, which in the midst of trouble I have
enjoyed, and I believe shall continue from Him, shall fully satisfy me; for
which let my soul, and all that is within me, praise him for ever and ever. And
I shall continue my Exhortation to you, earnestly desiring ye may wait to feel
the Love and Life of God flow in your particular Vessels, and therein watch
over and serve one another; and let the Strong and Faithful among you dwell in
the Power, that he may have a Garment ready to cover the Nakedness of the Weak;
and if the Tares at any time appear, let Wisdom and the Spirit of Meekness be
always used to separate the Tares from the Wheat, both in the ground and
offspring, that the bearer may clearly see it, and then if he will not put in
his sharpthreshing Instrument to cut them down, his blood will be required at
his hands, and with compassion pour Oil into the wounds of the wounded, and
bring them into the house where Salvation is; for the hope of Glory in you is
come to save that which was lost; so the Plant of God will grow, the Thorns and
Thistles will be cut down, and the Ground cleansed that the Course may be no
more; and if the Weeds should appear again, let them still be trodden down and
broken off the Root, and in time you shall see them dye at the Root, and then
the Plant of Renown, the Stem of the Root of Jesse within its seed and
beginning, may truly be resembled to the little Mustardseed, which will grow
and prosper, and be watered with the dew of Heaven, which, like soft drops of
Balm, will gently fall on the branches thereof; as Patience working unto
Perfection, waits to enter at the door of Life, without climbing one step to
satisfy the Lion of greedy desire, but let it suffer hunger, yea and death
also, through which you will find entrance into the green and pleasant Pastures
of the Folds, where you shall feed as the Herd in the low Valeys of Achor, the
entrance thereof will be a Door of Hope in the day of your greatest need and
spiritual hunger, when Experience and Hope is added to your Patience: And at
the Threshold theroof I leave all that hunger and thirst after Righteousness to
enjoy the Desire of their Souls.

Boston-Prison in New England, 1660. William Leddra.
This was given forth about three months before he suffered, and was copyed by
W. Coddington of Rhoad Island.



An EPISTLE of WILLIAM LEDDRA, to Friends, written by him the day before he was
put to Death.
To the Society of the Little Flock of Christ, Grace and Peace be Multiplied.
Most Dear and inwardly Beloved,
THe sweet Influences of the Morning Star, like a Flood distilling into my
Innocent Habitation, has so filled me with the Joy of the Lord in the Beauty
of Holiness, that my Spirit is as it it did not Inhabit a Tabernacle of Clay,
but is wholly swallowed up in the bosom of Eternity, from whence it had its
being.

Alas, alas! What can the Wrath and Spirit of man that lusts to Envy,
aggravated by the heat and strength of the King of the Locus which came out of
the Pit, do unto one that is hid in the Secret Places of the Almighty? or, unto
them that are gathered under the healing wings of the Prince of Peace? under
whose Armor of Light, they shall be able to stand in the day of trial, having
on the breast plate of Righteousness, and the sword of the Spirit, which is
their weapon of war against Spiritual wickedness, Principalities and Powers,
and the Rulers of the darkness of this World, both within and without! Oh my
Beloved! I have waited as a Dove at the Windows of the Ark, and have stood
still in that watch, which the Master (without whom I could do nothing) did at
his coming reward with fullness of his Love, wherein my heart did rejoice, that
I might in the Love and Life of God, speak a few words to you, sealed with the
Spirit of Promise, that the taste thereof might be a savor of Life to your
Life, and a Testimony in you of my Innocent Death: And if I had been altogether
silent, and the Lord had not opened my mouth unto you, yet he would have opened
your hearts, and there have sealed my Innocence with the streams of Life, by
which we are all Baptized into that body which is in God, with whom and in
whose presence there is Life; in which as you abide, you stand upon the pillar
and ground of Truth: For, the Life being the Truth and the Way, go not one step
without it, lest you should compass a Mountain in the Wilderness; for unto
every thing there is a season. As the Flowing of the Ocean does fill every
creek and branch thereof, and then retires again toward its own being and
fullness, and leaves a savor behind it; so does the Life and Virtue of God flow
into every one of your hearts, whom He has made partakers of his Divine
Nature, and when it withdraws but a little, it leaves a sweet savor behind it,
that many can say, they are made clean through the Word that He has spoken to
them: In which Innocent Condition you may see what you are in the presence of
God, and what you are without Him. Therefore my Dear hearts, let the enjoyment
of the Life alone, be your Hope, your Joy and Consolation, and let the Man of
God flee those things that would lead the Mind out of the Cross, for then the
Savor of the Life will be buried: And although some may speak of things that
they received in the Life, as experiences, yet the Life being veiled, and the
savor that it left behind, washed away by the fresh floods of Temptation, the
Condition that they did enjoy in the Life, boasted of by the Aerie Thing, will
be like the Manna that was gathered Yesterday, without any good scent or savor:
For it was only well with the Man while he was in the Life of Innocence, but
being driven from the Presence of the Lord into the Earth, what can be boast
of? And although you know these things, and (many of you) much more than I can
say; yet for the Love and Zeal I bear to the Truth and Honor of God, and
tender desire of my Soul to those that are young, that they may read me in that
from which I write, to strengthen them against the wiles of the subtle Serpent
that beguiled Eve; I say, stand in the Watch within, in the Fear of the Lord,
which is the very Entrance of Wisdom; and the State where you are ready to
receive the Secrets of the Lord: Hunger and Thirst patiently, be not weary,
neither doubt; stand still and cease from thy own working, and in due time thou
shall enter into the Rest, and thy Eyes shall behold thy Salvation, whose
Testimonies are sure and righteous altogether: Let them be as a Seal upon thine
Arm, and as Jewels about thy Neck, that others may see what the Lord has done
for your Souls: Confess Him before Men, yea before His greatest Enemies, Fear
not what they can do unto you: Greater is He that is in you, than he that is in
the World: For he will cloth you with Humility, and in the power of His
Meckness you shall reign over all the rage of your Enemies in the favor of
God; wherein as you stand in Faith, ye are the Salt of the Earth; For many
seeing your good works, may glorify God in the day of their Vitation. Take heed
of receiving that which you saw not in your Life, lest you give ear to the
Enemy; Bring all things to the Life that they may be proved, whether they be
wrought in God: The Love of the World, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Lust of
the Eye, are without the Light, in the World; therefore possess your Vessels
in all Sanctification and Honor, and let your Eye look at the Mark; He that
has called you is holy: And if there be an Eye that offends, pluck it out, and
cast it from you: Let not a Temptation take hold, for if you do, it will keep
from the Favor of God, and that will be a sad state: For without Grace
possessed, there is no assurance of Salvation; By Grace you are saved, and the
Witnessing of it is sufficient for you; to which I commend you all my Dear
Friends, and in it remain,

Boston Goal, the 13 of the first Month, 1660. 61. You Brother, William Leddra.

The 9th. of the first. Month 1660. 61.
William Leddra being called before the Court; and they having found him
guilty, that by their Law he was to die. He asked them, What Evil he had done?

They Answered, His own Confession was as good as a thousand Witnesses.

He Asked, What was that?

Answ. He owned those that were put to Death, and that they were Innocent, for
which they died; and that he would not put off his Hat in the Court; and that
he would say, Thee and Thou to the Magistrates.

Then said he, You will put me to Death for speaking English, and for not
pulling off my Clothes.

Then Daniel Donison said, A man may speak Treason in English.

Then William said, Let us come to the Thing in hand; Is it evil to say Thee
and Thou to a single Person? To it they Answered not.

Then one of the Court asked him, If he would Recant of those Errors?

He Answered, What, to join with such Murderers as you are? Then let every man
that meets me say, This is the man that has forsaken the God of his Salvation.

They said unto him, the last general Court he had the liberty granted him to
go for England, or go out of their Jurisdiction; and promising to come here no
more, he might save his Life.

He Answered, I stand not in my own Will, but in the Will of the Lord, if I may
have my freedom I shall go, but to make such a Promise I cannot.

After they proceeded to Pronounce the Sentence of Death, and the 14th. of the
first Month, 60. 61. they went to the Place with a Band of Men, and put him to
Death. When he came upon the Ladder, one said, William, Have you any thing to
say to the People? and after some time he said, For the Testimony of Jesus, and
for bearing witness against Seducers and Seduced, I am come to this day. And
the last words he spoke to best remembrance were, Lord Jesus receive my soul,
for unto thee I commit my spirit.

This was sent me by Nicholas Upshal, and Coppied by me, William Coddington, of
Rhoad Island.



The COPY of a LETTER from a Stranger to his Friend, touching the Death of W.
Leddra.
Boston, March 26. 1661.
ON the 14th of this instant here was one William Leddra, which was put to
Death. The People of the Town told me, he might go away if he would; but when I
made further Enquiry, I heard the Marshal say, That he was chained in Prisen
from the time he was Condemned to the day of his Execution. I am not of his
Opinion: but yet truly me thought the Lord did mightily appear in the man. I
went to one of the Magistrates of Cambridge, who had been of the Jury that
condemned him (as he told me himself) and I asked him by what Rule he did it?
He answered me, That he was a Rogue, a very Rogue. But what is this to the
Question (I said) where is your Rule? He said he had abused Authority. Then I
goes after the William Leddra.
man, and asked him, Whether he did not look on it as a breach of a Rule, to
slight and undervalue Authority? and I said that Paul gave Festus the title of
Honor, though he was a Heathen (I do not say these Magistrates are Heathens.)
I said then when the man was on the Ladder (who looked on me, and called me
Friend, and said, Know, that this day I am willing to offer up my Life for the
Witness of JESUS) Then I desired leave of the Officers to speak: and said,
Gentlemen, I am a stranger both to your Persons and Country, and yet a friend
to both: and I cried aloud, For the Lord's sake, take not away the man's Life:
but remember Gamaliel's Counsel to the Jews; If this be of man, it will come to
naught; but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow its but be careful ye be not
found fighters against God. And the Captain said, Why had you not come to the
Prison? The Reason was, because I heard the man might go if he would, and
therefore I called him down from the Tree, and said, Come down William, you may
go away if you will. Then Capt. Oliver said, it was no such matter; and asked,
What I had to do with it? and besides, bad me to be gone: And I told them I was
willing; for I cannot endure to see this, I said. And when I was in the Town,
some did seem to sympathize with me in my Grief. But I told them, that they had
no Warrant from the Word of God; nor President from our Country; nor Power from
his Majesty to hang the Man. I rest,

Your Friend, Thomas Wilkie.

To Mr. George Lad, Master of the America of Dartmouth, now at Barbados.
THE END.

