THE BURDEN OF BABYLON, AND THE TRIUMPH OF SION As it was seen in the VALLEY of
VISION: By GEORGE BISHOPE.

Multitudes, Multitudes in the Valley of Decision; for the Day of the Lord is
near in the Valley of Decision, Joel 3. 14.

Sing and rejoice O Daughter of Sion, for lo I come, and will dwell in the
midst of Thee, says the Lord, and many Nations shall be joined to the Lord in
that day, and shall be my people, and I will dwell in the midst of thee; and
thou shall know that the Lord of Hosts has sent me unto thee. And the Lord
shall inherit Judah his portion in the Holy Land, and shall choose Jerusalem
again; Be silent O all flesh before the Lord, for he is raised up out of his
holy Habitation. Zach. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson, 1661.

The Burden of BABYLON, etc.
IN the Valley of Vision, under the bottom of the Mountains, and the depths of
the Rocks, as I lay in the Deep, I saw this Burden of Babylon.

O ye Oppressing Powers! who have kept the Seed of God under, and made it
continually to cry by reason of its Oppression, the Word of the Lord thorough
me, is to You. Woe, Woe unto You from the Lord; for his Day is coming upon you
like a Whirlwind, and who shall stop it? He will work, and who shall let it? He
brings it on, and it comes swift, and who shall hinder it? I will not spare the
Guilty, says the Lord; I will not condemn the Innocent: I will render to Every
man according to his Work. My Day comes swift, and who shall put it by? I will
be avenged on mine Enemies, I will bring under them that hate me. All mine
Enemies shall be sound Liars unto Me: Vanity shall take them; the Wind shall
carry them away. But they that fear the Lord shall Possess the Land; They shall
inherit mine holy Mountain, says the Lord.

Fear, Horror, and the Pit is upon thee, O Daughter of Babylon: Thou shall not
be: An End is come, even the Measure of thine Iniquity: Thou have long boasted
thy self, and gloryed: Thou have long made merry over the Blood of the Slain;
thou have long drunk the Blood of the Poor and Needy: Thou have glutted thy
self, and become fat: Thou art covered with Ointments, and with Abominations,
and have enricht thy self: Thou have sitten as a Queen, and have said, I shall
see no sorrow: My Children are Many, I shall not be Desolate. Thou have vaunted
it against the Lord, and exalted thy self against the Holy One of Israel: Tush!
does God regard? Is there knowledge in the Most High? Thou have made thy Nests
in the Stars, and thither thou art gone up. Thou have decked thy self as though
thou should never know sorrow any more. Thou are grown exceeding lofty; Thou
tramplest upon the Foot of the Poor and Needy: Thou scornest the Lord, and
fear not before the Mighty One of Israel: Thou art gone beyond all bounds:
Thou enlargest thy self as Hell, and as the Grave which is never satisfied. The
Virgin Daughter of Sion was contemned by thee in the Day of thy Prosperity:
Thou deridedst when she was spoken of; thou made a mock of her sorrows, when
tears covered her; when she sat Desolate on the ground, and Ashes were over
her; when she was bereaved of Children, and without an Husband; thou sportedst
at her Affliction, and took'st pleasure in her groans; the Burden of Every One
raised thee up: When thou heardest them, thou rejoicedst: The more she was
brought low, the more thou exaltedst thy self, and thou made a mock of her
sufferings: Thou puttedst thy foot upon her; thou pushedst her; thou
disdainedst her with thine eye; thou cryedst Aha! The Lord God filled her with
bitterness, and the transgressions of her youth were upon her, and thou wast
glad.

Behold! Thy Day is come wherein thou shall be like unto her. Thou have lived
in pleasure; thou have murdered the Just, and he has not resisted thee: Thou
art very haughty, and winkest with thine eye, and mincest with thy feet: Thou
art become exceeding delicate. Many lovers thou have, and thine eyes roll up
and down, and thou think every one is taken with thy Beauty: Thy Destruction
shall come from far, and thy Calamity from the Ends of the Earth: And thou
shall fall and rise no more, says the Lord.

Thy Lovers shall leave thee, thy familiars shall forsake thee; thy Friends and
Kinsfolk shall stand afar off thee: Thy Children shall not be in the Day that I
will visit thee, says the Lord. Stand afar off, look upon her, behold her
torment: Flee, flee from the Land of Caldea; It Is rolling up as a Scrowle
before the fire: It Is iniquity is upon it; It Is sinking into the Sea; out of
which it shall never Arise, says the Lord.

No more Remembrance shall be had of Thee, O Daughter of Babylon! O Thou
Oppressing City! Thou Bloody City! Whose scum is in the midst of Thee; Thou
must be consumed; Neither Name, nor Remnant; neither Son, nor Nephew; No More
of thy stock from Generation to Generation. The Lord has said it.

Thy Day is at an End; Thy Night is Come; Thy Sorrows and Perplexities; Thy
desperate Sorrows; Thou may not be pitied, O Daughter of Babylon, who art to
be destroyed: Happy shall he be that Rewards thee as thou have served us.
Happy shall he be that takes and dasheth thy Little Ones against the Stones,
says the Lord.

Jerusalem was not at all considered by thee in the day of her Calamity, in the
Day that her Iniquity had an End: When thou saw it, thou helpest it on, and
joyedst in her Distress, Thou shall not be bemoaned; None shall sigh for Thee
in the Day when the Lord shall cover thee with thine own Doings, and fill thee
with the works of thy hands; Who shall lay thee low and desolate, and compass
thee with tears, and fill thee with blood, and put thee into the Pit, Never to
arise: None shall shed a tear for thee. The Lord has spoken it.

All thy Days of Pleasure draw to an End: Thou have been feasting it long, and
with thy Jovial Companions have been praising the Gods of Gold and of Silver,
of Brass, of Iron, of Wood, and of Stone in the Vessels of the House of the
Lord, and there thou have Quaff'd it: Whilst Sion lay ploughed up as a Field,
and Jerusalem in Ashes: A Deadly Draught it shall prove to Thee: For thou shall
Drink, and be Drunken, and be Moved, and be Mad, and Spue, and fall, and rise
no more, says the Lord.

Thou have been strutting it long in the Palace of Babylon, and have said, Is
not this Great Babylon that I have built for the house of the Kingdom, by the
Might of my Power, and for the Honor of my Majesty? Thou have thought thou
shall never be removed: A swift Destruction shall come upon Thee, and thou
shall be thrown into the Pit: The Lord has spoken it.

Great Peace shall be unto them who are thine Enemies; and of the increase of
the Government that is over thee, and Peace, there shall be No End. Upon the
Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to Order it, and establish it with
Judgment and with Justice, from henceforth even for Ever. The Zeal of the Lord
of Hosts shall perform this.

Thou have been exceeding Proud, and full of Contempt, when the Daughter of
Sion has been bowed Down: Thou shall go into Captivity, out of which thou
shall not Return, says the Lord.

Have Mercy upon Us, O Lord! have mercy upon Us; for We are exceedingly filled
with Contempt; Our Soul is exceedingly filled with the scornings of those that
are at Ease, and with the Contempt of the Proud. Remember, O Lord! the Children
of Edom, in the Day of Jerusalem, who said, Raze it, Raze it, even to the
Foundation of it; said Sion in the Day of her Distress: But thou vauntedst it
then, and cryedst, Aha! She is broken that was the Gate of the People: We shall
be Replenished, she is turned unto Us. These Two Nations, and these Two
Countries shall be Mine; and We will possess it, whenas the Lord was there.
Therefore as I live says the Lord God, I will do even according to thine
Anger, and according to thine Envy which thou have used out of thy Hatred
against them, and I will make my self known amongst them when I have Judged
thee, and thou shall know that I am the Lord, and that I have heard all thy
Blasphemies which thou have spoken against the Mountains of Israel, saying,
They are laid Desolate, they are given Us to Consume. Thus with your Mouth ye
have boasted against me, and have multiplied your words against me, I have
heard them. Thus says the Lord God, When the whole Earth Rejoiceth, I will
make thee Desolate: As thou did Rejoice at the Inheritance of the House of
Israel, because it was Desolate, so will I do unto thee: Thou shall be
Desolate, O Mount Seir! and all Idumea, even all of it, and they shall know
that I am the Lord. Son of M(...), thy face against Mount Seir, and prophecy
against it, and say unto it, Thus says the Lord God, Behold! O Mount Seir, I
am against thee, and I will st^etch out Mine hand against thee, and I will make
thee most Desolate; I will lay thy Cities waste, and thou shall be Desolate,
and thou shall know that I am the Lord, because thou have had a perpetual
hatred, and have shed the Blood of the Children of Israel by the force of the
Sword in the time of their Calamity; in the time that their iniquity had an
End. Therefore as I live says the Lord God, I will prepare thee unto Blood,
and Blood shall pursue thee, since thou have not hated Blood; even Blood shall
pursue thee. Thus will I make Mount Seir most Desolate, and cut out from it him
that passes out, and him that Returns, and I will fill his Mountains with
his slain Men, in thy Hills, and in thy Valleys, and in all thy Rivers shall
they fall that are slain with the Sword. I will make thee perpetual
Desolations; and thy Cities shall not Return: and ye shall know that I am the
Lord.

Thus far of the Burden of Idumea.

But as for thee, O Babylon! As for thee, O Leviathan! Thou piercing Serpent;
thou Crooked Serpent; thou Dragon that art in the midst of the Sea; I will
punish thee with my sore, and great, and strong Sword, says the Lord: And I
will slay the Dragon that is in the Sea.

And as for thee Pharaoh King of Egypt, the Great Dragon that lies in the midst
of His Rivers, which has said, My River is mine Own; I have made it for my
self. Thus says the Lord God, Behold, I am Against thee; I will put Hooks into
thy Chaws, and cause the Fish of thy Rivers to stick unto thy Skales, and will
bring thee up out of the midst of thy Rivers, and all the fish of thy Rivers
shall stick unto thy Skales, and I will leave thee thrown into the Wilderness,
thee, and all the Fish of thy Rivers; Thou shall fall upon the Open fields:
Thou shall not be brought together, nor Gathered; I have given thee for Meat to
the Beasts of the field, and to the Fowls of Heaven, and all the Inhabitants of
Egypt shall know that I am the Lord; because they have been a staff of Reed to
the house of Israel; where they took hold of thee by the hand, thou did break
and rent all their shoulder; and when they Leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and
made all their Loins to be at a stand. Therefore, thus says the Lord God,
Behold! I will bring a sword upon thee, and Cut out Man and Beast out of thee;
and the Land of Egypt shall be desolate and waste, and they shall know that I
am the Lord: because he has said, The River is mine Own, and I have made it.

But as for Thee, O Daughter of Sion! O Virgin Daughter of Jerusalem! Rejoice,
and be exceeding glad: For the Day of thy Calamity has an End: The Measure of
thy sufferings are up; when this is Over, which is now Coming upon Thee. Thou
shall not sorrow any more, neither shall thou weep: Tears no more shall be thy
Repast continually: Desolation and Destruction shall not come within Thy
Borders. Peace shall be within Thy Walls, and Prosperity within Thy Palaces:
They shall Prosper that love Thee. There shall no more be within Thee an Infant
of Days; Nor an Old Man that stoopeth by Reason of Age: Thy People shall be all
Righteous; The Branch of my Planting; The Work of my hands, that I may be
glorified, says the Lord.

Paleness shall no longer cover Thee; nor shall thy Cheeks any more wax thin;
Nor shall Dimness be upon Thy Glory: The Everlasting God shall be thine
Everlasting Light, and the Days of thy Mourning shall be ended. For a little
while have I forsaken thee, but with Everlasting kindness will I embrace thee;
and Restore Comfort unto thee, and to thy Mourners.

Behold, the Day is Come, wherein though I will make a full End of the Nations
where thou have been scattered; yet I will not make a full End of thee; but
will gather thee, and restore Comfort to thee; and thou shall be in the midst
of many People, as a Lion among the Beasts of the Forests: As a Young Lion
among the Flocks of Sheep; who if he goes through, both treads Down, and
teareth to pieces, and none can Deliver; Thine hand shall be lift up upon thine
Adversaries; and all Thine Enemies shall be cut off.

And, Whereas Thou have been forsaken, and Desolate, so that no man has passed
thorough thee; I will make thee an Eternal Excellency; a Joy of many
Generations. Thou shall call upon Me, says the Lord, and I will answer thee;
Thou shall speak, and I will hear thee. For, thou Israel art my servant Jacob
whom I have chosen; The seed of Abraham my friend: Thou whom I have taken from
the Ends of the Earth, and called thee from the chief men thereof; and said
unto thee, Thou art my servant; I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away.
Fear thou not, for I am with thee; Be not dismayed, for I am thy God: I will
strengthen thee; yea, I will help thee; yea, I will uphol^ thee with the right
hand of my Righteousness. Behold, all they that were incensed against thee
shall be ashamed and confounded; they shall be as nothing; and they that strive
with thee shall perish. Thou shall seek them, but shall not find them; even
them that contended with thee. They that war against thee shall be as nothing,
and as a thing of naught. For I the Lord thy God will hold thy Right hand;
saying unto thee, Fear not, I will help thee. Fear not thou Worm Jacob, and ye
men of Israel; I will help thee, says the Lord, and thy Redeemer; the Holy One
of Israel. Behold, I will make thee a new Threshing Instrument having teeth;
Thou shall Thresh the Mountains, and beat them small, and shall make the Hills
as Chaff; Thou shall fan them, and the Wind shall carry them away, and the
Whirelwind shall scatter them; and thou shall rejoice in the Lord; and Glory in
the Holy One of Israel.

So be thou of Good Comfort; Lift up thy head, for thy Redemption draws nigh:
Rejoice greatly, O Daughter of Sion; Shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem: Behold thy
King comes unto thee; he is Just, and having Salvation; Lowly, and riding on
an Ass, the Foale of an Ass; he will joy over thee with Joy, and rejoice over
thee with shouting; and he will marry thee unto him, as a young man marries a
Virgin; and thou shall be called the blessed of the Lord, and thine offspring
with thee, says the Lord.

For Silver I will give Gold, and for Brass Silver, and for Iron Brass, and
for Wood Iron. All thine Officers shall be Peace, and thine Exactors
Righteousness. Wasting and Destruction shall be no more heard within thy
borders. Thou shall call thy Walls Salvation, and thy Gates Praise. And the
Name of thy City from that Day shall be called, the Lord is there.

And this Triumph I heard in the Valley of Vision, and this Burden I saw in the
Valley of Decision, even the Burden of Babylon, and the Triumph of Sion, as I
was in the Deep the 24 and 25 8 Month, 1661.

The End
G. B.


