No Reason to desire NEW REVELATIONS;

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, October 7th. 1700.

BEING The Seventh, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire;

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, D. D. Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.


WHEN I first began to Discourse on these Words; I proposed to speak to these
three Points.

I. To show that the present Standing Revelation of God's Will, contained in
the Books of the Old and New Testament, is abundantly sufficient to persuade
Men to Repentance, if they are not unreasonably blind and obstinate. They have
Moses and the Prophets; (I add, they have also Christ and his Apostles;) let
them hear them.

II. To show that having already such good Grounds of Faith, such full
Directions for Practice, and such strong Motives to Repentance, it is an
unreasonable Request to desire more. Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went unto
them from the dead, they will repent. And,

III. Lastly, To show that in case God should condescend to gratify Men in
this unreasonable Desire, (working every Day new Miracles before their Eyes, or
sending their deceased Friends to them from the dead, to assure them of a
future State, and to warn them to prepare for it) it is highly probable that
very few or none of those who do not believe, and are not brought to
Repentance, by the Preaching and Standing Revelation of the Gospel, would be
persuaded by this means. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets (nor Christ
and his Apostles) neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

The first of these has been the subject of several former Discourses; the
second I design to speak to at this time; viz.

II. To show that having already such good Grounds of Faith, such full
Directions for Practice, and such strong Motives to Repentance, as I have shown
we have, in that Standing Revelation of God's Will which is contained in the
Holy Scripture, it is an unreasonable Request to desire more. Nay, Father
Abraham, but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent.

And the Unreasonableness of the Request which the Rich Man here makes in the
behalf of his Brethren; viz. That God would be pleased to send one from the
dead to preach to them; or in general, how unreasonable it is for men now
adays to desire, or look for more means of Conversion, or Motives to
Repentance, than God has been pleased to afford us in the Standing Revelation
of the Gospel, will appear, if we consider these following things.

1. That the Principles of Faith and the Motives to Repentance which we have
already, being well grounded upon Matters of Fact, which have been once already
sufficiently proved and attested, it is altogether needless that any fresh or
further Proof should be given of them; and it is what we never think reasonable
to desire in other the like Cases.

That when God requires us to believe or do any thing, and sends a special
Messenger to acquaint us with his Will, he should grant to this Messenger such
Testimonials, as are sufficient to satisfy reasonable Men that he is no
Impostor, but a Teacher sent from God, is indeed a thing that may fairly be
expected. And if God should not do thus, we should be excusable in not
harkening to such a Messenger, because we could not know whether he was a true
or a false Prophet; and God does not require, neither indeed is it reasonable
that we should believe every Pretender to Revelation. And the clearest Proof of
any Man's being sent from God to teach us any thing, being a Power of doing
such Miracles and Mighty Works, as are manifestly above the skill and strength
of a Man to do, it was therefore highly requisite, and what might reasonably be
looked for, that God should grant such a Power as this to all those whom he has
ever inspired with new Light, and Commissioned to make any new Revelation of
his Will to Mankind. And this he has always done.

He gave this Power to Moses in a large measure, because the Matters that Men
were to trust him for, were many, and very considerable.

He gave it also to some of the succeeding Prophets, but in a less measure,
because their Business, for the most part, was only to Interpret, or to press
the Observation of the Law of Moses, which had been sufficiently proved before.

And he gave it in the largest measure of all to our Savior and his Apostles;
because the Revelation made by them was of Truths very mysterious, some of them
above the Reach and Comprehension of Humane Reason; It was also a Revelation,
in a manner wholly new, even to the Jews themselves, and much more to the
Gentiles. And besides, it was a Revelation in many Points, to appearance,
contrary to a former Divine Revelation; inasmuch as it ordered the Abolition of
many things which had been before enjoined by divine Authority; viz. all the
Ritual and Ceremonial Law of Moses. And therefore to gain Credit to their
Testimony, that they were inspired and sent by God to teach such things, it was
very requisite that they should produce more, and more plain and undeniable
Testimonials of their divine Mission, than Moses himself had done. And such
Testimonials they had, such they did produce, working more Miracles, and those
as I may say, more wonderful and Miraculous, than Moses and all the Prophets
together had wrought before.

But when these Testimonials had been once fairly produced, and examined, and
by all reasonable Men allowed to be true and sufficient; and when Christ and
his Apostles had made and published all that Revelation which they were
Commissioned to make; And when to prevent all misunderstandings of it, or
mistakes concerning it, they had committed it all to Writing; and the Men that
lived in those times, and were capable of enquiring into the Truth of it, were
well assured that the Books said to be written by the Apostles and Evangelists,
were indeed theirs, and contained in substance all the same things, and no
other, which they had before declared by word of Mouth, and confirmed by
Miracles; After this, I say, when the Divinity of the Revelation was thus once,
at the first Publishing of it, so fully confirmed, there was no need that it
should be proved any more, and all other Proof thereof would have been
superfluous; because the whole Matter, both Doctrine and Proof, being once
faithfully recorded, and those Records well attested, there could afterward be
no reasonable Cause to call it again in Question. So that the Reason of working
Miracles being then ceased, it was reasonable that the Power of working
Miracles should cease too; at least till such time as God should think fit, to
make some Alteration in, or Addition to his former Revelations; (which we have
good Reason to think he will never do) or 'till he should please to undertake
the Conversion of those Nations to the Christian Faith, to whom the Knowledge
of the former Miracles that had been wrought for its Confirmation could not be
so well communicated by credible History as it is to us.

For (as was hinted before) Credible History is all the Proof and Evidence that
we ever think reasonable to require in other Cases of the like Nature.

As for instance; When a new Law is made concerning any Matter; it is
requisite, according to the Custom of our Country, that it should pass both
Houses of Parliament, and that the King should ratify and confirm it; and that
afterward it should be some way so published and promulged, that all the
Subjects that are then alive should have sufficient Assurance given them that
such a Law is made. But after this Law has been once so passed, and ratified
and promulged, it is passed and ratified and promulged for ever; and no Man is
so unreasonable as to expect that every Parliament that is called afterward,
should read and pass over again all the Laws that have been made before their
Time; or that every King that succeeds to the Throne should afresh ratify and
publish all the Laws that were made by all his Predecessors. But all the Proof
that we ever require of the Authority of any ancient Law, is a true Copy of it,
and a good History or Record of its being made at such a time, by such a King,
confirmed by the Tradition of all the intermediate Ages to our Time, which have
allowed of its Authority, by citing it as a Law of the Land, by Pleading from
it, and by giving Judgment according to it.

And he who will not allow of the same Proof and Evidence of the Authority of
the Christian Institution so many hundred years ago established, but would
needs have new Miracles and new Revelations to confirm the former, is every
whit as unreasonable as that Criminal would be, who being Indicted upon some
Ancient Statute, should refuse to plead to his Indictment, upon Pretense that
he knew not whether there was any such Law or not; it being made (if ever it
was made) long before his Time, and there being none now alive that were
present at the making of it. Show him the Law in the Statute Book; why, how
does he know, he would say, but that the Printers had a mind to put a Cheat upon
the Nation, by Printing a Law of their own making, as a Law made by some of our
ancient Kings; nay show him the Original Record, still he would say, There have
been abundance of Forgeries in the World, and how does he know but that this is
one? The Record he would own perhaps, looks like an Ancient Deed, and has all the
Marks of such Antiquity as it pretends to; but after all, it is possible it may
be, and therefore he cannot be sure it is not a Forgery; and 'till he is
assured of this, he will not plead to an Indictment that is grounded upon it.
But if the King and Parliament that now are, will be pleased to declare that
this is a good Law, and if he himself may be allowed to be by when they shall
declare it; or if at least two or three Witnesses that he can trust shall
testify upon Oath; that they were present when it was passed into a Law, then
he will allow it to be a good Law; and after that, will be content to suffer
the Punishment of it, if he shall ever again be a Transgressor.

Now what Man is there that would think this a reasonable Demand? Or what Judge
or Court would ever allow of such a Plea? And yet, as unreasonable as it is, it
is just the same with theirs, who, pretending to be more wise and cautious than
their Neighbors, will not allow of the same sort of Proof (though indeed much
better in its kind) of the Truth of the Christian Religion; but though we have as
Authentic Histories as any are in the World, (such Histories as the greatest
Adversaries of Christianity have not been able to say any thing to invalidate
the Truth of) which declare that Christ and his Apostles taught such and such
Doctrines, and wrought such and such Miracles to confirm the Truth of their
Doctrine, yet will not believe that the Doctrine of Christianity is true and
Divine, unless they may have special Messengers sent to them to declare a-fresh
all the same things which the Apostles once did; and those endued with a Power
of working in their sight and presence the same Miracles over again, that are
said to have been formerly done by Christ and his Apostles, to confirm the
Testimony that they gave.

2. The Unreasonableness of that Request which the Rich Man here makes in the
Behalf of his Brethren, viz. That God would make a new Revelation for their
particular Conversion; or, in general, The Unreasonableness of our now desiring
fresh Revelations; new Miracles or Apparitions of Men from the dead, to confirm
the Truth of those things which are already sufficiently proved to us by the
Standing Revelation of the Gospel, will further appear, if we consider; That to
us who live now in Christian Countries, other Grounds of Faith or stronger
Motives to Repentance than we have already in the standing Revelation of the
Gospel might be inconsistent with the Excellency of Faith, might destroy the
Virtue of Believing, and might be too great a Force and Constraint upon us,
such as would in a manner take away our Liberty of Choice.

For there is no Virtue at all in Believing what we see; there is no Praise or
Thanks at all due for doing what we are driven or forced to do; and for us, who
have already abundantly sufficient Grounds to believe and embrace Christianity,
to have fresh Miracles wrought every day before our own eyes (such Miracles as
we could not possibly doubt the Truth of) to confirm those Doctrines which are
already sufficiently confirmed, would not be to persuade us, but to force us to
be Christians; so that then the State we are now in would not be, as God
designed it should be, a State of Trial; for the Trial of Wisdom is, when there
are some Reasons on both sides; and he is the Wise Man who in that Case gives
Judgment on that side on which the Reasons are strongest.

But against what I have now said perhaps it may be objected, That the Evidence
which we desire of the Truth of Religion is no more than we are told has been
already given to some Men; particularly to those who lived in our Savior's and
his Apostle's times, and we cannot see why it would be more inconsistent with
the Nature of Faith and Religion now than it was then, or how it would more
destroy our Freedom than it did theirs, or how it would be a greater Force upon
our Choice than it was upon theirs, to have the very same Evidence of the Truth
of the Christian Religion which they had.

But in answer to this, it may be considered; that as they then had some
Evidence of the Truth of the Christian Religion which we have not, so we now
have some Evidence thereof which they had not: They indeed saw with their own
Eyes some of the Miracles that were wrought for the Confirmation of
Christianity; but they had not, as we now have, a credible History or Record of
a very great number of Miracles that were wrought for that purpose. And
therefore (without considering at present which of these Evidences of the Truth
of the Facts upon which our Religion is grounded, is the most convincing) thus
much is plain; That if we, who have already very good Reason to believe them
upon the Credit of a well attested History, were also admitted to be Eye
Witnesses of some fresh Miracles, such as we are told were then wrought, both
these Evidences together would be stronger and more irresistible, than either
of them alone; So that consequently, if we who have already one of these
Evidences, were allowed to have the other also, we should have more Evidence in
the whole than they had, our Choice consequently would not be so free as theirs
was, it would not be so much in the Power of our Wills to be Infidels, as it
was in theirs.

True, perhaps you will say, we should indeed in that Case have more Evidence
than they had, but that is not the thing we desire; all that we could wish for,
is, the very same Evidence that they had; and upon that Condition we could be
well contented to want the Historical Evidence which we have and they had not;
for we cannot but think, that the Evidence that they had is much stronger than
ours, and that they had much greater Reason to be Christians than we have. For
1. The Apostles of Christ who (as it is said) both saw his Miracles, and were
enabled by the Power of the Holy Ghost to do the like themselves, had plainly
greater Reason to believe, than even those had who heard from their mouths the
Testimony that they gave concerning our Lord, and saw the Miracles that were
done by their Hands in Confirmation of their Testimony. And 2. They who saw
with their own Eyes the Miracles that the Apostles wrought had more Reason to
believe, than those had to whom they were only Reported by Eye Witnesses, and
therefore much rather than we have who receive this Report only by a History
that was written many hundred years ago. Now this is all that we desire, viz.
To be upon the same Level with those who lived in the Primitive Times, and to
have as much Reason to be Christians as they had; and we cannot see why this
Request should be thought unreasonable; we do not understand why there would
not be then as much Freedom, and consequently as great Virtue in our Believing
upon such strong Evidence as there was in theirs.

In Answer to this therefore I shall consider distinctly the two Cases
beforementioned, and compare the same with ours.

(1.) I shall consider the Case of the Apostles, who both saw our Lord's
Miracles, and were enabled by the Power of the Holy Ghost to do the like
themselves.

And that they had a surer Ground of Faith than any since, or than any besides
themselves ever had, I believe must be granted; but then it is to be considered
on the other side.

1. That the Apostles were but few in number, only twelve Persons, or if we
should reckon in to the number, as in this respect, equal to the Apostles, all
those that were called by our Savior himself to be his Disciples, and who were
very much, though not so constantly in his Company as the Apostles were, we read
but of seventy of them; or if we add to these all those that were convinced by
our Saviors Miracles that he was the Christ, Luke 10.1.
and that owned themselves his Disciples while he was upon Earth, it is probable
that all these together were no more than five hundred; viz. those five hundred
Brethren, 1 Cor. 15.6.
to whom when met together in Galilee, our Lord showed himself alive after his
Passion.

2. It may be also considered; that their Case was extraordinary and peculiar,
and that this Advantage of greater Evidence (as we reckon it) which they had
above all others was no more than was necessary to qualify them for that
special Office which they, and none but they were to be employed in; which was
to bear Witness to the Men of that Generation by word of mouth, and to all
future Ages by their written Testimony, of the Doctrines and Miracles of our
Savior; for no Man is a proper Witness of any matter of Fact, but only he who
was an Eye Witness thereof.

3. It may be further considered, that as they had a more clear and
unexceptionable Evidence of the Truth of Christianity, than any besides ever
had, so they had also a greater Burden laid upon them, than any Christians
since have had; and it might be no more than necessary that the Grounds of
their Faith should be as much surer and stronger than those on which other
Men's Faith is built, as their Duty was larger and more difficult than other
Men's Duty is. For a weaker Foundation is as well able to support a low
Building, placed in a Bottom, and well sheltred from Storms, as a much stronger
is to bear a high built Tower, situated on the top of an Hill, or by the Sea
shore, and continually exposed to violent Winds and Tempests.

And this was the Condition of the Apostles in Comparison with ours. We have
indeed several Temptations to resist by the Power of our most holy Faith, but
then they are only such Temptations as are common to Men, and for the
overcoming whereof a Faith grounded only upon good Historical Evidence is
sufficient; for by the Power of such a Faith a great many in all Ages have
happily overcome them; But the Apostles had Difficulties and Temptations of
another sort to contend with; they wrestled not only against Flesh and Blood,
but against Principalities, against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness
of this World, against Spiritual Wickedness in high Places. It was their
Business to go in an untrodden Path, to break the Ice and to make plain the way
for all that were to follow; and our Work (very easy in comparison with
theirs) is only to follow in that Way, which they have made plain and smooth,
to that Kingdom of Heaven, into which they could not enter but through manifold
Tribulations.

That the Apostles therefore had stronger and more convincing Proofs of the
Truth of the Christian Religion than we have, and such as they could not so
easily resist, as we may those which are afforded to us, may be granted; and
yet it may be unreasonable for us to desire the same, unless we were to be put
to the same Trials of our Faith that they were; which in a Christian Country
can hardly be.

And indeed as desirous as we seem to be of having such Evidence of the Truth
of our Religion as we are told the Apostles had, I believe there are very few
of us but had rather be contented with less Evidence, than have so much as the
Apostles had with its appendant Burden; which was to travel all the World over,
even into the most rude and barbarous Countries to plant Christianity;
expecting wherever they came Bonds and Afflictions, meeting every where with
the most violent opposition and roughest Usage; encountering every where the
greatest Dangers, and sure at last to be made a bloody Sacrifice to the Malice
and Fury of their Persecutors. How much St. Paul alone endured (and it is like
the Sufferings of the other Aposiles were not much less) you may see in 2 Cor.
xi. 23, etc. and yet he was not then come to the end of his Sufferings; In
Labors abundant, in Stripes above measure, in Prisons frequent, in Deaths often;
Of the Jews five times received I forty Stripes save one; thrice was I beaten
with Rods, once was I Stoned, thrice I suffered Shipwreck, a Night and a Day I
have been in the Deep; in Journeyings often, in Perils of Waters, in Perils of
Robbers, in Perils by mine own Countrymen, in Perils by the Heathen, in Perils
in the City, in Perils in the Wilderness, in Perils in the Sea, in Perils among
false Brethren; In Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings often, in Hunger and
Thirst, in Fastings often, in Cold and Nakedness; Besides those things that are
without, that which comes upon me daily, the Care of all the Churches. And
therefore he might well say, as he does, 1 Cor. iv. 9, etc. I think that God
has set forth us the Apostles last, as it were appointed to Death; for we are
made a Spectacle to the World, and to Angels, and to Men; we are Fools for
Christ's sake -- we are weak -- we are despised; even unto this very hour we
both hunger and thirst, and are naked and are buffeted, and have no certain
dwelling Place; and labor working with our Hands, being reviled -- persecuted
-- defamed; we are made as the Filth of the World, and are the Off-scowring of
all things unto this Day. It was therefore plainly necessary that a Faith which
was to undergo these severe Trials, should be built upon the surest Grounds;
but for us, and to enable us to overcome the World, a Faith that is founded
upon less certain Evidence may be as sufficient.

(2.) The Second Case beforementioned was of those who heard with their own
Ears the Testimony which the Apostles gave concerning our Lord; and saw with
their own Eyes the wonderful Works that they did in Confirmation of their
Testimony. We could wish at least that we had such strong Evidence of the Truth
of the Christian Religion as they had; and if we had, we see not why there
would not be as much Choice, and consequently as much Virtue in our believing
as there was in theirs.

But here it may be considered,

1. That it was the Lot but of very few, even of those that lived in the
Apostles times, except of the Jews that dwelt in Judea, to hear the Apostles
themselves, or to see with their own Eyes the Miracles that they wrought; and
even of these there were but few that had the opportunity of seeing many of
their mighty Works; so that all things considered the Evidence that we have of
the Truth of our Religion, if it be not fully equal to, is very little inferior
to that which they had; for it being (as has been formerly shown) morally
impossible that the Gospel History which is now in our Hands should be forged
or spurious, or corrupted and altered, what can be thought to be wanting in the
Clearness of the Evidence that we have (being given in Writing and not by word
of Mouth) is made up by the Fullness and Abundance of it; we having in the
Writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, several Witnesses testifying the same
Miracles, and every one of them Witnessing more Miracles, than any except those
who were constant Attendants upon our Lord, or Companions of the Apostles were
in a Capacity to witness. But,

2. Granting it to be true, that in the Apostle's times those to whom the
Gospel was preached, had generally clearer and stronger Evidence of the Truth
of Christianity than we have now; yet I say, even that Evidence of Sense which
they had was not more apt or like to convince and persuade them, than the Proof
which we now have, though in it self it be less, is to convince and persuade us.

For when Men have already taken up an Opinion, (no matter upon what Grounds)
or when by their Worldly Interest they are engaged to be of such an Opinion, it
cannot be expected that the same Reasons, I mean Reasons of the same strength in
themselves, should be sufficient to persuade them to alter their Opinion, which
would have sufficed to have fixed and established them in their former Notions.

And this is plainly the Difference between those Times and ours; for when the
Revelation of the Gospel was first made by Christ and his Apostles, all, both
Jews and Gentiles, were most strongly prejudiced against it, each of them
having been bred up in a Persuasion that their own way of Worship was right,
and the Jews in particular having had good Assurance that their Law given by
Moses, (to which the Doctrine of Christianity seemed very opposite) had been of
Divine Institution. But however, when a Man has been bred up in the Belief of
any thing, and has believed it a good while, he takes it for granted that he
had reason to believe it, whether he had so or not; so that the Prejudice
against Christianity was as powerful, though not altogether so just, in the
Gentiles, whose Religion was merely fabulous, as in the Jews, whose Law was
indeed of Divine Institution.

And besides, (which was an Impediment alike common both to the Jews and
Gentiles) they could not either of them then embrace and profess the Christian
Religion without apparently hazarding the Loss of all things that were dear to
them in this World. And how very apt a strong Worldly Interest is to blind Men's
Eyes and to bias their Judgments, is what we cannot but daily observe in all
other Cases.

But our Case now is quite otherwise; our Prejudices and our Interest are both
for Christianity; for we sucked it in with our Mothers Milk, and we found it
the established Religion of the Country where we were Born; for which Reasons
we believed it, or at least were strongly inclined to believe it, before we
knew or had heard of any other Reasons; so that to us, who are already inclined
on this side; to us, who to be sure, are not prejudiced against it; to us,
whose Interest leads us to continue in the Religion we were first bred in, such
Proof as we always accept and allow of in other Cases of the like Nature, is
Proof strong enough. And therefore much rather when we have, as indeed we have,
a stronger and more uncontrouled Tradition for the Truth of the Gospel-History,
than of any History in the World besides, we shall be inconsistent with our
selves, if we do not allow it to be sufficient.

So that upon the whole Matter, considering the Prejudices both from Education
and Interest which they lay under who lived in those Times when the Gospel was
first revealed and preached; even their own Eyesight of some of those Miracles
that were then wrought to confirm it, was not more persuasive than is that good
Assurance that we now have by credible and undoubted Records that such Miracles
were then wrought. The Proof they had, considered in it self, was indeed
stronger than ours; but considering our disserent Circumstances, that Proof was
not more apt or likely to convince them, than that which we have given us is to
convince and persuade us. And if we had now the very same Proof and
Demonstration of the Miracles wrought for the Confirmation of our Christian
Religion, viz. The Evidence of our own Senses; this, which was but sufficient
to them, might to us be such a Proof as would be, in a manner, a Force upon us;
such clear Demonstration meeting with no strong Prejudice or considerable
Interest on the other side, might be enough to overpower us, so that we could
not be Infidels if we would, and then there would be no Virtue in Believing.

3. The Unreasonableness of desiring more Proof of the Truth of Religion than
God has been pleased to afford us by the Standing Revelation of the Gospel, and
particularly of desiring that God would be pleased to work new Miracles for our
particular satisfaction, or for the Conviction of some of our Friends that are
not persuaded by the Gospel-Revelation, will further appear, if we consider the
equal Right that all other Men have to desire the same, and the many
Inconveniences and Absurdities that would follow, in case all Men should be
gratified in this Desire.

For as to the first of these, viz. The equal Right that all other Men have to
desire the same; What Reason can I pretend for my Infidelity, which another Man
may not also as well plead for his? Have not I as good Proof of the Truth of
Religion as my Neighbor has? Have not I as free Recourse to the Holy
Scriptures as he? and the same Evidence of the Truth and Divine Inspiration of
them that he has? And are we not also in all other Respects alike? Being Born
in the same Country, and having had the same Education, and consequently being
probable to have the same Inclinations toward, or the same Prejudices against,
or Aversion to the Christian Faith? And if so, what Reason can I plead for any
extraordinary or peculiar Favor? For is not he God's Creature as well as I?
And has not God the same Tenderness and Regard for him that he has for me,
and consequently the same Desire of his Welfare, that I can suppose he has of
mine? Why then should not God grant him this same Request whether in the Behalf
of himself or his Friend, as well as I can expect he should grant it me? In a
word, Why may not every Man desire the same as well as I? And why should not
God grant it to all that desire it, as well as to any one?

But now if God should do this, see what Inconveniences and Absurdities would
follow thereupon?

One sort of Men would not believe, unless they might see Apparitions; If one
went unto them from the dead, they would repent. And so for their sakes the
World must be filled with Ghosts; the Dead must never be at Rest in their
Graves, and the Souls in Bliss who once rejoiced in the thought of being for
ever got clear out of a troublesome World, must be content (to gratify these
Men) to leave their Place in Abraham's Bosom, and to be deprived of the
Beatifical Vision, and the unspeakable Joys of Heaven, as long and as often as
any of these unreasonable Men are pleased to desire it.

But another sort of Men it may be there are, that would not like this kind of
Proof; A transient Apparition of a Ghost they would look upon perhaps as a thing
too liable to Cheat and Imposture; they would therefore desire some more plain and
sensible and permanent Miracles than this; some such Miracles as those were
which our Savior and his Apostles wrought; and if they could but see such,
they make no doubt but they should be convinced: And so for their sakes, and
for their Conviction, half the Men that are born into the World, must be born
Lame or Blind, that so they may be afterward Cured by Miracle, for the
satisfaction of these Men: And a great many must be possessed with Devils, and
be grievously torn and tortured by them, that these Men may have the Pleasure
of seeing with their own Eyes the Evil Spirits cast forth; and of observing how
much more calm and sober the Men are after the Devil is gone out, than they
were before.

But even these Miracles, it is like, would not satisfy all; but some it may
be, would be apt to suspect that there might be some Trick or Collusion in
them, and that what they saw, was done only by a Confederacy between the
Physician and the Patient, to amuse and deceive the Beholders; and therefore,
what they, it may be, would desire for their particular satisfaction, would be,
to see a dead Man raised to Life again after he had been dead several Days, and
began to stink; and such a Miracle as this they are sure would convince them.
And so for their sakes a great many Men must die two or three times over, or
much oftener; because perhaps every time before they have been dead a Week, some
other Person that was not present before, may have a desire to see with his own
Eyes the same Experiment tried over again.

But even this Miracle also would perhaps be excepted against by some, and
nothing less would satisfy them than the very same Evidence which the Apostles
themselves had, who conversed with our Savior for some years together, and
heard all his wise Discourses, and saw all his Miracles and mighty Works, and
were present with him when he expired on the Cross, and assisted at the laying
his dead Body into the Sepulcher, and within three Days after saw him alive
again, touched and handled him, eat and drank with him; and after they had
thus, several times, by the Space of forty Days, been, by many Infallible
Proofs, assured of the Reality of his Resurrection, saw him visibly taken up in
his Body into Heaven.

They that had this, they grant, had very good Proof and Evidence of the Truth
of the Christian Religion; and had they but been of this happy Number, they are
sure they should not only have believed, but also willingly have suffered as
much as the Apostles themselves did for Bearing their Testimony to the Truth of
those things which they had seen and heard.

And what now must be done for the Satisfaction of these Men? For these have as
much Right to a full Satisfaction as any others; and by the same Reason that
others do expect to be gratified in what they desire, these may do so too.

And therefore in order to their Satisfaction, it is necessary that our Savior
should be Born into the World in every Age of it, or indeed much oftener; and
that in every Country at least, if not in every Town and Village he should live
and Preach and do Miracles, and be Crucified and Rise again; for that these
things have been once done, they cannot, they say, believe only upon the
Testimony of other Men who say they did see them; And therefore by the same
Reason, if they themselves should see them, other Men that should come after,
or live in other Countries, would have as little Cause to believe their
Testimony.

So that for the full satisfaction of all such Doubting Men as these our
Savior must have suffered often since the Beginning of the World, and must
continue to do so very frequently as long as the World shall last, because with
some Men, nothing but seeing is Believing.

But that this should be, is what I presume none besides themselves can think
it reasonable either for Men to ask, or for God to grant.

4. Lastly, The Unreasonableness of desiring any further or additional Proof of
the Truth of Religion, besides what is already afforded us in the Standing
Revelation of the Holy Scripture, will farther appear by considering our own
Interest in being convinced and persuaded of the Truth of Religion by such
Arguments and Motives as are in themselves sufficient for that purpose, although
they be not so very strong and forcible as we could wish they were.

And this Argument I shall handle in the way of Reproof, (and a just and
seasonable Reproof I think it) to such bold and presuming Persons as I have
been now speaking of, who will needs stand upon their Terms with Almighty God,
and will not be persuaded to Believe and Repent, but just by such Reasons and
such Motives as they themselves shall be pleased to require. Tell not us, say
they, of Moses and the Prophets, and of things that were done a great while
ago, we know not when; We'll have fresh Revelations, and new Miracles, or
Messengers from the Dead, or else we will not Believe and Repent; that we are
resolved on.

Very well; Then I say you may, if you will, continue still in your Unbelief
and Impenitence; Nevertheless I would advise you, before you fully determine to
persist in this Resolution, to take a little time to consider seriously, whose
Interest and Concern it is, either that you should Believe, or that you should
not Believe; consider who it is that will be a Gainer or a Sufferer, either by
the One, or by the Other. For let me tell you, if there be really a Heaven and
a Hell, and a Judgment, and a Life to come, it is not your not believing them
that will make them not to be; and if these things are true, it is your own Life
and Soul that is at Stake; and if you are resolved to lose both unless you may
be Saved your own way, you your selves will be the greatest, nay you your
selves will be the only Sufferers.

And this is a Consideration that affects the Case very much, and makes it very
unreasonable to insist upon having such satisfaction in this Case, as in some
other Cases might, not so very unreasonably, be desired.

For if any Man tells me a Story which it is for his Interest I should believe,
it is his Concern to give me such Assurance of it as I shall require, even
although less than I require would be in all Reason sufficient; And therefore if
I will not believe one or two Witnesses, though it may be unreasonable in me not
to believe them, yet it is his Business, and what it behooves him to do, to
produce, if it be possible, ten or twenty Witnesses, or as many more as I shall
ask for; And if one sort of Proof, though in it self it be never so good, will
not satisfy me, it is his part, and what he ought in Reason to do, if he be
able, to bring other Proofs of it; and so to go on multiplying his Witnesses
and his Proofs, 'till such time as I shall declare my self fully satisfied; And
the Reason is, because the Loss or Inconvenience will be his, and only his, in
Case he cannot convince me of the Truth of his Relation.

But now on the other side, if the Story which he tells me be true, and it be
for my Interest and Advantage only, not at all for his that I should believe it
to be true; If, I say, he will be neither a Gainer nor a Loser, whether I
believe his Report, or whether I do not believe it; then, if he gives me such
Evidence of the Truth of it, as is sufficient to convince a Man of Reason, he
has done enough; he has done all that belonged to him as a Friend to do. And if
after this, I make it my Business to cavil at and to except against his
Evidence, and go about to prescribe to him what sort of Proof he should give me
of the Truth of what he relates; declaring withal that less or other Proof than
just that which I require shall never satisfy me; he may justly reject my Suit
as unreasonable, and condemn me for a Fool, that will not see my own Interest,
nor know when a Friend has done enough.

And this is exactly our Case.

God has sent his Son to us with the Promise of Eternal Life, and has given us
sufficient Assurance of his Divine Mission, and thereby of the Truth of that
Revelation which he made. Now if we will believe this, well, and good, the
Profit will be all our own; we shall save our own Souls alive; But God will
receive no Advantage to himself by our Believing; his perfect Happiness being
not capable of any Increase. But if we will not Believe this Testimony that God
has given of his Son, if we except against his Witnesses, and cavil at his
Evidence, and will not Believe but just upon that very sort of Proof which we
our selves are pleased to pitch upon; why then, we may even take our own
Course, we may be Unbelievers still; but it is we only that shall suffer by our
Unbelief; the Infinite and Essential Happiness of God, being as little capable
of Diminution, as of Advancement. And, as if we Believe and Repent, God will be
Glorified in our Salvation, so, if we will not Believe and Repent, he will be
no less glorified in our Destruction.

Seeing therefore whether you Believe or whether you do not Believe, God will
be neither a Gainer nor a Loser; but the Profit or the Damage will be all your
own; it is plainly your Interest as well as your Duty to give Credit to such
Evidence, as really and in it self is Credible (and such, I hope I have already
shown that to be which is given us of the Truth of Christianity) and not to set
your selves to cavil at it, and to study Exceptions to it; not to take upon you
to prescribe to God Almighty, and boldly to tell him what sort of Evidence he
must give you, or else you will not be satisfied.

Do not then stand in your own Light; do not bring Destruction upon your selves
when you may avoid it; but give Ear to what Moses and the Prophets and Christ
and his Apostles speak to you in the Holy Scriptures; and hear them without
Prejudice, with a Mind ready to hearken to Reason, and resolved to be persuaded
by it; and then what they will say to you will be abundantly sufficient to
satisfy you; for they say as much in this Case (or more) as by the common
Voice and Reason of all Mankind is judged to be sufficient in all other Cases
of the like Nature.

But if you are resolved not to be persuaded so long as there is any
Possibility of Doubt or Scruple left; if you are resolved not to Believe unless
you may have just that very Evidence given you that you your selves are pleased
to require; if you will boldly and arrogantly take upon you to teach God, (as
if he knew it not) what Evidence he ought to give Men of the Truth of Religion;
and are resolved to find or make Exceptions against any other; Look you to it;
For if God has done enough already, he is under no manner of Obligation to do
more; more, did I say? Nay he needed not to have done so much; for it was mere
Grace and Favor in God that he has done so much as he has done; that he has
made us any Promises at all, and given us any Assurance of the Truth of them.
And therefore for what he has done we ought to be thankful, and not to find
fault with him that he has done no more. Such Impudence and Sauciness as this
(for I can call it by no better a Name) from a Man to his Maker, from a mean
inconsiderable Creature, to the Great Lord of Heaven and Earth, is I Am sure no
proper Qualification to merit extraordinary and peculiar Favors. For as our
Savior says to some in a like Case, to some who formerly made the like
unreasonable Demand that you now do, Matthew. 12.39. Mark 8.12.
It is an Evil and Adulterous Generation that seeks after a Sign, and
therefore there shall no Sign be given -- Verily I say unto you, there shall no
Sign be given to this Generation.

Let us then be content with that assurance which God has given us of the Truth
of Religion; for greater than this we shall not have 'till it be too late. Let
us thankfully accept of, and readily comply with this, and not expect or wait
for more; for God will not gratify us in our unreasonable Desire. He is
resolved to deal with us as with Men, to incline, not to determine our Choice;
to persuade, not to force us to be Happy. And having already given us the
Standing Revelation of the Gospel, which is sufficient both to instruct and
convince us, and having proved the truth of this sufficiently to us, he will
not be making new Revelations, or sending more Prophets Divinely inspired, or
working fresh Miracles every Day. He has done enough already to satisfy our
sober Judgments; and he will not do every thing that we can think of to
gratify our wild and extravagant Fancies.

And there is the less Reason that he should do so, because if the Ordinary
Means which he uses for our Conversion do not succeed, the Fault lies wholly in
us; And therefore it is highly probable (so certain that it need not be tried)
that any other means proper for God to use to reclaim us, would be alike
unsuccessful. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the Dead.

This is the last Reply that Abraham makes to the Rich Man's Request; and it
was the third of those three Points which I at first propounded to speak to;
but which I must reserve for the Subject of my next Discourse.

FINIS.
NEW REVELATIONS Would probably be UNSUCCESFUL:

A SERMON Preached at the CATHEDRAL-CHURCH of St. Paul, November 4th. 1700.

BEING The Eighth, for the Year 1700, of the LECTURE Founded by the Honorable
Robert Boil, Esquire;

By OFFSPRING BLACKALL, D. D. Rector of St. Mary Aldermary, and Chaplain in
Ordinary to His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by J. Leake, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's- Head in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1700.

St. LUKE XVI. 29, 30, 31. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the
Prophets; let them hear them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the dead,
they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead.


IN Discoursing on these Words, I have already done these two Things.

I. I have shown that the present Standing Revelation of God's Will in the Holy
Scripture is abundantly sufficient to persuade Men to Repentance, if they are
not unreasonably blind and obstinate. This is intimated in the first Verse of
the Text; They have Moses and the Prophets; ( Christ and his Apostles) let them
hear them. And,

II. I have likewise shown, that having already such good Grounds of Faith,
such full Directions for Practice, and such strong Motives to Repentance, it is
unreasonable to desire more. This was what the Rich Man had done at the 27th.
and 28th. Verses; and which he still continues to do in the 2d Verse of the
Text, even after Abraham had told him that the Standing Revelation of God's
Will in the Holy Scripture was sufficient; Nay, Father Abraham, but if one went
unto them from the dead, they will repent.

He says it positively, they will repent; He speaks it as a thing that no Doubt
could be made of. In Answer to which therefore Abraham tells him in the last
Verse of the Text, that that which he thought so very certain, was not so much
as probable: If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And this was the third Point I propounded to speak to in discoursing on these
Words; viz.

III. To show, that in Case God should condescend to gratify Men in this
unreasonable Desire, (working every Day new Miracles before their Eyes, or
sending their deceased Friends to them from the Dead, to assure them of a
Future State, and to warn them to prepare for it) it is highly probable that
very few or none of those who do not believe, and are not brought to Repentance
by the Preaching and Standing Revelation of the Gospel, would be persuaded by
this means. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, (I add, nor Christ and his
Apostles) neither will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And the Truth of this will, I suppose, sufficiently appear if these following
things be considered. 1. That we cannot have better or stronger Motives to
Obedience and a Holy Life than are already offered in the Holy Scripture to
persuade us. 2. That the Proof and Evidence already given us of the Truth of
Religion is such as cannot be fairly excepted against, and that there is no
Proof thereof that could be offered, but what is liable to Cavils and
unreasonable Exceptions. 3. That if God should gratify all Men in this
Request, the Abundance and Commonness of the Miracles that must then be wrought
would go near to destroy the Efficacy and Persuasiveness thereof. And, Lastly,
That it is Matter of Fact and Experience that new Miracles have been generally
unsuccessful upon those who have not hearkened to nor been convinced by a
Standing Revelation of God's Will.

1. I say, we cannot possibly have, as to the Matter of them, stronger Motives
to Obedience and a Holy Life, than those which are already offered in the Holy
Scripture to persuade us. For there we have Life and Death set before us,
Blessing and Cursing; on one Hand, the Promise of this Life and of that which
is to come; and on the other Hand all the Evils that we can justly dread, the
wrath of him who is a consuming Fire; who often punishes Transgressors with
remarkable Judgments in this Life, and has threatened to all impenitent Sinners
Eternal Torments in the next.

Now if a new Revelation was to be made, and we our selves were to contrive the
Matter of it, what stronger Motives than these could we think of? Or if one
should come from the dead to Preach to us, if Lazarus were sent on purpose to
persuade us, what could he offer more toward it? Could he give us Assurance of
any thing better or more desirable than of God's Readiness to forgive us upon
our Repentance, and of complete and perfect Happiness both of Body and Soul to
all Eternity if we do Repent? Or could he threaten any thing more like to deter
us from Sin than intolerable and everlasting Misery? If not, to what Purpose
should he be sent to us? Or indeed to what Purpose should there be any new
Revelation at all? For these things are already promised and threatened clearly
enough in the Holy Scripture; Life and Immortality are already fully brought to
Light by the Gospel; And if the Hope of Eternal Life and Happiness, and if the
Dread of Everlasting and Intolerable Torments will not persuade us, nothing
certainly will or can persuade us.

All that, I think, could in any new Revelation be added to that Encouragement
that is already given us in Scripture to Virtue and Godliness, or to that
Discouragement that is therein given as to Vice and Wickedness, would be an
Assurance that there should be always as remarkable a Difference made, by the
Providence of God, between good and bad Men, in this World, as we are told in
Scripture there will be, by his righteous Judgment, in that which is to come.
And a good Assurance given us of this by some new Revelation, confirmed by our
own constant Observation that it was always well with the Righteous and ill
with the Wicked in this World, we may think perhaps would do much more toward
the Reformation of Mankind, than only those Promises and Threatenings of future
Happiness or Misery that we meet with in the Scripture have done, or are ever
like to do.

And this indeed might be. But then it is to be considered that a new Revelation
to this Effect would be inconsistent with the Nature of Religion, and would
frustrate the Design of God in sending us into this World, which was to prove
and try us, to see whether we love the Lord with all our Heart; whether we can
believe him for those things which we do not see; and whether we are so wise as
to prefer a greater future Good before a less that is present, a Blessed and
Glorious Immortality after this Life, before the Pleasures of Sin which are but
for a Season. For if the Reward of Virtue and the Punishment of Vice were
always visible and present, there would be no Room left for Faith in God, which
is a firm Belief of the Truth of his Promises and Threatenings, though we do not
see a present Performance of them; Heb. 11.1.
Faith (as the Apostle defines it) is the Substance, or (...) Hom. in Loc.
confident Expectation of things hoped for; the Evidence, or (...).
Conviction of things not seen. And if all the good things both of this Life
and of the next were the certain Portion of Virtue, and all the evil things
that can be suffered both in this World and in the other were the certain and
never-failing Consequence of Sin, there would be no room left for a virtuous
and wise Choice; nay indeed there would be hardly Matter for Choice at all; for
it cannot be conceived that a Creature that has Understanding and a Power of
choosing and refusing, should knowingly choose all Misery rather than all
Happiness. Such a Revelation as this being therefore so evidently inconsistent
with the Nature of Faith and Religion, and with the Design of God in sending us
into this World, cannot be expected. And I say that, bating this, there can be
nothing added to the Matter of the Scripture Revelation. From whence therefore
it plainly follows, that such as are not persuaded by the Gospel Motives to
Repentance, are not capable of being persuaded by any such Motives as,
consistently with the Nature of Faith and Religion and Virtue, could be offered
to them; And it cannot be supposed that any true divine Revelation should ever
offer any Motives to persuade us that are not such.

But it may be said perhaps, that though better or stronger Motives to Repentance
cannot be offered by any new Revelation, than are offered already in Holy
Scripture, yet we might by a new Revelation, have better Assurance given us of
the Truth of the Gospel Motives; and that if we had, it is very like they would
be then more prevailing than they now are.

And this likewise I believe must be granted. But then it is to be considered,
that the Nature of Faith and Religion, and of that State of Trial which we are
now in, requires that there should be a reasonable Boundary set to the
clearness of that Evidence that is given to Men of the Truth of those Motives
whereby they are to be persuaded, as well as to the Force and Strength of the
Motives themselves; Because (as I noted in my last Discourse) such very clear
and strong Evidence of the Truth of Religion as leaves no Room for a
possibility of Doubting, would destroy our Freedom of Choice, and, with it, the
Virtue and Excellency of Believing; for it is not Faith to believe what we see
and feel; and it is no Commendation to a Man to be good and Virtuous, if his
Virtue be not the Fruit of a wise Judgment and a free Choice; which it would
not be if his Judgment was over born by irrefragable Demonstration. And if that
farther Proof and Evidence that is desired of the Truth of Religion, be no
other than such as will leave us a Freedom of Choice and a Possibility of
Doubting, then I say it is not likely it should be more convincing to us than
that which we have already in the Standing Revelation of Holy Scripture. For it
may be considered further in the second Place.

2. That the Proof and Evidence already given us of the Truth of Religion is
such as cannot fairly be excepted against; and that there is no Proof thereof
that could be given us, (unless it be such as is not resistible, and
consequently such as is not fit for God to give us, while we are here in a
State of Trial) but what is liable to foolish Cavils and unreasonable
Exceptions; so that consequently the same Temper and Disposition of Mind, and
the same unwillingness to believe which now disposes Men to Infidelity, and
prompts them to make Exceptions to the present Grounds of the Christian Faith,
would work the same Effect in case other Proof and Evidence were given of the
Truth of it.

I say, first; That the Proof and Evidence already given us of the Truth of the
Christian Religion is such as cannot fairly be excepted against.

To show this has been the Design of several former Discourses. Sermon. III, IV,
V, VI.
And therefore to what has been said I shall only add, that if the Exceptions
that are made to the Evidence already given us of the Truth of the Christian
Religion were fair and reasonable, they would be allowed by Mankind to be so in
other Cases of the like Nature; which yet they are not. Nay if they who make
these Exceptions in the Case of Religion did themselves think that they were
just and reasonable, they ought to make the same in all other Cases, that are
equally liable to the same Exceptions; and in all other such Cases they ought
to live and act as if they had the same Doubts and Scruples upon them, which
they say they have in the Case of Religion; But we see the quite contrary every
Day we live.

For that same Infidel who will not allow of the Testimony which was given to
our Savior by his Apostles, though they gave the best Assurance that it was
possible for Men to give both of their Knowledge of what they testified, and of
their Honesty in relating it, yet readily allows that in all other Cases the
Testimony of two or three Credible Persons should be received, without any
collateral Evidence of the Truth of their Testimony; and thinks it reasonable
that all Disputes and Controversies among Men concerning their Civil Rights,
their Estates, nay and their Lives too, should be thereby determined. And he
that questions whether the Books of the New Testament were written by the
reputed Authors, yet makes no Question but that other Books, of as ancient or
older Date, and of the Authority of which there is not half so much Traditional
Evidence, were written by those Persons to whom they are ascribed; and he would
think those very unreasonable Men, who, when he was arguing any Point of
Learning with them upon the Authority of Virgil, or Cicero, or Seneca, should
refuse to admit his Argument till he had first undeniably and demonstratively
proved that the Aeneids were written by Virgil, or that the other Pieces that
have been allowed in all Ages ever since to have been written by Cicero or
Seneca, were not falsely Fathered upon those Authors. The Infidel who doubts of
the Truth of the Gospel-History, at the same time has no Doubt at all of the
Truth of other Histories, as ancient, and much more possible to be false, and
of the Truth of which there is not the hundredth part of that Evidence that
there is of the Truth of this. And he that pretends to be uncertain whether
there ever was such a Man as Jesus of Nazareth, and whether he said and did the
things Recorded of him by the Evangelists, and whether by the Preaching of his
Apostles he did spread his Spiritual Empire over all the Countries of the
World; (An Empire which is still kept up in most of the Countries over which it
was first extended, and of which there are evident Marks and Memorials still
remaining even in those Countries that have since revolted from it;) He, I say,
that doubts of these things although witnessed by the Writings of those who were
Eyewitnesses thereof, yet makes no Doubt but that there was such a Man as
Alexander the Great, who lived above three Hundred years before, and that he
translated the Empire of the World from Persia to Greece; and he also gives
full Credit to the other things which he finds related of him, by Curtius,
Plutarch and Arrian, although none of these Authors were Eyewitnesses of his
Wars and Greatness, but either Copied what they wrote from former Histories, or
took it up from Report; and although there are perhaps no Remains of that Empire
now left in the World. And if he was but as sure of a good Estate, as that the
History of Alexander's Expedition and Conquests is in the main a true History,
he would not, I believe, give the Hundredth Part of its Value to ascertain his
Title to it.

Those therefore are manifestly unreasonable Exceptions to the Proofs of
Christianity which no Man will allow, which even those that make them in this
Case do not think reasonable to make, in other Cases of the like Nature; so
that it is not at all likely that any Person that is not convinced by these
Proofs, should be convinced if more were given.

For (as I farther noted) there is no Proof that could be given us of the Truth
of the Christian Religion, (unless it be such as is not resistible, and
consequently not fit for God to give us, while we are here in a State of Trial)
but what is liable to foolish Cavils and unreasonable Exceptions.

This I think is so self-Evident, that nothing plainer or more undeniable can
be said to prove it. For though the Demonstration of the Truth of Religion were
as plain as Demonstrations in the Mathematics, yet even these may be cavil'd
at by such as will allow of no Postulata's, nor grant the Truth of the clearest
Axioms. Nay there have been Scepticks in the plainest Matters of Sense, and
some have denied Motion at the same time that their own Tongues were moving to
deny it.

Not that I think the Demonstration of the Truth of Religion is as clear as any
Proposition in Euclid, or as the shining of the Sun at Noon, (for that cannot
be, and I have already given Reasons why, if it might, it should not be so) but
it is as clear as such a Matter is capable to be. And I dare be bold to say
that there is no other Proof of Religion fit to be offered, or reasonably to be
desired, to which a Sceptick might not make as just and plausible Exceptions as
he can to the Standing Proofs of Christianity. For one single Miracle done in
his own Presence would be nothing near so convincing as the many Miracles
wrought by Christ and his Apostles were, of some or other of which there were
more than ten thousand Witnesses; And if he can suppose that so many were
deceived in plain Matters of Sense, he may much rather suppose that he, a
single Man, may be imposed upon. And an Apparition of a deceased Friend would
be a Matter wherein any one Man might be more probably Cheated, or be more
easily persuaded that he was Cheated, than the Apostles could be in the
Resurrection of our Lord, when he was seen by them very frequently, and
sometimes by a great Company of them met together, by the space of forty Days.
And a single Miracle that is over as soon as done, could not make such a deep
and lasting Impression upon a Man's Mind, as that constant Power of working
Miracles, and especially the Gift of Tongues, which lasted a whole Life, must
needs do upon the Apostles and those that lived in their time, who were either
Partakers of these Gifts themselves, or constant Witnesses thereof in others.

In short, whatever Miracles we can desire may be wrought for our Conviction,
either they must be seen by us with our own Eyes, or else they must be received
by Testimony from others.

And though they should be seen by us with our own Eyes, yet so long as it is
against our Inclination, or inconsistent with that Love which we bear to the
World or to our Sins, to believe that they are true Miracles, we should easily
be apt to fancy that they were only melancholy Delusions, or Tricks put upon
us by Designing Men, which our first Fright or Amazement hindered us from
discovering the Fraud of; and so they would probably have no effect at all upon
us longer than till our Fright or Amazement was well worn off.

But if we should only have an Account of them by Testimony from others, they
would be yet less likely to persuade us; because there can be no Testimony
concerning any such Matters of Fact more clear and unexceptionable than that
which we have already of the Truth of our Savior's and his Apostles Miracles;
so that if we believe not this, we should hardlier believe any other Testimony,
because we can scarcely have so good Assurance of any Man's Truth as we have of
the Sincerity and Veracity of all those who are the present Witnesses to our
Religion; and we can hardly be surer that we hear any Man whom we know,
speaking to us, than we are that we hear the Apostles speaking to us in the
Books of the New Testament.

And therefore I think it plainly follows (as I farther noted) that the same
Temper and Disposition of Mind, and the same Unwillingness to believe the
Truths of the Gospel, which now dispose Men to Infidelity, and prompt them to
study and make Exceptions to the Proofs already given us of the Christian
Faith, would work the same Effect if other Proof and Evidence were given of it,
and that Men would then quickly make as good Exceptions to that, as they do now
to these. For from what has been said, I think it is plain that if Men do not
see the Truth when it is placed in so clear a Light as it is in already, the
Reason must be because they wilfully shut their Eyes, or else are so blinded by
a Love of this World, or of their sinful Lusts, that if the Light were ten
times brighter than it is, they would see no more than they do now. And it
would be to as little Purpose, in order to the Conviction of such perverse and
obstinate Men, to add any more or stronger Proofs of the Truth of Religion, as
it would be to light up abundance of Torches to a Man that is quite blind.

For this is indeed the true Cause why Men will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, why they will not believe Christ and his Apostles, testifying the
certainty of a future State and other Truths of Religion; it is not, I say,
because there is any just Exception to their Testimony, but because they do not
like the Matter of it, and so are resolved not to believe. They love their Sins
so well that they can upon no Account be persuaded to part with them, and being
so resolved, it is an easy thing to cavil at any Motives or Arguments that are
urged to persuade them to it; Seeing they will not see, and hearing they will
not hear nor understand; and to Men so obstinately resolved against Conviction,
no Proof can be convincing enough.

And this is the sad effect of Love to Sin; it Viciates the Judgments of Men,
so that they cannot distinguish between things that differ most vastly; it
darkens their Understanding, so that the plainest Proposition or the clearest
Consequence in the World, if it be against the Interest of Sin, seems dark and
obscure to them; and it renders their Minds so averse to Religion, that they
cannot with any Patience so much as hear the Arguments that are offered to prove
it; And be a Reason never so good, it is not to be hoped it should be convincing
to a Man who will not hear it, or who will not allow himself calmly to consider
it.

From all that has been said therefore upon this Head, it plainly appears,
That the proper Cure of Infidelity is not the Addition of more Proof of the
Truth of Religion, but a right Prepaartion and Disposition of Mind to consider
well the Proof thereof that is offered; which is sufficient to convince and
persuade all those that have a Love of Truth, and a Will disposed to Virtue.
The Causes of Infidelity must be first removed, and then the Cure of it will be
easy, by those Means which God has provided and directed us to use, and there
will be no need of his Working Miracles for Men's Conviction; But 'till the
Causes of it are removed, it is hardly to be Cured even by a Miracle.

But it will be said perhaps that though fresh Revelations and new Miracles might
not be sufficient to convince all, they might however convince some; because
there are several Degrees in the Perverseness and Obstinacy of Men; Some indeed
there may be whom no such Proof of Religion as is fit to be given us in this
State of Trial would persuade, whose Case therefore must be given over as
desperate; but then there are others, Acts 26.28.
who (as King Agrippa was) are almost persuaded to be Christians; and when the
Scales are already near even, a small weight put into the lightest will make it
overbalance the other; so that it may reasonably be hoped that some small
Addition to the Proof of Religion (no more than might be made to it without
destroying either our Freedom of Choice or the Excellency of Faith and Virtue)
would prevail with these Half Christians.

And perhaps it might; But God is wiser than we are, and knows better than we
what is fit for him to do toward the Conversion of Men. We ought therefore to
conclude that he does all that is fit to be done, though we do not see but that
he might do more.

But this, it may be, will not be taken for an Answer, but will rather be
thought a way of avoiding a Difficulty too hard to be accounted for. And
therefore I say further, (and it was the third thing which I proposed to be
considered,)

3. That if God should gratify all Men in this Request, working new Miracles
every Day for the Conviction of particular Persons; Sermon VII.
(and, as I have formerly noted, there is no Reason in the World, why any one
Man should be gratified in this Request rather than others, when they have all
equal Reason and equal Right to desire it; should God, I say, gratify all Men
in this Request) the Abundance of the Miracles that must then be wrought, would
be so far from adding to the Proof of Christianity, that it would rather lessen
or weaken that Proof of it which we have already; because Miracles (the
properest Proof of a Public Divine Revelation) would not be then so convincing
as they are now.

For that which most of all affects Men in a Miracle is the Unusualness of it;
because it is such a thing as was never or but rarely before ever seen or heard
of; As the Blind Man that had been Cured by our Savior well observes, Joh. ix.
32. Since the Beginning of the World has it not been heard, that any Man has
opened the Eyes of one that was born Blind. Had it been a common thing it would
have been no Miracle; I mean it would not have appeared so, it would not have
been thought so by Men. For that which makes Men wonder even at a true Miracle
is not so much because it is such an Operation as they cannot give a fair
account of by Natural Causes; for this they cannot do, (I Am confident I may say
they have not yet done it) of many of the Works and Productions of Nature; But
they therefore conclude such a thing not to be a Natural Operation, because it
is not usual, because it is such a thing as was never before known to be done:
And if the same thing which now, for this Reason, we should account a Miracle
was done every Day, the Virtuosi would presently set themselves to invent, and
would quickly fancy they had found out some Natural Solution of it; And I
believe there are not many Miracles that have been done which they might not
after long Study be able to give as clear and probable an Account of by Natural
Causes, as they have done of Gravity, of Fire, of the Loadstone, of Vision, of
the Production of Vegetables, of the Generation of Animals, and of many other
things which yet are doubtless the Works and Effects of Natural Causes.

So that I say the most probable Consequence of having Miracles so very common
as they must be if they were wrought for the Conviction of particular Men,
would be this, that they would cease to serve for that Purpose for which
Miracles were designed; because being common they would be disregarded, or
would quickly be looked upon to be the Effect of Natural Causes only; There
would not be wanting those that would offer to give an Account how they were
done; and all those would be despised by the Scorners of Religion, as too much
addicted to Superstition; who rather than attribute the greatest Miracle to a
Supernatural Power, would not acquiesce in that Solution (how silly soever)
that was given of it by mere Matter and Motion.

And in particular, I question not but that if it was a common thing for dead
Men, after they had lain in their Graves for some time, to come forth again and
show themselves alive to their Friends, this wonderful Effect would be
attributed by a great many to some Vital Principle in the Body, which only
Slept for a while (as it does in Corn or other Seeds while they are kept dry
and above Ground) but afterward, when the Body was buried a while, was excited
by some Natural Virtue that was in the Earth to exert it self, and so by its
Plastic Power formed the Body into the same shape it was in before.

This I say would in all probability be the Effect that the greatest Miracles
would have in the World, if they were very common; They Would only serve to set the
Philosophers Wits to work to invent new Forms of Matter, and new Laws of Motion
by which to solve them; and any Solution of them, though never so improbable,
though only by Occult Qualities, would serve turn, and be thought better than to
recur to an Almighty Power. The Consequence of which would be, that this which
we desire as an additional Proof of Christianity, would in effect destroy one
of the best Proofs of it that we have already. But,

4. Lastly, If it be supposed that Miracles would still be thought Miracles
notwithstanding their Commonness, yet Abraham might well deliver it as a
General Truth, to which there are none or very few Exceptions; that he who is
not wrought upon by a Standing Revelation of God's Will, would not be persuaded
by an extraordinary Message or a new Miracle; because it is Matter of Fast and
Experience that this last Method has been generally unsuccessful upon those who
have not hearkened to nor been convinced by a Standing Revelation.

For this was the very Case of the Jews in our Savior's time; the Parable was
literally fulfilled in them. For as they would not believe Moses and the
Prophets testifying of our Savior, so neither did they any more believe our
Savior himself when he came down to them from Heaven in the Power of God; And
as they did not believe him while he lived amongst them, and went about
Preaching and doing Miracles, so neither did they believe him a jot more after
he came again to them from the dead. Never were there such Signs and Miracles
wrought for Men's Conviction, and yet never was there such a number of obstinate
Infidels as then. Very few even of those who were Eyewitnesses of our
Savior's Miracles were the better for them, but many were a great deal worse,
wilfully blaspheming that Spirit by which he wrought them, and attributing
those Operations to the Help of the Devil which they were convinced in their
own Judgments were done by the Power of God. The opening the Eyes of the Blind,
Joh. 9.39.11.47, 12.10.
did but make those that saw the Miracle more blind than they were before; And
when once a dead Lazarus did come forth out of his Grave and appear to them,
(which was the very thing that the Rich Man here desires in the behalf of his
Brethren, as being in his Judgment the most powerful, and so like to be the
most effectual method to reclaim them; when I say this was done by our Savior
in the presence of a great number, so that the Truth of the Miracle could not
be doubted, and was not denied by any of them) all the Effect that it had upon
those obstinate and incredulous Men, was only that it made them enter presently
(sooner perhaps than otherwise they would have done) into a close Consultation
to put to death both Jesus and Lazarus too.

Some Examples indeed, it must be granted, there are on the other side; For we
are told in Acts xi. 41. of a great number about three thousand that believed
upon the first Preaching of St. Peter, and sight of that great Miracle, the
Gift of Tongues, wherewith the Apostles were endued.

But then it may be considered, that it was not the Miracle that convinced
them, I mean not that alone; for many that were then present, Verse 13.
and heard the Apostles speaking with Tongues, were so far from being persuaded
thereby, that they most falsely blasphemed that, as they had done all our
Savior's Miracles before, attributing the fruit of that most evident Power of
the Holy Ghost to new Wine. And it may be further noted that those who were
persuaded by it, were such as before they saw the Miracle were in a good
Disposition to embrace that pure Religion that is taught in the Gospel, or else
that Miracle would not have persuaded them; for the Persons convinced thereby
were not of the Pharisees or unbelieving Jews that had rejected our Savior
before, Verse 5.
but they were Devout Persons, Jews or Proselytes, who had come at that Feast
of Pentecost, from other Parts of the World to Jerusalem to Worship, and who
had probably never heard of our Savior before more than by uncertain Report;
but being well read in Moses and the Prophets, and giving good heed to them,
were Converted, more by the manifest Accomplishment of all the ancient
Prophecies concerning the Messiah, in the Person of our Savior, than by the
sight of that great Miracle.

This therefore being Matter of Fact and Experience, what has been done and
come to pass already, that new Miracles have been generally unsuccessful upon
such as have not regarded a Standing Revelation of God's Will, we may
reasonably inser that it is highly probable if not certain, that the same
Experiment tried over again would have no better success.

The Sum of all therefore is this; such as are (as St. Luke says they were who
were Converted by the Preaching and Miracles of the Apostles) Acts 13.46.
(...).
Predisposed or fitted for Eternal Life; that is, such as are modest and
teachable, who hear without prejudice, and judge without Partiality, and have
no Interest of Sin or the World that stands in competition with their Desire to
obtain everlasting Happiness; such as enquire out the Truth with the same
Indifference that a Traveller does his Way, who has no Inclination to one Way
more than to another, but only desires to be directed right, and is resolved to
take that way which he is persuaded is the right, though it should not prove so
very clean and smooth and pleasant as he hoped it would; (such, I say, as are
of this honest and docible mind) will be persuaded by a good Reason, especially
if it be as good as the Matter is capable of, though it falls short of
Demonstration; and if there be Reason or appearance of Reason on both sides,
they will judge on that side on which the Reasons seem most weighty; and for
the Conviction of such as these, the Standing Revelation of the Gospel, being
so well proved as it is, is abundantly sufficient; so that such shall not need
new Miracles or new Revelations. And on the other side, such as only do need
them, that is such as being of perverse Minds, and stubborn Wills, and devoted
to Sin, will not hearken to Moses and the Prophets, nor to Christ and his
Apostles speaking in the Scripture, would very probably receive no Benefit from
new Miracles or new Revelations. For nothing will serve to convince those who
will not be convinced at all; no Arguments can be sufficient to persuade a Man
to that which he is strongly prejudiced and fully resolved against; And this
being the Case of all those who do not hear Moses and the Prophets, and Christ
and his Apostles preaching to them in the Holy Scripture, or are not persuaded
by them, we may well conclude with Abraham in the Text, that any other means
that might be used to reclaim them would most probably prove as ineffectual as
this has been, and that they would not be persuaded though one rose from the dead.

And now having shown that the present Standing Revelation of God's Will in the
Holy Scripture is sufficient to convince and persuade Men; having also shown
that more Proof and Evidence than we have of the Truth of our Religion cannot
reasonably be desired. And having likewise shown that any other Proof or
Evidence thereof would probably be ineffectual upon those who will not hear
Moses and the Prophets and Christ and his Apostles preaching to them in the
Holy Scripture; I have finished all that I proposed to do in discoursing on
these Words.

I shall conclude all with an useful Exhortation; first to Infidels, who will
not by all that has been said be persuaded to admit this divine Revelation; and
secondly to Christians who do receive it.

1. To you who are yet Infidels, (if there are any such here, as I hope there
are not; or if these Discourses shall happen to fall into the Hands of any
such) I beg leave to address my self in a few words.

And I would desire you, in the first Place, to prepare and dispose your Minds
to hear gravely and without prejudice the Reasons that are offered to prove the
Truth of Christianity, by considering seriously the great Importance of
Religion, if it be true. And if you do but consider this, you will quickly see
that it is well worth your while to be at some pains to satisfy your selves
fully whether Religion be true or not. For if Religion be true (and you cannot
be sure it is not, till you have well examined the Grounds and Proofs of it)
you have a great Concern at stake; and in a Matter of such Moment it becomes
not a Wise Man to be determined by a Jest or a Quibble. And if you seriously
consider the great Importance of Religion, you will likewise readily see, that
of the two you had much better be mistaken in believing the Truth of Religion,
though it be false, than in disbelieving it, if indeed it be true; so that
consequently if it can ever be reasonable for a Wise Man to be under a
Prejudice, it would be most reasonable that you should be prejudiced on the
side of Religion. You will also then see, that if in any Case it be Wisdom to
be over-credulous, that is, to believe beyond the strength of the Evidence, it
is so in the Case of Religion; because the greatest Damage you can suffer by
Over-credulity, in case Religion be all a Cheat, is infinitely less than will
be the Consequence of unreasonable Infidelity, if indeed Religion be true.

Next, I would desire you to examine your selves seriously, whether in your
Enquiries into the Grounds and Reasons of Religion, you have not hitherto had
some Bias upon your Minds; whether at the same time that you have set your
selves to consider of the Proofs of the Christian Religion, you have not
secretly wished that you might not find them satisfactory to your Reason. And
if so, I desire you to examine further, what was the Cause of this; whether it
was not some worldly Pleasure or Profit which you foresaw you should be
debarred from in case you should happen to be convinced of the Truth of the
Christian Religion. And if it was, I hope that some serious Consideration of
the great Importance of Religion, which I before advised in order to the
removing unreasonable Prejudices, will also suffice to satisfy you how
unworthy of any Love or Regard any Worldly Pleasure or Profit is in Comparison
with that Eternal Happiness which is promised in the Gospel; so that
consequently when you are enquiring into the Grounds and Reasons of our Hope of
that Eternal Life, all other Thoughts ought to be laid aside, and you ought to
have no Eye at all to any thing else; because to a Man who must be unspeakably
happy or miserable to all Eternity (which is the Case of all of us, if indeed
Religion be true) it is not a matter worth thinking of, whether his Worldly
State and Condition will be rendered better or worse by his endeavoring to
secure to himself a blessed Portion in the other World.

And if by these Considerations your Minds shall be freed from Prejudices and
from all Bias of Worldly Interest, I would, after this, desire you to take a
fresh into your Consideration what has been offered in the foregoing Discourses
for the Proof of the Christian Religion, and the much more that has been better
said by others upon the same Argument; for there can be no Hurt in considering
these things over and over again, although after all, you should remain as
unsatisfied as you are now. But I cannot but hope, I cannot but think that if you
do consider without Prejudice or Partiality the Reasons that have been offered
to prove the Truth of Christianity, you must needs be convinced thereby.

However, if the Reasons that are or may be offered for the Proof of it should
not be sufficient perfectly to cure your Infidelity and to make you become
Zealous Christians; they may be, and they certainly are, sufficient to satisfy
you that the Christians have some Reason for their Belief; even the same at
least (if not better) that you your selves are swayed by in all other Cases;
and consequently that they are not such very easy and credulous Fools as you
perhaps have hitherto taken them to be. I Am confident you must grant that if
the Reasons of our Religion are not demonstrative, they are at least probable;
and that if our Religion be not true, it has at least a fair show and
Appearance of Truth.

And if you will but only allow this, it is then a Reasonable Request, and what
I would next desire of you; not to make a Boast of your Unbelief; not to
ridicule our holy Religion; not to make it your Business to proselyte Men to
Atheism and Infidelity.

1. Not to make a Boast of your Unbelief; For if indeed you have no Religion,
yet what Interest can you have in telling the World so? Nay is there any thing
that you could do, more to your own Prejudice? For though you are not under the
Direction and Influence of any Religious Principles, yet so long as you appear
to have some Religion you will be employed and trusted as other Men are; Men
will believe you to be Honest 'till they shall find to the contrary; and in the
mean time you will have an Opportunity of raising your selves to Wealth and
Honor. But when once the World shall come to know that you are Men of no
Principles, that you are under no Restraints of Conscience, that you will do
whatever you can safely do for your own Advantage; that is, whatever you can do
without danger of a Prison, a Pillory or a Gibbet; (and they will have Reason
to think all this of you, when you your selves shall tell them that you are of
no Religion;) Who, do you think, will employ you? Who, do you think, will trust
you? So that the only way you will then have to make your Fortunes, will be by
open Force and Violence; and in that you will meet with such opposition from
all the World, as will quickly work your Ruin.

But you think, it may be, that it is a mean and ungenerous thing to disown your
Principles, or rather your no Principles; that it is beneath a Man to seem to
be what he is not; and to put on a face of Religion when he has none, how
profitable soever his Hypocrisy might be to him.

Very well; Then you may (if you are willing to suffer the Inconvenience of it)
freely own your selves to be of no Religion; but at the same time you should do
well to consider that the greatest part of the World is against you; that not
only the Ignorant and Illiterate, but the Wisest, the Gravest, the most Learned
and the most Noble Persons have generally been Men of Religion; or at least,
(which is all we can judge by) have outwardly professed themselves persuaded of
the Truth of it, and have expressed the greatest Zeal and Concern for it. And
therefore --

2. Though you do believe nothing of it your selves, and scorn to conceal your
Unbelief, you may however be civil to our Religion; for it is but good Manners
to treat with some Respect that which those with whom you Converse account
Sacred. Besides, whether Religion be true or false, the Subject of it is grave,
and therefore ought to be handled with a decent Reverence. Do not then show
such ill Breeding as to make that the Subject of your Sport and Raillery, which
all besides your selves account the most serious thing in the World. Be not
guilty of so much Indecency as to discourse of any Matter in a manner so
unsuitable to the Nature of it. But if you will needs be attacking our
Religion, compose your selves first to Gravity and Seriousness; and let it be
seen by your way of Treating us, that your Design is manly and generous, only
to undeceive and disabuse us, not to make Sport with us. Isa. 41.21.
Produce your Cause (as the Prophet speaks) and bring forth your strong
Reasons; by them it may be, if you propound them seriously, you may convince us
that we are in a mistake; but we are now in too grave an Humor to be wrought
upon by a Jest; and how strong soever your Objections against Religion are, by
a light and trifling way of expressing them, you will make them lose all their
Force. But indeed --

3. To what purpose is it for you to make it your Business, any ways, or by any
Arguments, to endeavor to proselyte Men to Atheism and Infidelity.

For whether our Religion be true or false, it is better for you, as well as
for all the World besides, that it should be generally believed; and that Men
should think themselves obliged to live according to the Rules and Precepts of
it. You cannot, surely, be so unacquainted with the World, if you have lived any
time in it, or read any thing of History, but that you must needs know that
before the Principles of Atheism and Deism prevailed so much as they have done
of late Years, there was a great deal more Truth and Justice and Honesty and
fair Dealing in the World than there is now. So that if you should succeed in
your Endeavor, if you should be able either to reason or to laugh Religion
quite out of the World, the most probable, nay the most certain Consequence of
it would be, that when the Godly Man ceased, Ps. 12.1, 2.
the faithful would also fail from among the Children of Men; that then they
would speak Vanity every one with his Neighbor, with flattering Lips and with
a double Heart would they speak; That then Strength would be the Law of
Justice, Wisd. 2.11.
and that which is feeble would be found nothing worth.

If therefore you have (as you think perhaps you have) found out the Cheat of
Religion; it is your best Prudence, however, to keep your Discovery to your
selves. Delight your selves as much as you will with the Contemplation of your
own Happiness above other Men, in that you are now freed from the Terrors of
Conscience and the Fears of another World, by means of that notable Discovery
which you have made of the Vanity of Religion; please your selves as much as
you will with thinking that you are not now as others are, tied to speak truth
when it is to your disadvantage, to suffer any thing in this World for
Conscience sake, or to be just and honest in your Dealings, when you can get
considerably by Fraud and Oppression, and can order the Matter so secretly as
to be safe from Discovery, and consequently from all Shame and Punishment from
Men: But be the Advantage which you have gained to your selves by discovering
the Cheat of Religion never so great, yet the greater it is, and the greater
you think it, so much the more cautious you ought to be not to make known to
others what you have so happily discovered; for when once others shall come to
know as much as you think you do, viz. That all Religion is a Cheat, all your
Advantage above them will cease; they will then be all upon the same Terms with
you; they will then be all as much at Liberty to defraud, oppress or otherwise
injure you, as you are now to defraud oppress or injure them. You ought not
therefore in Prudence, to try to convince them of their Mistake, though you were
sure it was a Mistake; for why should you make it your Business to cut in
sunder those Cords of Religion, by which they are now tied up from doing you
mischief?

In a word; either Religion is true and well grounded, or it is not; and which
soever it be, it is better both for them that do believe the Truth of it, and
for you also, that they should continue in the Belief of it; why then should
you be at Pains only to do mischief?

For put Case, first, that Religion is vain and groundless, it must be
confessed however that it is of some present Advantage to them that do believe
it; because it serves to bear them up under the unavoidable Pains and Troubles
and Misery of this Mortal Life with the comfortable Hope of a blessed
Immortality; and it will be no Disadvantage to them hereafter; for when they
are dead, if indeed there be no Life after this, they will be as if they had
never been, they will not be then in a Capacity of grieving for their
Disappointment. And it is also for your present Advantage, that they that are
mistaken in believing the Truth of Religion, should continue in their Mistake;
because it makes them better to you in every Relation than they would otherwise
be, more Just and Merciful Governors, more Loyal and Obedient Subjects, more
Loving Parents, more Dutiful Children, more Gentle Masters, more Faithful
Servants, and more Just, Honest and Loving Neighbors; why then should you be
at any Pains to Cure that Mistake (if it be a Mistake) which does them no harm,
but rather good; and which is likewise so profitable for you? Especially when
you cannot be so vain as to expect to merit Heaven (if indeed there be no
Heaven) by your Zeal for the Truth of Atheism.

But if indeed Religion be true; (and you cannot be sure it is not, how
deficient soever you may think our Proofs of it are) as I shall not need to say
that it will be better for them that believe it, that they should persist in
their Belief of it; so I shall not need to say much to show that it will, in
the Event, be better for you, that you should not endeavor to pervert them;
for, certainly, if there be a Hell, they will be condemned to the hottest place
in it, who not only withdrew themselves from their Subjection to Almighty God,
and would not suffer him to reign over them; but made it also their Business to
corrupt others, to form a Party against Heaven, and to raise an Universal
Rebellion against God.

These things, and more to the like Purpose I would say to the Atheists, if I
thought they were here to hear me. And I should not be without Hope, that
although what was said before in the foregoing Discourses was not sufficient to
cure their Infidelity, what has been now said might serve to convince them that
it is the wisest Course to keep their Infidelity to themselves; that how little
soever they believe of the Truth of Religion, it is not Prudence to tell the
World that they are Men of no Principles, and consequently not fit to be
employed or trusted; that it is not good Manners to make a Jest of Serious and
Sacred things, and to affront the common Reason and Judgment of Mankind; and
that it is not for their Interest to endeavor to bring other Men over to their
side, because if none had more Religion than themselves, they could not be near
so safe and secure in their Rights and Possessions, and in their Lives (the
only things they value) as they now are.

But I do not think there are any here present concerned in this Part of my
Discourse, and therefore shall lengthen it no further. Heb. 6.9.
I am persuaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation; For
your Presence here, in the House of God, and in the Assembly of Christians,
makes it reasonable to believe, that you are already convinced, not only of the
Being and Providence of God, but likewise of the Truth of the Christian
Religion and of the Divine Inspiration and Authority of the Holy Scriptures.

2. To you therefore who are Christians I shall now turn my Discourse. Heb.
13.22.
And I beseech you, Brethren, suffer the word of Exhortation; it is only this.

Since you have Moses and the Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles, and
believe that they are Messengers sent to you from God to instruct you in his
Will; receive the Truth and the Law at their Mouths; mind what they say, and be
careful to follow their Directions in all things.

For even we who have the Scriptures, the lively Oracles of God, may perish for
want of Knowledge as well as they that have them not, unless we make that Use
of them which they were given for; unless we are diligent in reading them, and
careful to practice what they teach. For the Rich Man spoken of in this Parable
had the Scriptures, but his mere having them did not keep him from Hell. And
his five surviving Brethren had likewise the Scriptures, and yet were then in a
fair way of following their Brother to that Place of Torment. They had Moses
and the Prophets but they did not hear them.

And this also may be our Case, who have not only these, but also Christ and
his Apostles Preaching to us; if we do not hear them; for what Advantage can it
be to us to have good Instructors, if we will not mind what they say; if we
stop our ears to all their Counsels and Reproofs? No Man was ever made a
Scholar only by having a good Library in his Possession: No Man ever learnt any
Art or Science, though it was never so well taught in any Book, only by keeping
the Book in his Chamber, or carrying it about in his Pocket. And as little
shall we be the wiser only by having the Holy Scriptures, though (as the Apostle
says) they are able to make us wise unto Salvation, 2 Timothy 3.15.
if we do not read and study them with an honest Design to furnish our selves
from thence with a stock of useful Knowledge, and with a firm Resolution to lead
our Lives according to the Directions which they give us.

Nay so far shall we be from receiving any Advantage only by our having the
Holy Scriptures given us, and free Liberty allowed us to look into them, (a
Privilege we of this Nation have above most of our Neighbors) that if we do
not read and study them, it will be much the worse for us; our Condemnation
will be the greater, and our Destruction so much the more certain. For the Case
of those who offend through Ignorance, when their Ignorance is unaffected, is
very pitiable; and though we cannot certainly say how God will deal with those who
had no clear Revelation of his Will made to them; this we may be sure of, that
God, who is a merciful God, will deal mercifully with them. John 15.22.
If I had not come and spoken unto them, says our Savior, they had not had
Sin. But the Case will be quite otherwise with those, Luke 12.47.
who knew their Master's will and did not do it; They, as our Savior says,
shall be beaten with many Stripes. And it will be all one if they did not know
it, if their Ignorance of it was occasioned by their own fault, in neglecting
those Means of Knowledge which God has afforded them; And much rather, if their
ignorance of their Duty was affected and chosen, that they might Sin with less
disturbance of Mind; for our Savior's Judgment in this Case is very plain (and
it is his Judgment by which we must stand or fall to all Eternity) Joh. iii. 19.
This is the Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men loved
Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were Evil.

Having therefore Moses and the Prophets, and also Christ and his Apostles,
continually Preaching to us in the Books of Holy Scripture, let us hear them;
This is both our Duty; and our Interest.

And that our study of the Scripture may be with good success, and we may
thereby be thoroughly furnished unto all good Work; Let us Pray as we are
taught by our Church in a most excellent Collect suited to the Subject I have
been Discoursing of.

Blessed Lord, who have caused all Holy Scriptures to be written for our
Learning; Collect for 2d. Sunday in Advent.
Grant that we may in such wise hear them, read, mark, learn, and inwardly
digest them, that by Patience and Comfort of thy Holy Word we may embrace and
ever hold fast the blessed Hope of everlasting Life which thou have given us in
our Savior Jesus Christ.

Amen.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 55. line 10. for some, read same.


