EBEN-EZER: OR, Profitable Truths after Pestilential Times.

Being some MEDITATIONS Upon ISAIAH 4.2.

SHOWING The MERCY and the DUTY Of Those that have Escaped the Slaughtering
Pestilence.

As also, That all Slaughter shall end in the Exaltation of CHRIST, and the
setting up of HIS KINGDOM.

Together with An Epistolary Preface To the Citizens of London and Westminster.

By THOMAS BLAKE.

London, Printed in the Year 1666.

To the Citizens of LONDON and WESTMINSTER: A few Things are humbly offered,
needful to be considered.
SIRS,
IN this day of the Lords Controversy, a Cup of trembling has been put into
your hands, and you have drank deep of it: Such Slaughters rarely, if ever,
have been within your Walls since their Foundations were first laid. The
memorable year of Twenty Five, must not be compared with Sixty Five, either for
the number of the Slain, the continuance of the Visitation, or such unwonted
reiterated Increases and Decreases: And O that suitable to the dread of the
Dispensation, Effects might be wrought upon all your Hearts! that the Lord may
be pacified toward you, and may not add to this Plague seven other and worse
Plagues. You are now comforting your Hearts with thoughts that the bitterness
of Death is past; your Trade will return, and the Cloud that has darkened your
glory and splendour will vanish: To which I heartily say, Amen; the Lord do so.
But if I thought it would be born, and kindly received, I would take leave to
tell you, I have my fears; fears not bottomed upon (...), as the Apostles
expression is, 1 Timothy 4.7. profane and old Wives fables; but upon
Considerations (as I judge) more solid: An account of which, be pleased to take
in a few words.

First, Cities every way famous have had their Periods: all worldly glory
carries decaying Principles in its bowels. It may, as the Sun, go forth in its
beauty and strength until it climb to its Meridian and thenceforward it will
decline until its luster set in obscurity. As they say of the World, so of
Cities, they have their Youth and Manhood, in which they are in their strength
and vigor; and after that, Old Age, until they return to the dust out of which
they were raised. Tire, a City of strength, called the strong City, Josh.
19.29. an ancient and enriching City; yet from the Lord went forth a
Commandment to destroy it, Isa. 23.11. Babylon, once the Metropolis of a mighty
Empire, and consequently stood upon suitable advantage-ground for its security;
yet could not bear up it self against that Sentence, Isa. 14.4. Thou shall take
up this Proverb against the King of Babylon, and say, How has the Oppressor
ceased? the golden City ceased? Ceased to be, as well as to oppress: It is the
destiny of some, that when they cease to oppress, they must cease to be also.
Jerusalem, the beloved City, honored by the King of Heaven (that Fountain of
all true Honor) against her cries the Prophet, Isa. 3.8. Jerusalem is ruined,
and Judah is fallen. God commands and threatens concerning Tyrus, Ezekiel. 26.4.
Break down her Towers; I will also scrape her dust from her, and leave her like
the top of a Rock: not so much as any Monument should remain. Jamseges est ubi
Troja fuit. Others their memory is perished, Psalm. 9.6. Thou have destroyed
Cities, their memorial is perished with them.

Secondly, Sins and great Provocations have been precedaneous unto, and the
procuring Causes of the ruin of Cities. God is known to be long-suffering to
all among whom he is known; he does not strike, much less destroy, without a
cause, nor yet for every cause: God can bear long, yet will he not bear always.
Wickedness may in places of eminency, as Diseases in the Body, lurk up and down
for a season, till by continuance they grow strong, seiz the Vitals, and down
goes the House of Clay. Sin drowned the old World, and burnt Sodom and
Gomorrha; and they are left upon record, as Examples of Divine Vengeance, to
put a restraint upon the exorbitancies of sinful Cities. Every public sin of
Cities, as they are a Body and Community, or the sin of them that are the
visible owned authority in them, acting as such, is a stroke at their
Foundations, and many such may soon level them with the ground. There are
Prognostics of decaies and approaching Death, not only in the Natural, but in
Bodies Politic also. The Death-Marks upon Cities of old, have been such as
these:

1. Pride: God resists the Proud, is true concerning a Nation, City, or Man.
It it was Moabs height that laid him low: We have heard of the pride of Moab,
he is exceeding proud; therefore shall Moab howl, for the foundations of
Kirhareseth shall ye mourn, Isa. 16.6. Tyrus said, I am of perfect Beauty,
Ezekiel. 27.3. thence was she defaced, and brought to nothing.

Foelicissima --
Dicta foret -- si non sibi visa fuisset.
2. Oppression; especially oppression and cruelty toward the Lords own People:
Woe to the oppressing City, Zeph. 3.1. Rev. 18.21. With violence shall that
great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at all: and why
so? that follows, verse. 24. In her was found the Blood of Prophets, and of
Saints, and of all that were slain upon the Earth. God will make inquisition
for Blood, especially for the Bloood of his Abels, that will cry; all that have
had their hands in it, call themselves by what name of distinction they will,
will be found to be Brats of Babylon, and they and their Cities may fall
thereby. One of the great Sins that came up into remembrance against Tire and
Zidon, was this, The Children of Judah and the Children of Jerusalem have ye
sold to the Grecians, that ye might remove them far from their border, Joel 3.6.

3. Treachery and Unfaithfulness: Amos 1.9. For three transgressions of Tyrus,
and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; because they
dilivered up the whole Captivity of Edom, and remembered not the Brotherly
Covenant.

4. False-Worship: Jer. 19.11. I will break this City as one breaks a Potters
Vessel that cannot be made whole again; and they shall bury in Tophet till
there be no place. In Tophet they sinned in their corrupt Worship, and there
they must fall by this their iniquity. Certainly woe to them who after Light
received, and solemn Covenants made, dare to corrupt the Worship of God, and
defile the Sanctuary with their detestable things; woe to them, whether Persons
or Places.

5. The baseness of pretended spiritual men: There is a woe against Jerusalem,
Zeph. 3.1. and why? Her Prophets are light and treacherous Persons; her Priests
have polluted the Sanctuary, they have done violence to the Law: HER Prophets
and Priests, says God, not MINE; some of their own making: they do wickedly,
and would wrest the the Word, and labor to make it speak for their abominations.

6. Contempt of the Gospel: This evidently was Jerusalems undoing; They killed
the Prophets, and stoned them that were sent unto them; and upon a supposition
and hope to preserve their worldly interest, they set themselves against Christ
himself, Joh. 11.48. If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and
the Romans will come and take away our Place and Nation. This their design
proved abortive; that which they intended for the promoting of their carnal
ends, let in the Enemy upon them like a flood, to the utterruine of them and
their City. Never yet did any sell a Gospel to gain a Trade, but ran an eminent
hazard of selling themselves into ruin and misery.

7. Incorrigibleness: Jerusalems scum went not out of her, as the Prophet
complains: A fire was kindled under her; she was in distress, but yet sin was
not purged out: She received not correction, as it is expressed, Zeph. 3.1.
Judgments are Gods last Remedy, if they do no good, the Patient must die,
without a miracle of mercy.

Thirdly, Sins have been the ruin of Cities, by their turning God to be
against them: So long as a People or Place can say, The LORD is with us, they
stand firm. God is the Rock of Persons, Cities, and Nations; if they sell or
forfeit their Rock, he will also sell them, or give them into the hands of
spoilers. A People and Places that God has wrought for, must not suppose the
presence and care of God so entaild upon them, that he will stand by them, be
it right or wrong. If they turn their backs upon God, cast off the thing that
is good, serve their lusts, seek themselves, scoff at Holiness, tread his
People in the dirt, pervert all Equity and Right, call evil good, and good
evil, put darkness for light, and light for darkness; God will also turn
himself against such, and fight against them as an Enemy: Woe to them that have
God against them! Woe unto them when I depart from them, says God, Hos. 9.12.
Jerusalem's doom was, Says the Lord God, behold I, even I, am against thee,
and will execute Judgments in the midst of thee. It is a great vanity in some,
who when they have provoked God to his face, and done evil even to the
uttermost they can, do imagine the breach may be repaired with a little feigned
Humiliation, upon whom that Text looks very sadly, Jer. 14.12. When they fast,
I will not hear their cry; and when they offer Burnt Offering and an Oblation,
I will not accept them: but I will consume them, etc. Sometimes God is so
turned against Cities, that he will not accept of the mediation of his People
for them, and this was the case in the Text but now cited, v. 11. God says to
Jeremiah, Pray not thou for this People. God, when turned against Jerusalem,
says to Ezekiel, Son of man, will thou judge, will thou judge the bloody City:
some render it, An causam ageres, an causam ageres Civitatis istius? Will thou
plead for that City? No, says God, thou shall not set upon such lost labor.
Noah, Daniel and Job, can sometimes only deliver their own Souls. God Almighty
keep his Noah's, Daniels, Jobs, whatever may be the lot of others.

Fourthly, There is no fence against Divine Displeasure; nothing can be a
security to that place against which God is turned. Jerusalem was once supposed
to be impregnable; hence when David went to take it, they set the blind and
lame to keep it, as a Guard conceived sufficient to defend it from all
Assaults; yet was it trodden down, when God armed an Enemy against it. Tyrus
was wasted in the day of Gods displeasure, although rich and strong in Shiping,
and what else might be accounted the strength of a place.

Fifthly, God wants not ways to lay Cities low, if his Mind be engaged against
them: He may possibly not do it all at once, but he can do it gradatim, by
degrees: He says of Tyrus, Bring it out piece by piece, Ezekiel. 24.6. The
remains after one Judgment, he can take off by another; What survives the
Pestilence, may fall by the Sword and Famine.

And great is the Equity of God in dealing thus with Cities and places of
eminency. They are the Heads from whence other places receive influence. If sin
abound in Cities, it is from them proppagated through all places that have
commerce with them, or depend upon them. It is said of Babylon, Rev. 17.1. The
Kings of the Earth and Inhabitants of the Earth have been made to drink of the
wine of her fornication.

Should you now put the question to me, that the People once did to Ezekiel,
Will thou tell us what these things are to us? My Answer is, Be you faithful to
your selves, and compare your selves with what I have laid before you, and so
may you come to inform your selves how far these things concern you. What your
sins are, you know, or may know: You have been and yet are under the Rod. Under
your Glory a burning is kindled, I wish it may be extinct ere it consume both
Root and Branch.

Three things there are, that speak for you; I wish they may outcry your
Provocations.

1. There are many among you in whom the Lord takes pleasure, however they are
by some lightly esteemed.

2. You have been a Refuge to the Needy in their distress: What day you cease
so to be, you will augment my fears, and perhaps your dangers also.

3. Some among you have lately with cheerfulness received the Gospel.

Certain it is, your Rowers have brought you into Great Waters, as the Prophet
speaks, Ezekiel. 27.26. God Almighty work you to a repenting broken frame, that
the Lord may repent him of the Evil. Nineveh had perished, had they not put on
their Sackcloth. The Lord humble you for Crying Sins, and give you New Spirits,
that you may not go on in ways of Provocation. A part of what is your present
Duty, the following Treatise may possibly give you a little light into. I have
used freedom and plainness with you; let it not be to me according to that Old
Saying, Obsequium Amicos, veritas odium parit. I am satisfied in what I have
written, having a witness in my self: I desire not the woeful day, but am among
the number of

Your hearty Well-wishers, Thomas Blake.

To the READER.
READER,
APologies for appearing in public are so common, and sometimes so full of
vanity, that they create suspicions of Pride and Vainglory in the spirits of
men, rather then remove such stones of stumbling: I shall therefore leave my
integrity in this Undertaking to Him whose prerogative it is to try the
spirits. Only know, Having upon some ground published something at the
beginning of this Calamity, I thought it not amiss to follow it with some
suitable Word, now we are (as is hoped) drawing toward a period of this sore
slaughter: Be assured I shall not any more for ever trouble the World with any
thing in this way, unless upon some special occasion and more then ordinary
Call.

My design in the whole is to speak something, that Saints may know their Duty,
being escaped; and to bear up their hearts under the sad thoughts of past, and
what future slaughters may be: and to commend Saintship to Sinners, that they
may be desirous to get into that number. I have avoided affected strains and
Jingles, that sound of words, (which in my apprehension are but dead flies,
that corrupt the Boxes of otherwise precious Ointment) that the design may be
heeded more then the expression, and have sought to speak something that may be
suitable to every case. I have not much more to add. Only,

1. If what I have written fall into the hands of any in any place not reached
by the hand of God this day; Remember the cup does many times go round, your
turn may yet be to come: Be not secure.

2. Let none be discouraged, though you seace sudden wished effects of the
slaughter the Lord has made; God is in his way, and will do his work with
sober speed: He could have made the World in one hour, but took six days for
it. God says of Zidon, Ezekiel. 28.23, 24. He will execute Judgments in her, he
will send into her Pestilence, and Blood in her streets, and the wounded shall
be judged in the midst of her, by the Sword on her, on every side: The issue of
this? Verse. 28. There shall be no more a pricking Brier unto the house of
Israel, nor any grieving Thorn of all that are round about them, that despise
them. The Promise is true, Faith and Patience is our work.

3. If thou art a Soul that know the Plague of thine own Heart, and art in
some measure delivered from it, thou have enough, and God will bear thee in his
Arms, and bring thee to himself, however things may be in the World.

I have this only to request of thee, That thou would look this little Piece
through, and if one page suit not thy case, another may. If it serve thy
spiritual Welfare in any measure, Give God the Glory, and beg that he may feel
the power of all Truth upon his heart, which he recommends to thee, and is
thine to serve thee for Jesus sake.

T.B.

EBEN-EZER: Or, Some MEDITATIONS Upon ISAIAH 4.2.
In that day shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the
Fruit of the Earth shall be excellent and comely, for them that are escaped of
Israel.
THat you may have a little light into these words, it will be expedient to
consider two things: 1. What we are to understand by the Branch of the Lord,
and the fruit of the Earth; and 2ly. To what Time and what Persons these words
do relate. As for the former, you shall find in Scripture there is one who is
called the Branch, Zac. 6.12. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, saying, Behold the
man whose name is the BRANCH; and Zac. 3.8. For behold, I will bring forth my
Servant the Branch: in these Scriptures, and also in the Scripture I am upon,
by Branch we are to understand Jesus Christ; and that we are to take Christ to
be thereby intended, is evident from Jer. 23.5, 6. Behold, the days come, says
the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous Branch, and a King shall
reign and prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice in the Earth; in his
days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is his Name
whereby he shall be called, The Lord our Righteousness, or Jehovah our
Righteousness: He that is the Lord our Righteousness, is this Branch, and that
is certainly the Lord Jesus: He is called the Branch of the Lord upon the
account of his Divine Nature, that he is the Son of God, the only begotten of
the Father, that lay in his Bosom from Eternity; as also because he was a
Branch growing out and appearing in his glory and splendor, before the Sons of
Men, by the appointment and Decree of the Father.

As for the Fruit of the Earth, who may that be? You find sometimes in
Scripture, Jesus Christ is said to be a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, and a
Branch growing out of his Roots, Isa. 11.1. And there shall come forth a Rod
out of the Stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall grow out of his Roots; He is so
called upon account of his humane Nature; as he is Man, he is of the Seed of
David, and upon the same score he is here termed the Fruit of the Earth;
Christ, the Branch of the Lord, as he is Man, is of earthly extract and
Original; Man is of the Earth, and Christ as Man, is made of the same mould
with the rest of the Children of Men; he was made Man, and being of the Seed of
the Woman, he is here called the Fruit of the Earth. Thus much for answer to
the first Enquiry, Who is meant by the Branch of the Lord, and the Fruit of the
Earth.

Secondly, To what Time and Persons do these Words refer? For there is a
certain time unto which these words have relation; in That day; in what day is
that? it is a day of slaughter, a day of great calamity; for it refers unto the
end of the foregoing Chapter without all dispute: in the 25 and 26 Verses it is
said, Thy men shall fall by the Sword, and thy mighty in the war, and her Gates
shall lament, and she being desolate shall sit upon the ground: it relates to a
time when much slaughter should be made, slaughter to a desolation, when men
should be exceedingly weeded out of the Earth, then shall the Branch of the
Lord be beautiful and glorious, and the Fruit of the Earth excellent and
comely. If that be the issue of Desolation, we need the less matter it. But
unto what Persons does this word relate? I answer primarily, unto the Jewish
People, and unto those among them that should survive and outlive the
Calamities that do befall them; it relates unto the surviving People among the
Jews: The Branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious, and the Fruit of
the Earth excellent and comely, for them that escape, and them that escape of
Israel: It relates, secondarily (I suppose) and may indifferently have some
respect to all the People of God; or more largely, to all those unto whom the
Gospel of Christ shall come, and they be thereby prevailed upon: as Israel in
Scripture was a name unto all the Jewish Nation unto whom the Oracles of God
were committed, and they owned a subjection to them; so it may have respect
unto all in all times of the Gospel, brought over to Christ, who falling under
sore Calamities, have this grace allowed them, to survive and outlive those
days of distress. This may serve to give light into the words; and two Truths I
would note from them, which lie fairly in them, and which I judge as pertinent
unto the present circumstances under which we fall, as any in any one Scripture
that I know of in the Book of God.

Doctr. 1. That it is a proper issue and a good effect of
slaughtering-Judgement, upon them that have escaped the slaughter, to have
Christ become glorious and excellent unto them. And

2. That the issue of all those dreadful destroying Judgments that shall break
forth in the world, shall be the putting of glory upon the head of Christ, and
that glory upon Christ shall be to the good and benefit of those of Israel that
shall escape the slaughter.

I shall begin with the first, namely, That it is a good issue of
Slaughtering-Judgements, upon them that outlive such calamities, that Christ
is become glorious and excellent in their accounts: The Words do certainly
relate to a Time of great slaughter, such a slaughter that Jerusalem (which was
once a very populous City) and the places of the greatest concourse in it,
which were the Gates (for in the Gates Justice was executed, and thither was a
confluence of persons from all parts) but such should be the slaughter that her
Gates should lament, and mourn, and become desolate; at this time there were
some should escape, (God uses to have a remaining Remnant when his displeasure
is at highest) and what should this sad Judgment work upon them that should
remain? The Branch of the Lord should become glorious among them: You read in
the 78 Psalm, verse. 34, 35. When he slew them, then they sought him, and they
returned, and enquired early after God, and they remembered that God was their
Rock, and the high God their Redeemer: When he slew them, that is, when he came
forth with slaughtering Judgments, as he did sometimes against Israel; and
particularly, God smote them with Plagues more then once: now what did they
that remained and were left alive do? they began to have more high and awful
thoughts of the Lord then before, the esteem of him was a little raised in
their hearts; they remembered he was their Rock, and the high God their
Redeemer; thus far they went well, only that which follows spoiled all; in
verse. 36, 37. Nevertheless they did flatter him with their mouth, and they lied
unto him with their tongues; for their heart was not right with him, neither
were they steadfast in his Covenant: if really the esteem of the Lord had been
raised in their hearts, they had been an excellent People, and the Lords
Judgments had wrought kindly. You shall find the Lord complains for the want
of such a spirit in Hos. 11.7. God called there to the People, and how? He
called by mercy; I drew them with the cords of a man, with the bands of love,
verse. 4. that is, I treated them kindly; he called them by Judgments, as you
see in verse. 6. The Sword shall abide on his Cities, and shall consume his
Branches, and devour them; what did God expect should be the answer unto his
Call, and the fruit of all his Dispensations? it was that they should have
exalted him, honored him, and admired him at a greater rate then before? but
because they did not, God took it ill, and reckoned that his Providence had
not a kindly reception among them. Psalm. 2.6. Yet (says he) have I set my King
upon my holy Hill of Sion; which words are not only a Prophecy concerning that
Kingdom Christ shall have, but declarative of that Kingdom he has, viz. his
Providential Kingdom, by which he manages and governs affairs in the World; now
in the management of it what does he do? sometimes, as in verse. 9. he rules
them with a Rod of Iron, and dashes in pieces like a Potters Vessel; but what
should they do that should outlive such Providence? you shall see the Fruit
that should grow upon this Root, Kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish
from the way; Christ expects when he is abroad with his Iron Rod, and dashing
Earthen Vessels to pieces, as he has this day, they that stand on their feet
not dashed to pieces, as others of the same mould, he expects higher thoughts
of himself, and to be more esteemed by them; and if he fail of his expectation,
let them remember that they are but Clay, and therefore in the way, not out of
danger. Jer. 51.50. Ye that have escaped the Sword, go away, stand not still;
remember the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come into your mind: God was
abroad with the Sword, it may be the material Sword, and it may be with such a
Sword of the Angel as he has lately been cutting withal; what should the
Escaped do? Remember the Lord: Remember him, you will say, what is that? Give
me leave to open it unto you a little, because I shall use the term again anon;
To remember the Lord, implies two things among others:

1. To have the heart wrought up into the fear of the Lord, to sanctify his
Name; Remember the Sabbath, to keep it holy; that is, sanctify the Sabbath: so
remember the Lord, that is, fear him, let his Name be great, his honor be dear
unto thee. Remember thy Creator; what is that? it is, Give up thy self unto the
Lord, remember who he is, and what he is, and what he calls for from thee: when
a People sin against the Lord, they are said to forget him many times; so
suitably to remember him, is to fear him, to honor him, and lift up his Name.

2. To remember the Lord, is to love and delight in him, to have a great esteem
of him; as the Lord says, Jer. 31.20. Is Ephraim my dear Son? is he a pleasant
Child? since I spoke against him, I do earnestly remember him: Gods remembering
Ephraim, was his love to and delight in Ephraim; so our remembering the Lord, is
our loving of and delighting in him: and this is the frame that should be found
upon the hearts of them that escape sore Calamities, To fear and magnify, to
love and delight in him: This indeed is a right Spirit, and it is called for
elsewhere, Ezekiel. 6.9. And they that escape of you shall remember me among the
Nations whither they shall be carried Captives: Time was when Israel had few
and slight thoughts of God their Redeemer, but when GOD had been at work among
them by severe strokes, those that did escape of them, their Spirits should be
much amended, much altered for the better; they should come and love him and
fear him, so as they did not before: So Isa. 10.20. And it shall come to pass
in that day; what day was that? a day of great slaughter: for, verse. 19. The
rest of the Trees of his Forest shall be few, that a Child may write them; a
Child that is but a bad Arithmetician should be able to number them that should
remain, the smallness of them should be such: It shall come to pass, that the
Remnant of Israel, and such as are escaped of the house of Jacob, shall no more
again stay upon him that smote them, but shall stay upon the Lord, the holy One
of Israel in truth: staying upon the Lord, is an Act of Faith, and Acts of
Faith do greatly glorify Christ, and speak the Heart much delighted in him; if
thou be'st not taken with him, thou will never act Faith upon him: But this was
the Fruit that this escaping Remnant should bring forth, and is that which God
expects from preserved ones in a day of slaughter.

All this confirms the Truth I have been driving at; and in the prosecution of
it, I shall propose two things to be spoken to:

1. To show what Engagement there lies upon them that escape in a day of
slaughter, to be thereby led unto an esteem of Christ; why it should render
this Branch of the Lord, and Fruit of the Earth, beautiful and glorious in
their eyes.

2. When those that do escape may conclude their escaping has this issue and
effect upon their Souls. And

3. Try what Improvement we may make of this Truth.

First, How does our escaping in a time of Calamity, lay an engagement upon the
heart to prize and value Christ the more? I suppose it is very natural; I would
evidence it in four or five things.

1. Christ has the management of all Providence, and surely then of such as
these; a Sword goes not through a Land, nor a Plague through a City, Country, or
Town, but Christ has a great hand in it: Joh. 3.35. The Father loves the Son,
and has given all things into his hand; the Father out of his great love unto
his Son, and confidence he has in him, that he will do nothing but what is
well, has committed the management of all Providence into his hands; he has
given him the power of life and death in the World, and where he will he
spares, and where he will he slayes: the People of God (represented under the
notion of the two Witnesses) it is said of them, that they have a kind of
power to kill People as they will, Rev. 11.6. These (meaning the two Witnesses)
have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of their Prophecy, and
have power over Waters, to turn them into Blood, and to smite the Earth with
Plagues as often as they will; but their power is but in a way of Prayer;
through the great interest they have in the Lord, and his Christ, they can do
much, and carry a great stroke for or against a People: But now the power of
Christ is absolute, he can do and govern in this matter as he pleases; and why
has he this power? look Joh. 5.22, 23. The Father judges no man, but has
committed all Judgment unto the Son: by judging here, I humbly conceive,
Ruling and Government, ordering and disposing of things in the World, is
intended, which the Father does not do without, but by the Son; the matter is
left unto him, and why? That all men might honor the Son even as they honor
the Father; therefore is this Government committed unto the Branch of the Lord,
that it might gain him the more esteem: We that have seen so much of Christ in
these his Dispensations, ought it not to have this effect upon our hearts, to
teach us to honor the Son as we honor the Father? Especially,

2. Considering, That that Escape which you and I have in a day of Calamity, it
is through the Son; if thou do escape, this Branch of the Lord has a great
hand in it; however we may rob Christ of his honor, and attribute it unto
second Causes, yet indeed and in truth, the matter is in Christ's hand: You read
of a Retiring-Chamber for the People of God in days of Calamity, Isa. 26.20.
Come my People, enter into your Chamber, and shut the doors about you, hide
your selves for a little moment, until my indignation be over-past: Are there
Retiring-Chambers in the day of Gods Controversy, when he comes to contend,
and smite down unto the Earth? I might ask the question, Where are they? and
say as David, Psalm. 139.7, etc. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit, or whither
shall I flee from thy presence? if I ascend up into Heaven, thou art there; if
I make my bed in Hell, behold thou art there; if I take the wings of the
morning, and dwell in the uttermost parts of the Sea, even there shall thy hand
lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me: where may a man be hid in the day of
Gods anger? I would say, Retire into Christ, he is a Rock of shelter, he is the
Munition of Rocks where the Soul shall be hid, it is the man Christ Jesus shall
be a Covert from the storm, a hiding place in the day of distress, suitable
unto which the Psalmist speaks in Psalm 32.7. Thou art my hiding place, thou
shall preserve me from trouble, thou shall compass me about with Songs of
Deliverance: Soul, art thou preserved? it is Christ has been thy hiding place.
There were some in the days of David's Calamity scoffed at him, and bid him
flee as a Bird unto his Mountain; but see what he says, Psalm. 11.1. In the
Lord I put my trust, how say ye to my Soul, Flee as a Bird to your Mountain? It
was a Psalm penned in the time when he fled from Saul (as I conceive) and it is
as if he should say, It is true, I have recourse sometimes unto this and that
Mountain, and I do go up and down from place to place to be hid from the hand
of Saul, but I go as God leads me, as Christ goes before me; and wherever I
am, and which way so ever I look, it is the Lord is my Refuge, from him I
expect my security. You read, Ezekiel. 1.26. of a Throne, and upon the Throne
there was one like unto a man; that Man was the Man Christ Jesus; the Throne
upon which he sat, is the Throne of his Providential Kingdom, where he sits and
governs all things in the World, and where he sits to order all the matters in
the following part of this Prophecy. Now see what he does upon this Throne of
his; And the Lord said unto him, (that is, the Man clothed with Linen, that
had the Writers Inkhorn by his side) Go through the midst of Jerusalem, and set
a mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the
Abominations that be done in the midst thereof; and to the others he said, Go
ye after him through the City, and smite, let not your eye spare, neither have
ye pity: slay utterly, old and young, both maids and little children, and
women, but come not near any upon whom is the mark, etc. I gather hence that it
is Christ has the marking men for destruction or preservation: he upon the
Throne of his Providential Kingdom, governs and orders for preserving or
destroying in a day of slaughter; therefore if thou art kept, know who has
been thy Keeper. This was typified in the Case of Aaron, in that sore Plague,
Numb. 16.46, etc. And Moses said unto Aaron, Take a Censer, and put fire
therein from off the Altar, and put on Incense, and go quickly unto the
Congregation, and make an atonement for them, for there is wrath gone out from
the Lord, the Plague is begun: and Aaron took as Moses commanded him, and ran
into the midst of the Congregation, and behold the plague was begun among the
People; and he put on Incense and made an atonement, and stood between the dead
and the living, and the Plague was stayed. Aaron he was the High Priest, and in
that Office a great Type of Christ, and in this action a great Type of Christ
also; it is he, by his intercession and mediation, steps in between the Living
and the Dead; if thou art not fallen among them that fall, it is because this
Aaron has stepped in to thy help, because he has rescued thee, and been a
Preservation unto thee. The 68th Psalm is a Psalm applicable to Christ, witness
that passage in the 18th verse, Thou have ascended up on high, thou have led
captivity captive, and received Gifts for men, yea, for the rebellious also,
that the Lord God might dwell among them; This, you know, is spoken of and
applied unto Christ by the Apostle in the Epistle to the Ephesians, Chap. 4.
mark now what follows in this 68th Psalm, verse. 26. He that is our God is the
God of Salvation, and unto God the Lord belong the issues from death: This is
also spoken of Christ, unto him belong the issues from death; so that if thou
art spared, and saved in a day of slaughter, it is from the Lord, thou must say
thou have had this issue from death. That which I drive at, is this, (that you
may not lose my design) Have you not cause, great cause, to see that the Branch
of the Lord by your escape be rendered so much the more excellent and comely to
you, since what escape you have, is through him? if you are preserved, it is by
Christ, unto whom you are beholding for your preservation.

3. Further, The escaping of slaughter should render the Lord beautiful and
glorious to you, seeing it is from him that thou have not only thy Escaping,
but the Good of thy Escape; not only the Thing it self, but the Mercy with it;
by him it is blessed unto you, if it be blessed. Some there are (and O unhappy
they!) unto whom every thing is accursed, Psalm. 69.22. Let their Table become a
snare before them, and that which should have been for their welfare, let it
become a trap. Every enjoyment is a snare unto some; The curse of the Lord is
in the House of the Wicked, Prove. 3.33. Some men, though they have houses to
hide their heads in, and it may be many things in them that look like mercies,
they are yet curses to them; possibly their houses are full of the things of
this World, Waters of a full Cup may be rung out unto them, their Eyes may
stand out with fatness, and they may have more then Heart can wish; they may
have Basket and Store, and yet be cursed both in the Basket and in the Store:
it may be their Houses are full of Children, and the Substance they leave is
left unto their Babes, as is the Psalmists expression; but they are cursed also
in the fruit of their Womb: it may be Health and Life are within their Walls,
not one sick, not one dead, all preserved, and well; but yet it is not well,
for this their preservation is not blessed. Let me tell you, that read these
lines, As God smites some in anger, in anger also sometimes he forbears to
smite; therefore in Isa. 1.5. Why should you be smitten any more? It was a word
of great displeasure: The escaping of some may be cursed unto them; but if thy
escape be blessed unto thee, and thou have it, and the mercy with it, thou art
beholding unto Christ for both: Some are preserved in love; sweet is that
expression, and happy they that can say so, Isa. 38.17. Behold for peace I had
great bitterness, but thou have in love to my Soul delivered it from the pit of
corruption; He was not only delivered from the pit of corruption, but
delivered in love unto his Soul, in a way of mercy and special kindness: happy
they that can say, Thou have given me this escape in love to my Soul! But how
comes a Soul to have such a Deliverance, and to have it in love too? from that
general word, Genesis 22.18. there is the fountainhead from whence our mercies
flow, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be b^essed; in Abraham's
Seed (meaning Christ) all the Blessings come, that come upon the World:
Whatever comes to thee or me, if it come as a Blessing, it is through the Seed
of Abraham, and upon that score we are to place it. Now if thou do escape,
and this Escape be sanctified unto thee, and all this be but Fruit growing upon
this Branch of the Lord, should not thy Escape render the Lord Jesus the more
amiable to thy Soul?

4. Thou have not only the mercy of thy Escape, from Christ, but skill to walk
under it becomingly; Vain man would be wise, though he is born as the wild
Asses Colt, untoward, untractable, good for nothing, unruly and perverse, and
if there be any thing of Wisdom given him, it is from this fountain, 1 Cor.
1.30. it is Christ that is made of God unto us, Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification and Redemption; it is in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge, and from him communicated and given down unto poor Creatures; as
Paul, Phil. 4.12, 13. says, I know both how to be abased, and I know how to
abound; every where and in all things I am instructed, both to be full, and to
be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need; I can do all things through
Christ that strengthens me: that is, I can do all wisely, I can use and manage
every Providence rightly: and how can thou do this; Paul? Through Christ that
strengthens me. So to use Afflictions and Distresses, Miseries and Mercies
becomingly, thy strength is in Christ, and from him it must be communicated
unto thee; and therefore the sense of this should much endear Christ unto thy
Soul, that not only the Mercy of an Escape is from him, but also Wisdom to use,
and rightly to manage it. To which add,

5. That by Jesus Christ, this Branch of the Lord, we have not only an Escape
in time of common Calamity, but greater and better things, which by our Escape
we may be led unto the consideration and meditation of: Certain it is, that
through this Branch of the Lord, we have salvations of more kinds then one: in
that 68th Psalm, verse. 20. where it is said, He that is our God is the God of
Salvation; Junius renders it thus, He is a God powerful to all kinds of
Salvation; or as the Hebrew is, He is the God of Salvations, in the plural
number: So is it with Souls that have really Grace and Mercy from Christ, they
have Salvations of diverse sorts: they have Salvation from Sin, from that power
and dominion that sin is wont to have in the Soul, they are wonderfully by
Christ delivered from that bondage; and Christ had therefore his Name Jesus,
Mat. 1.21. Because he shall save his People from their sins: Though the
Canaanites may dwell in the Land, they shall become tributary, they shall not
sit at the Stern turning the Soul which way they please. Christ brings
Salvation from Hell, he has the Key of David, that shuts and no man opens,
and opens and no man shuts; he delivers from wrath to come, 1 These. 1.10.
Salvation from sin, and the most dismal issues and consequences thereof, and
from a temporal deliverance, the Soul has occasion to consider and think of
these Salvations. Psalm. 103. I suppose might be penned upon the occasion of
some temporal deliverance, for this reason, because the Psalmist says in the
fourth verse, The Lord did heal his diseases, and redeemed his life from
destruction; what does this make the Psalmist think of? in verse. 3. Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities, who heals all thy diseases; it made him think
of pardoning Grace, and greater Mercy, that he was made partaker of through the
Lords bounty and goodness. Hezekiah from his temporal deliverance, was raised
to think of some higher pieces of kindness, Isa. 38.17. Thou have in love to my
Soul, delivered it from the pit of corruption, for thou have cast all my sins
behind my back. Now if from this Branch of the Lord you have this fruit, not
only of an Escape from temporal evil, but freedom also from greater; and the
escape from temporal ones, help to raise up the Soul to consider its interest
in higher things; then your Escape it self should render Christ more dear and
precious to you then he has been in times past. This therefore may serve for
the ground of the point, why the Soul should from its Escape have higher
Thoughts of Christ.

I come now to the second thing propounded for prosecution of this Doctrine:
When may a poor heart have some cause to conclude its Escape has this effect
attending it, That it is accompanied with more precious thoughts of this Branch
of the Lord?

I answer to it in five things:

1. If in thy Escape thou find thy heart more crucified unto the World, that
it is gotten out of thy heart beyond what it was, it is to be hoped the Branch
of the Lord grows in thy heart, and flourishes more then it did. Methinks it
is with the heart of a poor Creature, with respect to Christ and the World, as
it is between the Sea and Land; the Sea sometimes breaks out, and overflows
much of the Earth; you can very hardly recover any Land out of the Sea, and be
able to fence it out, or if you do, it is at every turn ready to break in
again, and swallow up all that has been recovered out of it: this World breaks
in like a Sea, and swallows up the hearts of many poor Creatures, it drinks up
their Souls, Eccles. 3.11. Also he has set the World in their Hearts; the
World is so rooted in them that it over-runs them: Some are called in Scripture
the men of this World, Psalm. 17.14. From men of this World, which have their
portion in this life; and they are called the Men of this World, because there
is nothing else they love and delight in: How hard a thing is it for Christ to
get ground upon the Heart, so as to sense out this World; witness that case,
Luke 18. when one comes unto Christ, and says, Good Master, what shall I do to
inherit eternal Life? he bid him at last, ver. 22. Go sell all thou have, and
distribute unto the Poor, and thou shall have treasure in Heaven, and come and
follow me: and when he heard this, he was very sorrowful, for he was very rich.
Some of whom it is hoped sometimes are recovered out of the World, and the
World in some good measure fenced out of their hearts, that one would think
there were no great danger of its returning; yet it again breaks in like a
torrent, and carries them away, so that all their Profession comes to nothing:
This World is a Sea that drowns thousands, thousands of Professors are by it
born down headlong, yet some through the power of Christ overcome the World, 1
John 5.4. Who ever is born of God, overcomes the world; and this is the
victory we have over the World, even our Faith. Then the World is said to be
overcome, when it is fallen in a man's esteem and love; when a Soul is convinced
what Idolatry it is, for this World to rule in the heart; for Covetousness is
Idolatry; when the Soul comes to see that all below is empty, perishing, and
vain, and that that fades in the very using, then it is overcome in some good
measure. Now Soul, if thou can say that thy Escape in the day in which God
frowned upon the World, has made thee see all to be vanity and vexation of
Spirit, and that thy heart is an entertainment for something more noble, it is
to be hoped that Christ has gained upon thee. Psalm. 45.10, 11. Hearken, O
Daughter, and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own Kindred
and thy Fathers House, so shall the King greatly desire thy Beauty; for he is
thy Lord, and worship thou him. You must not worship the World: then you
worship it, when it has that place in the Heart that Christ should only
possess; but if the love of this World be rooted out, it is to be hoped that
the love unto Christ has expelled it, and the sight of Christ more excellent,
has made thee trample upon these terrene objects. It was Moses his ardent love
unto Christ, that made him esteem the reproaches of Christ, greater riches then
the treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26. It was his value for Christ, made him
under-value these things. I desire I might reach every of your Consciences that
read these lines, if God will own me so far, I would urge it upon you; We are
yet escaped through infinite mercy, has your escaping had this effect, to
raise up in you higher thoughts of Christ than formerly? Can you witness it by
this evidence? You are possibly, some of you, those that have had much to do in
the World, and concernments of it; if you have not been entangled by it, and
found that it has been very apt to get upon your hearts, I must say, Either
you know not your hearts, or you have sped much better then most in your
capacity: But can you say, It is now turned out of doors? that the leasure-time
you have had, has helped you to look above this Earth, to view things of a
more excellent nature; and Christ's glory has so ravished your Souls, that you
can say that there is nothing that your souls love above or equal with him? Put
it to your Consciences, I charge it upon you as your duty from the Lord. And,

2. If you can say, Sin is out of your Heart more then it was, it is to be
hoped Christ is there; if that be down, Christ is set up, for these stand in
opposition to each other; it must be the fall of the one, that must raise the
other: the Dispensations of God are directed unto the destruction of Sin in the
hearts of his People; if he correct, it is a Rod to whip out the Folly bound up
in their Hearts: and he has said that the fruit of such Providence should be
the taking away of sin, Isa. 27.9. By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be
purged, and this is all the fruit, to take away his Sin: If he show kindness,
it is to destroy sin, to purge that out of the Heart, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Then
will I sprinkle clean Water upon you, and ye shall be clean; from all your
filthiness and from all your Idols will I cleanse you, a new Heart also will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you, and take away the stony heart
and give you a heart of flesh. It relates unto them that should escape public
Calamities, which should be attended with the purging away of Sin; and if you
can say that sin is fallen in your love, it is to be hoped Christ is raised. It
is between Sin and Christ as it was between the House of David and Saul, 2 Samuel
3.1. There was long war between the House of Saul and the House of David, but
David waxed stronger and stronger, and the House of Saul weaker and weaker; as
the House of Saul weakened, so the House of David strengthened; as Sin weakens
in the Soul, Christ gets ground: I may say of the lusts that are in the
Soul, as God sometimes said concerning Amalek. 1 Samuel 15.3. Go and smite
Amalek, and utterly destroy all that they have, and spare them not, but slay
both Man and Woman, Infant and Suckling, Camel and Ass: the Lusts in the heart
are destined unto utter destruction, God would have them killed, and not one
spared, not an Agag left alive. I would put the question unto you, the Lord
help you to put it home to your Souls; You that are escaped, is all slain in
your Souls, that is wont to stand up against Christ? is there not an Agag
spared? I wish (if you say that Sin is killed) the Lord may not say unto you,
as Samuel said to Saul, verse. 14. What then means the bleating of the Sheep,
and the lowing of the Oxen in mine ears? What means that pride, passion,
earthly-mindedness, in the heart of the People of God? if Sin be not brought
down, Christ is not exalted; if Sin be where it was, Christ is where he was;
the Branch of the Lord is not made beautiful and glorious, though his kindness
should have had that effect upon you.

3. If you can say that are escaped, That the Saints are become more precious
unto you, it is to be hoped that Christ is become so also: Many Souls have had
very precious thoughts of Saints, great esteem of them, much love for them;
Psalm. 16.1. My goodness extends not to thee, but unto the Saints, and to the
Excellent, in whom is all my delight. Now love to Saints increases according
as your love to Christ increases: thou can not love a Saint, until thou have
first loved Christ; Col. 1.4. Since we heard of your faith in Christ Jesus, and
of your love that ye have to all Saints; love to Saints followed faith in
Christ. I remember a good Soul, that has been lately telling me, that this was
his constant experience, According as my Soul grows in love to Christ, so it
grows in love to Saints: Even as when the Springs grow higher, you may conclude
a fullness of water in the place from whence they are fed; so if the Saints are
more precious then they were wont to be, he that is the Fountain of all grace,
it is to be presumed, has let in more of himself into thy Soul. Many of you
that read these things possibly have been wont to be the Companions of them
that fear the Lord, and have met and conversed with them, but how have they
been in your hearts? have they been dear, have they lodged in your Bosom? it
may be some will complain, Our Souls have not been so knit unto them as they
should have been; but can you say, That fault is somewhat amended since the
Lord has shown you kindness, and not only marked you for, but blessed you with
preserving-mercy?

4. Thou may hope thy Soul is growing in its love unto Christ, if thou can
say, since thy Escape thy Soul hungers more after Communion with him then it
was wont to do. The natural issue of Love is to desire Enjoyment; and according
as thy desires of enjoyment of communion with Christ are, so is thy love unto
Christ, of this thou may be confident: Many Souls that go up and down from
one Duty to another, have not their hearts inflamed with holy desires to meet
with Christ in ways of Duty; and therefore it is said of some, Their Oblations
were vain, that is, because not directed unto their proper ends: The Lord (
Isa. 64.5.) has promised that he would meet with them that rejoice and work
Righteousness, that remember Him in their ways: They that would see the Lord,
meet with him, and hold fellowship with him, they shall be delighted in his
Approaches unto them. How is thy heart? if the Branch of the Lord be more
glorious unto thee, thou will more desire and breathe after communion with God:
Says the Spouse, I sought him whom my Soul loves. I hope I write to some that
know what communion with Christ means, it is that that all understand not; it
is a Riddle to many, I fear to some professing Ones: If thou art taught of God,
and Christ has to do with thy spirit, and thou art really a gainer by thy
escape, thou do increase in longings after communion with Christ.

5. Hereby it will appear that the Branch of the Lord is become beautiful and
glorious unto thee who art escaped in this day of Distress, if there be a great
care upon thy heart to be found living up unto every Duty which Christ requires
and calls for at the hands of them that are escaped: every Mercy is a Call to
Duty, and lays an obligation upon the heart to some Duties or other; so this
eminent Mercy of Preservation in the midst of slaughtering-Providences, has a
loud Call from Christ, to live in an hearty respect unto some especial Duties
that are enjoined thee; which are such as these:

1. It is the requirement of Christ, That after thou art escaped a Calamity,
thou consider seriously, and seriously lay unto heart, and mourn for whatever
provocation might cause him to shake the Rod over thee; this is certain, that
the time of our escape, as well as our distress, should make us seriously to
consider, and having considered, to mourn over whatever abominations may have
occasioned the Lord to come forth at such a rate; Scripture has more then a
little to say for this, Ezekiel. 36.31. Then shall you remember your own evil
ways, and your doings that were not good, and shall loath your selves in your
own sight, for your Iniquities, and for your abominations. The time intended
here, is the time when they should escape Calamities that were upon that
People, and God should have wrought graciously for them, Then shall you
remember your Own evil ways, not others only, though you may remember others
also; you may warrantably look abroad, consider the National sins and evils,
but be sure thou forget not thy own; and having remembered, to loath thy self
for them, to be offended with thy self, that thou should have any hand in the
procuring of any Judgment from the Lord. There is a great mistake very common,
whether in Practice or Judgment, I will not stand to determine; we are not
careful to mourn over our miscarriages, but when the Rod is on our Backs; like
Children, while the Rod is on their Backs they will cry and mourn, but when the
Father is pacified, then forget wherefore he was contending. The time of your
escape is to be a time for enquiry into your ways, and mourning over them: look
a text or two, one you have Ezekiel. 6.9. And they that Escape of you shall
remember me among the Nations whither they shall be carried captives, because I
am broken with their whorish heart, which has departed from me, and with their
eyes which go a whoring after their Idols, and they shall loath themselves for
the evils which they have committed in all their abominations: observe what
Fruit it is the Lord expects from them that are escaped; they shall remember
me, and remember themselves too, their ways and doings, and then shall loath
themselves: to which add, Ezekiel. 7.16. Escape they shall, but being escaped
there is a Duty lies upon them, They should be upon the Mountains as the Doves
of the Valleys, every one mourning for his iniquity. The Babylonish Captives
after they escaped out of Captivity, and outlived the distress that had buried
many, you find that at that time there was found a spirit of mourning upon
them; Ezra 9.3. is an evident testimony of it, And when I heard this thing, I
rent my garment and my mantle, and plucked off the hair of my head and of my
beard, and sat down astonished: thus did Ezra, and thus should every one that
escapes the Day of Gods Controversy. Now what is the frame of your hearts?
truly all our hearing and knowing of what frame we should be in, will stand for
little, unless you compare your Spirits and the Word together, and see whether
it be with you accordingly: This you may be confident of, we have all had a
hand in the provocation of this day, and if so, we should have also an eye to
look into our hearts, and mourn over our evil ways, which must be done if we
would have a proof unto our selves, that this Branch of the Lord is become
glorious to us after our escape.

2. The Lord expects of them that escape, That they should perform their Vows,
make good the Covenant and Promises which they made in the day when they were
in trouble and fear; it is very common with men in a day when distress is
threatened, to make large Promises, and when the distress is over, to be as
backward in performing, as before they were forward in promising: this was the
case of that people, Jer. 2.20. For of old time I have broken thy Yoke, and
burst thy Bonds, and thou saidest I will not transgress; when upon every high
Hill, and under every green Tree, thou wanderest, playing the Harlot: the
meaning is, when distress was upon them they cried, if God would but take off
that distress, and remove the stroke, they would be a people not transgressing,
a holy people; but how did they keep the Promise? whenas upon every high Hill,
and under every green Tree thou wanderest, playing the Harlot; falsified their
word abominably; that is a great evil that the Lord cannot well pass by: that
is a known Scripture, Eccles. 5.4, 5. When thou vowest a Vow unto God, defer
not to pay it, for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have
vowed: better it is that thou should not vow, then that thou should vow
and not pay: in this kind delays are dangerous; defer not to pay thy Vows, for
he has no pleasure in folly; it is folly for a man to promise unto God what he
means not to perform; Better it is not to vow, then having vowed not to pay:
the Devil has a double design upon creatures in days of distress, and our own
hearts much deceive us in it: First, I am persuaded the Devil puts poor
Creatures many times upon a great forwardness to make Promises, and many times
our hearts do exceedingly deceive us by feeding us with some secret hopes by
our Promises to buy out an indulgence from the Lord, that we may escape the
evil we fear: and the second design of the Devil is, when he has brought the
Soul to bind it self unto the Lord in abundance of bonds, then to cool the
heart as fast as he can, and make it forget its engagements, and so wraps the
Soul in abundance of guilt. I have found that there is no guilt defiles the
Soul at a greater rate then the breach of Covenant; for God will not endure to
be mocked, and have the Promises made unto him falsified; God will put your
Bonds in suit against you, and require of you what you have been free to engage
for: Deuteronomy. 23.21. When thou shall vow a Vow unto the Lord thy God, thou shall
not slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will surely require it of thee; and
it would be sin in thee, it would be sin not to live up unto Engagements.
Examine your hearts what Engagements have you passed in the days of your
distress? it may be Visitations were near you, you were in eminent hazard, and
your hearts troubled for fear; did you not say, Lord, If thou will keep me this
day, if I may but outlive this distress, never will I be so vain, so earthly,
so carnal, so slight in the Work of God as I have been? Have you not past some
such or the like promise to the great God? Now Jesus Christ he is privy unto
all that you have said and done, though it were in secret, he has taken an
account of all that you have engaged to be and do; how do you perform? you
cannot comfortably conclude that Christ has gotten ground in your hearts,
unless you have paid your Vows to the Lord. The Servants of God have been
conscientious in the Case; Psalm. 66.13. I will go into thy House with
burnt-offerings, I will pay thee my Vows, which my lips have uttered, and my
mouth has spoken, when I was in trouble: David had his troubles as well as
other of his Neighbors, and in his troubles he did sometimes make Promises
unto God; herein he was honest and faithful, did conscientiously regard the
performing the Promises he had past: and thus to do, will be a proof of your
love to, and esteem of this Branch of the Lord, as more excellent to you, then
he was wont to be. Says David, Psalm. 116. I love the Lord, because he has
heard my voice, and my supplications; that is, I will love him better then ever
I did; if he had but a little, he shall now have more; and what proof does he
give of it? verse. 14. I will pay my Vows unto the Lord, now in the presence of
all his People: here was a proof it. The Lord help us that have the Vows of God
upon us, to evidence that Christ is become glorious unto us, by performing our
Covenant: God is known to be a Covenant-keeping-God, and his People should be
like their heavenly Father. But again,

3. A third thing required from them that escape a day of Calamity, is this,
That Christ be owned in the Escape, that he have the glory of it; put it not
upon your natural Fortitude and Courage, your natural hardiness and boldness,
as some vaunting spirits are apt to do, and to conclude thence was their
preservation: God does not fear to strike the most fearless, and sometimes the
most fearless are in the greatest danger: Put not thy escape upon the score of
thy own Wisdom, that thou have acted thus and thus prudently for thy
preservation; if the Lord would, he could easily have outwitted thee; and if
he had not been with thee in the acting, the best of thy Wisdom would not have
been useful; take heed of boasting in Means, if Means have been successful,
look up to that God that has been pleased to bless them unto that end, Psalm.
116.8. David puts the matter upon its proper Basis, Thou have delivered my Soul
from death, mine eyes from tears, and my feet from falling: Gracious hearts
desire to cry as Moses and the Children of Israel did, when they saw Pharaoh
and his Host sunk as Lead in the Sea, and themselves preserved, to their great
amazement, Exodus 15.2. The Lord is my Strength, and my Song, and He is become
my Salvation; He is my God, and I will prepare him a Habitation, my Fathers
God, and I will exalt him According to this time it shall be said (said Balaam
in his Prophecy) What has the Lord wrought? This must you and I say, What has
the Lord wrought? The truth is, Christ suffers much in the World, and suffers
much from his own People, they rob him of his glory, we are apt to give that
honor that is due to him, unto some one else; but it should be our care to be
found in the frame with them, Jer. 50.28. The voice of them that flee and
escape out of Babylon, to declare in Sion the vengeance of the Lord our God,
the vengeance of his temple: it is the work of escaping Ones to praise the
Lord, and declare his works: Would you all have some token for good, that the
interest of Christ is promoted in you? see whether it be your care to give
Christ the glory of this Salvation, of which you have been partakers.

4. This is the requirement of Christ from them that are escaped, That the
sense of this Mercy should long rest upon our Spirits: our goodness in every
respect is apt to be like the morning-cloud, and the early dew, that soon
passes away; and in this respect more then in many other things; the sense of
our deliverance is very apt to wear off the Soul; but it is a frame that Christ
much mislikes, where he finds it; an instance or two may serve to convince us
of it, Psalm. 78.10, 11. They kept not the Covenant of God; possibly by this may
be intended the Covenants they made with God in distress, they did not keep
them; why not? it was because they forgot his Works, and Wonders that he had
showed them; and one sin draws many more after it often times; they forgot the
Works of God, and so their Covenant with God, both are taken ill, and the
latter as ill as any; that God should show abundance of kindness to a People,
whilst they slight, and dis-esteem, and let the sense of that kindness slip out
of their minds; and therefore he complains of the same thing, Psalm. 106.13.
They soon forgot his Works, they waited not for his Counsel: They were the
delivering-Works of God, and all the wonders he had showed them, they soon
forgot, the sense thereof was crept out of their hearts in a little time. All
of us alive may say we have seen much of the goodness of God to us, but if we
should be of the number of them that soon forget his goodness, we do very
evilly requite the Lord.

5. This is the requirement of Christ from them that are escaped in the day of
Calamity, That we should be dedicated, consecrated and given up to his Use and
Service in our whole Course: This is the obligation that Christ has laid on
our Souls, by carrying us through the distresses of this day, That the rest of
the time we spend in the flesh, should not be spent according to the will of
the flesh, but according to the will of God, that the rest of the time of our
sojourning here, might be spent in fear. It is a kind of a new life that every
one of us have received, and this new Life should have Newness of Life going
along with it: says the Apostle, I beseech you by the mercies of God, that you
give up your selves, Body and Soul, as a Sacrifice to God, which is but your
reasonable service; and such a mercy as this does call for it, that your Souls
should be for God, and your Bodies for God; the Body has received a great deal
of mercy at this time, that is preserved and kept, the Clay-Cottage kept from
tumbling to dust and ashes; now all the members of the Body, as well as the
powers of the Soul, ought to be for the Lord: this the Lord expects, and it is
but your reasonable service, which in common Justice should be given unto
Christ: Psalm. 116.8, 9. For thou have delivered my Soul from death, mine Eyes
from tears, and my Feet from falling: I will walk before the Lord in the land
of the Living: that is, I will walk as in his sight and presence, I will look
to maintain a good frame of Life and Conversation in the rest of the time I
have to spend in the World: And thus may you testify unto your selves and
others, that Christ gains on you by your Escape this day, if you be found in
the discharge of those Duties which are expected from you. And thus I have
dispatched the Doctrinal part.

USE I.
If this be a proper effect of your Escaping in a day of slaughter, to have the
Branch of the Lord become lovely; know this kindness has been showed us;
therefore it concerns us narrowly to see how this effect is wrought out: Every
Soul should turn his Eyes inward, I would hope your Souls have been a little
thus engaged; I have not long since, met with a People that would eagerly make
it their business to compare themselves and a Word together, and see where
their guilt was, and get what light they could into their hearts: this be
confident of, the God of Heaven is considering diligently, Jesus Christ (this
Branch of which we are speaking) is observing what is the Fruit of every Mercy;
as Deuteronomy. 32.15. But Jesurun waxed fat and kicked; thou art grown thick, thou
art covered with fatness: then he forsook God which made him, and lightly
esteemed the Rock of his Salvation: when God had done much for him, he
considers how he had carried it, but he found sad effects of all, Jesurun waxed
fat, and kicked: I would the goodness of God to us should have some more kindly
reception, and entertainment. Now that which I shall do for the present, shall
not be to clear it up to you that Christ has gotten ground upon you, for as to
that, I shall refer you to what is spoken already, but to lay some few things
before you, that may convince you, if really you are short and wanting in this
blessed issue af your Escape.

If really this effect be not wrought upon your hearts, it will appear by these
four or five things, and I beg you to consider them seriously.

1. If in the day when the Rod of God hung more eminently over your heads, you
were not considering and pondering what effect it should work, and if the
Spirit of God were not teaching and instructing your Souls, that it was to
produce a greater esteem of Christ in your hearts; then I fear it is not done,
I fear Christ has no more of you then he was wont to have: You know this, that
God with his Correction, is wont to give Instruction; therefore says the
Psalmist ( Psalm. 94.12.) Blessed is the man whom thou Chastenest, and Teach
out of thy Law: God is wont to tell the Soul, where it is wanting, what he
calls for, and what he would have wrought in the heart: So Job 36 9, 10. Then
he shows them their Work, and their Transgressions, that they have exceeded,
he opens also their Ears unto Discipline, and commands that they return
from iniquity: He speaks here about a Day of Affliction, and truly if the Lord
has not been teaching you, and showing you that you were wanting in your
esteem of Christ, it is much to be questioned he is not become glorious. David
(Psalm. 119.67.) said, Before I was afflicted I went astray, but now have I kept
thy Word: how came he to be brought in unto God, to walk with him, and keep his
Word and his Way better then he was wont to do? God had been showing him that
he was out of the way, and where he should be, and so brought him in again.
Commune with your own hearts, my Friends, faithfully: have you sat like Stocks
and Stones, under the Visitations of God, when his Rod was upon others, and
threatened you? Had you any of the Visits of God? Were your Souls exercising
themselves at a spiritual rate? Did God make any approaches unto you? Or did
you live in that time without God? If you did, I fear you are without him still.

2. If your souls have not been pressing after Christ, and longing for a better
frame toward him, longing for an higher esteem of him; it is doubtful the
esteem of him is not raised in your souls: such an esteem of Christ is not a
frame that uses to steal upon the heart, it knows not how; It is for the most
part the issue of much care and pains, and great diligence; and if thy soul
has been wanting herein, it is to be feared that the interest of Christ is not
to any great degree promoted in thee: Some souls find sin very apt to creep in
do they what they can, and that it is a work, a hard work to keep it down; nor
is it less difficult to increase in our esteem of Christ, Phil. 3. Paul would
know more of Christ, and the power of his Resurrection, what course did he take
in order to it? says he, I go forward, and I press on to the mark, for the
price of the high Calling of God in Christ Jesus: He set himself unto the work
with great diligence. How have you been exercising your selves? have you been
crying unto the Lord in secret, wrestling and pleading with him that he would
carry on the Love of his Son in you? What was it you asked of the Lord, was it
merely to be kept from the evil of the day? or that the work of Christ might be
promoted in you by your escape? If your hearts have not been exercised this
way, I fear the Branch of the Lord is not become glorious unto you, though you
are escaped.

3. If in your Escape your great care is how to repair and piece up those
outward damages that you have sustained by this Visitation, the Interest of
Christ I fear has not much gained in you; possibly many of you may be sensible
you have sustained outward damages by this day, if your hearts are only
contriving how you may make up those breaches made upon your outward concerns,
you are not where you should be: I fear many this day will be like to the
Seamen and Mariners, who after a storm, when a calm comes, they are busy in
patching up their tackling, and repairing the damages the Vessel has
sustained by the storm, but not so careful to consider who has preserved them
in the storm, and brought them to a calm: but this is a bad frame; if thou
be gained upon by Christ, thou will say, What shall I render unto the Lord
for all his kindness? To which add,

4. If thy heart in this time of thy Escape be not affected with that unkind
usage which Christ meets with from many escaping-ones, I shall fear that thou
thy self also do not use him kindly, nor prize him much the more though thou
have an Escape from his goodness; doubtless Christ meets with much unkindness
from some that have escaped. How many in an Atheistical spirit this day, live
as if there were no after-state, nor eternal judgment? as they, 1 Cor. 15. cry,
Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye; they have learned to know
that Death hangs over their heads, therefore what will they do? why serve their
lusts as much as they can, make use of their time, as they call it, though it
be to abuse time, and turn the grace of God into wantonness. Now when thou have
heard things, how is it with thee? If Christ has gotten ground within thee,
these things will pierce thine heart. The evil of wicked men is a great grief
unto the Saints; therefore it is said, 2 Pet. 2. Righteous Lot was vexed with
the filthy conversation of the wicked; his righteous soul was vexed in hearing
and seeing the dishonor that was done unto the Lord, it was a burden to him.
And so David says, Woe is me that I sojourn in Mesech, and dwell in the tents
of Kedar; that is, among a people where God is dishonored. When thou look
abroad in the World, and see how little sin is born down, and how little the
Interest of Christ is advanced among any that are escaped; if thy Escape has
furthered Christ's Interest in thee, this will grieve thy heart; be careful and
watchful in the making a right use of this matter.

But to come to a second Use.

USE II.
Should the escaping dreadful Calamity, work the heart to a prizing this Branch
of the Lord; then if any of you have a witness coming in against you that it
has not had this effect, I must say, the Lord will say unto you as unto them,
Deuteronomy. 32.6. Do you thus requite the Lord, O foolish and unwise? I would a
little set before you the evil of this, and the misery that may follow upon it.

1. There is much sin in it; your sin lies in this, that you have hitherto
crossed the design of God by what means you can, the Designs of the Lord are
very much for the advancement of Christ; God says his Son shall be exalted and
extolled, and made high, and he works to this end by all means; Word and Rod
are both intended to this end; he gives you the Word to make way for Christ
into the heart; he comes with the Rod, and why with that? Rev. 3.20. Behold, I
stand at the door and knock; if any man hear my voice, and open the door, I
will come in to him, and will sup with him, and he with me: He knocks by the
Word, and he knocks by the Rod, and it is all, that the Door may be opened for
the exalting of Christ. If he do deliver and save you in times of trouble, it
is that he may be exalted. Is he not made glorious? If not, you cross God's
design, Hos. 11.4. I drew them with the cords of a man, with the lands of love;
and I was as one that took off the yoke from their jaws, and laid meat before
them: All this was that they might exalt the Lord. Now if it have not this
issue upon you, you are guilty of the great sin of thwarting Gods designs.
Further, there is sin in this respect; you pretend that you are for the
exaltation of Christ; this is that you pray for: how often have you prayed, Thy
Kingdom come? how often have you begged that Christ might become amiable and
lovely to you? and is not Christ yet made glorious, not yet exalted? If not,
your sin is this, it is doubtful your Profession is much of it Hypocrisy, and
your praying, mocking of God; sins enough; you need not be guilty of greater
evils.

2. It will endanger the intailing of punishment upon you, if Christ be not
become glorious to you. To speak of two or three things briefly: 1. It will be
doubtful it will lay thee under the plague of an hard heart, which is the
forest of all plagues: if the Lord's dealings do not soften thee, and promote
Christ's Interest in thee, it is to be doubted it will set thee further from
Christ, and will leave thee under very great rockiness and stoniness of heart:
Not only Pharoah's heart was hardened, when the dealings of God in removing the
Plague did not work kindly upon him; but Israel had their hearts hardened also,
as you may see Heb. 3.8, 9. Harden not your hearts, as in the provocation in
the day of temptation in the Wilderness, when your Fathers tempted me, proved
me, and saw my works: forty years, etc. This was the sin of Israel of old; and
possibly the like evil may befall thy soul. And 2dly, if thy Escape have not
produced this effect to render Christ more glorious, possibly thou shall not
yet escape for all this; thou set up thy Eben-ezer, and say, Hitherto
the Lord has preserved; but it is but hitherto; thou know not what a day
may bring forth, God can return this very Judgment, and cause it to cut off
thee and many more: the face of things look something sad for the present, The
Plague increasing at this time.
God is coming back some degrees in his displeasure, and whose turn among us it
may be to fall, we know not; it may be any of our conditions, if God find us
under hardness of heart; do not say the bitterness of death is past: remember
that when the Caldeans had besieged Jerusalem, and by the coming of Pharoah's
Army the Siege was broken up, presently the people were confident the Caldeans
should come no more: but see a little what God says, and also what he does,
Jer. 37.7, 8, 9. Thus says the Lord, the God of Israel, thus shall ye say unto
the King of Judah that sent you unto me, to enquire of me, Behold Pharoahs Army
which is come forth to help you, shall return to Egypt into their own Land, and
the Caldeans shall come again and fight against this City, and take it, and
burn it with fire. Thus says the Lord, Deceive not your selves, saying, The
Caldeans shall surely depart from us; for they shall not depart. And so it came
to pass, for in the 39th of Jeremy first verse, it is said, that
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babylon came, and all his Army against Jerusalem, and
besieged it; and in the next verse it is said, the City was broken up. These
poor people were confident, because the Caldeans were withdrawn and the Siege
raised, they should be in danger no more. It may be we say, the storm is over,
the Bill is much decreased: but alas it may increase again, and be yet more
sore than it has been. Thus, I say, if Christ be not advanced in thee,
possibly thou may not yet escape this Judgment. Or, 3dly, if not by this
Judgment, God can meet with thee by others; he has reserves of Judgments of
diverse kinds, and can easily and quickly meet with them that are not in the
frames they should be; as God says of Moab, Isa. 15.8. For the cry is gone
round about the borders of Moab; the howling thereof unto Eglaim, and the
howling thereof unto Beer-Elim. For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood:
for I will bring more upon Dimon, lions upon him that escapes of Moab, and
upon the remnant of the Land. God had been dealing with the Moabites in some
way of Judgment, and there was some of them remaining, but though they had
been emptyed from vessel to vessel, their scent still remained, and now God
says he will come forth with another stroke. God has every thing at his
command, and he can commission another Dispensation; but let me tell you, it is
sad if after thus long being under the hand of God, Christ be not advanced more
in your hearts. And this leads me to the third Use of the Point.

USE III.
If it be a blessed effect of Slaughtering-Judgements upon them that have
escaped, to have Christ become more glorious; what shall we think of those, who
though they outlive a day of sad Calamity, yet Christ is become more
contemptible in their eyes? who instead of being brought near unto Christ, are
at a greater distance from Christ: It is verily a sad consideration, that such
should be the conclusion of such a Providence upon the hearts and spirits of
any; but yet I fear thus it is with more then a few. Paul (2 Timothy 3.13.) tells
us, that evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse: It is the doom that
passes often times upon evil men, that let the dealings of God with them be what
they will, they are the worse under them; wanting the help of the Spirit of
Grace to manage and improve them for good, they grow into a worse and more evil
frame by them. All the goodness, the gracious dealings of God, they are
peculiarly directed to win upon the heart, to bring Christ and Souls nearer
together; this is hinted in Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance: We are to interpret the end of Gods kindness to
be for the bringing the heart to bow, and stoop, and fall at the Foot of Jesus
Christ; in case it have not this issue, what issue else it produces will
certainly be very sad, namely the setting Souls at a greater distance from
Christ, and plunging them into a condition worse then they were in before; and
so it is added, verse. 5. Thou treasurest up unto thy self wrath against the day
of wrath: thou by this means raisest up greater displeasure between him and thy
Soul. If you say Are there any that really have lower thoughts of Christ after
they have escaped a day of Distress, then before? I answer, it is to be feared
too many; and where you find one or more of these marks I shall lay down, you
may conclude that such persons, though Christ has dealt very tenderly with
them, and not swept them away in a day of destruction, as he might have done,
yet Christ is become more contemptible in their accounts then he was before.

1. Where you find a spirit more senceless and stupid, more sottish and secure
then before; such a one is really set at a greater distance from Christ then
before. Some there are, it is much to be feared, that having survived this day
of distress, begin now to look upon themselves as out of reach, as if no future
danger could possibly attend them, growing hard hearted, and exceeding secure
after those dealings of the Lord under which they have fallen; such Souls and
Christ are farther apart then they were wont to be: Isa. 57.15. the Spirit of
God tells you, Christ dwells in the humble heart, and with a broken Spirit: Now
according as you find a heart melted, and broken, and said low, put into a
tender frame; so far Christ makes his approaches toward the Soul, and comes to
be esteemed by it; but according as you find the spirits of men grow into a
hardness, insensibility, and security, by so much you may conclude Christ is
set at a distance from, and dis-esteemed by such Souls: and O that there were
not many sensible proofs of a very insensible Spirit in many poor Creatures,
who yet are allowed a being upon the Earth. If that be allowed to be a sign of
security which Christ himself tells us was a sign of it, Mat. 24.38. For as in
the days that were before the flood they were eating and drinking, marrying and
giving in marriage, until the day that Noah entered into the Ark, and knew not
till the flood came and took them all away; so shall also the coming of the Son
of man be: observe it, Noah was in his days a Preacher of Righteousness, he
warned the People of Judgment to come; the People were exceeding stupid, not
in the least prevailed upon; and what was a proof of it? They were eating and
drinking, marrying and giving in marriage, then at a more then ordinary rate;
therefore it was an argument, what ever was said unto them, or whatever God
intended, they were not much awakened: If that were a sign of stupidity then,
so it is now surely, and gives a great deal of reason to conclude that Christ
has not gotten, but rather lost upon many of the hearts of those that have
escaped.

2. Where persons are more desperately and eagerly set upon their lusts, there
you may conclude Christ is become more contemptible then he was. There is such
a direct contrariety between sin and Christ, that by how much the more a man
grows in love with sin, by so much the more he must grow out of love with
Christ: Romans 8.7. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject
unto the Law of God, neither indeed can be: Now by how much the more men grow
more carnal, by so much their enmity against Christ is increased and improved.
Sin does not only harden men's hearts, but it also blinds and shuts men's
eyes; and by how much the more a man plungeth himself in sin and gives up
himself to the service of it, by so much you may conclude his mind is blinded,
and his eyes shut from seeing that glory and beauty that is eminently found in
the Lord Jesus Christ: The more a man sets himself in the way of sin, the more
he is under the power of Satan; and where Satan rules as a Prince, what does
he? 2 Cor. 4.4. the Apostle says, The God of this World he blinds the minds of
men. And from this you may gather, if you can observe that men that are
preserved this day, their hearts are not in the least taken out of those ways
of sin in which they did walk, but are rather set with greater eagerness to
fulfill the desires of the flesh and of the mind; you may, without breach of
Charity, conclude those persons are more blinded, and less able to see any
beauty and excellency in this Branch of the Lord then before. Only we will
hope, if this spirit be found upon any, that it is but, as the Apostle says
sometimes concerning the Jews, Romans 11.7. What then? Israel has not obtained
that which he seeks for; but the Election has obtained it, and the rest were
blinded; We will hope that if there be any that are the more hardened and
blinded by this gracious Dispensation of Preservation, it is not the Elect that
are blinded, but those that are given up, which the Lord intends not to look
after in any gracious way: We will hope for any that have any interest in the
Lord Jesus, that he has not, nor will leave them to such a spirit.

3. If you find any more at enmity with the People of Christ, then before, you
may conclude Christ is more contemptible in their eyes then he was before: Mind
not what men talk; do not heed men's grasping after the name of Christians, and
talking of Christ as a Savior; but know that men may speak of Christ, as the
whole Nation does, and other Nations do, and yet have no more real love to him,
then those that never heard of Christ: It is a very notable Scripture, Jer.
12.2. Thou have planted them, yea, they have taken root; they grow, yea, they
bring forth fruit: thou art near in their mouth, and far from their reins. It
may be well with a People, they may be in an outward prosperous condition, they
may be flourishing, and speak much of Christ, and boast of him; and yet Christ
may not have one inch of their Hearts. But you shall judge whether really men
be for Christ or no, by their dealings with his People: if you find their
enmity against the Saints grow, let their boast be as it will, instead of
discovering glory in Christ, they are become more at enmity with Christ then
they were. Let me allude, at least, to that word, 1 John 5.1. Every one that
loves him that begat, loves him that is begotten of him: It is spoken
concerning the Father and Christ; men will say they love God, why says John,
You cannot, unless you love Christ; for he that loves him that begets,
loves him also that is begotten: So say I of Saints; Do you love Christ? if
so, you love them that are begotten of him. To which I might add a fourth, and
that is this:

4. Doubtless there is cause, at least, to fear that the Branch of the Lord is
not become glorious to those escaping ones who have endeavored to hinder the
efficacy and force of this dispensation, upon the hearts of poor Creatures: I
will tell who I think are some way culpable herein; they that have covered the
dealings of Christ; if there be, as is shrewdly suspected, any that have hid
this present Work of God upon us, and not let us know it in its full extent and
latitude It was feared some 1000's were kept out of the weekly Bills
; it will certainly lie upon their score that have stood in the way of Christ's
Work, and hindered that efficacy it might have had upon the hearts of poor
Creatures. But to all or any of those that are rather at a greater distance
from Christ, than brought nearer to Christ, I shall only say in brief, that it
is worth the minding. God considers what influence and effect his dealings have
upon the hearts of men; when a Judgment is on their Backs, the Lord considers
whether it work any good effect upon them, or no; as in 2 Chronicles. 28.22. it is
said of Ahaz, That in the time of his distress, he did trespass against the
Lord yet more; this is that King Ahaz: God notes especially that under his hand
a person became worse and worse; and there is such a mark put upon him, as is
scarce put upon any in Scripture, This is that King Ahaz, that Ahaz that became
worse in a day of distress. God also strictly observes how his kindness works,
in that forecited place, Romans 2.4. Or despisest thou the riches of his
goodness, and forbearance, and long-suffering; not knowing that the goodness of
God leads thee to repentance? Observe the long-suffering of God, and his
forbearance, that is, in not cutting down his poor creatures when he has them
at some kind of advantage, as in a day of common Calamity; if God spares them
then, he manifests his riches of Grace and Goodness toward them; and if it be
not answered with some suitable walking, how does the Lord interpret such a
neglect? He says they despise it. And to end this Use, let me take up some
passages in that first of the Proverbs; it is said, verse. 24. I have called,
and you have refused; I have stretched out my hand, and no man regarded: The
Lord calls by his Word, and he calls by his Rod: He calls by his gentle
dealings; his kind usage, his preserving in a day of Calamity, is as much a
Call, as the Calamity it self; and he says unto them that answer not this
Call, and do not improve it aright, verse. 26. I will laugh at your calamity,
and mock when your fear comes. They that are for a time unaffected, may have a
time to be in distress, when they may stand in need of kindness to be showed
unto them, though they are preserved and kept alive. Verse. 32. The turning away
of the simple shall slay them, and the prosperity of fools shall destroy them:
If men turn away from the Calls of God, not answering his expectation, either
under Preservations, or his more severe dealings, their turning away shall slay
them, and their prosperity shall destroy them. Some think, it may be, because
they are yet in prosperity, there is no farther hazard: but God says their
prosperity shall prove their destruction, and bring forth Consequences, more
sad it may be, then any of which they were afraid in the day when distress hung
over their heads. That is what I would say to the third Use from this point. A
fourth Use is this:

USE IV.
If the Lord should be beautiful and glorious unto those that escape, I would
here apply my self unto a Soul that may be tender and jealous over it self, and
fear lest after its escape Christ should not be rendered glorious unto it as he
ought. Some there are that take no pains to consider how things are, and
whether they go well or ill, that is not the thing that much engages their
hearts: others are jealous over their Spirits, knowing something the treachery
of their hearts, they are always apt to doubt and fear. A Soul that knows how
precious Christ ought to be, and beautiful in its eye, fears lest after such
kindness received from Christ, it should not see that beauty in him, nor be
taken with him as it ought: May this be the case of any one of us at present? I
would speak four or five things that may be seasonable and helpful to the Soul
in this case.

1. Such is the Glory and Beauty of Christ, that no Soul under Heaven is able
to see him in all his Glory, nor to admire him according to all those blessed
Perfections wherewithal Christ is clothed. That expression may be heeded by
you, Ephesians. 3.8. where the Apostle, speaking of Christ's glory, calls it, The
unsearchable Riches of Christ; it is an Ocean without a bottom, that cannot be
fathomed by him that searches into it most accurately and exactly; it is like
the Mines, the bottom of whom is not found out, though men have dug in, and
fetched Treasure from them, for a long time together: Let not a poor Heart
think it is at present in a capacity of valuing of Christ according to all his
Worth and Excellency, for that the Soul cannot fully know. What is spoken of
God, I may allude to, and apply to Christ, Job 11.7. Can thou by searching
find out God? can thou find out the Almighty to perfection? it is as high as
Heaven, what can thou do? deeper then Hell, what can thou know? the measure
thereof is longer then the Earth, and broader then the Sea: Such are the
glorious Perfections of this Branch of the Lord, should we measure and guess at
him according to the excellency found in any created being, alas it would be
infinitely short; there is in Christ that Excellency that does exceed and much
outdo whatever glory is found upon any thing our eyes behold. Shall I say, As
Solomon in his glory did outshine the glory of all the Princes that were on
earth in his time, so, and infinitely more, does the glory of Christ outdo
whatever our eyes behold, or whatever our hearts can conceive of? and in our
searching into his perfections, we may come to do as the Queen of Sheba did,
when she beheld the glory of Solomon, she gave this testimony, What she had
heard was true: So may we give this testimony of Christ, That what we have
heard of his Perfections, there is all in him, nay, the one half was not told
us: and if the Queen of Sheba was amazed, at standing before Solomon's glory,
how much more may we at Christ's, although we cannot see him in all his
Perfections. Thou can not know him at present in this life, according to all
that Glory with which he is clothed.

2. If thou that art escaped art jealous that Christ is not become beautiful
enough unto thee; Remember that the highest pitch unto which the Soul can come
in this life, is, to desire to see more of that beauty that is in him: The
highest pitch in any thing that is good in this life, is to desire to be
better: The Desires of the Soul do out-go in this life any Acts that it is able
to put forth. David, in the case of Holiness, the highest pitch of his Holiness
is expressed in his desire, Psalm 119.5. O that my Ways were directed to keep
thy Statutes! he did keep them in some measure, but the highest pitch unto
which he got, was to desire to keep them better: so also Psalm. 68.11. Teach me
thy ways, O Lord, I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy Name: he
was sensible that his heart did in some things wander from God, he did not fear
him as he should, but the highest of his attainment lay in his desires. Paul
was a man very excellent in his day, and doubtless did know and enjoy much of
Christ, yet the highest pitch he attained, was largeness of heart, and workings
of desire, expressed in Phil. 3.13. This one thing I do, forgetting the things
that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things that are before, I press
toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus: the
desires of his heart were large. And so the Spouse has an high esteem of
Christ, she expresses the value she has of him at a great rate, Cant. 2.3, 4.
As the Apple Tree among the Trees of the Wood, so is my Beloved among the Sons;
I sat down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet unto
my taste; stay me with Flaggons, comfort me with Apples, for I am sick of love:
her heart was much taken with Christ, seeing a great deal of Beauty in him; but
you shall see her desires did outdo any act she could put forth; and therefore
( Cant. 4.16.) she says, Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my
Garden, that the Spices thereof may flow out: she would have her heart
enlarged, her Graces acted more strongly. Now Soul, take in this for thy
comfort, it is a good frame that thou desire to prize Christ more, and have
this Branch of the Lord more glorious in thy account, though thou can not put
forth such acts as thou would: Remember thou art in that frame that the best
of Saints have been in.

3. Consider this, thou that art escaped, and fear that the Branch of the
Lord is not become so glorious as it should be; Remember that jealousy over
thy heart, is a good sign, and gives some hope that Christ has gotten some
ground upon thee: The wise man, Prove. 14.15. says, The simple believes every
word, but the prudent man looks well to his going: Some are so simple to
believe every good word their hearts speak; if they find any thing that looks
like good, they are apt to conclude that all is right: therefore the wise man (
Prove. 28.14.) says, Happy is the man that fears always: I apply it unto
this; It is a good thing sometimes to bear a jealousy, a constant jealousy
over the heart, lest it should not be wrought up to that pitch it ought. The
Author to the Hebrews gives us a warrant for holy jealousies and fears, lest we
should fall short: They that have been most confident of the goodness of the
frame of their spirits, have sometimes been in none of the best: Jehu cries,
Come see my Zeal for the Lord of Hosts, when he had not one grain of true Zeal
for the Lord of Hosts in him.

4. Thou that would have this Branch of the Lord glorious, if thy heart work
really this way; Know this, thou art accepted in this thy desire: It will pass
for a good improvement of this mercy of thy Escape. I confess some things there
are, which I find the Lord is angry at; He loves not to see souls sit down
satisfied and pleased in ways of sin, therefore he does reflect upon them,
Psalm. 1.1. that sit in the seat of the scornful; he is much angry with them
that can contentedly take up in ways of sin, and therefore you find him falling
foul upon them that harden their hearts in ways of sin, and also with those
that content themselves with little measures of Grace, when they have means to
rise up unto greater: He rebukes the Disciples, Mat. 8.26. for the littleness
of their Faith, O ye of little Faith; he upbraids them with the littleness of
their Faith, because he had long been with them himself, as he does hint unto
them afterward; Have I been so long with thee, and yet thou have not known me?
But this observe also, That where there is but a lesser measure of Grace, if
the heart be really working after more, it is accepted, and Christ receives it
with good will: The best instance I know in the whole Bible, is that in Mark
9.23, 24. where the Father of a Child possessed with a dumb Spirit comes unto
Christ for cure; Christ tells him, All things are possible unto him that
believes, and straightway he cried out, and said with tears, Lord, I believe,
help my unbelief: he had a little Faith, and desired more; therefore you find
Christ does not reject his little, but hears him, and calls unto the dumb Devil
to come forth of his Child: So if thou complainest that Christ is not exalted
in thy heart to any great degree, but thou longest he should be more; believe
it, it shall be accepted: as it is said in another case, 2 Cor. 8.12. If there
be first a willing mind, it is accepted, according to that a man has, and not
according to that he has not: Thus if really thou would have Christ become
more glorious unto thee, thou may be accepted in this which thou have, and it
shall not be charged upon thee that thou art wanting in that which thou yet
had not. Under the Law, when a Thank-Offering was to be returned, and the
Soul to admire the Lord in some kindness received, he that could bring but two
Turtle Doves, and two young Pigeons, if that were the most they had, and the
best they could bring, it was accepted as well as those that brought the
greatest Offerings; their hearts were enlarged, it is like, to bring more: So
though thou have but little, if thou desire more, thy little will be
accepted, though but two Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons.

5. Thou that would prize Christ more, know this, That the Lord will
increase that Grace in thee; and thou shall be able to prize him at a greater
rate: The Lord direct your hearts into the Love of God, 2 These. 3.5. it is the
Lord that must direct thee into the Love of Christ, and he will do it, if thy
heart be really working that way; if thou do prize him as much as thou can,
he will help thee to prize him more. Prove. 3.9, 10. Honor the Lord with thy
substance, and with the first fruits of all thine increase; so shall thy barns
be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst with new Wine: If thou do
with the first and best of thy strength, endeavor to honor the Lord, he will
increase thy strength, and communicate unto thee abundantly. And that is what I
shall say to the fourth Use.

USE V.
To any such Soul as can say it is escaped, and the Branch of the Lord is
become glorious unto it; I fear these Souls go into a little room, there are
but few of that sort, yet here and there some I confidently believe there are.
I would all to whom this Book may come, might say they find their
Escaping-Mercy has been seconded with such an effect. In a word, and but a
word or two, to this sort of persons: Ah what is thy mercy, O Soul! an Escape,
and the good of it too, this is Mercy indeed! to be delivered from the pit of
Corruption, and to be delivered in love to thy Soul; What is thy Duty? Truly,

1. To admire the faithfulness of the Lord, in keeping Covenant with thee; It
is a special Blessing and Promise of the New Covenant, That God will not show
his People kindness only, but will also give them the good of that kindness
that he shows to them. To be saved in a day of Distress, and thy spirit
bettered also, look on it as a mercy more then Preservation, without which thy
Preservation might have been imbittered unto thee: O celebrate his praises, as
a God that keeps Covenant and Mercy, and will not alter the good word that he
has spoken to thee.

2. Let this encourage thee to press after prizing Christ more; as Paul
speaking of the Corinthians, You love the Lord Jesus, see you abound yet more
and more; so say I, O labor to abound more and more: Let this goodness by
which you are brought to prize him, engage you to prize him more and more.

3. Communicate thy Experience unto trembling Saints, speak to them of his
gracious dealings unto thee, that their hearts may be encouraged to trust in
him: Come, says David, and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my
Soul: We have experience, every one of us, of what God has done upon our
Bodies, O let us be careful to show forth his praise. That is what I shall say
unto the fifth Use. Again,

USE VI.
I might speak a word to another sort of persons: If escaping a Day of Calamity
should cause a Soul to see a greater Beauty in Christ, what should it work upon
them on whom the Calamity is fallen, and yet are escaped? There are many such,
if you that read what I have written, meet with them, and know them, you may do
well to give them a little account of what may be spoken in such a case: How
should that kindness be admired, when poor Creatures have had Bodies full of
pain, Spirits full of fear, looking the King of Terrors in the face every
moment; poor Creatures that it may be would have given, had they had it, all
the world, to have been assured they should have been raised from their Bed,
and set upon their Feet; poor Creatures that it is like were sequestered from
company, whose case was like that of David, Psalm. 38.11. My Lovers and my
Friends stand aloof from my sore, and my Kinsmen stand afar off: Now that the
Lord should be with and look after them, in such a time, and raise them, this
should have such effects as such a mercy had once upon Hezekiah, Isa. 38.15. I
shall go softly all my years, in the bitterness of my Soul; that is, I shall
retain a sense of the bitterness that was upon my Soul, and in that sense I
shall go softly; the man that walks softly, step by step, he goes heedfully and
carefully, and minds every step he takes; so should such poor Souls walk, that
have been delivered from such hazard and bitterness of Soul; they should walk
warily the rest of their time: To which, two things may much engage.

1. That certainly the Escape, in such a case, is through Christ: I am satisfied
in this, That this Judgment of the Plague, as other Diseases, has in it
natural Causes, and natural Means are helpful to deliver from it; but as it is
in other cases, whatever natural Causes there are to further any Disease upon
the Body of Man, the Lord has a hand in it, and makes use of those natural
Causes; and so whatever Means are useful for recovery in any case, the blessing
and efficacy of it depends upon the Lord; so it is in this case also very
eminently, that a Soul may say as it is said Isa. 38.16. O Lord, by these
things men live, and in all these things is the life of my Spirit; some read
the words, They shall live for whom the Lord is, which is a great variation
from our Translation: They shall live for whom the Lord is; that is, whose
protection he is, and whom he stands by.

2. If Christ be not glorious to such a Soul, he can bring a worse evil upon
them; John 5.14. Go away, sin no more, lest a worse thing come unto thee: God
can bring a worse thing upon a Creature then the Plague, he can make death to
be chosen rather then life; as you have it, Jer. 8.3. And death shall be chosen
rather then life, by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family,
etc.

USE VII.
Should a souls escaping public Calamity, render Christ the more glorious?
Surely it should have this effect upon those into whose Walls it came, into
whose House it entered, and yet it may be their Persons not touched but have
been preserved, though Death was gotten within their Walls. This has been the
case of many; if of any here, it should strike deep upon the heart, and make us
sensible how much we owe unto Christ; how glorious should He become unto us!
what defense was the security of a poor Creature in such a time? it was not
Walls, it was not distance of place, but the hand of Christ: doubtless it has
been unto many something according to that word, Luke 7.34, etc. There shall be
two in one Bed, the one shall be taken, and the other left: Two in one Family
there have been, it may be, the one taken, the other left; yea, possibly two in
one Bed, the one taken, the other untouched; this has been a Case of rich
Mercy, and certainly should engage the Soul much to prize him: Psalm. 107.14,
15. O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness, for his wonderful works
to the children of men! Doubtless such a Soul must say as David, It was
compassed about with the shadow of Death; it was in a state of darkness, an
uncomfortable time to them whose Persons were possibly untouched, and a
wonderful work of God it was to keep one, while others were cut down. Now this
should work up the heart to admire the Lord.

USE VIII.
But then in the eighth place, If every escaping-One should see that Christ is
become glorious unto him; How should it be with those whose Houses were
compassed possibly round about, and Death very near them, but yet the hand of
God entered not into their Walls? My Brethren, it is promised as a peculiar
favor, Psalm. 91.10. No Plague shall come nigh thy dwelling: It is something
not to have it come unto thy person, and not to have it come into thy dwelling,
that neither thy self, nor any within thy Wall, have a hair of their heads
touched; nay, possibly thou have been within the hearing of the cryings and
groans of dying ones, doubtless many have; and when They have cried for a
little longer time, to be entrusted with a little more liberty in this World,
for Eternity, and everlasting Concernments, it has been denied Them, but
granted unto Thee and Me; and when the hand of God has been round about, it
has not come within thy Door; Oh who has been the Keeper of thy door and
mine! When many have been in the bitterness of their Souls bemoaning the loss
of this and that Relation; Parents, of Children; Children, of Parents; some
Husbands and Wives wailing and lamenting for one another: What mercy is it that
a Soul can say, It is well with me and mine, that no evil has come nigh them!
I tell thee Soul, these are things that should exceedingly engage thy heart to
Christ, and should prevail much to the setting him up in thy Soul. This should
be the resolution of every one partaking in this mercy, To use it for the
exalting of Christ.

USE IX.
A Use to those that Christ has carried from place to place, and so have been
preserved: Think not thy self the less indebted unto Christ, for his kindness
toward thee; He is to be as glorious unto such, as to any: let it not lessen
the mercy, that thou have not seen the dismal sight, and heard the doleful
cries of them into whose Windows Death has entered. I know we are apt not to be
affected, or at least very little, with things that our eyes do not see, and
our ears hear; but that is an evil frame: and certainly though our abode may
not have been in the time of this Distress, in the heat of it, in the midst of
it; yet we owe our preservation unto Christ, as much as any, and ought to see
that it have influence upon us as much as any; and that,

1. Considering it does not lessen but heighten the mercy, that thou art not
only preserved from falling, but from partaking in that bitterness and trouble
of spirit that has certainly born down many who have lived in the heat of this
Distress. Days of Slaughter and Calamity, are days of heart-trouble to them
that are preserved in the midst of them; Jer. 30.5, 6. For thus says the Lord,
We have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of peace; ask ye now, and
see whether a man does travel with Child; wherefore now do I see every man with
his hands on his loins, as a woman in travel, and all faces are turned into
paleness? It is spoken with respect to some that lived in times and places when
and where slaughtering-Judgements were abroad; and they that were alive, what
was the horror and perplexity of their spirits! Do not think, Soul, but thou
art the more engaged to Christ, that he has graciously carried thee out of the
sight and noise of those direful outcries: Many can say, We could hardly pass
the Streets but meet with Coffins, and hear the cries and complaints of Friends
bereft of their Relations; bless the Lord, that he kept thee from the hearing
of this: Not but that Christ can make the hearing and seeing such things, turn
greatly to advantage; but yet it is a piece of tenderness, if Christ will do
the Soul good at some cheaper rate.

2. Consider thou could not have found shelter any where, had not Christ led
thee thither: as it is not good to go without Christ's leading us, nor could we
have gone any where, if the Lord had not made our way for us: Prove. 6.9. A man's
heart devises his way, but the Lord directs his steps: Many were considering
whither to go, and what to do, and laid their designs, but if the Lord did not
order their steps, they could do nothing. You have a notable word, Job 3.23.
Why is light given to a man whose way is hid, and whom God has hedged in? Job
was encompassed with sad distresses, and he would fain have gotten out of them,
but says he, My way is hid, (he knew not whither to fly) I am hedged in, I
must stay by it. This has been the case of many, their ways have been hedged
in; and he could have hedged in thee and me, if so it had pleased him: and
therefore if you and I have been carried unto places where we have been
preserved, let us admire the goodness of the Lord: Jonah rose up to flee to
Tarshish from the presence of the Lord; but he could not, the Lord hindered him.
To which add also,

3. Christ could have found thee with the Sword, wheresoever thou had gone:
therefore let not thy preservation at a distance rob Christ of his honor, but
see his hand in it, and know that it has been his work; and see that he be
thereby rendered more beautiful and comely in thine Eyes.

USE X.
A tenth Use may be to Sinners that are escaped; You are preserved, it is true,
and Christ, this Branch of the Lord, should be glorious unto you: If thou art
yet in a state of sin, I would say unto thee four or five things:

1. Though thou art escaped, Christ is not become glorious unto thee: a Soul in
its natural condition sees no Glory and Beauty in Christ; it is the work of
Faith that opens the Eyes to see Christ's Glory and Excellency, 1 Pet. 2.7. To
you that believe he is precious: Though it be thy Duty, thou can not live up
to it; thy Eyes are blind, fast closed, and the Glory of Christ is not
discerned by thee: this therefore is thy misery, thou have not answered the
Lords expectation in this eminent preservation. Sinners cry as they, Isa. 53.2.
We see no form nor comeliness in him, nor Beauty, for which we should desire
him: the Sinners Eyes are fast closed, that though this be thy Duty, thou can
not see it. Nor

2ly. Can thou interpret thy Preservation to be out of good will to thee:
Romans 8.28. All things shall work together for good unto them that love God; but
thou do not love the Lord, nor art thou the Called of the Lord, thou art
still in thy sin, and for the present can not interpret this dispensation to
be in kindness: what may be in the heart of God, what secret purpose he may
have, how he may design hereafter to bring thee near unto himself, thou can
not tell, it is hidden for the present; and yet thou can not see there is any
good intended thee in thy preservation: and this is sad, it exceedingly robs
the Soul of the sweetness of such a dispensation, when it cannot be took to be
in kindness. And

3ly. If thou art a Sinner, thou will use thy preservation to a wrong end:
Sinners, if they ask mercy, it is usually to wrong ends; and if they receive
mercies, they improve them sinfully; Psalm. 78.18. They tempted God in their
heart by asking meat for their lust; they asked a mercy, but it was for their
lust, and they did as sadly improve it, verse. 28, 29, 30. And he let it fall in
the midst of their Camp, so they did eat, and were well filled, for he gave
them their own desire; they were not estranged from their lust, but while their
meat was yet in their mouths, the wrath of God came upon them, etc. Thus it
will be with thee, Soul, if thou art yet in thy Sin; it is true, thou art
preserved, but it will be to a farther misery; thou have asked it to sinful
ends, and wilt use it sinfully, and so bring a curse upon thy self. This is the
misery of a poor Soul in sin, he spoils his Mercies, and brings down the wrath
of God upon himself. To which add,

4ly. If thou remainest in sin, the time is coming when thou will certainly
give a sad account of this mercy thou have received, and wilt really fall under
a dispensarion much more sad then that from which thou art now delivered:
Christ will come in flaming fire, and render vengeance unto them that know not
God, nor obey the Gospel of Christ, the great intent of which, is the exalting
of Christ. Now when by all means thou have not been provoked to answer this
end; what will the result and issue of all be, but the rendering vengeance unto
thee, and the wrapping thee up in eternal misery? I would therefore say unto a
Soul in sin, What will thou do? thou art a dying creature; though thou have
escaped this storm, and art in safety to day, Eternity will soon come upon
thee: Ah what will thou do? Soul, thy great work lies in two things, I will
but even name them: First, Go unto the Lord, that he would open thy eyes to see
thy own misery, and Christ in his glory, that he would anoint thine Eyes with
his Eye Salve, that may cause the scales of ignorance to fall from them, so as
that thou may see thy self and Christ, aright: Secondly, Beg that thou may
have a heart to give up thy self to Christ, that the glory thou see in him,
may make thee restless until thou have taken hold of him, without which thou
can not walk comfortably, though thou art preserved, nor can thou
cheerfully look another time of trouble in the face, and much less that time
when thou shall be going to thy long home.

USE XI.
One Use more: Should the Branch of the Lord be glorious unto Escaping Ones? It
then advises all earnestly to press after such a Spirit: I have two or three
things to say, by way of motive, and so proceed to the second Note or Doctrine.

1. Consider what a Preservation it is thou have; it is not thy Estate, thy
Liberty, thy Name, but thy Life; and Skin for Skin, and all that a man has,
will he give for his Life: If thou say as Job, What is my life, that I
should hope? If I live, I may live in trouble, Distress is like to attend the
Servants of God; therefore why should I make such reckoning of my life? To that
I say, It is true, distress may be the portion of the Lords People; yet thy
Life is a mercy; thou may outlive, or live above the distresses of the
People of God; or, at least, while thou have life, thou have hope, and time,
and an opportunity to get into more intimate acquaintance with Jesus Christ, to
be at work about thy everlasting concernments, for which reason mainly life is
to be valued; It is thy Life that is given thee for a prey: and this should
make thee greatly to value and prize the Lord Jesus, that gives thee such
preservation.

2. Consider how many, of Spirits more excellent, of Hearts more enlarged, of
greater use in their places, that have been more serviceable unto Christ and
his Interest, then thou have been, have yet fallen, and thou preserved: Should
not this mercy wonderfully affect thine heart? Yea,

3. Take this, that the more thou see of the Glory of Christ, and the more he
gains in esteem upon the Soul, the more the Soul does gain; it is gain, yea
great gain, great riches for the Soul to improve in its esteem of Christ: Is
not Christ the great thing the Gospel presents, that every Soul should be
seeking after? Now the more thou have of him in thy heart, the more thou have
of true Treasure, of Riches that are truly so called. To which add,

4. That if Christ do not become glorious unto us, the time is hastening when
he will be glorious in the esteem of others: He will have glory, no thanks unto
us. Certainly it is not long, but Christ will make himself glorious, and get
himself a Name and Praise; and all these slaughtering Providence they do but
tend to that end. Christ is at work, though in the dark as to us, and we cannot
see his outgoings; yet he is really working out his own advancement, and will
make all these end in his own glory: Which leads me unto the second Doctrine
from the Words.

The Second Doctrine.
That the Issue of all Slaughtering-Judgements shall be the making Christ
glorious; and that glory that shall be put upon the Head of Christ, shall tend
to the Good and Benefit of those of Israel that shall escape the Slaughter.

THis Truth lies as plainly in the Words as may be; and for the prosecution of
it, I shall propound this plain method:

First, To show you that in days of slaughter all the Israel of God may not
escape: Some of them may, but others may fall.

Secondly, That the result of the slaughter, whoever stands or falls, shall be
for the raising up Christ and his glory, for the getting him a Name.

Thirdly, I shall endeavor to show you what glory shall be brought to Christ
in the end and issue of the slaughters that shall be made in the World. And

Fourthly, That all the glory that shall be put upon the head of Christ, shall
be in mercy unto those of Israel that outlive and escape the Distresses that
shall break in upon the World. And then

Fifthly, The Application will follow.

First, To begin then with the first, viz. That in days of slaughter all the
Israel of God possibly may not escape; some of them may fall to the ground:
That is clearly intimated in the Text, The Branch of the Lord shall be glorious
to THEM that ARE escaped of Israel; strongly holding out to us, that some among
Israel may fall. I need say nothing to confirm this Truth, but only refer you
to our sad experience this day: I might bid you go round unto all the Churches
of Christ in and about the great City, and ask them how it has fared with the
Saints of God this day; doubtless you will find every of them reckoning up
their Slain, and those that have fallen by the Sword of the Angel: I might bid
you go unto every Soul that knows God in truth, in and about this City, and see
what account they will give you; I am persuaded you would find almost every of
them making some or other sad complaint for the loss of such and such a
Christian Friend, and such a one that feared the Lord, with whom they had much
intimacy and acquaintance: this is the general cry among the Saints this day.
But a little, that these proceedings of God may not startle you; you shall
find some footsteps of like dealings in the days of old, that God has not
walked in an untrodden path, but a course he has sometimes taken in days and
times past. Sometimes in Scripture you find the Lord threatening of, and cutting
down only the Uncircumcised Ones, the profane Nations and People of the earth;
thus Ezekiel. 32. you have a long Catalogue of the dreadful Judgments of God upon
men uncircumcised, from ver. 20. to verse. 30. where he tells you that many of
the barbarous Nations that knew not God, are gone down to the pit, being slain
with the sword; and he concludes, verse. 30. There be the Princes of the North,
all of them, and the Zidonians, which are gone down with the slain, with their
terror; they are ashamed of their might, and they lie uncircumcised with them
that be slain by the sword, and bear their shame with them that go down to the
pit, etc. At other times you find the Lord dealing with his own People, as with
the uncircumcised, and laying them together under the same Calamity and
Distress; Jer. 9. is a famous instance, verse. 25. Behold, the days come says
the Lord, that I will punish all them which are circumcised, with the
uncircumcised: God tells us plainly there are such times in which his own
People and others may fare alike; Calamities and Distresses may make no
distinction; it may be in some measure unto the Saints as it is to the Sinners.
You shall find the Lord in Scripture sometimes threatens as heavy things
against his Israel, as against any, Jer. 14. the Prophet begins to beg mercy
for Israel, O the Hope of Israel, ver. 8. the Savior thereof in the time of
trouble! why should thou be as a Stranger in the Land, and as a wayfaring
man that turns aside to tarry for a night? in which words he seems to
intimate that it would be a strange thing, a strange way of proceeding, if God
should turn against his People; if thou art the Savior of thy People, will thou yet turn thy hand against Israel, to whom thou have been known as a
Savior? but God stopped the mouth of the Prophet, verse. 11, 12. Then said the
Lord unto me, Pray not for this People for their good; when they fast, I will
not hear their cry; and when they offer burnt-Offerings, and an Oblation, I
will not accept them; but I will consume them by the Sword, by the Famine, and
by the Pestilence: This very Israel unto whom God was sometimes known as a
Savior, yet at this time he took up a resolution concerning them, that he
would come out against them and consume them by his sore Judgments. So Ezekiel.
33. God threatens some that outlived and escaped some Distresses, verse. 27.
Thus says the Lord God, As I live, surely they that are in the Wastes shall
fall by the Sword, and him that is in the open Field will I give unto the
Beasts to be devoured, and they that be in the Forts and in the Caves shall die
of the Pestilence; This is spoken of Israel: And those of Israel that as yet
were not carried away captive, God comes out against them with this purpose and
determination, that though they did remain and were preserved, they should at
length fall. So Jer. 44.13. some there were that in the time of Israel's
Captivity, fled into Egypt for refuge, and what says he? I will punish them
that dwell in the Land of Egypt, as I have punished Jerusalem, by the Sword, by
the Famine, and by the Pestilence: observe, God sometimes punishes Jerusalem,
the Seat of his own People, with these great and sore Judgments: Sometimes if
his own People shall think to take Sanctuary, and refuge themselves here and
there, it shall not avail, but the hand of the Lord shall overtake them. Let me
tell you, not only some of Gods Israel may fall by slaughter, but some of the
principal of his People, some of the choice ones of the flock; Jer. 25.34, 35.
Howl ye Shepherds, and cry, and wallow your selves in the Ashes, ye principal
of the Flock; for the days of your Slaughter, and of your Dispersion are
accomplished, and ye shall fall like a pleasant vessel, and the Shepherds shall
have no way to flee, nor the Principal of the Flock to escape. We are apt to
say, when we see God terrible in his doings to the children of men, and
terrible in his dealings to his own People, What do these things mean? We are
ready to look upon such Providence as things uncouth, strange and unheard of;
but we find it is not out of the course and method that God has observed
heretofore. So that I may conclude in respect of common calamity, it sometimes
falls according to that, Eccl. 9.2. All things come alike unto all: there is
one event to the Righteous, and to the Wicked; to the Good, to the Clean, and
to the Unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not. As is
the Good, so is the Sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears an Oath.

But if the Reason be demanded, How comes it to pass, and whence is it, that
any of God's Israel should fall in times of slaughter?

1. Not to insist upon the Prerogative of God, (which might be the first thing)
whereby he is Lord of all his Creatures, and his own People as well as others,
and therefore may dispense unto all according to the good-pleasure of his own
Will.

2. In the second place; the ground of it may be this, viz. That God cannot
keep his Covenant with his People sometimes at any cheaper rate, he cannot be
faithful sometimes to his Promise with his own People, unless he let them feel
some smarting Rod, and taste of that Cup of which he makes his Enemies drink a
full Draught; God by Covenant stands bound to purge out the folly that is bound
up in the hearts of his Children; and truly sometimes lusts in the Soul are
like rust in Iron, deeply eat in, and cannot well be gotten out without some
severe and ruff usage.

3. But thirdly, The main Reason, the grand and principal Ground why some of
Israel may perish in times of common Calamity is this; they sin as the world,
and so God leaves them to suffer with, and as the world; their provocations are
like the wickeds, therefore he is pleased to suit out an external punishment,
something like that that falls upon the rest of the world: the Lord says, that
sometimes the sin of his own People, is not only as the sin of the world but
greater; Jer. 5.28. They are waxen fat, they shine, yea they overpass the deeds
of the wicked. It is spoken of God's Israel. The truth is, though the sin of
Saints shall never damn them, they are interested in Christ, and there is no
condem nation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.1. (and herein is much
of the overflowing Grace of the new Covenant, that notwithstanding the sin of
Saints may have some such provoking ingredients as the sin of sinners has not,
that yet sinners shall perish eternally under their sins, but the Saints shall
not come into condemnation) yet I say the sin of a Saint may lay him under an
external dispensation with the sinner: the Saints sin against such light as few
sinners do, and such love as no sinner can, and that makes their provocation
more provoking than the sins of sinners: When it is thus among the Lord's
People, the Lord is pleased to let them; or some of them at least, to fall by
sore slaughter. It is upon such a supposition that God threatens his People in
Deuteronomy. 28.58. If thou will not observe to do all the words of this Law that are
written in this day, that thou may fear this glorious and fearful Name, THE
LORD THY GOD: Then the Lord will make thy Plagues wonderful, and the Plagues of
thy seed, even great Plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sickness, and
of long continuance. The case supposed here is this, That God's People may not
keep to the Law of the Lord, that they may not carry it like a people that know
something of God, that they may not carry it as a people that know what dread
there is in the Name JEHOVAH, (which is a Name that speaks the Great God able
to meet with, and avenge himself on all them that walk not with him in Truth
and Uprightness) that they may not carry it as those that have intrest in the
Lord: Intrest in the Lord does not give a liberty unto sin, but is the greatest
engagement unto Holiness, and souls may forget that Obligation under which they
lie, those bonds of God that are upon them, that filial Child-like obedience
which they are to render unto their Father, and upon such defects God
threatens, as you have heard; Take his threatening in a few particulars, and
you shall see what sin may bring upon the Lord's own People: he threatens,
first, Plagues, yea, all kind of Plagues, Judgments of every sort. 2dly, Such
as should be wonderful, that should be full of terror and amazement unto all
that look upon them; as God sometimes speaks to his People, and tells them he
will make them an astonishment to all round about them, yea such as should make
them a wonder unto themselves. 3dly, He threatens they should lie under Plagues
of long continuance, year after year: we are apt to think a judgment must be
terminated to, and ended in such a space of time; but God can stretch it out
upon his own, even for a long season. 4thly, All the Judgments of Egypt shall
come upon them, all the Judgments they were afraid of, and proved a terror
unto their souls. 5thly, They might fall under such Judgments as they had not
heard, or at any time read of before; he would create trouble to them:
Certainly if it be according to that word, Lam. 3.33. that the Lord does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men: though they are but the
children of men, the Lord does not easily afflict them, not at every turn
contend with them, much less will he upon light and slight occasions contend
with his own People, and the choicest of his own; but when he finds them under
provocations he is pleased thus to break out against them. Observe that where
you find God coming out to cut off his People by a slaughtering stroke, you
shall find some notable provocation was the procuring cause, it was not for
nothing; Deuteronomy. 28.21. The Lord shall make the Pestilence cleave unto thee,
until he has consumed thee from off the Land whither thou go to possess it.
It was spoken to Israel: upon what occasion? the 15th verse will tell you; But
it shall come to pass, if thou will not hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy
God, to observe to do all his Commandments, and his Statutes, which I command
thee this day, that all these Curses shall come upon thee, and overtake thee.
And so Ezekiel. 5.11, 12. Wherefore as I live, says the Lord God, surely because
thou have defiled my Sanctuary with all thy detestable things, and with all
thine abominations; therefore will I also diminish thee, neither shall mine eye
spare, nor will I have any pity. A third part of thee shall die by the
Pestilence, and with Famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee, and a
third part shall fall by the Sword round about thee; and I will scatter a third
part into all the winds, and will draw out a Sword after them, etc. Here are
dreadful threatenings, and it was upon great provocations; there were great
turnings aside from God, corrupting his Worship, polluting his Sanctuary, the
fire of God's jealousy burns hot about his Sanctuary; and if he find his People
in the matter of his Worship corrupted, he breaks out against them with great
severity: It was upon some such account David shunned the place, the high place
at Gibeon, where the Plague was; he knew that he had deserved death, and
therefore he could not go to Gibeon, for he was afraid because of the Sword of
the Angel of the Lord, as you may see, 1 Chronicles. 21.28. I may allude to that,
Ezekiel. 18.24. I know the words have another sense than that that is before me,
but I allude to them only; and as he says, When the Righteous turns away
from his Righteousness, and commits Iniquity, and does according to all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness
that he has done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he has
trespassed, and in his sin that he has sinned shall he die. So I may say, when
the Saints of God turn into ways of sinners, and act in like provocations with
them, in the sins they sin, and the trespasses that they commit, they may die,
and the hand of the Lord may break out against them to the slaughtering of
them, and cutting them down.

Obj. 1. If any shall object here and say, If the Saints may be slaughtered by,
and fall in common Calamity, what profit has the Jew then, and what advantage
is there by Circumcision? what advantage has the Saint above and beyond the
Sinner?

Answ. To that I answer; He has advantage many ways; to name a few
particulars:

1. Though one of God's Israel may fall by a slaughtering Judgment, yet he is
in the least danger of any one; he may fall as sinners do, but he is in the
least danger; there is greater hope of his security than of those that know not
God: The Saints have the Spirit of God to lead them into his way and work, and
therefore are not so easily left to run into those sins that may provoke God to
cut them off by such Judgments; all the Sons of God are led by the Spirit of
God; Romans 8.14. As many as are led by the Spirit of God are the Sons of God;
and e contra: a blessed Promise the Lord does make in that 25th Psalm unto his
own People touching the guidance they shall have; ver. 12. What man is he that
fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way that he shall choose. God here
engages himself not to leave his People to themselves, to the ways and
workings of their own hearts, but to direct them into his way; and when he has
them in his way, what then? ver. 13. his soul shall dwell at ease, or, as
Junius translates, his soul shall dwell in good; as if he should say, when I
guide my People into my ways, than evil shall not easily overtake them; but
they shall dwell and rest in good, and mercy shall compass them about; if they
step out of Gods way, the Lord knows how to call them back again; Isa. 30.21.
Thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in
it. If the Saints have provoked God, there is a possibility for them to make
their peace, that the difference may not grow to any great height; they may
compound the difference, and make up the breach, by a spirit of mourning and
humiliation; they may lie at the foot of the Lord, and abhor themselves in dust
and ashes, and so make up the breach: and to this work they are fitted in some
measure through Grace; nay, they have a Friend in Heaven that intercedeth for
them; and though they have provoked God, the difference may be by him so
mediated, that God may be stopped from coming forth in his hot Displeasure. I
make no doubt but the Lord may say concerning many of his People, as he does of
Israel of old in Psalm. 106.23. Therefore he said he would destroy them, had not
Moses his chosen stood before him in the breach. Doubtless our Lord Jesus
Christ, that Moses, he of whom Moses was a type, and in this a great type, does
oftentimes step in between the Lord and his People, and make up the Breach, and
divert that Wrath that otherwise would come down in dreadful Judgments, to the
cutting them off the Earth.

2. Though a Saint may fall into a calamity, yet it is advantageous to be a
Saint in such a day, for such a one, though he fall, he shall be supported in
his fall, and the curse of the Judgment shall be taken off. God may chasten his
People with a Rod, let loose the severest Judgments upon them. He may cut them
down, but yet he must hold them by the hand; by Covenant he stands bound to
give them strength for every trial; and blessed Experiences there have been of
this kind this day, of those Servants of God that have gone to their eternity
by thousands; There are them that have left this Testimony, That God was with
them in that hour; and though the Judgment in it self considered, had much of
bitterness in it, yet God was pleased to sweeten it to them by an abundant
sense of Divine Love: it is said, Psalm. 149.5. Let the Saints be joyful in
glory, let them sing aloud upon their bed. Some Saints are not only joyful in
Glory now they are with God, but have sung aloud upon their sick and
deathbeds, on which they have been cast by this present Judgment of God, and
declared to the praise of his Grace, that he did support and cheer their inward
man by the enjoyment of his blessed refreshing Presence in that needful hour;
and truly the curse and sting of such a Dispensation is taken away from the
Saints. Thus some interpr^^ that word Psalm. 91.10. there shall no (...) come
nigh their dwelling; that is, say (...), the Plague of the Plague shall not
come nigh their dwelling; the curse of it shall not come, though the thing it
self come, God will take off the curse, and that is the bitterness and sting of
any affliction: Death comes upon every man, Saint and Sinner; on the Wicked it
comes with a sting in its tail, a curse with it, it is an inlet for them into
eternal misery, falling under the everlasting Displeasure of the glorious God;
the Saint dies too, but the curse is taken off from him in his Death, his
grave is his bed, where he rests in peace, and that stroke only opens a door
unto him into his Father's presence. Isa. 57.2. They shall enter into peace,
they shall rest in their beds, each one walking in his uprightness. So 1 Cor.
15.55. says the Apostle, O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy
Victory? The curse of Death is taken away from the Saint; So though the Saint
fall in and under such a calamity, the sting of it is so taken out, that it is
but a blessed passage unto him into Abraham's bosom.

3. It is yet worth while to be of Gods Israel in a time of Slaughter, though
one should not escape the Slaughter, for this reason; That if a Soul go unto
its Eternity by such a Slaughter, God will yet thereby glorify himself ^ore,
and make the fall of his Servants of greater use then their standing on Earth
could have been: be confident God resolves to make the most of every one of
his People; they are precious unto him, and shall not lightly fall to the
Earth; but if they do fall, it shall be because he knows how to make their fall
promote his glory: as in Martyrdom, the death of a Saint furthers the interest
of Christ more then his living could do, and so it is here: God by this means
vindicates his own Holiness, when he lets a Saint fall in a Calamity, he does
abundantly evidence his own Holiness; to the World, and let men see that if sin
be found in his own, he will punish it, and that sharply, even to a temporal
death; which is a high testimony of Gods purity and contrariety unto all sin. A
notable word you have Exodus 23.20, 21. Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to
keep thee in the way, and to bring thee into the place which I have prepared;
beware of him, and obey his voice, provoke him not; for he will not pardon your
transgressions, for my Name is in him: Observe, the Angel here is the Lord
Jesus, who has the command of Life and Death, he sometimes cuts off some of
his own People, because sin is found upon them; he will not pardon, but he will
cut off, and why? The Name of the Lord is upon him; he must vindicate Gods
Honor, his Holiness, and for this end lets some of his People fall: And truly
this is use enough that God makes of his People, if he pleases thus to deal
with them. This in answer to my first Objection.

Obj. 2. But how is the fall of Gods People in a common Calamity, consistent
with his Promise of special Preservation? One such Promise you have in that
famous place, Psalm. 91.9, 10. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my
Refuge, even the most High, thy habitation; there shall no evil befall thee,
nor shall any Plague come nigh thy dwelling: and another suchlike Promise you
have, Deuteronomy. 7.15. And the Lord will take away from thee all Sickness, and will
put none of the evil Diseases of Egypt, which thou know, upon thee; but will
lay them upon all them that hate thee: How does the Lords cutting off some of
his People, consist with these Promises?

Answ. To that I answer: These Promises are conditional, as is evident, and if
we keep not the condition annexed to those Promises, God is not bound to fulfill
them in the Letter: for that word in the 91st Psalm, No Plague shall come nigh
their dwelling, I have hinted already, that it may be taken otherwise then just
according to the letter; and where he says, No Plague, it may be taken thus,
The Plague of the Plague shall not come nigh thy dwelling; the Cause of it, and
wrath it, shall not come into thy dwelling; but take it as a Promise of special
particular preservation, and it is a Promise with a Condition; the Condition is
in the 9th verse. Because thou have made the Lord, which is my Refuge, even the
most High, thy habitation: The Condition is abundance of Faith, living in, and
living upon God; and a little Unbelief, one step awry in a way of Unbelief, may
forfeit thy interest in, and good by this Promise, and that is soon done: It is
a rare thing for a man to live in and upon the Lord, to make him our Habitation
at all times: The Soul that does not live up to the Condition, may forfeit the
Mercy promised. As for that word, Deuteronomy. 7. it is a Promise on Condition also;
the Condition of the Promise you find, verse. 12. Wherefore it shall come to
pass, if you hearken unto these Judgments, and keep and do them, that the Lord
thy God shall keep unto thee the Covenant and the Mercy which he swear unto thy
Fathers: but now if any of the Lords People be found turning aside to crooked
paths, the Lord may lead them forth with the Workers of Iniquity, to fall by
the same stroke with them.

Obj. 3. If it be objected, But these Dealings are not suitable unto the
ancient Dealings of God with his own People: for God has sometimes been wont
to cut down Sinners but spare his Saints; Abraham hints so much in his pleading
with God, Genesis 18.23, 24, 25. Will thou also destroy the Righteous with the
Wicked? peradventure there be fifty Righteous within the City, will thou also
destroy and not spare the place for the fifty Righteous that are therein? that
be far from thee to do after this manner, to slay the Righteous with the
Wicked; and that the Righteous should be as the Wicked, that be far from thee;
should not the Judge of all the Earth do right? and also that Exodus 12.29, 30.
where God cuts off the firstborn of Egypt; from the firstborn of Pharaoh that
sat on his Throne, unto the firstborn of the Captive that was in the Dungeon;
but not a hair of the head fell from any in Israel, and he cuts them off by the
Plague.

Answ. For answer to this, plainly thus: Let the Scriptures and Cases be
rightly considered, and you shall find the answer easy: In that case, Genesis 18.
where Abraham pleads for Mercy for Sodom, because of the Righteous, he does
suppose though Sodom was a wicked place, there might be many found in Sodom,
that did not fall in with the abominations of that place, for which God was
coming to destroy them; and by Righteous Ones, he may mean those that were free
in agreat measure from the crying Abominations for which God was coming to
punish: Now if the People of God do stand clear from all those Abominations for
which he contends with a People, then truly God will hardly cut them off; but
if he find them committing the sins for which he punishes, he may then suffer
them to fall among them that fall: This was the case in Egypt, God comes forth
to execute Judgments upon the Oppressors of his People, the guilt was not in
them, they were only the Sufferers; therefore being free from the Sin, God
exempts them from any part in the suffering: Which may be enough for answer to
that Objection.

Obj. 4. If it be said, But Isreal's Fall has. disappointed the Faith of many
of the Lords People; have not many of the Saints verily believed that the Lords
People should not have been touched, but God would distinguish between them and
others?

Answ. To that I answer, That the confidence and expectation of some may be
made void, but God will not fail the Faith of any; God fails no man's Faith, if
his Faith do not fail. There is a vast difference between Confidence,
Expectation, and Faith; Faith is a rare thing, a choice Plant, and I believe it
does not spring forth into act, even in the Garden of the Saints themselves, as
we are apt to imagine; we many times think a groundless Confidence real Faith.
You shall find the expectation of a People may be frustrated; Jer. 8.15. We
looked for peace, but no good came; and for a time of health, but behold
trouble: they did look for it, but such an expectation must not be called by
the name of Faith: Let me tell you, That nothing is Faith but that that is
grounded upon a Word, Psalm. 119.49. Remember thy Word unto thy Servant, on the
which thou have caused me to hope. It is very hard to find any word in
Scripture, where God does absolutely assure unto his People exemption in a
slaughtering-Calamity, especially until Christ shall come forth to execute
Judgment upon the Earth. Therefore there not being a word for such Faith,
there cannot be a Faith of such a distinction: Though men may call their vain
expectations by the name of Faith, they shall never find it to have Faiths
Efficacy.

Obj. 5. If it be further said, That by the falling of Gods Israel, the Lord
crosses and hinders his own design; he hinders the effect of the Judgment upon
the Hearts of sinners; their hearts come by this means to be the more hardened,
and they thence conclude it is not intended and directed specially against
them; for, say they, The Good fall, as well as the Bad; and we are not intended
more then others.

Answ. To that I answer: What if God will, for the hardening the hearts of
Sinners, let some of his own fall? What if that shall be one part of Gods
design in it, that their hearts may be hardened, and thereby they may be the
more ripened for their utter ruin and destruction? If God have this design in
his heart, and will therefore be content to let some of his fall in a Calamity,
who are we that we should reply against God?

Obj. 6. If, in the sixth place, you should ask me, But what shall we say
concerning those of Gods Israel that are fallen? must we conclude them all
fallen in their trespasses, and cut off because of some notable provocation
that they stood guilty of?

Answ. I answer, No, in no wise; notwithstanding all that has been said: But
my poor thoughts are these, That some of the Lords own Israel may have had too
great a hand in, and may have stood under too much guilt with respect to some
of the provocations of this day, and so may be fallen in their trespasses; God
may have cut them off from the Earth in some displeasure, for some
Abominations, in which they have been found, though he may receive them to
himself in glory: but I must say concerning others of the Lord's People this
day fallen, and some of them have this witness in my soul, that surely the hand
of God went not out against them for any special provocation upon them, but
upon account of the accomplishing and bringing about some notable things that
are in the heart of God, which time must manifest: therefore though the falling
of many Saints may speak, that the Lord is displeased with his People, yet I
would even say concerning many of them (and it may be a caution unto us) as
Christ, Suppose ye that these Galileans were sinners above all the Galileans,
because they suffered such things? I tell you nay, but except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish; or those eighteen upon whom the Tower in Shiloe
fell, and slew them, think ye that they were sinners above all others that
dwelt in Jerusalem? I tell you nay, but except ye repent ye shall all likewise
perish: though many of the Saints may possibly have fallen through great
provocations, yet surely for others we must not reckon them sinners above the
rest of the Saints that remain.

Obj. 7. If it be asked, May we conclude that all the Israel of God that have
escaped, and may escape through Grace, that they do therefore escape because
they have been found walking uprightly with God, in a constant exercise of
Grace, do they therefore escape because they are found in right and good frames
of soul?

To that I answer: Let us not be high-minded, but fear. Though possibly some of
the Saints that stand, God has found them in a right Spirit, and is therefore
pleased to spare, yet for many of us we must put our preservation upon some
other score; I would rather place it where the Spirit of God does sometimes
place the preservation of Israel, Psalm. 78. But he being full of compassion,
forgave their iniquities; yea, many a time turned away his Anger, and did not
stir up all his Wrath. I do rather suppose that most of us that live, live
through the grace and indulgence of a tenderhearted God, because he does not
stir up all his Wrath, rather than because we have been found in this right and
excellent Spirit which this day calls for, and which of right should have been
found upon us. And thus I have showed that in days of slaughter all of Israel
may not escape, and why.

I proceed now to the second Branch for prosecution of this Doctrine, to show
that whoever stand or fall, Christ will lose none of his glory, that all
slaughtering-providences shall end in the making Christ glorious; In that day
shall the Branch of the Lord be beautiful and glorious: that is, in that day
when some great and dreadful Slaughters are brought to a conclusion; as is
evident if you consider and compare it with what goes before in the third
chapter. Certainly a little light into Scripture is enough to satisfy us, that
God has brought forth many great things for his own glory and the good of his
People, by slaughters; it were easy to observe unto you that most of the great
things that God has done for his Name and People, have been effected and
brought about by great distresses: Israel were set free from their oppression,
which was an eminent mercy, and how? Slaughters were made to bring that about;
Exodus 14.13. Moses said unto the People, Fear ye not, stand still, and see the
Salvation of the Lord, which he will show unto you to day: for the Egyptians
whom ye have seen to day, ye shall see them again no more for ever. And you
shall find they were possessed of Canaan, settled in that good Land, but which
way? it was by and through great slaughters; the Canaanite was dispersed and
driven out, and it was by cutting them off; yea, I do suppose that one of the
means and ways by which God made way for Israel to set them in Canaan, was by
the Pestilence; I gather it from that Exodus 23.23. My Angel shall go before
thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites, and the Hittites, and the
Perrisites, and the Canaanites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, and I will
cut them off. God says he would send his Angel to do it. The Angels of God
work many ways; but that that is eminently called in Scripture the stroke of
the Angel, it is that stroke by the Pestilence, as many instances might make it
good; and I the rather judge it to be the intent of the expression, because it
is said in verse. 25. You shall serve the Lord your God, and he shall bless thy
bread and thy water, and I will take sickness away from the midst of thee: The
Angel shall cut off the Canaanites, but I shall take sickness away from thee.
And if you consider what God has promised to do for his People in the time to
come, Psalm. 103.6, 7. you find cause to believe that this is the way that God
delights to take; The Lord executes Righteousness and Judgment for all that
are oppressed; he made known his ways unto Moses, and his acts unto the
children of Israel. Mark, God says he will act for his People, he will free
them from oppression, from bonds, and from troubles; but how? He made known his
ways unto Moses, and his acts to the children of Israel. But you will say,
How? I will tell you, and God has told you long ago; he told Moses and Israel,
not only what he would do for them in their day, but what he would do, and how
he would proceed for good unto his People in after-dayes. In the days of Moses
God wrought for his People and led them into much good by slaughter, and this
is the way that God still intends to take. Psalm 72. entitled A Psalm for
Solomon, concerning the glory that was put upon Solomon: in the person of
Solomon Christ is eminently intended, and his Glory and Government is eminently
pointed at; observe which way it is that Solomon and Christ shall come to their
Glory, and come to do good to his People; He shall judge the Poor of his
People, he shall save the children of the Needy, he shall break in pieces the
Oppressors; it is in a way of slaughter. So Isa. 30. with abundance of
Scriptures more that I might name, you shall find there what the Lord says he
will do; There shall be upon every high hill, rivers and streams of waters, in
the day of the great slaughter, when the Towers shall fall: Says God, there
shall be a day of great slaughter; What shall the slaughter do? the Towers
shall fall; which are types and representations of the high great things of
this World, that seem to have great strength, and to be almost impregnable: But
in the day of great slaughter the Towers shall fall: And what will the effect
thereof be? it will be glory to Christ, and good unto his People; ver. 26. it
is in the days that the Lord binds up the breach of his People, in which the
light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun
shall be sevenfold, as the light of seven days: Thus will Christ glorify
himself and do his People good by slaughter. So Isa. 34.6. he gives you an
account of dreadful slaughter, The Sword of the Lord is filled with Blood, it
is made fat with fatness, and with the Blood of Lambs and Goats, with the fat
of the Kidneys of Rams: for the Lord has a Sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great
slaughter in the land of Idumea: Here shall be great slaughter, and what shall
be the effect of it? you shall see in the 12th verse. They shall call the Nobles
thereof unto the Kingdom, but none shall be there, and all her Princes shall be
nothing; that is, the glory that shall come to Christ shall so outshine and
outdo the glory of all the great Ones of the World, that they shall be looked
upon as if they were not, his glory that shall come to him through the
slaughter shall so surpass them in all their glory. I might add Isa. 33.10,
etc. The Earth mourns and languisheth, Lebanon is ashamed and hewn down,
Sharon is like a Wilderness, and Bashan and Carmel shake off their fruits; Now
will I arise, says the Lord, now will I be exalted, now will I lift up my
self: Now look what follows, and you shall find the way by which he will be
exalted, it is through slaughter; Ye shall conceive chaff, ye shall bring forth
stubble, your breath as fire shall devour you, and the People shall be as the
burning of Lime, as Thorns cut up, they shall be burnt in fire: Ah my Friends!
we may think our selves secure and out of danger, because upon our feet; but
alas, Christ that is to make himself glorious, how easily is he able to pull
down the pride of man, and to lay low his lofty looks? it is a notable word
that you have Job 24.22, etc. He draws also the Mighty with his power; when
He rises up, (mark, that is to plead his Cause) no man is sure of his life;
though it be given him to be in safety whereon he rests, yet his Eyes are
upon their Ways. Men may think themselves safe and secure, and that which is
their strength and confidence may be untouched for the present, but yet the
Lords Eyes are upon their ways; and verse. 24. They are exalted for a little
while, but are gone and brought low, they are taken out of the way (it is done
in a little time) as the tops of the Ears of Corn: Those that stand in the way
of Christ's Exaltation, they are exalted, but it is but for a little while; and
in a little while, at short warning, Christ can throw them down, and cut them
off as the tops of the Ears of Corn. You know a little thing will strike of the
top of an Ear of Corn, when it is fully ripe; Christ can with a little stroke
make all glory to perish, that his own may be advanced. So that I say it is
Christ's way and method to get himself glory, and do his People good by
Slaughter; yea, let me tell you, This Plague and Pestilence is a means by which
God will work out his own glory; We, it may be, look upon it as a thing that
comes of course once in forty years, or such a matter; but truly this is a sad
mistake, and in the 89th Psalm, a Psalm in which David is much concerned, but
in and under the Person of David, Christ is intended; and God when he promises
the Kingdom to David, that he would secure the Kingdom unto him, he intends
Christ especially, that he would make Christ great and glorious in the World;
and which way will he do it? verse. 23. And I will beat down his Foes before his
face, and plague them that hate him. Junius renders the word thus, Osores ejus
plaga afficiam; we may translate it, I will smite them that hate him: for,
plaga, a stroke, is put for any kind of stroke or smiting, but properly and
more especially, for this Judgment of the Plague; and I think so it is to be
taken here; I will send this Judgment abroad, that I may cut off and take away
the haters of my Son, that I may establish him in the glory that I have
designed for him. To which add Hab. 3.2. where the Prophet petitions the Lord,
O Lord, I have heard thy speech and was afraid; O Lord revive thy work in the
midst of the years, in the midst of the years make known; in wrath remember
mercy: God came from Teman, and the Holy One from Mount Paran, his glory
covered the Heavens; (that is, God came forth to work the Exaltation of his
Son) and what course does he take in order to it? verse. 5. Before him went the
Pestilence, and burning Coals went forth at his feet: The Pestilence is here
called a forerunner of Christ's Exaltation; he sends it before him to make room
and way for himself, though we possibly, and our capacities are too shallow to
conceive how it should be brought about: It is possible, if God let us stand
upon the Earth some few years, we may be much more enlightened in this matter,
and may see that God was this day eminently working to that end.

And that is what I would say to that Head, That Slaughter, and
slaughtering-Judgements, work for and shall end in the making Christ glorious.

Thirdly, What is that glory that shall be put on Christ in the issue and end
of these things?

I answer in a few particulars:

1. The Essential Glory of Christ, in the day of his Glory, shall be more
abundantly seen and discovered then now it is, and shall take more upon the
hearts of all Persons. Christ is as glorious in his Essential Glory as can be,
for he is infinitely glorious, and more then infinite cannot be imagined; but
this Glory may be discovered and manifested beyond what it is: The Sun is
always a glorious Body, but you know the light of it is hid many times, Clouds
stand between, and we cannot see it at some times as we can at others. Christ
is exceedingly glorious, but little of his Glory has been hitherto manifested
to the Children of Men; more Eyes shall see it, and more Hearts be taken with
it then at this day. Something of Christ's Glory is seen already by the Saints,
who have a spiritual Eye, they see that that takes their Hearts, and makes them
cry out, as the Spouse sometimes does, He is altogether lovely: Some of the
Saints see that in Christ which is more to them then all that is in this World;
they take more comfort and content in it, more of joy and satisfaction to their
Spirits. When Christ came in the Flesh, it is said, John 1.14. The Word was
made Flesh, and dwelt amongst us, and we saw his Glory, the Glory as of the
only begotten of the Father, full of Grace and Truth. That Glory that we do
for the present behold in Christ, and with which our hearts are taken, it is
rather (for the most part) that fullness of Grace that is in Christ, for the
good and benefit of Believers; with that we are usually more taken then with
his Essential Personal Perfections: But the whole of Jesus Christ's Glory shall
yet shine forth so as it has not done at any time; therefore Psalm. 102.16.
When the Lord shall build up Sion, he shall appear in his Glory: He is glorious
now, but he shall appear in his Glory hereafter, beyond what he has done at
any time to this day: suitable unto which, is that Word, Isa. 33.17. Thine Eyes
shall see the King in his Beauty, they shall behold the Land that is very far
off. The best of Saints upon Earth, if they see something in Christ that makes
them in love with him, in the day of his Glory there shall be abundantly more
discovered that shall make them in love with him, possibly more then ever they
thought they should be for ever. That is one part of that Glory shall come to
this Branch of the Lord.

2. Christ shall in the end of this slaughter be made glorious in his Priestly
Office; as he is a Savior he shall be made more glorious then ever: It is the
honor of Christ that he is a Savior, Act. 5.31. Him has God exalted to be a
Prince and a Savior: But it has been greatly to the disparagement of Christ,
and his dishonor in this his Office that he has been so lightly esteemed of
among the Children of Men, that so few have taken hold of him for Life and
Salvation: Those that have believed on Christ have been a small number,
compared with the rest of the world, and of these few, they have been chiefly
the poor, low and little ones of the World, persons of little esteem and
account; therefore Christ says, Mat. 11.5. The Poor have the Gospel preached
unto them: he says it is preached to them, because it is received by them: the
poor, inconsiderable ones of the World, have generally hitherto been the
persons that have received Christ: It is true, some of the Great Ones of the
World have courted Christ, and professed to own him, but not one of many have
given up themselves unto Christ as a Savior. But now this shall be the Glory
upon the head of Christ, that Souls shall abundantly flock in unto him. Before
Christ makes an end of his work in the World, he will so break the Hearts of
Men, that they shall flow in unto him in great abundance: Hag. 2.7. And I will
shake all Nations, and the Desire of all Nations shall come; and I will fill
this House with Glory, says the Lord of Hosts: Christ by his Sword, Pestilence
and Famine, is shaking the Nations, that is his way; and when he has done
shaking the Nations, the Desire of all Nations shall come: It is Christ is here
intended, and he is called the Desire of all Nations, because the Nations of
the World shall generally come unto him, and embrace him, such shall be the
confluence and flowing in to Christ. This is intimated in that known place,
Isa. 60.8. Who are these that fly as a Cloud, and as the Doves unto their
Windows? It is spoken about the access of Souls unto Christ; and mark, the
Saints that shall be alive at that day, they cry with wonder and amazement, Who
are these that like Doves come to their Windows? Doves you know fly in great
flocks, where they are plentiful, and the meaning of this is, multitudes shall
subject themselves to Christ in truth, and give up themselves to be saved by
him; Christ now does sprinkle many Nations, according to that Isa. 52. here and
there a few Souls in diverse parts and places of the world; but at length things
shall be so ordered that even a Nation shall be born in a day, and abundance of
poor Hearts shall give up themselves unto the Lord Jesus: This you have Numb.
24.7. He shall pour the water out of his Buckets, and his seed shall be in many
waters, and his King shall be higher then Agag. And this is another part of the
Glory that is to come unto Jesus Christ.

3. Slaughter shall terminate in the Glory of Christ, in this respect; He shall
be glorious in his Kingly Power, he shall be owned as the Head, and Lord, and
Lawgiver, the one only Lawgiver; so shall he be owned: Isa. 33.22. For the
Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will
save us. It relates unto a time when Christ shall be glorious: The glorious
Lord shall be as a place of Broad Rivers and Streams; so you have it in the
foregoing verse; and then there shall be a cry, The Lord is our King, and he
shall be our Lawgiver. For the present there is great debate between Christ
and the Men of the World, who should give Laws, whose Prerogative it is to rule
the Conscience; and men say unto Saints, Bow down that we may go over: they say
unto the SOULS of Saints, Bow down: But when Christ shall be made glorious,
these controversies shall soon end; then a Nation shall come and acknowledge it
is Christ is to rule them in every thing. Isa. 2. decides the Controversy,
where more then once it is said, The Lord ALONE shall be exalted; and what
then? verse. 3. Many People shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up unto the
Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of
his ways, and we will walk in his paths: for out of Sion shall go forth the
Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem: and he shall judge among the
Nations, and shall rebuke many People. This is the Spirit that shall be put
upon many People, and they shall say, It is not this, and that, and the other,
that pretends Dominion over the Conscience, must teach us how to walk, but HE
will teach us, and we will walk in his ways; and it is out of Sion the Law
shall go forth, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem; therefore Numb. 24.7.
it is said, Israel's King shall be higher then Agag, and shall carry the day,
and all the men of the Earth shall be constrained to submit to him.

4. Christ shall be glorious in this respect, That all the Great Ones of the
World shall come and fall at his Foot, and acknowledge they are in his hands,
that Christ can and may dispose of them as he pleases. It is a business there
is much tugging about in the World, the Great Ones of the World are loath Christ
should take his place, they would fain stand upon their own legs, and it is
from hence all their contrariety and hatred against his People and Ways does
arise, intimated in Psalm. 2.3. The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the
Rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his Anointed,
saying, Let us break their Bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from us.
They cannot think of stooping unto Christ, but it is in vain, for to this the
greatest on Earth shall be brought; therefore Christ has his Name, Rev. 19.16.
He has on his Vesture and on his Thigh, a Name written, KING OF KINGS, AND
LORD OF LORDS: It is written upon his Vesture and Garments, which is in the
sight and full view of all Men: He shall be in the sight of the World owned as
KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS, and the greatest upon Earth shall be
constrained to stoop unto him, as is excellently set forth in that typical
Psalm, Psalm. 72. where Christ's Dominion is much held out; The Kings of Tarshish
and of the Isles shall bring Presents, the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall offer
gifts; yea all Kings shall fall down before him, all Nations shall serve him.

5. Again, The Glory of Christ shall lie in the maintaining and excellent
managing of his Power and Government; he shall maintain his Government and
Glory: It is that that eclipses the glory of the Princes of this Earth, that
they are not able to keep their stations often times; but Christ shall keep and
maintain, and make good his ground: Psalm. 132.18. His Enemies will I cloth
with shame, but upon himself shall the Crown flourish: Those that would oppose
him shall fall before him, but he shall maintain his own station at a glorious
rate. And likewise his Glory shall be in the management of his Government, he
will put an end to Oppression, and judge with Equity; he will manage his
Government so as that none shall find fault with him: It is the misery of the
Potentates of this World, that their ill management of their Power, loses them
their Glory; but Christ, and all that shall have any power under him, shall not
do so; Isa. 32.1. A King shall reign in Righteousness, and Princes shall rule
in Judgment: all matters shall then be managed with much equity and
uprightness. Isa. 11.1, etc. is a notable Scripture for this, There shall come
forth a Rod out of the Stem of Jesse, (that is, Christ) the Spirit of the Lord
and of Wisdom shall be upon him: there is his Glory, when he comes to govern he
shall do things with wisdom, that is Wisdom really, for the Wisdom of this
World comes to nothing, and the ends of the Men of the World are not
accomplished; but Christ shall rule with Wisdom, and also with Equity, verse. 4.
With Righteousness shall he judge the Poor, and reprove with Equity for the
Meek of the Earth. Now Christ's thus managing of his Government, will render him
very glorious: Which leads me to the fourth thing propounded.

Fourthly, That Christ in his being glorious, shall be glorious for the good of
his People; those of Israel that shall be carried through the distresses and
straights they shall meet withal in the World, they shall share in, and partake
of all the Glory of Christ with much comfort: Psalm. 72.7. it is there said, In
his days shall the righteous flourish: when it is well with him, it shall not
be ill with them: So Isa. 24. where it is said, ver. 23. Christ shall reign in
Mount Zion, and before his Ancients gloriously; and you shall see, verse. 16.
how it will be with his People, From the uttermost parts of the Earth have I
heard Songs, even Glory to the Righteous: When Christ shall be glorified, his
People shall be glorified with him. If the Saints say unto Christ, as Joseph
did unto Pharaoh's Butler, Remember me when it is well with thee; their Desires
shall be answered at a better rate then Joseph's were. When Christ shall be
made glorious in the World, as he shall be one day, he will not be one day
without his Peoples reaping the good and benefit thereof: and it must needs be
thus; for consider First the Union between Christ and his People; Christ is the
Head and Husband of his Saints. And Civilians say, Uxor lucet Mariti radiis,
the Wife partakes of the honor of her Husband; so it shall be here, the Saints
shall partake of and reap the good of that honor that shall be upon the Head
of Christ; Christ is so full of love to his People, that the very love he bears
them, were there no other tie, would engage him to interest them in the good of
his Glory; Christ is the Head and his People are the Members, and if the Head
be dignified, all the Members must also; it cannot be otherwise. Secondly,
Christ's Glory must needs be for the good of his People, in that all the Glory
he is entrusted with, as Mediator, it is in their names, for their sakes, and
for their uses; he is Head over all things to his Church, Ephesians. 1.22. I may
therefore say unto Saints, as they in Cant. 3.11. Go forth, O ye Daughters of
Jerusalem, and behold King Solomon with the Crown wherewith his Mother crowned
him in the day of his Espousals, in the day of the gladness of his Heart: Go
forth and look upon, by the Eye of Faith, that Glory that shall be upon the
Head of Christ, and look upon it with comfort; you may account it a joyous
spectacle, for it is that that shall work out your Mercy, if your hearts be
upright with God. A little further to show you what benefit shall come unto
Saints by Christ's being glorious.

1. When Christ is glorious, glorious Liberty shall come unto the Saints: We
are now a company of inthralled Creatures, not only unto our own lusts, but the
lusts of men; you have a notable expression, Romans 8.21. The Creature it self
also shall be delivered into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God: The
Creatures of the Earth are now in bondage unto the lusts of Men: our Raiment is
in bondage to our Pride, our Meat to Gluttony, our Drink to Drunkenness; and
other things the like: the Creatures are held in slavery unto the lusts of Men;
but there is a time when they shall have glorious Liberty, when men shall not
be able at their pleasure to inthrall and oppress them. Psalm. 72.12, 14. the
Psalmist speaking of Christ in his glory, says of him, That he shall deliver
the Needy when he cries, the Poor also, and him that has no helper; he shall
redeem their Souls from death and violenee, and precious shall their Blood be
in his sight. It is worth your observing, that the whole design of Christ is
but to do his People good, to save them; and therefore at the 4th verse of that
Psalm it is said, He shall save the Children of the needy; and particularly
this service he shall do them, he shall give them glorious Liberty.

2. This shall be their Glory, their Reproach shall be wiped away; the People
of God have been a reproached People greatly reproached, but their reproach
shall be rolled away. When Israel came to Canaan they were circumcised, and the
place where they were circumcised was called Gilgal, and the reason given,
Josh. 5.9. For there he rolled away the reproach of Egypt; the lot of the
Saints is to be reproached in Egypt, but there shall be a time and day, and a
Place also, which he will name Gilgal, a time and place when and where he will
roll away the reproach of his People. For the present sometimes God gives his
People unto reproach, as you have it, Isa. 43.28. Therefore I have profaned the
Princes of the Sanctuary, and have given Jacob to the curse, and Israel to
reproaches: but there is also a time when reproaches shall be taken away, Then
will the Lord be jealous for his Land, and pity his People, yea the Lord will
answer and say unto his People, Behold, I will send you Corn, and Wine, and
Oil, and ye shall be satisfied therewith, and I will no more make you a
reproach among the Heathen.

3. The Glory of the Saints shall be this, They shall be raised up to much
height and dignity, that the greatest of all the ungodly ones of the Earth
shall bow before them; for which take one place insted of many, Isa. 60.14. The
Sons also of them that afflicted thee, shall come bending unto thee; and all
they that despised thee, shall bow themselves down at the soals of thy feet;
and they shall call thee, The City of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of
Israel: It were great arrogance for any of the Saints to hope for such a thing
as this, had not God spoken it; and it is as great infidelity not to believe
it, since the mouth of the Lord has uttered it.

4. They shall have this Glory, More eminent and uninterupted Communion with
God and Christ, then ever yet they had; and this is the thing that every good
Soul longs for: long for it they do, that is certain; and when they are
hindered in that enjoyment, it is their great burden; when their Tabernacles
are taken down, their communion's broken, this is that that makes them go
mourning: but the Lord will give his People more eminent and glorious communion
with himself and his Son, then they have yet partaken of. It is said, Isa.
60.7. with respect to a time yet to come, The Flocks of Kedar shall be gathered
together unto thee, the Rams of Nebaioth shall minister unto thee; they shall
come up with acceptance on mine Altar, and I will glorify the House of my
Glory. Observe it, the Glory of the Temple of old was the presence of God in
the Temple, he was said to fill the House with his Glory; the communion that
the Saints had with God, was the Temple-Glory, God meeting with them in his
Appointments and Administrations; and now he promises here, I will glorify
the House of my Glory; I will fill my Churches and Saints with more Glory then
yet they have seen; the meaning is, they shall have more of my presence with
them, and more abundant communion and fellowship with me, then heretofore: Isa.
66.11. it is said, They shall be delighted with the abundance of her Glory,
that ye may suck and be satisfied with the Breasts of her Consolation, that ye
may milk out and be delighted with the abundance of her Glory.

5. And in the last place, this shall be the Glory of Saints, Even their
glorious Union one with another, and this shall be their mercy in the day of
Christ; in Zeph. 3.8, 9. the Lord says, Therefore wait ye upon me, until the
day that I rise up unto the prey, for my determination is to gather the
Nations, that I may assemble the Kingdoms, to pour upon them mine indignation,
even all my fierce anger, for all the Earth shall be devoured with the fire of
my jealousy; for then will I turn to the People a pure language, that they may
all call upon the Name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent. It is the
great cry among the People of God, O that we could come to Unity, to love as
Brethren! all cry for want of it, though few endeavor after it as they ought
to do: but when we have done our utmost endeavors, (which is our Duty) yet it
will not rise up to any great height, till Christ come in his Glory: Wait upon
ME until I arise to the prey, to do gloriously in the World, and then I will
work thus and thus, that you may come to serve me with One Consent. They
mistake greatly that think to force People to a Union, to make them all of one
mind; it is the work of God to pour out a Spirit of Union, which he has
promised to do; The Lord shall be one, and his Name one, in all the Earth,
Zach. 4. and Jer. 32.39. I will give them one Heart, and one Way, to serve me.
When Christ shall be advanced, our Divisions shall be broken; and whatever the
Devil and wicked Men have cast in as a snare and means to rend and divide,
shall be taken out of the way: It is then that we shall be enlightened in the
things wherein we vary one from another: What is the ground of all our
differences? they are partly ignorance, and partly pride; our ignorance, we
cannot see into Truth, one thinks one thing, and another another, and because
we cannot see into every thing, we disagree; which is furthered by our Pride,
cleaving unto our own imaginations: but this will be removed, God will lay low
the pride of men, and we shall have more light, we shall see that we never saw,
and be enlightened as we never were: Isa. 60.20. Thy Sun shall no more go down,
neither shall thy Moon withdraw it self; for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting Light, and the days of thy mourning shall be ended: The Lord shall
at that day let us into the knowledge of much of his mind, which yet we grope
in the dark without light in; and then there shall be a great Union among
Saints. Now to all these ends, to the Glory of Christ, and good of his People,
Christ is working by his slaughtering-Providences: Those things that we wonder
at, and know not what they tend to, it is to that end they subserve, and shall
be crowned with that issue. And thus I have dispatched what I intend for the
Doctrinal part.

I shall now proceed to the Application

USE I.
IF this then be a Truth, That the end of Slaughters shall be to make Christ
glorious, and his Glory shall be greatly for the advantage of the Israel of God
that escape in times of slaughter; It will then certainly be found a Truth very
useful many ways: and that which first is upon my heart to give forth to you,
is that which I hope will be also upon your hearts; to put the question to your
Souls, Whether you are really the Israel of God or no. Escaped we are hitherto
(through Grace) we stand alive in the presence of God, but what state is it in
which we stand? Can you say, Through Grace you have good hopes the Lord has
not only spared you, but also implanted you into the number of his own People,
and made you of the number of his own Israel? The Mercy and the Good of an
Escape, is limited in the Text unto the Israel of God; others may escape as
well as they, but in the conclusion it will be little to their comforts. Israel
had his name given to him from his wrestling with God in Prayer, and
prevailing; and the Name is applied,

1. To the natural Seed of Jacob; the People of the Jews are often times in
Scripture called Israel promiscuously, one with another. 2. It is applied unto
the spiritual Ones among the natural Seed of Jacob, those of the Jewish People
that were really brought into a subjection unto, and an acquaintance with the
Lord, they are by way of distinction from the rest of the Seed of Jacob, called
Israel. 3. It is applied unto all, both Jews and Gentiles, that are really
brought within the Bond of the Covenant, Scripture dignifies them often with
the title of Israel. This is therefore the question that you and I are to put
seriously to our Souls, What testimony and witness have we, that we are brought
within the Bond of the Covenant, and that our preservation is this day a
Covenant-mercy to our Souls? That is the question that must be asked.
Unbelief has certainly proved the destruction of very many, I mean the
eternal destruction; and Presumption has been the slaughter of not a few; and,
if I judge not amiss, Presumption is oftentimes the root upon which Unbelief
grows: Many sitting under the Gospel of Christ, and having some Form and
Profession for God upon them, do run away hastily, concluding they are really
of Gods Israel; God Almighty give to you and me a greater Spirit of Wisdom,
that we may not upon slight grounds draw conclusisions that we are within the
Covenant, but may build our hope upon some good Foundation. My Friends, it
stands you greatly in hand to be faithful and serious in this enquiry into your
Spirits in this matter; for if you should not be of the Israel of God, it would
not only rob you of much mercy you might enjoy in this life, it would not
only strip you of a part in the good that shall come to the Israel of God when
the Branch of the Lord shall be glorious, but what is more and what is worse,
it will cut you short of the glory that shall be put upon the head of the
Saints in Eternity, when Christ shall have given up the Kingdom to his Father,
and God shall be all in all. Brethren, upon many serious thoughts I may tell
you, that there is great ground why every Soul should be jealous over his own
heart, and should not hastily determine concerning its state: Great are the
mistakes, false grounds, and bottoms of hope upon which many poor creatures
build; and it concerns you to act curiously and warily, lest you should be also
mistaken.

To quicken you a little, and to possess your Souls that there is need, and
great need, for poor hearts to have a jealousy over themselves in this matter;
I would take leave to commend and open to you two Scriptures that I find in the
Book of Truth: one is in Romans 9.6, 7. Not as though the Word of God has taken
no effect; for they are not all Israel which are of Israel, neither because
they are the seed of Abraham are they all Children: Look to the fourth verse.
and you will find that there are great Privileges reckoned up that did
appertain to Israel; Who are Israel, to whom pertains the Adoption, and the
Glory, and the Covenant, and the giving of the Law, and the Service of God, and
the Promises. How, might some of the Jews say, do these things belong unto
Israel? why surely Israel are cut short of them; for there is not one of many
of them that have received Christ, and so are cut short of these Privileges of
the Gospel. To that the Apostle answers, verse. 6, 7. Not as though the Word
of God has taken no effect; for they are not all Israel which are of Israel,
etc. as if he should say, You must not judge that these great things are
entailed upon the Jewish People because they are Jews, or the seed of Abraham,
but it is through Faith they come to an Interest in these great things. And in
these words the Apostle does remove a double bad Foundation upon which many
poor Creatures are apt to build a hope.

1. They are not Israel because of Israel: that is, a Soul is not an Israelite
indeed because he crowds himself in among that number, because he takes up the
same Profession with them, and pretends to be in the same Spirit with them. Let
it be minded, what is the Foundation of your Hope, think you? you are not
therefore Israel, because of Israel, because of them that do profess for God,
that will not be a foundation that is fit for you to build upon. And then,

2. Neither are they Israel because they are the Seed of Abraham: This was a
mighty thing which the Jewish People boasted of; say they, We are Abraham's
natural Seed, his Seed according to the flesh: And possibly some also may
reckon upon some such thing at this day; we are the Children of them that do
believe, and our education has been somewhat suitable thereto; but not
therefore Israel, because of Abraham's Seed, that is a mistake you should be
watchful against. From the consideration of this word, it is evident People may
reckon themselves Israel upon unsafe grounds, and therefore we ought to be
serious in our enquiry into this matter.

The other Scripture is in Isa. 48. where you have the preceding things, and
somewhat more expressed, verse. 1, 2. Hear ye this, O House of Jacob, which are
called by the Name of Israel, and are come forth out of the Waters of Judah,
which swear by the Name of the Lord, and make mention of the God of Israel, but
not in truth, nor in righteousness; for they call themselves of the Holy City,
and stay themselves upon the God of Israel, the Lord of Hosts is his name. It
is a Scripture worth your considering; and it does in the general teach us thus
much; That a People may be many things, and may do many things that do
seemingly bespeak them to be of the Israel of God, but when the matter is more
thoroughly enquired into, it will be found it is no such thing. Take a few
particulars out of the Text, and observe what persons may be and do, and yet
really not be the Israel of God.

1. They may be called by the name of Israel, they may be reputed Saints, pass
for somewhat in the esteem and account of others; suitable to which is that
Scripture which you have, Rev. 3.1. where the Spirit of God testifies
concerning the Church of Sardis, that they had a name to live, but yet were
dead: In the opinion of those that did converse with them, and that held
communion with them, they were indeed alive; but when the Spirit of God came to
pass a sentence on them, and to determine really what their state was, says the
holy Ghost, Thou art dead.

2. Observe also that they were the Posterity of Jacob; Hear ye, O House of
Jacob, that are come forth out of the Waters of Judah: that is, you are some of
the multitude of Judah's Offspring; they were the seed of them that were in
Covenant, but yet notwithstanding many of them were Strangers to the Lord, and
not of Israel unto this day. I beseech you mind it, that Grace is not certainly
and infallibly intailed upon every one of the Seed of Believers; although it is
very frequently seen that some or other of their Seed the Lord is pleased to
choose to himself, and does set them apart to be the Instruments of his praise,
according to Isa. 61.9. And their Seed shall be known among the Gentiles, and
their Offspring among the People; all that see them shall acknowledge them,
that they are the Seed which the Lord has blessed: not only the Seed of them
which the Lord has blessed, but a Seed which are themselves blessed in their
own persons: It is the usual method of the Lord, though he may pass by some,
yet he does take some other of the Seed, to bring them near to himself. But
this I must let you know, you must no further make reckoning of the interest of
Parents in the Covenant, but as a ground of Hope to you, and an argument to
plead with God; you must not thence conclude, that you your selves are in the
Bond of the Covenant, till some work be upon your hearts.

3. They made a profession for God, and therefore are said to swear by the Name
of the Lord. Swearing by the Name of the Lord is an act of Worship, a professed
owning of God, which shall be done by Saints, when they are found in the best
Spirit, witness that word, Isa. 65.16. He that blesses himself in the Earth
shall bless himself in the God of truth; and he that swears in the Earth
shall swear by the God of Truth; because the former troubles are forgotten, and
are hid from thine eyes. It is spoken about times in which a great deal of
mercy and good will be brought forth, and then there shall be swearing by the
Name of the Lord; it is a professed owning of God: and thus did this People do,
and yet there was nothing of God in them, nothing of Truth, nothing but
hypocrisy and deceit bound up in their Spirits.

4. Observe also they did reckon themselves of Israel, they were right in their
own opinion and esteem; they called themselve the Holy City: It is a marvelous
easy thing for a Soul to get a good opinion of himself, to stand right in his
own apprehensions; but I would not have you build too much upon this. It is an
excellent caution which the Apostle gives, Romans 12.3. For I say, through the
grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself
more highly then he ought to think but to think soberly, according as God has
dealt to every man the measure of Faith: I say unto every man among YOU, (he
speaks unto Professors) be not too hasty and forward to conclude well
concerning your selves, but let every man judge himself to be no more, then
according to the measure of Grace he has received. My Friends, be your
Profession what it will, and your approbation among others what it can, you are
really no more, nor will you stand for more in the day of Christ, then
according as there shall be somewhat of God found upon your Souls.

5. Observe also they had much confidence that God would own them, and
therefore it is said, They stayed themselves upon the God of Israel; they
profess that they do act Faith on God, and are full of confidence that they
shall be owned of God, and not rejected by him. But after all this, see what a
character the Spirit of God gives of this People, v. 4. Because I knew that
thou art obstinate, and thy Neck is an Iron sinew, and thy Brow Brass: a People
very wretched and wicked, very rebellious against God, not in the least
subjecting themselves to God, and to his mind, after all the profession they
have made, and their pretense to be Israel. Seriously consider these things,
and tell me if there be not cause that each Soul of us should fear, lest we be
found short of that number.

But you will say, How may I gather some comfortable grounded conclusions that
I am one of the Israel of God? I am an Escaped One this day, and would not be
willing that I should be stripped of the blessing of this Blessing, I would have
the Mercy in mercy; and therefore how may I come to some comfortable hope, that
I really am a Jew inwardly, and partake of the circumcision that is of the
Heart, whose praise is not of man, but of God?

I answer in a few things, the Lord make them really effectual upon your Souls.

1. If thou art one of Israel, thou art one of another Spirit then the men of
this world; the Israel of God they are a distinct People, separate from the
rest of the Earth, and separated in their Spirits eminently, in another Spirit
then the men of this world be. What is said concerning Caleb, Numb. 14.24. is
truly applicable to every one of Israel in some measure; But my Servant Caleb,
because he had ANOTHER SPIRIT with him, and has followed me fully, etc. There
were abundance of Israelites in the Camp at that day, but few of them were in
the frames they should be in; Caleb was of another Spirit, and such is every
Saint: The Searcher of all hearts knows that there is a difference between him
and the world: Not a Saint in the world, but has some ground to make an appeal
to God, as sometimes the Psalmist does, Search me and try me, and know my
thoughts; and to appeal to the Lord, as sometimes Jeremiah did, Thou know my
heart toward thee, O Lord. Isaac had been begging Seed for his Rebecca,
because she had been long barren; at length it is said, There was struggling in
her Womb; she wondered what it should mean; but see what answer the Spirit of
God makes her, Genesis 25.22, 23. And the Lord said, Two Nations are in thy Womb,
and two manner of People shall be separated from thy Bowels; and the one People
shall be stronger then the other People, and the Elder shall serve the Younger:
The two manner of People, were Jacob and Esau; and I bring this, to tell you,
that Jacob, who was after named Israel, and so all in the same Spirit with him,
they are another manner of People, as it were another Nation, another thing
then the men of this world are; there is an eminent difference and distinction
between Esau and Israel, they are of different Spirits, and of a different
language, as several Nations differing one from another. 1 Cor. 2.12. The
Apostle tells us, We have not received the Spirit of the World, but the Spirit
which is of God: This he speaks concerning the Saints of God, they have
received not the Spirit of the World, but another Spirit distinct and different
from them. Brethren, I would put it to your Consciences, and would ask you what
the answer of your Souls is? What ground have you to conclude that there is
another Spirit in you then that which is in the World? It may be your practices
are somewhat other then the practices of the World are; but grant it be so, yet
if you are not in another Spirit also, if the inward frame and constitution of
your Souls do not differ, you will not be found among the Israel of God in the
conclusion. Ah my Friends! possibly some of your Practices may not vary from
the men of the World, possibly you can be vain with them that are vain, and
profane with them that are profane; if it be thus with you, you must reckon
your selves to be of the brood of Esau to this day. Observe the words of the
Apostle, Romans 12.2. And be not conformed to this World, but be ye transformed
by the renewing of your minds. What say you? Are you conformed to this World?
Do you drive the trade, and take the course that the men of this World do? Are
you vain, and frothy, and foolish, giving up your selves to serve diverse lusts?
Youth is subject to be so, and if it be thus with you, you are not of Israel to
this day: But if you say, We are not of this World, we do not act as they do,
we do not live as they do; then let me ask you, Are you transformed? It is well
not to be conformed to this World, but that is not enough, you must be
transformed, and your Spirits renewed; you must be of another Spirit then the
men of this World. I would beseech you to look well to your hearts, and commune
with your Souls, and do it not slightly: I know many (and would wail over them)
that notwithstanding their profession for God, and their talking much of him,
and being high in an external owning of God, yet in their walking (and
therefore sure much more in their spirits) they vary little from the men of
this World: If it be thus with you, though you are escaped this day, yet you
cannot comfortably conclude you are of the Israel of God, or that you shall
bear a part in that mercy and good they shall enjoy, when the Branch of the
Lord shall be glorious.

2. Are you Israel indeed? then there is somewhat of Heart-cleanness in you;
there is somewhat of cleanness of Heart, and purity of Soul in you. Thus the
Psalmist describes the Israel of God, Psalm. 73.1. Truly God is good to Israel,
even to them that are of a clean Heart: God is good to Israel, he loves them,
they are exceeding dear to him, and because they are dear to him, therefore it
is he is good to them: But who are the Israel? They are a certain sort of
People that do not only put on an external garb of Holiness, a pretense for
God, and his work, and service, and glory; but a People that have some inward
conformity and likeness to God; who have some cleanness of heart, as well as of
hands and face. Man by nature is a very impure creature, polluted grievously,
defiled all over, all the Soul, all the Powers and Faculties of it are stained
and grievously polluted, and therefore Sinners are in Scripture called the
Impure; and Saints, by way of distinction from them, are called Pure. A sad
account it is that the Apostle gives of Sinners, Tit. 1.15. To the pure all
things are pure, but to the undefiled and unbelieving is nothing pure, and
their very consciences are defiled. Jesus Christ describing the persons that
shall see God to their comfort and joy, he calls them the pure in heart, Mat.
5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God. Many there are that
would pretend to this purity, but it is peculiar and proper to the Israel of
God only, it is the issue and fruit of a new work upon the heart; it is the
blessed effect of the Grace of God in and through the Covenant of Grace, the
making good of the Promise which he has passed, Ezekiel. 36.25, 26. Then will I
sprinkle clean water upon you, and you shall be clean; from all your
filthiness, and from all your Idols will I cleanse you; a new Heart also will I
give you, and a new Spirit will I put within you; and I will take away the
stony heart out of your flesh, and I will give you a Heart of flesh.

There are them who are really impure, and grievously polluted, and yet think
all is well with them, witness that known word, Prove. 14.12, 13. There is a
Generation that is pure in their own eyes, and yet is not washed from their
filthiness: There is a Generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their
eyelids are lifted up. There are some Souls greatly confident of their own
purity, and yet defiled woefully: While they boast of their freedom, and brag of
their purity, and are crying to others it may be, Stand by thy self, for I am
holier then thou; they become after this Servants to Corruption.

Others there are in whom a cleansing-work is really begun, but because there
are some remains of corruption in their Souls, it fills their hearts so much
with grief, and blinds their eyes so much, that they cannot see the cleansing
that is begun. To clear this therefore I must tell you, That where there is
really heart-purity, there is much of the love of purity: If thou have not
attained what of it thou would, yet thy heart is really in love with it:
Prove. 22.11. He that loves pureness of Heart, for the grace of his Lips the
King shall be his Friend. There are a People it may be have not attained to
that pureness of heart they would do, but yet pureness of heart they love, and
Grace is poured into their Lips; to such the King will be a Friend, they shall
find a Friend of Christ, and he will not be ashamed to own them in the day of
his greatest Glory, when the Crown shall be set upon his Head. Not a Soul in
whom purity is, but he is pressing after it in greater measure; though he has
not attained it, yet he does not sit down and cry, There is no hope for me; but
he is going forward, and pressing after more of the Image of God to be
implanted in his Soul. Now what is the answer of your Hearts? Can you from
hence conclude comfortably, you are some of Gods Israel? Are the lusts that
boil up in your hearts, fomented and cherished, favored and allowed, served
and pleased? If so, it is sad with you: If you lie in the bosom of any Lust, as
in the lap of a Delilah: if thou say of any sin in thy Soul, as sometimes
Lot said concerning his Zoar, I cannot escape to the Mountains, but there is a
City near, is it not a little one? let me flee thither, and I shall live: All
the Cities of the Plain were doomed to destruction at that day, but Lot was
earnest to prevail for the saving of one little City, that he might delight
himself in it. There is not a lust in thy Soul but it is doomed to destruction,
and God requires it should be put to death; but possibly thou say of it, O
spare it, it is a little one. Let me be faithful to thee, and tell thee, that
that sin will be enough to race out thy name out of the Catalogue of the Israel
of God; and when others will stand with comfort, that have escaped this day,
thou will be ashamed and confounded.

3. Art thou of the Israel of God? Then thou art one that have learned in some
measure to live upon God. As it is the certain property of, so it is a great
excellency in the Israel of God, that they live upon him; and this was as
eminently found in Jacob, as ever in any one of the Servants of the Lord: When
he was going to Padan Aram, not knowing what should befall him; observe how he
speaks, Genesis 28.20. Jacob vowed a Vow, saying, If God will be with me and keep
me in this way that I go, and will give Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on,
etc. The great thing about which he was solicitous, was, that he might have the
presence of God. He had a little before in this Chapter a most glorious Vision
of God; (and I must confess Visions of God are exceeding effectual to teach and
work up the heart to a living upon God) and what does Jacob now say? If he
might have but God to live upon, a very little of other matters should content
him; Bread to eat, somewhat that might support his nature, and Raiment to put
on, enough to cover him, and keep him warm; he does not say, If I may have
Varieties and Dainties to eat, and may be decked in costly Apparel; no, but
only Bread to eat, and Raiment to put on: If I can have but God, a little of
the World will serve my turn. This is the Spirit of Israel, and that with which
I doubt very few are acquainted. I must crave leave to put this to all your
Souls, and ask you what is the answer of your hearts? Can you say upon good
grounds, as the Church of God sometimes said, The Lord is my Portion, says my
Soul? Lam. 3.24. Suppose, should Satan take you, as once he did Christ, and set
you upon a high Mountain, and show you the Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory
of them, and tell you, All these things you shall have, if you will forgo and
part with God? What would the answer of your hearts be in that case? Suppose
Christ should come and say to you, If you will have a part in me, you must
expect trouble; you shall be hated of all men for my Names sake; yea, the
Parents from whose Bowels ye sprang, shall turn against you: Can you say, Amen,
so be it; Let me have the Lord for my Portion, and I can forgo all other things
whatsoever? This is Israel's Spirit, and so far as it ^s thus with you, it is
right. What excellency have you seen in the Lord at any time? How have your
hearts been taken with him? What are the workings of your Souls toward him?
What are you laboring after? Is it that you may know God and enjoy him? What
is it does relieve you in the time of your straights? Is it this, that the Lord
is yours? It was David's comfort when all went against him, when Ziklag was
burnt, his Wives and all were taken, and the People spoke of stoning him, he
then encouraged himself in the Lord his God. What is it that sweetens all your
enjoyments to you? Is it this, That you have a part in that which is better
then all these, that you have a part in the Lord, and he is become your God and
Father in Christ? Happy, yea, thrice happy are you that can say as once David
did, The Lord has made with me an everlasting Covenant, ordered in all things,
and sure; and this is my Salvation, and this is all my Joy. But O unhappy they,
who are not able to subsist without their Thousands, and look upon themselves
as undone for ever, if worldly Interest runs but a little against them: And
unhappy you, if in your Youth and Strength you have few thoughts, or few
serious thoughts of God; if he be little in your thoughts and hearts, I tell
you it is to be feared you are not of the Israel of God unto this day: Though
you escape and are preserved, yet it is to be feared your preservation will not
be attended with mercy to you, nor shall you bear a part in that Glory that
shall be upon the heads of Israel, when the Branch of the Lord shall be
glorious.

4. If you are the Israel of God, then are you Holiness to the Lord; you not
only live upon him, but to him, in some measure. Jer. 2.9. the Prophet says,
Israel was Holiness to the Lord; that is, when Israel was in his right spirit,
then he was Holiness to the Lord. For the expression, you have it in Scripture
elsewhere, Zech. 14.20, 21. In that day there shall be upon the Bells of the
Horses, HOLINESS UNTO THE LORD, and the Pots in the Lords House shall be like
the Bowls before the Altar; yea, every Pot in Jerusalem and in Judah shall be
Holiness unto the Lord of Hosts: that is, every Person and every Thing shall be
for God, for his Work and Service, to be to his Praise and Glory. Certain it
is, Saints are not their own, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 6.19. Ye are not
your own, ye are bought with a price; and so Tit. 2.13, 14. where speaking
concerning the purchase of Christ, Looking for the blessed hope and glorious
appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and might purify to himself a
peculiar People zealous of good Works. The Vessels of the Temple, before they
were made use of in the Temple, they had a legal consecrating, and being
cleansed, they were given up to the work of the Temple, to be for that use for
ever: And so the Saints of the Lord, who were typified by the Vessels of the
Temple, they are first purified, cleansed, and sanctified by Christ, by the
work of the Spirit on their Souls, and then given up to the Lord and his
service. It may be said of them as Hannah said of her Son Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.28.
Therefore I have lent him unto the Lord, to be his so long as he lives. Every
Israelite indeed is one lent to the Lord, given up to be for the work and
service of the Lord in his whole course, and in every thing to exalt his
praise, to mind his glory. Certainly thus it ought to be, and this was one end
of the Death of Christ, that he might have his People be for him, 2 Cor. 5.15.
He died and rose, that they which live should not henceforth live to
themselves, but to him that died for them and rose again; and unto this Spirit
Saints are wrought up in some good measure, as is expressed, Romans 14.7. And
none of us, says the Apostle, live to our selves. Souls, what say your Hearts
to this matter? You profess for the Lord, but are you for him as consecrated
things in the House of God? Which way do your Hearts work day by day? This
know, where there has not been a solemn resignation and giving up a man's self
unto the Lord, where there is not a diligent observing of a man's whole course,
to see to what ends they are directed, and whether the glory of Christ be
therein sought, it is doubtful that Soul is not of the Israel of God to this
day. The truth is, the sins of many witness to their Faces, and I make no doubt
but that inscription may be written over the doors of many Professors, upon too
great ground, All men seek their own, and not the things of Jesus Christ: If
this be the spirit of any to whom these things may come, you may fear (though
you are spared, and are not cut down this day) you stand but to cumber the
ground, such as God takes little delight in, and such as from whom he has
little fruit, such as he does not reckon among the number of his Israel, and
such as shall not be blessed with Isreal's mercies, when the Branch of the Lord
shall be exalted.

5. Are you Israel? then are you a praying People; Israel had thence his Name,
from his wrestling and prevailing with God; God asked him what was his Name,
Genesis 32.27, 28. he said, Jacob; and God said, Thy Name shall no more be called
Jacob, but Israel; for as a Prince have thou power with God and with men, and
have prevailed. In his praying there is observable his importunity, and that is
expressed partly when it is said he wrestled; and also in that expression
wherein much freedom and familiarity with God is set forth; God said, Let me
go; says Jacob, I will not let thee go, except thou bless me, v. 26. which
importunity of his is again noted by the Spirit of God, Hos. 12.4. He had power
over the Angel, he wept and he made supplication. There is also observable,
that this Prayer it was in secret, Genesis 32.24. And Jacob was left ALONE; it was
between the Lord and himself in secret: which I would beseech you to consider
heartily, That as soon, yea, at the very first moment when a Soul is enrolled
among the number of Israel, at that instant he becomes a praying Person, as in
the case of Saul, who was afterward called Paul. And let me ask you that attend
on the Lord in public Duties, what are you in secret? Does God usually there
hear from you? Cannot you live without seeing the face of God in secret? Let me
tell you, public Duties have many temptations; a man may desire to be engaged
in them from many base and bad ends; yea, it is possible natural Conscience and
your Education may carry you into corners sometimes: but therefore in secret
how do you carry it? Does it satisfy you that you have been in your Closets,
and have spent it may be a quarter of an hour there, and it may be with a
slight and formal Spirit? This is not the Spirit of Israel: But if thou art an
Israelite indeed, when thou art in secret thou will be fervent and earnest with
God. In public Duties, a man may seem to be zealous, that he may get a Name,
or keep up a Name that he has gotten, or to some suchlike end; but when in
secret the Soul cries mightily to the Lord, it is a good sign that there is a
sense of want, and that it does arise from a Spirit of Grace in the Soul, when
thou can in secret sign and mourn before the Lord.

Now these things I have gone over with this design, to see if I could let you
into a little Hope and good Ground, that as you have escaped, so you are
escaping Israelites, who shall partake of Glory when Christ, the Branch of the
Lord, shall be made glorious: And the Lord help you to be faithful to your
Souls, and make you Israelites indeed, in whom is no guile.

USE II.
THis will lead me to a Second Use: If it be thus, that the Glory that shall
come to Christ shall be for the good of escaping- Israel: Then methinks you
should say, Pray what will come to them that are not Israel, though they do
escape?

Ah woe to them! Dread and Terror will be their portion. I tell you Souls, if
any of you that are Escaping Ones this day, are not of the Israel of God, there
is dread enough behind to make your hearts tremble, though you have outlived
the present calamity. I confess I cannot well tell you what the dread of your
Condition is; for the Spirit of God says, Job 31.3. Is not destruction to the
Wicked, and a strange punishment to the Workers of iniquity? The Spirit of God
seems to say there should fall upon the heads of the Ungodly things that shall
be strange in their very nature, things unthought of. Let me tell you, though
you are among the number of professing Ones, and among them that are Israel,
yet if thou art not an Israelite indeed, the hand of God will find thee out.
Jer. 50. when Babylons plagues are threatened, it is said, verse. 35. A Sword is
upon the Caldeans, says the Lord; and then it is added, verse. 37. A Sword is
upon their Horses and Chariots, and upon all the mingled People that are in the
midst of her. It is said upon the Children of Israel's going out of Egypt, that
there went with them a mixed multitude, there crowded among them some that were
not the Israel of God: Indeed I suppose it is such a kind of People the Spirit
of God here speaks of. Possibly thou art mixed among Professors, but thy heart
is not right with God; God will find thee out, and his hand will deal with
thee. What was falsely surmised of Paul, when he had escaped the Shipwreck, and
was come among the Barbarians, it is said, A Viper came and fastened upon his
hand; and say they, No doubt this man is a Murderer, whom, though he has
escaped the Sea, yet Vengeance suffers not to live: What the Barbarians
falsely surmised, may be true concerning any of you; though you have escaped the
slaughter of this day, the hand of God may find you out notwithstanding.

A few things, and but a few things, to show you what the misery of those is
like to be, who are not the Israel of God indeed, though escaped for the
present.

1. Christ in the day of his Glory will cut them down, tread them down without
number: The expressions of Scripture in this case must not be judged of
according unto some of the Laws in our Land, which they say are made (in
terrorem) only to affright men, and it is not intended that the severity of
them shall be inflicted on them; but whatsoever God has said concerning
Sinners, shall be certainly executed: Isa. 63.3. I will tread down the People
in my anger, and trample them in my fury; and the same you have again, verse. 6.
This is like to be the portion of those that are escaped, and are not the
Israel of God. The Book of Joel is a Prophecy relating to that time when Christ
shall be glorious, verse. 14. Multitudes in the Valley of Decision, for the Day
of the Lord is near in the Valley of Decision: The day of the Lords Glory, it
will be a slaughtering-day, and multitudes shall fall; and they are said to
fall in the Valley of Decision, because at that time the Controversy shall be
decided that has depended so long, Who are the Lords People, and who are for
him, and who are owned of him indeed and in truth. You read of Christ, Rev.
14.14. And I looked, and behold a white Cloud, and upon the Cloud one sat like
unto the Son of Man, having on his head a golden Crown, and in his hand a sharp
Sickle: Christ when he shall come to wear his golden Crown, he comes with a
Sickle in his hand: Christ is reaping by every Judgment and Slaughter he
makes, and possibly you may outlive some Slaughters; but look on further,
verse. 17, 18, etc. And another Angel came out of the Temple which is in Heaven,
he also having a sharp Sickle; and another Angel came out from the Altar, which
had power over fire, and cried with a loud cry to him that had a sharp Sickle,
saying, Thrust in thy sharp Sickle, and gather the Clusters of the Vine of the
Earth, for her Grapes are fully ripe; and the Angel thrust in his Sickle into
the Earth, and gathered the Vine of the Earth, and cast it into the great
Wine Press of the Wrath of God; and the Wine Press was trodden without the
City, and Blood came out of the Wine Press, even unto the Horses Bridles, by
the space of one thousand and six hundred furlongs. The intendment of this
Scripture is to tell you what the dread of Earthly People shall be, they shall
be cut down, and trodden down, and Blood shall come forth, even to the Horses
Bridles.

2. In the day of Christ's Glory, they that are not Israel, though they now
escape, shall be cut down without respect of Sex or Age, without respect of
greatness or contempt in the World; it is evident from the Word: In Isa. 13.17,
18. you have a Prophecy concerning Babylon of old, which is applicable to
Babylon still; Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them, which shall not
regard Silver, and as for Gold they shall not delight in it; their Bows also
shall dash the young men to pieces, and they shall have no pity on the fruit of
the Womb, their eye shall not spare Children: It does intimate to us at what
rate Christ will act, when he comes out against them that are none of his; he
will neither spare nor pity, have no respect to young or old, nor shall man's
being high or low be ought of defense or security to him, The day of the Lord
shall be upon the Cedars of Lebanon, and upon the Oaks of Bashan, and upon all
the high Mountains: the Great Ones of the World shall feel the dread of that
stroke.

3. Distress shall attend them within and without, Job 15.20, 21. The Wicked
travelleth with pain all his days, and a dreadful sound is in his Ears; the
dreadful sound is the pangs of their own Consciences, being filled with terror.
And this shall be the portion of the World, they shall be filled with dreadful
sounds, terrors within; and also miseries shall compass them about in every
thing, and in every way: Isa. 19. it is said concerning Egypt, They shall err
in every work, and stagger as a drunken man.

4. Miseries shall be recompensed upon them suitable to the violence done to
the Saints, the dishonor brought to God, and the abusing of all the patience
and forbearance of Christ toward them; three sad scores that shall be reckoned
for in the day of Christ. Those that are not Israel, though they escape for a
time, they shall be dealt withal according to the violence done to the Saints
of God: The violence done to me and to my Flesh, be upon Babylon, shall the
Inhabitants of Zion say. Isa. 51.22, 23. I have taken the cup of trembling out
of thy hand (that is, out of Zions hand) even the dregs of the cup of my fury,
thou shall no more drink it again; but I will put it into the hand of them that
afflict thee, which have said to thy Soul, Bow down, that we may go over; and
thou have laid thy Body as the ground, and as the street to them that went
over. They shall suffer too according to the contempt of the Gospel, and the
dishonor done to Christ that way; for he shall come to deal with all them that
do not know him, and obey not the Gospel; and also according to the sin of
despising the forbearance of Christ. Indeed this day you are escaped, and the
patience of Christ is exercised toward you, but let me tell you, if you stand
and abide in your sinful state, you shall find that the abusing of the patience
of Christ, is but treasuring up wrath against the day of wrath.

5. Those that have escaped, and not Israel, they shall be compassed about with
eternal Sorrows, and shall never rise out of them. Says the Church, Though I
fall, I shall arise again; and though I sit in darkness, yet the Lord shall be
a light to me: Then shall she be confounded (that is, the Enemies of the
Church) shame shall cover her. That will be the portion of every sinner; though
he may escape for a season, shame shall cover him, misery and distress shall
abide him for ever.

USE III.
HAving dispatched the Second, I come now to a Third Use, (which the former
Uses necessarily lead unto.) It is a little to encourage the hearts of poor
Sinners, that possibly may be full of thoughts and desires, that they might yet
be brought into the number of Israel: Methinks I do even hear some poor heart
say, If it be so well with them that are Gods Israel, and so ill with them that
are not Gods Israel; What is there no hope for me, though I am yet none of that
number? Must I for ever stay in that state of misery in which I am? Must an
eternal doom of Misery be entaild upon me? I acknowledge my state is exceeding
desperate and sad; but is there no hope in Israel concerning this matter?

To that I answer:

If there be any poor sinner sensible of the misery of his condition, that
would gladly make an escape out of it; Soul, be not discouraged, thy condition
is not hopeless; but be encouraged, for there is a possibility that as thou
have escaped the dread and misery of this present day, so thou may be
delivered from that Christless state wherein thou art. There are two Scriptures
I would commend to you for this purpose; the first is in Isa. 44.5. One shall
say, I am the Lords: and another shall call himself by the Name of Jacob: and
another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the
Name of Israel. The words are both a Prophecy and a Promise, and they do
respect the Gentile-World, that were at that time, and long after, in their
sins, in their state of estrangement from God; here it is prophesied that yet
there should be a flocking into Israel, the number of Gods Israel should be
greatly augmented and increased: It is promised that God would so prevail upon
the hearts of some poor Sinners that they shall come and say, I am the Lords:
and shall come and subscribe their hands to the Lord, and shall surname
themselves by the Name of Israel: that God would conquer them so far that they
should see the need they had to be of that number, that they shall resign and
give up themselves to be of the Israel of God. This is an encouraging word to
the Sinner; there is a possibility for them that were strangers to come and to
name themselves by the Name of Jacob, and subscribing to the Lord, to take up
that Name, and so partake of the Privileges of the Israel of God.

Take another Scripture: Isa. 19.24, 25. In that day shall Israel be the third
with Egypt and with Assyria, even a Blessing in the midst of the Land; whom the
Lord of Hosts shall bless, saying, Blessed be Egypt my People, and Assyria the
Work of my hands, and Israel my Inheritance. The import of the words is this,
Egypt and Assyria were some of the Enemies of God and his People, at a very
great distance from him; but here is a Promise that they should come to be
conquered, and brought into subjection to the Lord, and to be baptized into the
Spirit of Israel, to be blessed with the Blessing of Israel, they shall speak
the Language of Canaan, they shall be of one Heart and one Lip with the Lords
People. Souls, were you as Egypt, and were you as the Assyrians, Enemies to God
and his People; were you at the greatest distance from God that could be
supposed; Egypt had neither Ordinances nor Privileges, nor ought else that
good was, more then the creatures of the Earth, and suchlike things; yet the
Lord intimates here to us, that they shall come to share in and divide a
Blessing with Israel. If thy estate were as one of them, yet may thou, as
and according to the promise made to them, be brought into the number that
shall share in the Blessing of the Israel of God: Therefore Soul, though now
thou art not of Israel, yet it may be said to thee, They have obtained Mercy
which had not obtained. This is the kindness of God, that he is pleased to make
blessed overtures of Mercy unto poor, vile, and unworthy Sinners. But more then
this, for the encouragement of any Soul that may yet be in his Sins, I would
speak four or five things: Thy condition is not desperate, but thou may be
brought into the number of the Israel of God, and so partake of the same Mercy
with them in thy escaping this day, if thou do consider,

1. That Gods Israel came to be the People of God by choice, and through the
Grace and Goodness of God: Israel were not born the People of God: He chose
Abraham and his Seed from the rest of the World, to be a peculiar People to
himself. Hence it is that Israel oftentimes are called in Scripture, Israel my
CHOSEN: so Psalm. 105.4. The Lord has CHOSEN Jacob for himself, and Israel to
be his peculiar Treasure: and in Isa. 44.1. Israel is called there the Chosen
of the Lord; Yet now hear, O Jacob my Servant, and Israel whom I have CHOSEN:
They were chosen merely from the good pleasure of God. Choice it is a free Act,
in which there is no necessity and constraint; so it was in God a free Act to
pitch upon Israel, to make them his People: This account the Lord gives of it,
Deuteronomy. 4.37. And because he loved thy Fathers, therefore he CHOSE their Seed
after them, and brought thee out in his sight with mighty power: so Deuteronomy. 7.7.
The Lord did not set his love upon you, nor CHVSE you, because you were more in
number then any People, for ye were the fewest of all People; but because the
Lord loved you, etc. At first God did out of his mere accord choose Abraham and
his Seed, and having in love chosen them, he continues his kindness and
goodness to them, that he might keep his Covenant and his Mercy that he
promised to Abraham. Poor Soul, this I would now say to thee: Israel was found
out by the Lords Grace, and that Grace may also fix upon thee: It was not any
thing that was in Israel, but merely the good pleasure of God that chose them
to be his People, and the same Grace of God may choose thee, and plant thee
among his People, and give thee with them a pleasant portion.

2. When God first chose Israel, he found them in as wretched and sad a
condition as thine can be; thy case cannot be worse then the case of Israel was
when the Love and Grace of God fixed upon them: Ezekiel. 16.1. Thus says the Lord
to Jerusalem, Thy Birth and thy Nativity is of the Land of Canaan; thy Father
was an Amorite and thy Mother a Hittite. Canaan were a People originally
without the knowledge of God, in their enmity against God: This, says God, was
Israel when first I found them; without the knowledge of God, and at as great a
distance from God as persons could be: Let the Devil say the worst against thee
that he can, he can but say thou art by nature at enmity with God, filled with
all the Principles of Sin, and so was Israel as well as thou: and that Grace
that yet pitied Israel in this his low estate, can also reach thy Soul.

3. Israel when first God did him good was in as hopeless and helpless a
condition as thine can be: So he goes on, Ezekiel. 16. And as for thy Nativity, in
the day thou wast born, thy Navel was not cut, neither wast thou washed in
water to supple thee; thou wast not salted at all, nor swadled at all, none Eye
pitied thee to do any of these unto thee, to have compassion upon thee, but
thou wast cast out in the open field to the loathing of thy person in the day
that thou wast born. What is more helpless and shiftless then an Infant just
taken from the Womb, not able to do its self the least service? This was
Israel's condition when the Lord first found them, not in a capacity of moving
one step out of that wretched, sinful, corrupt, and rebellious state. And truly
to this day the Israel of God in themselves considered, are altogether unable
to act for God and his Glory, but as they are assisted with power from on high.
Isa. 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, In the Lord have I Righteousness and
Strength: even to him shall men come, and all that are incensed against him
shall be ashamed. In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified, and
shall glory. Israel in their best state cannot glory in themselves, nor in any
strength of their own, but must look upon themselves as weak Creatures, only
as they are strengthened by the Lord unto any good Word and Work. Soul, this I
would say, Thou can but be a shiftless, helpless Creature, unable to move a
foot forward, or to further thy own Everlasting Concernments in the least; and
this is to be in no worse state then God found his own People in, and that
Grace by which they were brought near to God, can and may also work for the
good of thy Soul.

4. Consider further, That the very same Promises of Mercy are made unto poor
sinners to this day; Promises of a part in those very good things which Israel
is possessed of. All the blessings of the Covenant are freely offered and
tendered to Sinners to this hour: Hence are all the gracious Promises made to
the Gentiles up and down the Word of Truth, of which you have more then a few.
The first of which (as I suppose) is in Genesis 9.27. God shall enlarge Japheth,
and he shall dwell in the Tents of Shem, and Canaan shall be his Servant: This
is the first Promise ever made to the Gentiles, and some render the word (Deus
alliciet Japhethum) God shall allure or persuade Japheth, and he shall dwell in
the Tents of Shem: Japheth is put for the Gentile-World; for by him the Isles
of the Gentiles were inhabited, Genesis 10.2. and 5. compared. You shall find if
you look in Luke 3.36. and downward, Christ was of the Race of Shem; and the
import of the Promise is this, When God says he will persuaded Japheth to dwell
in the Tents of Shem; he means he will overcome the hearts of the Sinners among
the Gentiles, to come to an amity and friendship with Jesus Christ; as
co-habitation denotes amity, and it is a word full of Grace and Favor as it
can hold. But more plain and full is that word, Gal. 3.13, 14. Christ has
redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, for it is
written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree; that the Blessing of
Abraham might come on the Gentiles through Jesus Christ. It was the design both
of the Father and the Son, that all the Blessings of the death of Christ should
reach unto the Sinners among the Gentiles, that what ever Blessing was promised
first to Abraham, and unto his Seed, the same Blessing also should be made over
and given in to every poor sinner among the Gentiles, that shall come and
submit themselves unto the Lord Jesus. Well then, Is not this greatly for thy
comfort? If thou say, I am not Israel; yet here is room and way made for
thee: It is the intendment both of Father and Son to let in thy Soul into all
the Blessings and Mercies promised unto the Israel of God.

5. Consider this also, poor Sinner, if thou art yet in thy sin and
estrangement from God, That it is the real design and intendment of God, both
in the Judgment that thou have seen, and the Escape thou have had in and under
these Calamities, to bring thee among the number of his own People. What is the
design of God in all his Controversies with the World? It is to bring them to
kiss the Son: the great Controversy is, That People will not take the Yoke of
Christ upon them; and therefore sometimes he drives, sometimes he draws, and
all means he uses, that he may overcome the hearts of poor Sinners: See the
goodness he shows, the mercy he follows them with, in sparing and preserving
them, it is to this great end, That his goodness might lead them to repentance,
and to a real subjection to the Lord Jesus. Therefore Soul, though thou have
stood long in ways of Rebellion against Christ, yet the Blessings of Israel
stand open for thee, and the Door of Grace is wide open; be confident if thou
do enter in, close with, and accept of Grace, it will be as well with thee as
with any of the Israel of God. Consider thy hearty closing with Christ will not
only let thee into Mercy and Blessing of the present Day, but it will let thee
into Blessings of all kinds; it will bring a Blessing upon thee in every Work
and Way; it will let thee into a part and share in the highest Privileges that
the Children of Men are capable of: it will let thee into Sonship and
Friendship with the great and holy God: it will make thee blessed for Time and
for Eternity. Therefore fight not against thy own Mercies; mind really and
heartily what freeness and heartiness there is in the great God, in setting
before sinners all the Grace of the Covenant, and what gladness it does produce
when poor Souls are willing to kiss the Son; it will not only produce Joy in
thy own Soul, it will not only make glad the hearts of many of thy Relations
and of thy Friends, (for possibly thou have Relations and Friends that long to
see Christ formed in thee, that in every petition at the Throne of Grace their
hearts are working for thy Soul, and begging that thou may be a plant of
Righteousness of the Lords own planting, and nothing would glad them more then
to see thee a Son and Heir of the Kingdom of God) but also there will be Joy in
Heaven; Father, Son, and Spirit are gladded to see the designs of the death of
Christ graciously accomplished upon the hearts of poor sinners. Remember
therefore, I do this day in the Name of Christ invite thee to partake of all
the Mercies which be the Mercies of Gods Israel: And truly the Mercies of
Israel are many; there is Pardon, there is Purging, there is Adoption, Sonship,
there is the Spirit to comfort you, to lead you in every work and way; there be
the Promises made over to them, there is mercy now and for ever; A Kingdom the
Lord has prepared for them that love him: I invite thee to take a part in these
things this day, and forget it not, that thou have had a Call from the Lord at
this time. Soul, I tell thee, if thou do stand it out against this Call of
God, truly though thou art escaped, and thy life is given thee for a prey, yet
thou may possibly be sealed up unto destruction, thou may be left to dye in
thy sins, and to fall for ever under the weight of divine displeasure, for thy
neglect and contempt of Gospel Grace. Be confident as Jesus Christ is now
waiting upon poor Souls, and offering Mercy to poor Sinners; so when he comes
to the glory that is reserved for him, he will be found of power sufficient to
recompense all that have trodden under foot the Blood of the Son of God, and
made light of those overtures of Mercy that have been tendered to them. The
Light is now with thee, and the Lord is calling of thee; therefore make peace
while thou art in the way, lest the Lord come forth against thee in his hot
displeasure.

USE IV.
SOme methinks there are, that are of trembling hearts, and they cry, It is
true, I am escaped, but I fear I am none of the Israel of God. My Use therefore
would be to such as are of trembling spirits: When they consider how good God
has been to them, they may possibly tremble, lest at last they should lose the
Mercy of this Mercy, because they are not found among the Israel of God. Many a
Soul there is possibly cries out, Isreal's Privileges are too great for me to
hope to have a part in them, and Isreal's Spirit is a Spirit more excellent then
ever I have been found in; and therefore though I am escaped this day, yet I
want that which is the best piece of the Mercy of an Escape.

I would answer, Know this, O Soul, that among the Israel of God there are many
that are of fearful Spirits: although they are really among the number of the
Lords precious Ones, they have not an Eye to see it, nor Faith to believe it,
and so may possibly go mourning many days. But what are thy Objections? What
makes thee fear? Do not fear thou know not what, nor why: As we are to give
a reason of our Hope, so I would not have you fear without a reason.

Objection 1.
Methinks the Soul says, Gods Israel are a chosen People, and the Election of
God lies deep, it is a secret locked up in his Bosom, and I fear I have no part
in the Election of God: I fear the eternal thoughts of God did not concern
themselves about such a weak and worthless Worm as I am.

Answer.
It is true, the Election of God is a secret in the heart of God, and secret
things belong unto God; things written and revealed belong to us: It is not for
me or thee to climb Heaven to search Records, and at first dash to turn over
the leaves of the Book of Life, and to see whether we may find our Names
therein written. It is a great mistake upon which many run, that would think to
prove the truth of their being called, by finding out whether they are elected
or no; it is an endless, it is an impossible work. This therefore know is thy
work and mine, to consult what effects of Electing Love we can find upon our
Souls; if any thing of that be in thy heart, thence thou may safely conclude
thou wast in the heart of God from Eternity. There is a Scripture that answers
fully (I think) whatever the Soul can say in this matter, 1 These. 1.4, 5.
Knowing, Brethren, beloved, your Election of God; for our Gospel came not unto
you in word but also in power, and in the holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as
ye know what manner of men we were among you for your sake. Consider whether
the Gospel has had its work upon thy heart, whether it has come with power
upon thy Soul; and if so, others may know, and thou may know from thence
thine Election: Election is an act of God that he passes from Eternity, but
Calling is a work and Fruit of Election upon the Soul of a poor Sinner, by
which it may come to discover that it was in the thoughts of God before the
foundation of the World was laid. If therefore thou can trace the footsteps
of Gods going upon thy Soul, and of his working in a Gospel-way upon thy heart,
thy Soul is safe, and the thoughts of God (thou may conclude) were toward
thee before thou had a being. But

Objection 2.
The Soul objects, I fear God has not been at work upon me: I could conclude
Gods election of me, if I could find a work of the Gospel passed upon my Soul.
I know the work of the Gospel is to cleanse and purify the heart; but sin and
filthiness dwells in me, that I cannot think the Lord has been effectually at
work upon my Soul. That the work of the Gospel is to purify the heart, is
plain from Joh. 17.17. Sanctify them through thy Truth, thy Word is truth: so
1 Pet. 1.22. Seeing ye have purified your hearts in obeying the Truth through
the Spirit, unto unfeigned love to the Brethren. The Gospel, if it works, it
works to the purifying of the heart.

Answer.
As it is a work of the Gospel to cleanse and purify the heart, so it is not
all the work it does, nor is it the first work it does, nor the work that is
first manifest upon the Soul. The Law it humbles the sinner, and makes him see
his need of Christ: the first work of the Gospel is to give the sinner hope
that he may be delivered out of his undone condition; and the next is, to make
him willing to subject to and accept of the Grace of God in the Gospel, Psalm.
110.3. Thy People shall be willing in the day of thy Power. Therefore Soul, if
thou do make this Objection, this I would say to thee; Consider whether thou
can find that the Gospel has done its first work upon thy heart, has made
thee willing to accept of Grace in the Gospel-way, and to bow and fall at the
foot of Jesus Christ. As to thy Holiness, the holiness of thy heart will at
first discover it self hardly by any other ways then by thy love to Holiness,
then by thy hatred of Sin, and thy fighting against the Corruptions that be in
thy Soul; thy Conquest and Victory over Sin must be the work of time, the fruit
of much pains and long waiting: many excellent Souls have not attained unto
this: Paul himself found impurity remaining, and Corruption like to bear him
down; and therefore cries out, O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me
from this Body of Death? But then

Objection 3.
The Soul objects and says, But I have been but a little time under any
Soul-Work, and therefore I may soon be mistaken; I may reckon I am an
Israelite, and may be but an Edomite still: for it is but a little while that I
have had any workings upon my heart. I have gone indeed from Duty to Duty, for
a long time together, but I have sat in and under them like a Stock or a Stone,
and moved not: and therefore whether the Workings that are upon me are genuine,
or whether they be spurious, and not of the right kind, I know not.

Answer.
I answer therefore: The work of Grace upon the heart is wrought in a little
time, a little time does it: there are indeed many preparations to it, the Soul
may fall under many convictions, and many struglings may be in the heart of a
poor creature before the new Creature is formed; but Grace is infused into the
heart in a moment, at once. It is the Devils design to oppose young Converts,
and puzzle them with endless questions about their state: I would therefore
that thou should consult for thy satisfaction, which way is the bent of thy
Soul: Can thou say thy desire is for Communion with God, for fellowship with
Father, Son, and Spirit? Thou would fain see him who is invisible, and fain
would know him whom to know is Eternal Life: If the bent of thy heart be
really for God, it is bent and bowed; though it has not been long with God,
thou may conclude, I think with some comfort, the Lord has been at work
upon thy Soul, and thou art one of the Israel of God, though thou art but a
little one of that Tribe. But then

Objection 4.
Says the Soul, Many of much longer standing, and of much more raised
confidence, have afterward miscarried, and it has appeared that their Souls
have not been right with God; and therefore my heart trembles lest I should not
be an Israelite indeed.

Answer.
To this I would answer, That indeed it is so, and it may be thought of with
sorrow of heart, that many Souls after long profession have been but empty
Vines, bringing forth fruit only to themselves: And happy is he that by other
men's harms learns to beware. A holy fear and jealousy over thy heart is very
good, and there is great cause for it, considering the many and great
miscarriages that are among Professors. They say of Trees that are well rooted,
being shaken with the Wind, they are made to root the better: It may be thus
may thy Temptations touching thy state be; if thou art rooted in Christ, thy
Temptations may be for thy further settling in thy state. But yet to be always
perplexing thy self with questions about thy state, may not only mar thy
comfort, but may spoil thee in thy growth also, and may prove a great hindrance
to thee: My poor thoughts are therefore these, Be sure to make use enough of
Christ, see thy All in him; that he is thy Righteousness for Justification, and
that from him is the work of thy Sanctification; he must begin it, and it is he
also that must carry it on: lie at his foot, live upon him, and let all thy
expectations be from him; and whoever may fall, I think thou will stand, and
wilt be found one of the Israel of God, that shall be made glorious in the day
of Christ's Glory. I am persuaded, if thou can do as is hinted in Isa. 45.
ult. see thy Righteousness in him, and thy Strength in him, and can glory in
Christ, it is a good ground to thee to hope that thou art of the Israel of God,
with whom it is like for ever to go well.

Objection 5.
The Soul may object and say further, But alas I have had few Visions of God,
and that makes me fear; Israel of old had many, and he had sometimes very
glorious Visions, that did greatly comfort and strengthen, and bear up his Soul.

Answer.
I answer, That visions of God indeed are exceeding sweet, very sweet, but the
dispensing and giving them forth is in the hand of God, and he must do it how
and when he pleases; and it is good in his sight sometimes to let his own
People sit in darkness, and see no light. Have thou seen the face of God at any
time? If thou have had but some Visions of him, though not so many as thou
would, yet it is ground of rejoicing to thee, and thou ought from thence
to conclude much to thy own comfort: A little hint of Good Will is given in to
be lived upon in after times. However, which way is it thy Soul does press? Art
thou waiting for the manifestation of the love of God in Christ? Are these the
things which thou art seeking of, together with a Conformity to the mind and
will of God? If so, thou have cause of Thankfulness and Joy. Briefly, Watch
against those devices of Satan whereby he labors to do thee hurt, and put thee
besides thy present proper work. Thou art one of them that are escaped this
day, and God expects thy great work should be to give him the glory of that
mercy, to improve it to his praise: Satan would possibly divert thee, and cause
thee to make it thy work to perplex thy self about thy state, by raising
infinite questions in thee, whether thou art yet of the Israel of God, or no.
Be not easily thus deluded: but if thou have ought that may be really a solid
ground of hope to thee, do not easily cast away thy confidence; but having got
a little hold, keep it, that thou art spared in mercy, and shall find mercy
when Christ shall appear glorious.

USE V.
THe Fifth Use will be to them that are the Israel of God, to comfort their
hearts: and this Doctrine that is under consideration, is exceeding comfortable
unto such; I may truly say to them, I do bring them glad tidings of great Joy.
What! shall all the sad and dismal Slaughters made in the World, work to such a
blessed issue as the Exaltation of Christ? And shall all his glory be for your
good? What can you wish for more? When David had been speaking of the Kingdom
of Christ, and his Glory, under the Person of Solomon, in Psalm. 72. it is said,
The Prayers of David the Son of Jesse are ended: The sum of all that a gracious
heart can desire, is, That Christ may be glorified; when that is done, he knows
not what more to pray for. If you are Israel, and your hearts are as they
should be, the great thing about which your Spirits are working, is, that
Christ may be set upon his Throne, and that his Name may be exalted: If this
work go forward, and be in hand, the work that is in hand and goes on, is that
which lies most upon your hearts, and in which your Souls have greatest
occasion to rejoice. Let the consideration of this, comfort you,

1. Against whatever Breaches may have been made upon you by this day of
slaughter; it will be strange if some of you have not lost Friends and
Relations: Remember all these Breaches made upon you, only serve to repair the
interest of Christ, and work for his glory: and if your hearts be right, what
would you not part with, so the work of God may be furthered? If your hearts be
right, you will say, Let all go, and come what will; if Christ may but be a
Gainer, I will be willing all things should be lost.

2. Let it comfort you under those perplexities, and troubles, and dread, that
it may be, has been upon your Spirits in such a day: Doubtless Times of
slaughter are Times of great sorrow and grief of heart; but who would not
sustain a little grief, for the working out of greater comfort? The first sight
that you shall have of Christ in his glory, will wipe away these Tears, and
will suppress all those Fears; it will make them be as if they had never been.

3. Let it comfort you, if you should see worse things then ever yet you have
seen. I do believe many Souls do this day think that nothing can be more
terrible then what they have already seen and heard; but if they should be
mistaken, and you should see things more dreadful, be comforted; Christ's work
is going forward, his glory and Israel's mercy is upon the wheel. It is not
unusual in Scripture and experience, that one Judgment goes not alone, but it
is followed by others closely at the heels. Jer. 14.12. When they fast, I will
not hear their cry; and when they offer Burnt-Offering and an Oblation, I will
not accept them: but I will consume them by the Sword, and by the Famine, and
by the Pestilence: Not one single Judgment only, but others were to go in
hand along with it. Christ says, Luke 21.25, 26. That a little before the day
of his glory, there shall be distress of Nations, and men's hearts shall fail
them for fear, for looking after those things that are coming on the Earth. It
is a very probable conjecture, that as we have seen the distress of a City, we
may see the distress of Nations, and troubles may overspread the face of the
whole Earth. Yet if these things should be, remember Christ's Counsel to his own
Disciples, verse. 28. Look up, and lift up your heads, for your Redemption
draws nigh. Remember the words of the wise man, Prove. 3.25, 26. Be not afraid
with sudden fear, neither with the desolation of the Wicked when it comes; for
the Lord shall be thy confidence, and shall keep thy foot from being taken.

4. Be comforted though you cannot understand the method of God, and are not
able to conceive how these Dispensations of God should work for Christ's glory,
and the good of his People: We are apt to be perplexed because we cannot see
into the depths of the proceedings of God, and understand the reason of them
all. But remember he that has the management of these things knows his own
ends, and can tell how to accomplish his own designs, and he will be sure to do
his own work, when all men have done what they can: Things may and shall work
for the good of the Saints, though we cannot understand them. Remember the case
of Jacob, Genesis 42.36. Says Jacob, Me ye have bereaved of my Children; Joseph is
not, and Simeon is not, and will you take away Benjamin also? All these things
are against me. To his apprehension all this made against him; when in truth,
and when the issue was seen, it made so for him as nothing could do more. And
thus it is in the great amazing Dispensations of God with which we are
startled; though we understand not the mystery and reason of Gods proceedings,
yet they make for the good of his People, and will work out his glory, though
we cry these things are against us oftentimes.

5. And lastly, It will comfort you if you are Israel, though you should not
see all accomplished immediately, though the Branch of the Lord should not
forthwith become glorious; Remember Faith and Patience, they serve to help us
to wait and stay Gods time and leisure. God always keeps his Ends upon his
Heart, and in his Eye, and never acts in any inconsistency with them. This is
abundantly certain, that he will accomplish every good thing for his People:
Wait therefore on the Lord, and keep his Way, and he will exalt you in due
time. Though he answers your desires and expectations, for the present, by
terrible things, yet it is in Righteousness, and it is for the bringing about
whatever mercy he promised to his People.

USE VI.
THe last Use would be for a Word of Counsel. You that are escaped this day,
and are the Israel of God, what mercy is this that you share in? how amazing
and distinguishing are the dispensations of God to you-ward! How should the
sense of it overcome your Souls! To be preserved, and preserved in mercy, to
great and glorious ends, what can you desire more had you been put to make your
own terms with God? Believe it, if you are the Lords People in truth, you are
much in the heart of God, and your Good in the very next place to his own and
his Sons Glory is designed, however he deals with you: If he lets loose men
upon you, it is not with a design to hurt you; Psalm. 66.12. Thou have caused
men to ride over our heads, we went through fire and water; but thou have
brought us out into a wealthy place. If he comes to thunder down Judgments
upon the World, it is with a design to do you good; it is for your safety. Isa.
43.14. Thus says the Lord your Redeemer, the holy One of Israel, For your
sakes I have sent to Babylon, and have brought down all their Nobles; and the
Caldeans, whose cry is in the Ships. Christ in all his Administrations, and in
all the Dispensations of his Kingly Power from first to last, aims at the good
of his People, and it is for their benefit that he acts, however we are apt
through blindness and ignorance to interpret it. If he cuts down his People, it
is to do them good; if he spares them it is because he delights in them, and
will make them partake of sparing-mercy. How admirable is the kindness of the
Lord, and what effect should it have? But

1. To teach you to see the hand of Christ in all, and to sing forth the
praises of the Lord; your preservation is through Christ. When the Passover
was instituted of old, God bid the Israelites to sprinkle the Blood of the Lamb
upon the door posts, and when the Angel passed by to slay the firstborn of
Egypt, he would pass by their doors that were sprinkled: If the destroying
Angel has passed by your Doors, and has not come in, it is because your post
was sprinkled with the Blood of Jesus, the Blood of the Lamb: It is to Christ
that you own it, and O that the praises of the Lord might be sounded forth by
you: in Psalm. 22.3. God is said to inhabit the Praises of Israel; it is a
remarkable expression, O Thou that inhabitest the Praises of Israel, our
Fathers trusted in thee, and were delivered. Israel should be a praising
People, and God delights in their Praises: He loves to be where his Praises are
spoken forth. O that your habitations might be the habitations where the
Praises of God might dwell, and where the goodness of God may be sounded forth.

2. Sure your escaping should make (...) to be Holiness unto the Lord: Has the
Lord written you unto Life, as the expression is in this 4th of Isaiah? Are you
by his appointment and counsel in the Land of the living? O then see that you
be a People walking with him. He says in this 4th of Isaiah, to them that do
escape, that they shall be a holy People, verse. 3. It shall come to pass that
he that is left in Sion, and he that remains in Jerusalem, shall be called
Holy, even every one that is written among the living in Jerusalem. O that
every one written among the living this day, might also be called Holy, that
is, might be so, for God calls things as they are. There be great engagements
lie upon our Souls that we live up to this expectation of God.

3. Surely your work is to help forward the glory of Christ and your own good,
by all ways you can: Faith and Prayer are the great means by which you may be
serviceable to this great end. We are apt to be faithless and unbelieving, when
things succeed not according to our desire and expectation; but the work of the
Soul is, to wait for the salvation of God, and to believe for the
accomplishment of all that the Lord has spoken; to beg earnestly that God
would remember his Promise, that he would do according to the Faith of his
People: Whatsoever God has engaged himself to his People, that he will do for
them, he expects that they should enquire of him for it.

4. How much ought it to be your care to be found in a spirit fit to meet
Christ in his glory? There is great talk in the World of what expectations are
upon the hearts of the Saints; O that we could see suitable preparations in
every Soul, putting off the works of darkness, and pressing after a Spirit of
Humility and Holiness, that we might be crucified to the World, and raised up
to a spiritual frame: the day of Christ's glory will be exceedingly filled up
with spiritual things, and a carnal earthly spirit will be loathed and
abominable. O then shake off the filth of sin, and the filth of this World, and
put on your beautiful Garments, that so you may be prepared to meet the Lord in
his glory.

5. Do you much pity Sinners: When Christ shall come in his glory, with what
shame and confusion will poor sinners stand? every heart will tremble, and the
proudest spirit will then stoop. O pity them now, for then you will have no
pity for them: the Righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, they
will then only triumph in the righteous Dispensations of God. O pity them now,
and mourn over them, and pray for them, and pray them into Christ, if possible;
and walk so before them that thou may make them in love with the ways of God:
This is your work, the Salvation of Sinners should be much upon your hearts, if
you know the worth of your own Souls: And the more there are brought into
Christ, the greater will the solemnity be, and the glory of this glorious
appearance.

To close all therefore:

It is a sad day for the present, even with the Saints of God; and though we
are preserved, yet we and all our mercies lie open to we know not how much
misery; we and our best Privileges, how they may be dealt with we cannot tell:
however, of this be confident, That all this time the Lord is at work
graciously for his People: As he says in this fourth of Isaiah, when he had
said in the Text, The Branch of the Lord should be glorious for them that are
escaped; he adds, verse. 4. When the Lord shall have washed away the filth of
the Daughter of Zion. In the ^ean time before this glory, the Lord is wa^^ing
away the filth of his People, and purging out their dross that yet is among
them, that when his glorious appearing shall be, you and all your Mercies will
at once be delivered: and as he says in the fifth verse, The Lord will create
upon every dwelling place in Mount Zion, and upon her Assemblies, a Cloud and
Smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night; for upon all the
Glory shall be a defense. Now we have our Opportunities with hazard, and little
Communion with God in them; but at that day there shall be upon the Assemblies
of Mount Zion a Cloud. The Cloud in the Temple was the token of Gods presence,
God will be among his People: And upon their Glory shall be a defense: They
shall be safe from the fear of evil, and God will bless his People with peace;
He will bless them out of Zion.

Laus Deo Opt. Max.
FINIS.

