AN EMBASSAGE FROM THE KINGS of the EAST TO HIS HIGHNESS THE Lord Protector Of
England, Scotland, and Ireland.



Printed in the year 1654.

MY LORD,
THe soul of man, the glories of the world, are never sitting face to face, nor
side by side, much less rest they as in one bed, but are ever looking like the
East and West one from another, and although in this posture they seem to be
coupled, it is but by the thread of life, which every little distemper, years,
age or causualty snaps asunder, tumbling both as in one moment wider from each
other; than is the Sun and shadow, nor are these, the soul of man, the glories
of the world standing still, or resting in this present posture, back to back,
but like to penny birds upon a painted board, are always dopping down the
head, and picking one another; sure I am the soul, thrice noble and immortal
may pick and, peck for in this flattering-world, honors, glories, joys and
pleasures in a greedy way, but these pleasures dig down fast and soon this
glory, yea God, I was about to say, the soul of man, or breath of his, yea they
dig down that as low as hell, and in a moments time all your days, my Lord,
are no more, nor are they that, compared with eternity; if the heavens be but
as the wearing of a garment out, what is then the life of man but as the
putting on or off? yea the glance of it, much less are all his wants, fears,
hopes, joys and glories.

O my soul, flee away from all these things, be at rest, yea, at work, if there
be time and opportunity in thy hand, to do for God, self, souls, or nations;
Why should eternity drop upon thee, or thou roll into it before thou art aware?
Do what thou will; dye and get thee hence to thine own place, come no more
here, men are plotting, God prevents, the mourners go about the street, but the
Spirit to him that gave it, Go, Welldone, Welcome.

Yours my LORD, WILL. BLAKE.

To the whole Israel of GOD greeting.
CHurches, Saints and Christians, a true lover of you all in all forms, scarce
known, or worthy so to be, Dedicates this little Book or labor of love to you
and your acceptance, yea prosecution of, which be who will, first and most in,
they are the glory of the world Kings, Shepherds, Star, and Angel leading men
to Christ, or rather showing where they have laid by him and his truth, all
which may be done as follows, if you prosecute this business to the life,
not losing one day, and how many brave designs have failed for want of that? O
let it never be said, every man minds his own things and none the things of
Christ; you profess much, many of you do so, but who lays by all a little
while for him? yea, who makes it his whole and sole business to advance his
Name, Fame, Kingdom and glory in the world, he is not so far gone but he will
come again, Asts 1. 11. yea, as a thief in the night, Rev. 16. 15. and his
reward is with him. Watch for the good man of the house, Mar. 13. 35. and know
if he did know of the thiefs coming, he would certainly prepare and not sleep
like the foolish Virgins, do not you as do those who are of the night, Ephesians. 2.
2. you are of the day walk as the children of the light, and redeem the time,
because the days are evil, blessed is he that keeps his garments undefiled,
and is not found beating of his fellows, but walking with his lamp burning like
a beacon, but who almost does so, or minds that Christ to any purpose, who
wills, longs, loves, yea, crowns us with his own glory the glory of the Father,
and sets us in his throne, Rev. 3. 21. his work we are at, and recommend it
unto you, but if it stick, let it lie in the day of account upon his account
that shall slight it, saying, I am not concerned, I am not at leisure, and I am
not well, satisfied how, when, and what it is you would be at; well you may
shuffel cut and put it off to one another as much as you please, but it will be
hardly answered one day, and it may begrieve you when it is too late, that the
best of you all have done no more for him in your present generation; do not
sit piping or lamenting, Mat. 11. 17. things may do well enough for all this;
what need we care who rules, so Christ reigns and his Saints, which are best at
Prayer and Preaching, if we have liberty to purpose, for the latter let us be
content in the Name of God, else never whilst we breath, yea, without this let
our tongues rot, and cleave unto our mouths rather then be silent, but manage
well that, it is enough for Peter, Paul, James, Jack or John and the poor
Saints so to do, our turn will be next, and our day is a coming, 1 John 3. 2.
Iud. 14. what would Jonas, Job, Jacob, and the rest of good men do but for one
Christ, whom, who almost minds, knows, loves or likes, he is so poor, mean,
low far off, slow and long of coming to do any thing for one or the other; but
when he comes it is to purpose, his reward will be with him, Rev. 22. 12. In
the mean time we leave his work with you Churches, scattered Saints and others,
the Spirit bid us do it.

Yours, and every one of yours, in the nearest bonds. W. B.

And the last beast was like a flying Eagle. Rev. 4. 7. Such a Spirit should be
now in all the Saints, this being the last age of the world.
Let all write with this Quill, other Pens are out of date in this knowing age.


An Embassage from the Kings of the East, To His Highness the LORD PROTECTOR
of England, Scotland, and Ireland.
MY LORD PROTECTOR, in the Name of God Almighty, we the poor unworthy servants
of your Lord and Master do with one consent in love, zeal, and humility,
Petition you and your Honorable Council for our Magna Charta, purchased by the
blood of Christ, made over in his Word, and witnessed by his Spirit to be our
true and undoubted right, more than the blood of our veins; but the great
enemy of Mankind, the Devil, and his tail, the Pope and the popish Clergy
have robbed us this many years, not of health, wealth or lives, but our
Charter, our dearest Charter, our Christian Liberty purchased as beforesaid,
but yet withheld. O my Lord, this is our case, and a sad one it is, that we
redeemed by Christ, must thus be bound by men; had we never known our Liberty,
we would not now complain, nor this day mourn for it, but now our harps are on
the Willowes, nor can we sing the songs of Sion, nor her deliverance fully
come, whilst we are still in this captivity, and freed from all almost besides,
but may you live to set your hand to them whose hearts are yet with you, as
Jonathans was with David, froward things are sometimes in our mouths, yet our
hearts can never be divorced, nor our affections let go you out of our
thoughts; no, no, my Lord, far be that ingratitude from us, who long since have
learned better things, and as far be it from you to forget us, who were once as
deer to you almost as Israel was to Paul, for whom he even wished himself
accursed, jeapordi'd his life a thousand times, hunger, cold and perils, sure
the latter you have done, and more than ever any did, and that for us a
murmuring people against you, and your God, whose protection with you and the
Israel of God under your command, was your guard and rearguard, yea your
strength and victory in all your mighty battles in every nation: Oh that we
should do so, and oh that we should be so unworthy, so illy to requit so good a
God, so good a servant, it is our sin, let never yours be to revenge, or yet be
angry with a froward people, it was Moses sin, you know his punishment, far be
that from you, may you see the deliverance of Sion fully wrought, and they, as
in the land of promise, all the priveledges of the Gospel, yea this may you see
in your days, and say in the end thereof, Let me now thy servant depart in
peace, so mine eyes have seen thy salvation, the salvation of Sion, and her
deliverance fully wrought, and oh that your soul with such expressions may
leave this world at once; this flattering world, whose highest glories, joys
and pleasures leaves but sadness in the soul of man, yea, they fill that
immortal Jewel with nothing else but shame, guilt and sorrow, but may your
Sun never set in such clouds, but like a rainbow in a hopeful day; This is
our Prayer, and now comes our Petition, not for our lives nor our liberties
commonly so called, but our Christian Privilege yet not granted to us, no, nor
scarce thought on neither; My Lord excuse us, we cannot but with hearts grief
so speak it, care is taken for many things, we doubt not, the poor, the
fatherless, the right of the needy, the debts, Laws and Liberties of the
Nation, as far as this juncture of time will give leave, yea further, the
Gospel, and the Preaching of the Gospel by godly sound and able men, with the
discountenance of all vice and unsoundnesse: And yet my Lord, is this all? far
be it from you to think so; we look, we long, we hope for more; yea, for more
than all this, and never shall be silent, till you, or your God and ours hear:
We look, we long for liberty in our selves whilst men have it in their thoughts
to crush us for owning Christ too much, and yet it is too little, yea this is
the thing we tend the throne of grace for now, whilst we petition you, and the
godly in your Council for Liberty in our selves, for the word is as fire in our
bones, the Spirit having long since kindled it, we cannot longer now be silent,
but do claim for this as our undoubted Privilege, Namely the exercise of our
Gifts in the open Congregations; yea, this is so much our duty, and a
Privilege, that we cannot without guilt, sin, and shame keep one moment longer
silent, no, no, it is too long since we have wronged our selves, our choycest
selves this way, and grieved the Spirit to purpose; yea, we have wronged
thousands as our selves, had our candle been as on a hill, which is as
underneath a bushel, how many souls might we ere this day have enlightened,
some of which unhappily are in hell complaining of their unhappiness and our
unfaithfulness. My Lord, this is the case, and it is plain and clear, we are
guilty, we are guilty in the presence of the LORD; yea, we confess before
heaven, earth, men and Angels, and all the host of both we are guilty, and
what shall we now do, but with ropes about our necks, guilt shame and sorrow in
our souls now about our work, and oh that the the time is so far past, and we
not aware; but the night comes on wherein no man can work* for God, Christ,
self, or others; yet that we may at last be doing to purpose, yea for all men.

My Lord, we cry for help, and cry we will until deliverance come by you, or
else some other way; Israel was heard, and we doubt not but we shall be the
like, our cause is far better, we groan not for outward burdens (though some do
and that justly too, but for the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; yea, to
be set into that by you, and O my Lord Crumwel, now under God our Protector; if
you shall say the time is not yet come, and defer us one moment longer, God
will lay you by, and certainly out of the hearts of his dearest ones, and raise
up deliverance some other way, for the time of Sions deliverance is come, and
will come, let men and devils say nay, yea the set time is come, and the
watchmen are on her walls, there they see it, and the Spirit of Prophecy is in
their mouths, and they will not keep silent longer, you are to guard them that
is your Title, work and Honor, the subjection of Nations, without the
affections of Gods people, is a small thing; your greatness glory and honor
is nothing, if while you sit at the stern you guide not the ship for the most
to Gods glory, the good of his people, and souls of all men, how much will this
tend to both; yea, to the Nations of which we may with sadness say millions
perish for want of knowledge, thousands have words in their mouths, abilities,
with sincerity in their hearts, why should they want encouragement, or rather
protection by a law for that same purpose; for that is all they do desire, a
small thing for you, my Lord, to deny to them.

Let them be tried, and tried again, and again, for sincerity, soundness,
holiness and ability in some measure, the latter will come on apace, when we
have this Liberty, Protection and Commission to speak in all the schools of
the Prophets and Churches of Christ, the national ones. In all which we promise
by the grace of God, whose we are, to do nothing against the truth, but for it,
waving all disputes, and contentions whatsoever, nothing in disdain to our
Fathers in Christ, but in love to our brethren and sisters, especially the
little ones, yea for their sakes plead we thus, and the strangers that knows
not God; but you will say they are taught already, true, my Lord, and better
then we can do it, yet we will not rob them nor unteach them, but add a word of
our experience in convenient seasons, sometimes sooner, sometimes later; This
was practiced by your Army to the good of thousands in their marches up and
down, yea the greatest my Lord, you know it well enough, the public exercises
are as the bellows of the Almighty on ^^s people, carried on in the Spirit,
their hearts being warmed with the breath thereof, might not they then add a
word or two of their experience; O how sweet would that be from the sense of
Gods love so to do, one hour before or after would fit us for, or fasten those
things which now too soon we loose, thus might we prophecy, how sweet and
lovely would the Assemblies of the people be, yea, how primitive like then
would all our dearest brethren return again never more to separate from us, but
would be as lamps and pillars in our Assemblies? And why may not these Jewels,
and their Luster shine as well there as where few resort.

O my Lord, bring them forth that have lain among the pots, they will be as
doves whose feathers are covered with yellow gold; yea let the world see, the
gifts and graces of the sons of Sion more precious than choice silver, say
unto them upon whom the glory of the Lord is risen, arise and shine, for their
feet are beautiful, and their God will be admired; yea then will Satan and his
Kingdom fall like lightening before the Spirit of the Lord, men will not
disdain the Saints, nor perish for want of knowledge, as now they do, whilst
they think they have as much as any, not knowing what the Saints through grace
do; then will the boules of the Temple be useful indeed, other men have laid
them by, but bring them you out, that every one may drink from their experience
the waters of life, and receive the bread of life, for that is that we promise
now to break, and nothing of self, further be it from us ever to broach schism,
faction, treason, or rebellion; yea, any thing more than one thing our Lord
Jesus Christ his loves and loveliness, yea nothing but faith, Christ, his
righteousness, healing, and practical points, we promise to preach nothing
else but these things, and the humility of Christ for our example, nor will we
ever slight those stars that ^ed us first to him: no, no, they that traveled
with us, and pointed out the Lamb of God before us, shall never be forgotten if
they will be quiet; they are our Fathers, and wo^th^ ^wel of double honor, yea
we will ever ^ow to t^em, as Joseph did to Jacob.

And now, my Lord, our old Friend, and good Friend, will you hear, will you
help us your ^^llow members once again in this ^i^k of time, why should others
have the honor from you, try and try us by whom you please, yea, set up such
as may do it, and the God of heaven set up you in the hearts of his. My Lord,
we fear not the touch; many will be ^^t though most are not so in any measure,
le^ them be unbyassed, not all of the Clergy, and try us while they will, they
will find men enough; we desire not to run, before so sent by you or they, nor
then out of our calling to the charge of the Nation, but here and there as
Providence leads to witness for the Truth, most in our Parishes where our
walking is known.

O my Lord, this were Christian liberty indeed, this were to be freed from
Antichrist to purpose. Men talk as if after all we should go back again, far be
that from the Israel of God, and as far be it from you to withhold your hand
from this work of his, give us this Jewel long lost, make up this breach, and
give us liberty as in the days of old, and then we will lift up our heads, yea
voices, and sing together, yea we will never more complain, but sing the songs
of Sion, and her deliverance fully come, and under God and Christ you shall
have the glory, yea, the glory of all we are or have in this particular.

Saul has slain his thousands and David his ten thousands, so have you, but
Solomon built the Temple, and so have you, when these tried stones are laid in
every place; yea, you have then done more for Christ, the Saints, the World,
the Souls of men, than all the Christian Kings and Princes that ever was; none
has had a heart, nor none has had a hand for this, nor none are in memory of
Saints to purpose, but you shall be for ever; yea let our tongues cleave to the
roof of our mouths, if we forget your labor of love in this particular; yea
though we or some of us have railed at you; yea prayed to blast you in your
late Proceedings, yet will we ^^g you in our bosoms, and say you are more
righteous than thousands.

To wind up all, you know our minds, consult not with ^^esh and blood, nor
biased men; The Lord Jesus and his Spirit hold you close to the rule, keep you
waking night by night on your bed to weigh our Petition, and if it be right
hear us, as ever he should hear you in your heart-sick-dying hour, when you and
this world must part.

O my Lord, hear us, we are his, though all of his are not with us, yet
thousands are, and why, and how can be against us, the Word and Spirit is for
us; yea God himself: My sons and my daughters shall Prophecy, be not you
against us; n^d none but you can hinder, yea, against him who has been your
salvation all along, yea and them too, which at your command have shed blood,
and lost blood life limbs, and relations, yea, and all upon this account, more
than any.

Israel never fought with Amalek on so low account as pay, nor we with our
neighbors for vineyards, shadows, and titles; no, no, let it never be said in
Gath, nor published in the streets of Askalum, here or in other countries, we
destroyed towns, cities fired houses, spilt the blood of millions, and sent
souls to he^on, so low account; one valley full of sculs and bones are more
worth than these, besides, former vows would be minded, and in this the main
is paid, death would be minded, and for this you may take comfort, judgment
would be minded, and for this you may expect a Crown, if for any work under
heaven.

O my Lord, to have a Crown from Christ, with this saying, Weldone and Welcome,
when Kings and Captains shall run to the rocks, hills and mountains. This is
considerable, may such considerations ever well in great meant hearts, and
flatterers far from all your Councels, for if you should miscarry, good had it
been if you had never been, or any thing but what you are; The Name of Christ,
the honor of God, the expectation of the Saints, the eyes of all the nations
round about are more on you than any man on earth, the Lord God Almighty, and
the Prayers of his People lead you and your Council in all ways of well-doing.

LEt us now treat a little with the people of the Nation, I mean common
Protestants, that do confess Christ, and that is all, and me thinks we hear
most of them rail, laugh, and jear others, judging and condemning us for proud
fools and hypocrites, and such, as if ^et alone will spoil the Church in time;
wise men would weep to see mad men laugh, and as much laugh to hear fools rail,
for their Ministers, and they know not what; well, curse, rail, jear, and do
what you will, we are still the same, yea such as do truly pity and pray for
you, though you cannot for your selves, nor will not so well as you may; the
Lord Jesus do both for you, and open your eyes to see and loath what you love,
and love what you l^ath, especially the people of God, some of which you would
send for, if you were to die with speed; fetch them, fetch them, let them come
and pray; well, now you have them, do not rail, that is divilish, nor judge
them that is presumption, or leave your Churches if they should come there to
exercise their Gifts, they, time and your present means of grace will too soon
be gone: if they speak of their experiences, they have learned something: if
they speak of Christ the love, and lovelines of Christ, (Ephesians. 2. 4. Cant. 5.
16.) then it seems they know him, and that it life eternal, John If they speak
of sin the sinfulness of that, then it seems they loath it, if they speak of
you and the way to heaven, they would save you from the ways to hell, which we
are sure you are in, if you loath them for their love to God, Christ, his Word,
and your souls; one of which is more worth than a thousand worlds, and although
it be your own proper work and the Ministers to mind that, yet are we in
conscience bound not to suffer sin upon your heads; who would not help an ox
out of the pit (Mat. 12. 11.) if like to perish? Much more a soul, they that
this way set their helping hands can never be your enemies, God forbid that
these lamps should be so counted, though they be not torches, lesser lights may
be useful, so may the gifts and graces of the Saints, the Spirit speaks where
it lists, John 3. 8. Hear that where ever it be. Would a soul in hell say, If
I were on earth I would not hear the Saints, or should a man for heaven say, I
will go no further, such and such are going too, o Friend, if you be going to
hell, or they be going to heaven, hear and consider before it be too late, time
will never come again, nor they nor you from the dead to hear one another, now
you have Moses and the Prophets, Luke ^6. 31. so are they whom ye despise, if
they preach to you the same trut^s, by the same Spirit, the Lord make you wise,
after wit will do no good, nor repentance neither one day you may say, O that
we had the Saints again, their prayers light, and Counsels, when it is too
late; A certain man, where some of these lay prisoners in the late wars,
thought of them as some of you now do, but he being sick to death, cried night
and day, fetch the Saints again, fetch the Saints again, but they were gone
long before; be the Sunset or near it; you are they dead or dying; what will
good Sun, good death, or good Saint, stay a little longer? Any thing avail? No,
no, the night comes and none can work, John 9. 3. they for you, nor you for
your selves Let them preach, let them speak, let them pray while they may, if
they be against your sins, they are for your souls, if they be against your
customs the old or the new, it is for a better, may not time before and after
Ministers have done be better spent then it is, especially the Lords day, and
the after part of it, but you are afraid your Religion will go down, take heed
that that be not a form rather than a truth, many have the form of godliness,
but deny the power, 2 Timothy 3. 5. But the bulk of men deny both in England;
Lord, what should be the cause; have our Pastors made us so, nusling us up in
ignorance, My people perish for want of knowledge, says the Lord, Prove. 29.
28. Hos. 4 6. And says Christ If the blind lead the blind, woe be to both,
Luke 6. 39. or have you opposed truth, and would not see the light, because of
your deeds, John 3 19. Searching light is a saving light, if well improved;
have your Ministers so preached as certainly many have, take heed that you
refuse not him that speaks from heaven (Heb. 12. 25.) by their mouths yea, and
take heed of winking at what you see or may see in guifted Christians, they can
tell you from experience in their own language the mercies of a God, (Ephesians. 3.
18.) the height, depth, breadth and length, yea, to you the worst of sinners,
if you will accept it, but I obtained mercy, 1 Timothy 1. 13. Yea they can tell
you of his Loves, the length and strength of that in some measure, which is
better than life, so says David. Psalm. 63. 3.

This love and mercy God sends to sinners sometimes by poor, weak, plain and
unworthy men, without Latin Phrases, therefore thousands do refuse it, yea,
Christ the Bread, the Tree, Rev. 2. 7. the Well of life (Psalm. 36. 9.) is the
like with all his Loves, loveliness and virtues, (Luk 6. 19) upon the same
account.

O Christ, who almost knows thee? Who almost owns thee, the chiefest of ten
thousand? Cant. 5. 10. which art all in all in life, death, and eternity, Col.
3. 11. Well, this King, Priest and Prophet can the Saints tell the world of,
yea by the Spirit in the Word, they can open as it were his side and heart,
give them out his blood, to set their souls free from sin, death, hell and
eternal burnings, yea they can give a taste of the life and joys to come, 1
Pet. 2. 3. one drop thereof is more worth than the treasures of the world, if
well considered, yea they can breath upon you the holy Ghost, my meaning is,
they by the Spirit in them breathing from them, conveyes the words of life to
poor sinners many times; thousands can seal to this; no fires ever kindled one
another like this ho^y fire: the Spirit of love, the Dove in Noah's Ark, Genesis 8.
8. rest it where it will it ever brings an emblem of peace from the God of
peace.

O that men should refuse this love, this Dove, this peace, an emblem of peace
speckled with the blood of Christ, because it breaths not where the world
lists, but it self, Joh. 3. 8.

Well, be ye not offended, I go not to throw down men nor Ministers, no, the
Lord Jesus keep up them that are good and watch for your souls as they that
must give account for in the day of judgment, Heb. 13. 17. and throw down all,
yea all besides, and what I say for Ministers, who are your Seer^, Isa. 13. 10.
Prophets, Watchmen, Jer. 6. 19. Shepherds, Jer. 23. 4. which have the main care
of your souls committed (Acts 20. 28.) to them by Christ, when as he sends them
to you, and not a lesser benefice; the same I say for gifted Brethren, Saints
by calling and Profession, the Lord increase their number, gift them, and give
them more favor in your eyes, not for their sakes, but your own: these are
neither Watchmen nor Shepherds extraordinary in an outward call, yet ar they
all inwardly, so if gifted and bound by God, reason and nature to do you all
the good they can; yea, they must preach to you by life and doctrine, as Noah
and Lot to the old world, 2 Pet. 2. 5. yea, they are bound to pray for you by
night and day, 1 Timothy 2. 1. and as they are bound by God and Nature to do this
for you, so are you by Scripture-bonds and common ingenuity to love their
persons, and mind their Counsels, and wholesome admonitions, and woe to he that
shall storm against it or Pharisie-like grieve at this kind of doctrine, Well,
take heed ye resist not the holy Ghost, (Acts 7. 51.) nor fight against the
mind of God, from ignorance of his word, much more like Shimei to rail and
curse good David, 2 Samuel 16. 7. I mean good men for nothing but pointing out
the lamb of God in John the Baptists absence, (John 1. 35.) or presence either;
if it be he they point at, as certainly they do, look for the objects sake,
that takes away the sins of the world, and that by your looking on him the true
brazen Serpent, which every man should labor to set-up, John 3. 14.

A Warning-Message, or a Parley with the Ministers.
OF all good men on earth, your godly Ministers are the best, that are really
so, and self denying men: the most good they do, they are to us as the rivers
to the valleys, they make us by Gods blessing fruitful in good ways and works,
yea they make us through persuasion of the Spirit loath the world, and love
God, yea all of God, and all of good, they bring down God to us, and us to God
by Preaching, they charm us with the loves of Christ, and wooes us by the
Spirit to make a match with him, who is the chiefest of ten thousand, and
altogether lovely, Cant. 5. 10. They raise us from the death of sin, Ephesians. 2. 1.
and yet we die again, yea daily to the world, Gal. 6. 13. They lift us up, they
lay us low, yea at the gates of hell, by showing us our sins, and by a word of
faith they raise us again, by lifting up the brazen Serpent, John 3 yea when we
are like the Sallamander in the flames of afflictions, they make us sing like
the Nightingale, by showing the good of them, Romans 8. 28. the loves of God,
Rev. ^. 19. yea with the Spirits assistance, they can do any thing for us, or
with us. but without that they can do nothing, so that it is God alone that
does all, Phil. 2. 13. and yet what he usually does is by them, (1 Cor. 3. 6,)
instrumen^ally, he wins, saves and comforts souls, yea the most lost and
afflicted ones, and so they are the best of men in one sense, and do the most
good whilst others harden they soften, others lead to the pit, and destr^ction,
yea, some Ministers be witch men with a form in stead of the substance, and
that a poor empty one too, how many have nothing else but old empty nothing
stufe from their Pastors, yea scarce moral things, Law nor Gospel never heard,
divided, nor can many hundreds distinctly preach either the new birth, the new
Creator, the gifts of God, the graces of the Spirit, how to comfort or cast
down, they know no more then the plowman does the Planets, such kind of men we
loath, not their persons but their sin, in taking to themselves this high and
holy calling, the proper Names of it, Christ's Ambassadors they are, and they
know not how to treat about the souls of men and heavenly things, who are
reconciled, and who not, never making any distinction in praying or preaching
to any purpose, these Priests never offered one sacrifice all their days for
themselves, nor those poor souls upon whom they live and feed their family on,
yea feed bare: if a horse be ridden with a hag, he will never thrive, some say,
if a man or a Parrish be the like (as too many be in England) with such a kind
of Priest they and their souls can never thrive, no, it is impossible; those
set up will surely look to this before they put down us that are gifted, can
the fish live without water, the beast without food, or the souls of men
without something, and where nothing is, nothing can be had; empty Preaching,
praying with a little Popery, and Latin, pleases poor country men for present,
but dambs them in the end, yea, and some in the City too, else they would never
run to Marybone and Paddington, and up and down to many places more in the
City, where the old saints meet for a lick of Antichrist, yea the very tail of
him, but let us leave these snuffes and old Priests, time may put them out for
all their present hopes, and a little treat with our Fathers the godly
Ministers, and for them we are not sick, unless it be for more, and yet
amongst them fair dealing is not used; they would not be intrencht upon as they
themselves do upon us and our Liberties, yea our fathers do so, yet you cry out
we have too much, we cry out we have too little, and not without cause,
especially now, when it is in your thoughts to take what we have from us, what
means the jerks this way in most of your Sermons, if it be not so; well, rob
us, if you please, get what you can; in the mean time know we are for Christian
Liberty, the exercise of our gifts in the same places before or after you, for
we say, they that have hands must work, and they that have gifts must the like,
again so to do is a great advantage to our souls and others, and we are bound
to do good to all men in an outward way, much more to the souls of one another,
Gal. 6. 10. we must not receive the grace of God in vain, 2 Cor. 6. 1. which we
do as to others, when we do not improve our gifts and graces; again according
to what is given will be required of every man, Luke 19. 16, 23. Mat. 15. 15,
16. 2 Pet. 1. 8. Let every man as he has received the gift administer the same
one to another, as good disposers of the manifold graces of God, 1 Pet. 4. 10.

Weigh these Scriptures well; and see if we be to be reproved for what we claim
as our Privilege and duty; again consider whether by the Word, the people of
God are any where reproved for exercising of their gifts, or were they ever
checked for it, before Antichrist crept into the world, the Word holds out that
if we have any special gifts or parts, we must exercise them as may be most
for the use of the Church, and the Spirit of God, it seems to be given us for
this very purpose, 1 Cor. 12. 6, 7. again is it not Prophesied we shall be able
so to do, Joel. 2. 1 These. 4 8. Romans 8. 16. 1 John 46. 13. Is not this Spirit
that thus dwells in us a teaching Spirit as well as a pleading, or a preaching
Spirit as well as a praying; yea are not we bid to covet and desire that it may
be so.

Mind those Texts well, and give a Sermon on one of them if you dare at
White Hall, 1 Cor. 14. 1, 5, 30. but ye are all of you to shie this way, yea I
think scarce any of you good, men, that can freely say as Moses, Number. 11. 29. I
would all the Lords people were Prophets, and with Paul, I rejoice that Christ
is preached, though it be of ill will, Phil. 1. 15, 15. But you grieve although
we preach Christ of good will, judge us to be selfish, proud, and
self-conceited, the Lord pardon, we do, and in his presence profess, what we
do we do in love and obedience, though you say in pride; the Word of Christ,
which we preach thus in good will, seems to be committed to our care and charge
as well as yours; Contend earnestly for the faith (Jude 3.) once delivered to
the Saints, that is the doctrine of the Scripture which we are to dispute, pray
and preach up; you tell us of Corah, Dathan, Vzza's, staying of the Ark, 1 Chronicles. and would fain frighten us from the Work of God: What things the people
were forbidden, they might not do, but what we are commanded we may and must
do, and we are bid to build up one another, pray with and for one another,
admonish and Prophecy to one another, yea all Prophecy one by one, 1 Cor. 14.
31. meaning not in an extraordinary way, but in an ordinay way of opening
Scriptures, Prophesies and Promises to one another, you tell and fright us with
what men were forbidden to do, we tell you of what we are bidden and commanded,
thou shall not suffer sin upon thy brothers head, but come, ye and tell us what
judgment did befall upon Apolos, or Priscilla, and Aquilla that preached unto
him, Acts 18. 26, 28. Pray, tell us if you can, in the next, the meaning of
this Scripture, 1 Cor. 14. 24. But you object and cry out, this kind of
Doctrine, and if all might preach will fill the Church with Errors; from whence
comes that? Christ is of another mind, Math. 22. 29. We are called, not you,
says the Preachers, to one place and people; in an outward way they are so;
yea some to two or three, but that we know no warrant for, nor well which flock
they are charged withal, we are not with any, not is it our duty to make it
our whole business as it is yours, and not to write news, make strife, accuse
us to, or the Magistrates to us, you say, the Priests lips were to preserve
knowledge, now the Spirit is poured out upon the people, breaths in and from
the people; this is a better help to us then the gift of tongues, The Spirit
searches all things yea the deep things of God, and that learning cannot, 1
Cor. 2. 14. yea this Spirit leads us into all truth, when men leads us by many
times, but here comes in the great one: If ye preach, ye will baptize in a
little while; No, no, we deny that, and it may be are not for it as you are, or
the baptized Churches either, more of Mr. Dells judgment the Spirit Baptism,
but we think, some of us thinks so, that believers may break bread together,
though it be most convenient for a Pastor and Preacher in office, yea the dead
may bury the dead, and who will unless he be a fat hog or rich Saint, yea, the
best Text in the Bible is scarce good enough for either this in practice you
allow; and now cries some we will have no Preachers at all within a little
while, God forbid we should say so: and yet will we bake, brew and dress meat
for our selves, yet do we not destroy the Trades nor your peculiar calling in
all that we stand for, nor do we ever intend to set it up more then he, the
profession of a Lawyer that studieth the Lrwes for the good of himself, and
some few friends, or many for whom he freely pleads now and then, but you like
not that neither.

Well, we have hinted at our judgment as well as we can in a sheet or two, and
what have we said to offend you, ourself denying godly Pastors, truly nothing
we should think, but now happily we may, and yet we will hide our Fathers
nakedness with the mantle of modesty, minding our distance; you cry out for
our affections, we for our affliction, yea all of us for our Liberty: the truth
is, you rob us and chide us, but loosers best may speak, you cry out for
honor, we freely give you, double, our duty it is, and yours to be diligently
in the Word of Christ, withholding nothing of his mind from us, Acts 20. 27.
But however see you be John the Baptists self-denying men, John 3 30. and such
as give all your glory to Christ, owning his Members and the gifts of his
Spirit every where, and God will give you honor: He that honors me, him will
my father honor, John 12. 26. yea and all the Saints too.

Again, would you honor us now and then in our meetings, where we may err,
and do what we please for all you we should honor you more in your Pulpits:
yea this condescension would bring the world to a love and liking of the Saints
Assemblings, Heb. 10. 25. which now they throw dirt on: you not commending them
so much as in your Pulpits, but revile them, too often you cry out of Errors,
more then needs many times, yet too many are we do confess: but to put the
Devil, Pope, Jesuits, Anabaptists, Antinomians together, meaning Gospel
Ministers, I think, as a great Presbyterian Minister lately did in his Prayer,
then cried out, the Lord confound the designs of them all, or worse seems
something bitter, and why might not liberty be given to object in such a case
without offense, Sermon being ended, you would weigh the more what you
sometimes pray and preach: ye too often read from a Paper, and we grieve the
less when we hear such kind of things, but we will wind up all lest we should
offend too much where we love and honor.

Our request is in the name of Christ our Lord and yours, that ye would be
faithful in this controversal points, and i^ in truth our desires be according
to the mind of God, as certainly they are for the glory of his Name, the
exaltation of his Son and Spirit, and against sin and Satan's Kingdom, wicked
men, devils, and the works of darkness: yea, if it be against ignorance the
mother sin of the Nation, whereby souls perish, Hos. 4 6. and go down to hell
every hour in the year, one where or other: yea if it be against the Errors of
the times, which are up and down in every Corner, as certainly it is, because
so contrary to Antichrists doctrine whose Bishope, Priests and Clergy could
never endure to hear it without spitting at it, knowing they must all down, yea
their gain as Demetrius said; if Christ and his Kingdom once get up, as
undoubtedly it will ^pace.

Further you this Work which is ^o full of glory; and the leading Card to Romes
destruction, the worlds conversion Jews, Turks, and ^^agans, much more our
neighbor Nations, France, Spain and others: yea this Nation may be as the
rising of the Sun to the world, the Son of rigteousnesse, Mal. 1. 1. who must
arise in every place and inherit all Nations, let us give him first ours, and
from hence let him shine gloriously in the gifts and graces of his Spirit, yea
make the whole ^and an University for the Saints, and every Public place, a
place to take degrees; pray they can already, and Preach they would as well
might they practice one as well as the other.

Let the Fountains run freely, and from these living ones let the in-dwellings
of God flow forth, to water dry, yea to water empty places, which you judge not
considerable for the present, till Universities be recruited, yea filled with
the holy Ghost, and learning, but one of twenty takes not right this way: can
two universities fill the world at that rate: thousands are too little for our
own Land, what can now and then one do to supply every barren place, and a
great one spoil many, yea to preach to every Creature: Amongst which, if but
one perish through your withholding laborers that would freely work in the
Lords Vineyard, you are guilty, but if millions perish, how, and what then?
Blood will be required here here, and the Lord convince you.

We are not against you all this while: nor will we ever be: Give us what we do
desire for the good of all men: yea give us that, and we will be your servants
upon all occasions, be ye sick, be ye absent, be ye where you will, we will
preach for you, never whilst we live against you in any kind whatsoever.

For the Lords sake trust and try us once or twice, we have the faith of
Christians, and that we pawn again, give us but your help, and a little
countenance; and you shall have all we have, heart, hand and purse. And now we
pray again:

Good Ministers, good Fathers, for the Lords sake do not slight gifts and
graces, and the Breathing of the Spirit, nor break our hearts with long delay,
we long to be omnifying Christ, magnifying Christ, yea to be pouring out his
blood to the world, yea we would turn him inside out, yea we would make the
most of Christ, and all of Christ, all his works in us, and all his works
without us; all his gifts all his graces, all his Ordinances, as far as we may,
we would fain be handling, ye the love of Christ, and the loveliness of
Christ, the sweetness of his Person, the joys of his Spirit, and greatness
of his Merit, for the worst of sinners, that we would be talling, yea and our
own experiences, what of him we know, what of him we see, feel and enjoy here,
besides what we hope for (1 Pet. 1. 9.) another day when he and we his Members
shall meet and appear altogether to give the world one confounding show, we
shall never appear till then, but then we shall: beloved, now are we the Sons
of God, but it does not yet appear what we sha be, but when Christ who is our
life shall appear we shall appear (Col. 3. 4. John 3. 2.) with him in glory;
would we might beg leave to tell the world this, and warn them as Noah did, we
would then save them as Lot was, yea we would smite men and save men, like Paul
and Zacheus, strip men and cloth them by the righteousness of Christ, yea, we
would persuade men from the ways of sin, by telling them the terror of the
Lord, 2 Cor. 5. 11. yea, we would fetch men, the worst of men from the high
ways and hedges, and compel them into Christ, Luke 14. 23. Yea, dead ones
from the grave of sin, and make them live again, Ephesians. 2. 1. Yea, and as we
would raise them up, so we would fetch them down from the pinnacle, and top of
all earthly glories, to glory in a crucified Christ, like Paul, Gal. 6. 14.

All this we would do, and all this we could do by the grace of God, if the
Ministers would but let, (the godly Ministers) for the Lords sake stand a
little by; yea, stand away straight, or else we will preach you down, and pray
you down, write you down and pull you down headlong by faith and Gods
assistance.

Men, Brethren and Fathers, hear ye this day what the Spirit says unto the
Churches, and harden not your hearts Rev. 2. 7. Heb. 3. 8. Yea, if you have an
ear, hear what Christ says to the Churches; yea, to you, and your Churches,
which are neither hot not cold, but let us come amongst them or else he and we
will spew you all out together, Rev. 3. 15, 16. Some cry out, let us do it
straight, we have scarce patience for a day, but the Spirit waits long,
grieve not, yea, quench not the Spirit, 1 These. 5. 19, 20. Mark that Scripture.

Oh ye Ministers of England, London, White Hall and thereabouts, but will none
hear and see who is with us like the little Cloud with Elisha, 1 Kin. 18. 44.
Our chariots are as strong as yours, yea, more and more numberless, look if ye
can by Faith, you may see the day for us, and the many thousands with us.

Cannot you see Scripture and Prophesies just a fulfilling? Is the world
blind? hear ye the striking of the clocks if you be indeed awaked, and aware
of the days coming on, the Lords Day, yea, the Spirits day, wherein he will be
a swift witness against every thing that opposes, yea, he will be a fire, and
burn up all, hay, stubble, and the buildings of men, 1 Cor. 3. 11, 12. Your
sitting and your standing, if it be not for him, as well as from him, yea if
you be against the Spirits coming forth, this wind shall blow you hither and
thither, like the chaff; yea, your very name away from the earth and presence
of his people.

Watchmen, watchmen, are you all asleep? Hear the Travelers of Sion, Jer. 50.
5. call, and ask you what it is a clock, yea, they tell you what it is, and how
the night is far spent, and the day just at hand; Yea, the Lords day, a day of
rest to his people, but disquiet to the inhabitants of the earth, Jer. 50. 30.
Yea, to them who are at ease in Sion, (Amos 6. 1, 7. Isa. 32. 9) and never
mind her travails.

Take heed ye Kings, Priests, and Prophets, improperly so called, yea, and all
ye Rulers of the earth, especially ye whom we are treating with for our
liberty, which we charge you to preach up, for it is the year of Jubilee that is
come, Lev. 25. 10. Sions captives some (Psalm. 126. 1.) of them we are, yea, we
warn you by the Trumpet of the Lord so to do: Noah being warned of God,
prepared an Ark, Heb. 11. do you do the like, yea, prepare an Ark of protection
from my Lord Protector for us, and your selves especially, we fear not, the
Lord and his Word will save us, yea, his Arm shall save us, for we are children
that will not lie, Isa. 63. 8. nor do not lie, for it is the truth we stand
for, nor can ye do any thing against it if ye would. This Rock will break and
dash ye all in pieces, set you up who will; yea, this truth hinted, will prick
you to the heart, if ye kick against them that maintain it.

Why should ye that are for God, and have been so all your days many of you,
fight now against him; take heed, and take that Scripture, Acts 5. 39. Yea,
again take heed lest ye be found so doing through pride, self-hastinesse, or
any thing.

Men, Brethren, and Preachers, we babes and children warn you old men and
Fathers, 1 John 2. 12. Yea, we write these things unto you Fathers, because ye
have known him and owned him all your days, that was from the beginning; yea,
we know ye know him, and this to be his mind, yea, a Truth according to his
mind, that we now stand and plead thus for, your conscience tells you it is
so, we know it does so, and before the Lord, we think most of your consciences
know it, but something or another troubles, fear of errors, fear of slighting,
means and maintenance, honor and esteem from men, which if you be pleasers
of, you know what is said, John 5. 44. But fear ye none of all these things, do
not perplex your hearts this way, fear him whom ye should fear, our King and
yours, the King of Saints, great and mavelous are thy works Lord God
Almighty, Just and true are thy ways O King of Saints, who shall not fear
thee O Lord, and glorify thy Name; all nations shall come and worship before
thee, Rev. 15. 4. A sweet Scripture, but to the point, fear not Errors, which
we think is one of your great and main fears, fear not that, God is wiser than
man, ye than the wisest of the sons of men; we nor you never play the fools
more than when we set our wisdoms to his; mind what we say; Ye may think to
save the truth of Christ as Vzzah did the Ark, by putting out your counsel,
take Gamaliells counsel, we have done: ye, that of the Ark which erring ye turn
against us: Vzzah was forbid to touch the Ark, we are bid to build up one
another, and covet the best gifts, yea, to Prophecy, 1 Cor. 14. 1. Jude 20.
which we do, men of old ordained unto condemnation creep forth with us, Jude 4.
not without the mind of God, and broach damnable Errors, yea, denying the
Lord that bought them; In zeal, as you think, for him to save his truths, Word,
and Ordinances, it may be your selves, yea, all from falling, ye put your hand,
power, policy and humane wisdom against these men and us with them, in true
zeal as you think to save these truths, well, if ye do, we think what we know,
and we know what we think, and tell you too of the Texts.

1 Chronicles. 13. 9, 10.

Acts 5. 33, 39.

A Word to the well satisfied, sanctified, and Godly of the Nation, who are in
Christ Jesus Saints by Calling. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
ANd for you of all forms and Judgments that are good and sound, we have a
word to each; and first for you Churches, and holy Brethren, partakers of the
heavenly calling, Heb. 3. 1. We shall need to say but little to you about our
Model or Petition; Yea, nothing at all, but straight choose ye out from
amongst your selves men that are full of the holy Ghost like Stephen, Acts 6.
3. zealous as Paul, self-denying as John the Baptist, who always pointed to
Christ denying himself, that like to the other John may preach nothing but
love, love to God and all his ways, love to Saints in all their forms, such
men there are, such men choose from amongst your selves; yea, and be sure they
be so, to promote this work in the public places.

But first call a meeting, ye that are in fellowship, have many pray spend one
or two in a serious consultation in and about this Model for your next
Petition, I mean not for words but substance; ye that I pray consult, the mind
of God is amongst, the light of God in, and the truth of God professed by you;
lay the golden Rule, the Reed of the Temple, the Word or the Model and
Petition to this Rule, try, see, search, and find if it be not so: But herein
you are satisfied already; Yea, I think, scarce a man otherwise; What then? Up,
and be doing, for the Lord is with, and has laid this as a present work before
you; Yea, do not you see it on your Tables as you sit, and in your Bibles too;
Yea, is it not, and was it not in your hearts long ago; well, you had never
such a nick of time as now to promote so good a work: One man can do more than
fifty could formerly, you know who we mean, you have the ear of God; Yea, you
his little Church and Churches have so, and the heart of this man too: Pray
what should hinder? It is but ask and have; two humble lines from one of your
Society does this work, we will warrant you, but for company sake which is
good, yea, exceeding good in a good matter; You may all draw a line or two of
love and liking to the Work, and when he that has our hearts, as well as we
his, shall be humbly presented with these desires, we shall then see what a
gracious answer we shall soon find believe it; the Lord our God, nor the Lord
protector our true old Friend, and good Friend under him, can deny nothing to
the Saints, and little Churches, scarce himself, especially such a thing as
this as tends so much to the good of all souls; peace and welfare of the Church
and State, the glory of both, which is most under his care now: so then it is
but to seek and find, ask and have; one knock by a Petition, and this door of
Liberty flies wide open, beating down all that stand against it.

Well, is the Work before you, yea, on your Tables, in your hearts; Yea, and
put into your hand by God, and his poor sinning servants; do not delay time, it
requires haste, post-haste, therefore do not delay, because ye know not what
they are, nor where they are, nor of whose judgment, all which concerns just
nothing; The work is the Lords, and before you by his Providence, so we say
again, do not ye be busy.

Paul once complained none was like him; Why so? Every one minded his own
things, and none the things of Christ, Phil. 2. 21. but God forbid his Churches
should do so, or say what Liberty shall we have, and we have to exercise our
gifts that is selfish, why should one or the other say so, may not all have
leave, one as well as another, sure none will preach what the people cannot
bear, nor any thing disputeful, or to bring in Members to their own Churches,
but to the universal, one Church, of which wholly and solelie Christ is the
King, Past our, Priest and Prophet; yea, we say, none will speak or Preach
otherwise, that would straight confound us all, and spoil all our meetings then
indeed; but we are not jealous of you in the least, though we thus speak, for
we know you have learned to do all things in decency and order, 1 Cor. 14. 40.
not any thing in confusion; Yea, you have the mind of Christ dwelling in you,
1 Cor. 2. 16. and will do nothing in strife and vainglory Phil. 2. 3. boasting
in flesh, Gal 5. 26. wrangling or jangling, but in love and meekness, with a
sweet Spirit of humility to all good Magistrates and Ministers, which he has
set over us, for our good, that we may live peaceably, Godly and honestly in
both our Callings.

Now Brethren fare ye well, fare ye well again, peace and the God of peace
which passes all understanding now and ever knit and keep (Phil. 4. 7.) all
your Churches, members, hearts and minds in the knowledge of God our Father,
and of his Son Jesus Christ our dearest dear, and beloved one, these things,
persons, and this Work be now and ever in your hearts, and the grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, Amen, Amen, Amen. 2 Cor. 13. 11, 12, 13, 14.

A Word to our other Brethren; yea, to all you that love our Lord Jesus, the
God and Father of him that raised him from the dead, Acts 4. 10.
ANd to you that are traveling Sion-ward, some under one dispensation, some
under another, even as the Lord pleases, and persuades the heart, which light
of his in you, you neither dare nor can go against, but on, on, as the Lord
persuades, from one degree unto another, until at last you come to see he
himself, which you never do, nor can do fully in this vail of tears, though
some draw nearer far than others, by meeting with more fountains, (Psalm. 84.
8.) loves and discoveries; Yet the God of gods, and fountain of all joys and
glories they never fully see, but in time may; Yea, undoubtedlie shall, And
they shall see his face, Rev. 22. 4. and what I say to one I say to all, his
face in whose presence is fullness of joy, at whose right hand are pleasures
for evermore, Psalm. 16. 11. You which are traveling Si^n-ward shall, some it
may be with your Cimbals and instruments of joy, leaping as the Roe upon the
mountains of spices, Cant. 8. 14. through the indwellings of God, the high
discoveries and joys of his Spirit, which the joye of the Harvest is never
like in substance or operation, Isa. 9. 3.

Well, some are traveling so, with these joys and glories in their heart and
eye, others silently and s^eetlie, yea, greatly mourning and lamenting for the
absence of him, who should be nigh them and in them, Christ their Bridegroom
and husband; Luke 5. 35. and the comforts of Christ his Spirit and joys, all
which they want through the indwellings of sin, temptations and afflictions for
sin, to all these we have a word, a sweet word, and this it is:

They shall all return like the rivers in the South from their captivity, Psalm
126. 4. of sin, bondage and temptations to sin with joy, yea, they shall bring
their sheaves with them, Psalm. 126. 6.

The fruits of this penitential, holy and heavenly sorrow, which be it, where
it will, and as much as it will, it is never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10.
For on the heads of all hearts where this sorrow now dwells shall be everlasting
joy, Isa. 61. 7. yea, Crowns of Roses, joys and glories, these sorrows now
are pleiting, and when the work is done, like a mighty Eagle, sorrow and
sighing shall fly away, and all tears shall be wiped clean away from these
blubbered cheeks; God himself shall do it, Rev. 21. 4.

Wherefore comfort ye your selves and one another with these words, as Paul
says in another case, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18. In the mean time here is a work
commended to your hands from your brethren, your fellow members, Citizens and
travelers, yea, the same way with you, whom you and every one of you are bound
by God, nature, all the nearest relations and obligations under heaven to do
for all that you can, and for the present your hearts and hands are desired to
this good Work, for your good God and our Lord Jesus the glory of both, and
your own and our liberty; Yea, your own, for amongst you are many more precious
than choice silver, Lam 4. 2. Isa. 13. 12. Yea, the Stars of heaven mark well
what we say, and their graces would shine like the gold of Ophir, (Isa. 45. 9.)
where they called to the present work: which with tears, we beseech you
Brethren in Christ's stead, and for Christ's sake, Romans 12. 2. 2 Cor. 5. 20. to
set about in good earnest, and for the present get a meeting two or three
amongst your selves, God shall pay the Messengers that bring them together, 1
These. 1. 3.

What if you send a Summons ten or twenty miles round to meet in some
convenient places; Yea, Tickets, one man and one Saint unto another, it is the
work of God, and the generation; Yea; a Work that will wagg before you set your
hand, if our great Counsel do but hear an inkling, they know your labor of
love, and the godly will help; Yea, he that sits at the helm will do it
himself, it is in his heart, yea, and thoughts so to do; yea, to put you on it,
and wonders why ye stay so long in the Work of God, knowing he has power now
to do any thing for you: you in the Army have nothing else to do, and can pray
and preach well, if you have not forgot that and the afflictions of Joseph,
Amos 6. 6. which is sorer than all that you have freed us from: Yea, than the
Egyptian one, we value not to make brick, maintain you or any thing; Yea, your
wives and coaches to set but your helping hand; yea, the Lord set that, we need
not your sword but your faith, prayers and Petition; Yea, one word from the
Counsel of Officers at St. Jameses does it, and if one among you all scruple,
ask Mr. Cradack, he is right for the work, we are sure, old Hugh at Whitehall,
and most of your Independent Ministers, Nathaniel Caryll, Mr. Sterrey, Doctor
Owen, the man preaches well and clear; these will all help, however good
Captains, good Soldiers, Sergeants, Saints, and Christians, speak one to
another of the thing, for the Lord Jesus sake, it is right in your eyes, yea,
your own practice, and we have learned of you, and will set it up by the grace
of God, if you lay it by to look for Arrears and Debenters, which when this is
done you may: Yea, marry, buy and sell too: so ye do not forget the Rock, and
living unto him who like a River followed you in the Van and Rear, three
wildernesses together, some once or twice over, and smote the rock again and
again, yea, your enemies in every place where you or they met, Oh that men
would praise the Lord, may the Army now say, for his mercy endures for ever,
yea, sing this 136. Psalm, as long as you live, yea, breath; and yet we
dedicate it to you once again; yea, to every one of your hearts, it is so part
and full to your condition; And pray when you sound your brave triumphing
sounds, Remember us the last Trumpet, and how much of your love and zeal in
this particular you have lost, Rev. 2. 4, 5.

And now we come again to you Men and Brethren, which we were treating with
before; we meddled with the sword or godly of the Army about the same thing
still, if you have not dispatched your Summons to all men aind places where the
fear of the Lord dwells, rich, poor, hgh, low, young and old, blind, halt, and
lame; yea, get them altogether, to consult, do not stay, and say one to
another, Pray ye Sir do you, and Pray ye Sir do you; send for old Father Eli,
and you for young Samuel, and you for Zacheus, we, Christ and his people will
all dine there, Luk, 19. 5. and treat afterward about restoring every man his
own at least, especially the Liberty of the Saints, and promulgation of the
Gospel: but let every one; yea, some in particular, go to all as the Messengers
of the Churches 2 Cor. 8. 23. and let them charge them in the Name of God to
come straight away by the morning light, the light of God in them; yea, charge
them by this day, and charge them by this night of Gods withdrawing from them,
they delay no time, if they be about a business of their own, dealing in their
Calling, let them shut up, and bring them straight away, if they be about the
business of another, or meddling with the State, bring them straight away, if
they be about their holy Worship and Christian duties, bring them straight
away, yea, from the Lords Table to meet the Lords people; Men may leave the
best of duties upon some occasions, in a case of necessity, and such a one is
this; yea, the season of the year requires it, look else says Christ to every
Saint in England* do not you see the ears white: Pray ye therefore the Lord of
the harvest to thrust forth laborers into his harvest, John 4. 35. Mat. 9 38
Yea, pray my Lord Protector so to do, or else pray him, Oxford and Cambridge
will never send enough. What do we gazing so after these, as once the Angel
said, Oh ye men of Galilee, Acts 1. 11. So say we, Ye men of the Army, City,
Town and Country, why do ye all so gaze and gape after those men that were
taken away once; so shall they come again, yea, the very men shall come again,
though some without their gowns, yet their University gifts shall not be
wanting, the graces of the Spirit, the Gifts of Gods People, Oh my friends,
many of these you gape and gaze after are gone, and gone in the late wars, I
hope just the same men are not come again to another, much less to the same
place. This we never fought for, or looked for, unless they were taken by
their sequestrations up into heaven, I mean godly sorrow and Repentance for
their former sins, popery, pride, fullness of bread, ignorance, emptiness,
drunkenness and thirst, yea for our blood, which is precious in the fight of
the Lord, so says David, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of all
his Saints, Psalm. 116. 15.

Well, but shall we trust these thirsty wretches with our souls once again,
rather then a known godly Christian of ten or twenty years, standing gifts and
abilities.

Good and godly Tryers do not you do so wickedly, and sin against God, Gen 19
7. There be of the Synagogue of Satan, which say they are Jews, Rev. 2. 9.
Yea, they will say so now, because ye are uppermost, but try them well, and you
shall find them liars; they guilt themselves it may be by praying for the
State, and the Lord Protector can they by the Spirit do so, or Preach.

Well, we hope ye will not take tin, and lay by silver, Isa. 1. 22. for all
the keys of David in your hand, power to open and shut, whom and when you
please, which should be wholly in the hands of Christ, Isa. 22. 22. Rev. 3. 7.
Two sweet Texts in the eyes and hearts of Saints. But to our other friends once
again, whom we must entreat they are so backward, some through the worlds
pleasures, profits, places cannot give a meeting, no, it may be e^^ry week,
though it were to be wished they could, not because they, the Saints more
employed and richer, have better gifts the^ poor, but for their own souls and
graces sake, for a good meeting is better for the good of their souls, and
strength of their graces, than a good bargain or dinner, either much more then
a little idleness, some walk abroad, others ride some visit Joan hold my
staff the other day, but these rich Saints cannot come to our poor weekly
meetings, I wish they may to this good work, 'its their good Masters who has
blessed them thus.

Oh but others which have more peace, joy, and communion far then these, them I
hope will come; but some are so full of cares, fears and poverties that they
cannot give a meeting, unless it be the Lords day about five of the clo^k,
Well, once a week would do no hurt, nor bring the world backward, rather thee
forward and upward, and it is best thriving so, having food and raiment, let us
be content said a good man, 1 Timothy 6. 8 for our selves and children it is
employed; passions may come soon enough and may be God himself will be one, and
that is enough says David, Psalm. 119. 57.

In the mean time come you to the General Assembly of all Saints and Church of
the first born, Heb. 12. 23. Yea, to the first in the Work of the Lord, which
will be good so to do at last, it is best at first, and most honorable, God
ever minds the first fruits, Exodus 23. 19. and claims the first Male.

Christ the first Gospel Minister sets up him above John the Baptist, Mat. 11.
11. one Preached Repentance, the other Pardon. Mind it Presbyterians, too many
of you set up John the Baptist, and set the other by. Yea, Paul and John the
Evangelist both down; You know how I mean, one for an Antinomian, and the other
for a Flyer; Yea, sometimes a Liar, to make up the number of the Heretics,
because you for the present, it may be do not see them, yet truly for my part,
I do love exceedingly to see a Preacher as well as hear him, yet I must
confess they fly sometimes higer than I can well tell yet, or see where they
are, or hear either what they say understandingly, which I do not well like,
not dare not too hastily judge. I know but in part; Yea, says Paul, we all
know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9.

But when I do consider Christ and the Apostles, most of which slew very low;
Yea, preached according to the understanding, and best advantage for the
people, that is a good rule, but to fly to high is dangerous, and
unprofitable, one may get a fall, and the other two be dazzled, Yea, stagger in
his judgment, and misled it may be in judgment from the Lord, for want of
love to plain truths, 2 These. 20. 11, 12. and too much too high Disputes, the
fruit of spiritual pride, so I like not men too high, but as heavenly as they
will, in Emblems, Divine things, and Meditations: Yea, I say, I love to hear
men so Preach, and they take us up like John in the Spirit, Rev. 1. 10. or Paul
in his rapture, but these are still in New England, Old-England has but few,
so many changes have been of late, and every change distempers, some Ministers
half a year at least, after Mr. Loves head; how long before the Presbyterians
settled right to the work of Preaching Christ up, down self; Yea, are they yet
at it, especially the latter, I do not know, but I have heard a little; But
will you hear a fool and Friend gladly by way of advice, Job and David did so,
of you know whom* will you lift up Christ more in Prayer; Yea, your selves and
the Saints in what God has done for us in a way of praises, Ephesians. 1. 34. 56. as
well as what we are by nature, and that is bad enough in our selves, yet in
Christ's righteousness we are still righteous; Mind that, however confess no
more then you are guilty, and in that confession distinguish between men and
men, and this hint to in your preaching, and I shall presume no more, Lift him
up there who is the true brazen Serpent, John 3. 14, 15. for every eye to look
on; Spread upon the pole of the Cross, with his Crown of thorns fast nailed
to the Law, yea, justice of God for satisfaction, and so let his side run
freely, yea, tell the world of his Speech. W^man, behold thy son, John 19. 26.
Yea, sinner, sinner thy Savior, for it is thee he calls as well as she, and
when ye have clearlie so done by right distinguishing between the Law and
Gospel, what he has freely done for us; Yea, to the uttermost farthing, and
what he requires of us more then he has given or promised to us; and so ye
give us the very man that once looked down from Mount Olives, Luk 19. 41. with
soul-longings for us: Yea, ye give us then the very names of Christ Jesus, the
Lamb of God, that takes away the sins of of the world, (John 1. 29.) before
Repentance, and from thence gives right repentance never to be repented of,
world without end, Amen,

Will ye try a little this Doctrine, and give us this wine reserved for the
latter age, John 2. 2. at least one cup full now and then, and you will draw
the hearts of all men more then you do unto Christ, and your selves, and off
from all sin and sorrow, yea, our lives will be better, and our stirrings
quicker when you pour this oil of gladenesse upon our heads and hearts. And now
you that have it come away, to the old work and Petition for our Liberty to
preach the Scapegoat, Lev. 16 21. the Paschall Lamb, Exodus 12. 21. the brazen
Serpent, but some a little scruple at this, namely our Call; if it be but so, a
little scruple, come away, never be too nice in a good Work, for an honest
heart, it is for thousands, indeed it is so.

Oh but it is divelish, and damnable says many of our Brethren, honest sincere
and godly ones, say and think so happily because they have been taught so that
they have been the truth of it is too much, but for these that thought so, and
was once of that judgment, will you still maintain it therefore, I hope not
so; again many see, and will not see, but are sinfully silent, marry pray God
some great Ministers be not so (well, when one comes the other will, the people,
yea, both in time, how many of the latter would not come to a meeting till they
found the sweetness, but then like some cattle having tasted sweet corn; how
did they run and cry, come husband, come wife, let us go to such and such a
place to day, there is a very sweet meeting ten or twenty of them in a Parlour,
they begin and end with Prayer, two or three speak, but one at a time, all to
one point, I am sure by the same Spirit, 1 Cor. 12. 13. it was so sweet, and
did warm my very heart and soul, says one that has tried; Well, will ye try
now, you that are against the public exercisings of the People; Oh but I am
not for that yet; Why? A private life is good, but a public Saint is best, if
a Private meeting of ten or twenty Believers, and others be so sweet, the
latter saying nothing, nor the former but about forgiveness, faith, and
Repentance, how God pardoned them, and how sweet it was, what now they will do,
and how much through grace love again this God, and that the Lord is gracious
in himself, in his Son and Promises, he is good to all, yea, all his works
says one; yea, to Saints and the worst of sinners; Yea, says a third, or else
I had been in hell; believe you says a fourth Saint to the Sinners then; Yea,
you may believe now, look unto him and be saved, straight from that Text, Look
unto me all the ends of the earth, and be saved, Isa. 45. 22.

Leave and loath your sins after this, home runs the sinner and cries God was
amongst them, makes restitution straight crying out with David, Away from me
all ye workers of iniquity, Psalm. 6. 8. which another hearing of cries, this
was good if it were so, always when they meet to Preach, but they wrangle
much, fall out and judge one another very seldom we assure you a^ our set
meetings, carried on by a knot of true lovers, sober able Christians, but from
whence comes the Errors some cry, we have none amongst us, we answer for our
selves in two or three meetings that we know, but do hold the same truths, with
our Ministers in every particular; Yea, we are baptized into one and the same
faith with them, by the same Spirit through the same blood, 1 Cor. 12. 13. Yea,
we differ in nothing in the world, but that we would be setting up and
converting sinners too, thinking it is our duty, When thou art converted
strengthen thy brother, Luke 22. 32.

Oh, but from whence then comes your Errors? Most from Ministers scandalous,
not knowing the truth, sometimes through falsehood and the Ministers fancy, they
say such a thing, and such a thing is abroad, and spread them in their Pulpits
Errors which the people who are ever heavy in hearing to good and sound truth,
often catch the badd, it is good in some cases to see and not to see, we think
it is in this, especially not to say we see what we hear from three or four
hands, every one adding or diminishing; through weakness or wickedness, but
the Errors and erroneous are none of us, nor of the settled meeting
Christians, whose liberty we plead for, but rather some giddy headed gadding
Christians, that runs up and down, peeps in here, and peeps in there, no where
out of love, but in every place to object and wrangle, and make a little way
for an old Error, or a whimsie according to the rule of Paul, First in love we
check him once or twice, Tit. 3. 10. if they be not too gross, however they
are gone, or else ever silent, and converted from their sin; Yea, many times we
gain some that are just a going by underpropping them, when they lean a little
from the truth, by neglecting good Ministers, hearing bad; Our meetings to hear
bad Disputes, who, nor where we neither own nor know, nor love these things,
yea, we love nothing but what may tend to the edification of one or another,
nor will do nothing else in your public place when we come about a month
hence, some I hope will provide room or matter for us, but you shall never come
while you breath, says a Formalist, one that has every thing of a Saint, but
the real life, power, gifts, joys and graces, and these men will envy this
light, life and power, least other men should expect as much from them, because
they have past all along under the same names and notions of good and godly
men, and so we shall be slighted, say they, and in time loose our esteem for
our godliness, though we have followed them in their very steps, truly they
that seem to have something, and are nothing, will in time loose that, that is
certain, To him that has shall be given, and from him that has not shall be
taken away, even that which be seems to have, Mat. 13. 12.

But be this far from a good heart so to think, be his gifts or graces as small
as they will; have not the members of the Church their peculiar gifts? Are all
the Lords people Prophets, or have all the gifts of light knowledge, grace and
power alike? No, but every one has as God has given, nor is it requisite it
should be so; John speaks of babes, young men and old, 1 John 2. 12, 13, 14.

Every Member need not be an eye, nor every Saint a Prophet, yet every one is
to covet the best gift, especially this of Prophesying, 1 Cor. 12. 31. or
expounding Scripture, but he that cannot may be as much humble, yea, as much
useful in another way, therefore let not honest men and humble walking
Christians fear the loss of this esteem, but subscribe to the Model, Legal
men and Pharisees and hypocrites will be offended more than any, if every man
preach thus: It was so in Christ's time, and after, Acts 4. 2. but we stand not
for every man, but for some able men judged to be so, by some that are able so
to do, What if godly Christians should upon a summons from among themselves, or
from a Magistrate, choose two, three, or four, as the place can afford to be as
public speakers, as your Burgesses are chosen one, two or three for such a
Town, and two or three for such a Parish, not too many at the first by no
means; better one old speaker then three or four young ones coming on for the
present, will ye take a fools advice, it is but a hint, not a platform, or a
rule for all; that were high presumption; Yea, to make ones self St. Peter, but
let me say what we think would do well, leave your young speakers coming on to
the private, we can bear with one another weakness there, and gain ^^ much by
one as the other many times, but still for the present able to divide the word,
batter down sin, yea, the sinners, and raise up the Saints, especially the
mourners of Sion, Isa. 40. 1. answer all objections bravely, preach bold and
humbly, put out these first, and the other forward as much as may be, and
hereto we, who cannot well tell what to say in this nice point, would not be
too strait laced in giving leave to any to speak or object a little, desiring
every man's Light may be held forth, most where his life and conversation is
known to be good and godly; yet we think they may do as Parsons do speak, one
for another that are well known; And what if it were by a kind of Commission,
we mean the approbation of the Saints thereabouts; yea, and it would be very
good to have as much love, leave, and liking as may be from others, and we hear
of many that are free and willing to hear us* before or after Sermon, every day
we hope to gain more and more, yea we have gained much already this way.

And this we add further, You that choose these men, improve your Interest with
your Minister of the Parish, giving him to know who it is, what it is, when it
is, and why it is he should speak in the Public this request of yours, his
love or liking of the man or men's Spirits, may put him, himself upon the
breaking of the ice, and recommending of the work to the people once or twice,
then the thing is done, laughing, jeering, standing up, the News, and talking
of it, and all kind of hubbubbs are hushed and gone for ever, and we have our
Liberty without the loss or mischief of an hair to any man living.

Ministers, our hearts, hands, purses, we feast them, they sometimes us; yea,
and we will better all their means, be it Tithes, be it what it will be; yea,
we will look to their charge in case of death, own them, and do for them as our
own Brethren; yea, and a thousand times more, in requital of their love to us,
and the truth, which then they have to purpose manifested to the world round
about; yea, and then every eye shall see that they are not in the least, what
too many are to prone to think, yea, and hastily to judge.

But yet a word more to our setters up, in case such a one or more, should
through weakness, and the devil which will not be wanting every way to tempt
and try, fall into any scandalous sin, one or more, yea, or in case he do not,
but grow proud and selfish, which that there may be danger of, we admonish or
else give our thoughts may be from the mind of the Lord in this thing also:
That then our Christian friends and neighbors, the Godly of the Parish, yea,
one or two of these bodies may for the honor of Christ, the Vindication of the
Gospel; yea, and for the good and humbling of the guifted Christian brother,
with a great great deal of humility, grave and godly exhortation call in, and
take back his Commission, with a dehortation to exercise any more for the
present, yet after a full manifestation of his godly sorrow, not for a week,
month, scarce three or four let it be returned, and when ever it is, with a
great deal of grave exhortation, yea, and prayer among your selves; yea, ordain
none nor Ticket none without that, nor let never none claim to, or look upon
himself as an absolute Minister, but as a kind of assistant, much less to
meddle with many things quite out of their sphere, as baptizing, burying,
ministering the Sacrament, or any such kind of works, for these are without
dispute the proper office of the Minister who has the charge of the place, and
not of these who help only of good will, exercising not every day so
constantly as the Minister better miss three Lords days than not hit one, my
meaning is not good and sound matter; and now I think how they were served that
went to cast out Devils, Acts 19. 15, 16. upon whom the evill-Spirits fell, and
cried out against, wounding, tearing, and sending them away naked and ashamed,
so say we; happily a Ranter vain or ungodly man may attempt to imitate or do, in
vain glory, but let all such take heed, the beadel, people, or Churchwardens
do not fall upon them; nothing will preserve a man from mischief but sincerity
in such a case, therefore let all take heed what they attempt from the example
of these vagabond Jews, and how they do disturb any congregation, or come with
tears, vain wanton notions or delusions of the devil to disturb our holy
worship, and in case such a man do come, mark the sting or poison of the adder,
and mildely give a hint of that, the Justice will take course if he come too
often, but for once he may pass as he is, but no more by no means.

But as I said but now, Scribes Pharisees and Hypocrites will storm and grieve
exceedingly, notwithstanding all these cautions, and cry down for pride,
Schism, faction, new doctrine, and I know not what; yea, a legion of lies they
will raise against it, but this is one, yea, a thumper to, cry out so unless
it be in this sense, they mean it has been lying by a long time we do
confess, yea, and up by Antichrist, but be it new or old it must be sold and
broached every day, an old suit or fashion long laid by, is a new when put on
again, an old Antichristian Error is the like, when it is new broached; but we
are sure this Gospel Truth spurned at by the Ministers whilst they send a Post
to Scotland for you know what, and what it cost, is no new thing, but an old
thing, and that must not be despised nor the old customs of the Saints in the
Primitive times too.

Take a bundle of Texts and weigh them at your leisure, we are in haste too.

Acts 8. 4. 8. Acts 18. 28. Acts 17. 11. Acts 11. 19, 20, 21. Heb. 3. 13. Heb.
10. 24, 25. Jud. 20. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11. 14, 19, 20. 1 Pet. 4. 10, 11. 2 Pet. 1.
20. 21. 1 Pet. 2. 9. James 5. 19. 20. Mal. 3. 16. Isaiah 2. 3. Joel. 2. 28. 1
Cor. 14. 34. Col. 3. 16. 1 Cor. 2. 14, 15, 16. Phil. 1. 16. 17. Number. 11. 26.
Mar. 9. 38, 39.

Surely some of these are to the purpose, and never a one in the Bibl^ looks
with a full and broad face against us: But to come to the old matter.

Well, are you for the work, or are you not? You bondmen to the Ministers, five
to Mr. such a one, and ten to Mr. such a one, yea, and it may be twice as many
to another, Oh ye captive daughters of Sion, Isa 52. 2. Yea, Sinah, I had
almost said the children of the bondwoman, Gal. 4. 22, 25. But the Lord make
you free, whose freemen you are, if you be Believers; have you never read that
Text If the Son make you free, you are free indeed, John 8. 36. We know he
has, yea, we cry aloud, Come out of her my people, all kind of Antichristian
bondage, and how fast are you in, yea, tied by the leg to one Pew or one
Pulpit, daring scarce for your life, miss one Sermon in a whole year of one
man's Preaching, when a hundred, may be five, are as good within a mile round,
here in the City, but still you ly groaning under such a one, and such a ones
Cushion as it were, where he beats the Law, yea, breaks your heart, or at
least puzles and fills your soul with doubts; yea, almost quite off from
believing that your sins are pardoned, which were pardoned long ago.

For the Lords sake do not sigh, and cry, if I have not all grace, I have none,
all faith, yea, to remove mountains, especially that of Repentance, which they
branch out forty ways sometimes, thirty of them in impossibilities, have thou
a loathing of sin, love and liking to Christ, Faith in and on Christ, to act
and fetch comfort from Christ, it is enough; yea, have thou nothing of all
this? Believe thy sins pardoned, and they are pardoned; yea, believe it to be
so really, and they are, as sure as the Lord lives, fetch strength from that,
wash thy face, dip thy head, back and belly in the blood of Christ, the
Fountain set open for Judah and Jerusalem to wash in, Zech. 14. 1. Yea, dabble
day and night thy soul there, especially in your hot days of temptations and
accusations; yea, in such days lay always by your thoughts in the Fountain,
dipping and diving of your souls like the little dive dapper, in the mean time
put on thy, beautiful garments, Isa. 42. 1. and come away, and do not cry, I
am for Paul, and I am for Apolos, I am for Cephas, 1 Cor. 3. 22. I am for
Christ, for so do many say, dividing him, but will you be for us, and our old
work, you that say you are for Christ, we are in his way, and for his work, and
resolved upon it by the grace of God, you are for Christ in one, we for Christ
in every man: Yea, to make him known to every man like Philip we would call
Nathaniell, John 1. 45.

Run and tell, yea, Preach, we was about to say with the woman of Samaria, and
with the Angel, show where men have laid by Christ and Religion too in these
times, yea, where and when again he is risen in the souls of his, and with
Stephen witness these things almost with our blood, I do not see Stephen (now
I think of it) had much more call then some whom we plead for, only more of
God, and zeal for God to encourage to the work, and I hope we shall have some to
begin in every parrish Church; if in case the Magistrate give not leave, this
were a work of honor, and worthy to be chronicled amongst the Miracles of the
Saints, if such a one should a little suffer; yea, would we could but hear of
one or two suffering in such a kind of way what never a bold man in all the
Churches now in London that dare come to ours. Margarets, Paul's, White Hall,
Covent Garden or Clements, there you may be all welcome, and preach a little
Sermon before the Minister comes in the Name of God, break the ice some body,
make a gap in the hedge of Antichrist, we will widen it and follow in apace.

Where is the Bell-weather of the Saints, I mean the brave; able, bold and
gifted Christian that can go on in his matter roundly, answer all objections
bravely, look scoffers in the face boldly; yea, go on with his matter if in
case the people stare, stand up on the top of the Pewes, whisper one to
another, never minding these things, yea, in case the Church Wardens, which are
seldom good, cry, Pray Sir be quiet and make no disturbance, Sir, we speak for
Christ and will till the Clerk or Minister come; if one sheep go first, forty
straight will follow; but by all means let us first of all draw our Petition,
if it be but three lines, yea, and let our hands be to it by all means, and
not one man but every man's name be down, but not one more, than really godly
and blameless in their conversations, yea, let all such in London, and all
such in England, yea, in Wales where they say they are good at the work
already, and have very good success in one or two places, the people flock in
amain, their Welsh blood malignity and ignorance out; yea, let all subscribe;
two, three or four parrishes may, where the Saints be scarce, else every one a
Petition by themselves, yea, and as near as may be give notice one Church, one
country to another so to do, yea, and come in Person as many as conveniently
can, it will do my Lord Protector good to see some of his poor old friends and
his Soldiers, Landlords once again, some of which he has prayed with and for.

What if a day, or two, three, or a week be lost upon so good an account? My
Lord will bear your charges down with his gracious answer; the great Council
has prepared it already, if you will but come; Why do you stand staying for a
hand or two, when you have thousands known to be good, godly, quiet, humble and
self-denying Christians, some will come the next day, but stay not you for any:
We have stayed too long, they that will not join now may hereafter, let every
man do as the Lord shall persuade him, Gal. 1. 10. and let us do so too. This
was always the rule and saying of one of our best friends, In the name of God
let us see what he says now he is still the same man, and for the same things
we hope though in more power.

Oh, but you will say the people are not yet persuaded: No, nor never will to
any thing for their good; Must not we compel men into Christ? Luke 14. 23.

Ob. God must persuade them by his word and Spirit.

Ans. This is the means commanded to be used, and that that has been
frequently blessed, and let that satisfy all good men that will be satisfied,
Acts 11. 21. 1 Cor. 14. 31, Jud. 20, 21, 22, 23.

Yea, the last ten years experience which you say has filled the world with
errors; and although many errors were before concealed, it was but as the
weeds are in the night, which are as much then as in the day, only men cannot
so well see them as when the light arises: but God forbid the the Sun should
not shine for fear of these weeds growing or discovering.

The way to weed the world is not to put out the Lights or Light of the world,
Math. 5. 14

The Devil, errors, ignorance and wickedness may as well hide under a short
cote, a rigid Presbyterian strickt and strait Last form as in a Bishops Goun.

What think ye of Scotland where we be all can Religion for the Kirk and
Pearson, and in gend faith we will pay the Sectaries Army, and the Devil
Crumwel the horn of the beast, (we say of the Lamb, Rev. 5. 6. and we are sure
he was so to us, and we hope ever will be) What? Stand against the Kirk of God,
Preach themselves, and speak against their Ministers; aut, aut, for shame,
haang these heretic dogs, false lowns and blasphemers, yea, the curse of God
and the holy Kirk light on them all I say.

What do you think of these poor simple ignorant and bewitched people, which
never wanted legal Preachers; but alas, is their harvest like ours, or is
there not too too much want of our gifted Saints amongst them, the Lord
convince all opposers upon this consideration, and the experience from among
our selves, for although more errors may be now then ten or twelve years ago,
yet we are sure they are not considerable to the numberless number of knowers
that are more now than ever in England, yea, in any place of the world, and we
hope ye fear egransdamnes a thousand for one hundred, and I pray consider that.

But we conclude with this Prayer, The Lord grant our knowledge lay none of us
the more low in hell; and on the other hand lead some, that see and will not,
toward the sin against the holy Ghost, which of all men in the world clear
knowers, strict Professors and rigid men are aptest to fall into; we have told
you already who always resisted the holy Ghost, and murdered the Lord of life
and glory; O if ever a Prophet perish in England, it will be by Jerusalem:
means, the knowing legal godly men.

Luke 13. 33, 34, 35.

An Exhortation to the gifted Saints to manage well this Liberty, or some
Gospel Rules for new Preachers.
ANd now holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, joys, gifts and
graces of the holy Spirit, which few or none of the Princes of this world which
come to naught do or have known for many hundred years, 1 Cor. 2. 6. yet not
hid from some of the Princes of this world now in our days, the glory of the
Nation, and to you we would be free, for we are all so being the Lords bond men
and servants, yea, to some of you in great Authority, we cannot but commend it
if we could, we would certainly command it, but do for the present on the knees
of our affections humbly entreat you to condesc^nd to this mean, high and low
work, the work of a few Fishers at the first, God himself in Person after,
though at first of all by many great men, Kings, Priests, Prophets, Samuel,
Moses, Aaron, David and Daniel, now Peter Paul, James and John again, yet not
without the old Spirit, the Spirit of his Son.

God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times past by the
fathers the Prophets, has in these last times spoken to us by his Son, Heb. 1.
1.

You the great Saints of England, and glory of the world, we would entreat you
on the knee again and again, yea, beseech you in the bowels of love, yea, the
God of love, and the mercies of that God, Romans 12. 2 for his own, and the
honor of his, and the poor gifted Saints sake, that you would all pull off
your Crowns of honor for an hour, as once the poor fishers did their great
boots to follow Christ, else it would have been but slow.

And you my Lord Protector; What if you should begin in this high and low work,
and give us in your own Person one short and sweet Sermon now at White Hall, as
late you did to your own Family, we would say King David were on earth again,
and put in their murmuring no more at your present greatness, who did a meaner
thing in dancing before the Ark of God, 2 Samuel 6. 16. My Lord, look to the
Canopies above, and down again to White Hall, yea, your self, and what are you
(though so great a Saint) more than a worm, gnat, nothing, Isa. 41. 14. Yet may
you Nothing, this way honor him that is what he is, and does what he pleases
in heaven and in earth, yea, in hell, amongst and with Saints, Angels, men and
devils, yea, every living thing, as well things that are not, winds, Seas,
storm, fire, hail, ice, snow, yea, day and night, for they are all his too,
Psalm. 74. 16.

This one Being, and Being of all Beings may you poor Nothing yet preach, and
our good Lord Jesus, who once beca^e nothing to serve and make you and us all
Kings, Priests and Prophets to our God by his blood. Rev. 1. 6.

Not that above once or twice we desire this work of honor from and for you to
preach this God that every moment rides the circle of the heavens, Isa. 40. 22.
upon the mighty wings and Chariots of the winds that draws or drives the
cloud^ hither and thither, yea, the Seas, where he wills quite from off the
earth, and flings them down again upon the Prayers of his people, when and
where he please, as lately now, when man and beast was mourning, yea, every
senseless creature dying, yea, the earth it self yauning wide, as if that and
all would dye, yea, dye they would, and dye they must at once, but God
prevented all for his peoples sake, and said live again.

Oh that men would praise his Name, and sing again his mercy endures for ever,
Psalm. 136. a Psalm for your soul in secret, but a Sermon it is we beg, yea, one
at at least from you my Lord, and the Princes among the people, yea the Saints
of the most high God, Dan. 7. 27 shall imitate you all for the honor of the
work.

Nathaniel Pickering, Woosl^y, Sadler, and Sir Henry Vane, all which and many
more could and can, pray and Preach bravely; and if all Jacob be but one worm
to the God of Jacob, it is no dishonor to these choice bitts of this worm to
praise their Maker once or twice at the least in the great Congregations, and
the Assemblies of the Saints, which David hints so often at, as his own
practice in a soul exalting way of glory, I will praise thee in the
Congregation, yea, in the great Congregation of the people, yea, among the
Gods, Psalm. 111. 1. and 138. 1.

I will do it, and will not you Gods your selves once at the Prayers of all
Saints, as Paul speaks in another case, God forbid you or any should be ashamed
of a good Master, and what is it else that some princes stick at; Come, come,
it will be an honor one day to come bowing to the Saints, and lick the dust of
their feet, yea, the meanest work for Christ, and them, will be an honor for
the greatest Monarchs in the world, yea, to preach this King of kings, that
has this Name written on his thigh, The Word of God, Rev 19. 13. and 16. Read
ye often the sixty of Isaiah; but let us come down from these gods to the
people, yea, to the Saints that may tend it best, and most to them we have a
word.

Be as the tree or river in the Paradise of God, Rev. 2. 7. Watering and
feeding, yea, feed and water, yea, that have gifts, all the rest, yea, all the
Church of God over which you are made in your own proper places Overseers, a
high glory so to be Acts 20. 28. but begin at the 17. verse, and mark well the
whole Chapter.

The Angels never were but servants to bring news or carry Saints to their
home, Heb. 1. 14. and how sweetly did they sing for joy of this glorying in the
Work, Luke 29. And what may you say? Oh ye dust of Jacob who are all of you
together less then the least of the mercies of a God. Genesis 32. 10.

Your God we mean, and your work we are at, that is to Preach him up, sin,
Satan, death and Devils down; yea, to their own places, I mean the sorrows of
the Saints, and the works of darkness, all which are to be Preached down, and
Christ up, from the grave of death and hell, with the keys of both in his
hand, Rev. 1. 18.

This Lord and these keys must you Preach up, yea, the power now in his hand,
and in his hand alone, over sin, Satan, curse, grave, Law, men, devils, Saints
and Angels, things present and to come, yea, over all these he is King for
ever, and has wholly and solely the power of, and over these things, souls and
consciences of men. That is one thing my Brethren, you are now called to Preach
up, by the first born, which do call on you from the rising of the light, life
and love of God now in their souls, and therefore do not scruple.

Oh ye Kings of the East, Rev. 16. 12. but come forth as the morning Sun in the
glory of your gifts and graces, and the Spirit of the Son and Father, and
Preach up all three, the Father in his love, John 3. 16. the Son in his merit,
1 Timothy 1. 18. yea and the fruits, joys, life and power of the Spirit, Gal. 5.
22. converting and convincing, killing, saving, damning and destroying powers,
burning up, and burning down like devouring fire in and on the soul, the world
and all the works of flesh, flaming up to the heavens, the righteousness of
men, much more pride, hypocr^sie, self, and the foolishness of and in man,
every whereas he turns from one form to another, resting more than he ought
therein.

Well, and who is now free, fit and sufficient for this thing, but our
sufficiency is of God, 2 Cor. 3. 5. And he has appointed for good men every
one to contribute what he has, and yet I know my brethren you have just
nothing of your own but a little self-pride, and self-covetousnesse,
earthlinesse and lust, anger, pride, malice, emptiness, and fullness in your
own conceit, yea, this is all the best of you all have; Are not ye stufft with
these things hatred and rebuke, yea, your very hearts as David speaks in
another sense, and would be seen of men as Christ tells elsewhere, being very
hypocrites, pray, preach, dispute and Prophecy for nothing else in the world
but to get the world, because it is a step and stirrup for preferment to be
seen of men so to do, and glory to the flesh to be counted somebody, and a
brave Preacher, yea, almost a Pastor at least a Member and an Officer in the
Church of Christ, called such a man's Church, an ungodly divelish word; Who has
a Church but Christ? What? has every selfish Saint a Church purchased by his
own blood, got and brought from the body, I know not how? No, it may be never
of it, but got into it at a back door, or brought in head and shoulders, or for
company, which is best still in the best things; But this is stark naught to
call any Church of Christ, or little piece of his body by the name of this or
that, or the other man; but be ye what ye will, Pastor, Preacher, Church or no
Church.

Mind what you are in your selves, though in Christ we all know you are
righteous, Col. 2. 10. Yea, you especially that are gifted Saints indeed, for
our eye is still on you, and only you for carrying on this work of Reformation
in the world, and setting up of Christ in the Popes Chair, as it were, and if
ever he had a pill or a pull, this will be one to purpose, yea, me thinks we
see the Rope just about his neck himself hanged up and choked, and the Spirit
breathing, yea, the witnesses which have lain dead and slain as it were many
hundred years, or Prophesying in sackcloath at the best are now alive again; do
not you hear and see them speak, pray, Preach and Prophecy and their beds
green Cant. 1. 16. Fruitful in their Work, successful in their war against
sin, Satan, Turk, Pope, devil, devils mates, and all the powers of hell, Munks,
Punks, Priests Friars, whorish and false worshippers, these rogues, rovers,
drovers robbers of the soul of men, backs and bellies too, Pigmongers,
whoormongers, Applemongers, Egg, Corn, Pease or Baconmongers, loving all and
better bitts too: greedy dogs, and Priests that can never bark, pray nor
preach, but are snapping honest men in all hours and companies, often on the
Ale bench, Puff and tippling elsewhere, but the witnesses are up on their legs
again, for the King of glory as in the days of old.

And have at, away runs the rabble, the Kings of the Eall drive these locusts
to the West, the Devils to their dens, and Imps to their dams, and Errors to
their homes. yea, all to the Devil, most to the Pope, many to the Mass-Priest,
the other Priest too, and his tail, lustful, lazy, idle, simple, ignorant,
wanton, loose, and vain-glorlous Christians, Shakers, Quakers, and ungodly
Ranters, some such there be.

All these, and your journey Jobbers, hard red faced Clerks, Sawers, Psalm-men,
Wardens, Pares, neither good, drunken Readers, Sleepers, Runners, or Baptizers,
that have always Cross and Common prayer, yea, and Godfathers in their
Pockets too; these are all the long tail of the Priest, where these errors,
like a bag full of catterpillars, hang as on an old bush, the rising of these
Kings, Tub-Preachers so called, fires, frights, yea, burns bag, bush, yea, the
devils nest and all; And this is your work, mark how Paul's falls, the scaffold
to the Body, all to the ground. It is our work, and it does us good to the
heart to see how the old idle whore tumbles, yet hang her, she will make a
brave Hospital, and a good piece of Reformation it would be to give her to the
Saints for such a kind of use; you that are free, fit, and long for this work,
yea, to be setting up this new Trade, as some fools think, yea, too many good,
godly choice, and precious Saints, but take a serious observation, though a
weak application follow, the Jews Temple rent, Mat. 27. 51. at the slaying
Christ, in that was the true worship, and true worshippers of God, but the
worship and worshippers were little less then a den of thieves and robbers,
yea they murdered the Lord of life and glory, Acts 7. 52. God tears their
worship, yea, the worshippers in pieces, rejecting both by this simile, rending
the whole Temple in twain, yea, did he ever since smile on that sinful selfish
people against the appearances of Christ in his own Person, and Disciples whom
he ever, did and does still love as himself, but these zealots in their
darkness does by the servant, as before with the Master, one is a Beelzebub,
yea, so says the Scribes, Pharisees and Doctors, most Temple-men, but before
this inhumane murder of our Lord Jesus, the people cried, Hosanna, Hosanna,
John 12. 13. though after Crucify, Crucify, Mark 15. 13. 14.

The Priest leads the people to their sin, God rejects both, they reject the
Stone, Mat. 21. 42. the Stone rejects the builders, Romans 11. 15. Yea, the
sacrifice of them all, but the Temple then was rent.

Mind their sin thoroughly, for which this Judgment comes, the Person of Christ
they loathed, the Spirit of Christ is as really now in the members of Christ, 2
Cor. 13. 5. As God was in the humane nature of Christ when they hanged him on a
tree, this Spirit they cannot come at; but how many this day nail this Spirit,
and the appearances of it, yea, the very arms and legs of it, they crown these
appearances with reproaches, yea, thorns, some think they are making such a
cap now, others see them spit continually in every Sermon. I could almost name
some that cry for the spear, noted ones. (C. A, and others) what has this love
and speckled Dove done against these men, which good work is it they would now
stone him for, is it for enlightening the world, or filling their hearts with
joy, which others did with sorrow, for convincing men too much of the deeds of
darkness, John 16. 8. or distinguishing of the works of holiness, wills and
inventions of men, all which this Spirit does, must and was to do, yea, to fill
the world with Prophets, but take heed ye despise not these little ones, Mat.
18. 6. yea, erring ones, for so they are in the esteem of most men.

Touch not the anointed of the Lord, he has rebuked Kings for their sakes, nor
do these Prophets any harm, Psalm. 105. 15. If ever you do, know, God and men
forewarnes you of meddling with these or his little Churches, which you are too
apt to spit at, and speak hardly of, but the work of God is carried on by these
little trees, scattered Saints and Churches, yea, God and his Spirit has done
it.

And why may not this be a providence or sign, this piece of Babels Temple
falling, when a Sparrow falls not otherwise, Mat. 10. 29. which they say has
stood so many hundred years, it is strange, why should it fall now? in the
rising of the Saints, the coming forth of the Spirit, or the zealous
persecuting of the worshippers; but to receive wounds in our names, holy
worships, and Christian prophesying, as schismatics, heretics, giddie,
gaddie, headie, ignorant, factious, foolish, and blasphemous men, opposers of
all government, and all for our holy worship, as we think from God, and
according to the mind of God, yea for all these wounds in the houses of our
friends, Zech. 13. 6. this wounds our souls double as it were.

This present Simile and fall may prognosticate something, our prayer and
prayers shall be, that you nor your Temple may never be left to outward
judgments, much less your Sacrifice be loathed, or any thing hid from your
eyes, yea all our eyes, that may concern your present, much more your future
weal and happiness; yea we will ever pray, that they that see may say, and
they that say may see, what they do in the day of their visitation, yea
temptation to all that dwell on the earth, or elsewhere, below the true God,
life, light, and love of God, and those wherein this light, life, and love is
daily manifested, which heaven froward men neither do nor can know, or did
they ever? yet now are fallen, not as the Angels to bondage and darkness, God
forbid, or from the Olive either, the love and sweetness, life, joys, and
fatness once of communion with the Vine, our head and husbands presence and
embraces, which makes and keeps our beds, and graces, heads, gifts, hearts,
joys and glories lovely, green and fruitful, yea, our bed being so by his
rising on, in, and with us, our hearts, joys, hopes, helps are always near
us, nor may, nor can we then be touchie, vain, wanton, sinful or idle, yea men
may say what they please, do what they please, tempt while they please, men
and devils all, but we charge you do not awaken our beloved till he please,
Cant. 2. 7. yea once again we charge you by the Roes and the Hindes, the
leaping of our hearts, the joys of our souls, all which are as in a pleasant
field, a specious and spacious place of liberty, where our souls are sported,
over hills and dales, high and low, promises all chased and set home upon us by
the Spirit, but awake not our beloved until he pleases.

Yet let us about and about the mountain of spices, Cant, 8, 14. until the day
break, and all these shadows of sin, temptations, accusations and sorrows fly
all away, which for the present the body, bed, head, and whole soul is filled
and laden, sometimes by friends, who through envy would fain wake our beloved,
but still our bed is gr^en and fruitful; none of these things can cause
uncleanness, unclean things may, yea do often, come out of men's beds and
mouths seemingly green like ours: this may and can be, must and will be, but
can an unclean thing, or action, word, or thought, much more reproach, shame,
sinful evil surmisings, false lies and slanders, with bitter invectives, the
brats of Babell begotten with strife, pride, ill will and envy, on beds of
ignorance, seemingly green, all bastards by bondage, and the bond-womans
sons. But Mount Sion the sons of her whose beds are green and really so, do
nor can bring forth any of these unclean spirits, or the evil of them, love,
joy, and the fruits of love, longings, and forbearance, without envy or evil
for any, but good will for all, yea and good for evil, the best of good we can
we wish to our enemies, whilst we pray for our friends, we forget not our
selves, it is true, nor the worst of them neither, the falsenesse of them that
kiss and smite us, love us as their lives, and leave us at an hour.

But we will run on nor off no more from our brethren, only close up the
point, you know what you must preach up, and what down, when you go about the
work, which the Lord set you forward for, and assist you in.

Christ must be preached up in his Kingly Office, all power in his hands, it
may be Church keys and all, Isai. 22. 22. Yet some are too busy, and claim
more than Peter ever did, lock out and lock in worse many times. But self and
all of self must be preached down, the loves of God, the coming of the Spirit,
the Sons Merit, and tumbling down of Paul's, we mean Gods leaving, of the
froward heart and worshippers, but this latter with abundance of caution, not
loudly, nor angerly, or seemingly zealous in carriage, or countenance,
bitterly, so I mean, but with one hand always on your heart in a begging way
of consideration ever press this point, be sure to do it, in a love-Dove like
winning way, yea, let this holy Spirit breath in you all, and live at rest in
you all, then you must be quiet with all men, Romans 12. 18. self, condition and
relation, Phil. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 6. 7. rather suffer wrong, never do any, Ier. 22.
3. You must make peace and follow it with and for all men, 1 Pet. 3. 11.

If you will Preach the God of peace, and our Lord Jesus the Prince of peace,
Isa 9. 8. hear nor tell no news that may tend to strife, Prove. ^6 20. Say it
is not so, sure you are mistaken. Ah but he was weak or angry, be sure you be
free from pride and covetousness the sin of many Preachers, Prove 16. 18. Prove.
29. 23. Luk 12. 25. Heb. 13. 5. 1 Cor. 6. 10. do not fly too high* nor lie too
low in your Preaching, but that I leave till anon, be grave and sober, 1 Cor,
14. 40. Tit. 2. 7. be humble and modest, Psalm. 101. 2. Romans 12. 13.

Be sure you do not Preach, humm, haw, speak little nonsense when you Preach or
Pray, yea, and look to the main chance at home, 1 T^m. 5. 8. for we will never
feed you as a Minister, give or lend you sixpence more than another brother; it
is better to give then to borrow, Acts 20. 35. have a care of running into
debt, Romans 13. 8. ill coming out, these cares and thorns will spoil any
Saint, or Preacher in the world, Luke 8. 14. Preach sometimes abroad, yea, be
sure to Preach and pray to and with every one that is sick, Jam. 5. 14.

And this you may have leave to do, especially to poor people, and poor Saints,
I am afraid may want and want, for all some.

Persuade all erring, Gal. 6. 1. convince all living one time or other, if it
were possible, remember while ye live this saying, Woe be to him that all men
speak well of Luke 6. 26.

What good thing do thou (Mat. 5. 47.) more then another? And yet a Teacher,
a full gut and empty stomach always goes together, I am sure in a Preacher: It
is an ugly thing to belch, humm, haw, or spit to make thy self to be hemmed up,
the sin of your nothing asses; do not be too tedious in Prayer, Mat. 6. 7. but
pray when you pray, and mind what you say, Parrats prate, Papists pray,
Protestants cry, Lord have mercy upon us. Amen. say we, for they know not what
they say many times in the Pew and Pulpit; yea, good men may strive to speak
more then in the sense of Gods love or their own vileness; and we are resolved
if you pull a Sermon from your Pocket, we will all run away, therefore keep in
the desk if you mean to read old notes or new, we love to drink from the
fountain.

Take no notice who governes, confess no more for, nor against then is
needful, be sure ye be not a touchy fool, a Pinch-belly, or a tyrant over son
or servant, nor be too lofty neither, but read often the 6. of the Ephesians,
correct most for sinning faults after exhortation, and all kind of Passion, Mr.
Dods rule, have a care of controversall points, a ripe wit hears, objects, and
sends you home ashamed after Sermon is done. Never come in flaunting Cuffes,
powdered or too long hair, although thou be a gentleman, 1 Cor. 11. 14.
Expect not a glass of sack, nor turn into the vestry that stinks of old Baal
and his vestments, 2 Kin. 10. 22. but slink away home for fear of being proud,
some body may flatter, have a care of your wifes tongue, much more your own,
foolish jests or laughing, 2 Timothy 2. 16. when you hear them.

It is enough to be guilty of another sin, a silent or mellancholy look when
others laugh is a good reproof: Christ never laughed at all, no more should a
Christian scarce, and yet rejoice always, Isa. 53. 3. 1 These. 5. 16. Yea, this
is joy indeed, and not the girning of fools, go by no means to the tippling
School, but in some great cases; what? a Parson in an Alehouse, more than for a
glass, it was, is, and ever will be scandalous, dine not too much abroad,
persuade thy wife to gossop seldom, the Ministers wife must take place, and
she be humble to all, never go too fine; be free, Romans 12. 13. invite honest
neighbors now and then to dinner, yea, sinners, preach Christ to them all,
that is a Scripture rule, Mar. 16. 15. I am sure: be not chubbed, dogged, or of
a Melancholy look, Psalm. 149. 3. Do for the worst in the world if thou may
without hurt, but especially for the Saints, Gal. 6. 10. yea, pinch back and
belly sometimes for them, the feet will go far for the head, the head plod much
for the belly, the eyes looking after all Ephesians. 4. 25. Speak very kind, d'off
thy hat to any, 1 Pet. 3. 8. persuade thy wife not to be too complementall,
however love her as Christ loved the Church, if she has a thousand failings,
Ephesians. 5. 25. Col. 3. 19. If thou lie, cheatst, or cozenest in thy Calling, we
will hang thee at thy shop, Romans 2. 21.

However thou have done so to thy name and Profession and it stinks, do not say
thou will not give and give, sell and sell, that is lying, Prove. 20. 14. None
will trust what thou say, light gain makes an heavy purse, and the buying of
a thing in some cases to a poor man, Prove. 15. 27. Mind this griping Citizens,
go not a stargazing, a world gazing, needless walks and visits, time is
precious, Ephesians. 5. 16. Lords, Ladies, Fools, and young Gallants, yea, too many
Christians, squander that away.

If the Sun be setting, or the Sand run, then they beg and houl, but good
Sun, good Sand, or good death, will not hold a minute their immortal souls from
going to God, Christ, joys, Saints, Angels, Sym, Him, flames, chaina and
devils, one or the other, all men.

Think on that in time, and be sure to preach it much to the world, and let not
one neighbor forget another so soon as he has got his biskets, always think
upon the soul, and where that is, when the corpse is given to the worms, yea,
and preach a few serious points before or after burial, single out two or
three, if it be not convenient to the whole, a body is dead, a soul is gone,
and the Kite is coming for another Chick, the Hen makes more ado then some for
a near relation, blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord, all the rest go to
the devil, Rev. 13. 14. Rev. 20. 14. Read no books but Bibles for thy Sermon,
John 5. 36. Acts 17. 11. We shall find and loath it, if it be another.

Do not trust thy memory, if thou will preach, study, yea, take pains for the
gains and joys of the Spirit, It is reward enough to have some Communion,
before, in, or after any godly duty. Two or three hours close studying in a day
will make thee a brave Preacher; The best Minister that we have, do not always
beat their brains about the Scriptures, but are sometimes in the Garden, the
world, and governments of the world, yea, in old Almanacks, and Fathers too
some times, but Timothy like, give thee thy self wholly to thest udy of the
Bible, that is, let that be the Sum and substance of thy study, and to know
Christ crucified in and for thee, how to preach him to the best advantage of a
soul: now suppose thou be a Tradesman, Gentleman or shopkeeper, especially
the latter, consider the day and night consists of twenty four hours; you that
Preach, seven for the bed is enough in conscience, one to dress and undresse,
two for religious duties, if you go morning night and noon by your selves yet
it is enough, a brief word of exhortation, and a pithy Prayer is better than a
tedious, long and dry business, have a care of that in your meetings, strive
not to speak beyond the breathings of the Spirit.

Men that have time enough, may enlarge better then he whose self and servants
is too much tired many times, but Saints should not make their trade a toil,
and yet be careful too; four hours in your shop besides your three hours
studying, writing Texts and reasing of the Bibles at one corner of the Counter,
and then thou art as ready for a Customer, as if thou were gazing up and down,
and so thy temporal means comes in as the Ministers spiritual, in tending thy
particular Calling, which is rather better blessed, and looked too by this kind of
practice.

Paul could stitch and study too, or make Tents, Act. 18. 3. And though in the
presence of the Lord it be far from our desire for the special Ministers of
the Gospel so to do, yet studying and tending of the shop, may do well to
gather for them that must abide in their Callings, and yet we are not out,
only improving time, like good husbands and Christeans, we are bid so to do,
Ephesians 5. 16. and in so doing, we are like that diligent hand which Solomon says
makes rich; we enrich the Common wealth with the knowledge of Christ, and his
righteousness by this kind of industry, yea, the Ministers who take the more
pains for fear least we should excel them, besides our experiences are
considerable, and it will be a good help to them also, two may see more then
one, and two hours more in every day thou may est allow thy self to read over
debts, gather in and pay, if thine and thy debtors names be in one book, it is
done in half a one, if thy trading be not very great; at this rate eight or
nine will be spent in thy shop, every day take one for recreation, and that is
more then Christ took, who was Lord of time and all things: But suppose thon
take two to recreate thy self, walk with neighbors, wife and children, Rich
Saints, rather poor, crying friend and neighbor what is in the Cubbard, how
hangs the tassles of the buget, we mean how goes things where the charge is
great? Is the Landlord paid? Are ye out of debt, how much will put you in a way
of subsistence?

All this is good: But stay, we must not forget the belly, Gentlemen will have
two for that, but we allow, but one for our selves, meat is made for the belly,
and the belly for meat, it is a shame how some eat, whilst others fast, but God
shall destroy the one and the other, 1 Cor. 6. 13. Yet we have an hour left
still, spend one half of that, and take the rest to pick up in thy thoughts
dead bones and sculs of thy old acquaintance, yea, go spuddel in the grave or
cave, brave Dean who was slid into a vault by his princely Train, and music
was but a melancholy crucifying sight, the old board flapt down, the glory all
was gone; would some would peep in there every day, where they intend to ly,
and must at last, in the mean time remember you the worlds vanity, thine own
mortality, Christ's excellency, Heavens joys, and hels torments, Christ's
coming, and thy daily going to another world, where thou would be stated the
first moment that thou die in an unchangeable condition; and if it be of
glory with Christ, as certainly all believers will, yet will their never be an
opportunity to act, do or speak one word for this Christ or his Saints again as
is now, a damned sinner once in hell will never have a minutes opportunity to do
for self, or hear of Christ again; nor can a Saint warn a sinner there; Laza:
us could not send to Dives kindred, who, (as it is probable) were laughing,
playing, buying, selling, not at all minding his condition.

Well, friends if you would be good Preachers, Christians, or forewarners of
poor simple sinning sinners, mind time, study hard, and resolve to be, and do
to day what you would to morrow if you were to die, but one Saint of a thousand
is not yet, does not yet, or at least so much as he intends, and what a sad
thing is this? How much trouble may it cost, if death come as a man from a far
country, or thief in the night, Rev 16. 15.

But to our old rules once again, only remember this of time, to keep a book
or watch to see how that goes away, a private book is best a thousand times,
and set down what of God you enjoy, every days providence, and what of that is
most remarkable, it is done in half a quarter of an hour, your failings and
distempers write down every night, good deeds leave out, Christ will tell of
them before Men and Angels, Mat. 25. 35. this will be a better glass and a
larger, then my Lady fools paint or pleasure, who is dead while shelives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. verse. for in this you may see your life every day and year, and when
you shall read so much communion with God on such a duty, such a strait, such a
providence, such a casualty, or deliverance from the grave, self, wife, or
children, such a loss, and why so? Saints can tell if they please to look, why
every rod comes, Mich. 6. 9. and what to do in a new strait, if they keep the
experience of their old deliverance, Psalm. 77. 7, 8, 9, 10. the day and year
exact, as some do their expenses, for seven years together: the Lord make us
as wise as the children of this generation, Luke 16 8. and especially you that
would fain be teachers, which the Lord make you able to; but take one direction
for your Bibles, in all your Bibles write us at the side, or in every place
where there is room for a word, one word and no more; as thus in the second and
the third of the Revelations, where mention is made of seven Churches, and
choice promises to all: now write, for thy own help and readiness, the
remarkable word of every promise in the spare places; ^s thus at the seventh
very of the second Chapter, write Tree; at the tenth verse Crown; at the
seventeenth white Stone; Power, or Nation at the twenty seventh: White Ray at
the fifth verse of the third Chapter; Name, or Pillar at the twel^^; Gold at
the eigthteenth. And so in Isa. 65. 13. where the Lord says, My Servants shall
eat, but ye shall be an hungry, drink, but ye shall be thirsty; sing for joy of
heart, but ye shall weep and lament. Set thirst, sing, or weep, at the side of
the verse, bread, water, well, life, treasure, fullness, rock, refuge, stone,
lilly, rose, wine, apple tree, shadow, great rock, sun, star, olive, oil,
priest, prophet, King of Kings, Rev. 19. and 16. Write thigh, lamb, altar,
escape goat, serpent, and so in regard of Christ's sufferings, write bruised,
broken, afflicted, marred, sorrow, or a man of sorrows, yea, by us a sixpenny
Concordance, or a bigger bound up by it self, and every remarkable word in it,
set that with your pen by the side of the Scripture, especially the most
useful, and where you find one and the same remarkable promise, or one and the
same threatening exhortation, or reproof to be in two or three Scriptures, set
us by the verse where the remarkable and most known word stands, a little hint
where the other stands that is most like it, or the same.

Many Bibles have something this way, but you may add much more, and with a
little pains make one Bible worth ten of your gaudy ones, and always bring
this to the Pulpit, and not a cheating thing like a Bible, gilt, bound, filled
^p and stuffed with white Paper, old notes or new, got, stole, preached or
borrowed we know not where, nor when, yea it may be some ten times over, this
is worse than pinning new leaves in, and truly we think it much our duty to
call for it from you, if any of you should do so, when you are set up; what?
rivers of living waters in your belly, John 7. 38. and speak by a quill to
living stones in the Church of God, 1 Pet. 2. 5. For shame take pains, it is
laziness and not the memory, it is no matter for so much, let us have a little
life in what we have; and therefore put nothing in your Bibles, but here and
there a word according to our first directions.

Most men will laugh if thou speak fine words, and know not whence they
are derived, much less prate not of the Original, some things are hard to be
understood, enough is, wrest not the Scripture, a Pet. 3. 16. Speak what thou
know, and know what thou speak; Preach by thy life, Mat. 5. 16. In every
ten shillings that thou getest lay by one for the poor, Prove. 19. 11.

I would to the Lord the Tithes were theirs that have most need, the poor
Saints, the Church land to the poor sinners, something would do well,
twelvepence every Lords day would do good, and Tradesmen must lay by for the
Saints, and one for another every Lords day more or less, what do ye talk of
sixpence, 1 Cor. 16. 1. Yet a mite is acceptable.

Mercy is as good as sacrifice; I will have that, and not the other says the
Lord, Hos. 6. 6.

Many Saints or worldlings as they may be called, will have one, and are much
in that, little, little, nothing scarce in the other.

If a man be worth fifty pound, yea, a crown clear, and will do no good in some
cases, he shall never feed my soul that will not feed my body too in a great
distress, James 2 17.

John, James, Peter, Paul would loath such a Preacher yea, lover of the world,
Romans 12. 13.

By no means preach for or against a point that is disputeful, Romans 14. 1.
especially about Baptizing, 1 Cor. 1. 13, 14, 15, 16. mind this Scripture ye
great disputers for it, seldom miss the Public, although you do not pray.
Preach, or expound, and do that most, it is much one and the same thing.

What matter whether thou ever go up to the Pulpit?

Yet speak near it, and not at the other end of the Church.

If ten be in the Church or Chapel, one may begin with Prayer, and another
brother may expound, one or half a Chapter; but for Christ his sake have a
care what ye say, you know many thrust themselves too forward, ye many times
the most unfit and unable, learn first, then teach but be not ever learning,
you might have been good Preachers by this says Paul, H^b. 5. 12.

Observe that well all ye that oppose: When the Minister and people are all
come, then go no further in Prayer, or rather in expounding.

Never stay for Psalmmen or Readers, they may all go plough, play, or sing Te
Deum, and yet we are for both in the Public places; but why should any but a
godly man do either, we think St. Paul had no such Clarks, and readers as too
many have; yea, we think there must be almost as great a call for either as for
Preaching, yet the worst may touch the Ark here, though they fill the pot and
pipe all the week besides, but not a godly grave and sober Christian by no
means, able to preach pray and expound sweetly by the Spirit, would some of
you would prove these men's Callings, before you disprove ours, which reason God
and nature seems to allow.

Does the rose send forth its sweetness, the vine and olive too their
fatness, and are we to make the most good of every good thing? but the gifts
of Gods Spirit must ly still, or hid as in a napkin, and yet the Be carries
all her honey to the hive; but we must carry nothing to the Church of Christ,
though we labor for it as the Ministers do, yea, fetch it from the same
flowers and promises, so that it is just the same thing we bring, and by the
same Spirit, but we are clothed in gray, yea, in fools cotes many times, and
made the scorn of the world, for bringing honey to the hive: Surely God does
nothing in vain, yea, every thing for the most advantage, he gives the rain,
not for the earths sake alone, but for man and beast, gifts and parts seems to
us to be given for some such public end, else why are we bid in a general way
so earnestly to covet for it. 1 Cor. 14, 1.

Meditation is as good as Preaching for a man's self, yet covet to prophecy, to
your Family says the Minister, one neighbor or two, then say we it is as
lawful if a hundred comes, and more public too then theirs, if there he but
ninety nine, the People not the Pulpit makes it public.

But let us go on with our rules, and keep some arguments behind, parts and
Ministers will turn all, yea, the Moon, some say, to green Chease, yea, and
this Sun to darkness too, if men will believe all that some of them say, but
observe well their end that shall bitterly write or preach against this truth;
yea, see if these men die the common death of other Saints, which is to be most
fruitful in their old age, like David's tree, Psalm. 1. 3. Isa. 27. 6. But we
fear these men will be like the figtree, the broken bough, or fallen leaf
underneath the tree, or high way side, yea, if they do not weather, God has
not spoken by us; have not we observed? Be silent O earth, God is risen out of
his holy place, Zach. 2. 13. And the blast of the terrible One shall light upon
them, Isa. 25. 4.

Well, but if any be free to stay longer than the Minister has done, then
exercise again, when the rest are all gone out Acts 13. 15. If it be possible
let three or four gifted Christians keep a meeting up in every public place,
as now they do in a Parler which is too private, Mat. 10. 27. to begin and end
just at an hour, and always give a little bread or something to the poor of
the Parish, 1 Cor. 16. 2. One rich Saint may do that for the honor of all, and
never hurt himself; this may toll in poor men and beggars unto Christ, whose
souls are as precious as the Kings of Nations, and more to be pitied too, for
their poverty and ignorance, yet both more worth then a thousand worlds, Mat.
16. 26. Get the Minister as often as may be to be with you, not to speak by no
means, they will eat up time too much; Mind this gathered Saints and
Churches, most of your Pastors are very guilty this way, and I pray God there
be not a popes toe in this also; why should one have almost all the time? Let
them keep and see it best managed, how their flock and people thrive, and what
light and life is amongst them, this will guide and help them all in Preaching,
knit and tie hearts and hearts together.

More might be added, as the sending of your gifted Saints ten, twenty, thirty
miles, for a month more or less, Phit. 2. 19, 25.

If he be free and well able to defraud his charge, else the friends of Christ
must do it for him, the rich contributing double and treble; who can spend
means better, and let ever some of these true travelers of and for Sion be
traveling to one place or another, Preaching to, and enquiring after Saints,
and their walkings all along the rode, alighting still to visit every sick and
afflicted one.

This will be as a Messenger of a thousand, did a brother so come, to a Saint
sick or dying he would be received as an Angel of God, as Paul speaks in
another case, what? a Messenger from the Saints, ten twenty or thirty miles to
visit me, like Sion whom no man regarded, Jer. 30. 17.

For my poverty or weakness surely the Lord alone sent him, as Joseph said to
his brethren, but never take this journey without the State gifted Brethren
Saints, and as many Christians hands as may conveniently be got of the
neighborhood, yea, the Ministers if it can be got, and half a dozen of honest
men going to him may do much, if he be a good one, else take it not by no
means; and let this with a godly Justice be by the States order to empower you
to command the keys in any place Church or Chapel now in England, in case the
Ministers or Churchwardens be malignantly opposite; and upon their and the
Constables peril let it be if any should be wronged going so forth: And this
is the main work of all we would be at, and not so much preach where there is
little need, unless it be to improve our time and talents, yea, never where
there is an able Minister but a little before he comes, and after, and yet we
would have a care of tyring men too much; a six a clock Lector may do well in
any man's Church in the Summer mornings, John 8. 1, and 2. Psalm. 63. 2. and
persuade the Minister to come or send his servants rather, he himself may be
busy in his study, and let all consider if want be within three or four miles
off London, some Chapels quite shut up, others none but Mass Priests,
Common Prayer men, that can preach and pray no more than a cat to any purpose
to supply them; what want then must needs be twenty miles round, well, you see
your work, we your willingness for the work; The Lord be with one, all and
every one of you in your journeys, yea, the mighty God of Jacob, Genesis 19. 24.
Make you strong against all oppositions from men or devils, yea, the beast of
Ephesus, which Paul fought so often with, 1 Cor. 15. 32. harmless and wise as
serpents in the managing of your gifts and Liberty, Mat. 10. 16. successful
as the primitive Saints, Acts 2. 46. 47. through the zeal of Paul, who became
all to all men to gain some, 1 Cor. 9. 22. caught and begot many by gile, 2
Cor. 12. 16. beged and beseeched them to Christ by the mercy of God, Romans 12.
2. to whose mercies, loves, arms, joys and blessings, gracious presence and
assistance we commit you by prayer, and let all be sent forth so and let them
follow you, yea, every one of you which are willing to spend and be spent for
Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 15 which none almost minds besides, Phil. 2. 21. O Christ
how few owns thee in this Nation called by thy Nam? How few lives to thee that
profess much, sweet Jesus our dearest dear keep them that do from all enemies
as in an Ammunition of rocks, Isa. 3^. 10. Let bread be given to them, their
work and water never fail, Amen, Amen, Lord Jesus Christ.

IF any unsatisfied man or men without pride, self, or passion would seriously
read squier Shepherds little book, Called the peoples Privilege and Duty;
guarded against the Pulpit and Preachers increachment never answer to any
purpose, but as one Lawyer does a lost cause, who must say something to please
his simple cliant, who has fed and feed him all along; yea, a little balling
pleases some when money and cause is both lost, and it may be still some will
shoot against the light of the Spirit, but take heed of looking too much
against this truth, or those Arrows which self pride, parts, or malice may
shute upwards at it, but read squier Shepherd once or twice soberly over, you
that are willing to be satisfied in these truths, which does and shall prevail,
and now though the sea rores (Psalm. 46. 3, 4.) and makes a noise, yet will we
be glade, there is a river, the streams thereof shall refresh the City and
Citizens of our God, that are now dwelling on mount Sion, and not Sinai in
Arabia the wilderness of strife and bondage.

Gal. 4. 24, 25, 26.

And now if the drift of this be erroneous for a wanton Spirit, or against our
Lord Jesus, whip us at the cart, or hang us up in chains till we and our names
rot, and this is our Petition also to you the high and great Council of these
Nations; yea, good my Lord, do one or the the other, for us, it is the only
way to get our hearts to purpose; why should you loose the choicest thing under
heaven, next to the heart of God, and we the main fruit of all our travel,
blood and treasure?

O my Lord, the night comes when none can work, John 9 4. Remember that ye
sleepie virgins of Sion, Awake, awake for our deliverance, O Arm of the Lord,
Isa. 51. 9, 10. and let all the Churches now in London, yea, in England, hear
what the Spirit says to them Rev. 2. 29. in this day of their visitation.

W. B.

A Hint of some Texts we fain would be at, Col. 3. 11.
HE is all and in you all Christ is all in all, in and to himself and in the
eye of the Father, and working of the Spirit; he is all and in all to his
Saints, the last and present help and hope of si^ners he is the light, life and
g^ory of the world, the image of the Father; the Son, Rock, Well, Water,
Spring, Morning Star, light, life and comfort of the Saints; all in all to them
in his Names and Titles, sweet Jesus, Lord Jesus, anointed Christ, God-Man,
Man-God, Immanuel with and ^n us, Titles, King of, for, and in the Saints, to
keep, save, help and deliver all Believers, from, sin, death, hell, flames,
men, devils, dangers, grave, sting, curse and curses, Law, fears, bondage and
captivity, yea, a Priest to pray day and night, he interceeds continually when
we do, and cannot at the Throne of grace; if we live die or sin he is still our
intercesso^, a Prophet to us when we pray, preach, study, mind, think or
meditate; that is sweet, heaven comes down, soul goes up, world laid by, we
dye, live and contemplate our God, but Christ is all in all, in health,
sickness, wealth, plenty, want, poverty, all cases, of all kinds, whatsoever,
yea, in life, and death, Christ is all, and he that has him shall not, cannot
dye, nor lie long in the grave, John 11. 26. and it is dead whilst he lives,
and shall live when he dies, with, to, and before the throne of God and the
Lamb, singing glory, praise, honor and salvation, Palmleaves, white Robes,
throng of Angels, Rev. 7. 9. Wicked men dying so, curse, gnaw, cry, houl tear,
damn, roar with, in and among, brimstone, pitch, rosin, worm, conscience,
satire, scrich owl, devils fighting, flying, teeth gnashing, damned souls
crying, altogether frying, for refusing Christ who is all in all, little
pleasure, profit, stories, va^n glories, crowns, Kingdoms, names, fames,
capps, knees, bowings, melancholy music, joys, toys, moments pleasure,
earthly treasures, sweet meat, sour sa^e^: What is all to he, and and what is
he to nothing? the other nothing gets nothing, loses all for nothing. Oh Christ
be my portion; what will all avail me when I come to dye, or a little thatch,
he whose goods, wife, children are all burnt by a fire, their welfare thee
less if thy soul misearry for want of this All.

This and these Texts we fain would be at.

Behold the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world, John 1. 29. If
ye be risen with Christ, seek those things* which are above, where Christ
sits on the right hand of God. Col. 1. 3, 4. And when Christ who is our life
shall appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory: Jud. 20, buy of me
gold tried in the fire, that thou may be rich, Rev. 3 18. Build up ^re
another in your most holy faith, what shall it profit a man to gain the world
and loose his own soul? Mat. 16. 26. I sleep but my heart wakes, Cant. 5 2.
Bear you one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2.
Unless a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God, John 3. 3. The
night comes when none can work, John 9. 3. Speak not evil of dignities Jud. 8.
Woe be to you when all men speak well of you, Luke 6. 26. Every man seeks his
own things, but none the things of Christ, Phil. 2. 21. Thy loving kindness is
better then life, therefore my lips shall praise thee, Psalm. 63. 3. God is
love, and they that dwell in God dwell in love, 1 John 4 16 I have fought the
good slght, I have finished my course, henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
glory, 2 Timothy 4. 7. If any man draw back my soul shall have no pleasure in him,
Heb. 10. 38. Yet when ye have done all say ye are unprofitable servants, Luke
17. 10. I am come into my garden my sister my spouse. Amen, even so come Lord
Jesus, Can. 5. 1. Rev. 22. 20. Th^se Texts and no other by the grace of God,
would we Preach and study: but if cursed be the man that does the destroying
work of God negligently, Jer. 48. 10. much more he that hinders this wilfully:
but we are ready not only to be bound, but to dye for Christ at Jerusalem,
yea, welcome all for him, Acts 21 13.

FINIS.

