The Nature and Mischief of Envy. A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN, Aug. 20.
1693.

BY JONATHAN BLAGRAVE, D.D. Sub-Almoner, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their
MAJESTY'S.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed for John Southby at the Harrow in Cornhill, and Sold by R.
Tailor near Stationers' Hall, 1693.

PROVE. xxvii. iv. Latter part of the Verse. -- Who is able to stand before Envy?

The whole Verse runs thus: Wrath is Cruel, and Anger is Outrageous: But who is
able to stand before Envy?


AND in these Words the Wise Man designs to set forth the great Evil of Envy,
to show us how violent and mischievous a Passion it is; and to that end he
compares it with two very exorbitant commotions of Man's mind, with Wrath, and
with Anger, or FVRY; for so it should rather have been Translated, the word in
the Original, implying the highest degree, or utmost transport of Anger. Now, a
man that is in Wrath or Anger against any one, forgets all kindness to that
person; he will no longer be governed by any law of Love or Charity, in any of
his Actions toward him. Therefore says the Wise man, Wrath is Cruel, all
Kindness is lost in an angry, or wrathful man's heart.

And yet perhaps such an one will not do a manifest wrong or injustice to the
person he is Angry with: But then, when Anger rises to a great excess, it is
rightly termed Fury; and one, that is possessed with it, is a Madman for the
time. He has no regard to Right or Wrong, he cares not what injury or mischief
he does, and therefore says the wise man, Fury is Outrageous.

And yet worse than either of these, more unkind and uncharitable, more unjust,
more violent, and much more mischievous than either of them, is Envy; There is
neither any goodness, nor yet any strength, that is a sufficient guard against
it. For,

First, There is no man's Innocence, no man's Virtue, that can secure him from
the direful strokes of Envy. Nay, many times the more Innocent, the more
Religious, useful and beneficial a man is in his place and station, Envy
increases the more against him. The Reputation, Dignity, or Profit, such a man
gains by his good Qualities, inflames the hearts of the Envious, and makes them
contrive and act all they can for his Ruin.

When there were but two Brothers in the world, and there must be the
strongest, and most engaging Tie between them, both of natural Affection, and
Love of Society; yet Envy broke through all this, and made one of them
inhumanly Murder the other; and that for no other reason, but because Abel, for
the goodness and sincerity of his heart, was more approved of by God than Cain.
This example of the violent and outrageous cruelty and injustice of Envy we
have in the beginning of the World; we have another like it in the beginning of
Gods choosing him a peculiar Church. There we find Esau would have killed his
Brother, for no other reason, but because Jacob valued being the Father of the
Faithful more than profane Esau did, and so God determined to have his Church
in Jacob's offspring. And in that very offspring we have presently a strange
instance of the blind and inexorable cruelty of Envy in the Patriarchs,
otherwise good men, who for no other reason, but because God had in Visions
revealed his favor to Joseph, and his Father loved him, set themselves in the
most bitter manner against the poor innocent child, and had no compassion on
him, when They saw the anguish of his Soul; when he besought them, they would
have killed him: The greatest pity they could show him, was, to sell their
Brother to be a slave to Infidels, as St. Stephen says, Acts 7.9. The
Patriarchs moved with Envy, sold Joseph into Egypt.

We have likewise a Signal Instance in the History of Saul and David, of the
great Injustice and Vile Ingratitude of Envy; For certainly never was Master
better served, than Saul was by David; never did one man receive greater
Benefits from another; For first, the man, whom the whole Host of Israel feared
was slain by David; the Kings Enemies were often discomfited and destroyed by
David. Saul himself was frequently refreshed and comforted by him, when he lay
under the heavy oppression of a Melancholy and an Evil Spirit; His life also
was diverse times saved and preserved by him, David had married his Daughter,
and was his son's friend; He never had done the least Injury either to him or
his, but shown all kindness to the House of Saul; and yet Saul looking upon
him with an Envious Eye, 1 Samuel 18.9. continually with great eagerness hunted
after his life to destroy it.

But the greatest instance of all, of the most wicked Injustice and baseness of
Envy, is in the Envy of the Scribes and Pharisees against our Savior; who was
purely Envied for the Reputation of his goodness, and nothing else; for he
neither had nor sought any earthly Title or Riches; neither could they accuse
him of any sin; And yet for Envy, as Pilate himself could see, They delivered
him up to the most cruel and shameful Death.

And as there is no Innocence so clear, no Goodness so perfect, that can
preserve a Man from the soul Reproaches, the malicious Contrivances, and the
ruining practices of Envy: So,

Secondly, There is no Man so great or powerful, or of so secure an Estate or
Fortune, but the Violence of Envy has been capable of overthrowing him.
Sometimes a private Envy has been able to do it; but a common Envy has seldom
failed of accomplishing any Man's ruin. We have many Instances in Sacred Writ
of Great Men destroyed by Envy; as Abner Captain of the Host of Israel, and
Amasa Captain of the Host of Judah, both of them, as David observed, better Men
than Joab, who through Envy slew them. And in Civil History, in the History of
all Commonwealths, we find innumerable Examples of Great and Mighty Men, that
have been overthrown and destroyed purely by Envy. Nay, we have Instances even
of Princes themselves, when they have thought their Honor obliged them to
stand between their Favorites and a general Envy, that have fallen together
with them. There is no standing before a Common Envy; there is nothing to be
done but to get out of the way of it, unless a Man will bravely resolve to
become a Sacrifice for Truth, and the Common Good: For it is to no purpose for a
Man to stand on his Innocence, to plead his Merit, to seek to oblige or gain
favor, to oppose strength or interest in this Case. A Common Envy, like an
Hurricane or impetuous Torrent, overturns and carries all before it; at least
it does so for a time, till the Truth of things comes to be known by some woeful
experience; so that the Wise Man may well ask this Question in my Text, Who is
able to stand before Envy?

Having thus given you a Taste of the Evil Nature of Envy, whereby we may
perceive it to be the most violent and unruly of all the Passions, to be indeed
the very worst of all the Diseases of Man's Mind: That we may the better avoid
it in our selves, beware of it in others, and use proper Remedies to cure it,
either in our selves or others, I shall,

First, Endeavor to give a just Description of it, that we may perfectly know
it. Secondly, Particularly set forth the usual mischievous Effects of it, that
we may the more hate and avoid it: And, Thirdly, Propose such Remedies as will
effectually cure it; that so we may apply them, as we see occasion. And,
1. To know what Envy is, we shall find, if we consider it, That it is a
Displeasure or Trouble arising in a Man's mind from the sight or knowledge of
another Person's prosperity, (of whatsoever sort that Prosperity be, whether it
consist in Reputation, Honor, Riches, or any other like advantage,) which
causes a man to hate the Person, whose Prosperity he beholds, and to wish and
contrive and endeavor what he can to lessen, if not to ruin that Person.

And this commonly arises on the sight of the Prosperity of Inferiors, or
Equals.

Men are Envious, when they see such as they accounted much their Inferiors,
begin to draw near them; Or those they accounted scarce their Equals get above
them. And therefore Envy frequently breeds amongst Relations, near Neighbors,
or men of a like sort. Men Envy that to others, which they think themselves as
well or better to deserve.

They seldom envy Things, that are far out of their Reach; or Persons that are
very much above them. As for Instance, a Peasant or a mean Man never thinks of
Envying the Greatness of Noblemen or Princes; But Nobles are envied by such as
come near them, and Monarchs only by those of the same High Station, and that,
by the way, gives an Advantage of peace and quiet to a Government that is under
One; since if he takes care of his own Affairs, none can envy his Actions:
Whereas, where many Govern, and the Governors are almost upon the Level with
the Subject, Envy creates endless strife and contention.

But, I say, Envy is amongst them that at least think themselves of equal Merit
and Pretensions. And therefore we may observe in History, That the Course which
Wise Rulers have always taken to prevent this mischief, has been with great
Care to proportion Favor to Merit. And though this has not been always able to
do it, because men are very partial Judges of their own merit, and some will
ever be envious; yet this they found the best Expedient to keep ENVY from being
propagated, or growing to a mischievous Height; for if Envious men can do so
much hurt, when they only take an occasion, How much more will be in their
power, when great Occasions are given them?

There is indeed a Commotion, that arises in Men's Hearts upon the like occasion
of seeing the Prosperity or Honor of another, which they think themselves as
capable of; that is very different from Envy, and is termed by the Moralists
Emulation; and is that Virtue, which St. Paul exhorts to in those words, Let us
consider one another to provoke unto Love and to good Works, Heb. 10.24. Which
does not like Envy covet the Reward, but the work too; and which has always
this great Difference to distinguish it from Envy, or those Carnal (...), which
are ill Translated Emulations in the 5 th. of the Gal. that these are always
joined with Hatred and evil-Will; whereas the virtuous Emulation always creates
Love and Esteem of the persons whom we see in Honor and Prosperity, and a
Desire to imitate them, that by a like Industry and Virtue, we may come to the
same advantages.

We have a lively Instance of the difference of these two Qualities in Saul and
Jonathan upon the very same occasion of David's killing Goliath. Saul, we see,
envied him for that great Action, and therefore hated and sought to destroy
him; but Jonathan on the contrary emulated his Virtue, and therefore loved and
admired the man, and desired to make him his Friend; and yet the Fame that
David got by this Action, was no more, nay, rather less opposite to the
Interest of Saul, whom David was never like to hurt, than it was to the
Interest of Jonathan the Heir of his Father's Crown.

There is then a wide Difference between noble Emulation and wicked Envy; the
One of which ought to be rooted out, and the other cherished and cultivated as
much as is possible; because it is the Spring and Rise of all Noble and Worthy
Actions, and that on which all good Example works, and no great Genius was ever
yet found without a great deal of Emulation.

Plutarch in his Lives gives us two Notable Examples of the powerful working of
Emulation in the hearts of two Famous Captains, Themistocles among the Greeks,
and Caesar among the Romans. He relates that Themistocles complained to his
Friends, that the Victory of Miltiades would not suffer him to sleep; And
Caesar, when he read the Actions of Alexander, wept to think he was past his
Age before he had done any thing memorable. These great Men had no ill Will to
the persons they emulated; nor did they go about to lessen, but rather
magnified their Deeds; and never grieved that others did well, but that they
had not done the like themselves.

Such a Gallant Emulation we often read of in the Histories of our Ancestors,
and cannot but wish that the same Noble Spirit might revive again, when there
is so much occasion for it, and these want not some great and eminent Examples
to kindle it. For how much more honorable were it for men to emulate one
another in valiant Actions for the Defense of their Country, than to spend
their time in the little Intriegues of envy?

Emulation is a Great and a Noble Virtue, but Envy a poor and a sneaking Vice:
A Vice that always sculks and hides it self: For though men are sometimes so
wicked as to boast and glory in other Vices, yet no man will own himself to be
envious, which shows it to be an Infamous Quality in the eyes of all Men. A Man
is afraid to be found in it, ashamed to own it. And therefore an envious man
uses great Art to hide and color his envy, and to make it look like something
else: Sometimes he disguises it under a Mighty pretended Zeal for the Truth,
sometimes under a great Love for the public Good and Welfare, sometimes under
a Charitable Concern and great Tenderness for the Good or Credit of his
Neighbor, whom he seems to pity, whilst he disparages; and, if you will
believe Men's pretenses, there is not a man living that has the least Envy in
him. And yet if we enquire into the certain marks* and undoubted symptoms of
this Vice, we shall hardly find any man wholly free from it; for if a man is
grieved or troubled, when he hears of another's good Success; if he finds any
Delight in his mind, when he hears of any Disgrace or Misfortune, that has
befallen his Neighbor; if he loves to hear of the weakness or miscarriages of
those that are in prosperity; if he is glad to have an ill thing to tell of
them; if he is out of Humor, when he hears their praise or commendation; if in
relating their Actions he slily endeavors to lessen them, or when he does
commend them, puts in still some malicious Buts or Exceptions; if, as the
Apostle in few Words expresses all this, A man rejoices in Iniquity, and not in
the Truth. In iniquity, that is, to the Disgrace of any Person, and not in the
Truth, that is to his advantage, That Man is certainly Envious. And how few
then are wholly free from this Vice? In some indeed it grows to a most wicked
and pernicious Height: but in all that have not wholly mortified their carnal
Affections (amongst whith S. Paul reckons this) there is some Taint of envy,
according to the words of St. James, chapter 4. v. 5. Do ye think that the
Scripture says in vain, The Spirit that dwells in us, lusts to Envy?
Without the powerful Grace of God to pluck it up, this Root of bitterness will
grow in the hearts of all the Corrupt Children of Adam.

We have seen then what envy is, Let us in the

2 d. Place take a view of the usual mischievous effects of it, and see what
Abundance of Evil it commonly does in the world; that we may be the more set
against it, that we may avoid it our selves, that we may beware of it in
others, that we may use our utmost endeavors to quench this Flame, to dispatch
this Hydra, to shut up this Pandora's Box, out of which mischief has and does
continually fly over all the Earth, according to the words of the Apostle,
Where Envy is, there is confusion, and every evil Work.

For if we consult Histories, either Sacred or Civil, or the experience of any
observing men, we shall find, that there has been no Disturbance in the state,
no Heresy or Schism in the Church, no trouble in any little Neighborhood or
private Family, but it is chiefly owing to envy.

In the State, when one man is advanced to any Place of Trust, or Dignity, or
Profit, presently those that think themselves as capable, or as deserving as
he, raise a clamor, seek to disparage, endeavor to oppose him, lay plots for
his Downfall and Ruin; and that many times for no other Reason, but because the
man has obtained what they would gladly have had themselves. For a man that has
so many Vices, that they cannot be reckoned up, when once he has a little got
the start of his Neighbors in his Fortune, had been as good and as innocent a
man as any one living, if he had continued upon the same Level with them, and
joined in their envious Calumnies against others: But having got above them,
they disparage, they hate, they endeavor to thwart him in all things, though it
be to the hind'rance and detriment of the Public Interest. In which, though they
themselves have a common stake; Yet envy many times so blinds men's eyes, that
they will rather hurt themselves, injure the common Good and Safety, ruin
their Native Country, hazard all that is dear or precious, rather than not do
what they can to pull down and destroy those whom they envy.

And as envy has and does work continually such Confusion in the State, so it
has no less been a Disturber of the Peace of the Church.

For though the Scriptures of the New Testament are full of Precepts against
envy, such as that of St. Paul, Gal. 5.26. Let us not be desirous of Vain
Glory, provoking one another, envying one another. And though our Blessed
Savior, both by his example and precept, taught all Christians not to seek
Earthly, but Heavenly Riches and Honors, (the way to which could never be the
same with that by which Satan fell from them) and though he gave to the Ministers
of his Church the greatest Caution against vain Ambition, and would have those
that are in the Highest Station be most humble and meek, and as officious to do
good, as if they were the least, and servants of all, Mark 9.35. Yet
nevertheless, because no Society can consist without Government, and there can
be no Government without Subordination; for there is no Authority, and there
can be no obedience, amongst those that are in all Respects equal; therefore
our Lord himself did constitute different Orders; he ordained Apostles, whose
Office is in the 1 st. of the Acts, called a Bishopric; He likewise ordained
Elders, who were not of so great Authority as the Apostles; and the Apostles,
who were endued with Power from on high, ordained Deacons, all the Orders we
now retain. Now, because Authority is that which all ambitious and
worldly-minded men do seek; and it is impossible that any Church, or any
Society here on earth, should be without any worldly-minded men in it: Thence
has arisen the Disturbance of the Peace of the Church, there have been men
like Diotrephes, whom we read of in the 3d. Epistle of John, ver. 9. who loved
Preeminence, and therefore envyed the Possession of it by any other Persons;
and as it is at the Tenth Verse, first began to prate against them, and then
made Divisions from them

This in all Ages of the Church, if we look into Ecclesiastical History, we
shall find to be the first and chief Cause of all Heresies, Sects and Schisms.
There were men that would fain have had the Preeminence, that were very angry
that it fell to other men's Lots; and so first prated against them, and then
made Divisions from them. Thus of Old, the Novation, Donatist, Arrian, and many
other both Schisms and Heresies began: And therefore we must not think strange,
if we see such things happen again in our Age. We have seen the effects of
this, not only in Divisions in the Church, but also in Sub-divisions among the
Dividers themselves. For when a Proud man has made himself Head of a Sect,
others of the same Sect, as Proud as he, have Envied that his Preeminence, and
divided from him to make themselves Chief of other Sects, and in their turn
have felt the same effect of Envy. For let men talk what they will of Parity or
Equality, it is utterly impossible in any Society or Company that hold
together, but that there will and must be some that will be more Eminent, and
that will bear a greater sway than others, and in effect Govern; and
wheresoever there is Superiority, that will be a But of Envy, and that Envy
will be the Cause of Division; and Sub-divisions are the easiest things in the
world, because there is neither Authority nor Argument to restrain them, but
what had been rejected before by the Dividers. So that if God should leave
Human Nature to it self, as long as there is such a thing as Envy in it, there
could be no Church Government, there could be no Unity in the World.

Having thus spoken of the Disturbance of Church and State that is given by
Envy, I need say nothing of that Trouble and Vexation, that flood of Evil
speaking, of Evil surmising, the multitude of Feuds and Quarrels, that Envy
begets in every little Neighborhood, in every private Family; since men's too
common experience of this, to their Cost, will sufficiently excuse me from
enlarging upon this Point; and indeed we have no Relation in History, Sacred or
Civil, of the private Affairs of any Family, but we find therein some dreadful
Marks of Envy.

And to what end is all this Mischief done by Envious Men? What do they get by
it? There is certainly a great deal of Labor, in contriving, in prosecuting,
and yet hiding Envious Designs. There is much pain and anguish to the Envious
Man, not only from a sense of the Guilt of his Sin, but in the Sin it self,
besides the punishment he must expect hereafter, which can be no other than
what is inflicted upon the Devils, his Sin being the same with theirs.

Envy is also its own Punishment; a Punishment so great, that when a man
becomes extremely Envious, it even pines him away, it wastes his flesh,
consumes his bones, eats his very heart; so that no man can find a greater
Torment for a very Envious Man, than he inflicts upon himself. And what profit,
I say, has he for all this pain? His Envy is not only a discouragement to
Worthy Men in the doing of their Duty, when they find so much ill will for
their pains; but is also an hinderance to himself, from treading in their
steps, and taking the same Course to Virtue, and the Rewards of it: For when he
has reproached others, he is ashamed, and too proud to imitate them; for which
Reason Job charges the Envious with folly, as well as wickedness, saying, Envy
slays the silly one.

But suppose a Crafty Envy may sometime obtain its purpose, and pull down the
man aimed at; it is but seldom that the Person, whose Envy chiefly procured
this, has the fortune to step into his Place; or if he does, the Envy that he
propagated against his Predecessor, often becomes as troublesome to himself,
when he arrives at the same station; and so the Envious Man is very good at
overturning or destroying any thing, but at building or settling of nothing.

But since Envy is such a Plague to all the Earth, such a Disturbance to
Society, such a Breeder of Discontent and Faction in the State, such a
never-ceasing Cause of Schism and Division in the Church: It is a Wonder, some
Man may say, that the good Providence of God endures Envious Men upon the face
of the Earth, that the Divine Justice does not, as it did once in the Case of
the Envious Levites, send them all down quick to those evil Spirits, whom they
so nearly resemble, and not suffer them to trouble this earth any longer.

But this is an Objection to be made by such as do not understand or consider
the state of this present Life: We ought to know that this is an imperfect
State, wherein evil must be mixed with good, of which there can be a perfect
separation only in the future Life; that it is, as it were, the state of
Infancy to good Men, who must be bred up here as Children in a School, for the
state of Perfection; and therefore here they must pass through many Trials and
difficult Methods of Discipline and Improvement, amongst which, the Envy both
of Men and Devils, as it is managed by the Wise Providence of God, who can bring
good out of evil, may very well be reckoned for one.

For First, All Men are very apprehensive of shame and disgrace, to which the
Envious stand ready, and are watchful, to expose men on any fault or
miscarriage; and this doubtless keeps many Persons from being so bad as
otherwise they would be.

Again; The best Men are but weak and frail, and the snares of the Devil
manifold; so that by avoiding one sin, we often run into another; and the most
perfect Men on earth, if they do not err on the left hand, yet are apt to err
on the right, to fall into some unreasonable extreme or other: And good Men,
when they have attained to any excellency, are apt to be puffed up with some
degree of Vanity, and in some sort to despise and contemn others, and to become
more remiss in their own Duties. And these Faults, though they cannot see in
themselves, and the kindness of their Friends makes them overlook them, and
perhaps Flatterers may commend as Virtues; yet the quick sight of the Envious
presently discovers them, and they blow them up into great Crimes, and blaze
them abroad, so that Men themselves can be no longer ignorant of their faults.

And again, Though the Envious do often Calumniate the best Men, yet they never
directly Calumniate them for their Virtues, but they find out some fault, or at
least some appearance or probability of a fault to Calumniate withal: As we
read in the First of Job, the Devil, when he could not find any disobedience to
charge Job with, charged him with worldly and self ends in his obedience: So
Envious Men, who are the Devil's most apt Scholars, never plainly reproach a
Man for his Piety, Justice, or Charity, Prudence or Diligence, Temperance or
Fortitude, though it be for the Reputation and Rewards of these, that they envy
him; but they will charge him with Vain glory, or Hypocrisy, or
Self-endedness, or the like: And if they can find the least Color of any of
these Vices; they take this for a Discovery, and magnify it to the uttermost.
So that in effect, Envious Men are the most curious and exact Censors of
Manners; they keep the World in a great deal of Awe, and are oftentimes our
truest Friends to discover to us those faults which otherwise we should have
overlooked. They make us circumspect in every Action, and I believe, a great
many may say by experience, That the Envy of their Enemies (though it is no
thank to them) has contributed more to the Reformation, and the perfecting of
their Manners, than all the kindness of their Friends. This good use and profit
of Envy, though in it self a very wicked thing, and dwelling only in the most
wicked hearts, the All-wise and Overruling Providence of God does make; and
every wise and good Man ought to make this Advantage of others Envy, he ought
to grow the more careful and circumspect in all his ways, and so to profit
thereby.

But because the generality of the World are not wise, and the best Men on
earth are but imperfectly so; therefore, when Envious Men raise slanders,
contrive evil devices against those they Envy, the Persons envyed are apt to
retort them, to render evil for evil, and the standers-by take part with the
one side or the other, according as their Envy or other Passions incline them;
and so Quarrels are inflamed, Parties are formed, and it often ends in War and
Confusion. The best way then to prevent so much Mischief, as Envy usually
brings into the World, is to use what means we can to cure this evil Disease in
Men's Minds, which is the

Last Enquiry, What are the proper Remedies for this Disease? And there are
Four sufficient and effectual Remedies, if we will but carefully seek and Apply
them. The

First is, A Right Apprehension of the Nature of the things of this World, a
true Understanding of the Value of them. The Second, A Due Submission to the
Will of God in all things. The Third, A True Humility. And the Fourth, A
Christian Charity.
1. Then, A true understanding of the Nature, and the Value of the things of
this present world, will be a powerful Remedy against Envy; For indeed, when
Virtuous and Worthy men are envied, it is not for their Virtue, but it is for
those worldly Advantages which they get by it. As for Virtue it self, it is in
every man's power: He may have it if he will go to the Cost. But those
Advantages which are the Rewards of it, are commonly in the Power of others.
And men do not grieve for want of that, which it is in their own power to have,
but for want of that, which it is in the power of others to give. This is plain
in the Instance I mentioned of Cain's envying his Brother; for God told him,
that he need not be cast down, since he might do well and be accepted; But he
had no mind to do well, and yet he had a Mind to be Accepted, and to have the
Benefit of it; so that he envyed not his Brother's Goodness, which he might
have had, if he pleased, but he envied God's Acceptance of him, and the
Blessings that were like to follow thereupon. So likewise, in that other
memorable Instance of the Envy of Saul against David; Saul envyed not David's
Courage in venturing to go against Goliath, for that he might have had himself;
he might have gone against that Champion then, or afterward against any of his
Gygantick Brethren, but Saul envyed the praise, that David got by this, when
the Women celebrated his Valor in their Songs, saying, Saul has slain his
Thousands, but David his Ten Thousands. He was very willing that David should
have the Fighting, but he would fain have had the praise.

Now, besides that it is most unjust, that the work and the reward should be
separated, or that they should desire the one, that have no mind to the other:
I say besides this, if men would but enquire what there is in popular praise,
in worldly Wealth or Greatness, they would find them so unfit and improper to
give true Content or Satisfaction to man's Mind; so uncertain also, for they do
not always happen to those that best deserve them; and if it be our hap to
obtain them, they can be ours but so little a while; that a wise man would
hardly spend one anxious or solicitous thought about them, much less torment
his mind with so grievous and sore a passion (as Envy is) for them: Especially
when that more substantial good of doing well, and performing our Duty, and
what becomes us in all Circumstances, is always within our Reach and Power, the
Grace of God waiting continually to assist us therein; and this, besides the
unconceivable Comfort every good and generous mind must feel therein, will
entitle us to Rewards, that are not empty, uncertain, and transitory, but
unspeakably Happy and Eternal. The

2. Remedy against Envy, is a dutiful Submission to the will and pleasure of
God, by whose providence all things here below are ordered and disposed. If we
consider how much it is our duty to submit to him, whose all things are, and
even we our selves, (and he cannot but have a just Title to do whatsoever he
will with his own) we can never have an evil or an envious Eye at the
Prosperity of any of our Brethren. For even this is wholly the Gift of God; So
the Scripture says, The Lord makes rich, and makes poor, he lifts up and
casts down; and How dares man then, by his Envy, censure the Actions of his
Maker, or say unto God, What do thou? He has wise Reasons for all his
Doings, though we sometimes are not able to find them out. We know not the
meaning of His Providence oftentimes, and why then should we presume to judge
it? For we cannot, as Solomon says in the 9. of Eccles. ver 1. Judge either of
God's Love or Hatred, by the things that are before us, by the disposal of
worldly Advantages; for worldly Goods are not always Blessings, and God may in
Judgment and Anger suffer some to be rich and great in this Moment of Life,
whilst others, whom he loves better, may be mean and despised. Even, according
to Natural Reason, and the Judgment of the Philosophers, those that are termed
the good things of this World, are not good in themselves, but as they are
used: A wise and good Man will be sure to use them well, and he were an ill Man
that would envy him any thing. But Riches or Honors heaped upon a fool, or a
wicked man, are rather a Mischief than a Benefit to him: They make him but more
remarkably foolish, they greaten and show his faults more advantageously, and
in a clearer light, they also blow up and inflame his Lusts and Passions: For
either they lead him into Pride and Vanity, Riot and Excess, and so there is a
quick dispatch both of the Man and his Fortune together; or else Covetousness
seizes him, and renders all his Substance useless to him, and fear of losing
what he has, keeps him always in anxiety. Now who would envy a man in such a
state of misery? This may cure Envy in the worst natured man living. How much
more, if we consider what the end of all this is like to be? God may suffer
wicked men to prosper in this World, to fill up the measure of their
Iniquities; or they having placed their happiness in earthly things, he may in
Judgment make them all their portion, as Abraham told Dives, they had been his.
God may suffer them, as Job speaks, chapter 21. v. 13. To spend their days in
wealth, and in a moment to go down into the Grave: Nay, below the Grave, to a
Place, as David tells us, Psalm. 33.19. where they are consumed with Terrors.
And is this a Condition to be envyed? Who can envy a moments folly, that must
end in never-ceasing Torment and Misery?

3. Humility is also an Effectual Remedy against Envy: For Envy arises from
Pride, Self love, and Self-conceit; and a man is never envious, who has humble
thoughts of himself: He that looks carefully into his own Infirmities and
Failings, will have but little heart to be ambitious or envious, or to censure
others; he will find it so necessary to judge himself, that he will never think
of judging his Neighbor; and seeing plainly how much weakness he himself might
be liable to, if he were in place or power; he will be so far from envying
others Advancement, that he will be glad, that he himself is not set in so
slippery a place, where he knows not, whether he should be able to stand
upright. It is therefore excellent Advice, that is given by the wise Son of
Syrach, Seek not to be Judge, not being able to take away Iniquity. And if men
would impartially examine their own fitness for the Stations they envy others,
they might easily cure themselves of this troublesome Passion. But (as the
Apostle speaks) men neither measuring nor comparing themselves, as they ought,
are not wise, but fall into many foolish and hurtful Lusts and Passions.

Lastly, A true Christian Charity is a most effectual Remedy against Envy; For
this pluks it up by the very Roots, and plants in our Hearts what is most
contrary thereunto. For he, that truly loves his Brother, can never Envy him,
so says the Apostle, Charity envyeth not. He, that loves his Neighbor as
himself, Nay, that accounts his Neighbor to be himself, (for so the Apostles
Words imply, Ye are members one of another, Romans 12.5. And again, Ye are one
Body, 1 Cor. 10 17.) will be so far from envying or repining at any good, that
happens to his Brother, that he will find a sensible Joy and Delight therein;
according to the Words of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 12.26. If one member be honored,
all the members rejoice with it.

It is a wonderful Alteration, that true Charity (if it once take possession of
a man's heart) makes in all the Passions and Affections of his mind. For
nothing in our Brethren can be grievous to us, when we have Charity: Nothing
can, but what is an Evil to them, and that also moves Compassion, and not
Hatred; not only Hatred and Malice, and Envy, and all those troublesome and
tormenting Passions, are utterly banished out of our hearts by Charity; but our
hearts are thereby mightily enlarged; Our Joy and Delight are made more Noble
and more Abundant; we have a Spiritual and Rational Delight instead of that,
which is sensual and brutish, to which a man, that has a base Self-love, is
only confined; neither is our Joy so poor and narrow, as to be limited within
the Compass of one Particular. But he whose Heart is enlarged with Charity,
partakes of Joy in all men's Happiness, which he accounts his own, because they
are dear to him, and of the same Body. For as a man, that has natural
Affection, rejoices in the Prosperity of his Children, or near Relations; or
he, that has a true sense of friendship, reioyces in the Happiness of his
Friend; so a truly Charitable man, that accounts himself nearly related, and a
friend to all men, rejoices in any good that happens to any man, if it be
indeed a good to him.

By planting this Noble Charity then amongst men, our Blessed Savior has
countermin'd all the devices of Satan, has destroyed the works of the Devil,
which he chiefly promoted and carried on by Envy. And as the Devil by Envy
first disturbed Heaven it self, and has since wrought all manner of mischief
and Confusion in the Earth, so our Blessed Savior on the contrary, by Charity,
of which himself was the Greatest and Noblest Example, and which he has made
his Chief Commandment, and taken the greatest care to instruct us in, and press
upon us, has restored all things, has established the Blessed Angels in their
Happy State, has given Peace on Earth, and put us into a Capacity, if we
continually walk in Charity, of coming to the same unalterable state of Glory
and Happiness, that the Holy Angels are in; of coming to those Regions of Bliss
and Joy, where all Rejoice in one another Felicity; where mutual Love, and
most sincere kindness, makes the Blessedness of all that Glorious Society, the
Blessedness of every particular Member of it; where being most nearly united
together in the most intimate concern for one another, in the straitest Bond of
Friendship, and having, as it were, but one Mind and one Soul, they partake of
one common and unexpressible Joy together.

To which God of his Infinite Mercy, bring us all for Jesus Christ his sake.
Amen.
FINIS.
Books Printed for John Southby at the Harrow in Cornhil, London.
By the same Author, A Sermon Preached before the QUEEN at White Hall, Aug. 23.
1691. published by her Majesty's Command.

The Unworthy Non-Communicant: A Treatise showing the danger of Neglecting the
Blessed Sacrament of the Lords Supper; and rectifying the mistakes of many in
this Age concerning it: The First part. The Third Impression Corrected, with
Addition of Prayers before and after Receiving the Sacrament. The Benefit of
Early Piety, recommended to all Young Persons, and particularly to those of the
City of London. The Second Edition, part 1 st. A Sermon preached before the
Right Honorable, Sir Tho. Stamp Lord Mayor, the Court of Aldermen, and
Citizens of London, September. 29. 1692. at the Election of the Lord Mayor for
the Year ensuing. These Three By William Smythies, Curate of St. Giles
Cripplegate, London.



The present War, No Burden to ENGLAND.


