To the Kings most Excellent Majesty, The humble Remonstrance of John Blande of
London Merchant, on the behalf of the Inhabitants and Planters in Virginia and
Mariland,
MOST HUMBLY representing unto Your Majesty the inevitable destruction of those
Colonies, if so be that the late Act for increase of Trade and Shipping be not
as to them dispensed with: for it will not only ruinate the Inhabitants and
Planters, but make desolate the largest, fertilest, and most glorious
Plantations under Your Majesty's Dominion; the which, if otherwise suspended,
will produce the greatest advantage to this Nations Commerce, and
considerablest Income to Your Majesty's Revenue, that any part of the world
does to which we trade.

And that the prejudice which this Act brings to those Colonies may appear to
Your Majesty, I shall presume to desire, that the following particulars in
order to the discovery thereof may be taken into consideration, as it has
reference to the Territories of Virginia and Mariland, and then to those
persons that first were the promoters of the same, for debarring the Hollanders
trading to those Plantations, in the long Parliament, with their specious
pretenses alleged for the obtaining thereof, which are as follows.

First, That the Hollanders will not permit us to trade into their Indian
Territories, therefore we should not admit them to trade in ours.

Secondly, That the Hollanders admission into Virginia and Mariland spoiled our
Commerce, not only there, but in England, and hindered the increase of our
Shipping.

Thirdly, That the Hollanders trading into those Colonies lessened our Customs
here in England.

Before I come to show how invalid the Pretenses of the aforesaid persons be,
as to the intent for which they were alleged, being only colorable, and to
hinder the Hollanders trade thither, that they might still keep the trade which
they had engrossed in their own hands.

First, I will say something concerning the Persons that did solicit and
procure the prohibition of the Hollanders from trading into those Plantations.

Secondly, Wherefore the said Act against the Dutch was procured by them, and
is still sought to be continued.

Thirdly, I shall take into consideration those three Motives, or Pretenses,
urged by the Ingrossers of the Virginia and Mariland trade, for the debarring
the Hollanders from trading thither; and so speaking to each of them,
demonstrate plainly, that what is alleged thereby to be an advantage to those
Colonies, is quite contrary, and will in time utterly ruinate them, the
Commerce, our Customs, and Shipping here in England.

To the First, concerning the Persons that procured the prohibition of the
Hollanders from trading into Virginia and Mariland, I give this account of them.

They are no Merchants bred, nor versed in foreign parts, or any Trade, but to
those Plantations, and that from either Planters there, or Wholesale
Tobacconists and Shopkeepers retailing Tobacco here in England, who know no
more what belongs to the Commerce of the World, or managing new discovered
Countries, such as Virginia and Mariland are, than children new put out
Prentice, Can it then be Rational, that such persons judgments should be taken
or relied upon for passing so important an Act?

To the Second Particular, Why these men procured this Act, prohibiting the
Hollanders trade into those Colonies at first, and its continuance now, was,
and is, because they would keep still in their own hands that Trade which they
had engrossed, and have no body come there to hinder them, and that for the
following reasons.

First, That for whatever goods they carried out of England to those
Plantations, the Inhabitants should pay to them what prices and rates they
pleased to require, else they should have nothing at all of them to supply
their necessities.

Secondly, To force the Planters to deliver them such Tobaccoes, which by the
labor and sweat of their brows they had made, at the rates they themselves
trading thither would have it, whereby they got that oftentimes of the poor
Planters for a halfpenny, which they made us pay for here in England by Retale
three or four shillings.

Thirdly, That if they could not get the Planters Tobaccoes at their own rates,
but that the Planters would ship it themselves for England, then would not the
Traders thither let the Planters have any Tunnage in their Ships to England,
exc^pt it were at such high freight, as the Tobacco coming for England could
never yield what would satisfy the same; so that if they could not get the
Planters Tobacco for nothing in the Country, They would have it for nothing
when arrived in England.

Fourthly, That seeing the Hollanders could not go to Virginia and Mariland,
the Traders thither might carry it to Holland from those Colonies themselves,
and so get (besides having the Tobacco for little or nothing of the Planters)
the Duties the Hollander used to pay in the Country for what he exported
thence; and also the Custom, which ought by their own rule to have been paid in
England.

By which I hope its apparent, that it was nor is not their love to the
Plantations, the Commerce, or to increase the Duties in England, that caused
them to seek the Hollanders prohibition from Virginia and Mariland, but their
own private interests, not regarding if the Colonies and all in them perished,
so they might keep the said Trade still: Surely then such men are not meet
Judges for debarring of the Hollanders from trading to those Plantations.

To the third Particular, wherein it is to be considered, how destructive those
three motives and pretenses (urged) for the obtaining this Act of prohibition
to the Hollanders from trading to Virginia and Mariland are to those Colonies,
the Commerce, and Your Majesty's Customs here in England, I declare as
follows,

To the First, in which it is alleged, That being the Hollander permits not us
Trade in their Indian Dominions, why should we admit him Trade in ours?

A good reason it were, and justly retaliated, if Virginia and Mariland were
stoared with, and did produce such rich Commodities as those Territories do,
out of which the Hollanders do debar us Trade, or that those our Plantations
were inhabited with such ingenious men as theirs be, into which they will not
suffer us to trade.

But seeing Virginia and Mariland have no such rich Commodities, nor ingenious
people to produce them, nor plenty of any thing but what may be had every
where, is it not then a madness to hinder the Hollanders or any else from
trading thither? Shall we, to put out one of their eyes, lose both our own? I
do hope it will be more seriously considered, and not by following the humor of
a few covetous, ignorant, self-seeking men, destroy so many thousands of Your
Majesty's Subjects planted in those parts, and thereby lose the best and
hopefullest Plantation that belongs to this Nation; but permit the Hollanders,
or any other Nations that will to trade thither, until Virginia and Mariland
be capable to maintain it self by it self; then, and not till then, will it be
convenient to debar Foreiners from trading thither.

The second Motive alleged for the obtaining this Act against the Hollanders
trading to Virginia and Mariland, is, that it hinders our Trade, not only
there, but in England, whereby the general Commerce is, and our Shipping are
decreased.

To explain this, and to show, that the promoters of the Hollanders prohibition
from trading to Virginia and Mariland, by reason of their ignorance and
unexperiencedness in the negotiations of the world, are very unfit for
Statesmen, and to make Laws for whole Nations, when most of them have never
been farther than in their own Shops and Warehouses wherein they were bred; so
that certainly it is hard for such, especially that mind only their own profit
and interest, to set Rules for others in those things which they understand
not; but with grief it may be spoken, that through the sluggishness and
sloathful neglect of our most experienced men in this Nation, and their
unwillingness to take pains, or to appear in public business, which chiefly
may be attributed for their not being encouraged and countenanced, do thereby
give too much leave to hairbrain'd Ignorance to obtain that, which does not
only overthrow themselves, but the most ingeniousest men, and our whole
Nation, whereby, and that deservedly, all perish together.

Therefore before I proceed to the next particular, I pray, that the State of
Virginia and Mariland, as they now are in, may be considered.

Virginia and Mariland are Colonies, which though capable of better
Commodities, yet for the present affoard only these, Tobacco chiefly, then in
the next place Corn and Cattle, Commodities almost in every Country whatever to
be had; withal they are such Commodities, that except purchased in those
Plantations so cheap as not else-wheie so to be had, none would ever go thither
to fetch them, no not we our selves. Which being so, then certainly it cannot
stand with wisdom to hinder the Hollanders from going thither, for unless what
is there produced be fetched from thence, the Planters will have little
encouragement to manure the ground, or trouble themselves to take so much pains
as they do, for what, when obtained, they know not what to do therewith. Does
it not then hence appear, that unless as some plant, others go to buy what is
planted, there can be no trade or commerce in such a place? Seeing then what
the Commodities of Virginia and Mariland are, is it not a great advantage to
those Colonies to have them by every body fetched thence? and on the contrary,
must it not needs be a disadvantage to the Commerce there, not to do it? If
therefore then we debar the Hollanders from going thither, see the
inconveniences that will arise thereby.

The Hollander began to plant Tobacco in his own Territories, as soon as the
Act for their prohibition from Virginia and Mariland in the long Parliament was
obtained, will he not proceed to plant greater quantities, and so totally
supply himself by his own labor? do we not force him to this our selves, and
so thereby cut off our own trade? will he, after accustomed to the Tobacco of
his own grouth, ever regard that which is in Virginia? will he ever afterward
be induced to fetch it thence, when he finds his profit nigher at home? and
will he ever buy that of us, when by passing so many hands, and so much charge
contracted thereon, is made so dear, that he can have it cheaper in his own
Territories? (Surely no.) Therefore it clearly appears, that being so, of
necessity we must lose that Trade and Commerce.

And if it be alleged, the Tobacco planted in Holland is not so good as what
comes from Virginia, none will buy Gold too dear, and being used once to bad,
the best is not regarded; what grows in Holland for present spending is as
good as any. Have we not in this Nation, by reason of the dearness and
sophistication of Va^^na's Tobacco, accustomed our selves so to Virginia, that
little Spanish, though much better, is spent amongst us at this day? And
certainly, experienced men will say, it is, and will be the overthrow of our
Trade and Commerce, to put any people upon necessities to seek that out in
their own Territories, which we will not let them have from us, but with
excessive cost and charge; which if it were otherwise to be had of us at easy
rates, they would not so much as think thereof to plant it themselves, of
which, many experimental examples may be shown in order thereunto.

Again, If the Hollanders must not trade to Virginia, how shall the Planters
dispose of their Tobacco? the English will not buy it, for what the Hollander
carried thence was a sort of Tobacco not desired by any other people, nor used
by us in England but merely to transport for Holland: Will it not then perish
on the Planters hands? which undoubtedly is not only an apparent loss of so
much Stock and Commodity to the Plantations, who suffer thereby, but for want
of its employment, an infinite prejudice to the Commerce in general.

Then again, If you keep thence the Hollanders, can it be believed, that from
England more Ships will be sent than are able to bring thence what Tobacco
England will spend? if they do bring more, must they not lose thereby both
Stock and Block, principal and charges? the Tobacco will not vend in England,
the Hollanders will not fetch it from England; what must become thereof? even
flung to the Dunghill. Is not then this a destruction to the Commerce? for if
men lose their Estates, certainly trade cannot be increased.

A farther prejudice does evidently attend the Commerce by this Act, not only
in debarring Hollanders from trading to those Colonies, but thereby we do
likewise debar our selves; for by the Act, no English Ships can load any goods
in Virginia and Mariland to transport to any Country but our own Territories;
Is not this absolutely against the very essence and being of Trade and
Commerce, and cuts off all industry or ingenious designs, and is in a manner
quite against, and contrary to the intent of the Act it self, which I conceive
is to find out a means, that the Hollanders cheap sailing should not overthrow
our Markets, our shipping going dearer set to Sea than theirs?

Which I explain thus, A Ship having laden her self in Virginia and Mariland
with Tobacco, Beef, Pork, and Corn, must bring these commodities to England, or
into other our Territories; being landed in England, is not the Hollander,
arriving in that place, where those Goods are so landed, as free to buy them of
the Importer as any other Merchant of England, that would transport them in our
own ships? they then both going to one Market, has not the Hollander the same
advantage he ever had? and do what we can in such a case, will under-sell us.
Is not this then a prejudice to the Commerce, and gives the Hollanders that
very benefit which we strive to keep from him?

Now as this is a prejudice to the Commerce of Virginia and Mariland, so in the
like it will hold in all our American Plantations; but I am, and it is my
business at present only, to plead for Virginia and Mariland, and to show its
disadvantages to those Colonies; Will not this contract a great deal of
needless charges and hazardous voyages, and that upon such goods and
commodities as Virginia and Mariland affoard, which will not keep in long and
tedious voyages? does it not hereby then appear to be an absolute hinderance of
trade and commerce, nor only to those places, but to our selves here in
England?

I demand then, If it would not be better to let our English Ships, loading in
those Colonies, when laden, to go whither they please, and pay in the places
where they do lade (if it will not be dispensed with otherwise) the same
Customs to your Majesty as they should have done in England, or give Bills from
thence to pay it in England? certainly this would be more beneficial to the
commerce, and security both for the ships and goods, and advantageous to Your
Majesty; for whilst they are coming to England they might be at the end of
their intended voyages, and obtain a Market, which happily in England could not
be had; and with the proceeds of those very goods return for England, and there
produce more advantage to Your Majesty's Customs, when as otherwise by making
a double voyage run a hazard to lose all. So that by what herein has been
said, I hope it will appear, our Commerce is rather hindered than furthered.

Then, as concerning our Shipping, I shall briefly show, that the debarring the
Hollanders thence does no way increase them.

The Hollanders never from Virginia and Mariland fetched any thing else but
Tobacco; neither do our English ships that sail thither ever go full laden, as
few as we send.

Therefore if the Hollanders go not thither, but plant Tobacco in their own
Territories, whereby they will not need ours, we shall not send ships to
Virginia and Mariland to fetch thence what we cannot again dispose of; so that
we shall employ no more ships to those Colonies than will fetch as much Tobacco
as will vend in England. How is it possible that this then can decrease or
increase our ships, when as, when the Hollanders traded thither, we brought no
less into England than we do now, nor when they trade not shall we bring the
more?

Does it not plainly appear, that foreign Nations trading into a Country make
the people industrious, and their industry makes that Nation rich, and so by
wealth comes Countries to be inhabited, which increases Trade, and the more
trade the more need of shipping to manage it? So that I am of the judgment,
that the freer foreign Nations be admitted to those Colonies, it will the more
increase Navigation that way, and the contrary will lessen it: For if once the
Inhabitants be destroyed and ruinated, where is your trade? and then, how shall
we employ our shipping?

Having by the foregoing reasons showed how those Colonies will suffer, in
debarring the Hollanders trade thither, and increase, if admitted, both as to
the Commerce and Shipping;

In the next place I come to the third Motive or pretense urged, for
prohibiting the Hollanders trading to Virginia and Mariland, under this notion,
that Your Majesty's Customs thereby would much suffer and be lesned.

This would be true, and to be allowed, if we could force the Hollanders to
fetch all the Tobacco they spend out of England, and that it were not to be had
but in those Plantations; but we see the contrary, it is to be had in all the
parts of America that are seated by any European people; In France great
quantity is planted yearly, and of late years merely by our debarring them
going to our Plantations; the Hollanders, as I said before, have planted such
store, and will, if continued from going thither, plant daily more and more,
that they will not need it from any other place: So that the Hollanders not
fetching it from Virginia or Mariland, nor our Traders bringing it to England,
it must perish in the Country; or, if brought into England, and not able to
bear its charge, nor finding vend, it will undoubtedly rot in the Warehouses.
Which way then shall our Customs increase by the Hollanders not trading into
those Colonies?

I am sure upon the first obtaining this Act in the long Parliament, our
Traders to Virginia and Mariland carried the Tobacco from those Colonies
directly to Holland themselves, and neither paid Duties in the Country, nor in
England, and so they would do still if permitted; wherein it is apparent, its
their own interests that is sought after; for the Custom, let the Hollanders
trade thither or not, will be the same in England, and rather increase than
decrease if they be permitted to trade thither; for as the Colonies increase,
they will grow to better husbandry, and so by the production of better
Commodities make our Customs the greater.

Having run through those three grand Pretenses of the Traders to Virginia and
Mariland, for the Hollanders prohibition from trading thither, I hope it will
clearly appear, that the debarring the Hollanders from going to those
Plantations does not at all advance our Commerce, or Your Majesty's Customs,
but on the contrary, will utterly ruinate the Colonies Commerce and Customs
together in a short time; for if the Inhabitants be destroyed, of necessity the
Trade there must cease.

I demand then in the next place, which way shall the charge of the Governments
be maintained, if the Hollanders be debarred trade in Virginia and Mariland, or
any thing raised to defray the constant and yearly Levies for the securing the
Inhabitants from Invasions of the Indians? how shall the Forts and public
places be built and repaired, with many other incident charges daily arising,
which must be taken care for, else all will come to destruction? for when the
Hollanders traded thither, they paid upon every Anchor of Brandy, which is
about 25 Gallons, 5 s. Impost, brought in by them, and upon every Hogshead of
Tobacco carried thence 10s. And since they were debarred trade, our English, as
they did not; whilst the Hollander traded there, pay any thing, neither would
they when they traded not, and yet they carried the Tobacco directly for
Holland; So that all these charges being taxed on the poor Planters, it has so
impoverished them, that they scarce can recover wherewith to cover their
nakedness.

As Foreign trade makes rich and populous any Country that has within it any
staple Commodities to invite them thither, so it makes men industrious,
striving with others to gather together in Societies, and builing of Towns, and
nothing does it sooner than the concourse of Shipping, as we may see before our
eyes, Dover and Deal what they are grown unto, the one by the Flanders Trade,
the other by ships riding in the Downs. Withal, Strangers will be brought to
Rules and Orders when they come to other Princes Territories, which Natives are
not so soon brought unto, especially our English, that except they be forced
unto that which is for their advantage, they will not admit it, ever repining
to be liable to any Rule, be it never so good.

So that except the Hollander be permitted to trade to Virginia and Mariland,
it will never flourish or come to any thing, nor never have Town or Village in
any part thereof propagated or built; for our English trading thither send no
more ships than they need to fetch thence what Tobacco our Nation spends, and
for it they run straggling all the Country over, abiding in no settled place,
which will never bring to perfection any thing, to the wonderment of ingenuous
men, that a Country so well seated, and furnished with all manner of delights
and provisions of Land and Water, should be so much slighted and dis-regarded.

Further, it may be ascertained, that except there be some order or care taken,
that a particular place be assigned for all Commerce, and Shipping to come to,
and go from, in those Colonies, there can never be any encouragement for
handicrafts men, or ingenious Artists to settle, or reside there; and in case
they might be by some means induced thereunto, would it not be a sad thing,
that after all their industry and pains taken to produce any thing worthy of
regard, and more valuable than Tobacco, Corn, or Cattle, to have it left to the
mercy of a few Tobacconists, and ignorant men, that know not how to prise or
value the same, but to make a prey of them, as they have already done, by
engrossing their Tobacco, and so give them only what they please for such
Commodities?

If that notwithstanding what is by the foregoing particulars declared, it may
seem reasonable, that the Act shall stand in force against those Colonies of
Virginia and Mariland, and that the Hollanders and all other foreign Nations,
that would go thither, shall be prohibited;

Then let me on the behalf of the said Colonies of Virginia and Mariland make
these following Proposals, which I hope will appear but equitable; and I dare
undertake for them, that they will be very well satisfied, that those few
Tobacconists that have engrossed that Trade into their hands, shall still
continue in it, without moving further against them therein.

First, That the Traders to Virginia and Mariland from England shall furnish
and supply the Planters and Inhabitants of those Colonies with all sorts of
commodities and necessaries which they may want or desire, at as cheap rates
and prices as they used to have them when the Hollander was admitted to trade
thither.

Secondly, That the said Traders out of England to those Colonies shall not
only buy of the Planters such Tobacco in the Colonies as is fit for England,
but take off all that shall be yearly made by them, at as good rates and prices
as the Hollanders used to give for the same, by Bills of Exchange or otherwise,
when the said Hollanders and Dutch were permitted thither to trade.

Thirdly, That if any the Inhabitants or Planters of the said Colonies shall
desire to ship his Tobacco or goods for England, that the Traders from England
to Virginia and Mariland shall let them have freight in their ships at as low
and cheap rates, as they used to have it when the Hollanders and other Nations
traded thither.

Fourthly, That for maintenance of the Governments, raising of Forces to with
stand the invasions of the Indians, building of Forts, and other public works,
needful in such new discovered Countries, the Traders from England to pay there
in Virginia and Mariland as much yearly as was received of the Hollanders and
Strangers as did trade thither, whereby the Country may not have the whole
burden to lie on their hard and painful labor and industry, which ought to be
encouraged, but not discouraged.

Thus having proposed in my judgment what is both just and equal, to all such
as would not have the Hollander permitted to trade into Virginia and Mariland,
I hope if they will not agree hereunto, it will easily appear, it is their own
profits and interests they seek; not those Colonies, nor your Majesty's
service, but in contrary the utter ruin of all the Inhabitants and Planters
there; and if they perish, that vast Territory must be left desolate, to the
exceeding disadvantage of this Nation, and your Majesty's Honor and Revenue.

Now to have all parties pleased, the Traders to Virginia and Mariland, and the
Inhabitants and Planters, and that all may be done for your Majesty's glory and
advantage, without loss to any;

By way of Accommodation this I propose, Let all Hollanders and other Nations
whatsoever, freely trade into Virginia and Mariland, and bring thither and
carry thence whatever they please; and to counterpoise the cheapness of their
sailing, with the dearnesse of our ships, to pay a set Duty and Imposition that
may countervail the same; and when what they paid formerly will not do it, let
it be doubled and trebled, as shall be thought meet, yet still with this
caution, that it may not make it as bad as if they were totally prohibited.

In the next place, that all English ships that do go thither to trade, and
carry goods to any other Country besides England, may be freed of any Custom
there, more than some certain Duty to the use of the Colonies; for as it is
before expressed, the proceed of those goods vended abroad, will countervail at
their return to England to Your Majesty twice the Custom that should have been
paid, did they come directly from those Colonies to England.

This being so settled, those Colonies will flourish, their respective Governors
and Governments will be maintained without charge to Your Majesty's Exchequer,
the people will increase, and by the bringing all trade to certain select
places, riches will abound, Artists go over, Your Majesty's Dominions will be
enlarged, the Customs there and in England advanced, the Commerce made
splendent, and all particular persons that are concerned as well as public,
receive their contentments; otherwise only destruction must attend and be the
portion of those Colonies.

I have already in a few printed sheets of mine, entitled, Trade revived,
which I presumed to deliver to Your Majesty, declared the value of those
Colonies of Virginia and Mariland, and what advantages they will yield to this
Nation, if encouraged, as in folio 10 to 13. of the said Book appears,
therefore I shall here say no more therein; but on the contrary, if the
Hollanders and Dutch be prohibited trading thither, they will come to nothing.

And being Virginia was upon its last legs, as we here were, when it pleased
Almighty God by a like miracle, their Governor, under the late usurped Power
dying, by an unanimous consent of the Colonies, Sir William Bartlet was
restored to the Government, his worth being so well known to them, in which
happiness, by Your Majesty's most gracious confirming him therein, they are
made more happy, his fitness for that Government being such, as few, if any
there be, can parallel.

Forasmuch then as God has so wonderfully freed those Colonies, as he has
also freed us, from their Egyptian Taskmasters, and given them their ancient
Governors as at the first, whereby they be in hopes to enjoy not only their
liberty, but their wonted trade with all Nations, and so recover out of that
languishing distemper in which they were; Shall they, after so long suffering,
and expectation of relief, be made more miserable now than ever, and that by an
established Law, merely obtruded on them by a few covetous and self-interested
men, Tobacconists, and ingrossers of that Trade? God forbid.

Having therefore as briefly as I could, and the matter required, in reference
to those Colonies, Remonstrated to Your Majesty, both their agrievance by
reason of the said Act, debarring them foreign Trade; as also the advantage that
will arise to them, the Commerce, and Your Majesty's Revenue, if admitted, and
the Act suspended, It is left to Your Majesty's pious consideration to do
therein as shall be most meet, by

Your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subject, JOHN BLANDE.


