Some REMARKS upon GOVERNMENT, And particularly upon the ESTABLISHMENT Of the
English MONARCHY Relating to this present Juncture.
In Two LETTERS, Written by, and to a Member of the Great CONVENTION, holden at
Westminster the 22d. of January, 1688/9.
SIR.
YOU have been highly Obliging in the frequent Accounts you sent me of Affairs,
in this Great and Extraordinary Revolution. I was once very diffident, and
could scarcely conceive that the States of Holland, or Prince of Orange, could
have attempted so Expensive, and so Hazardous an Undertaking out of pure
Generosity, merely for our Sakes, and for the Re-establishment of our Laws and
Religion, which did both equally Labor under the Pressures of an Ill
Administration, and seemed to draw toward their last Periods. I knew the
States had the Character of preferring their own, before any other Interest
whatsoever, and the Prince had the Reputation of setting a duo Value upon That
which creates and proportions the Value of all things else. The Enterprise I
looked upon, as very Expensive in its Methods, and Uncertain in its
Accomplishment, which made me prove to believe that something more lay coucht
in this Vast Undertaking, than was expressed in the Prince's Declaration; But
since His arrival and coming to London, I perceive He has, upon all Occasions,
carried Himself with that wonderful Modesty, with such an unparalled Care and
Tenderness of our Laws, Liberties, and Religion, and adheres so Resolutely to
every Particular in His Declaration, that I cannot but esteem these to be His
Noblest Trophies: And that which crowns those Successes which have crowned His
Generous and Pious Undertakings. His persisting to referr all to the Impartial
Decisions of a Free Parliament, to Do and Establish such Matters, either in
His, their Own, or the Kings behalf, as they shall think fit, even then, when
Honor and Power spread their Perswasives before Him to do otherwise, is so
great a Thing that it exceeds all His other Glories, and strikes the Beholders
with nothing less than Amazement. I do more rejoice than wonder at the
Unanimous Concurrence which has hitherto been maintained between the Lords and
Commons Assembled in Council, and indeed in the Wishes and Desires of all the
People in General: It is what this Juncture does highly require, and what the
Prince's Conduct does Oblige. We are very busy here in the Country in
Electing Members for the Great Convention which is to sit in January, and I
think the Lot will fall on me to serve for my Neighboring Borough. You know I
was never fond of Business or Trouble, and truly Age seems now to have signed
my Writ of Ease. I also always cherisht some Cynical Notions, which made me
very much slight and disregard the Honors and Flatulencies of a giddy World:
But the thoughts of being one of the Great Planters of a Government which shall
last for Ages, and perhaps till Time has run out its last Minutes, is no
Ordinary thing. This thought alone has envigorated my Age and baffled my
Philosophy, so that you may expect to see me in London about the 22d. of
January next; and in the mean time, if you will favor me with your Thoughts
and Opinion of Affairs, and what Understanding Men do think will, or ought to
be the Issue and Consequence of this great Revolution, you will very
considerably add to the many Kindness conferred upon

SIR, Your assured Friend and humble Servant A. B.

The Answer.
YOurs (tho it bore and early Date, yet) came not to my hands till last Friday.
I am very glad that my slender Services have proved upon any account acceptable
to you. I never thought my self qualified to pry into the Recesses of
Government, or the privacies of a King: What I acquainted you with, was little
more than what was publicly discoursed of in Coffee-Houses: But indeed such
was the Management of Affairs during our late King's Supremacy, That his most
private Councels proved generally the next days Table-talk, for as they were
shallow, so was the bottom of them discoverable to every common Eye. The Prince
has perhaps, with more Courage than Caution, and a great Zeal for the
Protestant Interest, then Care of His own particular Concerns, undertaken
mighty Things for us, and run such Risques in the Accomplishing of them, which
Story can scarcely parallel. But what the sequel of this will be, I must leave
to Astrology. It Is true, the people seem to be Unanimous to a wonder, and yet
there are a Set of Men in this Nation whom nothing will satisfy but to Lord
it over their Brethren: These do still labor under some Discomposures, and
although, in no respect disobliged, yet fearing they may receive a Crush in
this great Turn, do by their Sourness and Discontent rather assist and further
their fate, than anticipate and prevent it. The Protestant Dissenters are not
esteemed, by Computations which have been formerly made, to amount to more than
a 25th. part of the Nation, the Church of England receiving all the rest: This
I do believe to be true, if the Church of England be taken in the most large
and comprehensive Sense, by including all such as frequent the public Service:
But if we might suppose them in the same Circumstances that Dissenters were in,
at the time of this Computation made, under the Frowns of the Court, and the
power of the Laws, which like so many Billows, beat in against them; if thus we
might be admitted to view them in Reverse, I do believe their Numbers would not
exceed, or Scarcely equal those of the Dissenting party. There are but very few
in the Nation would undergo Fines and Imprisonment for the sake of the Surplice
or Common Prayer. The prevailing Opinion now in England is, Latitudinarian:
Most Men are so far improved in their Judgments, as to believe, that Heaven is
not entailed upon any particular Opinion, and that either an Episcopal, or
Presbyterial way of Worship, together with a due observation of the Rules of
Morality, may serve well enough to carry them to Heaven, the only Bias which
enclines them to the one side or the other, being the Laws. Be subject to the
Higher Powers, not for Wrath, but Conscience, sways the Scale and gives the
casting Vote in such Things as are thought indifferent: This is it which crowds
the Church, otherwise the Sarsnet Hood and Lawn Sleeves might be as destitute
of Votaries, as the Long Cloak and Collar Band.

Which may the succeeding Government will lean, I dare not determine, but it is
more than probable, That Episcopacy, in that strictness in which it has of late
Years excercis'd, owed its Continuance, as well as Originally its Being, to the
King: His power and His purse, has been liberally employed in favor of the
Church, and they as plentifully requited His Kindness, by their Doctrines of
Jure Divinoship, and Passive Obedience: So long as the King continued thus
their Servant, He was in all Causes Civil and Ecclesiastical, their Supreme
Head and Governor: But when the King became of another Interest, and they
themselves were likely to be squeezed by the pressures of their own Weighty
Doctrines, then the Case Was immediately altered and Plowdens Hogs could be no
longer Trespassers: They instantly changed their Note, and rang their Bells
backward, for they were all on fire, and likely to be reduced to their original
Dust in a moment. Fears of Popery was first the pretense of their
dissatisfactions: This way very plausible, and seemed once to give them an
interest in the people: But surely now these Dangers are Removed; the
Protestant Interest is likely to settle upon firm Foundations, and the Prince
seems well affected to their way of Worship, and signalizes His Approbations by
Communicating with them according to the Rights and Ceremonies of the Church,
and yet they seem dissatisfied, and are still apprehensive of Danger.

What then can be the reason that this bright Hemisphere should thus be wrapped
up in Clouds and Darkness? It must needs be this, That they have lost, or are
likely to lose the King and Courts good Service employed in all or most of the
former Parliaments so freely in their behalf. This in truth was the chief
Pillar of their Church: That which first built, and afterward supported it.
Tho the Prince does sufficiently approved of this Establishment in His own
Judgment, yet He is resolved to call a Free Parliament, being the purport of
His Declaration, backed with many subsequent Promises and Assurances in which
the People shall have freedom to Elect such Persons as are for the True
Interest of the Nation, and not for the upholding a particular Interest or
Faction There shall be no Elections either forced by Power, or bribed by
Treats; No false Returns, no Committee of Affections to determine according to
the Court or Chapter of England Interest; No Parliamentary Pensions, nor Treats
with Guinea's laid under their Plates to seduce them from their honest
Principles and the Interest of their Country. The Prince abhors such
irregularities: He desires such an Assembly may meet, as may truly represent
the People, to Enact and Establish such Laws and such a Government as may
secure their Religion, Liberties and Properties, with the best advantage and
security to the Nation that can be proposed: And although the Church of England
is hereby left destitute of that unfair and irregular advantage it firmly had
from the King's power and assistance, yet I doubt not but this and succeeding
Parliaments will Enact such an Establishment in the Church, as may very well
agree with the honest desires of the more moderate and pious Churchmen.

What the Civil Government will be, is more difficult to guess at, but I can
tell you what it has been, and wherein it seems defective and requires some
touches of your Legislative Skill to help it ^ut. This I am confident of, That
if the Consultations of this great Council does but produce what the
Necessities of the People, and the Conveniences which a well-setled State does
require, the Alterations will be very considerable. It Is true, there is a
Notion generally received by the Nobility and Gentry of Eng. that a Mixed
Monarchy (just such a one as ours is, and no other) must needs be the best of
Governments, and that amongst all others, none could boast of those advantages
as that of England. This fancy is so rivetted in the minds of the People
(spread abroad and preached up, only to keep the people in peace, and from
endeavoring an Alteration, which could not be effected without the
Inconveniences of the Sword) that I do believe All things will again settle
upon its old Basis, and the Government be rebuilt with all its irregularies.
However, because I understand you are in election to be one of Those, from whom
succeeding Ages must derive their Happiness or Misery, I will make use of the
Liberty you have given me, to express my Sentiments in this mighty Affair, in
order to which I will in the first place acquaint you with my Notions of
Government in general, and afterward will descend to Particulars; And to our
present Case as it now lies:

Government is a Power whereby a Community of Men are kept in Order, disposed
to act conformably to their Natures, and to the common advantage of the whole
Body Politic. This Power is sometimes placed in one single Person, and then it
is Monarchy: Sometimes in a select number of the Chiefs, when it assumes the
name of Aristocracy; And sometimes in the whole Body of the People, which is
called Democracy. But of these three Primatives, there are several Derivatives,
Compounds, and Variations.

The first, Magestracy, I do allow to be grounded in Nature, and the first
Magistrate to be a Genarcha, or Patriarch, who ruled over Families of his own
Extraction, and Cities of his natural Generation. It was in this sense that
the Fifth Commandment was given; and it was from hence that Men grew up into
Cities, Kingdoms, and Empires, and therefore the Laws to regulate them ought
to be such as are apt and fit to govern Families, for the preservation of their
Peace, Libertys and Properties, not to bind them to perpetual Slavery and
Vassalage. So also, the Submissions due from the People to the Supreme Power,
are in their nature filial, not servile, as proceeding rather from Love and
Gratitude, for protection given, than for fear of the Rod hanging over their
Backs, which ought to be exercised only to prevent a common Inconveniency. But
this Patriarchal Government, continues no longer than the Patriarch holds a
power over his Family, to punish such offenses in particular persons, as might
otherwise (if allowed of) obstruct the common Interest; and to protect the
whole Body and every individual in their natural and acquired Rights, both from
Domestic and Foreign Invaders: For when the natural power of one or more in
Conjunction shall exceed that of the Patriarch, or Father of the Family, this
for of Government is so far dissolved, that if they please and find it
convenient, they may reassume their natural Freedom, or again engag^ in the
same Family, by Pact or promise, or else leave it, and h^^ compact with others,
submit to what Laws or Measures of Livin^ together in a Comunity they think
fit. He that will make t^^ natural Magistrate more Sacred than this, may at
last commit Idol^try, and fall down to worship.

But this is not the State of any Nation or People now under Heaven. We are all
shufled and blended together, so that we stand not Ori^^nally associated to any
Magistrate out of natural Duty, but out (...) mutual fear of each other, which
to avoid, produced, these civil Co^pacts by which the World is now Governed.
Thus being separated from our Families, each Man has a right by nature to
defend himself, which supposes his primary Allegiance now due to himself: He
has farther an equal right with all others to all things necessary for
sustentation, and an absolute right in his own person; and having thus a mutuum
jus in both, he is fitted for mutual Compact with others. It Is certain that
Nature, tho She did provide for Mankind in its tender helpless and
unexperienced years, a natural Governor and Protector, yet being withdrawn
from that Power and Subjection, it falls into a state of War, which was the
Condition of the World in those Times, which Historians call Heroical: When
Nimrod obtained the Character of the stoutest Hunter, and Hercules traveled to
tame Monsters and Usurpers.

The Patriarchal Government being at an end, and the People being now left in a
state of War, occasioned by the Universal Right that every man had to every
thing, the Government that succeeded was accordingly Martial and Warlike, and
their Governors were rather Generals than Kings, and like them, Arbitrary and
Unlimited. In this state the Chief Magistrate was properly and Originally
called Tyrannus; but Lust, Ambition, and Avarice being the usual attendants of
absolute power, did too far prevail, to the prejudice of those in Subjection,
that both the Person and Title of such Governors in time became odious and
contemptible. It was for this reason that Plutarch in his life of Timoleon,
affirms that over a Tyrant, every man is a Judge, and may be an Executioner;
and Plato in his Commonwealth, delineates a Tyrant amongst his Subjects by a
Woolf amongst the Flock, placed there rather to devour than preserve them.

But the World soon grew weary of this Course of Life, and by experience found
that Compact was more apt for the Coalition of Societies than mere Power; which
is the cause, That in the more civilized and cultivated parts of the Earth,
this sort of Government is very rare and unusual, unless sent by the Supreme
Power of Heaven and Earth for the punishment of a People for some Sins
committed, that thereby they may be compelled like the mute Fish in the Gospel,
to bring their Penny unto Caesar, and after pay their Lives for Contribution:
And it is observable that it prevails principally, and is no where else
willingly allowed of, but where Idolatry and Invincible Ignorance are the
National Sins.

This Tyranical Government, or State of War, being found uneasy in many
places, and more intolerable than the Patriarchal Government in which they
were first engaged, and also finding that there is now no Father of the
Country, in a natural Sense: The People as becoming Orphans, choose One or More
to be their Guardian, which in several Countries goes under several
Denominations. Thus the People are in the state of Pupillage, and as a Minor
cannot make a Contract to his prejudice, so we may conclude, that the People
may meliorate their Condition by Compact, but cannot make it worse; and
therefore it may with much more reason be allowed, that such Concessions which
are made by them, and which infringe or derogate from their natural Rights
should be void, than that what a Prince grants to his People out of his
Prerogative (though for their better Government and well Being, for which alone
Prerogative was first given and intended) should be null and of no validity,
which some Presidents in our present Establishment seem to countenance and
abet. Thus all Governments in the same degrees that they differ from
Patriarchal and Tyrannical must derive their Originals from Compact, and the
Governor must necessarily derive his Power from and by, the mutual Consent of
the People he governs; unless God does himself immediately appoint a
Magistrate, and even then the People have usually confirmed, as in the case of
Saul. 1. Sam. 10. So of David, 1 Samuel 16. 2 Samuel 2.

I cannot but with Grotius believe, that Salus populi est Suprema Lex. Nor did
Junius Brutus err in affirming that, Imperii finis unicus est populi Utilitas.
But on the contrary to imagine the People to be made for their King, and that a
Million of Souls should be Born Slaves and Vassals to the Lust and Tyrrany of
one Man, who by nature is no more than their fellow Creature, made of the same
mold, and standing upon the same level with themselves, is nonsense and
directly contradictory to the true notion of Government it self. In all States
and Kingdoms whose Government is by Compact, the King cannot be supposed to be
any thing more than an Officer, elected and appointed by the People to preserve
the Government, and therefore the People must necessarily be supposed to have
still a Reserve of Power in extraordinary Exigences above the King. Quicquid
efficit Tale est magis tale. Their Concessions cannot extend farther than for
their own preservation, and when that ceases, the Grant determines Our General
and Original Rights cannot totally be swallowed up by any Compact that can be
made to settle Liberty and Property, neither is all that was Natural now made
Civil; wherefore that old Law was but old Reason. Quod populus postremum jubet
id ratum esto. Upon this Account the People in notorious cases, do themselves
become the Accuser, Judge, and Executioner; it being but reason that in such
Cases they should be allowed this privilege; for as every man is the best
Judge of his own health, and how such and such Meats and Medicines assists and
helps the health and vigor of his Body; so in the Body Politic, the People
must be Judge how this or that Governor or Law agrees with their Constitution,
and Contributes to their Health, Peace, and Welfare. In the 17th. of Deuteronomy. and
the 14th. v. God leaves the Election of a King absolutely to the People, and
puts it into their choice whether they will have a King or not, and whosoever
they pleased to set over them (provided he were chosen from among their
Brethren) should be their King. Thus before David's Inauguration, The People
made a league with him, 2. Sam. 5.3. v. And by this they restrained and bound
him up as they thought fit: And he who in any settled legal Government,
arrogates to himself and other Supremacy over all or any part of his Brethren,
other than what is immediately appointed by God, or claimed from the People,
breaks those Bonds and Limits which they have set; and is as Civilians
distinguish, Tyrannus exercitio, though not Titulo.

A Supreme, Absolute, and Arbitrary Power, is essentially necessary in all
Governments whatsoever, whether Monarchial, Aristo-critical, or Democritical,
in respect of which, these three distinct Species differ no otherwise than as a
Guinea from twenty Shillings, or forty Sixpences, which put together are
equivalent one to the other: Thus the Supreme Acts of all Governments are the
same, for no State can go higher (nor ought to descend lower) than 1st. to be
able to redress a grievance, by making or repealing a Law. 2ly. to have the
power of War and Peace, 3ly. to judge of Life and Death, and 4ly. to fix and
Appeals in it self. So also if a mixture be made of these three Governments,
yet it makes no change as to the product of a Supreme Act; for they who limit
one another, are yet Copartners and do the same thing together which one alone
does Legislatively: And as the prudence and foresight of the first Founders of
these various Constitutions, saw any advantage or inconveniency peculiar to the
people, place, or time they lived in, so they accordingly made various and
suitable provisions and Laws, to assist the Good and to divert the Evil. Upon
this account there are few Governments but have some things woven into their
Constitution peculiar to themselves. In Poland where the Monarchy is Elective,
and the Prince bound to observe the Laws, any Gentleman may safely and freely
accuse his Prince. In Arragon the Chief Justice has a Tribunition power. In
Venice the Duke stirs not out of the City without leave, and is made so much
greater then any of the rest, only to allay the growth of Ambition in any one
besides. In the form of Transactions, Most do follow the Plurality of
Sufferage, but in several ways: In the Senate of Venice in many Cases there
must be a Concurrence of three parts of four. In the Conclave of Rome at the
Election of the Pope, two parts of three must concur: In the Consistory the
Pope alone carries it against all the Council of Cardinals. In the Convention
in Poland, Potior est Conditio Negantis, One Negative hinders all proceedings
in the most important Affairs. In Holland the States General of the Provinces
have but seven Votes in all, and these obliging according to the Plurality of
Sufferage, but the number of States sent to manage the Interest of their single
and Provincial Votes are unlimitted; and as the respective Provinces please to
Delegate; wherefore their Votes may be more properly termed local than
personal; but with us in England Votes are merely personal; for as we represent
not Provinces or Places distinctly Supreme, but mixtly together; so the odd
Vote carries all; by which it may happen that one man may make or destroy the
best Law that ever was. From these particulars you may collect the varieties
that are in Government, instituted according to the different Notions of the
first Founders, and the Circumstances and Temper of the People Governed.

Monarchy vested with the most absolute powers that either Concession or
Conquest can create I esteem the best of Governments, but that only happens
when it represents God more in his Justice than Singularity; and when Mercy is
the Ornament as well as Power the supporters of his Throne: In such a
Government under a Prince whose Goodness and Wisdom runs in equal paralells
with his power and greatness, the people are happy and secure, whilst their
Neighbors live in fear and subjection, His Councils are private, and the
Execution of them sudden, without which no great enterprise can be successful:
To such a King is applicable the Answer which was made to this Question upon
Pasquill in Rome, Quid est Prerogativa Regis: The Reply being in optimo Rege
nihil nimis, in Malo Omne Nimum. But to take a view of this Government in its
dark side, under a Child, Fool, or vicious Prince, nothing carries such an
aspect of Horror and Misery to the poor Wretches who live under it: Wherefore,
if we consider that the generality of Men, when let loose to their natural, or
rather corrupted Inclinations, are much more apt to lean toward Tyranny and
Oppression, than to such Methods as may promote their Peoples Happiness, I
think this sort of Government by no means desirable. It does at the best but
keep the State which is directed by it, in a fluctuating and unsettled
condition. It sometimes in the Reign of a Warlike and Ambitious Prince, like
the Sea in a Storm, rowls in with rage, and Fury upon a Neighboring Shore, and
again under the Tuition of another who is of a weak and pusillanimous spirit,
it moulders and gives way to the loss of all its former Acquisitions, so that
the Balance of the Kingdom is never at a stand, the Scale moving sometimes
upwards, and anon down again, and the People consequently kept in a rolling,
unsettled condition, poor, miserable, and uneasy.

Aristocracy is composed by a select number of the Chiefs of the People to
Govern the Rest, and stands like a Moderatour between the Excesses of Kingly
and Popular Power: But this Mixture often produces Monsters, and as as the
greatest Storms are formed in the Middle Religion, so the Bloodiest Commotions
are raised in this State, though most Temperate.

Democracy does properly and naturally reduce all to equality, and most
carefully consults the Peoples Liberty and Property, but withal, it obliges
every Man to hold his Neighbors hand, and when it falls, it does with great
difficulty recover its feet again. It Is true, that Monarchies are more Quick
and Expeditious in their Attempts, but Commonwealths, as they are more slow,
so they are more sure, and in regard that their Councils are more public, so
are they generally more Honest and justifiable. Commonwealths are not like
Monarchies, subject to the inconveniences of Evil Council or Corruption where
the Prince's personal folly or ambition, the Commands of an Imperious Wife, or
the Flatteries of a Fawning Courtezan, may in a minute overthrow a People and
Kingdom. We have found it by sad Experience, practiced at home, where a
Chambermaid has prevailed with her Mistress, and she again by a Kiss or Smile
with the Monarch; and we also owe all our present Discomposures to the
Directions of a Zealous Priest, managed by the Mediation of a Commanding Queen.
We are also sufficiently sensible of the great Unhappiness that befalls a
people living under a Monarchy, in having their Prince of a Religion different
from themselves: But this Inconvenience can never befall a Commonwealth, it
being impossible to change, alter, or introduce any new Religion by such a
Government, but such as the greater part of the people embrace, and are willing
to receive. But in Monarchies the King being but one person, may in that
respect be more easily and probably seduced, both to his own and his peoples
irreparable Injury.

The Eastern Countries which lie under the Course of the Sun, as Persia, Turkey,
Africa, Peru, and Mexico, are most disposed to Monarchies, in which latter
Quarter of the World the people are better Governed by the Spaniard, who are by
fits in the Excesses of Kindness and Cruelty, than by the Dutch, whose
Government is of a more even Temper. But in Europe and nearer the Pole, the
people are disposed more to Republics, tempered by fundamental Laws. Nec totam
servitutem pati possunt nec, totam Libertatem. Sir William Temple, whose
insight in the Constitutions of States and Kingdoms, may deservedly give him a
decisive Vote, tells, us, That Monarchies do indeed seem most Natural, but
Commonwealths the more Artificial sorts of Government; which was but a modest
way of giving his suffrage for the last, for Art always corrects the defects of
Nature, and pollishes it up to a greater Luster: But when all is done, we find
it experimentally true, that all Government's like all sublunary things
besides, have their Defects: Nature in every part is sick, and therefore can
find rest in no posture: Humane Laws grow out of Vices, which gives to every
Government a tincture of Corruption.

That the Government of England was originally and always under the same
constitution that now, or of late it did appear to be, I cannot conceive,
though Sir Edward Coke, and some others, do seem with much earnestness to
contend for it. I am of opinion, that like Epicurus his World, it is grown by
Chance and Time to what it now is or lately was, by various Concussions and
Confluence of People, Interests, Factions, and Laws, like so many Attoms of
different shapes and disposures, springing from mere Accident in several Ages;
for where there are Men, there will be also Interests, which creates Factions
and Parties, and these, as they prevail, or are suppressed, produce Laws for or
against them, which so far alters the former Government, as new Laws are
introduced in the room and place of old ones which were thought fit to be
Repealed and Abrogated.

Although some Governments seem to be built upon firmer and more unalterable
Foundations than others, yet there is none but ought to adapt it self to the
Circumstances and Disposition of the People Governed, and as these do daily
change, so ought the Government to shift and tack with them, that it may the
better hit with the Necessities and changing Circumstance of those for whom it
was first instituted.

That Property is founded in Dominion, I look upon to be a most undeniable
Truth, for Naturally in the same degree that a Man has a Right and possession
in a thing, he must necessarily have the Power and Dominion over it; To argue
or defend the contrary, is as great an absurdity in Nature, as to say the Fire
must be hot, and yet not burn such Cumbustibles as are cast into it. It is upon
this account that the Grand Seignior is so Despotick in his Government, for by
the Constitutions of that State all Lands are in the Crown, none hold longer
than during pleasure, or for Life, and then their Lands revert to him that gave
them. For the same reason, in the days of Englands Ignorance and Poverty, when
Arts and Learning were strangers to the Land, and the people were scarcely
removed from their primitive estate of Nature and War, when every man had a
universal Right to all things, and no man could by a peculiar property pretend
to a Possession longer then his Sword and Bow could maintain it; Then I say
were our Governors like Generals, absolure and unlimitted. It Is true indeed,
we have some dark shadows of Laws and Councils, then in use, which our
Governors thought fit, as they saw occasion to make use of; and we also find
the People sometimes dissatisfied, treating their Magistrate with much
Roughness and ill Usage upon his Male Administration; yet this does not at all
argue that their Governors were limited and bound up by Laws, as now they
are: These things are all practiced in France, Turkey, and the most Arbitrary
Monarchies in the World. Without Laws and Methods, such as these, one Man is
not able to govern Millions, and therefore Moses, who under God, was Absolute
and Arbitrary, was necessitated to appoint certain Rules and Methods, and to
admit of others into the Government with him, as Assistants, by their Council
and Advice, the Work being too great for one Man to discharge. It was from the
King's absolute Property in the Lands of England (which in those Times none
could pretend to but by and through him who held the Sword) as well as from his
power over the Laws that our old Tenures sprung of Knight service, Serjeantry,
Escuage, Socage, Villenage, etc. Then were all Tenures servile, and all Persons
held mediately or immediately from the King, which our Law Books tell us, we
still do; but there was a vast difference between our then, and present
Holdings, the first being by actual Services paid; these now being only Nominal
and Titular: To hold in Socage, is by the service of the Plow, (as almost all
persons are said to do) The Tenant was in old Times actually bound to Plow the
Lords Lands, in consideration of which Service, he granted to his Plowman,
instead of Wages, to hold another piece of Land to his own proper use; but now,
though the Tenure does nominally remain, yet the Service is absolute; every Man
being now become, by the circular motions of Chance or Providence, his own
Lord, and his own Plowman: His Property and Possession makes him the Lord over
those Glebes which his Necessity (derived from his Ancestor Adams
Transgression) makes him Till.

Those Governments which succeeded the Patriarchal, were all Military; all
people being then left by Nature in a state of War; but some Countries ripening
into Prudence and Knowledge sooner than others, they also sooner betook
themselves to Compact, and to such Methods of living, as might be for their
Common Advantage. Amongst these, England was none of the earliest Reformers,
but continued long after Greece and Rome, in that Natural state that the first
Fathers of Families lest it: and there was reason for it in respect it was an
Island, and (in those Times, when Navigation was in a great degree a stranger
to the World) not so apt for Commerce or Correspondence with other Countries
which were more civilized; they had then no Government but what conduced to
War, and no other King but a General. Caesar in his Commentaries, telis us,
that he found the Britains, poor, ignorant, and destitute of Laws, but he also
gives them the Character of a People disposed to War, Brittannnos in Bello
promptos and in Armis expertes: All things (as in the state of Nature) were in
Common, even to their Wives and Children: But the Romans having given them a
taste of the sweetness and advantage of Government, they soon after began (as
Tacitus in his Annals acquaints us) to make Application to their General, to
protect and defend them, by his Power and Strength, in the peaceable enjoyment
of certain proportions and allotments of Land, against all Invaders; In lieu of
which Protection to them and their Heirs, they promise and swear to him and his
Heirs, certain Services, together with Homage and Fealty. With this Notion of
Tacitus, Bide seems to concur in the 4th. Book of his History, where he says,
That Generals and Kings were amongst the Britains as Terms Univocal, for Kings
went always out to Battle in times of War, and in Peace, exercised the
Legislative power at home: And Ammianus in his 15th. Book, is more plain and
positive, for he tells us, That Brittanni nulla separali fruebantur
possessione, nisi Principis concessu and potestate defendantur.

From hence it may be reasonably allowed, that England was first Governed by an
absolute Power, not from the Election of the People, nor by Conquest, but from
the Temper, Disposition, and Circumstances of that Age of the World in which
most Countries lay under the same sort of Government, and more especially by
their Ignorance of better methods, which continued longer in Islands by reason
of the difficulty of Commerce, than in Continents where a Correspondence was
then more easily maintained. It is undoubtedly from this bottom, that the
People of England are still supposed to hold all their Lands mediately or
immediately from the King, and it is perhaps from hence that so many Commons and
Wastes still remain uninclosed, and that Waiss, Strays, Wrecks, Wastes, and all
other things, in which no man can lay a particular propriety, are reputed to be
in the Crown.

Upon these reasons I conclude, that the property of all the Lands here in
England being originally in no particular person, must necessarily (as the Law
still is in such Cases) rest in the King, and those that held from or by his
power, neither had or could have any right against that power by which they
held, but only against others that were in a level with themselves.

How many these Landed Men Originally were, or what separate proportions were
alloted to them, whether the quantity of a County, Hundred, or Tything, or
whether their Allotments were according to the largness of their respective
Families, or their Princes favor, I cannot say: But these Proprietors were
probably the Pares Regni, or such as afterward, by the growth of Laws and the
removal of Ignorance, became by a settled and uncontrollable right, the Peers
and Nobles of the Land; and having by their Princes permissive favor long
enjoyed their Dignities and Possessions, they at last wrought them up to an
Establishment by Law, insomuch that what was held before ad voluntatem Domini,
is now made hereditary, performing only some small Services and Acknowledgments
to their King of General, some whereof were payable in times of War, as Knight
Service, Escuage, petty Serjeanty, and grand Serjeanty, others in times of
Peace, such were Burgage, Villenage, Socage, Homage, and Fealty.

Thus did a part of the People first twist themselves into a real Property in
part of the Lands of the Kingdom, and as the Prince proved kind and liberal, so
did the numbers of these Proprietors increase, and their Properties grew more
strong and indefeasable, and so consequently their Power and Dominions; but the
Prince on the other hand grows proportionably poorer and weaker, Both
resembling a Boat which rises and falls with the flowing Element that bears it
up. After this manner the Lords grew daily richer and stronger, till they had
in a great measure, by their acquisitions stripped the Crown of its chiefest
Embellishments, and invested themselves in much the better share of the Lands
of England: And their Power grew with their Property to that degree, that they
who were Originally but Servants to the Prince, became now Masters of the
Nation. This, King John to his sorrow, was sufficiently sensible of in his
Barons War; and it was from the Power of the Nobility alone that King Henry the
Seventh did receive his Chaplet as well as Crown. He was a wise Prince, and
from hence took an occasion of Jealously, that the same Powers which raised and
placed him in the Throne, might pull him down again and lay his Glories in the
Dust. To prevent therefore all Dangers which might arise from their growing
Greatness, he first procures a Statute to be Enacted against Retainers, that
the number of the Followers and Attendants of Noblemen might be retrenched, for
they did so far indulge the Vanity of a large Retinue in those times, that
their respective Trains were sufficient for a Sovereign Prince's Guard. In the
next place he procures the Statute of Fines to pass both Houses, whereby the
Nobility got a power (which by the Common Law they had not) to cut of Entails,
and thereby to sell their Estates to the best Purchaser. Before this Statute,
and Estate in a Noblemans hand, might in some respect be said to be in
Mortmain, for by the Intail it was so bound up in the Family, that it grew
almost irremoveable; and thus having a power to purchase but not to fell, their
Possessions, and consequently their Power grew daily greater, without a
possibility of Diminution. But these Entails, as they were injurious to Trade
and Industry, so by their Consequences they were dangerous to Regal Authority,
and therefore this Device was contrived to prevent both these Inconveniences:
and it did indeed prove very effectual in divesting the Nobility both of their
Property and Power, but at the same time it opened a Door to the Commonalty,
and gave them free access to that Property and Dominion which the Nobility did
by degrees part with: Nor did they neglect to improve this advantage they had
got by Diligence, Industry and Frugality, for in process of Time they wound
themselves into the better share of those Possessions which were first derived
from the King to his Nobles, and from them thus to the Commons of the Nation.

The Effect and Consequence of these Acquisitions, made by the Commonalty, were
discovered and feared by King James, but not felt till the Reign of King
Charles the First, who by an imprudent Contest with This Superior Power, was
first deprived of his Crown, and afterward of his Life. The yearly Rents of
England (besides the accrewing benefit of Trade, which is altogether in the
hands of the Commonalty) amounts to 14 Millions per annum. Of this the King and
Nobility both together hold not above one Million at the most, the King's
Revenue being principally made up by the Excise and Customs, not by the Rents
of Crown Lands; so that there remains 13. shares of 14. of the Lands of
England, and consequently a proportionable share of the Power in the Commons.
But the Constitutions of our Government, as it now stands, placing the Dominion
in the King, whilst the Property is in the People, does in this commit a sort
of Violence upon Nature, (...) seperating thus the Soul from the Body, the
Power from the Possession: This it is which causes these frequent Distempers
and Convulsions in the Body Politic; for Power is a sort of Volatile Spirit
which cannot subsist without a proper Vehicle to give in Body, and this must be
Possession, from which if it be once separated, it immediately evaporates and
disappears.

Having hitherto traced the Government of England in its Originals and
Procedures, I will farther take the liberty to advert some Particulars as they
seem now to stand in its present Constitution; and in the first place, I cannot
think it so happy and well composed a Government, and so aptly suited to the
present condition to the People, as most Men endeavor to represent it, for it
seems in its Frame and Nature to be set to Factious Interests and Dissentions,
and thus it has been ever since the disunion between Property and Power; the
Court and Country Interests are no new nor unknown Terms to us, and have been
managed and upheld by their respective Votaries (tho in some Kings Reigns with
greater Spirit and Animosity than in others) ever since, and for some time
before the Barons Wars. The people have got the Possession, and the King is
entrusted with a power and prerogative over it, or at least with so much, as
may prove prejudicial to it. This Naturally creates Fears and Jealousies, least
at any time the Prince by his power, should invaded their Properties and
abridge their Liberties, upon which account his Prerogative is the White they
level at, esteeming it rather their Terror than their Security for which it was
at first given and intended; and therefore when the people find an opportunity,
either by their Prince's weakness, folly, or other unhappy circumstances, they
have usually made breaches upon this Bulwark of the Crown, and by such Sallies
and Incursions have got ground and advantage toward the farther securing of
those Liberties and Properties they with so much Diligence and Reason
endeavored to provide for. So on the other side is the Prince jealous of his
people, and is always fearful that they should snatch this Rod which he holds
over their Backs out of his hand; and to obviate this Evil, he is not without
his Counter-designs also, and therefore spares neither Money nor Power in the
Elections of Parliaments and Juries, to obtain such persons to be returned, as
for a Mess of Porridge will sell their Birthright, and by advancing his
Prerogative and lengthening his Scourge, are willing to ruin and undo their
Country: And so it generally falls out, that when this power happens to fall
into the management of an haughty daring Spirit, it breaks in upon the people,
and endeavors to get again by Force, what his Ancestors had given away by
Flattery. Thus there is always a Tide of Ebb or Flow, the Scales rarely or
never standing even between the King and his People; and indeed the
Constitution of our Government is such, That Murmuring and Dissension do
naturally spring from it: the Ground is disposed to produce such Weeds, we are
always engaged in a sort of Civil War, and in this respect continue still in
the same state in which Nature left us. An House divided against it self cannot
stand, every Man has enough to do to defend his own from Domestic Invaders,
and whilst this Root of Division is suffered to grow at Home, its impossible to
do any thing that is Great abroad; every Design is poisoned with a Jealousy in
its Cradle, and it is enough to make the people suspect it a Snake (tho the
Skin and Flowers in which it lies be never so plausible and pleasing) if the
King does but hand it to them. From hence it is that our Government always
tottered, twice fell down, and now lies in its primitve undigested Chaos, and
he must be a greater Architect, than Perhaps our Nation can afford, to warrant
its standing above three ordinary Reigns, if it be rebuilt upon its old
Foundations. An Expedient to prevent this Inconvenience, will be a proper
Subject for this Great Convention.

Another thing not well consistent with the Policy and Government of England,
is the exceeding largeness of the Revenue of the Crown. In France indeed it is
six times greater, that King being reputed to have 12. Millions, and the King
of England but two: But we see the miserable Effects of it, in the extreme
Poverty and Vassallage of his people. It Is true, the Kings of England once had
more, for they had in effect all, but then the people were but one remove from
the state of Nature, and the possessions are now got into the hands of the
people, which they will be loath to part from, so that the Case is much
altered; Whatsoever the Government of Heaven may be, yet on Earth in one State
there cannot be two Equals, One must submit and the other must Govern, or else
there will be a constant War; and while the King has so great a Revenue as to
be able to maintain a Standing Army, there still remains so much of this
Equality as will promote and maintain such Differences as ought by no means to
be allowed of in a well constituted Government: But moreover, the people by the
present Constitution, are Sharers with the Prince in the Supreme and
Legislative Power in Parliament, and it is by them that Grievances must be
redrest. It ought therefore in every Well-Constituted Government to be provided
for, that this Supreme and Legislative Power may frequently, if not always, be
in a capacity to Enact and Order such things as tend to the Peoples Benefit and
Security; but in this, our Government is defective, it being in the Prince's
power (as our Lawyers have generally determined) to keep off Parliaments as
long as he pleases. And how is this defect remedied? Only by another, which on
the other side they subject the Prince to, which is, by keeping him poor, that
so his poverty may necessitate him to call frequent Parliaments. Thus by a
mutual lameness or infirmity on both sides, the Prince and People are become
equal Matches, Both Cripples, not able to go forward in any great Enterprises
abroad, but to lie struggling with each other at home. King Henry the Fifth,
had but 56000 l. per annum, and Queen Elizabeth's whole Revenue was but 160000
l. but some kind Parliaments (and such they usually are to excess, upon the
first accession of a King to the Throne) either bribed by Smiles, or flattered
by Hopes of private Gain, have thought fit to setter the Nation by advancing
the Revenue to about two Millions per annum; so that now there is little hopes
of meeting with those advantages and opportunities of tacking their Grievances
to a Money Bill, which formerly they use to do; though in truth, even then the
State was in a dangerous condition, that could not have a Remedy at hand upon
every Disturbance and Malady which should happen. This I think may not
improperly be esteemed a thing worthy of Your Thoughts to find a proper
Expedient to redress it.

Another Particular which I take to be one of the greatest Silecisms in
Government imaginable is where the most Absolute and Supreme power is yet
without a Power to Remedy and Redress the Peoples Grievances: Thus it has been
for many years adjudged to be by the Interpreters of our Laws and Government,
the Judges. And to illustrate this by an Instance. Suppose the people are
agriev'd, and want a law to set them Right; The King has no power to make it of
himself, and till he thinks fit to call a Parliament, the people must still
continue subject to their Government: But perhaps the Kings Interest (which is
unhappily divided from the peoples) forbids this Expedient; What shall be done?
Why then let them stay and be ruined, till the King wants Money, which as the
present Eestablishment is, will never be. But suppose a Parliament is called,
and they in their proceedings happen to fret upon the Kings Prerogative, a
Favorite evil Councellor, or some other Interest that the King has a mind to
promote and protect, though never so opposite to that of the Nations, why then
their Supreme and Legislative power is not worth a Rush, for the King, though
he has no absolute power himself, yet has a power above this, to destroy it by
a Dissolution or Prorogation when he pleases, and so like the Cat in the
Manger, can neither eat Hay himself, nor suffer the Horse to eat to whom it
belongs. This seems contrary to all the Rules of Art and Nature, and more
Unintelligible than the Doctrine of the Trinity, or Transubstantiation, for
here the Supreme power is subject to an Inferior, and the King who is Minor
Universis, yet is also Major and Superior to them; That Power which was given
for the Protection of the People is their Destroyer, and the great and weighty
Affairs of the Nation becomes subject to the passions and humors of a single
Person. This I think I may safely affirm, That all Governments are built upon
wrong bottoms, where there is not a Supreme and Absolute Power, which may
without Control, and upon any sudden Occasion or Emergency, alter, create, or
repeal such Laws as shall be thought by them necessary for the Peoples Good.

Another thing that has been very incongruous and disagreeable in our
Establishment is, That the Election of the Judges, and consequently the
pronouncing of the Law, should be in the Kings Power* If indeed he were a Third
Person unconcerned in point of Interest, this Method would be more tolerable;
but being One that so often sets up an Interest different from that of his
People, and is subject to be seduced by the evil Councels of a Confessor, Miss
or Favorite, and the Peoples Rights hanging wholly upon the Lips of these
twelve men in Scarlet, it is most fit they should be chosen by Them who are
chiefly concerned, and for whose benefit and protection both the King and Laws
were first made and intended, otherwise that very Prerogative, which was given
to the King only for the better enabling him to act for the benefit of the
People, may be (and often is) set up against them. It is contrary to all Rule,
that in any Controversy a Man should be Judge in his own Case, But he in
effect is so who has power to make or unmake the Judge at pleasure: nor can
this defect be well remedyed by granting their Commissions quam diu se been
gesserint. This will only oblige a greater care in the first choice, that they
may be such as in their Principles will stand firm to the Kings Interest. The
Honor and Income of a Judge to one that knows not how otherways to live is a
violent Provocative; it is a sort of lawful Bribery upon him to pursue his
Maker and Destroyers Commands tho against all the Rules of Justice and Equity;
self Preservation is his Warrant, binds him to a Compliance, and makes him
think it more allowable to break his Oath then to destroy his Honor and the
Interest of a young Favorite who makes hay with great diligence whilst his Sun
shines.

I have often wondered at the unjust Censures of some in saying that our late
King so often and so notoriously broke his word and promises to his People in
not Governing them according to Law. For Instances, they urge His Dispensing
with Statutes, and his hard Usage of the Gentlemen in Maudlin College, in both
which I conceive he committed no breach of his Word or Promises if they be
taken strictly and in a literal sense. This I think may easily be granted if it
be considered, That the present Laws and Constitutions of England are such as
do undoubtedly give the King a Power to make the Judge, and to the Judge a
power to pronounce the Law. What he does judicially affirm is Law, and becomes
from thenceforth the strongest President, the last Judgment being always
esteemed the surest and best Rule to go by: Now the King in both these
transactions neither made or turned out any Judges but in such methods that
former Judges had pronounced Lawful, nor did he do afterward any thing either
in the case of Maudlin College or the Dispensing Power, but with the Opinion
and Concurrence of his Judges being the Method that our Establishment and Laws
in such Cases does direct.

There is also a great Cry against the late Judges, for giving their Opinions,
and pronouncing Judgments contrary to the Laws of the Land, and no other Fate
must be their reward, but that of Tresilian and Belknap. It does, I must
confess, seem very reasonable, that Men, who by their Honor, Oaths and
Rewards, were bound indistinguishably to administer Justice, should smart for
those Delinquencies by which so many Hundreds have been ruined and undone. But
in the first place, let me know how a Judge can give his Opinion contrary to
Law, whose very Opinion judicially given, by the Constitutions of our
Government, is Law it self, and shall be deemed a stronger President in the
point, than any other formerly given. And Secondly, If Judges must suffer for
giving Sentence contrary to former Judgments, there is scarcely a Term passes
even in the best of Times, but there are Offenses committed by them of this
kind. How ordinary is it for a Judge to give his Opinion in common Cases
contrary to his Brethren on the same Bench, and for one Court to reverse the
Judgments of another? And how full are the Law Books of Judgments and Opinions
directly contrary to each other? The Law is not Mathematically demonstrable, it
is a Science which depends upon the Judgment and Opinion only of those that are
Learned therein, which we often find various and uncertain. Is not a Judge
Sworn to act and determine according to his Opinion only, and who can pretend a
power to direct and rectify it, or to judge whether the Sentence given, was
not according to his real judgment, since none can know his heart and thoughts
but God: And suppose it could be proved by Demonstration, that his Sentence or
Opinion was not Law, this may proceed as well from his want of Knowledge as
Honesty, and what Law is there to punish a Judges ignorance or mistake? It Is
hard that Men should be deemed guilty of a Transgression where there is no Law,
or condemned to punishment where there is no Transgression. No, no, Tho our
King was misguided, and our Judges were corrupt, yet it is not at their doors,
we must lay our Misfortunes but to the weakness of our Government, which gives
a Loose to these Inconveniences, and which pins the Justice of the Nation upon
the Frailties of a single Man in so Arbitrary a manner. Opportunity makes a
Thief, and these Meshes in the Government, tempts the Ministers thereof to slip
through sometimes when a Bait lies on the other side to invite them to it. It
is from this Root that all our late Miscarriages sprung; We suffered much, and
yet it was all but little, if compared to that which was likely to befall us,
had not Providence snatched us by a Miracle from the Jaws of Misery; and as it
has delivered us from the Evil Administration of Law, so in some things I wish
it would rescue us from the Law it self, and so far change it, that for the
future it may be no more subject to such Shams and Delusions, nor in a capacity
thus to become an Accessory to its own Death.

It seems farther very incongruous, That where Government is made up of two
different Interests, as here it is, the absolute power of Peace and War should
be only in the King, whilst the power of maintaining it, continues in the
People: For if the King should be led aside by a private Interest, and should
refuse to make War in a time when perhaps the Safety and Honor of the Nation
did wholly depend upon it; What a condition must the People then be in? Put the
case, that before this our late but seasonable Deliverance, the King, in whom
this Power did reside, should have opened the Gates of the Kingdom, our
Harbors and Strengths (which are to protect us from Foreign Invaders) to a
French, or Irish Army; Who durst lift a hand to stop this inundation of
Tyranny, without incurring the penalty of a Traitor: Nay they must farther be
called Friends and Allies, even whilst they pillage our Houses, and hold their
Knives to our Throats. This Branch of our Laws serves to cover the Landing of a
Foreign Power, and so long to cherish and keep it warm, till like the Serpent
in the Fable, it at last stings the improvident Benefactor to death.

Another thing which highly requires Your Regulation, is the Elections for
Parliament. It Is a great Blemish to our Government, that such whose Place gives
them the Title of Founders of our Laws, and Preservers of our Liberties; and
whose Reputation for Principles of Honor, Honesty and Prudence should be
beyond assault or censure, must yet be exposed to a Necessity of doing such
things as are really mean and scandalous as well as expensive, before they can
get into a Capacity of doing their Country service: for if such things be not
done, some Pensioner from Court bids higher, jostles him our and gets thereby
into a Power to put to Sale both the Laws and Liberties of his Country which he
is willing to barter for the hopes of some Court Preferment, and the Euge of
his great Master. In old times no person had an Electing Vote in the Shire, who
had not a Freehold of 40 s. per Ann. but I could easily demonstrate 40 s. then,
to be Equivolent in value to 40 l. now, for by the discovery of the Western
World, Gold and Silver is to that degree increased. Now if the number of
Electors were reduced to those only having Freeholds of 40 l. per An. these
lavish Expenses would certainly cease, and the Electors, though fewer in
number, would be less apt to be led aside by such low and indirect means. There
are also great irregularities in the Corporations and Buroughs Electing as
well as in the Electors: I can see no reason why Cornwall a poor and barren
County should return 43 Members for Parliament, and yet Cheshire together with
the City of Chester should return in all but 3, and why old Sarum which has but
2 Houses, and those under the Commands of one Landlord, should send 2
Representatives to Parliament, whilst many other Towns which might deserve the
Title and Privileges of Cities send no Representatives at all. I can scarcely
think a Parliament thus Constituted can truly and fairly represent the People,
the Majority and Richest of them being by such inequallities excluded from an
Electing Vote. The same inconvenience springs from the Constitutions of the
Boroughs which Elect, not by virtue of their Wealth, Dignity, or Number of
Inhabitants, but by the Borough Houses in which they live, These only, (which
perhaps are the most inconsiderable part of the Borough) having in them the
Electing power exclusive of the rest. This Qualification makes such Houses sell
better to a purchaser then any others in the Town, and it is customary for
Gentlemen who are desirous of a Seat in Parliament, to lay out their Money in
such Bargains, and though it costs them dear, yet if it be possible, they will be
Landlords of a sufficient number of these Borough Houses, (in the purchase
whereof some Friends Name is mostly made use of in Trust) that thereby they may
Command an Election either for themselves or their Assigns at pleasure. What is
this less than buying of Votes with Money? A Crime which has been always looked
upon with a severe brow, and yet Licensed by this old Usage. Nor can I discern
why this Electing power should be thus fixed to the Freehold in being,
restrained to a small and inconsiderable number of Houses, as if Wood and Stone
had a Rational faculty, and must be made use of to build and repair the
Government.

The Methods of Electing in these Boroughs are various, Titles to Elect are
also different, and very often dubious and uncertain. This necessitates double
Elections, and countenances false Returns, which are often made ill use of; for
the King having a power to nominate the Sheriff, and he to make a Return, it
may happen that the true and rightful Members shall continue Petitioners only,
whilst such as came in by unjust Returns, pass an Act to give the King Money
for the maintenance of a Stranding Army. This Artifice was of much use in the
last Parliament at Westminster, and became so notorious from the great Number
of Petitioners, that a Gentleman being asked, whether the House of Commons sat
that day in the Parliament; No, (replied he) It stood in the Lobby.

It is Customary in the Borough of Limmington in Hampshire, to Elect by the
Ballot: The manner is to give to every Electing Burgess (their number being
limited and known) a different Colored Ball for every Competitor, each Color
being respectively appropriated to the several Competitors: As suppose there
should be three Candidates, each Elector has three several Balls given him,
which he so manages as to keep only that in his hand, which by its Color
belongs to the person he intends to choose; this being enclosed in his hand, he
puts it into a close Box made for that purpose, leaving no possibility to any
one to detect what colored Ball he put into it. Thus each having put in his
Ball according to his Vote, the Balls of one Color are separated from those of
another color, and so according to the Majority of Balls of one Color, the
Return is made. This Method I know to be of great advantage where it is made
use of; It prevents Animosities and Distaste, and very much assists that freedom
which ought to be in Elections. No man in this way need fear the disobliging of
his Landlord, Customer, or Benefactor; for it can by no means be discovered how
he gave his Vote, if he will but keep his own counsel. If this or some such
Device were appointed to be made use of in every Borough over all the Kingdom,
I am persuaded it would abundantly answer expectation, in the many Advantages
which would attend it: And perhaps it would be of equal Benefit in all other
Elections, as well as in those, for Members of Parliament, if the Government
were so disposed as to fill up all Vacancies, whether in Church or State, by
the plurality of Votes appointed to elect: And I am apt to believe that
succeeding Ages may reduce it into a Law, that Privy Counselors shall be
chosen by the Lords, Judges by the Gentlemen at the Bar, Bishops by their Dean
and Chapters, Ministers by their Parishioners, Fellows and Masters of Colleges
by the Graduates of the same College, Sheriffs by the Gentry of the Country,
Officers of Trust in the State and in the Army by the Parliament, the
Parliament by Freeholders of 40 l. per annum, and all by the Ballott.

It Is much e^sier (I know) to find Faults than to mend them; and I could
mention many other things of the same nature, the Redress whereof, I hope will
be thought of in this great Convention, before They proceed to dispose of the
Crown. It Is an easier matter for a People to make ten Kings, than to unmake
One, and to deck a Crown with the highest Prerogatives, than to deprive it,
when they are Conferred, of the least of them. If the Crown be given again with
the same Qualifications that Other Heads wore it, It will then be exalted above
the Peoples reach, without some such assisting Miracle as was lately shown in
favor of them. Now, to reform its Redundancies is natural, easy, and prudent,
the Government being escheated to the People by the Kings deserting it; But to
offer at any such Attempts afterward, will be both unkind and imprudent, and
will signify no more than the chatterings of a parcel of Magpies about an Owl
in her Majesty.

Some Men have espoused an odd and unwarrantable Notion, that the Kings
Desertion of the Government amounts to a Demise, or Civil Death. If this be so,
the next Heir ought immediately to be Proclaimed, and must Inherit the Crown
with the same inseparable Prerogatives that heretofore belonged to it, and all
Laws or Acts of Parliament made to limit and abridge them, (if Lawyers speak
truth) are void and null. But if the Departure of the King amounts to such a
desertion as dissolves the Government, then the Power must necessarily revert
and vest in the People, who may Erect a new One, either according to the old
Model, if they like it so well, or any other that they like and approve of
better.

Were such a mighty Thing to be determined by my single Vote, the Government
should be Monarchy, and this Monarchy should be Absolute and Arbitrary, and the
Prince should be my King. It Is He alone who is The Man in Christendom in
respect of Courage and an innate Disposition to delight in the Happiness of his
People, with whom I could freely and securely entrust my All: But the Honor I
have for Him, runs not to His Posterity, for as a good Man may notwithstanding,
get a Profligate Son, so I should be loath to Repose such a Trust at a venture
in the hands of any one whom I do not know. You have a great Work to do, and
it is from Your Councels, that after Ages must date their Happiness or Misery,
and it therefore Obliges Your most Serious Thoughts.

I hope, Sir, you will excuse the Liberties I have taken, in giving you so
large a Diversion from better Notions of your own, which I know are of an
higher flight and swifter wing than what I can pretend to: Mine I do not
impose, but submit, as becomes

SIR, Your Obliged humble Servant N. T.


