THE NOVUM ORGANVM OF Sir FRANCIS BACON, BARON of VERULAM, Viscount St. Albans.

EPITOMIZED: For a clearer understanding of his NATURAL HISTORY.

Translated and taken out of the Latin by M. D. B. D.

LONDON,

Printed for Thomas Lee at the Turks-head in Fleetstreet. 1676.

LICENSED

Jan. 26. 1675. Roger L'Estrange

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Need not recommend to your perusal this useful Treatise, seeing that it
proceeds from such a Genius, whose most trivial conceptions have obtained the
esteem of his Age, not inferior in Learning to any of the former. He was a
person of a sound judgment, sharp wit, vast comprehension, and of
extraordinary abilities both natural and acquired. But I need not run over the
praises of a person so well known amongst us to oblige my Reader to a kind
reception, and favorable interpretation of this obscure, but useful Book: For
the things therein contained are so excellent in themselves, and so well
designed, that we may be inclinable of our own accord to embrace and peruse
them.

The Authors purpose, as you may (...), is to censure the limitations of
Sciences to the bounds prescribed to us, by the shallow pates of some of former
Ages, to discover the mistakes of our understandings, to point at the sources
from whence they proceed, to rectify the common errors of men, backed by ill
grounded Axioms, to direct us to a right interpretation of Nature's Mysteries,
and oblige us to settle our judgments, upon better and sounder principles than
ordinary; his purpose is to open to us a Gate to a greater Proficiency and
improvement in all kind of Learning, to pull down the Walls of Partition, and
remove the Non plus ultra, that we might sail to those Indies full of Gold and
Jewels. I mean the Sciences not yet discovered to our World, and fetch from
thence all the Rarities, the Knowledges, and Inventions, that might pleasure
and benefit our humane life. For that purpose he advises us not to take things
and notions too much upon Trust, but to ground our belief upon Practice, and
well ordered experience. He lays down several Principles, which may seem
strange and new; but if they be rightly examined, we shall find them naturally
proceeding from the nature of things. I confess the most excellent conceptions
are wrapped up in obscure terms, and in such new contrived expressions, that
King James at the first perusal judged this Novum Organum to be past all Man's
understanding. But we may consider, that a new Method, and new Things and
Principles deserve new expressions, and that (...) (...) (...) speaks not to
the Vulgar, but unto the (...), (...) (...) he (...) other Lands never found
out (...) and advises them in (...) to seek and to proceed on without minding
the discourage (...) and (...) of our Predecessors in Learning.

This (...) (...) was (...) upon as a seasonable Addition to his Matural
History, (...) (...) (...) (...) (...) have made it too (...), I have been
desired to (...) (...) (...) (...) and Directions as might be answerable to
that subject. (...) (...) (...), after a serious perusal, I did scarce know
what was to be set aside; for all the things things therein contained, are so
material and seasonable, that I have wondered, that our English Curiosi have not
had the desire to study and understand the directions that are (...) given
(...) (...) their mistaken (...). In such a Case, that this Novum Organum might
be the better intelligible, a mere interpretation is not sufficient, in regard
of the Authors difficult and new found expressions, a Comment weuld be
required, which if it were well and judiciously composed according to the
Authors true meaning and intent, I am persuaded every one (...) be of my
Judgment, that it is the best and most useful Treatise of our Days for the
purpose that is designed. I am persuaded that it might be of a singular use to
such Vertuosi amongst us, as are not perfectly acquainted with the Latin
Tongue, and yet employ their Time and Studies in the improvement of their
abilities, and finding out inventions useful to the Life of Man, for it would
supply them with such principles as their (...) and (...) might wonderfully
improve in new discoveries.

I was sorry (...) my, Pen was limited to so few sheets, and that I had not the
liberty to make the whole Organum appear in our Language. For brevity sake
therefore I have in some places shortened the Authors expressions. (...) this
will be sufficient to give a taste of the whole, which such (...) understand
the Language of the Learned may peruse at their leisure, Vale.

M. D.

Part of the Novum Organum, OR, APHORISMS OF THE Interpretation of NATURE and
KINGDOM of MAN.
Taken out of the First Book.
MAN, Natures Minister and Interpreter, acts and understands only so much of
the ordering of Nature, as he has observed by the assistance of Experience and
Reason: more he neither does, nor can apprehend.

Neither the Hand alone, nor an Understanding eft to it self, can do much.
Things are performed by instruments and helps, which the (...) needs as much as
the Hand. Now as (...) Instruments assist and govern the Hands motion, likewise
the instruments of the Understanding prompt and advise it.

Humane Knowledge and Power are co-incident in the same, or happen to be alike,
because ignorance of the Cause renders the Effect unintelligible: for Nature is
not overcome without submission, and that, which in Contemplation stands
instead of the Cause, in Operation serves as a Rule.

As to Operation, Man can do no more but only apply or remove natural Bodies.
The rest Nature willingly compleats.

The Mechanic, the Mathematician, the Physician, the Chemist, and the Magician
are variously concerned in natural Operations, but as it happens at present
their attempts are but slight, and their successes inconsiderable.

It were an extravagancy, and a plain contradiction to expect the
accomplishment of those things, which were never yet done unless by means never
yet attempted.

Even those Operations which are found out are rather to be ascribed to Chance
and Experience than to Sciences; for the Sciences, which are now professed
amongst us, are nothing else, but an adorning and a setting forth of things
formerly invented, not the modes of Invention or the desigments of new
Operation.

The Cause and Origin almost of all the Mischiefs, that happen in Sciences, is
this alone, that we too much admire and set up the strength and power of our
understanding, and we neglect the true helps and aids thereof.

Natures subtilty far exceeds the subtilty of our Sense, or that of our
Understanding; so that the delicate meditations of Mankind, their speculations
and inventions are but foolish things, if they were narrowly searched into.

As Siences commonly so called are unprofitable for the invention of
Operations, so the Logic now in use is not conducible to the finding out of
true Sciences.

The Logic, which we now use tends to the establishment and confirmation of
Errors, which are founded in vulgar notions rather than to a serious enquiry
after Truth, therefore it is more hurtful than profitable.

A Syllogism is not used amongst the principles of Sciences, and in medial
axioms it is employed in vain, for it falls much short of Natures subtility. It
has therefore a command over assent, not over the things themselves.

A Syllogism consists of Propositions, Propositions of Words, Words interpret
Notions, therefore if Notions, the basis of Things be confused, and rashly
abstracted from things, nothing will be firm that is built upon them, therefore
our only assurance is in a right induction.

There is no soundness in Logical and Physical Notions, neither substance, nor
quality, action, passion, nor being it self, are proper Notions, much less
heavy, light, thick, thin, moist, dry, generation, corruption to attract, to
expel element, matter, form, etc. All these are fantastical and ill designed.

The Notions of the lower Species, as a man, a dog, a dove, and the immediate
apprehensions of our senses; namely, hot, cold, white, black, don't much
deceive us, and yet nevertheless by the fluidity of matter and m^xture of
things they are sometimes confounded. All other Notions, which men have
hitherto used are aberrations, and are neither duly nor truly abstracted, and
raised from the very things themselves.

The things that are already invented in Sciences, are such as most commonly
depend on vulgar Notions. If any will search into the more inward, and remote
mysteries of Nature, he must make use of Notions and Axioms, abstracted from
things in a more certain and solid manner, that the working of the
Understanding may be better and surer.

There are and may be two ways of searching and finding out truth: one from
Sense and perticulars leads to the most general Axioms, and out of those
Principles and their unquestionable Authority judges and finds out middle
Axioms. This way is much in use. The other raises Axioms from Sense, and
perticulars by a continual and gradual ascent it proceeds at last to generals.
This is a true way but not yet attempted.

The Understanding left to it self goes the former way, observing a Logical
method; for the mind delights to leap to generals, that it might acquiesce
there, and after a little stay it loathes Experience. But these evils are now at
length augmented by Logic for the pomp of disputations.

An Understanding left to it self, accompanied with sober, patient, and grave
Wit, if not hindered by former (...), essays the other way, which is right but
not successful; because when the Understanding is not directed and assisted, is
but weak, and unable to overcome the obscurity of things.

Either way derives its beginning from sense and perticulars, and acquiesces in
things most general. But yet they differ very much, for the one does lightly
run over experience and perticulars; the other converses in them in a right and
methodical manner. Again the one lays down at first, certain abstract and un
profitable generals. The other rises by degrees to these things, which indeed
are more known to Nature.

It can never be that Axioms framed by arguing, for finding out new Operations,
should be of any value, because the subtilty of Nature does far surprise the
acuteness of disputation. But Axioms rightly abstracted in order from
perticulars, do easily discover and show forth other new perticulars, and
therefore by that means Sciences became active.

The Axioms now in use sprang from small and slender experience, and a few
common perticulars, they are for the most part made and enlarged according to
their measure, so that it is no wonder, if they lead not to new perticulars.
Now if by chance any instance not observed or known before, offer it self, the
Axiom is salved by some friviolous distinction; whereas it is more proper,
that the Axiom it self should be mended.

That humane reason, which we use in Natures assistance, we are wont to call
anticipations of Nature, because it is rash and hasty. But that reason, which
is rightly extracted out of things, we call interpretation of Nature.

An icipations are strong enough to gain consent, seeing that if all men were
equally and conformably made, they would agree well enough among themselves. To
speak plainly, no right judgment can be made of our way, nor of those things
which are found out agreeable unto it by anticipations, I mean by the reason
now in use: because we cannot desire any one to stand to the judgment of that
thing which is it self called in question.

It is no easy matter to deliver, or explain those things which we have
produced; because things new in themselves are to be understood by the Analogy
they have with old ones.

Borguas tells us of the French Expedition into Italy, that they came with
chalk in their hands to mark out their Inns, and not with arms to break through
them. Our design is the same, that our doctrines might be admitted by well
disposed and capacious Souls, for there is no need of confutations, where we
disagree in the very principles, notions, and forms of demonstration.

Their reason, who held non-comprehension, and our way do in some sort agree in
the beginning, but they vastely differ and are opposite in the end, for they
absolutely affirm, that nothing can be be known, but we say not much can be
known in Nature, in that way as it is now handled. They by their assertion
destroy the authority of Sense and Understanding, we study and give remedies to
help them.

Idols, mistakes, and mis-apprehensions, which now possess, and are deeply
rooted in Man's Understanding, so besiege the minds of Men that Truth can hardly
get admission, but if it should they would hinder and disturb the restoration
of Sciences, unless Men being fore warned would arm themselves against them, as
much as they could.

There are four sorts of Idols or false Images, which besiege Men's minds: we,
for distinction sake, have called them first Idola Tribus. 2. Idola Specus. 3.
Idola Fori. 4. (...) Theatri.

The raising Notions and Axioms by true induction is doubtless a proper remedy
to drive away and remove these Idols, yet their indication is of great use, for
the doctrine of Idols conduces to the interpretation of Nature; even as the
doctrine of Sophistical arguments does to vulgar Logic.

Idola (...) are founded in humane Nature it self, and in every Family and
Stock of Mankind. For humane sense is safely affirmed to be the measure of
things. On the contrary, all the conceptions both of sense and reason are taken
from the analogy of Man, not the analogy of the Universe. Humane Understanding
is like an unequal looking-glass to the rays of things, which mixing its own
Nature with the Nature of things, does wrest and infect it.

Idola Specus are the mis-apprehensions of every individual Man. For every one
has besides the mistakes of humane Nature in general, a den or individual
cave, where the hight of Nature is obscured and corrupted. This happens either
through every Man's singularity; or through education and conversation among
others, or by reading of Books and the authorities of them who are honored and
admired by every one, or through the different impressions which occur in a
prepossessed and predisposed, or in a calm and equal mind, or the like: so that
the Spirit of man, as it is placed or qualified in every Man, is a various, a
troubled, and a fortuitous thing; wherefore Heraclitus said well, that men
sought after Siences in lesser worlds, and not in the great and common World.

There are also Idols or mis-apprehensions arising from the mutual contracts,
and also ciations of Men, which by reason of humane commerce and society we
call Idola Fori: For Men are associated by speech, but words are imposed
according to the vulgar capacity; therefore a vicious and an improper
imposition of words does wonderfully mislead and clog the Understanding.
Neither the definitions and explications, wherewith learned men are wont to
defend and vindicate themselves in some things, do mend the matter for words,
do plainly force the Understanding and disturb all things, they lead men into
many idle controversies and foolish inventions.

Lastly there are Idols or misapprehensions, which are entered into Men's minds
from diverse opinions of the Philosophers, as also from the (...) Laws of
demonstrations: these we call Idola Theatri. Because all the kinds of
Philosophy, which have been invented and received we look upon as so many
Fables produced and acted to make fictitious and senical Worlds. Neither speak
we of those amongst us, or only of the ancient Philosophers and Sects; seeing
many the like Fables may be composed and made, because the causes of the
different errors are for the most part common; neither do we understand this
only of universal Philosophy, but also of many Principles and Axioms of
Sciences which have prevailed by tradition, credulity and neglect. But of all
these kinds of Idols we must speak more largely and distinctly, that so the
humane intellect may take more heed.

Humane Understanding is inclinable of it self to suppose a greater order and
equality in things than it finds. And whereas many things in Nature are
monodical and altogether unlike, yet it appropriates to them parallels,
correspondencies, and relatives, which are not from hence, are derived those
Figments.

In Celestial Bodies all things are moved by perfect Circles. In the mean time
they reject Spiral and Serpentine lines, retaining yet the names: From hence it
is, that the Element of Fire is introduced to make a quaternion with the other
three, which are within the reach of our senses. To the Elements also, as they
call them, fancy ascribes to them a double proportion of excess in their mutual
rarefaction, and such like dreams are invented. Nor is this vanity predominant
in opinions only, but also in simple notions

The Humane Understanding attracts all other things to give its suffrage and
consent unto those things which once please it, either because they are
received and believed, or because they delight. And though a greater strength
and number of contrary instances occur, yet it does either not observe, or
contemn them, or remove, or reject them by a distinction not without great and
dangerous prejudice, by which an inviolable authority remains in those former
conceptions. Therefore he gave a right answer, who, when a list of the Names of
such as had paid there their vows for escaping the danger of Shipwreck, was
shown to him hung up in a Temple, and when he was questioned whether he did not
acknowledge the Deity of the gods? He in answer demanded what was become of
their pictures who had perished after that they had paid their Vows? There is
almost the same reason for all Superstition, as in Astrological dreams,
presages, etc. Men delight in such vanities, they mind the events when they
come to pass, but when they fail, which is very often, they neglect and pass
them by. But this evil more subtly invades Philosophy and Sciences, wherein
that which once takes, infects and corrupts the rest, though more firm and
better. But in case this delight and vanity were wanting, yet it is a proper
and perpetual error in Humane Understanding, to be rather moved and stirred up
by affirmatives than by negatives, although in truth it ought to be indifferent
to both: Yet on the other hand the strength of a negative Instance is greater
in constituting every Axiom.

Humane Understanding is for the most part moved with those things, which
suddenly and at once effect and reach the mind, and wherewith the fancy is wont
to be filled and puffed up. As for the rest it supposes and fancies to have
them in a kind of inperceptible manner, even like those few things that possess
the mind. But as to that quick running over remote and heterogeneous instances,
whereby Axioms are tried as it were by fire, the Understanding is altogether
slow and unable, unless severe Laws and violent commands be imposed upon it.

Humane Understanding cannot rest, but still desires more and more, though all
in vain. Therefore it is not to be imagined that Heaven should hear any extreme
or extime parts; for it may be always necessarily urged, that there is
something further. Again it cannot be conceived how Eternity has run along
until now, because there is a common distinction usually admitted, that it is
infinite a part ante and a part post, which can in no wise be proved, for
then it would follow that one infinite is greater than another, and that an
infinite consumes and tends to a finite. The like nicety occurs through the
weakness of our imagination concerning lines always divisible, but this mental
infinity more dangerously interposes in the invention of causes: For whereas
Universals chiefly ought to be in a positive nature, as they are found out,
being not really causable, yet the Humane Understanding being unable to rest,
still desires things more known, but whiles it tends to further things it falls
back to nearer ones, viz. Final causes, which indeed arise rather from Humane
Nature, than the nature of the Universe. Out of this Fountain Philosophy is
strangely corrupted. But he is equally an unskilful and a slight Philosopher,
who seeks out a cause in primary universals, as he who desires it not in
subordinate and subaltern things.

Humane Understanding is not an Ignis fatuus a mere light, but it receives an
impression from the Will and the Affections, which produces the reason why it
desires Sciences, for what a Man had rather have true, that he resolves to
believe. Therefore he rejects difficult things, through impatiency of inquiry;
sober things, because they confine the hope; the high Mystery of Nature,
because of our natural Superstition; the light of experience, because of an
arrogance and pride, least the mind should seem to converse in vile and
transitory affairs, he rejects Paradoxes being too much overruled by the
mistakes of the vulgar. Lastly affection qualifies and infects the Soul many
ways which cannot be conceived.

But the greatest hinderance of the Humane Understanding, and its most
dangerous errors proceed from the dullness, unsufficiency, and deceptions of the
senses: those things which make impressions on the senses are of a greater
weight than others of a higher nature, that do not affect them: Therefore
contemplation most commonly ends with the sight, insomuch that there is little
or no observation made of invisible things. Therefore the actings of the
Spirits shut up in sensible bodies are hid from us. And all subtle
transformation, that happens in the parts of the grosser things, which we
commonly style alteration, but is in Truch a subtle metaschematism escapes also
our knowledge. Nevertheless, if these two that we have named be not found out,
there can be no great matter performed in the works of nature.

Again the nature of common air, and of all Bodies which in thinness surpass
the air, they being many in number are almost unknown, for sense in it self is
a weak and an erroneous thing, nor do the Organs conduce much to enlarge or
sharpen the senses, but the truest interpretation of Nature is made by
instances, and by fit and proper experiments, when sense judges of the
experiment, the experiment of Nature, and of the thing it self.

The Humane intellect is by its own Nature carried on to abstracts, and those
things which are unstable it fancies to be constant.

But it is better to dissect Nature than abstract her, which was done by
Democritus's School. By that means he searched further than the rest into
Nature. For that purpose we must rather examine matter, its schemes and
transformations, its pure acts and the Law of action and motion. Forms are but
the invention of men's brains, unless you will call the Laws of the act forms.

Of this kind are those false imaginations, which we call Idola Tribus, they
proceed, either from the equality of the substance of the humane Spirits or the
prepossessions, coarctations, and turbulent motions thereof, or from the
inspirations of the passions, or disagreement of the senses, or the manner of
impression.

Idola Specus proceed from the proper nature of every individual mind or body,
as also from education, custom or other casualties, which kind though various
and manifold, yet more especially we propound those which require most caution,
and have greatest power to defile the Understanding, and render it (...)
contemplations of Nature and most simple Bodies only disturb and impair the
Understanding, but contemplation of Nature and of Bodies compound, and in their
configuration astonish and dissolve the intellect, This is most evident in the
School of Hencippus and Democritus compared with other Philosophy, for it so
much considers the particles of things, that it almost neglects their frames:
and others so amazedly behold them, that they cannot arrive to Natures
simplicity. These contemplations therefore are to be altered and
interchangeably assumed, that the Understanding at the same time, may be made
penetrating and capable, and those inconveniences we speak of be avoided with
the false notions proceeding from them.

Let therefore your speculative prudence be so disposed in expelling and
removing the Idola Specus, which proceed either from the predominancy, or
excess of composition and division, or from our affection to the times, or from
large and small Objects. In general let every one, who studies the nature of
things, chiefly suspect that which captivates his Understanding, and so much
the greater heed is to be taken in these opinions, that the Understanding may
be kept equal and pure.

But Idola Fori are the most troublesome of all, which, by a confederacy of
words and names, have (...) themselves into the Understanding. For men believe
that their Reason governs words, but so it happens that words retort and
reflect their power upon the Understanding. This has made Philosophy and
Sciences Sophistical and unactive. Now words are for the most part accommodated
to vulgar capacities, and by lines most apparent to common apprehensions they
divide things. But when a sharper intellect, or more diligent observation would
transfer those lines, that they might be more agreeable to Nature; words make a
noise: from hence it comes to pass, that the great and solemn disputations of
learned men, often end in controversies concerning words and names, with which,
according to the custom and prudence of Mathematicians 'twere a wiser way to
begin, and to reduce them into order by definitions. And yet definitions in
natural and material beings cannot remedy this evil because they also consist
of words, and words beget words, so that it is necessary to have recourse to
particular instances, and their ranks and orders, as we shall presently show,
when we come to the manner and reason of constituting notions and Axioms.

Mis-apprehensions forced by words upon the Understanding are of two sorts. 1.
The names of things which are not: for as there are things which through
inadvertency wanting a name, so are there names without things, through a
Fantastical supposition. 2. Or the names of things which are but confused, ill
determined, rashly, and unequally abstracted from things. Of the first sort are
Fortune, the Primum Mobile, the Planetary Orbs, the Element of Fire, and such
like fictions arising from vain and false speculations. This kind is easier
cast out, because it is exterminable by a continued abnegation and antiquation
of such speculations. But the other sort is perplexed and deeply rooted,
proceeding from an ill and unskilful abstraction. For example sake, take any
word, Humidum if you please, and let us see how its various significations
agree, and we shall find this word Humidum to be nothing else but a confused
note of diverse actions enduring no constancy or reduction; for it signifies
that which easily circumfunds it self about another body, and is in it self
indeterminable and inconsistent, that which easily gives place on all sides,
and easily divides and dissipates, and as easily collects, and reunites it
self, that which easily flows and moves, easily adheres to another body and
moistens it, that which is easily reduced into a liquid, or melts, having been
before consistent or solid: Therefore if you consider the predication and
imposition of this word taken in one sense the Flame is moist, in another sense
the Air is not moist. In one sense again small dust is moist, in another glass
is so. Whence it is evident, that this notion was only rashly abstracted from
waters and common liquors without any due verification.

In words also there are certain degrees of pravity and error, less vicious are
the names of some substances, especially the lowest Species well deduced, for
the notion of Chalk and Clay is good, the notion of Earth bad, more vicious are
the actions of Generation, Corruption, Alteration: The most vicious qualities,
except the immediate objects of sense, are heavy, light, rare, dense, etc. And
yet even among these it cannot be helped but some notions will be better than
others, accordingly as more copious matter supplies Humane sense.

The other mistakes named Idola Theatri, are not innate, nor secretly wrought
in the Understanding, but by fabulous speculations, and the perverse Laws of
demonstrations plainly infused and received. But in these to undertake or
endeavor a confutation is not agreeable to what we have spoken. For seeing
that we neither agree in our principles nor demonstrations all disputation it
taken away. But this is good luck for the Ancients, that they may preserve
their reputation, for nothing is detracted from them, seeing the way is so
questionable. Because a lame Man, as they say, in the way, out goes a Racer out
of the way, for it is evident the stronger and nimbler he is, the greater is his
aberration, whiles he is out of the way.

But such is our manner of inventing Sciences, that we attribute not much to
the sharpness and strength of wit, and yet we almost equalize them, for even as
the describing of a right line or perfect Circle much depends on the (...) and
exercise of the hand, (...) it be done merely by the hand, but if a rule or
compasses be used, there is little or no such dependancy upon the hand: So
fares it exactly with our Reason, Although there be no particular use of
confutations, (...) yet we must say something of the Sects and Kinds of these
Theories, and afterward of their outward signs, because they are in a bad
condition, and lastly of the causes of so much unhappiness, and so long and
general a consent in error, that Truth may have an easier access, and the
Humane Understanding may be more thoroughly purged, and rid of these mistakes.

Idola Theatri or theoretical mistakes are many, and may be more, and in time
to come will be, for unless men's wits had been employed about Religion and
Divinity during many Ages, and also about civil Governments, especially
Monarchies, they had (...) such novelties in contemplations. So that Men
addicted unto them, ran the hazard of their fortunes, not only deprived of a
reward, but also exposed to contempt and envy. Doubtless many more Sects of
Philosophy, and Theories like to those, which once in great varieties
flourished amongst the Grecians, had been introduced: for as upon the etherial
Phoenomena's more figures of Heaven may be formed, likewise many more various
opinions may be as easily founded and established upon the Phenomena's of
Philosophy: Now the Fables of this Theater are like those that are acted on the
poetical Stage, whence it comes to pass, that Scenical and (...) narrations are
more quaint and elegant than those taken out of true history, and better please
the Readers.

In general either much out of little, or little out of much is assumed into
Philosophical matter, so that on all sides, Philosophy is founded on the too
narrow basis of experience, and Natural History, and determines out of fewer
things than it ought; for the rational sort of Philosophers snatch from
experience several vulgar things, and they to neither certainly found out, nor
diligently examined or tried, the rest they place in meditation, and the
exercise of wit.

There is another sort of Philosophers, who have bestowed a great deal of pains
in few experiments, and from thence have presumed to draw and frame a
Philosophy strangely wresting all other things thereunto.

There is also a third sort of them, who intermingle divinity, and traditions
of Faith and Adoration amongst whom the vanity of some has inclined them to
seek and derive Sciences from Spirits and Demons. Therefore the stock of
Errors and false Philosophy is threefold, namely Sophistical, Emperical, and
Superstitious.

Of the first kind Aristotle is an evident Example. By his Logic he corrupted
natural Philosophy made the world consist of Categories attributed to the
humane Soul, a most noble substance, a genus made up ofsecondary notions,
transacted the business of dense and rare, whereby bodies under go greater or
(...) dimensions or spaces by the cold distinction of act and power. He
asserted only one proper motion to be in all bodies, and if they had any other,
that he said was from another; many more things he affirmed according to his
fancy, which he imposed upon Nature, being every where more solicitous how he
might explain himself in answers, and make any thing positive in words, than of
the internal truth of things. This plainly appears if you compare his
Philosophy with others famous amongst the Grecians, for the Homoiomera of
Anaxagoras, the Atoms of Lencippus, and Democritus, the Heaven and Earth of
(...), the discord and concord of Empedocles, Heraclitus's resolution of Bodies
into the adiaphorous nature of Fire, and the replication of them to density,
have something of natural Philosophy in them, and a relish of nature and
experience: whereas Aristotle's Physics are nothing but logical notions, which
under a more specious name, not nominal but more real he retracts in his
Metaphysics, nor let not that move any one, that in his Books of Animals, in
his Problems and other Treatises he frequently uses Experiments. For he first
decreed them, neither did he rightly consult experience in establishing his
Determinations and Axioms, but after he had determined them according to his
pleasure, he made experience a slave to his fancies: And upon this account he
is more to be blamed than his modern Followers, I mean a Sect of Scholastical
Philosophers, who have altogether forsaken experiments.

But the Emperical kind of Philosophy brings forth more deformed and monstrous
opinions than the Sophistical or rational, because it is not founded in the
light of common notions, which though slender and superficial is
notwithstanding in some measure universal and conducive to many things, but in
a few narrow and obscure experiments. And therefore to those who daily converse
in such experiments, and have thereby corrupted their fancy, this Philosophy
seems probable and certain, but to others incredible and vain. A notable
example whereof we find in the Chemists and their opinions, but now scarcely
any where else, unless in Gilberts Philosophy. However we must by no means omit
a caution concerning this Philosophy, because we inwardly foresee and presage
that if men awakened by our precepts, shall at last betake themselves to
experience, bidding adieu to Sophistical doctrines, they will sustain some
damage, through a praemature and inconsiderate haste of the understanding, by
soaring too soon to generals and principles, which evil we ought to prevent.

But the corruption of Philosophy through superstition and intermixed Divinity
extends it self further, and works much mischief, both to Philosophy in general
and particular. For the humane understanding is no less obnoxious to the
impressions of Fancy, than to the impressions of vulgar notions. For the
contentious and Fallacious kind of Philosophy ensnares the Understanding, but
the other kind being fantastical, swollen and Poetical does rather flatter it.
For there is in Man a certain ambition of the Understanding as well as in the
Will, especially in sublime and elevated Wits. Of this kind you have an example
amongst the Grecians, especially in Pythagoras, but joined with gross
superstition, but more dangeroufly and subtly in Plato, and his School. This
kind of evil is found in the parts of other Philosophers; by the introduction
of abstract Forms, final Causes, first Causes, and frequent omitting the
medial, and the like. Wherefore take great heed to this matter, for it is the
worst of evils to defy errors, and to adore vain things may be well accounted
the plague of the Understanding.

Some modern Men guilty of much levity, have so indulged this vanity, that they
have essayed to found natural Philosophy in the first Chapter of Genesis, the
Book of Job, and other places of Holy Writ, seeking the living among the dead.
Now this vanity is so much the more to be checked and restrained, because by
unadvised mixture of divine and humane things, not only a fantastical
Philosophy is produced, but also an Heretical Religion. Therefore it is safe to
give unto Faith with a sober mind, the things that are Faiths.

Hitherto our Excellent Author has spoken of the bad authority of Philosophy,
founded in vulgar notions, a few Experiments, or in Superstition: he examines
next the depraved matter of Contemplation especially in natural Philosophy.

He proceeds next to discover to us by what means demonstrations lead us into
errors and mistakes, and concludes that experience is the best demonstration,
if it be founded upon mature Experiments. He discourses afterward of the
several sorts of Philosophers among the Greeks, and takes notice of their
imperfections, of their ignorance in ancient History, and in Cosmography, so
that they could not be acquainted with so many experiments, as the Learned of
our days.

Afterward he discourses of the causes of Errors, and of their long
continuance in credit in the World, that none might wonder how it comes to pass
that some in these last Ages, find so many mistakes in the Learning and Wit
admired in former Ages.

The first Cause of the small prosiciency in Sciences, he says, is the
streights of time, and their ignorance of former Times: for their Observation
had not scope enough, nor sufficient assistance from true History, to gather
right and judicious Experiments.

In the second place another Cause of great moment certainly offers it self;
namely that in those times, when the wits of men and Learning flourished most
or but indifferently, Natural Philosophy had the least share in humane
contemplations: nevertheless this ought to be accounted the great Mother of
Sciences: for all Arts and Sciences, plucked away from this Root. may perhaps
be polished and accommodated to use, but they will never grow. Now it is
evident, that since the Christian Faith was embraced and increased the most
part of the rarest Wits applied themselves to Divinity. To this end large
rewards were propounded, and all manner of helps plentifully afforded. This
study of Divinity took up the third part or period of time amongst us
Europeans, and the more because about that time Learning began to flourish,
controversies touching Religion did wonderfully increase: but in the preceding
Age, during the second period among the Romans, the chiefest meditations and
studies of Philosophers were employed and spent in Moral Philosophy, which was
then the Heathens Divinity. Moreover the greatest Wits in those days for the
most part applied themselves to Civil affairs, by reason of the Roman Empires
greatness, which required the labors of many men. But that Age wherein Natural
Philosophy seemed chiefly to flourish among the Grecians was a parcel of time
of small continuance, for even in ancienter times, those Seven, called Wisemen,
all except Thales, applied themselves to Moral Philosophy and Politics. And in
after times, when Isocrates had brought down Philosophy from Heaven upon Earth,
Moral Philosophy prevailed further still, and diverted men's thoughts from
physiological speculations.

That very period of time also, wherein Physic Enquiries flourished was
corrupted and spoiled with contradictions, and new determinations. Wherefore
Natural Philosophy in every one of those periods, being greatly neglected or
hindered, it is no wonder men profited so little in it, seeing they altogether
minded other things.

Add moreover, that those who studied Natural Philosophy, especially in these
modern times, did not wholly addict themselves thereunto, unless perhaps you
may allege the example of some Monk in his Cell, or Nobleman in his Country
House. So at length it was made but a passage and drawbridge to other things.

This, this famous Mother of Sciences, was basely thrust down into servile
offices, and made a drudge to wait upon Medicine, or the Mathematics; and
again to wash the immature wits of young men, and give them a superficial
mixture, that they might afterward be the better qualified to receive of
another. In the mean while let no man expect a great progress in Sciences,
especially in the practical part, unless natural Philosophy be produced to
particular Sciences, and those again reduced to Natural Philosophy: for hence
it comes to pass, that Astronomy, Optics, Music, many Mechanichal Arts,
Physic it self, and what is more wonderful, even Moral Philosophy, Politics,
and Logic, have for the most part no considerable depth, but languish in the
surface and variety of things, because when once these particular Sciences are
divided, they are no longer nourished by Natural Philosophy, which out of the
Fountains and true contemplations of motions, rays, sounds; texture and
figuration of Bodies, affections, and intellectual apprehensions, communicates
new strength and augmentation to them. And therefore it is no wonder, that
Sciences grow not since they are separated from their roots. Another great and
powerful cause, why Sciences are so little advanced, is this, that race cannot
rightly be run, where the Goal is not rightly placed and fixed. Now the true
and legitimate mark of Sciences is to enrich Man's life with new inventions and
forces. But the greater number of men know nothing of this, because they are
mercenary and professory, unless it happens that some Artist of a sharper wit,
and ambitious of Glory, studies some new inventions, which commonly tends to
his own undoing. Therefore most Men are so far from propounding to themselves
the advancement of Arts and Sciences, that even out of those things that they
have, they seek no more than what may be converted into professory use, gain,
reputation, or the like advantages. And if any one amongst the multitude seeks
knowledge ingeniously and for it self, yet you will find he does this rather to
obtain variety of contemplations and precepts, than for the rigid and severe
inquiry of Truth. Again suppose another more severely enquires after Truth, yet
even he propounds to himself such conditions of Truth as may satisfy his mind
and understanding in reference to the causes of things known long ago, not
those which may give fresh pledges of operations or new light to Axioms, The
end therefore of Sciences being not yet rightly defined, or well assigned by
any body, no wonder if Error and mistakes attend those things which are
subordinate thereunto.

The Noble Author condemns next the erroneous ways which conduct to Sciences;
namely obscure Traditions, giddy Arguments, the windings of Chance or unclean
Experience; and wonders that none yet have recommended sense, and well ordered
Experience, which he supposes to be partly caused by a great mistake. That the
Majesty of Humane Understanding is impaired with long conversing in Experiments
and particular things, subject to sense, and determined to matter; especially
seeing these things are laborious in the inquiry, ignoble in the meditation,
harsh in discourse, illiberal in the practice, infinite in number, and full of
subtilty.

Again the reverence of Antiquity, and the authority and consent of those who
have been accounted great men in Philosophy, has detained and inchauted men
from making any progress in Sciences.

As for Antiquity the opinion which men entertain of it, is idle and
incongruous to the word it self, for the old age, and great age of the world
are terms equivolent to antiquity, and ought to be attributed to our times, not
to the youthful age of the world, that wherein the Ancients lived.

For that Age in respect of ours was greater and ancienter, in respect of the
World it self, lesser and younger: and therefore in like manner, as we expect a
greater knowledge in Humane Affairs, a more mature and a riper judgment from
an Old Man than from a Young Man, by reason of his Experience, and the variety
and plenty of things which he has seen, heard, observed, and understood, so
also far greater matters may rationally be expected from our Age, than from the
ancient times, if it would but know its strength, and were willing to try and
mind things, because we live in the Worlds old Age, and are stored with
infinite experiments, and advanced in our noble Observations. The discoveries
of other Lands unknown to former Ages are no small helps to our experience.
Besides it is a great weakness to attribute so much to ancient Authors, for
Truth is the Daughter of Time not of Authority, and the ancientest times are
the youngest in respect of the World. The other cause of men's mistakes is their
admiring the operations which can show gray hairs, and a too great esteem of
liberal Arts and Learning already found out, which is an act of simplicity and
childishness. But the greatest damage has happened to Sciences through
pusilanimity; and the smalness of those tasks, which humane Industry has
proposed to it self, and yet, what is worst of all, that pusilanimity is
accompanied with Arrogance and disdain.

Moreover Natural Philosophy in all Ages has had a troublesome and harsh
Enemy; namely Superstition, and a blind immoderate zeal of Religion.

Lastly the way to all Reformed Philosophy has been blocked up by the
unskilfulness of some Divines, who were afraid least a deeper enquiry should
dive into Nature beyond the bounds of Sobriety, traduce and falsely wrest those
things, which are spoken of Divine Mysteries in the sacred Writings, against
Searchers of divine Secrets: Others cunningly conceive, if the means be
unknown, which they think greatly concerns Religion, all things may more easily
be referred to the deity. Others from their example fear least motions and
mutations in Philosophy should terminate in Religion.

Again all things in the manners and institutions of Schools, Universities,
Colleges; and the like places destimated for learned Men, and getting
Learning, are found to be against the advancement of Sciences, etc.

But the greatest Obstacle in the progress of Sciences, and new undertakings
thereof is discerned in the dispairing of men, and a supposed impossibility,
for even wise and grave men are wont to diffide in these things, pondering with
themselves the obscurity of Nature, shortness of Life, deception of the Senses,
weakness of judgment, difficulty of Experiments, and the like, etc.

We must take our beginnings from God, in what we are about, for the excellent
nature of Good therein it manifestly from God, who is the Author of Good, and
Father of Lights.

The Foundations of Experience, for we must descend to them, have hitherto been
either none at all or very weak; neither has a sufficient System of
particulars been any ways as yet found outand congested, either in number,
kind, or certainty, able to inform the understanding.

In the plenty of Mechanical Experiments, there is discovered a great want of
such as assist or tend to the information of the understanding, etc.

Not only a greater plenty of Experiments is to be sought, and procured,
differing in kind from what ever was yet done. But also another method, order
and process are to be introduced, for the continuing and promoting of
Experience. For wandering Experience, guided by it self, is a mere cheat, and
does rather amaze men than inform them. But when Experience proceeds regularly,
orderly, and soberly, there may be some better hope of Sciences.

Seeing there is such a great number, and as it were an Army of particulars,
but so scattered and diffused, that they disgregate and confound the
understanding, we can expect no good from the skirmishes, light motions, and
transcursions of the understanding, unless by fit, well disposed, and exact
Tables, there be an instruction, and co-ordination of those things which
appertain to the subject of our enquiry: and the mind be applied to the
preparatory and digested helps of these Tables.

But when this plenty of particulars is rightly and orderly placed before our
eyes we must not presently pass to the Inquisition, and Invention of new
particulars or operations, or if we do we must not rest in them, etc.

We must not permit the Understanding to leap or fly from particulars to remote
and general Axioms, such as are called the principles of Arts and Things, or by
their constant verity to prove or discuss medial Axioms.

But then Men may hope well of Sciences, when by a true Scale, and continual
not intermitted degrees, we ascend from particulars to lesser Axioms, then to
medial, for some are higher than others; and lastly to universals; for the
lowest Axioms differ not much from naked Experience, but the supressive and
more general which occur, are rational and abstracted, and have no solidity.
The medial therefore are those true solid and lively Axioms, wherein men's
fortunes and estates are placed, and above those also are those more general,
if not abstracted, but truly limited by these medial or middle Axioms.

Therefore the humane understanding needs not feathers but lead and weights to
hinder its leaping and flying. But this is not yet done, when it is we may have
better hope of Sciences.

Now in constituting an Axiom another form of induction contrary to what was
formerly, or is now used, is found out, and that not only to prove or invent
Principles, as they call them, but also lesser and medial Axioms, ye all. For
that induction, which proceeds by simple enumeration, is a childish thing, and
concludes precariously, being exposed to the danger of a contradictory
instance. And yet most commonly it gives judgment from fewer instances than it
ought, or from those only which are at hand. But that induction which would
induce to the invention and demonstration of Arts and Sciences, must separate
Nature by due rejections and separations, and, after sufficient negatives,
conclude upon affirmatives, which thing is not yet done, nor so much as
attempted, unless by Plato only, who indeed, to examine definitions and Ideas,
does in some measure use this form of Induction. But for the good and lawful
institution of such an induction or demonstration. many things are to be used,
which never yet entered into any mortal man's heart, so that greater pains is to
be taken herein than was ever yet spent in a Syllogism. Now the help of this
induction is not only to be used in finding out Axioms, but also in
terminating motions, for certainly in this induction our greatest hope is
placed.

Far more and better things, yea and in shorter time, are to be expected from
the reason, industry, direction, and intention of men, than from chance the
instinct of Animals, which hitherto have given the beginning to Inventions.

This also may be brought as an encouragement, that some things which are found
out, are of that kind, that before their production it could not easily come
into man's mind to imagine any thing of them, for every body despised them as
impossible, as the use of Guns the invention of Silk, the Seamans needle, etc.

Therefore we hope there are in Natures bosom many secrets of excellent use,
which have no alliance nor paralellism, with the things already invented, but
are placed out of Fancies Road, not as yet found out, which doubtless after
many revolutions of Ages shall at last come forth, even as those former did.
But by the way we now declare, they may speedily and suddenly be both
anticipated and represented.

We must not omit another thing, which may raise up our hope. Let men reckon
the infinite expense of Wit, time, and money, which they are at in things and
studies of far lesser use and value; the least part whereof, were it converted
to sound and solid things, would conquer all difficulty.

Had we a man among us, who would de facto answer Nature's Queries, the
Invention of all Causes and Sciences would be the study but of a few years.

Some without doubt, when they have read over our History and Tables of
Invention, may object that something is less certain, or altogether, false in
our experiments, and therefore perhaps will think with himself, that our
inventions are founded on false foundations, and dubious principles. But this
is nothing, for such things must needs happen at first, for it is all one as
though in writing or printiug some one Letter or other should be misplaced,
which does not usually hinder the Reader, for such errors are easily corrected
by the sense, etc.

Many things also will occur in our History and Experience, first slight and
common, then base and mechanical, lastly too curious, merely speculative, and
of no use, which kind of things may divert and alienate the studies of men.

Now for those things which seem common, let men consider, that they themselves
are wont to do no less than refer and accommodate the causes of rare things to
these which are frequently done, but of things daily happening they enquire not
the causes, but take them for granted.

And therefore they inquire not into the causes of weight, celestial rotation,
heat, cold, light, hard, soft, slender, dense, liquid, concistent or solid,
animate and inanimate, similar dissimilar, nor lastly Organical, but dispute
and judge of other things, which happen not so frequently and familiarly by
these as being evident, manifest, and received. But we, who know well enough,
that no judgment can be made of rare and notable things, much less new things
be brought to light without the causes of vulgar things, and the causes of
causes rightly examined and found out are forced necessarily to receive the
most vulgar things into our History: Furthermore we perceive nothing has
hindered Philosophy more, than because things familiar and frequently happening
do not stay and detain the contemplation of men, but are entertained by the by,
and their causes not inquired into, so that information of unknown matters is
not oftener required than attention in known things.

Now as touching the vileness and dishonesty of things, they are no less to be
entertained in Natural History than the richest and most precious things, nor
is Natural History thereby polluted, for the Sun does equally visit Palaces
and Sinks, and yet is not defiled. Again we do not build or dedicate a Capitol
or Pyramid to the Pride of men, but we found an holy Temple for the worlds
pattern in humane Understanding.

Therefore we follow our Copy for whatsoever is worthy of essence is worthy of
Science, which is the image of Science, but vile things subsist as well as
costly ones. Moreover, as out of some putrid matters, as musk and civet,
sometimes the best odours come, even so from low and sordid instances sometimes
excellent light and information flows.

Before all things we have and must speak first of this thing, viz. That we how
at first setting out, and for a time, seek only lociferous not fructiferous
Experiments, according to the examples of Divine Creation, which only produced
Light on the first day, and bestowed a whole day upon it, not intermingling
with it, in that day, any material Work. If any one therefore think these
things are of no use, it is all one as if he should think Light useless,
because it is indeed no solid nor material being; for we may truly affirm,
that the light of simple Natures being well examined and defined, is like Light
which affords passage to all the secret Rooms of Operations, drawing after it
all the companies and troops of Operations, and potentially comprizing the
Fountains of most noble Axioms, yet in it self it is not of so great use: Thus
the Elements of Letters of themselves and separately signify nothing, neither
are of any use, but yet are like the first matter in the composition, and
preparation of every word. Thus the seeds of things strong in power are as to
use, except in their increase of no value, and the scattered beams of Light
unless they unite together, become unbeneficial to men.

Some also will doubt rather than Object, whether we speak only of Natural
Philosophy, or else of other Sciences; namely, Logic, Ethics and Politics to
be perfected according to our way. But we surely understand what we have said
of all this, and as vulgar Logic, which rules things by syllogism, belongs not
only to natural, but to all Sciences. So ours, which proceeds by induction,
compriseth all things; for we make an History and inventory Tables, as well of
Anger, Fear, Modesty, etc. as of Politic Examples, and so of the mental
motions of memory, composition and division, judgment and the rest, no less
than of heat and cold, or light and vegetation, etc. But as our method of
interpretation after History is prepared and ordered, does not only behold
mental motions and discourses, as common Logic, but also the nature of things.
So we govern the Understanding, that it may apply it self in a perfect and apt
manner to the nature of things.

But that ought by no means to be doubted, whether we desire to destroy and
demolish the Philosophy, Arts, and Sciences which we use, for we on the
contrary willingly allow their use, cultivation, and honor; nor do we any
ways hinder, but that those which have been in credit, may nourish
disputations, adorn Orations, be used in professory employments. Lastly, like
current money, be received among men by consent. But how truly we profess this
very thing, which we mention concerning our affection and good will toward
allowed Sciences, our public Writings, especially our Books of the Advancement
of Learning declare and attest.

It remains that we now speak somewhat concerning the excellency of the End.
Had we before treated (...) these things, our expectations probably had better
succeeded, but now we are in hopes, that all prejudices being removed, these
matters may perhaps be of more weight.

For though we had perfected and completed all things, nor had called others
to share in our labors, yet should we have refrained these words lest we might
be thought to proclaim our own merits, but seeing the industry of others is to
be sharpened, and their minds to be stirred up and inflamed, it is fit we put
men in remembrance of some things.

First then the Introduction of noble Inventions seems to carry the greatest
sway amongst humane actions, as former ages also have judged; for they gave
divine honor to the Inventors of things, but to those who were meritorious in
civil affairs, as the founders of Cities and Empires, Lawgivers, (...) of their
Countries from temporal evil, Destroyers of Tyranny etc. they only decreed
heroic honor. Inventions also, are the new creations, they are man's Glory,
they cause him to be a God to the rest of mankind. New inventions are of a
wonderful consequence as the Art of Printing, Gunpowder, and the Sea men's
compass. These three have changed the Face and State of affairs in the whole
World. First, in Learning. Secondly, in Warfare. Thirdly, in Navigation.

There are three sorts of ambition, the first desires to enlarge man's own
power over Countries and People, this is common and ignoble, the Second,
endeavors to enlarge other men's, as our Prince's Dominions, this has more
dignity, but no less desire.

But if any one endeavors to restore and enlarge (...) power and dominion of
mankind, over the university of things, doubtless this ambition is sounder, and
nobler than the other two: Now man's dominion over things consists only in Arts
and Sciences, for nature is not trusted, but by obedience.

It is now high time that we propound this art it self of interpretating
nature, wherein though we suppose we have given most true and profitable
precepts, yet we do not attribute unto it any absolute necessity or perfection,
as though nothing could be done without it. For we are of opinion if men had by
them a just History of Nature and Experience, and would diligently study it,
and could command themselves in two things; first in putting away received
opinions and notions. Secondly, in forbearing a while generals and subgenerals,
they would by the proper and genuine strength of the understanding, without any
art, light upon our form of interpretation; for interpretation is the true and
natural work of the mind, all obstacles being first removed: But certainly our
presents will make all things more ready and sure.

Nevertheless we do not affirm that nothing can be added unto them. On the
contrary we, who consider the mind not only in its own faculty, but as it is
united with things ought to determine, that the art of invention may grow and
increase with things invented.

Part of the Novum Organum, OR, APHORISMS OF THE Interpretation of NATURE and
KINGDOM of MAN.
Taken out of the Second Book.
IT is the business and intent of humane power to produce and superinduce a new
nature, and new things upon a body given to it; but it is the business and
purpose of humane science, to find out the true form of this body, or the right
difference, or the essence of nature, called natura naturans, or the Fountain
of emanation: these words we use, because they express the thing, and discover
it best. Now to these works of the first rank there be two of a second and
inferior sort, that are subordinate. To the first, the transformation of
concrete bodies from one to another within possible limits. To the second,
invention in all generation and motion of a Secret proceeding continued from an
apparent efficient and vissible matter to a new form; as also the invention of
an hidden schism of resting bodies not in motion.

Although the ways leading to the power and humane science, be nearly allied
and almost the same, nevertheless it is the safest, because of that old and
pernicious custom, of spending time in abstracts to begin and raise sciences
from their very foundations, which look upon the active part in order, that it
might consume and determine the active part, therefore we must see to some
nature to be superinduced upon another body, what precept or direction any
should require for that purpose, and that in an easy and plain expression.

For example, suppose any should desire to cover over Silver with the yellow
color of Gold, or give unto it an increase of weight, with a regard to the
Laws of matter, or to make an obscure stone become transparant, or glass
gluttinous, or to cause a body not vegetable to grow; we must see in such a
case what direction or deduction may chiefly he desired, first a person would
doubtless wish for something of a like Experiment to be shown unto him, which
might not fail in the operation, nor deceive in the undertaking. Secondly, he
would desire some directions which might not bind him, and force him to certain
mediums, and particular ways of acting, for it may be, that he may be unable to
purchase, and procure unto himself such mediums, therefore if there be any
other mediums and other methods of acting, besides that direction of producing
such a nature, it may perhaps be of such things, as are in the power of the
Worker; yet notwithstanding he may be excluded from the (...) of such, things
by the narrowness of the Rule, so as that he shall meet with no (...). Thirdly,
he may desire, that (...) may be shown unto him, which may not be altogether so
difficult, as the operation that is in question, but that comes nearer to the
practice.

Therefore it is (...), that every true and perfect Rule of working be certain,
(...), and well designing, or in order to action: therefore this is the same as
the invention of a true form, for the form of any nature is such, that when it
is supposed the nature it self must needs follow, therefore it is always
present, wherever that nature is, it be speaks it in general and (...) it. Such
is the form of a thing that when it is taken away the (...) of the thing is
removed.

Therefore it is always (...) from it, when that nature is absent, and is in it
alone. (...), a true form is such, that it deduceth the nature of a thing out
of the Fountain of being, which is common to many, and more (...) than the
nature, as they speak, than the form. Therefore the Rule of knowing a true and
perfect Axiom is this, that (...) (...) (...) (...) found out which might be
convertible with the nature given, and yet be (...) (...) of a more known
nature, like as of a true genus. (...) (...) (...), the one active, the other
speculative, are the same in effect, and what is most useful in operation is
most true in speculation.

But the Rule or Axioms of transforming bodies are two fold. The (...)
considered a body, as a troop or conjugation of simple (...), as in (...) these
things do meet, that it is yellow, weighty, and of such (...) (...) (...) may
be beaten thin and drawn into wire, of such a bigness that it is not volatile,
and that it loses nothing by fire, that it is to be run in such a manner, that
it is to be separated and loosned by such means, and the like of the other
natures or properties of Gold.

Therefore such an Axiom deduceth the thing from the forms of the simple (...)
or properties, for he that knows how to bring new forms and methods of yellow,
of weight, of fluidity, etc. he will see and take care of their graduations and
means, that all these be conjoined in one body from whence transformation into
Gold may be expected. Therefore this manner of marking belongs to the primary
action, for there is the same method required in bringing forth one simple
nature, as many; only man meets with more difficulty in working, when he is to
join together many natures, which meet not of themselves unless by the ordinary
and usual ways of nature; nevertheless we may affirm that the method of
working, which considers the (...) natures, though in a concrete body, proceeds
from those things, which in nature are constant, eternal, and universal, and
open a wide door to man's ability, which as affairs are now managed our humane
understanding can scarce comprehend or represent.

But the Second kind of Axioms, which depends from the invention of a secret
proceeding, acts not by simple natures, but by concrete bodies, as they are
found in natures ordinary course; for example, suppose an Inquisition is made
from what beginnings, how, and in what manner Gold, or any other Metal, or
Stone is generated from its first matter and deform substance until it comes to
a perfect mineral, likewise in what manner Herbs grow, form their (...) (...)
of the sap in the earth, or from the seed until it rises up to be a plant with
all the succession of motion, and the diverse, and continued endeavors of
nature. Likewise of the ordinary generation of animals from their conception to
their birth, in like manner of all other bodies.

But this inquisition relates not only to the generation of bodies, but also
to other motions and workings of nature; for example, suppose an inquisition be
made into the universal series, and continued manner of nourishment, from the
(...) reception of the Food, until it turns into the substance of the body;
likewise of the voluntary motion in animals, from the (...) impression of the
fancy, and repeated endeavors of the spirits, to the movings and turnings of
the Arters, or of the outward motion of the tongue, and lips, and other
instruments to the giving of articulate (...); for these things relate to
concrete or collegious bodies, and in operations they are looked upon as
particular and special custom of nature, not as fundamental, and common Laws,
which constitute forms. But we must needs (...), that this method seems to be
the most expedite, the most likely and (...) and more than the other primary.

(...) wise the operative part, which answers this speculative, does (...)
(...) (...), working from those things, which are commonly (...) (...) things
near at hand, or from those things to other (...) (...) highest and radical
operations upon nature depend (...) (...) (...) Axioms. Moreover, when man has
not the (...) (...), but only of knowing and beholding, as in (...) (...)
(...) are not within man's reach he cannot change nor alter them. (...) the
inquisition of the fact it self, or of the truth of the (...) (...) (...) as
the knowledge of causes and agreements, relates to the primary and universal
Axioms of simple (...) as the nature of voluntary relation, or the (...) (...)
of the load stone, and many others; which are more common than the (...):
neither can any body hope to terminate the question, whether in the daily
motion, the earth does in truth come round, or the Heavens unless he
understands (...) the nature of voluntary rotation.

The hidden proceeding, which we have mentioned, is otherwise, so that our
humane understanding, as it is now wrapped up in (...), cannot easily search into
it; neither do we (...) certain measures, (...), or degrees of proceeding
visible in bodies, but that continued proceeding, which for the most part is
not subject to our senses.

For example, In all generation and transformation of bodies, we must inquire
what is last, and what flies away, what remains, what is added, what dilates it
self, what is drawn to it, what is united, what is separated, what is
continued, what is cut off, what means, what hinders, what commands, and what
yields, and many other things.

Again, neither are we to enquire after these things in (...) and
transformation of bodies, but in all other alterations and motions we are
likewise to enquire, what proceeds, and what succeeds, what is most fierce, and
what is most remiss, what gives the motion, what commands, and the like.

All these things are unknown to, and never handled by the Sciences, which are
composed by the grossest and the unablest wits. Seeing (...) natural action is
transacted by the least beginnings, or by such as are so small, that they are
not to be perceived by our senses, no body can hope to rule or turn nature,
unless he can comprehend and take notice of them in a due manner. Out of the
two kinds of Axioms, which are already mentioned, Philosophy and Sciences are
to be divided, (the common received words which approach the nearest to the
discovery the of things, being applied to our meaning) namely that the
inquisition of forms, which in reason according to their own Laws are eternal
and unmovable, constitutes the Metaphysics; but the inquisition of the
efficient, of the matter, of the secret proceeding, and hidden schismatism, all
which things regard the common and ordinary course of nature, not the
foundamental and eternal Laws, should constitute the Physics. Now to these are
subordinate two practical Sciences, to Physic the Mechanic is subordinate,
and to the Metaphysics, the better sort of Magic, in regard of its large ways
and greater command in nature.

Now that we have thus described our doctrine we must proceed to the precepts
in a right and orderly manner; therefore the discovery of the interpretation of
Nature contains chiefly two parts. The first tends to the drawing out and
raising Axioms from experience; the second teaches how to take and derive
Experiments from new Axioms. The first part is divided in a threefold manner
into three ministrations; into that which relates to sense, into that which
relates to the memory, and to that which relates to the mind or understanding.

First we must have a Natural and Experimental History; sufficient and good,
which is the foundation of the thing: It must not be feigned or contrived
only, but we must find what Nature does, or bears.

But the Natural and Experimental History is so various and scattered that it
confounds and disturbs the understanding; unless it be limited and placed in a
right order; therefore we must form some tables and ranks of instances in such
a manner and order, that the understanding may work upon them.

Which, when it is done, the understanding left to it self, and moving of it
self, is not sufficient, but unable, for the working of Axioms, unless it be
ruled and assisted; therefore in the third place a lawful and true induction is
to be brought in, which is the Key of the Interpretation; we must begin at the
End and proceed back-wards to the rest.

An inquisition of forms proceeds in this manner, first, upon nature given, we
must bring to the understanding all the instances of notes, that agree in the
same Nature, though by different matters; Therefore such a collection is to be
Historical, without any hasty contemplation or greater subtilty than ordinary,
for example in the inquisition of the form of Hot.

Convenient Instances in the Nature of Hot.
1. THe Sun beams chiefly in Summer; and at Noon. 2. The Sun beams beaten back
and pressed together; specially between Mountains, Walls, and through
Burning-glasses. 3. All fiery Meteors. 4. Fiery Thunderbolts. 5. The bursting
forth of flames out of the Caves of Mountains, etc. 6. All Flame. 7. All solid
bodies of fires 8. Hot and Natural Baths. 9. All liquids heated or boiling. 10.
Vapors and hot smoke, and the air it self, which receives a strong and furious
heat, when it is shut up, as in all places of reflection. 11. Some kind of
storms, by the constitution of the air, when there is no respect to the time of
the year. 12. The air shut up in subterraneous Caves, chiefly in winter. 13.
All hair and shag, as wool, the skins of beasts, feathers, have something of
heat. 14. All bodies, as well solid as liquid, as well thick as thin, as the
air, may be heated for a time. 15. Sparks of fire out of Iron or steel, when
they are struck out. 16. All bodies rubbed together as a stone, wood, cloth,
etc. So that the axle-trees, and wheels of Carts sometimes are enflamed.

And the custom amongst the Western Indians is to make fire by rubbing.

17. All green Herbs, and moist, shut up close together, as Roses, Pease in a
basket, and Hay, if it he laid up wet will often take fire. 18. Lime watered.
19. Iron when it is first dissolved by strong waters, in glass without any
assistance of fire, and likewise Pewter, etc. which is not so hot. 20. All
animals chiefly in their inwards, though the heat in insects, because of the
smalness of their bodies cannot be perceived by our feeling. 21. Horse-dung and
the new excrements of such like creatures. 22. Strong oil of Sulphur and
Vitriol performs the office of heat in burning linning. 23. The oil of wild
Majoram, and the like, does the office of heat in burning bones and teeth. 24.
The strong spirit of wine well rectified performs the office of heat, so that
if the white of an Egg be cast into it, it will thicken and whiten almost in
the same manner, as when it is boiled, and cloth being cast into it will burn,
and be brown as a toasted piece of bread. 25. All sweet sents, and hot herbs,
as dragon wort, cresses, etc. Although the hand feels not their heat, neither
when they are entire, nor when reduced to ashes, but when they are chewed a
little, they heat the tongue, and the pallet, as if they did burn. 26. Strong
vinegar, and all things acide or sharp, are hot in a member, where there is no
Or skin to cover such as covers the body.
Epidermis, as in the eye and tongue, and in a wounded part, or where the skin
is taken off, they cause pain like to that of heat. 27. Also extroardinary cold
seems to be burning. 28. Garlic.
This List we are want to name the Table Essence and Presence.

Secondly, we must examine with our understanding the instances which are
deprived of Natura data.
nature given.

The Instances at hand which have not the nature of heat.
THe beams of the Moon, of the Stars, and of the Comets seem not to be hot to
our feeling, for we may observe that the greatest frosts are in the full Moon,
but the fixed and bigger Stars, when the Sun goes under them, or draws near
them, they are thought to be heated by the heat of the Sun, as when the Sun is
in Leo, or in the Dog Days.

The Sun beams, in the middle region of the air, are not hot: The reason is,
because that region is not near enough to the body of the Sun, from whence the
beams burst forth, nor to the earth that reflects them back; therefore this is
plain, upon the tops of mountains, which are not the highest, snow abides upon
them always. But on the contrary, some have taken notice, that on the top of
the Pick of Tenerif, and on the top of the Mountains of Peru, there is no snow
to be seen, but upon the sides of these hills snow remains; therefore the air
on the top of those Mountains is not cold, but subtle and sharp, so that in the
mountains of Peru it pricks and offends the eyes with its sharpness, and the
stomach, so that it makes men inclinable to vomit. The Ancients have taken
notice, that, on the top of mount Olympus, the air is so subtle, that such as
climb up to the top, must carry with them spunges dipped in water and vinegar,
and often put them to their mouths and noses, because the air is there so
subtle, that it suffices not for respiration. They say also that there is
there so great a calm, free from all rain, storms, snow and winds, that some
who sacrificed there, upon Jupiters altar, having made with their fingers an
impression in the Ashes upon the Altar, the next year the same Letters and
impression were to be seen without the least alteration. And such as venture up
to the top of the Pick of Tenerif go by night and not by day, they are called
upon a little after the rising of the Sun by their guides to hasten down again,
because of the danger, as it seems, caused by the subtilty of the air, for fear
that it should stiffle the spirits.

The reflection of the Sun beams near the northern pole are very weak and
inefficacious in matter of heat.

Let this Experiment be tried, take a Looking Gloss made contrary to the
burning-glasses, and put it between your hand, and the Sun beams, and take
notice whether it don't diminish the heat of the Sun, as the burning-glass
increases it.

Try this other Experiment, whether by the best and strongest burning-glasses
it is not possible to gather together the beams of the Moon in one point, and
cause thereby a small degree of warmth.

Try also a burning-glass upon any thing that is hot, but not luminous or
shining, as upon hot urine, or hot stone, which is not fiery or upon boiling
water or the like, and see whether it increases not the heat, as at the rays
of the Sun.

Try also a burning glass before the flame of the fire.

The Comets have not always the same effects in increasing the heat of the
year, though some have observed that grievous droughts have succeeded them.
Bright beams, and columns, and Gaping of the firmament.
Chasmata, and such like meteors appear more frequently in the winter than in
the Summer, and especially in great frosts, when the air is very dry. Thunder
and Lightnings seldom happen in Winter, but in the time of great heats. But
falling Stars are thought to consist for the most part of a thin substance,
bright and kindled, near a kin to the strongest fire.

There are some Lightnings that yield light but don't burn, such happen always
without thunder.

The breaking out, and eruptions of flames are to be seen in cold regions as
well as in hot, as in Istandia, Greenland, as the trees which grow in cold
Countries are more combustible, more full of Pitch, and Rosom, than others that
grow in hot Regions.

All flame is hot, more or less: Nevertheless, they say, that Ignus fatuus,
which lights sometimes against a wall, has but little heat: it may be like the
flame of the spirit of wine, which is mild and soft; but that flame is yet
milder, which some credible and discreet Historians affirm to have been seen
about the hair and heads of Boys and Girls, which did not so much as singe the
hair, but did softly wave above them.

Every thing that is fiery, when it turns into a fiery red, when it should not
yield any flame, it is always hot.

Of hot Baths, which happen by the situation and nature of the Sun, there has
not been sufficient inquiry.

All boiling liquors in their own nature are cold, for there is no liquor to be
touched, which is so naturally, which remains always hot; heat therefore is
given to it for a time, as an acquired nature or quality; so that the things
themselves, which are in their operations most hot, as the spirit of Wine, some
chemical Oiles, and the Oil of Vitriol, and of Sulphur, and the ike, which at
the first touching are cold, but soon after they burn.

There is a doubt whether the warmth of wool, of skins, and of feathers, and
the like, proceed not from some small inherent heat, as it rises from animals,
or whether it proceeds not from a fatness and Oyliness, which is agreeable to
warmth, or whether it comes not from the inclusion and fraction of the Air.

There is nothing Tangible, or yielding spirit, but is apt to take fire: yet
many things differ in this, that some receive heat sooner, as Air, Oil, and
water; ohers not so quickly, as Stone, and Metals.

There can be no sparks struck out of Stone, or Steel, or out of any other hard
substance, unless some minute parts of the substance of the Stone or Metal be
also struck out.

There is no Tangible Body to be found, but becomes warm by rubbing; therefore
the Ancients did fancy, that the heavenly Globes had no other warmth or virtue
to cause heat, but that which was derived to them from the (...) of the air,
when they were rolled about in their swift and surious course.

Some Herbs and Vegetables, when they are green and moist, seem to have in them
some secret heat; but that heat is so small, that it is not to be perceived by
feeling when they are single, but when they are heaped together, and shut up,
that their spirits cannot escape out into the air, but encourge one another,
then the heat appears, and sometimes a flame in convenient matter.

New lime becomes hot when it is sprinkled with water, either because of the
union of heat, which before was dispersed. or by the irritation and
exasperation of the spirits of water and of fire; for there is a kind of
conflict and antiperistasis. How the heat is caused will easily appear, if
instead of Water, Oil be cast into it, for Oil, as well as Water, Unites the
Spirits shut up, but it will not Irritate or anger them.

All dung of Animals, when it is old, has the power of heating, as we may see
in the fatting of ground.

Aromatic substances, and Herbs sharp at the taste, are much hotter when they
are taken inwardly; we may try upon what other substances they discover any hot
virtue. The Seamen tell us, that when heaps and lumps of Spices or Aromatic
substances, are long shut up closs, and then opened, there is some danger for
such as stir them, or take them out first; for the fumes that arise from them
are apt to inflame the spirits, and to give fevers. Likewise an Experiment may
be tried, whether their dust will not be able to dry Bacon, and other flesh
hung over it, as over the smoke of a fire.

There is an accrimony or penetration in cold things, as Vinegar, and Oil, of
(...), as well as in hot, as in the Oil of wild Marjoram, and the like;
therefore they cause a like pain in animals, and in inanimate substances they
dissolve, and confirm the parts. In animals there is no pain but is accompanied
with a certain sense of heat.

Cold and hot have many effects common to them both, tho produced in a
different manner; for snow seems to burn the hands of children, and cold
preserves flesh from putrefaction, as well as fire, and heat draws together
some substances to a lesser bulk as well as cold.

A Table of degrees, or of such things as are comparatively hot.
WE must first speak of those things, which seem not to the feeling to be hot,
and yet are so potentially afterward: we shall descend to mention such things
as are actually, or at the feeling hot; and to examine their strength and
degrees of heat.

1. Amongst the solid and Tangible bodies, there is none found, which is hot
naturally or Originally, neither Stone, nor Metal, nor Sulphur, nor any
Mineral, nor Wood, nor Water, nor the Carcass of any anima; but in baths there
is hot water by accident, either by subterraneous flames, as fire; such as is
in Etna, and many other mountains, or by the conflict of bodies, as heat is
produced in the dissolution of Iron and Pewter. Therefore our feeling cannot be
sensible of any degree of heat in inanimate substances, but they differ in
their degrees of cold, for Wood is not so cold as Metals. 2. But touching
things that have heat potentially in them, and that are ready to kindle, there
are many inanimate substances of that nature, as Sulphur, Naptha, Saltpeter,
etc. 3. Those things which before were inflamed, as the Horse dung, by an
animal heat, or lime, ashes, and soot; by the fire they yet retain certain
relics of their former heat. Therefore there are certain distillations, and
separations of bodies, effected by the heat of Horse dung; and the heat is
raised in lime by Water, as we have already said. 4. Amongst the Vegetables
there is no plant, nor part of a plant as the droppings, or sap, which seems to
our feeling to be hot. 5. There is no part of dead animals nor any thing
separated from them, which appears hot, nor the Horse dung it self, unless it
be shut up, and buried close. But nevertheless all dung seems to have heat
potentially in it, as may appear by the improvement of the ground. Likewise the
Corpses of dead animals have the same secret heat potentially; therefore in
Churchyards, where they are daily buried, the ground has by that means
acquired a secret heat, which soon consumes a Carcass newly buried, and sooner
than other earth. 6. Whatsoever fatness the ground, as all sorts of dung,
Chalk, Seasand, Salt, and the like have a secret disposition and tendency to
heat. 7. All Putrefaction has some beginnings of a little heat, though not to
that degree as to be perceived by feeling 8. The first degree of heat of those
things, which are to be felt. To be hot by feeling is the heat of animals, that
have a great Latitude of degrees; for the lowest degree, as in insects, is not
to be perceived by touching. The highest degree scarce attains to the degree of
heat of the sun beams in the hottest Regions and Times: Nevertheless it is
reported of Constantine and of several others, that they were naturally so hot,
and their constitution so dry, that in several violent fevers their bodies did
burn so much, that when any did but touch them with the hand it would seem to
burn a while after. 9. All animals do increase their heat by motions and
exercise, by Wine, good Cheer, and Venery, and in burning Fevers, and pain.
10. All animals in the intervals of Fevers are ceased with Cold and shivering
at first, but a little after they burn the more. 11. We may further inquire and
compare the heat of several animals, as of Fishes, four Footed Beasts,
Serpents, Birds, and according to their several species, as in a Lion, in a
Kite, or a Man; for, according to the common opinion, Fishes are inwardly less
hot, Birds most, especially, Pigeons, Hawks, and Austriches. 12. Let us inquire
further of the heat compared in the same animal with the several parts and
members, for Milk, Blood, Seed, Eyes, are of a moderate degree of warmth, and
less hot then the exterior flesh of animals, when it moves and is stirred
about, but what degree of heat is in the brain, stomach, heart, and other
parts, was never yet found out. 13. All animals, during the Winter and in Cold
storms, are outwardly cold, but inwardly they are thought to be hotter than in
summer. 14. The Celestial heat, in the hottest Regions, times of the Year, and
Day, is not so hot as burning Wood, Straw, or Linen, neither does it burn but
through a glass. 15. The Astrologers inform us, that some Stars are hotter th
another, Amongst the Planets, next to Sol, Mars is the hotest, afterward
Jupiter, then Venus, but Luna is thought to be Cold, and Saturn colder: Amongst
the fixed Stars Sirius is the hottest, then cor Leonis or Regulus, afterward
the Dog Star, etc. 16. The Sun warms most when he is nearest to our Zenith,
over our Heads; the same we may think of the other Planets, according to their
degree of heat, for example, Jupiter is hotter when he is under Cancer or Leo,
than when he is under Capricornius or Aquarius. 17. The Celestial heat is
increased three several ways, Namely, when the Globe is over our heads, when it
draw near by proplnquity, and by a conjunction or association of several Stars.
18. There are several degrees of heat in flames, and fires in strength and
weakness. 19. I Judge that the flame, that bursts forth and proceeds from
certain imperfect metals, is very strong and fierce. 20. But the flame of
thunder seems to be fiercer than all other flames, for sometimes it has
dissolved Iron it self into drops, which all other flames cannot do. 21. In
things set a fire there is also a different degree of heat, we esteem the
weakest to be burned Linen, or Tinder, touch Wood or Match; after them the
weakest fire is that of a burnt coal, and laths set a fire: But the hottest we
think to be Metal inflamed, as Iron and Copper, etc. 22. Motion increases
heat, as we may perceive by blowing with bellows: for some of the harder sort
of Metals are not to be dissolved, or liquefied by a dead fire, unless it be
Stirred up by blowing. 23. We Judge that the great fires that happen, when the
Wind blows hard, do struggle and strive more against the wind than they do
yield to it, for the flame in such a case flies back with a greater fierceness
when the Wind yields than when it drives it.
By the common fire, especially by the subterraneous fires, which are the
remotest and shut up clossest from the rays of the Sun, you may expel the
Caelestial Nature from the form of hot.

By the heating of bodies of all sorts, I mean of Minerals, of Vegetables, and
of the exterior parts of Animals, of Water, of Oil, etc. In drawing them
nearer to the fire or any hot body you may expel all variety, and subtle
texture of bodies. By Iron or other fiery Metals, which may heat other bodies
without minishing ought of the weight or substance, expel the mixture of the
substance of another hot thing.

Here follows several other directions and precepts most useful, if well
understood; but because I am limited I proceed to the other helps of natures
interpretation recommended by the worthy Author. First, He places prerogatives
of instances. Secondly, Helps of induction. Thirdly, Arectification of
induction, etc. Amongst the prerogatives of instances the solitary instances
are first. They are such as discover the nature, which is inquired after in
such subjects, which have nothing common with other subjects, except that
Nature. And again, such as discover not the nature inquired for in such
subjects, which are like in all things with other subjects, unless it be in the
Nature it self, for example, if the Nature of Color, is inquired into, the
solitary instances are Gems of Crystal, which yield not not only a color in
themselves, but cast it upon a Wall.

They have nothing common with the fired colors in flowers, colored Gems,
Metals, Wood, etc. unless it be the Color; from whence it may easily appear,
that color is nothing else but a Modification of the Image of light cast into,
and received in the first kind, by diverse degrees of lightning upon the body;
in the Second, by the textures and various schesmatisms of the body.

The Second are the instances called Migrantes, they are such in which the
nature inquired for passes to the generation, when before it was not, or
contrariwise passes to corruption, when it was before these instances are
useful for a right understanding of the nature of things, and to direct us to
practice; for example, suppose the nature of whiteness be inquired into, the
instance putting to generation is whole glass, and glass beaten to with powder,
likewise simple water, and water stirred about into froth, for whole glass and
water are transparent, not white, but glass beaten and water turned into froth,
are not transparant, but white; therefore we must inquire what happens from
that change or passage to glass or water; for it is evident that the form of
whiteness is conveyed in by the contusion of the glass, and the stirring of
the water, and there seems to be nothing added besides the communition of the
parts of glass and water, and the mixture of the air.

By these instances we may understand such as pass, not only to generation and
privation, but such as proceed to Majoration and Minoration; for they tend also
to discover to us the true forms of things.

The Third assistances are named offensive, they are such as discover the
nature inquired, for nakedly and in it self also, in its rise, and highest
degree of power, free from all impediments; for as every body receives the
forms of many natures conjoined, so as that in the concrete one weakness
depresseth, breaks, and binds another, by that means every form is obscured:
Now there are some subjects to be found in which the nature sought for is above
the rest in its full vigor, either by the absence of the impediment, or by the
predominancy of its virtue. These Instances do chiefly discover the nature of
forms. For example, if you inquire for the nature of weight take quicksilver,
which is the heaviest of all other things beside Gold, which is not much
heavier: But the instance of quicksilver is more proper to discover the nature
of weight, than Gold; because Gold is solid and close, but quicksilver is
liquid and full of spirits; nevertheless it is heavier than Diamonds, and the
most solid things, from whence we may understand the form of weight, which
consists in the abundance of the matter, not in the compactness and closeness
of the thing.

The Fourth instances are named clandestine. They show the nature inquired for
in its lowest power, and as it were in the Cradle and beginning, rising and hid
under a contrary nature that domineers over it. These instances are of great
consequence to find out the forms of things, for example, if we inquire for the
nature of solid; the clandestine instances are such as discover a weak, and
lowest degree of consistency, a solidity in a fluide substance, as in a buble
of water, which is as a thin skin of solidity determined and made of a watery
body. By this example, and by snow, froth, and melted Metals, we may understand
that liquid and solid, are but ordinary notions, agreeable to the sense, for in
truth there is in every body a liquidity which is weaker and more infirm in
bodies homogeneous, as water, but stronger in heterogenious, therefore the
conjunction to an heterogeneous body unites and joins together, but the
insinuation of the homogeneous dissolves and loosens.

The fifth sort of Instances are named Constitutive. They are such as
constitute a species of the nature inquired into, as a lesser form, for as the
lawful forms which are convertible with the natures sought for, are hid in
secret, and are not easily to be found, the thing it self and the weakness of
our intellect requires that the particular forms be not neglected, but be
diligently inquired into, for whatsoever unites nature, although in an
imperfect manner, it shows a way to find out forms.

For example, if any desires to understand nature of memory, or that which
excites or helps memory, the constitutive instances are order and distribution,
which evidently help our memory, also places in an artificial memory, etc. So
that there are six lesser forms of those things which help memory; namely;
limitation, a reducement of intellectual matters, to a sensibility an
impression into a strong affection, an impression into a pure and disingaged
mind, a multitude of helps and a former expectation.

The Sixth are consormable instances or proportioned, for they show
similitudes, agreements, and conjugations of things, not in the lesser forms,
as the constitutive instances do, but in a concrete body. They show and
discover a certain agreement between bodies, although they don't much (...) to
find out (...), nevertheless they are very beneficial to reveal the Fabric of
several parts of the universe, and in its members they make a kind of
dissection, and therefore they lead us, as it were, by the hand to high and
noble axioms.

For example, these are conformable Instances, a looking glass and an eye, the
make of the ear, and the places where the Echo sounds, but of which
conformity, besides the observation of resemblance, which is very useful for
many things, it is easy to gather and form this Axiom, viz. that the organ for
the senses, and the bodies, that send back the sounds to the sense, are much
alike. Again, the understanding being from hence informed, may easily rise to
another Axiom higher and more noble; namely, that there is no (...) between the
Consents, or Sympathies, of Sensible Bodies, and such as are inanimate without
sense, unless it be that in the former, there is an animal spirit in the body,
fitted to receive and entertain it, but in the latter there is none. Therefore
as many consents as there are in inanimate bodies, so many senses there might
be in animals, if there were as many holes or perforations in the animate body,
for the animal spirit to move and fly to the member rightly disposed, as a
right organ, etc. Another conformable instance is the root of a plant, and the
branches. Every vegetable swells and pushes out its parts round about as well
downwards as upwards neither is there any Difference between the roots and
branches, but only that the root is shut up in the Earth and the branches,
spread in the air and the Sun, for if any one will but take a tender branch
that grows, and turn the top toward the ground, though it touches not the
earth, it will push forth a Root and not a Branch. And on the contrary, if the
earth be put upon a plant, and be pressed with a stone or other hard substance
that might hinder the plant from spreading up, it will bring forth branches in
the ground and underneath.

Other conformable instances are the Gum of Trees, and the most part of the
gems of Rocks, for either of them are but the exudations and sweatings, the
first out of the sap of trees, the Second out of Rocks, from hence proceeds the
clearness and splendour of both. Namely from the thin and subtle percolation
from hence it is also that the hairs of animals are not so beautiful and of
such a lively color as the plumes of birds, for their sweat is not so fine
when it issues out of their skin as when it comes out of a Feathers.

Other conformable instances are the Fins of Fishes, and the Feet of four
Footed Beasts, or the Feet and Wings of Birds unto which Aristotle adds four
Circles in the motion of Serpents. Therefore in this great Fabric of the World
the motion of living creatures seems to be performed by four Arters or flexions.

Also in terrestrial animals the teeth, and in birds, their bills are alike,
from whence it is evident that in all perfect animals there is a certain hard
substance that draws to the mouth.

The Seventh are irregular instances, such as discover bodies in their whole,
which are extravagant and broken off in Nature, and do not agree with other
things of the same gender, but are only like to themselves, therefore styled
Monodicae. They are useful to raise and unite nature, to find out the genders
and common natures, to limit them by their true differences. Neither are we to
desist from an inquisition until the properties and qualities, which are found
in such things as are thought to be miracles in nature, may be reduced, and
comprehended under some form or certain Law, that all irregularity and
singularity might be found to depend upon some common form.

Such instances are the Sun and Moon amongst the Stars, the Loadstone among the
Stones, quicksilver amongst metals, the Elephant, amongst the four Footed
Beasts, etc. The eighth sort of instances are named Diviantes, because they are
Natures errors, and Monsters, when Nature declines and goes aside from its
ordinary course. The use of these is to rectify the understanding, to reveal
the common Forms; neither in these ought we to desist from the inquisition
until we have found out the cause of the deviation. But this cause does not
rise properly to any Form, but only to the hidden proceeding to a Form, for he
that knows the ways of Nature, he shall with more ease observe its deviations.
And again, he that understands its Deviations can better discover its ordinary
ways and methods.

The Ninth sort of instances are Named Limitanea, such as discover the species
of bodies, which seem to be composed of two species, or the Rudiments between
one species and another: such are Flies between rottenness and a plant, certain
Comets between stars and fiery meteors, Flying, Fishes, between Birds, and
Fishes, etc.

The Tenth are instances of Power, which are the noblest, and the most perfect,
as the most excellent in every art; for as this is our business chiefly, that
Nature should be obedient and yield to the benefits of men; it is fitting, that
the works, which are in the power of men, as so many provinces, be overcome and
subdued, should be taken notice of, and reckoned specially such as are most
plain and perfect, because from them there is an easier and a nearer way to new
inventions, never found out before.

The Eleventh instance are styled Comitatus and Hostiles. They are such as
discover a concrete body such in which the nature inquired after, does always
follow it as an individual companion, and on the contrary, in which the Nature
required does always fly from it, and is excluded out of its company as an
enemy: for out of such instances propositions may be formed, which may be
certain, universal, affirmative, and negative, in which the subject shall be
such a body in concrete, and the predicate the nature it self that is sought,
for example if you seek for hot the Iustantia comitatus is the flame, etc.

The Twelth are subjunctive, etc.

The Thirteenth are instances of Union which confound and join together
Natures, which are esteemed to be heterogeneous, and for such are noted and
confirmed by the received divisions.

For example, if the nature required is hot. That division seems to be good and
authentic, that there are three kinds of heat; the Celestial, the animal, and
that of the fire. These heats especially one of them being compared with the
other two, are, in essence and species, or by a specific nature, differing and
altogether heterogeneous; for the heat of the Celestial Globes, and the
animate heat, encourage and help generation; but the heat of the fire corrupts
and destroys. It is therefore an instance of Union. This experiment, is common
enough when the branch of a vine is brought into the house, where there is a
continual fire, by which the Grapes will ripen a month sooner than those that
are in the air: so that fruits may be brought to Maturity when they hang upon
the tree by the fire, whereas, this seems to be a work proper only to the Sun.
Therefore the understanding is persuaded from hence to inquire, what are the
differences which are really between the heat of the Sun and that of the fire;
from whence it happens that their operations are so unlike, and they
nevertheless partake of the same common nature. The differences are found to be
four. First, that the heat of the Sun in respect of the heat of the fire is a
degree much milder and more favorable. Secondly, That it is conveyed, to us
through the air, which of it self is humide. Thirdly, and chiefly that it is
very unequal, sometimes drawing near and increasing in strength, anon departing
and diminishing, which very much contributes to the generation of bodies.
Fourthly, that the Sun works upon a body in a long space of time; but the
working of the fire, through men's impatiency, performs the business in a
shorter time. If any will be careful to attemper and reduce the heat of the
fire to a more moderate and milder degree; which may be done several ways, if
he will besprinkle it, and cause it to send forth something of humidity;
chiefly if he imitates the Suns inequality. Lastly, if he stays a little, by
this means, he shall imitate or equal, or in some things cause the fires heat
to be better than the Suns.

The Fourteenth sort of instances are the Judicial, which is when an
inquisition is made, and the understanding is placed in an Equilibrium, in an
uncertainty where to assign the cause of the Nature inquired for.

For example, suppose any man seeks the cause of the flux and reflux of the sea
twice a (...). This motion must needs proceeds from the progress and regress of
the waters, in the manner of water troubled up and down in a basin, which when
it touches the one side of the basin, it leaves the other. Or it must proceed
from the rising and falling of the waters in the bottom, as boiling water: now
there is a doubt unto which of these causes the ebbing and flowing, or flux and
reflux of the sea is to be assigned; which if the first of these be asserted,
then it will follow, that when the flux is on this side, the (...) will be at
the sametime on the other. But Acosco with some others have found after a
diligent inquiry, that upon the Coast of Florida, and upon the Coast of Spain,
and Africa, the ebbing and flowing of the Sea happens at the same moment of
time. This question is further examined in the Original.

The Fifteenth sort of instances are of divorce, because they discover the
separations of those (...) which often meet.

The Sixteenth are the Instances of the lamp, or of the first information,
which assist the sense, for as all interpretation of nature begins by the
sense, and from the perception of the sense leads by a right and straightway
to inform the understanding, which are the true notions and axioms; it must
needs be, that the more copious and exact the representations of the senses
are, so much the better and the happier all things must succeed.

The Seventeenth sort of Instances are styled of the Gate, because they help
the immediate actions of the senses. Amongst the senses, it is certain that the
sight is the chief, in regard of information; therefore we must seek
assistances to this sight.

The eighteenth are Instances called Citantes, which deduce that which is not
sensible to be sensible.

The Nineteenth are Named Instances of supplement, because they supply the
understanding with a right information when the senses fail, therefore we must
Fly to them, when we have no proper instances. This is done in a two fold
manner, either by Gradation, or by Analogy. For example, the Medium is not to
be found which stop the Lodestone in moving the Iron, neither gold, if we put
it between, nor silver, nor stone, nor glass, nor wood, etc. Nevertheless after
an exact trial, there may be a certain medium sound, which might dull its
virtue more than any thing else comparatively, and in some degree, as that the
loadstone should not be able to drawIron to it self through gold of such a
thickness, etc.

The Twentieth sort are styled Instances persecantes, because they cut nature
asunder, etc.

The One and Twenty sort are instances of the Rod, or of non ultra.

The Two and Twentieth are called Instances Curriculi. They measure nature by
the moments of time, as the instances of the Rod measure it by the degrees of
space. For all motion and natural action is performed in a time, some quicker,
some softer, etc:

The Three and Twentieth sort are instances Quanti, etc.

The Four and Twentieth sort are instances of Predominancy,

The 25. sort are called Innuentes, because they discover and design the
benefits of men.

The Six and Twentieth sort are named Instantiae Polychrestas.

The Seven and Twentieth are the Magic instances. They are such in which the
matter or the officient is but little and slender, if compared with the
greatness of the work, or of the effect that follows, in so much that though
they are common, they are looked upon as miracles, etc.

I am forced to out short, and abbreviate many excellent directions, and to
pass over several weighty observations, because I am limited. However this
abbreviation may give the Reader (...) of the whole.

FINIS.

