A SMALL TREATISE Writ by one of the True Christian FAITH; WHO Believes in GOD
and in his Son JESUS CHRIST.

Acts 24.14. After the way which Men call Heresy, so worship I the God of my
Fathers, Believing all things which are writin the Law and the Prophets. --

Psalm 78.1. What I have heard and known, and our Fathers have declared we will
not hide from our Children, but to the Generation to come we will show forth
the Praise of the Lord; his Power also, and his wonderful Works that he has
done, and declare it to our Children, that they may set their hope in God; and
forget not the Works of God, but keep his Commandments.

By S. B.

London, Printed in the Year, 1700.

THis small Treatise is given forth by one who has not designedly insinuated
into any Man's favor, nor w^^ingly to offend, but desires to follow Peace with
all Men; having in the sight of the All-seeing God declared what I have seen,
and what I have heard and received by the Word of Life; not boastingly, but in
simplicity of Heart; and whoever sows in that Ground, shall find increase: They
that sow in the Hypocritical ground, to be seen of Men, shall in Harvest reap a
poor and barren Crop; but those that have in sincerity followed the Lord their
God, and have gone on weeping, bearing Precious Seed, shall come again
rejoyceing, bringing their Sheavs with them, with such I have mourned, and with
such I now rejoice, and have not consulted with Flesh and Blood nor earthly
advantage, but with many of my dear Friends have wrestled with the good Angel
until the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in our Hearts, and has not let him
go until he has blessed us; and of that Stone have made a Pillar, and he was
there though we knew it not, and have not received these things by Tradition,
though born of good Parents (though of another persuasion) yet could not my
Heart be satisfied but thirsted, to know the True and Living God, who has
fully satisfied me, of whom I asked the true Bread, and he has not deceived
me, nor given me a Serpent instead of a Fish, but like a good Father has given
me that Bread which daily nourishes my Soul; Blessed are all those that have a
part in the first Resurrection, on such the second Death shall have no power.

It is not to the Rich nor the full, but to those that are asking the way to
Sion with their Faces thitherward, to whom I thus write.
THE Lord having given to Man a Measure of his Spirit to profit withal, has by
his Son the Light of the World knocked at the Door of our Hearts, to whom we
opened, and let him in, and he is become our Salvation; and all those that
fight against this his Blessed Appearance, and will not that he should rule
over them, he will come in an hour that they look not for him, and give them
their portion with Hypocrites and Unbelievers.

Having beheld many good Men casting their gift into the Treasury, I of my
little cast in my Mite, which I would not through negligence omit any thing
wherein I might serve the Lord, his Truth and People; believing it my Duty,
having found that satisfaction and rest to my traveling Soul, that I could not
find by all my undertakings, though I sought them sincerely in visible things;
until I turned into the Word of God in the Heart, and by the light thereof saw
to sweep my own House, wherein I found the lost Piece, Luke 15.9. the Pearl of
great Price, the little Leaven hid in three measures of Meal, and the Parable
therein truly opened, and thereby have learned to know the true God, and Jesus
Christ whom he has sent; which to know is Life Eternal, which leads into the
Kingdom of Rest and Peace; and am so well satisfied with the truth thereof,
that I may say with Paul, if an Angel from Heaven should Preach any other
Doctrine, I could not receive it: Though I have met with many Trials and
Temptations in the way, yet none so great as to cause me to question the truth
thereof, when I have beheld many to fall on the Right Hand, and on the left,
and many go back again, I was preserved, and firmly fixed, and grounded on the
Rock, which Rock is Christ, and he is my King, Priest, and Pro^^^ and has led
me through dispensations, and administrations, and has brought me to praise
his Name in the Land of the Living, and in this we rejoice, notwithstanding the
fury of Men, well knowing from what Spirit it comes, even the same that called
the Son of God a Devil, a Blasphemer, a Friend to Publicans, and Sinners, a
breaker of the Law, and his Apostles, turners of the World upside down, Acts
17.6. and as he was then, so are we, accounted by some as deceivers, yet true,
though called Heretics, Worshipping the God of our Fathers, Believing the Law
and the Prophets, and in Jesus Christ the Son of God, and in the Anointing,
which he promised to send, and he has sent, and we have received it, and the
sufficiency whereof we have experienced, and is become our Teacher sufficient
to guide into all Truth: This is the Day he Promised, which many desired to
see, but saw it not; and many might have seen, but have rejected the Lord of
Life; and like the Dog returned to the Vomit, and as the Sow once washed, to
the wallowing in the Mire; and think to cover themselves by laying open what
they judge the weakness, or infirmities of others, and make Men offenders for
words, and make their own perverse Constructions thereof, and not what they
intended that writ or spoke them; but if some were so weak as they have
Represented them, sh^^ not every one Answer for himself? But the Innocent, and
many who were not then Born, must be Charged therewith. O ye workers of
Iniquity, your strength in the Arm of Flesh shall not secure you; for he
against whom you are risen is too mighty for you, to whom all must bow; though
he is great in Mercy, yet just in Judgment, and will judge the Secrets of all
Hearts, by Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior, who with his Spiritual Eyes sees
through all carnal imaginations of Men's Traditions and Imitations, and will get
himself a Name above all, Lord of Lords, who in the time of Ignorance winked at
these things; but now he looks that all should come to the knowledge of his
Son, who gives unto his Children to know the God of Abraham and his Seed; that
he will bring them to the Land of Promise; who raised up his Servant Moses to
go before Israel, and delivered them (out of the Hand of Pharaoh and his
Taskmasters) who passed through the Sea, and came into the Wilderness, and
there wandered, and murmured, as some have done in our day, and have gone round
until they came near the Place where they came in, some went forward toward the
good Land, and brought an evil Report thereof, but praised be God who has
raised up a Spirit of Courage, as was in Josuah and Caleb, and they press
forwards toward the good Land, and have entered the Borders thereof, and found
it as God Promised, a Land following with all good things; of which, whoever
have tasted, it is beyond all carnal apprehensions or Imaginations, which if
the Heart be filed therewith, it must be emptied. All that would know the True
God, in the Heavenly still Voice, and the Prophet, of which Moses said the Lord
your God shall raise up, him shall you hear, and him we do hear, and have
Learned subjection to his Will thereby, as well knowing, all things work
together for good: And have this to say to all true Christian Friends, be of
good Courage, fear not the Reproach of Men, there is nothing come to pass but
what was for a Trial for us, and what I said once I may say again, it is a
Cloud God suffers to rise, and the Wind shall blow away the Chaff, but he
will gather the Wheat thereby nearer together; this I know to be a certain
truth, by which my Heart has been strengthened, and so I have by this
Prophetical Dream, which I had many years ago, when I had no thought or
suspicion of what is since come to pass. Which was as follows,

I with some of my Christian Friends, was fallen into their Hands who had been
of the same Profession, but they were changed into so cruel a Nature, as I
thought I never saw the like; for, for my Friends I was grieved more than for
my self, but they were taken out of my sight, and I (...)


