THE EPITOME of the whole Art of Husbandry

London Printed for Ben: Billingsley and Obadiah Blagraue 1669



THE EPITOME OF THE Art of Husbandry.

Comprising all necessary Directions for the Improvement of it. Viz.

Plowing, Sowing, Grafting, Gardning, Ordering of Flowers, Herbs; Directions
for the Use of the Angle; Ordering of Bees: Together with the Gentleman's
Heroic Exercise, discoursing of Horses, their Nature, and Use, with their
Diseases and Remedies: Of Oxen, Cows, Calves, Sheep, Hogs, with the manner of
ordering them, their Diseases and Remedies.

Of the Nature of Marle, the best way of Planting Clover-grass, Hops, Saffron,
Liquorish, Hemp, etc.

To which is annexed by way of Appendix, a new Method of Planting Fruit Trees,
and Improving of an Orchard.

By J. B. Gent.

London, Printed for Ben. Billingsley and Obadiah Blagrave at the Entrance into
Gresham College over against the Church in Broad-street, at the Sign of the
Printing press, formerly in Cornhil. 1669.

To my ever Honored Uncle George Miller Esquire of Swallowfield, in the County of
Wil^s.
Sir,
THe Author of this Treatise unwilling to affix his name, gave me the liberty
to dedicate the same to whom I would: So I knew none that I was more obliged
unto then your self, or did better understand this Treatise, in regard you are
Landlord, and an Improver of Lands, and so capable of putting in Practice some
new Discoveries offered to the Public. If you have any Leisure to peruse the
same, I hope you may with your Pen leave such a Platform for your hopeful Heir,
your great Grandchild, Sir Henry Winchcomb my Kinsman; That if God shall bless
him with health, he may follow your Directions as may most improve his Estate;
that when God shall be pleased to take you out of this withering Durance, he
may survive you, and be the main Prop and Luster in your Family, which shall
ever be the Prayer of,

Sir, Your dutiful Nephew, and humble Servant, O. B.

THE TABLE TO THE EPITOME OF THE Art of Husbandry.
OF the diverse manner of Ploughs. Page. 1 To know the Names of all the Parts
of the Plough. 3 Of the tempering of the Ploughs. 5 Necessary things that
belong to a Plough, Cart, or Wain. 7 Whether is better a Plough of Horses, or a
Plow of Oxen. 9 Of Horses and Mares to draw. 10 To carry Wood and other
necessaries. 13 To carry out Dung or Muck, and spread it. ibid. The first
Stirring. 15 The second Stirring. ibid. To harrow all manner of Corn. 16 To
fallow. 18 How to plough all times of the year. 20 How to plough for Pease and
Beans. 21 How all manner of Corn should be sown, and how much most commonly on
an Acre. 22 How to sow Wheat and Rye. 23 To sow Barley. 25 To sow Oats. 27 How
to sever Pease, Beans, and Fitches. 28 How all manner of Corn should be
covered. ibid. To load Corn, and mow it. 29 How to know diverse manner of
Weeds. 30 How to weed Corn. 32 How to mow and shear Barley and Oats. 33 To reap
or mow Pease or Beans. 34 How Rye should be sown. ibid. How to shear Wheat. 35
H^w to sow both Pease and Beans. 36 To make a Ditch. 38 To get Sets, and set
them. ibid. To make a Hedge. 40 To plash or plethe a Hedge. ibid. To mend a
Highway. 42 How Forks and Rakes should be made. 44 H^w to mow Grass. 45 To
redd and make Hay. 46 To remove and set Trees. 47 How to set Trees without
Roots, and yet for them to grow. 48 Necessary things belonging to Grafting. 49
How to Graft. 50 What should be first Grafted. 51 How to graft betwixt the Bark
and the Tree. 52 To nourish all manner of Stone-fruits and Nuts. 53 To fell
Timber. 54 To fell Wood for the House, or to sell. 55 To keep Spring Wood. 56
How to shred, lop, and crop Trees. 57 Particular Secrets and choice Rules for
setting, watering, and ordering of several choice Plants, Roots, delectable
Flowers, and Herbs for Gardens; the ordering of the Summer-Garden for pleasure
and delight, as also for the more profitable increase of the Kitchen-Garden:
Together with Directions how to sow and order for the Season whatsoever
belongs to the Summer or Kitchen-Gardens; for Plants, Herbs, Roots, etc. As
also for the aptest time to gather, dry, and preserve them. 59 Of Bees. 79 How
to keep Beasts and other Cattle. 81 To buy fat Cattle. 83 To buy lean Cattle.
84 To rear Calves. 85 To geld Calves. 86 Of which is the greatest loss, a Lamb,
a Calf, or a Foal. 87 What Cattle should go together in one Pasture. 88 Of
Swine. 90 Of the Properties of Horses. 91 Of the diverse Diseases of Cattle, and
the Remedies thereof; and first of the Murrain. 93 Of the Long-saught, with the
Remedy. 94 Of Dewholm, and the hard Remedy thereof. 95 Of the Risen upon, and
the Remedy thereof. ibid. Of the Turn, and the Remedy thereof. 96 Of the
Warry-breed, and the Remedy. 97 Of the Foul, and the Remedy. 98 Of the Gout
without Remedy. ibid. To help a Beast that pisseth blood. 99 A Remedy for a
Blain in the Tongue. ibid. To help a Beast that is goared. 100 A Remedy for the
Pantasie in a Beast. ibid. To kill Lice and Ticks in Cattle. ibid. A sovereign
Remedy for the Plague in Cattle. ibid. An approved Remedy for the Tetter in
Cattle. 101 An excellent Cure for an Ox or Cow that has a Fever. 102 An
excellent Remedy for the Lungs of Cattle infected. 103 To help an Ox or any
other Beasts that have lost their Quide. 104 A Remedy that fails not to cure a
Beast that cannot piss. ibid. To cure a Cow of the Whethered. ibid. A Remedy
for the faintness of a laboring Ox. 105 To recover the Leanness of a Cow.
ibid. Remedies against the Worms in Cattle. ibid. Against the Milting of an Ox,
or any other Beast. 106 An excellent Remedy for the dropping Nostrils and watery
Eyes of Cattle. ibid. To cure the Garget in the Maw. ibid. A Remedy against the
Crying and Fretting of the Guts in Cattle, by some called the Crowling. 107 To
cure Impostumes in Beasts. ibid. To cure a Beast that is goared. ibid. The best
times to be observed to stop Laxes. 108 A sudden and approved Remedy against a
Sprain or Stroke. ibid. To cure Calves that have the Worms in their Bellies.
ibid. An approved Remedy for the Costiveness in Cattle. 109 An excellent Cure
for a Beast that is Hide-bound. ibid. An excellent Cure for the Garget in the
Throat of a Beast. ibid. A certain Remedy against the Worm in a Beasts Tail.
110 An approved Remedy to cure Galls and Scabs in Cattle. ibid. A Remedy for
the Galling of the Neck or Throat with the Yoke. ibid. A Cure for the Itch in
Cattle. 111 A Cure for the flowing of the Gall. ibid. An approved Remedy
against the Colic in Cattle. ibid. An excellent Remedy against the Haw in the
Eye. 112 A Remedy for the Kibes in the Heel. ibid. An excellent Remedy for the
Sickness of the Lungs. 113 Excellent Remedies for the Cough in Cattle. ibid.
For the Navel gall, with the Remedy. 114 Of the Worms, with the Remedy. 115 Of
the Farcy, with the Remedy. 116 Of a Courb, with the Remedy. 118 Of Wind-galls
in Horses, with the Remedy. 119 Of the Pains and Cratches of the Horse, with
the Remedy. ibid. Of the Ring-bone, a Disease in Horses, with the Remedy. 120
Of the Spaven, with the Remedy thereof. 121 Of the wet or blood Spaven, with
the Remedy. 123 For any dangerous Bots or Maw-worms, the Remedy. 124 Of the
Serew or Serow, with the Remedy of it. 125 Of a Malender, with the Remedy.
ibid. Of the Splent, with the Remedy. 126 Of the Glanders, with the Remedy. 127
An excellent Remedy for the Haw in the Eye. 128 Of the Barbes, Barbels, with
the Remedy. ibid. Of the Vives, with the Remedy. ibid. Of the mourning Chine,
with the Remedy. 129 Of the broken Wind, with the Remedy. 130 Of the Gravelling
of the Horse, with the Remedy. 134 Of the Lampas, with the Remedy. ibid. Of the
Accloyed, or cloying the Foot with the prick of a Nail, with the Remedy. 135 Of
the Colts Evil, with the Remedy. ibid. Of the pains in the Head, with the
Remedy. ibid. Of a Horse that stumbleth, which is called the Cords, with the
Remedy. 136 Of the Morefound, with the Remedy. ibid. Of the En^erfere, with the
Remedy. 137 Of the Scelander, with the appointed Remedy. ibid. Of the Scab,
with the Remedies. ibid. A Remedy for cut and bruised Sinews. 138 For a Horse
that cannot piss. ibid. To bring Hair again. 139 For the Stone and Colic in a
Horse, the Remedy. ibid. Of a present Remedy to kill the fire either in burning
or shot. ibid. To ripen ^n Impostume. ibid. For a Wrench in the Fetlocks or any
other Joint, that is suddenly done. ibid. For the dangerous Galling of a Horse,
an excellent Remedy. 140 Of Warts in general, and of the spongy Warts, with the
Remedy. ibid. To help the Surbaiting, or soreness of a Horses Feet. 141 For a
Wrench or Strain in the Pastern. ibid. For a Back-sinew Strain, or any other
Strain. ib. For a frothy Hoof. ibid. Of the Attaint. 142 Of the Mourning of the
Tongue. ibid. A Remedy for a Pinch or a Gall in the Withers. ib. A present
Remedy for the Staggers. ibid. An excellent Remedy for the Strangles. 143 A
Remedy for the Swelling of the Cods. ibid. A Remedy for the Mattering of the
Yard. ibid. An excellent Cure for the Tetter. ibid. A rare Medicine for a sore
Back, be it never so wrung with a Saddle. 144 For the Botch in the Groyns of
the Horse. ibid. A Remedy for the Lax. ibid. A Remedy for the Costiveness or
Belly-bound. ibid. An excellent Remedy for the Yellows. 145 A Remedy for the
Swelling of the Gums. ibid. A Remedy for the Rifts and Corruption in the Palate
of the Mouth. ibid. A Remedy for the heat in the Mouth. 146 A Remedy for the
Cold in the Head. ibid. An excellent Remedy for the Canker in the Mouth. 147 Of
the Lousie. ibid. Of the repairing of a broken Hoof, that it may grow. 148 A
certain Remedy for the Fretting of the Guts. ibid. Of pulling out of Shivers or
Thorns, and of Swelling. ib. Of the Strangullion. 149 Of Blindness. ibid. Of
the Foaling of the Yard, with the Remedy. ibid. Of the Millets, without Remedy.
ibid. An excellent Remedy for the Stringhault or any old strain or Lameness in
the sinewy Joints. 150 A Remedy approved for the Hide-bound, by some improperly
called the Affrayde. ibid. A Remedy for the Hurt of the Tongue with a Bit. 151
A Remedy for the Giggs in the Mouth. ibid. An excellent Receipt to fatten a
Horse. 152 An excellent Remedy against a Horses surfeiting with Provender. 153
Several things that are most excellent to put into a Horses Provender to
preserve him from Diseases. ibid. Of the Catarrh in Hogs, with the Remedy.
ibid. Approved Cures for a Hog bitten by a mad, or by other Dogs. 154 An
approved Remedy for the Staggers or stirring Disease in Hogs. ibid. To make a
Hog to scour. 155 ibid. Of the Lethargy in Hogs, with the Remedy. ibid. A
Remedy for the L^^k in Hogs. ibid. To kill Maggots in Hogs. ibid. An approved
Remedy for the Disease in Hogs, called the Milts. ibid. To cure Hogs that have
eaten of poisonous Herbs. 165 To cure the Impostumes under the Hogs Throats.
ibid. An approved Cure of the Garget in Hogs. ibid. A Remedy, together with a
Bath for a Swine that has the Swine-pocks. 157 A Remedy for lousie Hogs. ibid.
Preservatives against the Meazles, with the most approved Cures of them in
Hogs. ibid. To fatten Sheep. 158 To make the Wool to come again. ibid. Of the
red Water, with the Remedy. ibid. An excellent Remedy for the Cough in Sheep.
159 Of the Cloven Pesil. ibid. A Remedy for the Phlegm. ibid. To kill Maggots.
ibid. A Remedy for the Water in the Belly or Head. 160 For the Worms in the
Guts, a Remedy. ibid. Of the Tin-Worm. ibid. A Remedy for the looseness of the
Teeth. ibid. A Remedy for the flowing of the Gall. ibid. A Remedy for the
Choler in Sheep. 161 A Cure for the Lousie in Sheep. ibid. Of the Wildfire.
ibid. A Remedy for a Sheep that has lost her Quide. ibid. An excellent Cure
for the Staggers in Sheep. ibid. Useful Preservatives when the Pestilence
rages amongst Sheep. 162 A Remedy for the short Breath and Pursie. ibid. To
help the Wethering of a Sheep. 163 A Remedy for the turning Disease in Sheep.
ibid. For the Jaundice. ibid. A Remedy for the Water in the Belly of Sheep.
ibid. A Remedy for the Water-bladder under the Chin. ibid. A Remedy for the
Lung-sick or Pursiness. ibid. To cure the Glanders or Snivel. 164 To cure the
Itch or Scab in Sheep. ibid. An excellent Remedy for the Giddiness in Sheep.
165 Approved Remedies for the Haw in the Eye, and other Distempers of the Eyes.
ibid. Of the stop in the Tea^s. 166 How to set and see over the Sheepfold.
ibid. What time of the year the Rams should be put to the Ews. 168 To make an
Ew to love her Lamb. 169 At what time Lambs should be weaned. 170 To draw
Sheep, and to sever them in diverse parts. 171 To meddle Tar. 172 To make
Broom-salve. ibid. To grease Sheep. 173 To belt Sheep. 174 To wash Sheep. 175
To shear Sheep. ibid. How to draw out and separate the bad Sheep from the good.
176 If a Sheep has the Mathes. ibid. Of the Blindness of Sheep. 177 Of the
Worm in the Sheeps foot, and help thereof. ibid. Of the Blood, and the timely
Remedy of it. 178 Of the Pocks, and the Remedy thereof* ibid. Of the Wood-Evil,
and the Remedy thereof. 179 What are the things that chiefly rot Sheep. ibid.
To know rotten Sheep diverse manner of ways; whereof some never fail. 181 Brief
Experimental Directions for the right Use of the Angle. 182 The Nature, Use,
and Benefit of Marl. 197 The best way of planting Trefoyl and Clover-grass. 198
Of the Plantation of Hops, and how Land is improved thereby. 204 Of the Mystery
of Saffron, and the way of planting of it. 216 Of the Plantation of Liquorish
at large. 220 How good a Commodity Hemp is, with the manner of planting of it.
224 The husbanding of Flax, so as to make it come up as much of the Improvement
as we can. 227 A Discovery of Rape and Goal-seeds Husbandry. 232 Of Woad, or
Wade, the Land best for it, the usage of it, and the advantages thereby. 238
The nature, use, and advantage of Madder. 248 The young Gentleman's Heroic
Exercise, or the Perfection of Horsemanship, drawn from the Nature, Art, and
Practice of Riding. 254 Of Correction. 263 That Teaching is not fit for such
Horses as Nature has not framed fit to be taught. 265 Of the English Bridle,
Saddle, and bringing of the Horse to the Block, the mounting and seat of the
Rider, and of the Execution of the action of teaching of the Art. 266 Of the
Bound, Leap, and Yark. 293 Of the Capriole and Cornetti. 294 A true and brief
way of planting and ordering of all sorts of Orchards, either Apple, Pear,
Plum, or Cherry, according to the Experience of the Author; being never before
Published. 299
THE EPITOME OF THE Art of Husbandry: With the ancient Terms thereof, as they
have been used in several Counties of England: Together with the Chiefest,
Choicest, and most Experimental Observations; as well of former, as also our
Modern more Refined Writers in Rustical Affairs.
Of the diverse manner of Ploughs.
THere are several makings of Ploughs, according to the diverse manner of
Countries; there are Ploughs of Iron of diverse fashions, which is occasioned
from the diversity of Grounds and Soyls: Some are white Clay, some red, some
gravel chilturn, some sand, some barren Earth, some marled, and in many places
Heath-ground; so that one sort of Plough will not serve in all places,
therefore it is necessary to have diverse manner of Ploughs. In Sommerset-shire
about Cicester, the Sharre-beam that in many places is called the Plough-head,
is 4 or 5 foot long, and it is broad and thin. And that is because the Land is
very tough, so as to soak the Plough into the Earth, if the Sharre-beam were
not large, broad, and thin. In Kent they have other manner of Ploughs; some go
with wheels, as they do in diverse other manner of places, and some will turn
the Shell-bred at every Lands end, and plough all one way. In Buckingham-shire
are Ploughs made of another manner, and also other manner of Plough-Irons, the
which generally are good and likely to serve in many places, and especially if
the Plough-beam and Sharre-beam were four inches longer between the Sheath and
Plough-tayl, that the Shell-bred might come more slope; for those Ploughs give
out too suddenly, and therefore they are the worse to draw. In Leichestershire,
Lanca-shire, Yorkshire, Cambridge-shire, Lincolnshire, Norfolk, and many
other Countries, the Ploughs are of diverse makings. But howsoever they are
made, they are well tempered, and go well.

To know the Names of all parts of the Plough.
To inform those young Husbandmen that are ignorant of the several names of
ploughs, I shall express them as follows: The Plough-beam is the longer Tree,
above which is a little bend. The Share-beam is the Tree underneath; whereupon
the Share is set. The plough-sheth is a thin piece of dry wood made of Oak,
that is set fast in a Mortes to the ploughs beam, and also into the Share-beam,
the which is the Kere or chief band of the plough. The plough-tayl is that the
Husbandman holds in his hand, and in the hinder end of the plough-beam is put
a long slit made in the same tail, and not set fast, out that it may rise up
and go down, and it is pinned behind, and the same plough-tayl is set fast in a
Mortes in the hinder end of the Share-beam. The plough-stilt is on the right
side of the plough, whereupon the Rest is set: the Rest is a little piece of
wood pinned fast upon the nether end of the stilt, and to the Share-beam into
the further end. The Shelbred is a broad piece of wood fast pinned to the right
side of the Sheth in the farther end, and to the utter side of the stilt in the
hinder end: And the said Shelbred should come over the said Sheth and Senbred
an inch, and to go past the midst of the Share with a sharp edge to receive and
turn the Earth when the Culter has cut it. There are two long stands in every
plough in the hinder end, set a slope between the plough-tayl and the stilt, to
hold out and keep the plough abroad in the hinder end, the one is longer then
the other. The plough-foot is a little piece of wood which is crooked and set
before in a Mortes in the plough-beam, set fast with Wedges to drive up and
down, and it is a stay to order of what deepness the plough shall go* The
plough-ear is made of three pieces of Iron, nailed fast to the right side of
the plough-beam. The meaner sort have a crooked sort of wood pinned fast to the
plough beam. The Share is a piece of Iron, sharp before, and broad behind, a
foot long, made with a Socket to be set on the further end of the Share beam,
the Culter is a bent piece of Iron set in a Mortes in the midst of the
plough-beam fastened with Wedges on every side, and the back thereof is half an
inch thick, and more then three inches broad, made sharp before to cut the
Earth clean, it must be well steeled, which will cause the easier draught, and
the Irons for to last the longer. The plough-wall is a piece of hard wood, with
a pin put through, set in the plough-beam in an Augure hole.

Of the tempering of the Ploughs.
THe knowledge of the tempering of the Plough is very expedient and necessary
for a Husbandman, that he may plough and turn clean, and make no Rest-balks. A
Rest-balk is where the Plough biteth at the point of the Culter or Share, and
cutteth not the ground clean to the Furrow that was lately ploughed, but
leaves a little Ridge standing between, the which breeds Thistles and other
Weeds. All these Ploughs should have all a like manner of tempering in the
Irons: Howsoever one may temper for one thing in two or three places, as for
deepness; the foot is one, the setting of the Culter is another, and the third
is at the Plough-tayl, where are two Wedges that are called Slote-wedges; the
one is in the Slote above the Beam, and the other is in the said Slote under
the Plough-beam; sometimes the Husbandman will set both above, or both
underneath; but always let him take good heed, and keep one general Rule, That
the hinder end of the Share-beam always touch the Earth, that it may kill the
Worms, or else it goes not truly. The tempering to go broad or narrow, is in
the setting of the Culter, and with the driving of the same Wedges, fore-wedge
and hind-wedge, which should be made of dry wood, and also the setting on of
his share helps well, and is a cunning point of Husbandry, which mendeth and
pareth much ploughing; it must lean much into the Furrow, and the point must
not stand too much up nor down, nor too much into the Land, nor into the
Furrow. Some Ploughs have a Band of Iron triangle-wise, set there as the
Plough-ear should be, that has three nickes on the further side: and if the
Husbandman will have his Plough to go a narrow Furrow, as a side Furrow should
be, then he must set his Foot-team in the nick next to the Plough-beam; and he
will go an ordinary breadth, he sets it in the middle nick that is best for
stirring, and if he would go a broad Furrow he sets it in the uttermost
nick, that is the best for following, the which is a good way to keep the Bread
sound tempered, but it serves not the deepness: and some men have instead of
the Plough-foot a piece of Iron set upright in the further end of the
Plough-beam, they call it a Cock, made with two or three nicks, and and that
serves for deepness. The Ploughs that go with Wheels have all a straight Beam,
and may be tempered in the Iron, as the other are for the breadth; but their
most special temper is at the Bolster, where the P^ough-beam lies, and that
serves for deepness and for breadth. They are good on even Ground that lies
light, but they are far more costly then the other Ploughs. And though these
Ploughs be well tempered for one manner of Ground, that temper will not serve
for another manner of Ground, but it must rest in the discretion of the
Husbandman to know when it goes well.

Necessary things that belong to a Plough, Cart, or Wain.
BEfore the Husbandman begins to plough, he must have his Plough well ordered,
and his Plough-Iron, his Oxen, or Horses, and all the Gere that belongs to
them, that is to say, Bows, Yokes, Lades, Stickings, Wrethyne Teams. And before
he does lade his Corn, he must have a Wain, a Capiock, or pair of Sleths, Wain
rope, a Pitchfork. This Wain is made of diverse pieces, that will require great
reparation, that is to say, the Wheels, which are made of Nathes, Spokes,
Tresses, and Dowles, they must be well fettered with wood or Iron, and if they
are Iron-bound, they are much the better; although they are the dearer at the
first, yet at length the Husbandman shall find them better cheap; for a pair of
Wheels Iron-bound will wear out seven or eight pair of Wheels, and go round and
light after the Oxen or Horses to draw. Howsoever on Moorish Grounds and soft,
the other Wheels are better, because they are broader on the sole, and will not
go so deep. They must have an Axletree clout with eight Wain clouts of Iron,
two Limpins of Iron in the Axletree end, two Axle pins of Iron, or else of
tough hard wood. The body of the Wain of Oak, the Staves, the nether Rathes,
the over Rathes, Cross-somner, the Keys and Py-staves. And if he go with a
Horse or a Mare to plough, then must he have his Hombers, or Collers, Holmes,
whited Traises, Swingleters, and Tog. Also a Cart made of Ash, because it is
light and like stuff to the Wain, and also a Cart-Saddle, Back-bands and
Belly-bands, and a Cart-ladder behind when the Husbandman shall carry any Corn,
or other Provision. In many Countries there are Wains that have Cart-ladders
both behind and before. Also the Husbandman must have an Ax, a Hatchet, a
Hedging-bill, a Pin-auger, a Rest-auger, a Hail, Spade, and a Shovel: many
other things are belonging to Husbandmen which will be very costly, therefore
it will be necessary for him to make his Yokes, Ox-bows, Stoles, and as many
other things as he can of his Plough-gere.

Whether is better a Plough of Horses, or a Plough of Oxen.
IN some places a Horse-plough is better then an Ox-plough, that is to say, in
every place where the Husbandman has several pastures; for the Horses may be
teddered or tied upon their Leys, Balks, or Hades, whereas Oxen may not be
kept, and it is but in few places that they are used to be teddered. And Horses
will go faster then Oxen on even or light Ground, and quicker in Carriages, but
they are far more costly to keep in Winter; for they must have both Hay and
Corn to eat, and Straw for Litter: they must be well shod on all four feet, and
the Gear that they draw with is more costly then that of Oxen, and will last
but for a short time. The Oxen will eat straw and a little Hay, the which is
not half the cost that is required for Horses, neither are they shod. Therefore
where the Husbandman has several pastures to put his Oxen in when they come
from their work, there the Ox-plough is the better. For an Ox must not endure
his work to labor all day, and then to be put to the Commons, or else before
the Herdmen, all night without meat, and to go to his labor in the morning:
But if he be put in good pasture all night, he will labor lustily all the day.
Moreover Oxen will plough in tough Clay and hilly Ground where Horses will
stand still. If any Disease come to the Horse, or the Horse grows old, bruised
or blind, then he will be little worth; and if any Disease come to an Ox, that
he grows old, bruised, or blind, for a small matter he may be fatted, and then
he is man's meat, and as good or better then ever he was; whereas when the Horse
dies, he is but Carrion.

Of Horses and Mares to draw.
A Husbandman cannot be without Horses or Mares, or both, and that more
especially if he go with a Horse plough, he must have both his Horses to draw,
and his Mares to bring Colts to uphold his stock; the Mares must not bear
Sacks, or be ridden upon, or go Journeys when they are with Fool, and
especially when they have gone with Fool twenty or twenty three weeks, for then
then there is great danger; for if she be then ridden upon and set up hot, she
will cast her Fool, which will prove a great loss to him that ownes her* For
she will labor and bear when she has foaled, and draw when she is with Foal
as well as the Horse. It is convenient for the Husbandman to know when his Mare
should be horsed. It is the common saying, that she will take Horse within nine
or ten days next after she has foaled, but I am not altogether of that
opinion; and if she so do, she will not hold thereto, for that Horse does force
and drive her to it: but twenty days after is time enough to bring her to a
Horse, for otherwise she will not hold to it, except she be very eager of
horsing: and that may be known by her shap, for that will twirl about and close
again many times in an hour. And then bring her to a Horse, and let her be with
him a day or a night, and that is sufficient; for it is better to keep the
Horse from the Mares, then to go with them, for diverse causes, and that more
especially for that the Horse shall be more lusty, and more Foals may be got.
But that Husbandman that has many Mares will have too little leisure to attend
them, but let them go together, and happy be lucky. Some men do hold an
opinion, that put a Horse to a Mare in the beginning of the Moon, after it be
prime, that he shall get a Horse-foal; others hold the contrary, that if a
Horse be put to a Mare in the old of the Moon, he should get Horse-foals. I
hold that it makes no matter whether, for I have proved it, that a Mare is
most able to bear the Horse from May Day to St. Bartholomews day; for I have
had Horses that have gone into my Mares both day and night, and at the foaling
time. I have had upon one day a Horse-foal, and on the next day and second a
Mare-foal, and on the third and fourth day next after a Horse-foal, and on the
next day or second a Mare-foal, and on the third or fourth day next after a
Horse again, and so every week of both sorts; whereas by their opinion or
reason, I should have fourteen days together Horse-foals, and other fourteen
days together Mare-foals. But of one thing I am certain, that some one Horse
will get more Horse-foals then some other Horse will do; and likewise a Mare
will bear more Mare-colts then some other Mares will do, though they are horsed
both with one Horse; neither can I give any reason why, except the lustiness of
the Natures of both of them are put to it, whether of them should have the
domination. But if the Husbandman have Mares of diverse colors, let him sever
them in diverse parcels, and let him put to his white Mare a gray Horse, and his
gray Mare a white Horse, so that he be not all white-skinned about the mouth;
and to a Mare of color that has no white upon her, a colored Horse that has
much more white on him, and to his colored Mare a mean white Horse of color
main white. And thus shall the Colts be well colored. And if a white Horse be
put to a colored Mare, she shall have most commonly sandy Colt like to an Iron
gray, neither like Sire nor Dam. Howsoever, I have known many Mares that will
have their Colts like the Horse that got it, the which is against the kind of
Mares; for a man had rather get one good Horse then many Mares that are not so
likely to prove well.

To carry Wood and other Necessaries.
IN May when the Husbandman has fallowed the Ground, and set out his
sheepfold, and carried away the Dung and Muck, if he have any Wood, Coal, or
Timber to carry, or such other Necessaries, that must needs be done with the
Cart or Wain, then is the time to do it. For then the way is like to be fair
and dry, and the days long, and at that time the Husbandman has least to do in
Husbandry.

To carry out Dung or Muck, and spread it.
IN the latter end of April, and the beginning of May, is the time for the
Husbandman to carry out his Dung or Muck, and to lay it upon his Barley-ground.
And where he has Barley this year, let him sow it with Wheat or Rye, and the
next time that it is fallowed, he shall mow all his Lands over at every second
fallow. But that Husbandman that can find the means to carry out his Dung, and
does lay it upon his Land after it be once stirred, it is much better for him
then to lay it upon his fallow, for diverse causes: One is, that if it be laid
upon his fallow, all that falls upon the hollow ridge shall do little good;
for when it is ridged again, it lies so deep in the Earth, that it will not be
easily ploughed up again, except that when he has spread it, he will with a
Shovel or a Spade cast out all that is fallen in the ridge. And if it be laid
upon the stirring, at every ploughing it shall meddle the Dung and the Earth
together; the which shall cause the Corn to grow and increase much the better.
In some places they load not their Dung till Harvest be done: this has been a
custom on the furthest side of Darbyshire called Scaresdale, Halonshire, and so
Northwards toward York and Rippon, and that I call better then upon the
fallow, and especially for Barley. But upon the first stirring it is best for
Wheat or Rye, and that the Husbandmans Dung be laid upon small heaps nigh
together, and to spread it even, and to leave no Dung there as the Muck-heap
stood; for the moistness of the Dung shall cause the Ground to be rank enough:
And if it be meddled with Earth, it will last the longer, and better for Barley
then for Wheat or Rye, because of Weeds, Horse-dung is the worst Dung that is.
The Dung of all manner of Cattle that chew their Cud, is very good, and the
Dung of Doves is best, but it must be laid upon the Ground very thin.

The first Stirring.
IN June is the time to rigge up the fallow, the which is caused the first
stirring; and then let the Husbandman plough it as deep as he can for to turn
the Roots of the Weeds upwards, that the Sun and the dry Weather may kill them;
for he cannot conveniently plough his Land, and load out his Dung both upon one
day with one draught of beasts, but he may well enough load out his Dung before
Noon, and he may load Hay or Corn in the Afternoon with the same draught, with
no hurt to his Cattle, because in loading of Hay or Corn the Cattle are always
currying or biting, which they cannot do in loading of Dung or ploughing.

The second Stirring.
IN August, or the beginning of September, is the time for the Husbandman to
make his second stirring, and most commonly it is cast down and ploughed a main
furrow not too deep and so he turns it clean. But if it be cast, it should be
water-furrowed between the Lands there where the Rain uses to be, that it may
be dryer when the Land shall be sown, and if the Lands lie high in the Rigge,
and high at the Rain, and low in the midst of the side, that the water may not
run easily into the Rain, as I have observed from time to time in many places,
then let the Husbandman set his Plough three or four foot from the Rigge, and
cast all the Rigge on both sides, and when the Rigge is cast, let him set his
Plough there as he began up to the remainder of the Land, and so will the Land
both be cast and rigged, and all at one ploughing: And this shall cause the
Land to lie round when it is sown at the next time, and thus shall the Corn be
saved from drowning.

To Harrow all manner of Corn.
WHen the Lands are ploughed, and the Corn sown, it will be convenient that
they should be well harrowed, or else Crows, Pigeons, will eat, devour, and
bear away the Corns. It is the custom in many Countries to have all an
Ox-harrow, the which is made of six small pieces of Timber called Harrow-bulls,
made either of Ash or Oak; they are of two yards long, and as much as the small
of a man's leg, they have shots of wood put through them, like Laths, and in
every bull are six sharp pieces of Iron called Harrow-tyndes, set somewhat
aslope forward, and the forma slope must be bigger then the other, because the
fore-beam must be fastened to the same with shackle or with a With to draw by.
This Harrow is good to break the great Clots, and to make much mould, and then
the Horse-harrows to come after to make the Clots smaller, and to lay the
Ground even. It is a great labor and pains for the Ox to go to harrow, it is
more easy and better for them to go to plough two days, then to harrow one
day. It is an old saying: The Ox is never woe,
Till he to the Harrow go.
And the reason is, because the Harrow goes by twitches, and not always after
one draught. The Horse-harrow is made of five bulls, not above an Ell of
length, and not so much shotted and tinded. And when that the Corn is well
covered, then it is harrowed enough: There are Horse-harrows that have tindes
of wood, and those are used much about Rippon, and some other places where he
may border stones; for those stones would wear the Iron too soon. And those
tindes are most commonly of the Ground-end of a young Ash; they are more then a
foot long in the beginning, and stand as much above the Harrow as beneath. And
as they wear or break, they drive them down lower; they should be made long
before that they are used, that they may be dry; for then they will endure and
last much better, and stick the faster. The Horses that shall draw these
Harrows, must be well kept, and shod well, or else they will be soon tired, and
sore beaten, that they will not be able to draw; they must have Hombers or
Collers, Holmes writhed about their Necks, Tresses to draw by, and a
Swingle-tree for to hold the Tresses, and a Togewith betwixt the Swingle-tree
and the Harrow. And if the Barley-ground will not break with Harrows, but be
clotty, it should be beaten with Mauls, and not straight down; for then the
Corn will be beaten into the Earth. And if they beat the Clot on the side, it
will the better break, and the Clot will be the lighter, that the Corn may come
by the lighter. Some use to roll their Barley-ground after a shower of Rain, to
make the Ground to be the evener to mow.

To Fallow.
WHen the Husbandmen have sown their Pease, Beans, Barley, and Oats, and
harrowed them, it will be their best time to fallow in the latter end of March
or April, for Wheat, Rye, and Barley, and let them do the best that they can to
plough a broad Furrow, and deep, so that they turn it clean, and lay it flat,
that it rear not an edge, the which will destroy all the Thistles and Weeds:
For the deeper and the broarder that it goes, the more new mould, and the
greater clots shall they have, and the greater clots, the better Wheat; for the
clots keep the Wheat warm all the Winter, but at March they will melt and
break, and fall into many small pieces, the which is a new dunging and
refreshing the Corn, and likewise there shall be but few weeds grow upon the
fallows that are fallowed, for the Plough goes underneath the roots of all
manner of weeds, and turns the root upwards, that they may not grow. And if
the Land be fallowed in Winter time, it will be far the worse, for these three
causes: One is, all the Rain that falls, shall wast the Land, and drive away
the Dung, and the good Mould, that the Land shall be much the worse. Another
cause is, the rain shall beat the Land so flat, and bake it so hard together,
that a dry May coming, it will be too hard to stir in the month of June. The
third cause is, the weeds shall take such root in the stirring time, that they
will not be clean turned underneath, the which shall be a greater hurt to the
Corn, when it shall be sown, and especially in the time of weeding of the same,
and for any other thing, make a deep hollow furrow in the ridge of the Land,
and let the Husbandmen look well that the Rest balk it not; for if they do,
there will be many thistles, and then they shall not make a clean ridge at the
first stirring, and therefore it must be deep ploughed, or else it will not
turn the weeds clean.

How to plough all manner of times of the year.
THe Ploughs being made and tempered, as I have already expressed, it will be
convenient to inform the young Husbandman how he should plough all times of the
year. In the beginning of the year, after the Feast of the Epiphany, it will be
time for the Husbandman to go to the plough; and if he have any Leys to fallow
or sow Oats upon, first plough them, that the Grass and the Moss may rot, and
plough them a deep square furrow, and in all manner of ploughings, let him look
that his eye, and his hand, and his feet do agree, and that they are always
ready the one to serve the other, to turn up much mould, and lay it flat, that
it rear not up an edge; for if it rear an edge, the Grass and Moss will not
rot, and if he sow it with Winter-corn, as Wheat or Rye, as much Corn as
touches the Moss, will be drowned; for that the Moss does keep such a wet and
moisture in it self. In some Countries, if a man plough deep, he shall pass the
good Ground, and have but little Corn, but that Country is not fit for men to
keep Husbandry upon, but to rear and bring up Cattle and Sheep; for otherwise
they must go beat their Grounds with Mattocks, as they do in several places in
Cornwall, and in some parts of Devon-shire.

How to plough for Pease and Beans.
FIrst the Husbandman must take notice, which is the most clayie Ground, let
him plough that first; but let it lie a good space before that he sow it,
because the Frost, the Rain, the Wind, and the Sun may soon cause it to break
small, to make much mould, and to ridge it, and to plough a square furrow the
breadth and the deepness all one, and to lay it close to its fellow: For the
more furrows, the more Corn serves, as has been said, for a general Rule for
all manner of Corns, which may be proved at the coming up of all manner of
Corns, if the Husbandman do but stand at the Lands end, and look toward the
other, end, and he shall easily perceive how the Corn grows.

How all manner of Corn should be sown, and how much most commonly on an Acre.
FIrst of Pease and Beans. An Acre of Ground by the Statute, that is to say,
sixteen foot and an half to the Perch or Pole, four Perches to an Acre in
breadth, and eleven Perches to an Acre in length, may be very well sown with
two London Bushels of Pease, that is but two Strikes in other places; and if
there be the fourth part Beans, then will it require half a London Bushel more;
and if it be half Beans, it will have three London Bushels, and more; if it be
of Beans, it will have four London Bushels fully, and that is half a Quarter,
because the Beans are great, and grow up straight, and do not spread and grow
abroad as Pease do. An Acre of good Beans is worth an Acre and a half of good
Pease, because there will be more Bushels: And the best property that belongs
to a good Husbandman, is to sow all manner of Corn thick enough, and especially
Beans and Barley; for commonly they are sown upon rank Grounds, and good Ground
will have the burden of Corn and of Wood: And as much ploughing and harrowing
has an Acre of Ground, and sow thereupon but one Bushel, and another sows
four Bushels: And undoubtedly one Bushel will not give so much Corn again as
the four Bushels, though the three Bushels that be sowed more be allowed and
set apart. And one Bushel and a half of white Pease or green Pease, will sow as
much ground as two Bushels of gray Pease, and that is, because they are so
small, that the Husbandman need not to take so great a handful. In some
Countries they begin for to sow Pease soon after Christmas, and in some places
they sow both Pease and Beans under-furrow, and those of reason must be sowed
betimes; but generally to sow after Candlemas, is found to be a good season, so
that they are sown toward the beginning of March, or thereabouts. But
especially let them be sown in the old of the Moon: For the opinion of the most
expert Husbandmen is, that they will cod the better, and ripen the sooner. But
I speak not of Hastings, for those are to be sown before Christmas.

How to sow Wheat and Rye.
ABout Michaelmas is the time to sow both Wheat and Rye. Wheat is most commonly
sown under the Furrow, that is to say, cast it upon the fallow, and then plough
it under: and in some places they sow their Wheat upon their Pease-stubble, the
which is never so good as that which is sown upon the fallow; and that is used
where they make fallow in a Field every fourth year. In Essex they use to have
a Youth to go in the furrow before the Horses or Oxen, with a Bag or a Hopper
full of Corn, and he takes his hand full of Corn, by little and little casts
it in the same furrow. This Boy, as I suppose, ought to have somewhat more then
ordinary discretion: howsoever there is much good Corn and Rye most commonly
sown above and harrowed, two London Bushels of Wheat and Rye will sow an Acre.
Some Ground is good for Wheat, and some for Rye, and some for both, and upon
that good Ground sow blend Corn, that is, both Wheat and Rye, which is the
surest Corn of growing good for the Husbandmans Household. And this Wheat that
shall be meddled with Rye, must be such Wheat as will soon be ripe, and that is
flaxen Wheat, pole-ear'd Wheat, or white Wheat. There are diverse kinds of
Wheats: Flaxen Wheat has a yellow Ear, and bare, without Anys, and is the
brightest Wheat in the Bushel, and will make the whitest Bread. This Corn will
wear the ground very much; the straw of it is small, but it grows very thick,
and is but small Corn. Pole-ear'd Wheat has no Anys, it is thick set in the
Ear, and it will soon fall out; it is greater Corn, and it will make white
Bread. White Wheat is like pole-ear'd Wheat in the Bushel, but it has Anys,
and the Ear is apiece, and it will make white Bread. In Essex they call
flaxen Wheat, white Wheat. Red Wheat has a flat Ear, an inch broad, full of
Anys, it is the greatest Corn, the broadest Blade, and the greatest Straw, it
will make white bread, though it be the ruddiest of color in the bushel.
English Wheat has a dun Ear, it has few or no Anys, and it is the worst
Wheat, except Peck-wheat. Peck-wheat has a red Ear, full of Anys, thin set,
and oft-times it is flintered, that is to say, small Corn wringeled and dried;
it will not make white bread, but it will grow upon cold ground.

To sow Barley.
EVery good Husbandman has his Barley-fallow well dunged, lying ridged all the
deep and cold of the Winter; the which ridging makes the Land to lie dry, and
the dunging makes it to be mellow and rank. And if a dry season comes before
Candlemas, or soon after, it should be cast down, and water furrowed between
the Lands, and in the beginning of March ridge it up again; sow in every Acre
five London bushels, or four at the least: some years it may so happen that
there is no seasonable weather before March to plow the Barley-earth. The
Husbandman as soon as he has sowed his Pease and Beans, then let him cast his
Barley-earth, and shortly after ridge it again, so that it be soon before
April: And if the time of the year be past, then sow it upon the casting. There
are three kinds of Barleys, that is to say, Sprot Barley, long Ear, and Bear
Barley: Sprot Barley has most commonly a flat Ear, three quarters of an inch
broad, and three inches long, the corners are very great and white, it is the
best Barley. Long Ear has a flat Ear, half an inch broad, and four inches and
more of length: But the Corn is not so great, nor so white, it will soon turn
and grow to the Oats* Bear Barley or big, should be sown upon light and dry
Ground; it has an Ear four inches long, or more, set apiece, like
Peck-wheat, it has small corns and little flour, and that is the worst Barley,
four London bushels are sufficient for an Acre: and in some Countries they do
not sow their Barley till May, and then most commonly upon gravelly or sandy
ground: But that Barley generally is never so good as that which is sown in
March. For if it be very dry weather after it is sown, that Corn that lies
above, lies dry, and has no moisture, and that little underneath comes up,
and when Rain falls, then that spreads that lies above, and oftentimes it is
green when the other is ripe, and when it is threshed, there is much light Corn
in it.

To sow Oats.
IN March is the time to sow Oats, and especially upon light Ground and dry,
howsoever they will grow on wetter ground then any Corn else; for wet ground is
good for no manner of Corn. Three London bushels will sow an Acre. There are
three sorts of Oats, that is to say, red Oats, black Oats, and rough Oats. Red
Oats are the best, when they are threshed they will be yellow in the bushel;
they are very good to make Oatmeal of. Black Oats are as great as they are, but
they have not so much flour in them, for they have a thicker Husk, nor do they
make so good Oatmeal. The rough Oats are the worst Oats, and it quitteth not
the cost to sow them. They are very light, and have long tayls, whereby they
will hang each on the other. These several kinds of Oats wear the ground very
much, and makes it as it were quick. A young Husbandman had need to be careful
how thick he sows all manner of Corn for two or three years, and to observe
how it comes up, whether it be thick enough or not; and if it be too thin, let
him sow thicker the next year; but if it prove well, let him hold his hands for
three or four years; but if it be thin, let him recollect with himself, whether
it proceeds from the unseasonableness of the Weather, or through his thin
sowing.

How to sever Pease, Beans, and Fitches.
WHen the Husbandman has threshed his Pease and Beans, after they be winnowed,
if he sow them or set them, let them be well reed with Sieves, and let him
sever in three parts the great from the small, by which means he shall get in
every Quarter a London bushel, or thereabouts: For the small Corn lies in the
hollow and void places of the great Beans, and yet shall the great Beans be
sold as dear. And therefore he that buyeth by whole sale, and retaileth, must
needs be a great gainer, and he must needs be a loser, that sets his Pease,
Beans, and Fitches together, for then he loses his whole sale* but sever into
three parts, there is the more gain.

How all manner of Corn should be covered.
THe Corns being shorn and bound, and the Tithes cast out, it will be time to
cover them, stock them, or half throve them; but covering is the best way of
all manner of white Corn: And that is to set four sheaves on one side, and four
sheaves on the other side, and two sheaves above of the greatest, bound hard
nigh to the nether end, the which must be set upwards, and the top downwards,
spread abroad for to cover all the other sheaves. They will stand best in wind,
and save themselves best in rain; they should be set on the ridge of the Land,
and the side-sheaves to lean together in the tops, and wide at the bottom, that
the wind may go through to dry them. Pease and Beans should be set on the ridge
of the Land, four sheaves together, the tops upwards, and writhen together, and
wide beneath, that they may the better wither.

To load Corn, and mow it.
WHen all the several Corns are dry and withered enough, then let the
Husbandman load them into the Barn, and lay every several sort of Corn by it
self: And if it be a wet Harvest, let him make many Mows, and if he have not
housing enough, then it is better for him to lay the Pease and the Beans
without upon a Reke, rather then other Corn, and it will be better upon a
Scaffold then on the ground, but then it must be well hedged for Swine and
other Cattle. Besides, the ground will rot the bottom, whereas the Scaffold
saves both hedging and rotting, but they must both be well covered. And the
Husbandman may set Sheep or Cattle under the same Scaffold, for it will serve
him instead of a house, if it be well and strongly made.

How to know diverse manner of Weeds.
IN the latter end of May, and the beginning of June, is the time for the
Husbandman to weed his Corn. There are diverse manner of Weeds, as Thistles,
Kedlocks, Docks, Cockle, Drake, Darnel, Gu^des, Hadods, Dog-fennel, Mathes,
Tare, and diverse other small Weeds; but these already named, are those that are
most troublesome. The Thistle is an ill weed, rough and sharp to handle, which
fretteth away the Corns nigh it, and causes the Shears not to shear clean.
Kedlocks have a leaf like Rapes, it bears a yellow flower, and is an ill
weed; it grows in all manner of Corn, and has small cods, and grows like
Mustard Seed. Docks have a broad leaf, and diverse high spires, and very small
seed in the top. Cockle has a long small leaf, and it will bear five or six
flowers, purple color, as broad as a Groat; the seed is round and black, and
may well be suffered in bread-corn, but not in seed, for therein is much flour.
Drake is like Rye till it begin to seed; it has many seeds like to
Fennel-seeds, and hangs downwards, and it may well be suffered in bread, for
there is much flour in the seed, and it is an opinion, that it proceeds from
Rye. Darnel grows up straight like to a high grass; it has long seeds on
either side, there is much flour in the seed; it grows much amongst Barley,
and it is said to come from small Barley. Guldes or Goldes has a short jagged
leaf that grows half a yard high, it has a yellow flower as broad as a
Groat; it is an ill weed, that grows most commonly amongst Barley and Pease.
Hau^od has a blew flower, and a few little leaves, it has five or six
branches flowered in the top; it grows commonly in the Rye upon lean ground,
it does little hurt. Dog-fennel and Mathes are both one, and in the coming up,
is like Fennel; it bears many white flowers, with a yellow seed, and it is
the worst weed that is, except Tare: it rises most commonly when great wet
falls shortly after the Corn is sown. Tare is the worst weed, and it does
never appear till the month of June, after a great wet, or a little before; it
grows most in Rye: It is somewhat like Fitches, but that it is much smaller;
it will grow as high as the Corn, and with the weight thereof, pull it down
flat to the Earth, fretting the Ears of it away: Wherefore I have seen
Husbandmen mow down the Corn and it together; and also with sharp hooks to reap
it, as they do Pease, and make it dry, and then it will be good Fodder. There
are many other Weeds which do much harm, which here for brevity sake I shall
omit to mention.

How to weed Corn.
THe chief instrument to weed Corn, is a pair of Tongs made of wood, the
further end of them being nicked to hold the weed the faster. After a shower of
Rain it is best weeding, for then they may be pulled up by the roots, so as
never for to grow again. If it be dry Weather, then must the Weeder have a Hook
with a Socket upon a little staff a yard long; and this Hook should be well
steeled, and ground sharp both behind and before; and in his other hand he
should have a forked stick of about a yard long, and with his forked stick he
must put the weed from him, and he puts the Hook beyond the root of the
weed, and he pulls it to him, and cutteth the weed close to the Earth, and
with his Hook he takes up the weed, and casts it in the Rain, and if the
Rain be full of Corn, it is better to stand still when it is cut and withered;
but let him beware that he do not tread too much upon the Corn, and especially
after that it be shot, and when that he cutteth the weed, that he cutteth not
the Corn; and therefore the Hook should not exceed to be above an inch wide.
And when the weed is so short, that he cannot with his forked stick put it from
him, and with the Hook put it to him, then must he set his Hook upon the weed
close to the Earth, and put it from him, and so he shall cut it clean. With
these two instruments he shall never need to stoop to his work. Dog-fennel,
Goldes, Mathes, and Kedlocks are bad to weed after this manner, they grow upon
so many branches, and are so close to the Earth, and therefore they use for the
most part to pull them up with their hands: but let them look well, that they
pull not up the Corn therewithal. As for Tare, no weeding will serve turn.

How to mow and shear Barley and Oats.
BArley and Oats most commonly are mown, a man or a woman following the Mower
with a Hand-rake half a yard long, with seven or eight teeth, in his left hand,
and a Sickle in the right hand; with the Rake he gathers as much as will make
a sheaf: And then he raketh the Barley or Oats by the top^, and and pulls out
as much as will make a band, and casts the band from him on the Land, and
with his Rake and his Sickle takes up the Barley or Oats, and lays them upon
the band, and so the Barley lies unbound three or four days until it be dry
weather, and then he binds it. And when that the Barley is led away, the Land
must be raked, or else there will be much Corn lost, and if the Barley or Oats
lie, they must needs be shorn.

To reap or mow Pease or Beans.
PEase or Beans are reaped most commonly last, or else mown after diverse
manners; some with Sickles, some with Hooks, and some with Staff-hooks. In some
places they lay them on Repes, and when that they are dry, they lay them
together on heaps like Hay-cocks, and never bind them; but the best way is when
the Repes be dry to bind them, and to set them on the ridge of the Lands three
sheaves together. Mowers geld not your Beans, that is to say, to cut the Beans
so high, that the nether Cod grow still in the stalk, and when they are bound,
they are the readier to load or unload, to make a Reke, or to take from the Mow
to thresh, and so are not the Repes.

How Rye should be shorn.
AT the latter end of June, or the beginning of August, is the time to shear
Rye, which should be shorn clean, and fast bound. In some places they mow it,
the which is not so profitable a way for the Husbandman, but it is the sooner
done. For when it is mown, it will not be so fast bound, and the Husbandman
cannot gather it up so clean, but that there will be much lost; it also takes
up more room in the Barn then shorn Corn does: Nor will it keep or save it self
from rain or ill weather, when it stands in the cover, as the shorn Corn will
do.

How to shear Wheat.
WHeat should be shorn clean, and bound hard; but for a general Rule, let the
Shearer take heed, that the shearers of all manner of Wheat-corn, cast not up
their hands hastily, for then all the loose Corns, and the straws that he
holds not in his hand, flies over his head, and are lost, and also it will
pull off the Ears, and that more especially of the Corns that are very ripe. In
some places they will shear their Corns high, to the intent to mow their
stubble, either to thatch or to burn; if they so do, they have great cause to
take good heed of the shearers: For if the Ears of the Corn crook down, or bend
to the Earth, if the shearer be not very wary, and put up the Ear, or he cut
the straw, as many Ears as be under his Hook or Sickle, fall to the Earth, and
are lost: And when they mow the stubble, it is a great hinderance to the profit
of the ground. In Sommerset-shire about Zelchester or Martock, they shear their
Wheat very low, and all the Wheat-straw that they purpose to make thatch of,
they do not thresh it, but cut off the Ears, and bind it in sheaves, and call
it Read, and therewith they thatch their Houses. And if it be a new House, they
thatch it under their foot, the which is the best and surest thatching that can
be of straw; for Crows, Pigeons, and the like, shall never be able to hurt it.

How to sow both Pease and Beans.
LEt the Husbandman sow his Pease upon clayie ground, and the Beans upon the
Barley ground, for they require ranker ground then the Pease. Howsoever some
Husbandmen are of opinion, that the big and stiff ground, as Clay, should be
sown with big ware, as Beans: but I am of another mind; for if a dry Summer
come, his Beans will fall short. And if the ground be very good, put the more
Beans to the Pease, and they will yield the better, when they are threshed. And
if it be very rank ground, as it is much at every Town-side, where Cattle do
resort, that plough not the Land, until it be sown; for if he do, there will
come up Kedlocks and other weeds. But let him sow it with Beans; for if he sow
it with Pease, the Kedlocks will hurt them. And when he finds a seasonable
time, let him sow both Pease and Beans, so that they are sown in the beginning
of March. To know a seasonable time to sow, go upon the Land that is ploughed,
and if it sing or cry, or make any noise under thy feet, then it is too wet to
sow; but if it make no noise, and will bear the Horses, then sow in the Name of
God. For the manner of his sowing, let him put the Pease into the Hopper, and
cast a broad thong of Leather or Garth-web of an Ell long; let him fasten it to
both the ends of the Hopper, and put it over his head like a Belt, and stand in
the midst of the Land where the Sack lies, the which is most conveniently for
the filling of the Hopper, and let him set his left foot before, and take a
handful of Pease. And when he has taken up his right foot, then let him cast
the Pease from him all abroad, and when his left foot rises, let him take
another handful, and when his right foot, then cast them from him, and so at
every two paces, he shall sow a handful of Pease; let his foot and his hand
agree, and then he shall be sure for to sow even. In his casting, he must open
as well his fingers as his hand: And the higher and the further that he cast
his Corn, the better shall it spread, except it be a great wind* And if the
Land be very good, and will break small in the ploughing, it is better to sow,
and after the Plough, then to delay and lose time.

To make a Ditch.
IF the Husbandman will make his Ditch four foot broad, then it should be two
foot and a half deep: And if it be five foot broad, then it must be three foot
deep, and so accordingly; and if it be but five foot broad, then it must be
double set, and the rather it should be fenced, and the lower Hedge will serve.

To get Sets, and set them.
IF the Husbandman have pastures, he cannot want for quick-setting, ditching,
or plashing: When it is green, and comes to be of age, let him get his
quick-sets out of some woody parts, and let them be of white Thorn and
Crab-tree, for they are best: Holly and Hasel are good. If he dwells in the
plain Country, then he may get both Ash, Oak, and Elm, for those will increase
much wood in a short space. Let him set Oak-sets and Ash ten or twelve foot
asunder, and cut them as he does his other Sets, and cover them over a little
with Thorns, that Sheep and other Cattle eat them not. And also weed them clean
in the Midsummer Moon, or soon after, for the weeds, if they over-grow, will
kill the Sets. But get no black Thorn for this use, for it will grow outward
into the pasture, and do much hurt to the Grass, besides the tearing of the
Wool off the sheep. It is a good time to set Quick-sets, from the time the
leaves are fallen, until our Lady Day in Lent. The Husbandmans sandy or
gravelly ground should be first set, for it will soon dry, and then the
Quick-set will take no root, except it meet with great wet; for the Moulds will
tie it, if it be ditched in February or March, and likewise clayie ground, etc.
Let the Husbandman make his Sets long enough, that may be set deep enough in
the Earth, for then they will grow the better: Let them stand half a foot and
more above the Earth, that they may spring out of many branches; and then let
him take a Line and set it where he will have his Hedge, and let him make a
Trench after his Line, and pare away the grass, there let the Quick-sets be
set, and let him cast it by Line, where the Earth of the Ditch shall lie, and
dig up the Moulds, and spade graff deep, and put in the Sets, and dig up more
Mould and lay upon that Set, and so to go through with it till he have set up
his Sets, and let them lean toward the Ditch, and a foot from that, let him
make his Ditch; for if he make it too nigh his Sets, the water may happen to
cause the Sets to fall down.

To make a Hedge.
THe Husbandman must get his stakes of heart of Oak, for those are best;
Crab-tree, black Thorn, and Elder are good. Red Wethy is best in moorish
ground; Ash, Maple, Hasel, and white Thorn will do well for a time. Let him set
his stakes within two foot and a half together, except that he have very good
hedging, and lodge to bind with. And if it be double endered, it is much the
better, and of greater strength to the Hedge, and it will last much the longer;
let him lay his small Trouse or Thorns that he hedgeth withal, over the
Quick-sets, that sheep do not eat his Spring or Buds of the Sets; let his
stakes be well driven that the point take the hard Earth, and when that he has
made his Hedge, and endered it well, then let him take his Mall again, and
drive down the endering, and also his stakes immediately: For with the winding
of eddrings, he shall lose his stakes, and therefore they must needs be driven
new, and hardened, and that stake shall be driven the better when it is well
bound.

To plash or plet^e a Hedge.
IF the Hedge be ten or twelve years growing since it was first set, then let
the Husbandman take a sharp Hatchet or Hand-bill, and cut the Sets in a plain
place close unto the Earth the more half asunder, and bend it downwards toward
the Earth, and wrap and wind them together; but always let him be sure that
the top lie higher then the root a good quantity, for else the sap will not run
into the top kindly, but in process of time the top will dye; and then let him
set a little Hedge on the backside, and it shall need no more mending for many
years after; and if the Hedge be of 20. 24. 30. years of age since it was first
set, then let him wind it at the nethermost boughs, and wind them together,
and then cut the Sets in a plain place a little from the Earth the more half
asunder, and let him suffer it to hang downwards rather then upwards, and that
for diverse causes; then let him wind the boughs and branches thereof into the
Hedge, and at every two foot or three foot to leave one Set growing not
plethed. Let the tops be growing of five foot high, or thereabouts, to stand as
a stake, if there be any such, or else to set another, and to wind another
that is plethed about them: And if the boughs will not lie plain in the Hedge,
then cut it the more then half asunder, and bind it unto the Hedge, then shall
not the Husbandman need for to mend that Hedge but in few places, twenty years
after or more: and if the Hedge be old, and be great Stubs or Trees, and they
in the bottom, that beasts may go under or between the Trees, let him take a
sharp Ax, and cut the trees or stubs that grow a foot from the Earth, or
thereabouts, in a plain place, within an inch or two inches of the side: And
let him again shave downwards, and let the top of one Tree lie over the root of
another Tree, to plethe down the boughs of the same Tree to stop the hollow
places. And if all the hollow and void places will not be filled and stopped,
then let him scour the old Ditch, and cast it up new, and fill with earth all
the void places; and if so be these Trees will not reach in every place to make
a further defense, then let him double quick-set it, and ditch it new in every
place that is needful, and set a Hedge thereupon, and let him over-lay the Sets
to keep the sheep and Cattle from eating them.

To mend a Highway.
FIrst and principally let the Husbandman look that there be no water standing
in the Highway, but that it be always current and running, nor that it have no
more a stop in one place then in another. And in Summer when the water is dried
up, then to get gravel, and to fill up every low place, and to make the even
somewhat descending or current one way or other; and if there be no Gravel or
stones to get, yet fill it up with earth in the beginning of Summer, that it
may be well hardened with carriage and treading upon, and it will be well
mended, if the water may pass from it: The which should be well considered of,
and that more especially about London, whereas they are at much more cost then
needs. For there they ditch Highways on both sides, and fill up the hollow and
low place with earth, and then they cast and lay Gravel aloft: And when a great
rain or water comes, and sinketh through the Gravel, and sinketh into the
Earth, the Earth swells and waxes soft, and with treading, and especially
with carriage, the Gravel sinketh, and falls downwards, as its nature and
kind requires, and then it is in a manner as a Quick-sand, that is difficult
for any thing to go over it. But if he would make more Ditches in Summertime
when the water is dried up, that the Workman may see all the hollow and low
places, and then to carry Gravel, and fill it up as high as the other knoles
are, then would it not swell or be turned into a Quick-sand, and every
Traveller might go besides the Highway with his Carriage at his pleasure: if
this course were followed, it would be both good and necessary for that purpose.

How Forkes and Rakes should be made.
THe good Husbandman has his Forkes and his Rakes in a readiness the Winter
before, and they should be got betwixt Michaelmas and Martlemas, beyked, and
set even to be upright in his hand, that they may be hard, stiff and dry. And
when that the Husbandman sits by the fire, and has nothing to do, then may
he make them ready, and teeth the Rakes with dry wethy wood, and bore the holes
with his Wimble both above and under, and drive the teeth upward fast, and
hard, and afterward wedge them about with dry wood of Oak, for that is hard,
and will dry, and never come out. And if the Husbandman get them in sap-time,
all the baking and drying that can be, shall not make them hard and stiff, but
they will always be plying; for they are most commonly made of Hasel and Wethy,
and those are the first Trees that bloom, and especially Hasel; for it
begins to bloom as soon as the leaf is fallen: and if the Rake be made of
green wood, the head will not abide upon the steal, and the teeth will fall
out when the Husbandman has most use of them, to the hinderance of his work,
and the loss of his Hay. Let him be sure that his Rake and his Fork are upright
in his hand; for if one end of the Rake, or the side of the Fork hangs
downwards, they will neither be handsome, nor easy to work withal.

How to mow Grass.
AT the latter end of June it will be time for the Husbandman to begin to mow
his Meadows, for then they will be well grown: but howsoever they are grown, in
July they must be mown, for diverse causes: One is, that it is not convenient to
have Hay and Corn both at work at one time. Another is, that the younger and
greener the Grass is, the softer and the sweeter it will be when it is Hay, but
it will require the more widdring; and the elder the Grass is, the harder and
dryer it is; and the harder and dryer it is, the worse it is for all manner of
Cattle; for the seeds will be fallen, which are in a manner a kind of
Provender, and it will be the harder to eat and chew. And another cause is,
that if dry weather come, it will dry and burn upon the ground, and waste it
self away. Let the Husbandman have a care that his Mower mow clean, and hold
down the hinder hand of his Sithe, that he do not indent the Grass, and mow his
swayth clean through to that that was last mown before, that he leave not a man
between, and especially in the common Meadow; but in the several Meadow it
makes the less charge, and that the moldy Warpes-hills be spread, and the
sticks clean picked out of the Meadow in April, or the beginning of May.

To read and make Hay.
WHen the Meadows are mowed, then they should be redded, and laid upon the even
ground; and if the Grass be very thick, it should be shaken with hands, or with
a short Pitchfork; for good redding is the chief point to make good Hay, for
then it shall be widdered all alike, or else not: and when it is well widdered
on the over-side and dry, then let the Husbandman turn it clean before Noon, as
soon as the Dew is gone. And if he dare trust the weather, then let him let it
lie so all night, and on the next day let him turn it again before Noon, and
toward the night make it windrows, and then in small Hay-cocks, and so to
stand one night at the least and sweat, and the next fair day cast it abroad
again, and turn it once or twice, and then make it into greater Hay-cocks: and
to stand so one night or more, that it may unjoyn and sweat; for if it sweat
not in the Hay-cocks, it will sweat in the Mow, and then it will be dusty, and
not wholesome for the Cattle. And when it stands in the Cocks, it is better
for to load, and more Hay may be loaded at a loading, and the faster it will
lie; which Hay comes of a Grass called Crow-foot, and grows flat above the
Earth, and bears a yellow flower half a yard high and more; and has many
knots toward the coat, and it is the best Hay for Horses and Beasts, but it
requires much more widdering then any other Hay, for else it will bepiss it
self, and wax hot, and afterward dusty. For to know when it is widdered
enough, make a little Rope of the same, that you think should be most green,
and twine it as hard together between your hands as you can, and so being hard
twined, let one take a sharp Knife, and cut it close by your hand, and the
knots will be moist, if it be not dry enough. Short Hay and Ley-Hay are good
for Sheep and other Cattle.

To remove and set Trees.
IF the Husbandman will remove and set Trees, let him get as many Roots with
them as he can, let him be careful that he neither break nor bruise them. If
there be any Root broken or much bruised, let him cut it off hard by the Root,
as it is bruised with a sharp Hatchet, otherwise the Root will dye. And if it
be Ash, Elm, or Oak, let him cut off all the boughs clean, and save the top
whole. For if he make himself rich of boughs, he makes himself poor of thrift,
for two causes. The boughs cause them to shake with wind, and to loose the
Roots; also he cannot get them so cleanly, but that some of the Roots must
needs be cut, and then there will not come so much sap and moisture to the
boughs as there did before: and if the Tree be long, cut off the top two or
three yards. And if it be an Apple Tree or a Pear Tree, or such other as
bears fruit, then let him cut away all the water-boughs, and the small
boughs, that the principal of them may have the more sap; and if he make a mark
which side of the Tree stands toward the Sun, he may set it so again, which is
so much the better.

How to set Trees without Roots, and yet for them to grow.
THere are Trees that will spring Roots themselves, and those are certain
Apple Trees that have knots in the Boughs, or Caffes, or Wides, and such other
that will grow on slavelings; and likewise Poplars and Wethies they must be cut
clean, and beside the Tree that they grow on, and the top cut clean off eight
or ten foot in length, and all the boughs between, and be set a foot deep or
more in the Earth in good ground: There are four manner of Wethies, that is to
say, white Wethy, black, red, and o^iered Wethy. White Wethy will grow on dry
ground, if it be set in the beginning of Winter, and will not grow on moorish
ground. Black Wethy will grow better on moorish then on dry ground; and red
Wethy in like manner. Osiered Wethy will grow best in watery and moist ground*
And they are Trees that will soon be nourished, and they will bear much wood,
and they should be cropped every seven or eight years, or else they will dye,
but they must not be cropped in sap-time, nor no Trees else* In many places
both the Lords, Freeholders, and Tenants will set such Wethies and Poplars in
moorish grounds for to increase Wood.

Necessary things belonging to Grafting.
IT is no less necessary then profitable and pleasant for a Husbandman to be
furnished with most sorts of Fruit, and therefore it will be convenient for him
to know how to Graft. Therefore he is to be acquainted with what things he must
have to graft withal. He must have a Grafting-saw, the which should be very
thin and thick toothed; because it is thin, it will cut the narrower Kirfe, and
the cleaner from bruising the Bark. And therefore it is set in a Coppice piece
of Iron six inches, for to make it stiff and big. He must also have a
Grafting-knife of an inch broad, with a thick back to cleave the stocks withal.
And also a Mallet to drive his Knife and his Wedge into the Tree, and a sharp
Knife to pare the stock-head; and another sharp Knife to cut the Graft clean.
And also he must have two Wedges of hard Wood or Iron; a long small one for a
small stock, and a broader for a bigger stock to open the stock when it is
cloven and pared; and also good tough Clay and Moss, and Bastes, and peeling of
Wethy or Elm for to bind them with.

How to Graft.
HE must get Grafts of the fairest Lanses he can find on the Tree, and let him
be sure that it have a good knot or joint, and an even; then let him take his
Saw, and saw into his Crab-tree in a fair plain place, pare it even with his
Knife, and then let him cleave the stock with a great Knife and his Mallet, and
set in a Wedge, and open the stock according to the thickness of his Graft;
then let him take his small sharp Knife, and cut the Graft on both sides in the
joint, but let him not pass the midst thereof; and let the inner side that
shall be set into the stock, be a little thinner then the outer-side, then let
him proffer his Graft into the stock, till that they close so clean, that they
cannot put the edge of his Knife on the other side betwixt the stock and the
Graft, and let him set them so that the tops of the Graft bend a little
outward, and let him look that the wood of the Graft be set fit with the wood
of the stock; and therefore he may not set the Barks meet in the inner side:
then let him pull away his Wedge, and it will stand much faster. Let him
afterward take tough Clay like Marle, and lay it upon the stock-head, and with
his finger lay it close to the Graft, and a little under the head to keep it
moist, and that no wind come into the head at the cleaving; then let him take
Moss, and lay thereupon for chinning of the Clay, and take a baist of white
Wethy or Elm, on half a Brere, and bind the Moss, the Clay, and the Graft
together; but let him be very careful that he break not the Graft, neither in
the cleaving nor in the binding, and he must set something by the Graft, that
Crows, and such ravenous and unruly birds do not light upon the Graft; for if
they do, they will quickly break them.

What should be first Grafted.
PEars and Wardens should be grafted before any manner of Apples, because the
sap comes sooner and rather into the Pear and Warden, then into the
Apple Tree; and after St. Valentines Day it is time to graft both Pears and
Wardens till March be come, and then to graft Apples to our Lady Day; and then
let him graft that he has got of an old Apple Tree first, for that will bud
before the Graft got of a young Apple Tree lately grafted, and a Pear or Warden
should be grafted in a Pear-stock: and if he have got none, then let him graft
it in a Crab-tree-stock, and it will do well. Some men graft them in white
Thorn, and then it will be the harder and more stony. For all manner of Apples,
the Crab-tree-stock is best.

How to graft betwixt the Bark and the Tree.
THere is another manner of Grafting, and sooner done, and of sooner growth,
but it stands in great danger of the wind when it begins to grow. Therefore the
Husbandman must spare his stock, and save the head thereof as he did before,
but let him not cleave it; then let him take his Graft, and cut it on the joint
to the middle, and make the tenant thereof half an inch long, and a little
more, all of one side, and part the bark away a little at the point on the
other side; then he must have made ready a punch of hard wood with a slope and
a tenant on the other side like to the tenant of the Graft: Then let him put
the tenant of the Ponche betwixt the bark and the wood of the stock, and pull
it out again, and put it in the Graft, and let him be sure that it join close,
or else let him mend it. And this course so taken, cannot fail; for then the
sap will rise on every side, and it will spring so fast, that if it stand on
plain ground, the wind may possibly blow it besides the head, for it has no
fixation in the wood. And this is the best remedy for the blowing off, to cut
or crop away some of the nethermost leaves as they grow, and this is the best
way to graft, and especially a great Tree: and then let him clay it, and bind
it as he did the other.

To nourish all manner of Stone-Fruits, and Nuts.
AS for Cherries, Damsons, Bullas, Plums, and the like, they may be set on the
Stones, and also of the Siens growing about the Tree of the same, for they will
soonest bear. Filberts and Walnuts may be set on the Nuts in the Garden, and
afterward removed and set where he will. But when they are removed, they
should be set upon as good ground or better, or else they will not like.

To fell Timber.
IF the Husbandman have Wood to sell, I advise him for to retail it himself,
that he may have an eye to his Market; and if not, if he have a Baily or some
other discreet Servant, to do it for him; and if it be small Wood, to kidde it,
and sell it by the hundreds or by the thousands; and if there be Ashes in it,
to sell the small Ashes to Coopers for Garches, and the great Ashes to
Wheel-wrights, and the more mean and ordinary Trees to Plough-Wrights, the
Crab-trees to Millers to make Coggs and Tongs. And if there be any Oaks, either
great or small, to fell them, and peel them, and sell the Bark by it self, and
afterward to sort the Trees, the Poles by themselves, the middle sort by
themselves, and the greatest by themselves, and then to sell them by scores and
half scores, or hundreds, as he can, and to fell it hard by the Earth; for one
foot next to the Earth is worth two foot on the top. Let him cut his Timber
long enough, that he may leave none on the top; and let them sell the tops as
they are at the great, or else dress them, and sell the great Wood by it self,
and the Kid-wood by it self, and to fell the under-wood first at any time
between Martlemas and Holy-rood Day. And all the Ashes between Martlemas and
Candlemas; and all Oaks as soon as they will peel, until May be done, and not
after.

To fell Wood for the House, or to sell.
IF the Husbandman have any Woods to sell for his Household to burn, or to sell,
then let him fell the under-wood Sire in Winter, that his Cattle and Beasts may
feed and brouse the tops, and let him fell no more on a day then the Beasts
will eat the same day or on the morrow after. And as soon as it is well eaten
and broused, then let him kid them, and set them on their ends, and that will
save the bands from rotting, and they will be the lighter to carry, and they
will burn the better, and lie in less room* And when that he shall bring them
home to make a stack of them, let him set the nethermost course upon the ends,
and the second course flat upon the sides and the ends, the sides and the ends
outward, and for the third course, let him fall on the side overthwart the
other, and so to go them over until that he have laid all up. And when that he
shall have occasion for to burn them, to take the uppermost first.

To keep Spring Wood.
IN the Winter before the Husbandman will sell his Wood, let him make a good
sure Hedge, that no manner of Cattle may get in. And immediately after it is
fallen, let it be carried away before the Spring rise up; for else the Cattle
that carry the Wood, will devour the Spring, and when the top is eaten or
broken, it is a great hinderance to the growth and goodness of the Spring; for
there where it is eaten, buds and issues out of many branches, and that not so
far as the first would have been. A Park is best kept when there is neither
Man, Dog, nor four-footed Beast therein, except Deer. And so a Spring is best
kept, when there is neither man nor four-footed Beast within the Hedge: but if
there be much grass, and the Husbandman is unwilling to lose it, then let him
put in Calves newly weaned, and taken from their Dams, and also weaning Colts,
and Horses not past a year of age. Let him take his Calves away at May, the
Colts may go longer for their eating of any wood, but its dangerous both for
the Calves, Foals, and Colts for ticks or for being lousie, the which will kill
them, if they be not well looked to. In seven years it will requite the
greatest part of the cost, but at ten years it is at the best, and then the
under-boughs should be cut away, and made kid of, and the other will grow much
the better and faster: But if the under-boughs are not cut away, they will die,
and then they are lost, and will prove very hurtful to the Spring; for they
will take away the sap that should make the Spring to grow the better.

How to shred, lop, and crop Trees.
IF the Husbandman has any Trees to shred, lop, or crop for his Firewood, let
him crop them in Winter (as has been said) that the Beasts may eat the brouse
and the moss of the boughs. And also the Yves, and when that they are broused
and eaten, let him dress the wood, bow it clean, and cut it at every height,
and rear the great wood to the top, and kid the small boughs, and set them an
end; and if he shall not have sufficient wood, except that he head the Trees,
and cut off the tops, then let him head them three or four foot above any
Timber: and if it be no Timber, but a shaken Tree, or a Hedge-root full of
knots, then let him head it thirty foot high, or twenty at the least; for so
far it will bear plenty of wood and boughs, and much more then if it were not
headed. For a Tree has a property to grow to a certain height, and when it
arriveth to that height, it is at a stand, and grows no higher; but in breadth
and in conclusion, the top will dye or decrease, and the body thrive; and if a
Tree be headed and used to be cropped and lopped at every twelve or sixteen
years end, or thereabouts, it will bear much more wood in process of time, then
if it were not cropped, and be more profitable to the Owner.

It is the common Custom with some to begin at the top of the Tree when it is
to be shred or cropped, because each bough should lie upon the other, when that
they shall fall, so that the weight of the boughs shall cause them to be the
rather cut down; but that is not the best way, for that causes the bough to
shave down the nether part, and pulls away the bark from the body of the
Tree, the which for the future will cause the Tree to be hollow in that place,
to the hurt of it. And therefore let the Husbandman begin at the ne^hermost
bough first, with a light Ax for a hand to cut the bough, or both sides a foot
or two foot from the body of the Tree, and especially to cut it more in the
nether side, then the upper side, so that the bough fall not straight down, but
fall on the side, and then shall it not slave nor break any bark, and every
bough will have a new head, and bear much more wood; and let the Husbandman,
except he must needs do it, avoid to crop the Tree, and that more especially
when the wind stands in the North, or in the East, and let him beware that he
crop it not in sap-time, for then it will dry within few days after, though it
were an Oak.

Particular Secrets and choice Rules for Setting, Watering, and Ordering of
several choice Plants, Roots, delectable Flowers and Herbs for Gardens. The
ordering of the Summer-Garden for pleasure and delight, as also for the more
profitable increase of the Kitchen Garden: Together with Directions how to sow
and order for the Season whatsoever belongs to the Summer or Kitchin-Gardens;
for Plants, Herbs, Roots, Seeds, etc. As also for the aptest time to gather,
dry, and preserve them.
THe Husbandman or Gardener, who would have Plants to grow to a greater bigness
then ordinary, ought to remove them after four or five Leaves are come up, and
to set them again, as out of one bed bestowed into another, and the like from
one border into another, prepared at a certain distance asunder, when showers
of rain have well moistened and softened the same, being such Plants (that before
the setting) require to have tops of the Leaves, and ends of the Roots cut off,
whereby they may the freelier grow up broad or big in the Roots.

The young Sets in the Garden (of pleasant delight and smell) may the Owner of
the Garden also bestow in Borders in all seasons (although more commendably in
the Spring time) in breaking of the slips or branches of one years growth, for
the bodies of the old stock, and in wreathing the ends about, so to set them a
good depth in the Earth, the Moon at that time drawing near to the Change,
which will much further the Sets in their sooner taking of root.

The Marigold, Daisie, Columbines, Primrose, Cowslip, Sweet John, Gilliflowers,
Carnations, Pinks, and sundry other delectable Flowers, if the Gardener do
change those into Beds, they will increase the bigger, fairer, and doubler, the
Moon at this time being considered to be increased of light, there must be a
diligence to be bestowed in the often watering of them.

The Plants (which are certain Leaves sprung up) need not to be removed into
other Beds, are Spinnage, Arach, Dill, Sperage, Sorrel, Chervil, Parsley, and
diverse others of the like sort.

The Gardener having dug and prepared his Garden into Beds and Borders, I
will now show him, as briefly as I can, the best order and manner for setting
and sowing of the chiefest Plants, Herbs, Flowers that are now most in request.

When he sets any Herbs, Flowers, or Plants, he must the next day a little
moisten the ground in the morning, and so keep it moist until they be well
rooted by watering.

The best watering which is certain (except his Ground be new made with half
Dung) is to make a hole with the Dibble a little for the Herb or Plant aslope
to the Root, and so to water the Root under the ground; for water rotteth and
kills above ground, and whatsoever he sows, let him cover it with Earth, but
as thin as he can; for if they be too deep set or sown, most Seeds, Kernels,
and such like, will never come up.

When he sets any thing, let him be sure to make the Earth very wet, then let
him overlay half a foot on dry Mould, making it so close (with beating it with
the Spade) as he can, then let him set in his Herbs or Plants, thrusting the
Earth very hard to the Root.

Herbs for works may be watered; but Plants must not be wet above ground, for
fear of rotting.

Let him never water but in the morning, except in June or July, and then he
may water about four of the clock in the afternoon.

For setting, sowing, or planting, it is best when the weather is warm, nor the
ground neither too wet nor too dry at the top, but so moist as that it will not
stick to his shoe, as after a Frost. And for the time of the Moon, I hold the
second day before the New Moon to be the best for most things but for Flowers,
and that a little after the Change or New Moon.

The Ground which is to sow at the Spring, must be dug at Michaelmas, with
good Dung, and then let him trench the digging.

The best time for sowing is February, March, April; but for the setting of
Herbs, March, and the beginning of April is best: and those Herbs which spring
out of the ground in February, must be set in the month.

In the middle of April, or in the beginning of May (as the Moon shall happen
to be in the Wane) let him dig a Ditch about a yard deep, and lay some three
quarters of a Load of Horse-dung therein, then let him cover the Dung over a
foot thick with good Earth, laying his Seeds along on the Earth dry, and let
him cover them an inch thick with light Earth, and every night (until May be
past) let him cover them with a wet Cloth or straw, to keep away the Frost, and
uncover them in the day time: And let him take notice, that when the Cucumber
has three leaves, he may then remove them to their other places. The Pompion
seeds should be set a finger deeper in the Earth; and the Cabbages should be
removed when they are a handful high.

Parsnep seeds may be sown in October (in the Wane of the Moon) but if they
prove not, let him sow more seeds in February following.

Carrots should be sown at the latter end of April, or the beginning of May.

Turnips grow best in sandy Earth, and should be sown at that time that Carrots
are: but if they are required in Lent, let him sow them in August, at the Wane
of the Moon.

Onions require a rank fat Ground, half dung; he must sow them in February: He
may also sow Onion and Lettice seeds, and Radish seeds mingled together in one
plot for Sallets, at the same time in a hot Ground: Let him set Onions for
Scallions to seed in October.

Garlic requires a temperate Ground, not too rank; and it is good setting of
it in February and in October.

Leeks are for a rank Ground, and should be sown in October.

Radishes require such a Ground as the Onion does; sow it in February, and it
will last all the Summer, every month before Woodseer, in the Wane of the Moon
for fear of seeding, and he shall always have them fresh and young: but after
Woodseer he may sow them at any time of the Moon.

Skerrots must be set in the Wane, about the latter end of September or
beginning of October. For the most part all Roots should be sown in the Wane of
the Moon.

Lettice sown in August, will live all Winter; but if they are sown in March,
they will be so bitter, that they cannot be eaten.

Parsley should be sown after the beginning of August, and it will be fresh in
the spring all the year; it loves the shade: The seeds of Parsley and Marjoram
will lie six weeks in the ground before they come up.

Hop may be sown in seeds in April, but they will not last: The Roots that are
young are good to set, but the slips are best.

Marigolds may be sown in August for the Spring; he may remove the Plants about
two inches long, and they will grow the bigger.

Alexander is sown in March or April; he may remove the Roots, and they will
grow the next year.

Borrage and Bugloss are sowed in the Spring, and dye that year.

Succory or Endive are sown in March or April, remove them before the spindle,
and they will be the better.

Pennyroyal, the Roots parted, or the branches set in the ground, will grow.

Mints, either the Roots set, or the branches being cut in diverse places, and
set in the Earth, being wet, will thrive.

Savory sowed in the Spring, commonly dies: but being removed, it will live in
Winter.

Time is sown or set in the Spring, both the seeds, slips, and roots of it will
grow: keep it from seeding, and it will last three or four years.

Tansie may be sowed in March or April; the Roots being removed, will prosper.

Bloodwort may be sowed in the Spring; its Roots being new-set, will last long.

Dandelyon may be sowed in March or April; and may be ordered as the former.

Carduus Benedictus must be sowed in the Spring, for it will dye in the Winter.

Wormwood is best to be set in the slips; it will last three or four years.

Clary is sown in the Spring; it seeds the second year, and then dies.

Fennel may be known in the Spring and Fall; he may set the Roots, and it will
continue many years.

Sweet Marjoram may be sown in April, but it will dye in the Winter; but if it
be set, the slips will prosper.

Artichokes proceed of young Plants taken from the old stock: The best time to
plant them is in March or April, two days before the Full of the Moon (yet some
plant them in August) let him set no Plants, if he may have choice, but those
that have the bottom-knobs whole, neither let him pluck any plant from the
stock, till it be strong; and if the bottom-knobs are pulled off, and broken,
it will hardly grow. And when that he would take the plants from the stock, let
him dig the Earth half a foot deep round about the stock, then let him thrust
his Thumbes betwixt the stock and the plant, keeping the bottom whole and
unbroken, etc.

Pease and Beans for the Garden must have the seed changed every year; if not,
the increase will be very small, and grow less and less; for in three years the
great Rounseval and great Bean will be no bigger then the wild ones, let him do
what he can to his Ground, if he set or sow them which grew there before; and
so likewise it is with Corn, if the seed be not changed.

If his Pease be in February, let him set them an inch and an half deep; but if
he sow them in March or April, let him set them but an inch deep, but let him
be sure that he set them in the Wane of the Moon, some six or seven days before
the Change, or else he will have a great God, and but small Pease; and let him
set them down eight inches asunder, and he shall have Pease long, and have them
often: Let him set them in several plots, some in February, some in March, and
others in April: A Quart of Pease will serve to set a good plot of Ground.
Pease and Beans will prosper well, being set under Trees; and being sown in
temperate wet weather, it will be a month or longer, before they will appear.

We shall now proceed to give other expert and certain Rules for sowing,
planting, and setting of the most delectable Flowers and Herbs in use, for the
adorning of a Summer-Garden, or a Garden of pleasure and delight.

Roses are of several sorts and colors, as White, Red, Damask, Province, Musk,
and sweet Bryar, etc. Of all the Flowers in the Garden, this is the chief for
beauty and sweetness: Rose-trees are commonly planted in a plot by themselves
(if the Gardine shave room enough) leaving a pretty space between them for
gathering. Now for him to get and set his plants, he must do thus: In the
latter end of January, February, or the beginning of March (at the Increase of
the Moon) go to some old Rose-trees (but not too old) and the Gardener shall
find long young suckers or branches, which sprang up from the Root of the Tree
the last year, let him dig the hole deep, that he may cut off those suckers
close to the Root (but let him take heed of wounding the Tree) then let him
fill up the hole again with Earth very close and hard; these suckers must be
young plants for young Trees: If the suckers have too many branches, let him
cut them away, also the tops of them, they will take Root the better: Then
where he intends to set them, let him dig holes in good ground, at the least a
foot deep, and set them a good depth, treading in the Earth hard about them,
having a little Trench near them for watering, till they have taken Root. The
Provost Roses will bear Root the same year that they are set in, he may, if he
please, plant Strawberries, Primroses, and Violets amongst his Rose-trees, and
they will prosper very well.

Gilliflowers, Carnations, or July-flower^, so called, because in July they are
in their prime and glory; these for beauty and scent are next to the Rose, they
are of several curious colors, and smell like to Cloves, and therefore of some
are termed Clove-July-flowers: These are to be set of young slips without
shanks, taken from the old Body or Root; and when that the Gardener sets them,
let him leave one joint (next to the leaf) at the top of the Ground, so that
the Ground be above the top of the middle joint; for if he set any part of the
Leaves within the Ground, the Gilliflowers heads will never prove. Earthen pots
are good, which have holes in or near the bottom, in which pots let him plant
his Gilliflowers, and in dry weather, twice a week in the Summertime set them
in a Tub of water, for three hours or more. But let no water come to the top of
the pot, but the Rain, the pot will suck up a sufficient moisture at the
bottom-holes: The Gardener shall never need to take in his pots but in frosty
weather.

Wall-July-flowers usually growing on Walls; for they delight to grow in Lime
and Mortar: they will sometimes seem dead in the Summer, and be green, and bear
flowers in the Winter; they bear store of seed, which he may sow, and set the
slips: If he will have them grow upon a Wall, let him dig little holes betwixt
the Bricks and Stones with an old Knife, and put in the seed.

Tulips are very beautiful Flowers, but have no scent; they adorn a Garden well
or a House, their Roots are all like Onions, which the Gardener must set in
January, if there be no Frost; and after they have done bearing, about
Michaelmas let him take up the Roots out of the Ground, which will be double,
and keep them dry in a Box against the next year.

Primroses, so called, as they are the first Flowers in the Spring; they are
very sweet, growing both single and double: when the Roots grow too great, part
them in two or three quarters, and set them again, though they be flowered,
they will grow.

Cowslips are dainty sweet Flowers, they also grow both single and double; and
if the Roots grow broad, you may sever them as you did the Primrose.

Harts-ease or Pansies, they are in shape almost like a Violet; they shed their
seeds, and dye, but come thick up the next Spring.

Lavender is wondrous sweet, both Leaf and Flower, good for show; their Roots
will grow double like a Tulip, which being parted must be new set.

Marigolds show pleasant, and are of a reasonable scent; you may sow them of
seeds, or set young plants.

Daisies are white, red, or mingled colors, they make a pretty show in a
Garden in the Spring; their Roots growing too thick and too broad, are to be
parted and new set.

Flower-de-luces also make a great show in a Garden; the Roots are to be
severed and new set, which being dried, smell sweet.

Lillies that are red make a pleasant show, but have no scent; their Roots grow
like Garlic double, but bigger, which being parted and new set, will grow
again.

White Lillies, their Roots are not like the red; their Roots also are to be
parted, and set as the red Lilly.

Crocasses must be used and set as the Tulip; if the Gardener set them in his
Borders, they will make a pretty show in the Spring.

Lupines proceed from a seed sown in April and March; they bear a delicate
flower, and the green leaves are of a strange shape; they bear Cods like small
Beans, in which are seed.

Holy-hocks are white and red; he may sow them of seeds, or plant the Root.

Piony must have the Roots parted and set, the green leaves spread very broad;
it bears a great beautiful red flower: The seed of it must be sown in the
Spring.

French Mallows make a handsome show; they are also to be sowed in the Spring

Saffron flowereth about Michaelmas; when the flowers fade, it is to be set of
Roots, which ought to be removed every third year about Midsummer.

Poppy has a very fair flower, and of a pretty color; the seed of it must be
sowed in the Spring.

Batchelers buttons are sowed in the Springtime, or the Roots may be planted.

Sweet Sisely has a pleasant scent; he may sow the seeds, or part the Roots
and set them.

Rose-Campions may likewise be sowed of seed, or the Roots planted.

Flower of the Sun grows very high, and bears a great yellow flower, as big
as the crown of a Hat* is opens and shuts with the Sun (like the Marigold)
the seeds must be set in February or March, about a finger deep.

Strawberries are white, red, and green; but the best Strawberries are gathered
out of the Woods, which have Roots well bearded: Let him set them in January,
February, or in August, three inches one from the other, in the beginning of
the last Quarter of the Moon.

I shall next follow the order of the growing and setting of green sweet Herbs
for the Summer-Garden.

Angelica grows big and broad, and lasts long; you may sow it of seeds in
the Spring, and the Roots may be removed after the first year. Lonage grows
much like to Angelica, and it is to be ordered in the like manner.

Anniseeds are produced of seeds sowed; they dye the first year, and so does
Coriander.

Coast-Mary may be sowed of seeds, or the Roots parted and set in March, are
best.

Featherfew is to be sowed in March or April.

Oculus Christi is best to be sowed of seeds, or upon any remove of the young
plants, and new set them.

Herb of Grace, or Rue, the best way to set it is of slips; it is green most
part of the year, and thrives best in the shade: Southernwood is to be ordered
like Rue.

Dutch-box grows green most part of the year, it is very handsome for Works and
Borders; he may part the Roots and set them.

Rosemary is a tender Herb, the best setting of it is in April, or in the end
of March, the Gardener must set such as have no Blossoms, and as he takes it
from the branch; but by no means let him slive it, or tear the slips, but cut
them off a little from the body, leaving some few leaves behind on the piece,
and then it will grow again, otherwise the body being hurt, it will never grow.

Bay-roots will proceed from the Bay-berry, being set in the Spring, or he may
plant the young suckers which spring from the Root.

Honey suckles or Wood-bine, the Gardener must get them in Woods or Hedges in
the Fields, but let him dig enough to have their Roots; prune them, and plant
them against the side of a House, or a Wall, or Pole, and they will yield a
most pleasant shade or a comfortable scent: They must be taken up in January,
February, or the beginning of the Spring.

Hedges or Quick-sets in his Gardens, may be made either with suckers of
Goosberry-trees, Currants, Privet, or Hauthanethorn, planted in January and
February, at the Increase of the Moon.

Eglantine or Sweet-Bryar is to be set on suckers also, and in those months
also, as the former; they will grow from the red Hips, which they bear, but it
will be long before they come to any bigness.

In August, four days after the Change, or three days before the full Moon, let
the Gardener cut all his Winter-herbs within an handful of the ground, then
will they get head against the Winter, and it will preserve them the better
from hard weather; and in the end of September, let him sift the Earth or a
good mould upon them, to cover the Roots well, otherwise the Frost and Rain
will bear the Earth from the Roots, that the Herbs will be in danger of being
killed. And such Herbs as the Gardener intends to keep against Winter, let him
cut them often, to keep them from seeding (for seeding does kill most Herbs) by
this means they will live the better in Winter; but let him have a care that he
do but seldom cut his Herbs in the Wane of the Moon.

To have Flowers great, let him remove them once a year, the second or third
day before the full Moon, and so plant them in August, as in March the weather
being warm, and the ground wet, they will grow.

To dry Herbs for Broths or for Chests, he must make use of set Plats in the
Sun in August in their Flowers, as Winter-savory, Time, Marjoram, Pennyroyal,
Mints, Balm, Rosemary tops, Marigolds, Lavender, Rose-leaves, etc. Let him
gather them as he dryes them, when he sees the morning fair and hot, and the
Herbs dry.

The best and worthiest Roots of Herbs, for the most part are to be gathered in
apt and fit seasons and places, when that the leaves are beginning to fall off,
and the fruits and seeds already shed, so that the season be fair: for done in
a nainy day, the Roots will be rendered the weaker, when they are filled with
unnecessary moisture.

The flowers in like manner are to be gathered, as the Borrage, Bugloss, and
all others of like sort, when they are wholly opened, and before they are
feeble, except the flowers of the Rose and Jesamine, which ought to be gathered
for the better and longer keeping, before that they are much, or rather but a
little opened.

The Leaves and whole Herbs are to be gathered, when that they are come to
their growth and perfection.

The Fruits, and Melons, Cucumbers, Citrons, and Gourds, when they appear
yellow, and are come to their perfect growth and perfection.

The seeds in like condition are to be gathered when they are well ripened, and
before they shed on the Earth; but those that do remain on the Earth, after the
Herbs are thoroughly dried, ought to be rubbed forth with the hands, and kept
unto the time of sowing.

Let the Gardener remember that seeds ought to be gathered in a clear season,
and in the Wane of the Moon.

And let the Gardener take this for a general Rule to be observed, That always
all those things that are to be gathered, as the Herbs, Flowers, Roots, Fruits,
and Seeds, that they are to be gathered in a fair and dry season, and in the
decrease of the Moon.

The Herbs which the Owner intends to keep, are to be picked, and to be
preserved by cleansing; let them be dried in the shade, the place being open
toward the South, not moist, and free from smoke and dust.

These are to be put in Leather-bags rather then Canvass, the mouths at the
hanging up fast tied, or into wooden Boxes of the Box-tree, to the end that the
Herbs may not lose their proper virtues.

The Flowers ought to be dried no otherwise then by the Sun at Noon, but more
especially through the sharp heat of the same, together with the heat of the
Air, unless it be our Rose of the Garden, which is to be preserved for a longer
time, and it is to be longer dried, and more moderately in a high place,
standing open to the Sun at Noon, or so that the Sunbeams enter into, but yet
touch not the Rose-leaves.

The best way for drying of Flowers, is to lay them in a temperate place, free
from moisture, dust, and smoke, and to stir them to and fro, that they corrupt
not in the drying, so as to lose neither their color nor their natural savor.

The finer seeds are to be preserved in Leather-bags, or in earthen Vessels,
having very narrow mouths, or else in Glass-bottles, or Gally-glasses very well
stopped.

But the seeds of Onions, Chibols, and Leeks, as also of Poppy, are to be
preserved in husks and heads.

For the preserving of Roots, the Gardener ought to learn and exercise two
means; the one for keeping of them fresh, and the other for the round Roots, as
the Navew, Radish, Carrot, and other like sorts, for to preserve them dry.

The way and means to preserve Roots fresh, is to bury them in a Cellar, in
Gravel or Sand well turned upon them, or in a Garden-ground reasonably deep
dug, even as he does for the Radish and Navew in the earth, that he may
enjoy the commodity of them for the greater part of the Winter: to preserve
Roots dry, the Gardener (after the plucking of the Roots out of the Earth)
ought to wash them very clean with Conduit or Spring Water, afterward to cut
away all the small and hairy Roots; which done, to dry them in a shadowy place,
free from the beams of the Sun, if so be that they are slender or thin Rind, as
the Roots of the Fennel, Succory, Parsley, Endive, Borrage, Bugloss, Sperage,
and sundry such like: but if the Roots are thick of Rind, of a gross Essence,
and big, then must the Gardener lay them dry in the Sun at Noonday, as the
Roots of Gentian, the Earth* Apple, Briony, Rapontick, Aristolocia, or any
others like them.

All the Field-plants, Flowers, and Roots, are longer in Nature, but in
substance inferior to the Garden-plants, etc.

Among wild Plants, those growing on the Mountains do excel the others in
property.

Amongst all Plants, those are of a stronger Nature, more especially those that
are of a livelier color, better taste and savor.

The Herbs which one would use for the Kitchen, ought rather to be gathered
with a Knife, somewhat above the Earth, when they are shot up to their perfect
growth, as the Beets, Succory, Arach, Borrage, Marigold, Colewort, Endive,
Clary, Rocket, Basil, Marjoram, Mercury, Lettice, Parsley, and many others.

Thus I have, as briefly as I could, discoursed of Fruits, sundry Herbs, and
Flowers, how they are properly to be gathered, and according to their diversity
to be preserved; all which Instructions and rare Secrets I have in part
borrowed out of the Treasures of the best and most experienced Professors of
Husbandry; together with what I have got through my earnest importunity from
some of my most intimate Friends. I beseech God to vouchsafe his Blessing to
these my poor Endeavors.

Of Bees.
IN the keeping of Bees there is little charge, but they require good
attendance to the time that they shall cast the Swarm. To which purpose it will
be convenient that the Hive be set in a Garden or an Orchard, where as they may
be kept from the North Wind, and the mouth of the Hive toward the Sun. In June
and July they do most commonly cast, and they should have some low Trees nigh
to them before the Hive, that the Swarm may light upon; and when the Swarm is
knit, take a Hive, and splent it within with three or four splents, that the
Bees may knit their Combs unto it, and anoint the splents and sides of the Hive
with a little Honey; and if he have no Honey, let him take sweet Cream, and
then set a stool or a form nigh to the swarm, and lay a clean washed sheet upon
the stool, and then let him hold the small end of the Hive downwards, and shake
the Bees into the Hive, and then presently set it upon the stool, and turn the
corners of the sheet over the Hive: Let him leave one place open, that the Bees
may go in and out; but let him do this quietly; for he must not in any wise
fight or strive with them: and let him lay Nettles on the boughs where they
were knit, to drive them from the place; and then let him watch them all that
day, that they go not away; and at night, when all are gone up to the Hive, let
him take it away, and set it where it shall stand, and take away the sheet, and
let him have Clay ready tempered, to lay about it upon the board or stone where
it shall stand, that no wind come in; but the board is better and warmer. Let
him leave a hole open on the South Side of three inches broad, and an inch of
height, for the Bees to enter in and out. And then let him make a covering of
Wheat or Rye-straw to cover, and house the Hive above, and let him set the Hive
two foot or more above the Earth upon the stakes, so that a Mouse nor any other
Beasts or Vermin may come near it. But if a swarm be cast late in the year,
they should be fed with Honey in the Winter, and laid upon a thin narrow board
or Slate or Lead put into the Hive, and another thin board should be set before
every Hives mouth, that no wind come in, and to have four or five little nicks
made in the netherside, that a Be may come out or go in, and so fastened, that
the wind blow it not down; and so ordered, that he may take it up when he will.
That Hive that is fed, let the mouth of it be stopped clean, that other Bees come
not in; for if they do, they will fight and kill one another. And let him
beware, that no Wasps come into the Hive; for they will kill the Bees, and eat
the Honey. There is also a Be called a Drone, which is greater then another
Be: This Drone will eat the Honey, and gather nothing, and therefore they
should be killed; it is a common saying, that she has lost her sting, and that
therefore she will not labor as the others do.

How to keep Beasts and other Cattle.
IF a Husbandman would keep Cattle well to his profit, he must have several
Closes and Pastures to put them in, the which should be well quick-setted,
ditched, or hedged, that at his pleasure, he may sever his biggest and
strongest Cattle from the weakest, and especially in Winter time, when they
shall be foddered. And though a man be but a Farmer, and shall have his Farm
twenty years, it is less cost for him, and more profit for him to quick-set,
ditch, or hedge, then to have his Cattle go before the Herdsmen; for let the
Husbandman spend in three years as much money as the keeping of his Beasts,
Swine, and Sheep do cost him in the years. Then always after he shall have all
manner of Cattle with the tenth part of the cost, and the beasts shall like
much the better, and by this means the Herdsman shall have for every beast two
pence a Quarter, or thereabouts. And the Swine-herd will have for every Swine
at least a penny. Then he must have a Shepherd of his own, or else he shall
never thrive: Then reckon Meat, Drink, and Wages for his Shepherd, the
Herdsmans, and the Swine-herds Hire: these charges will double his Rent, or
arise nigh to do so, except his Farm be above forty pounds per Annum* Now let
us compute what these Charges will come to in three years; but let him lay out
as much money in Quick-setting, ditching, and hedging, and in three years he
shall be discharged for ever, and much of his labor, he and his Servants may
do with their own hands, and save much money. And then has he every field in
severality, and by the assent of the Lord and the Tenants, every Neighbor may
exchange his Lands with the other. And then shall his Farm be twice as good in
profit to the Tenant as it was before, and as much Land kept in tillage; by
this means the rich man shall not over-eat the poor man with his Cattle, and
the fourth part of the Hay and Straw shall serve his Cattle better in a
Pasture, then four times so much will do in a House, and less attendance, and
the Cattle shall like the better.

To buy fat Cattle.
IF the Grasier shall buy fat Oxen or Kine, let him handle them, and see that
they are soft on the fore-crop behind the shoulder, and upon the hindermost
Rib, and upon the Hucklebone, and the Nache by the Tail: Let him see that the
Ox have a great God, and the Cow a great Navel; for then it is very likely that
they are well tallowed. And let him take heed where he buys any lean Cattle or
fat, and of whom, and where it was bred: For if he buy out of a better ground
then he has of his own, that Cattle will not like with his. Also let him look,
that there be no manner of sickness amongst the Cattle: whether there be any
Murren or Long-saught amongst them, which may prove very dangerous; for a beast
may take a sickness ten or twelve days or more before it appears on them.

To buy lean Cattle.
THat Husbandman that will thrive, must be well furnished with Cattle, he must
rear and breed some Calves and Foals, or else he must be a Buyer. If he buy
Oxen for the Plough, let him look that they are young and not goutty, neither
broken of Hair, of Tail, or of Pizzle. If he buys Kine for the Pail, let him
see that they are young, and likely to give good Milk; and let him be sure that
he feed her Calves well. And if he buy lean Oxen, let him feed and fat them,
the younger they are, the better they will feed, and sooner gain flesh: but (as
we have said) let him look well to the Hair, that it stare not, and that the
Beast lick himself, be whole mouthed, and want no teeth. And though he have the
Gout, and be broken both of Tail and Pizzle, yet will he feed. But the goutty
Ox will not be driven far. Let him also be sure, that he have a broad Rib and a
thick Hide, that he be loose-skinned, that it stick not hard nor strait to his
Ribs, for then he will not feed.

To rear Calves.
IT is convenient for a Husbandman to rear Calves, and especially those that
come betwixt Candlemas and May; for at that season he may best spare Milk, and
by that time the Calf shall be weaned, there will be Grass enough to put him
into, and at Winter he will be big enough to save himself amongst other beasts,
with a little favor. The Dam of the Calf shall bull again, and bring another
by the same time of the year: but if he shall tarry till after May, the Calf
will be weak in Winter, and the Dam will not bull again, but oftentimes go
barren. And if he shall rear a Calf that comes after Michaelmas, it will be
costly to keep the Calf all the Winterseason at Hay, and the Dam at hard meat
in the House, as they use in the plain Champion Countries. And a Cow shall give
more Milk with a little grass and straw, lying without in a Close, then she
shall do with Hay and Straw, lying in a House, for the hard meat dries up the
Milk. But he that has no Pasture must do as he may: but yet it is better for
the Husbandman to sell those Calves, then to rear them, because of the cost,
and also for the profit of the Milk to his House, and the rather the Cow will
take the Bull. If the Husbandman go with an Ox-plough, it is convenient that he
rear two Ox-calves, and two Cow-calves at the least to uphold his stock; and if
he rear more, it will be the more profitable for him. It is better for the
Husbandman to wean his Calves at Grass, then at hard meat, if they went to
Grass before. And that man that may have a Pasture for his Kine, and another
for his Calves, and water in them both, may rear and breed good Beasts with
little cost. And if the Husbandman wean his Calves with Hay, it will make them
big-bellied, and they are the likelier to rot when they go to grass. In Winter
they should be put in a House by themselves, and given Hay over night, and put
in a good pasture in the day time, which will render them much the better to
handle when they shall be Kine or Oxen.

To geld Calves.
IT will be a fit time to geld Calves in the old of the Moon, when they are ten
or twenty days old; for then is least danger, and the Ox shall be the higher,
and the longer of body, and the longer horned. And that may be thus proved:
Take two Ox-calves, both of them of one kind, one making, and both of one age,
geld one of them, and let the other go forth, and be a Bull. And put them both
in one pasture until they are four or five years old, and then shall you see
the Ox-calf far greater every way then the Bull. There is no other cause of
this but the gelding. And if he geld them not till they are a year old, there
will be the more danger, and he will be less of body, and shorter horned.

Of which is the greatest loss, a Lamb, a Calf, or Foal.
IT is less damage to a Husbandman to have his Cow to cast her Calf, then an Ew
to cast her Lamb; for the Calf will suck as much milk ere it be fit to be
killed, as it is worth, and of the Ew comes no profit of the milk, but the
Lamb. Howsoever they use in some places to milk their Ews when they have weaned
their Lambs; but that is a great hurt to the Ews, insomuch that it will cause
them that they will not take the Ram at the time of the year, because of their
leanness, but grow barren. And if a Mare cast her Foal, that is thrice so much
loss. For if the Foal come of a good Breed, the loss is so much the greater,
and in a short time the Foal may be sold for as much money as would buy many
Calves and Lambs.

What Cattle should go together in one Pasture.
BEasts alone, nor Horses alone, nor Sheep alone, except it be Sheep upon a
very high Ground, will not eat pasture even, but leave many in Fees and high
Grass in diverse places, except it be over-laid with Cattle. Therefore we may
the better take notice, that Horses and Beasts will agree well in one Pasture;
for there is some manner of Grass that a Horse will eat, that a Beast will not,
as the Fitches, Flashes, and low places, and all the hollow Bundes and Pipes
grow therein. But Horses and Sheep will not so well agree, except it be Sheep
to feed; for a Sheep will go on a bare Pasture, and will eat the sweetest
Grass, and so will a Horse, but he would have it longer. Howsoever he will eat
as close to the Earth as a Sheep, but he cannot so soon fill his belly. To a
hundred Beasts the Husbandman or Grasier may put in twenty Horses. If it be low
ground, and if there be grass enough, he may put in an hundred Sheep, and so
after the rate the pasture more or less: and after this manner they may feed or
eat the Close even, and leave but few tufts. But if it be high ground, let him
put in more Sheep, and less Beasts, and Horses. Milch Kine and draught Oxen
will eat a Close much barer then as many fat Kine and Oxen. A Milch Cow may
have too much meat; for if she grow fat, she will the rather take Bull, and
give less milk: for the fatness stops the Pores and the Veins that should
bring the milk to the Paps. And therefore mean Grass is best to keep her in a
low estate. And if a Cow be fat when she should calf, then is there great
hazard of her, and the Calf shall be the less; but the Husbandman cannot allow
his Draught-Ox too much meat, except it be the after-mathe of a low-mown
Meadow, for that will cause him to have the Girte, and then he is not so fit to
labor. And if there be too much Grass in a Close, the Cattle shall feed so
much the worse, for a good bite to the Earth is sufficient; for if it be long,
the Beasts will bite off the top and no more, for that is sweet, and the other
lies still upon the ground, and rotteth, and no Beasts will eat it but Horses
in Winter: But these Beasts, Horse, and Sheep may not be foddered together in
Winter; for then they should be severed, for else the Beasts with their horns
will gore both the Horses and the Sheep in their bellies. It will be necessary
to make standing Cratches to cast their Fodder in, and the staves set right
enough together for pulling their Fodder out too hastily for shedding. And if
it be laid upon the Earth, the fourth part thereof will be lost: but if he is
forced to lay it on the Earth, let him lay it every time in a new place, for
the old will spoil the new.

Of Swine.
THe Husbandman that is well furnished with other Cattle, it will also be very
profitable for him that he have Swine: It is a common saying, That he that has
Sheep, Swine, and Bees, sleep he or wake he, may thrive; and the saying is,
because that from these things the greatest profit arises with the least cost.
Therefore let the Husbandman consider with himself how many Swine he can
conveniently keep: let them be Boars and Sows all, and no Hogs. And if he be
able to rear six Pigs a year, then let two of them be Boars, and two of them
Sows, and so to continue after that rate: For a Boar will require as little
keeping as a Hog, and is much better then a Hog, and has more meat on him, and
is ready at all times to cut in the Winter season, and to be laid in Souse. And
a Sow before she be fit to be killed, shall bring forth as many Pigs and more,
as she is worth, and her body is not the worse, but will be as good Bacon as a
Hog, and asks as little keeping, but at such a time as she has Pigs. And if
his Sow has more Pigs then he intends to rear, let him sell them, or dispose
of them for his Family; but let him rear those Pigs that come about Lent,
especially at the beginning of Summer; for they cannot be reared in winter for
cold, without great cost.

Of the Properties of Horses.
A Good Horse has several properties, two of a Man, two of a Bauson or Badger,
four of a Lion, nine of an Ox, nine of a Hare, nine of a Fox, nine of an Ass,
ten of a Woman.

The two properties that a Horse has of a Man, is to have a proud heart; the
second is to be bold and hardy.

The two properties that a Horse has of a Bauson or Badger, is first to have a
white Raze or Ball in the Forehead; the second to have a white Foot.

The four properties that a Horse has of a Lion, is first to have a broad
Breast, the second to be stiff-docked, the third to be wild of Countenance, the
fourth to have good Legs.

The nine properties that a Horse has of an Ox, is first to be broad-ribbed,
the second to be low-brawned, the third to beshort-pasturned, the fourth to
have great sinews, the fifth to be wide betwixt the Challes, the sixth to have
a great Nose, the seventh to be big on the Chine, the eighth to be fat well
fed, the ninth to be upright standing and

The nine properties that a Horse has of a Hare, is first to be stiff-eared,
the second to have great Eyes, the third to have round Eyes, the fourth to have
a lean Head, the fifth to have lean Knees, the sixth to be light of Foot, the
seventh to turn upon a light Ground, the eighth to have short Buttocks, the
ninth to have two good Fillets.

The nine properties that a Horse has of a Fox, is first to be prick-eared,
the second is to be little-eared, the third is to be round-sided, the fourth is
to be side-tayled, the fifth is to be short-legged, the sixth is to be
black-legged, the seventh is to be short-trotting, the eighth is to be
well-colored, the ninth is to have a little Head.

The nine properties that a Horse has of an Ass, the first is to be
small-mouthed, the second is to be long-reined, the third is to be
thin-crested, the fourth is to be strait-backed, the fifth is to have small
Stones, the sixth is to have Lath-legs, the seventh is to be round-footed, the
eighth is to be hollow-footed, the ninth is to have a rough Foot.

The ten properties a Horse has of a Woman, the first is to be merry at meat,
the second is to be well-paced, the third is to have a broad Forehead, the
fourth is to have broad Buttocks, the fifth is to be hard of Ward, the sixth is
to be easy to be leapt upon, the seventh is to be good at a long Journey, the
eighth is to be ever busy with the Tongue, the ninth is to be chewing the
Bridle, the tenth is to be active and stirring under a man.

Of the diverse Diseases of Cattle, and the Remedies thereof, and first of the
Murrain.
THe Murrain proceeds from a rankness of Blood, it appears first most
commonly in the Head; for the Head will swell, and the Eyes wax great, and run
with water, and froth at the Mouth, which are certain signs that the Beast is
past Remedy; for he will not eat after he has fallen sick. The best way is to
tie him, and to make a deep pit hard by the place where he dies, and so to
cast him in, and cover him close with Earth, that no Dogs may come to the
Carrion. For as many beasts as smell of that Carrion, are very likely to be
infected. And then let him take the skin, and carry it to the Tanners, and sell
it. It has been a common charitable Custom, to take the bare head of the same
beast, and put it upon a long Pole, and set it on a Hedge fast bound to a stake
by the Highway side, that every man that rides or goes by that way, may see
and know by that sign, that there is sickness of Cattle in that Township. And
the good honest Husbandmen in those parts are of opinion, that this may be a
means that the Murrain may the sooner cease: when the beast is flayed, the
Murrain will appear betwixt the flesh and the skin, and it will rise up like a
Jelly or Froth an inch deep or more; and the best Remedy for the Murrain, is to
take a small Curtain-rod, and bind it hard about the Beasts Neck, and that will
cause the blood to come into the Neck; and on the other side of the Neck, there
is a Vein that a man may feel with his finger, then let him take a Blood-Iron,
and set it straight upon the Vein, and blood him on both sides, and let him
bleed the quantity of a pint, or nigh it, and then let him take away the Cord,
and it will stanch bleeding. And thus let him serve all his Cattle in that
Close or Pasture, and by Gods Blessing there shall no more of them be sick.

Of the Long-saught, with the Remedy.
THis sickness will endure long, it is perceived by its hoissing, the Beast
will stand much, and eat but little, and grow very hollow and thin, and he will
hoist twenty times in an hour, but few such do mend. The best Remedy is to keep
the Cattle in sundry places, and as many as were in company with that Beast
that first fell sick, to let them blood a little. There are many Farriers that
can sever them, that is, to cut the Dew-lap before; there is a Grass called
Fetter-grass, take that Grass, and bruise it a little in a Mortar, and put
thereof as much as a Hens Egg into the same Dew-lap, and be careful that it
fall not out.

Of Dewholm, and the hard Remedy thereof.
THis Disease comes when a hungry Beast is put into a Pasture full of rank
Grass, where he will eat so much, that his sides will stand as high as his
Backbone, and at other times the one side more then the other. When the beast
has this disease with the swelling, he must not be driven hastily nor
labored. The substance of this distemper is but a wind, and therefore he
should be softly driven, but not suffered to lie down. I have seen a Farrier
take a Knife, and thrust the beast through the skin and the flesh two inches
deep or more, six inches or more through the Rigge-bone, that the wind may come
out; for the wind lies betwixt the flesh and the great Paunch.

Of the Risen upon, and the Remedy thereof.
FEw or no men know from whence this Disease proceeds; but you may perceive
it by swelling in the Head, and more especially by the Eyes; for they will run
on water, and close the beasts sight, which many times causes them to dye
within an hour or two, if they are not suddenly taken in hand. The cause of
this disease is, that there is a Blister risen under the Tongue, the which
Blister must be slit with a Knife across: when he has pulled out the Tongue,
let him rub the Blister well with Salt, and take a Hens Egg, and break it in
the beasts mouth, shell and all, and cast Salt with it, and hold up the beasts
head, that all may be swallowed down into the body. But the breaking of the
Blister is the great help; let him drive the beast a little about, and this
shall cure him by the help of God.

Of the Turn, and the Remedy thereof.
THere are beasts that will turn about when they eat their meat, and will not
feed: it is a dangerous disease for them, by reason that they are subject to
fall in Pits, Ditches, or Waters. The cause of this distemper proceeds from a
Bladder in the Forehead, between the Brain-pan and the Brains, the which must
be taken out, or else the beast shall never mend, but it will kill him. This is
the Remedy and the greatest Cure that can be on a beast: Take the beast, and
throw him down, and bind his four feet together, and with his Thumb let him
thrust the Beast in the Forehead, and where he finds the softest place, there
let him take a Knife, and cut the skin three or four inches on both sides
between the Horns, and as much beneath toward the Nose, and flay it, and turn
it up and down, and pin it fast with a pin. And with a Knife cut the Brain-pan
two inches broad, and three inches long; but let him look that the Knife go no
deeper then the thickness of the bone, for perishing of the Brain: Let him take
away the bone, and then he shall see a Bladder full of water two inches long
and more. Let him take that out, and be sure that he hurt not the Brain; and
then let him lay down the skin, and sew it fast as it was before, and bind a
cloth two or threefold upon his Forehead, to keep it from cold and wet, for ten
or twelve days together: thus have I seen many cured. But if the Beast be fat,
and have good substantial meat upon him, it will be safer to kill him, for
there will be but little loss. If the Bladder be under the Horn, it is past
cure. A Sheep will be troubled with the same distemper; but I never saw any of
them cured.

Of the Warry-breed, and the Remedy.
THere are Beasts that have this Disease in diverse parts of their Body and
Legs. This is the Remedy; cast the beast down, and bind his four Legs together,
and let the Farrier take a Culter or pair of Tongs, or such other Iron, and
make it glowing hot; and if it be a long Warry-breed, let him fear it close to
the body; and if it be in the beginning, and but flat, then let him lay the hot
Iron upon it, and fear it to the bare skin, and it will prove a perfect Cure.

Of the Foul, and the Remedy.
THis Disease is for the most part between the Clees, sometimes before, and
sometimes behind; it will smell, and cause the Beast to halt. This is the
Remedy; cast him down, and bind his four feet together, and take a Rope hard
writhen and twisted together, and put it between his Clees, and let him draw
the Rope to and fro for a good space, till that he bleed well; and then let him
lay to it soft-made Tar, and bind a cloth about it, that no Mire or Gravel get
between the Clees; then put him into pasture, or let him stand still in the
House, and he will suddenly mend.

Of the Gout without Remedy.
THere are Beasts that will have the Gout, and that for the most part in the
hinder-feet, which will cause him to go stiffly and halt. I never knew any man
that could find such a Remedy as to cure this distemper: the only way to be
taken that I know of, is to put him into good Grass, and let him feed well.

To help a Beast that pisseth Blood.
Take of Bloodwort, of Shepherds-purse, or Knotgrass, of each a like quantity,
and stamp them together, then strain them with a quart of Milk of one colored
Cow, and put thereinto a little Runnet made of the same Milk, and mix therewith
the Leaven of brown Bread; then strain them all together, and give it with a
Horn: use this morning and evening, and it will cure him.

A Remedy for the Blain in the Tongue.
IT is a certain Bladder growing above the Root of the Tongue against the Pipe,
which grief at length with swelling, will choke and stop the wind: You may
perceive this distemper by his gaping, and holding forth of his Tongue, and
foaming at the mouth; without a speedy Remedy, it will suddenly kill him. The
Cure is, to cast him, and to take forth his Tongue, and slit the Bladder, or
break it thereon; then wash it with a little Vinegar and Salt, and he will
recover.

To help a Beast that is goared.
Take Ashes finely sifted, and mix them with the grounds of Ale and Beer, and
make it as thick as Butter, and so lay it thereon, and it will heal it.

A Remedy for the Pantasie in a Beast.
THis Disease will shake him much, and make him quiver in the Flanks, and pant
extremely. For the Cure, you shall give him some Runnet, Soot, and Chamber-lye
mixed together.

To kill Lice and Ticks in Cattle.
Take the Decoction of wild Olives mixed with Soot, then rub and chafe the
beast all over therewith. Another: Take Bearfoot-herb, stamp it, and then
strain it with Vinegar mixed with it, and so apply it.

A sovereign Remedy for the Plague in Cattle.
THis Disease proceeds from an infection of blood: it appears first commonly in
the Head; for the beasts Head will swell, and his Eyes grow great, and run with
water. When he does once forth at the mouth, he is past Remedy. For the Cure,
take of the wild Carrot, called in Latin Daucus or wild Parsnep, of Groundsil,
of Angelica-roots, or the Root of Sea-Holm, named Eringion, with Fennel-seed,
and sprinkle it with sod Wine, and fine wheaten Meal, with hot Water, mix them
so together, and give your sick Cattle to drink thereof: then soon after you
shall make a Drink of Cassia-Mirrh, and Frankincense, in like manner mixed with
as much blood of the Sea-Tortoise, if you can get it; then put altogether in a
quart of good old Wine, and squire it into their Nostrils. You must administer
this Medicine three days together, every day a third part. Other Preservatives
are these: You must change their Lays, and divide them into many parts, far off
from thence, and also separate the whole from the sick; for one beast infected
will infect all the rest in a short time: Thus when you have changed them into
other parts, you must put them where you may be sure that no other beast do
feed with them.

An approved Remedy for the Tetter in Cattle.
THis Distemper is an ill-favored Scurf or Scab growing on the skin or outward
part of the beast. Some Tetters are broad, and some will grow long, and hang
like a Cluster of Grapes, somewhat hard. It is supposed that they are increased
through leanness and wet; or it may proceed from some venomed Humor, or by
some prick or bruise. The running or broad Tetter is cured by fearing it round
about with a hot Iron, then lay Tar on it, and it will take it away. Some also
say, that when the beast begins to be in good case, and lusty with eating of
grass, that it will wear away of it self by degrees; for he has it for the
most part in the Winter, and not in the Summer.

An excellent Cure for an Ox or Cow that has a Fever.
THis Disease is sometimes got by cold or other distempers: The signs thereof
are* when his Eyes are hollow, and seem as if they were heavy, dropping from
his head, his mouth lathering and foaming, drawing his breath very long and
hard, with much pain, which occasions him sometimes to sigh. For the Cure, you
must keep him a day and a night without meat or drink, then the next morning
fasting you may draw a little blood from him under his Tail; about an hour
after give him thirty small Truncheons of Coleworts sod in Sallet-Oyl and salt
Fish-water, or Brine, and force him to swallow it. Do thus to him for five
mornings fasting; cast before him the tender branches of Olive Trees, or the
tender buds of the Vine; rub and cleanse his Lips thrice a day, and give him
cold water to drink, and keep him up till he be well. The Ox also is troubled
with this disease, which proceeds from his too much labor: You must let him
blood on the Vein of the Forehead, or on the Vein of his Ear. Then give him
green Herbs, as Lettice, and such like, that are cold; bathe all his body with
white Wine, give him cold water to drink, and he will recover.

An excellent Remedy for the Lungs of Cattle infected.
THe Cure is; you must pierce one of his Ears with a little Bodkin, and being
so pierced, put into the holes the burnt Roots of Hazel-trees, then take a
quantity of the Juice of Leeks, with so much Sallet-Oyl, and mix it with a pint
and an half of Wine, and give it him fasting. Use this nine days together, and
he shall recover. This distemper proceeds from the Lights and Lungs of a beast
infected, which will cause him to grow lean; till at length a common Cough will
so dry his body, that it will kill him, if a sudden Remedy be not applied.

To help an Ox or any other Beast that have lost their Quide.
THe Quide by some accident or other may fall from the beast, which will cause
him to mourn, and have no stomach to eat; for that the meat which he has
already eaten, he cannot digest. To cure this distemper, take part of the Quide
out of another beasts mouth, and give it to the sick beast to swallow down, and
by that means he will recover: But if he has been long distempered, that he is
much wasted and spent, then you must pull forth his Tongue, and prick the
under-vein with an Awle in two or three places, till it bleed: this will cure
him. Probatum est.

A Remedy that fails not to cure a Beast that cannot piss.
Take and bruise Carduus Benedictus steeped in white Wine, and so give it to
him. Give an Ox that cannot piss warm Water mixed with Bran; also take and
stamp Sow-thistle, and heat it with Ale and Beer, and it will help him.

To cure a Cow of the Whethered.
THis distemper falls upon her when she has but newly calved, and has not
cast her cleaning, which without voiding will suddenly kill her. To cure her,
take a good quantity of the Juice of Mallows, mixed with Ale and white Wine,
which is excellently good to repulse the latter birth after the Cow has calved.

A Remedy for the faintness of a laboring Ox.
That Ox that has labored hard all the Winter at Plough, and at the approach
of the Spring will be very lean and faint, and lousie, insomuch that with
little or no labor they will lie down. To recover and make him lusty, before
his watering you must give him a good handful of Barley in the straw, and
afterward let him drink: which will preserve him in a strong and good case.

To recover the Leanness of a Cow.
You must make a Drink, and give it her fasting, which is: take of long Pepper,
of Madder, of the Bark of Walnut-tree, and Turmerick, with some Bays, of each a
like portion: beat them into fine powders, and put them into a pint of Ale
lukewarm, and she will be in a good liking, and far better plight.

Remedies against the Worms in Cattle.
Take and stamp Garlic, and mix it with Milk or Ale, and give it to the beast.
Take a handful of Wood-Sage or wild Sage, bruise it, and strain it with Ale,
and give it: They are approved Medicines.

Against the Milting of an Ox, or any other Beast.
This distemper is so called from the beasts sudden lying down, if there be but
the least stop, though at Plough or Cart, which for the most part may proceed
from some blow, stripe, or other mischance. When the beast lies down, do not
disturb him, so as immediately to raise him; but gently turn him, and lay him
on the other side, and he will by degrees recover himself: For the Remedy,
bruise the Bark of an Ash, strain it with Ale, and so give it him, and he will
do well.

An excellent Remedy for the dropping Nostrils and watery Eyes of Cattle.
Take Salt and Savory mixed together, and rub his Throat with it, as also his
Jaws; also you may rub and chafe the said parts with Brine and Garlic mixed
together, or squirt in his Nostrils the Juice of Pimpernel mixed with a little
white Wine: These things are excellently good for the dropping Nostrils and
watery Eyes of Cattle.

To cure the Garget in the Maw.
This dangerous distemper proceeds from the beasts over-eating of Crabs or
Acorns that they find under Trees, which for the most part they swallow whole
without breaking or chewing, so that they lie so in lumps in the Maw, that they
cannot digest it; so that in time it will grow and sprout in the Maw (as some
fancy) till it brings them into a dying condition. The Cure is, take a good
quantity of whole Mustard Seed, and mix it with Wine and strong Ale, and give
it to the beast, and it will set him right.

A Remedy against the crying and fretting of the Guts in Cattle, by some
called, the Crowling.
The Cure is, when the beast shall suddenly see any thing swim, especially (as
some will have it) a Drake on the water, that he shall presently be cured.

To cure Impostumes in Beasts.
Open the place with an Iron, and when it is cut, then you may crush out all
the evil humor and matter in it, then stir and wash it with the warm Brine of
an Ox. Afterward take Chirpi (so named of the French) mixed with Tar and white
Oil of Olive, plaisterwise close the sore therewith: If you cannot wash the
sore clean inwardly, you must melt the Tallow of an Ox or Goat, and so infuse
it into the wound, and let it run down all about the bottom thereof. Probatum
est.

To cure a Beast that is goared.
If it be by some of his fellow-cattel, to prevent some Gargel or some
Impostume that may proceed from it, you must take Ashes finely sifted, mix them
with the grounds of Ale or Beer, and make them as thick as Butter, and so lay
it on the Goar, and this will certainly cure it.

The best times to be observed to stop Laxes.
You must observe when the Moon, or sign of Taurus is in Virgo or Capricorn,
that will be the best time for to give your beast drink to stop it. Also it is
not good to purge, or to let blood (without a great necessity) in the change of
the Moon, nor when there is an evil Aspect in one Planet to another, nor in the
signs of Capricorn or Aquarius; for they are the two Houses of Saturn and Mars.

A sudden and approved Remedy against a Sprain or Stroke.
Take Butter, black Soap, and Hemlockherb, with a quantity of Salt and Oil
proportionable, then mix them altogether, bathe the Sprain and Stroke
therewith, as hot as he can endure it, and it will cure him. But if it be in
the Legs, you must put unto them the things aforesaid, either with grounds of
Beer or Ale, wash them therewith, and then wrap it about them with a hair-rope
dipped in Chamber-lye, and the beast shall do well.

To cure Calves that have the Worms in their Bellies.
These Worms will annoy them much, and at length prove dangerous; they will
take away their stomachs to their meat. The best Remedy is to take Lumpin-pease
half raw, bruise them, and divide them into small pieces, make them to swallow
them: do this in the morning, and it will kill them.

An approved Remedy for the Costiveness in Cattle.
A Swelling in Ox and Kine is procured through heat, so that they cannot dung.
The Cure is to chafe and drive them apace up and down: If they do not then
dung, anoint your hand with Oil or Grease, then rake them, and take forth their
dung.

An excellent Cure for a Beast that is Hidebound.
This disease happens to an Ox when he has been over-laboured. For this Cure,
sethe Bayleaves in Ale, and so bathe him therewith, and immediately chafe and
rub him with Oil and Wine mixed together, and so pluck and draw the skin on
both his sides, till you have by degrees loosed it from his Ribs: do this in a
Sun-shiny-day, that it may the better dry and soak it.

An excellent Cure for the Garget in the throat of a Beast
This distemper will grievously afflict him; it commonly seizes on him through
some great drought for want of water. The Cure is, you must cast him, then cut
and flay his skin on both sides, as far as any swelling does appear, then take
the whitest sifted Ashes that you can procure, and mix them with the grounds of
Stale and Piss, and stir them well together, and wash the flesh sore therewith,
and it will heal it.

A certain Remedy against the Worm in a Beasts tail.
This Worm will breed like to an eating Canker, which will make the beast of
ill liking, very poor in flesh: when you offer to feel, you shall find this
place somewhat soft; a little above the place on the sides of his Tail, you
must slit the skin downright with a sharp Knife, two inches long; then take a
quantity of bruised Garlic and Salt mixed together, bind it fast to the place,
and let it so remain till it do fall off it self, and the beast will do well.

An approved Remedy to cure Galls and Scabs in Cattle.
Take Garlic, and bruise it, and with it chafe and rub all the Sores. If it
grow to any great Sore, then rub the place with bruised Mallows mixed with
white Wine, and bind them to the place.

A Remedy for the Galling of the Neck or Throat with the Yoke.
If it swell but of one side, you must let him blood on the Ear on that side;
but if it be chafed in the midst of the Neck, then let him blood in both his
Ears, and lay unto it a Plaster made with the Marrow of an Ox, mixed with the
Suet of a Buck, and then melt them together with some Pitch and Tar, and you
shall heal him.

A Cure for the Itch in Cattle.
It may proceed from bad dressing, he may take it from his Fellows, or it may
come from ill water, and Choler in the Veins. The Remedy is to wash and chafe
him with his own Urine made warm, and mixed with old salt Butter.

A Cure for the flowing of the Gall.
This distemper proceeds from the abundance of Choler, increased by hard
traveling in hot seasons; the Gall being filled with Choler, it overflows the
whole body, causing the Yellows or the Jaundice. For the Cure, take Gallwort
herb, which is bitter, and stamp a handful thereof, and then strain it with a
quart of Ale, and so give it the beast to drink three mornings, and he will
recover.

An approved Remedy against the Colic in Cattle.
This distemper causes a gurting or rumbling of the belly, with a noise in the
Guts, you shall see the diseased beast lie down, and rise presently, because
his pain will not suffer him to take any ease or rest. If it be an Ox, bruise
Garlic, or bruised Leeks with a pint of Wine. The general Medicine to help
Cattle, is to put into their drink the Oil of Nuts, or Onions boiled in sweet
Wine.

An excellent Remedy against the Haw in the Eye.
This disease is soon perceived by the beasts holding of his head on one side,
and his winking with his Eye, which will run of water. The Cure is, you must
hold him fast by the head, with a strong double thread, put therewith a Needle
in the midst of the upper Eyelid, and tie it to the Horn, then take your
Needle again with a long thread, and put it through the Gristle of the Haw, and
with a sharp Knife cut the skin exactly round, and so pluck out the Haw; then
lay a fine Linen Cloth about the top of your finger, and put your finger
inwardly round about his Eye, and take out the blood, then wash it with Beer or
Ale, and cast in a good quantity of Salt, wash it again, and stroke it down
with your hand: Let him go, and he will do very well.

A Remedy for the Kibes in the Heel.
Cut them forth as nigh as you can, and let them bleed well; then take
Herb-Grace, and the Yolk of a new-laid Egg well beaten and stamped, and so bind
it to the grief, and it will help and heal it.

An excellent Remedy for the sickness of the Lungs.
This disease is perceived by the rising and shaking of the Dew-lap. For the
Cure, take Bearfoot and beaten Garlic, wrap it in Butter, then cut his Dew-lap
two inches beneath his sticking place, open it round with your finger, or with
a stick on both sides and beheath, then put in your stuff: You must cut your
Dew-lap four fingers above the bottom thereof; then must you tie a strong thread
to your stuff, to pluck it up and down as you shall see cause to every third
day, and it will rot the sooner. If the humor do not rot, then change your
stuff, and put in new, and he shall do well.

Excellent Remedies for the Cough in Cattle.
This distemper proceeds from cold or overtravelling of the beast, or by eating
of some unwholesom thing. For the Cure, take Stitchwort chopped small, with
husked Beans bruised together: you may also take of Lentil-pease cut out of
their Husks, bruise them small, and mix them with three pints of warm Water,
and give it him with a Horn. If an Ox has but of late got a Cough, you may
cure it by a drink made with water mixed with Barleymeal.

For the Navel-gall, with the Remedy.
THis distemper proceeds from a hurt with a Saddle, or with the Buckle of a
Crupper, or from some other cause that has hurt the midst of the Back: The
Cures whereof are diverse, and so they ought to be; for Medicine is to be
administered according to the hurt, as it may be more or less. If it be but only
galled, take the Soot of a Chimney and Yest mixed together, and plaster it
once or twice a day. Another Cure for it is, that if it be so hurt, that it
swell, and is impostumed, then lance it on the nethermost part of the Ulcer, so
that the matter may have issue downward; for if you should lance it at the top,
then the corruption that remains will fistulate: if you find the concavity
deep, then make a Tent of Flax, and dip it in this Salve: Take of Deers Suet,
of Wax, of Tar, and of Turpentine, of each three ounces, and one ounce of
Rosin, mingle them together, and tent the Wound; and if you see any dead flesh
grow in it, then sprinkle the powder of Verdigrease upon it; lay upon the head
of the Tent the plaster of the Yolk of an Egg, Honey, and Wheat-flour, and
thus dress it morning and evening, and it will quickly be whole.

Of the Worms, with the Remedy.
THe Worms lie in the great Paunch of the Belly of the Horse; they are
engendered of raw and bad humors: There are three kinds of them; the Worm, the
Bot, the Truncheon: some of them are of a shining color, like a Snake, six
inches in length, great in the midst, and sharp at both ends. The Horse when he
is troubled with them, will lie down and wallow, which is when they feed on
him, his breath will stink, and his mouth be clammy. The present Remedy is to
give him a quart of Milk, and half a pint of Honey in it blood-warm; this will
keep them from gnawing of him, because they will suck thereof until they are
ready to burst: then the next day give him this Drink, Take a quart of Wort, or
Ale that is very strong, then take a quarter of a pound of Fern, half a pound
of Savin, half a pound of Stone-corp, stamp them, and mix them together with
two spoonfuls of Brimstone, and as much Chimney-foot, beaten to powder. Let
them lie in steep two hours, then strain them, and give the Horse a little
warm, bridle him, and let him stand six hours without meat, and question not
but your Horse will be quiet and do well.

Of the Farcy, with the Remedy.
THis is a very bad disease, but may be cured, if it be taken in time; it will
appear in diverse parts of the body, where there will rise Pimples, and as much
as half a Walnut shell; they will follow a Vein, and will break of themselves,
and as many Horses as do play with him that is sore, and gnap off the matter
that runs out of the sore, will have the same disease within a month after;
and therefore let the Grasier keep his sick Horses from the whole. This
distemper proceeds from an Ulcer which is not unknown to any that have for a
long time been Masters of Horses, and yet unknown to all, I mean as to the true
cause of this disease: Some say it is a corruption of the blood, some an
outward hurt, as of Spur-galling, biting of Ticks, Hogs Lice, or such like;
some say an infirmity bred in the Breast near the Heart, in the Side-vessels
near the Stones, with many evil humors congealed together, which afterward
disperse themselves into the Thighs, and sometimes into the Head, and does send
forth watery humors into the Nostrils, and then it is called ^he running Farcy.
Indeed if the true cause ^f a disease be known, the disease it self is ea^^ly
cured. The Mange, the Leprosy, and this disease of the Farcy, are most
pernicious to a Horse; for oftentimes it falls out, that many Horses infected
therewith, though they live, and the disease seems to be healed; yet they are
rendered of small or of no use. For my own part, I conjecture the cause of this
disease grows either from abundance of bad blood, or by a great distemper
thereof, through a violent heat changed into a sudden cold. To cure this
distemper, first let him blood on both sides of the Neck three quarters at
least; for it is most certain, that the Liver which is the fountain of blood,
is corrupted, and so sends the same into every part of the body, so as to
become lothsom to behold; then give the Horse this Drink. Take a Gallon of fair
Water, put into it a good handful of Rue, and a good spoonful of Hemp Seed, and
a handful of the inner Rind of green Elder, bruise them in a Mortar together,
and let them sethe until they are half consumed, and being cold, give it to him
to drink: still continue to let him blood a great quantity in that Vein which
is nighest to the sore place, as you see occasion. Let his diet be thin, but
very clean and sweet, then take this following approved Medicine. Of Herb-Grace
a handful, of Featherfew a handful, of Chickweed of the House a handful, of
Kikweed a handful, of Herb-Robert a handful, keep the residue thereof in a
Pipkin close covered with the Earth, stop the mouth thereof close with
Herb-Grace and Dock-leaves, and a green Turfe laid upon it, no Air to come in,
and every third day untye his Ears and dress it, and so continue till all the
Farcy be dead; for undoubtedly at three or four dressings it will kill it.

Of a Courb, with the Remedy.
THis disease makes a Horse to halt very sore; it appears most upon the
hinderlegs straight under the Cambrel place and a little beneath the Spaven: it
will be swelled, and hard to cure, if it grow upon the Horse. The Cure is, take
a pint of Wine-lees, a Porringer of Wheat-flour, of Cummin half an ounce, and
stir them well together, which being warmed, charge the sore place therewith,
renewing it once every day, for the space of three or four days; and when that
the swelling is almost gone, then let them draw it with a hot Iron, and cover
the burning with Pitch and Rosin melted together, and laid on warm, clap on a
Flocks of his own Collar, and let him rest, and come in no water for the space
of twelve days. Another for the same: Take an Iron, and make it red hot, and
hold it against the sore as nigh as you may, but touch not the sore, and when
it is warm, then take a Fleam, and wet it in six or seven places full of
Nervil, then take a handful of Salt, and a penny weight of Verdigrease, and the
White of an Egg, and put all these together, and take a little Flax, and wet it
therein, and lay it to the sore.

Of Wind-galls in Horses, with the Remedy.
WInd-galls are a disease which proceeds from too much labor; they appear
above the Fet-locks, as well before as behind: they consist of a little
swelling with wind. This is a Grief many are acquainted withal. The Cure is,
wash the places with warm water, and shave the hair, then draw it with a hot
Iron, in this manner; that done, slit the middle Line which passes downright
through the Wind-gall with a sharp Knife, beginning beneath, and so upwards
half an inch, thrust the Jelly out, then take Pitch and Rosin molten together
laid on hot, with Flocks upon it.

Of the Pains and Cratches of a Horse, with the Remedy.
THis disease causes a Horse to halt; it proceeds chiefly from ill keeping: it
appears in the pasterns, as if the skin were cut over-thwart, that a man may
lay in a Wheat-straw. This distemper proceeds from a frettish waterish matter
bred in the pasterns of the hinder Legs, liquid and thin humors resorting to
the Joints, whereby the Legs will be swollen, hot, and scabby. The Cure is to
wash the pasterns with Beer and Butter, which being dry, clip away all the
hair, saving the Fetlock; then take of Turpentine, Hog's Grease, and Honey, of
all a like quantity, mingle them in a Pot, and put into them a little Bole of
Armony, the Yolks of two Eggs, and as much Wheat-flour as will thicken them,
then with a slice lay it on a cloth, make it fast to go round the pastern, and
bind it fast, renewing it every day. Let him not come into any wet, but stand
still: some will wash it only with Gunpowder and Vinegar, which cannot but
serve very well to the purpose.

Of the Ringbone, a Disease in Horses, with the Remedy.
THis is a dangerous disease; it appears before on the foot above the Hoof, as
also behind: it gets into a Gristle growing about the Crouts of the feet; it
will swell three inches broad, and a quarter of an inch or more of height, the
hair of the beast will stare and wax thin, it will make him halt; it is hard to
cure, if it be of any long growth. The Cure is to fire the sore with right
lines from the Pastern to the Coffin of the Hoof, in this manner III. and let
the edge of the drawing Iron be as thick as the back of a big Knife, burn it so
deep, that the skin may look yellow, then cover it with Pitch and Rosin molten
together, and lay thereon Flocks of the Horses collar: some will eat it away
with Corrosives, as the Splent.

Of the Spaven, with the Remedy thereof.
IT is a very bad distemper, which will occasion the Horse to halt, and that
more especially in the beginning of it; it appears on the hinder Legs within
and against the Joint, it will be a little swelled and hard. Some Horses have a
through Spaven, as it appears both within and without: such a kind of Spaven
is hard to be cured. Our most expert Farriers will have a Spaven to be of two
kinds, either dry or wet; this latter they call the Blood-Spaven. The dry
Spaven is cured in the manner following. First wash it with warm water, and
shave off the hair as far as the swelling is, then scarifie the place, that it
bleed, take of Cantharides a dozen, and of Euphorbium half a spoonful, break
them into a Powder, and boil them together, with a little Oil de Bay, and when
they are boiling hot, with feathers anoint the sore, and tie his Tail, so that
he may not wipe it, and within an hour after set him in the Stable, and tie him
so that he lie not down that night (for rubbing off the Medicine) and within a
day after, anoint it with Butter, and so continue for six days; then draw the
sore place with an hot Iron, take a sharp one like a Bodkin, somewhat bowing at
the point, and so upward betwixt the skin and the flesh, and thrust it in the
nether end of the middle Line, then tent it with Turpentine and Hog's Grease
molten together, and made warm, renewing it once every day, for the space of
nine days; but remember that after this burning, you take up the Master-vein,
which must be done in this manner: Cast the Horse upon some straw, then having
found the Vein, mark well that part of the skin that covers it, and pull that
aside from the Vein with your left thumb, to the intent that you may slit it
with a Razor without touching the Vein, and cut no deeper then through the
skin, and that longest-wise that the Vein goes, and not above an inch, then
will the skin return again to the place over the Vein: with a Cornet
under-cover the Vein, and make it bare, thrust the Cornet underneath it, and
raise it up, and put a Shomakers thread underneath somewhat higher then the
Cornet standing, slit the Vein long-ways, that it may bleed, and having bled
somewhat from above, then knit it with a sure knot somewhat above the slit,
suffering it to bleed only from beneath a great quantity; then knit up the Vein
also beneath the slit with a sure knot, then betwixt these two knots cut the
Vein asunder where it was slit, and fill the hole with Salt, then lay on this
following Charge: Take half a pound of Pitch, a quarter of a pound of Rosin, a
quarter of a pint of Tar, boil them together, and being warm, anoint all the
inside of the Joint, and clap on the Flocks of the Horses collar, and turn him
to Grass, if it may be till he be prefectly whole, and the hair grown again.

Of the wet or blood Spaven, with the Remedy.
SOme call this, as has been said, the Through Spaven; it is fed by a thin
flexible humor by the Master-vein. The Cure is to shave off the hair, and to
take up the Vein on every part, and then cut the Vein asunder, and draw it with
a hot Iron, charge it and put on the Flocks, and it will perfectly heal it, as
I have certainly experimented.

For any dangerous Bots or Maw-worms, the Remedy.
THis is a very evil distemper, the Bots lying for the most part in the Horses
Maw, where they will remain an inch long, white-coloured, and red-headed, and
as much as a fingers end; they will grow quick and stick fast on the Maw-sides.
This disease appears by the stamping or trembling of the Horse; taken at the
beginning, there are Remedies enough for them; but let alone too long, they will
eat through the Horses Maw and kill him. For Cure, take as much Precipitate
(which is Mercury calcined) as will lie gently upon a silver Twopence, and lay
it on a piece of sweet Butter almost as big as a Hens Egg, in the manner of a
Pill, then chase him a little up and down, and afterward set him up warm,
making him fast for full two hours after, and it will kill all manner of Worms
whatsoever; yet in the administration, you must be very careful; for in the
Precipitate there is a strong poisonous quality, therefore mix the same
prescribed quantity with a little sweet Butter, as much as Hazel-nut: Before
that you lap it up in the great lump of Butter, it will be the better to allay
much of the evil quality. But this I leave to your own discretion, assuring
you, that there is not any thing comparable to it for the same infirmity.

Of the Serew or Serow, with the Remedy of it.
THis disease is like to the Splent, in manner of a Gristle, but it is a little
longer and more, about the bigness of an Almond; it grows on the fore-leg,
and lies upon the knee on the inner-side: Some Horses have a Thorow-Serew on
both sides of the Legs, that Horse must needs stumble and fall, and it will be
very hard to cure him. The best Remedy is, to take an Onion and to cut out the
Core, and put there in a spoonful of Honey, a quarter of a pound of unslackt
Lime, three penny worth of Verdigrease, and roast the Onion, and bruise it, and
lay it to hot, having first cut the skin. Probatum est.

Of a Malender, with the Remedy.
THis is a disease that may be cured for a time, but with ill keeping it will
come again; it appears on the foremost Leg on the bending of the knee behind:
it is like a Scab or Scald growing in the form of lines or streaks. Some Horses
will have two of them on a Leg within an inch together; they will make a Horse
to stumble, and sometimes to fall. The Cure is, to wash it with warm water, and
to shave the Scab clean away, then take a spoonful of Soap, as much Lime, and
make it into a Paste, and spread as much on a clout as will cover the Sore,
bind it fast, renewing every day for three days together, then anoint the same
with Oil of Roses, to cause the crust to fall away, then wash it with Urine,
and strew upon it the powder of Oyster shells. Another for the same: Take a
barrelled Herring with a soft Row, and two spoonfuls of black Soap, half an
ounce of Alum, and bruise them together, and lay it on the Sore three days.

Of the Splent, with the Remedy.
THis is the least disease that is, except it be the Lampas, and many undertake
to cure it, of which very few fail. The Cure of it is, to wash it with warm
water, and shave off the hair, and lightly to scarifie all the sore places with
the point of a Razor, so as that the blood may issue forth: then take of
Cantharides half a spoonful, and of Euphorbium as much, beaten into a fine
powder, and mingle them together with a spoonful of Oil de Bay, and then melt
them in a little Pan, stirring them well together, so that they may boil over;
and being so boiled hot, take two or three feathers, and anoint all the sore
places therewith, and let not the Horse remove from the place for two hours
after. Afterward carry him away, and tie him, so that he may not touch the
Medicine with his lips; and also let him stand without Litter that day and
night, and within two or three days after anoint the Sore with Butter for nine
days, and it will cure him.

Of the Glanders, with the Remedy.
THe original cause of this disease is the Rheum, which being an abundant
moisture, and naturally very cold, at length congealeth according to the nature
of cold, and then proceeds to Kernels, and so to Inflammations, which become
so great in the end, that they seem to strangle the breath of the Horse, from
whence it is said to have the Strangles, which by continuance of time either
perish the Liver or the Lungs, by a continual distilling of putrefied and
corrupt matter: the signs are apparent to any man that has any discerning, and
the diversity of Medicines infinite. The beginning always of this disease, is
taking of cold, after too much heat, the which cannot be avoided from a Horse
that has had too much feeding, and too great rest, more especially if his diet
be naught: or by the use of continual Travel upon a full stomach, or before his
body be made clean after long rest; for the standing Pool is ever muddy. The
Cure is, you must take one ounce of Fennel Greek, boil it in Water till it
split and open in two, and after that mingle it with the Decoction, and two
pound of Wheat-meal, and give it the Horse to drink twice a day, keep him
fasting. Probatum est.

An excellent Remedy for the Haw in the Eye.
THis disease in the Horses Eye is like a Gristle; the way to cure it, is to
take up the Haw with a little Ivory Needle or Penknife, and then to cut it all
away with your Sissers; for the only way to cure it, is to cut it out.

Of the Barbes, Barbels, with the Remedy.
THey are little Paps in a Horses mouth that hinder him from eating. The Cure
is, to clip them away, and to wash them in Vinegar and Salt.

Of the Vives, with the Remedy of it.
THis disease is in a Horses Ear between the upper end and the Chall-bones and
the Neck; it proceeds from the corruption of the blood: they are round knots
between the skin and the flesh, like Tennis-balls, and if they are not timely
killed, they will grow quick, eat the roots of the Horses Ears, and kill him.
The Cure is, to draw them with a hot Iron right down in the midst, from the
root of the Ear so far as the tip of the Ear will reach, being pulled down, and
again under the root of the Ear, with a hot Iron draw two streaks on each side,
then in the midst of the first line, lance them with a Lancelet or Razor,
taking hold of the Kernels with a pair of Pinsers, so as that you may cut the
Kernels out without hurting the Vein, then fill the hole full of Salt. Another
Cure for the same: Take Agrimony, Honey, and Violet-leaves, stamp them
together, and slit the Sinew under the Ear, and lay a Plaster thereunto for
two or three days.

Of the Mourning Chine, with the Remedy.
THe cause hereof is great heat, and afterward taking of cold; it first
begins with a Rheum, which proceeds to the Inflammation of the Liver and
the Lungs, by the continual distilling upon them, then to the Glanders, which
is the Impostumation thereof, and lastly to an Exulceration, which abruptly and
untruly is called the Mourning of the Chine: The signs to know this disease are
these. 1. The continual distilling of Rheum in the Head. 2. The continual Knobs
between the Jaws. 3. The keeping of the hair without casting. 4. A continual
running of a thick stinking matter at the Nose, like O^k-water. 5. The fastening
and growing of a Knob as big as a Walnut, to the inside of one of the Jaws;
which if so, commit the Horses Carcass to the Crows, for he is past all help.
The Cure for such a Horse, if he be not past Cure. For the first, which is the
Rheum, the Cure is what I have mentioned for the Cold in the Head. For the
second Cure, I refer you to that of the Glanders. For the third, let him blood
till you see that he have fine and pure blood, and give him good Mashes. For
the fourth, for the running of his Nose, you may add some ordinary purging
Drinks that are used for the purging of the Head. For the fifth, if you find no
amendment but a knob grown to his Jaw, then you must give him a Purge with
Pills; and if these means will not help him (though he were the best Horse in
the world) he is remediless.

Of the Broken Wind, with the Remedy.
THe cause of this dangerous disease, has been but guessed at, not truly
discovered by any, as not being well understood, and therefore accounted of
most Horsemen incurable. I do intend to use my best endeavors to unfold and
explain it: to which purpose, I will divide the same into three kinds, every
one of which may be truly termed a Broken Wind, because the breath being drawn
very short and thick, contrary to the original Institution or Creation, the
which is long, cold, and quiet, for so every Creature is by Nature; but when
any accident of violence of the body is used in any of them to a distemper, the
signs thereof will quickly be visible, and then every man's experience tells
him evidently, that he pants and fetches breath very short and thick; I
therefore will begin with the Cause thereof, the which rightly understood, the
Effects cannot be hid. Now the causes why a Horse draws his breath very short,
are these; as sickness, great fullness, violent exercise: but the reason of the
cause is, for that the Heart being the only hottest part of the body, from
whence the Arteries and Veins do carry the heat thereof to every part of the
body (and therefore it is truly said to be the Chariot of Life) when the same
by sickness, or violence of exercise is choked, or as it were smothered with
too great heat, then do the Lights, being the Bellows to draw breath, according
to that Office that Nature ordained them unto, presently labor with all
violence to draw it, and cool and comfort the Heart, and so consequently all
the members and parts of the body, to fill all the empty corners with Air,
which naturally and in predominant qualities is moist; and when they have drawn
sufficient breath, the dryness and heat by the moistness of the Air is
quenched, which being so, then does the Creature draw breath leisurely and
coldly, and not before: but so long as the Heart is oppressed by the violent
heat of sickness, or by great fullness, or violent exercise, the Caves, Pipes,
and passages for the breath, are almost stopped and choked up; then do the
Lungs labor extreme thick to preserve the life of the Creature, which is the
Heart, and therefore it is said to be the first thing that lives, and the last
that dies: So that all things which hinder and stop the passages of the
breath, breaking the natural course thereof, are the only causes of a Broken
Wind. So likewise the Cure of the Broken Wind must be by removing of the
stoppings of the Air, and then the Lungs will perfectly perform their Office,
and the Creature will be freed from the disease. The differences of Broken
Winds both in cause and effect, are diverse, and yet may be termed Broken;
namely, the shortness of breath, the Pursick, and Broken-winded. 1. As touching
the shortness of breath, it may proceed from some gross and tough humors,
cleaving to the hollow places of the Lungs, stopping the Wind-pipes, so that
the Horse cannot easily draw his breath; and the sign thereof is his coughing
often, daily, and vehemently, without voiding at the Nose or the Mouth. 2. It
may come by hasty running after drinking, or upon a full stomach, or
dissolution of humors, descending into his Throat or Lungs, by reason of some
violent heat dissolving the same. And the signs thereof are, continually
panting, sending the same forth very hot at his Nose, in a wheasing manner, his
Flanks beating so thick, that he cannot fetch breath, but by holding his Neck
rightout and straight: and this may be truly called a Broken Wind. The Cure is,
to take a close earthen Pot, and put thereinto three pints of strong
Wine-vinegar, and some new-laid Eggs, with the shells unbroken, and four
Garlick-heads, clean peeled and bruised; then cover the Pot close, and set it
in some warm Dunghill, and there let it stand a whole night, and the next
morning take out the Eggs, but break them not, then strain the Garlic and
Vinegar through a clean cloth, put thereunto a quarter of Honey, half a quarter
of Sugarcandy, two ounces of Liquorish, two ounces of Aniseeds beaten into a
fine powder. The Horse having fasted all night, in the morning open his mouth,
and put out his Tongue, and put one Egg into his Throat, and then let go his
Tongue, so that he may swallow it down, then pour after it a Horn of the said
Drink, being lukewarm, and so all the Eggs in that manner, and all the Drink
being spent, bridle him, and stop him, and cloth him very warm, and let him
stand four hours, then unbit him; and if it be in Winter, give him Wheat-straw
but no Hay; and if in the Summer time, give him Grass, and for some days
together Mashes to drink, with some Sallet-Oyl or Hogs grease in them, and the
Horse will do well, and in few days be fit for Exercise.

Of the Gravelling of the Horse, with the Remedy.
IT is a hurt will make the Horse to halt; it proceeds from Gravel and little
stones that get in between the Slough and the Heart of the Foot: The Cure is,
to pare his Hoof, and get out the Gravel, and then stop him with Turpentine and
Hog's Grease molten hot, and stopped with Tow: have a care that he come not out of
the Stable till he be well.

Of the Lampas, with the Remedy.
THis disease is in the Mouth; it is the easiest to be cured of all those that
disturb the Horse: as it is only but a thick skin full of blood that hangs over
his Teeth, that he cannot eat; so there needs no more to be done, but to let
out the blood, and then take away the skin, and the Horse will be cured.

Of the Accloyed, or Cloying the Foot with the prick of a Nail, with the Remedy.
IT is a hurt that comes from ill shoeing, when a Smith drives a Nail into the
quick, the which will make the Horse to halt: The Cure is, to take Turpentine,
Wax, and Sheeps Suet molten together, and poured into it.

Of the Colts Evil, with the Remedy.
THis is a very bad disease, which proceeds from the rankness of water and
blood: it appears in his Scote, for they will swell great, and will not be
hard. This distemper taken at the first, is thus cured; wash the Sheath clean
with lukewarm Vinegar, draw out his Yard, and wash it also, then ride him to
some running stream up to the belly, to allay the heat: do this lustily for a
quarter of an hour, and so after for three or four days, and it will cure him.

Of the Pains in the Head, with the Remedy.
THis is an evil distemper that befalls the Head. The Cure is: Take a pint of
Malmsey, five new-laid Eggs, a head of bruised Garlic, small Pepper, Cinnamon,
and Nutmegs beaten fine; give it him to drink three days together, and let him
fast six hours after.

Of a Horse that stumbleth, which is called the Cords, with the Remedy.
THis distemper appears in the further Legs of the Body of the Horse; it is
called the Cords, because the Cord is a Sinew that breeds amongst the
Sinews, the one end comes down toward the Shackle-vein, and so up through the
Leg, and goes over the inward side of the Knee, and so over the Shoulder, and
so along the Neck by the Weasant, and it goes over the Temples under his Eye,
and down over the Snout, betwixt both the Nostrils and the Gristle, there knit
the length of an Almond. The Remedy is, to take a sharp Knife, and cut a slit
even at the top of his Nose just with the point of the Gristles, open the slit,
and you shall perceive a white string, take it up with a Boars Tooth, or a
Bucks Horn, that is crooked, or some Bodkin made so, and twine it about the
strait, and cut it asunder; you may twine it so much, as that you may rear his
foot from the ground, then stitch up the slit, and anoint it with Butter, and
the Horse will undoubtedly be cured.

Of the Morefound, with the Remedy.
THis is an evil disease, which proceeds from riding fast till the Horse sweat,
and then being set up presently in a cold place without Litter that he takes
cold on his feet, and that more especially before that it appears in the hole
under the heart of the foot, for it will grow down, wax white, and cromly like
a Pumice; and also will appear in process of time on the wrinkling of the Hoof,
and the Hoof before will be thicker and more brittle, then if he had not been
morefound: nor will he tread so boldly upon the hard stones as he did before.
The Remedy is, paring and good shooing, which being carefully done, he will do
good service.

Of the Enterfere, with the Remedy.
THis distemper proceeds from the ill shooing of the Horse; it appears
oftentimes both behind and before, between the feet against the Fetlocks. There
is no other Remedy for it but good shooing.

Of the Scelander, with the appointed Remedy.
THis distemper is in the bending of the Leg before; it is somewhat like a
Malander, and may be cured in the same manner.

Of the Scab, with the Remedies.
THere is a disease amongst Horses, which is called the Scab; it is a Scurfe in
diverse parts of the body; it chiefly proceeds from leanness and ill keeping.
It is commonly amongst Horses. There is a filthy stinking Scab, which is called
the Crown Scab, growing about the Coronets of the Horns: the hair will stare
like Hogs bristles, and be always mattering. When the hair is shaven away, you
are to take a little Frankincense, Nitre, Tartar, and the Bark of Ash, Vitriol,
Verdigrease, and Hellebore white and black, round Birthwort, and stamp them
together with Yolks of Eggs and ordinary Ale, then after that boil them, and
anoint the sore place. This Ointment will also serve for the Scab and the sore
Crupper.

A Remedy for cut and bruised Sinews.
Take of Tar and Bean flour, and Oil of Roses, and lay it hot to the place: of
the same effect are Worms and Sallet Oil fried together: to the same purpose
also serves the Ointment of Worms, which you may have at the Apothecaries.

For a Horse that cannot piss.
Take a pint of white Wine Vinegar, half a pound of Simgreen, bruise it small,
and wring out the Juice, take a handful of Fennel, and a handful of Fox-Gloves,
the Leaves of the Flowers, two ounces of Gromwel-seed, and half a pint of sweet
Honey, stamp them well together, and strain them into Vinegar. Let him stand
without meat and drink 24 hours. Probatum est.

To bring Hair again.
Take the Dung of Goats, and some Honey and Alum, and the Blood of a Hog, boil
them together, and being hot, rub the place therewith.

For the Stone and Colic in a Horse, the Remedy.
Take a pint of white Wine, half a pint of Bur-seed, and beat them small, two
ounces of Parsley-seed, half a handful of Hop, half a handful of unset Leeks,
and half a handful of Watercresses, half an ounce of black Soap, and mingle
them together, stamp and strain them, but put the Bur-seed and Parsley-seed
together to it after it is strained, and then warm it, and give it him to drink.

Of a present Remedy to kill the Fire either in Burning or Shot.
Take Varnish, or Oil and Water beaten together, and anoint the place with a
feather.

To ripen an Impostume.
Take Mallow-roots and Lilly-roots, and bruise them and put them into Hogs
Grease, and Linseed-meal, plaister-wise, lay it to.

For a Wrench in the Fetlocks, or any other Joint that is suddenly done.
Take of Narvil, and black Soap, and boil them together a little on the fire,
and anoint with it.

For the dangerous Galling of a Horse, an excellent Remedy.
Take a pottle of Verjuice, two penny worth of green Coperas, boil it in a pint
and a half, and wash and search the hole therewith, and fill it with red Lead,
and let it remain three days untouched, then wash it with the same, and fill it
again with red Lead. This will heal it, though it be galled to the body.

Of Warts in general, and of the spongy Wart, with the Remedy.
THere is a distemper that some Horsemen will neither allow to be either a
disease or hurt, and that is, if a Horse want Warts behind, beneath the Spaven
place; for then he is no Chapmans Ware, if he be wild: but if he be tame, and
have been ridden upon, then caveat Emptor: Let the Buyer beware that he has
both his eyes to see, and his hands to handle; there is a Saying, That such a
Horse should dye suddenly when he has lived as many years as the Moon was days
old, or such time as he was foaled. But to pass over this light digression,
there is a Wart which is called Spongy. The Cure is, if it be long enough, to
tie a thread about it, and it will eat off, or else to take it off with a hot
Iron.

To help the Surbaiting or Soreness of a Horses Feet.
WHen you find your Horse to be surbaited, presently clap on each of his
fore-feet two new-laid Eggs, and crush them therein, then upon the top of them
lay good Cow Dung: Thus stop him for four hours, and he will recover.

For a Wrench or Strain in the Pastern.
Take a quart of Brine, and sethe it till it be ready to boil over, and then
strain it, and put into it a handful of Tansie, a handful of Mallows, a Saucer
full of Honey, a quarter of a pound of Sheeps Tallow, beat them together, and
set them on the fire until they are well sodden, and then lay it hot to the
Tent, and sew a cloth fast about it, and so let it rest five days, and it shall
cure him.

For a Back Sinew-strain, or any other Strain.
Take an ounce of Turpentine, and two or three spoonfuls of Aqua vitae, and
beat them together, till they come to a perfect Salve, then anoint the strain
very well therewith, and heat it either with a hot Brick, or Bar of Iron; and
thus doing three or four times, it will take away the strain.

For a frothy Hoof.
First with an Instrument make hollow the extremities of the Hoof on the
outside, till the principal Vein break; let all the blood come forth, then fill
up the hole with fine Salt and Hurds steeped in Vinegar, and then bind them, so
that they shall not fall off. This is a sure way to make a hard and sound Hoof.

Of the Atteint.
It is a distemper that proceeds from an overreaching before; and if it be
behind, it is the treading of another Horse, which every ordinary Farrier knows
how to cure, and therefore we shall wave it.

Of the Mourning of the Tongue.
I shall pass over this distemper as it is held incurable.

A Remedy for a Pinch or a Gall in the Withers.
First cut out the dead flesh, and make a Tent with the White of an Egg, and
then wash the part with warm white Wine, and afterward anoint the sore place
with white sweet Suet.

A present Remedy for the Staggers.
When you find your Horse distempered in his Head, then take a piece of woollen
Cloth, and bind it fast to the end of a stick, being well rubbed with good
Barbary Soap, and then put in into both his Nostrils with as much ease as you,
and it will draw it forth very gently again: This is a perfect Remedy.

An excellent Remedy for the Strangles.
When you first see the Strangles growing, prick them under the Throat in the
morning, and after cover the Horses head with a Linen cloth, and then rub him
often under the Throat with fresh Butter on the sore place, and it will cure
him.

A Remedy for the Swelling of the Cods.
Take strong Vinegar, white Chalk well powdered, stir it well, and make a
Paste, anoint the Cods of the Horse three or four times a day, and in few days
it will cure him.

A Remedy for the Mattering of the Yard.
Take a pint of white Wine, boil therein a quart of Roche-Allum, and with a
Squirt thrust it very far into his Yard; squirt the same some three or four
times to pierce and cleanse the bottom from the filth, and thus continue until
he be whole.

An excellent Cure for the Tetter.
Before you meddle with the place, first draw blood from his Legs, and then
strike the Veins of the Legs on the outside, and on the inside, but not on the
place where the Hoof comes forth, then wash the place with white Wine, and
mingle the Juice of Prunella with powder of Galls and clear Water, and with
this Liquor beat the Hogs Grease and liquid Pitch, that all become like Honey,
and having so done, anoint the Tetter, and in six times dressing it will be
cured.

A rare Medicine for a sore Back, be it never so wrung with a Saddle.
Take of Sheeps Dung to the quantity of three parts of your Plaster, and the
fourth part of dry Wheat and Rye-flour, and mingle them well together, and let
them boil a quarter of an hour in good fair water, and then lay it on warm, and
at two or three times applying, it will cure the Back: This is a tried and
approved Plaster.

For the Botch in the Groyns of the Horse.
The Cure is, to take of Wheat-flour, Turpentine, and Honey, of aech a like
quantity, stirring it to make a stiff Plaster, and to lay it to the Sore to
break it, and then lance it: tent it with Turpentine and Hogs Crease.

A Remedy for the Lax.
Take of Bean-flour and Bole Armony, of each a quartern, mingled in a quart of
red Wine, give it him luke warm, and after it, let him drink warm water, with
Bean-flour; but if that will not stay him, then give him half a pennyworth of
Alum beaten into powder, and Bole Armony beaten small, in a quart of Milk,
stirring them till all the Milk be of a Curd and this will stop him.

A Remedy for the Costiveness or Belly-bound.
Take of the Decoction of Mallows a quart, put to it half a pint of Oil, or so
much Butter, an ounce of Benedict Laxative, and pour it into his Fundament with
a little Horn, and hold his Tail close to his Fundament, whilst another does
lead him, and so keep it in him as long as you can, and after keep him warm,
and give him warm water to drink.

An excellent Remedy for the Yellows.
The cause thereof is the abundance of bad humors; the Cure is plain: Let him
blood, if you see it yellow, a pottle, then give him a quart of white Wine, of
Saffron and Tamerisk of each half an ounce, and the Juice that is wrung out of
two handfuls of Selandine; let him take it blood-warm, and keep him warm, and
with good Mashes, wherein put two spoonfuls of the powder of Brimstone. Some
will give him in this Drink the green Ordure of Geese strained.

A Remedy for the Swelling of the Gums.
The Cure is, to make him to bleed well in the Palate of the Mouth, and also to
scarifie the rank Gums, that the blood may come out, then rub them soundly with
Vinegar and Salt.

A Remedy for the Rifts and Corruption in the Palate of the Mouth.
Take sharp Vinegar and Salt, and wash the same, and then anoint it with Honey.
For the Lampas and Bladders in the Mouth (as we have said) every Smith can cure
it.

A certain Remedy for the Camey in the Mouth.
This distemper proceeds from the eating of filthy Hay, that Cats, Dogs, and
other Vermin have pissed upon, which will cause the Horses mouth to be clammy
and furred, so that he will not eat. The Cure is, to let him blood in two great
Veins under the Tongue, and to wash his mouth with Vinegar and Salt, and to
give him new Bread that is not hot.

A Remedy for the Heat in the Mouth.
Turn up the upper Lip, and jag it with a Lancet, that it may bleed, and wash
it with Vinegar and Salt.

A Remedy for a Cold in the Head.
The cause proceeds from some heat, or standing too much still, or from having
some Air piercing his head when he is hot, or by some humors congealed after
long rest, and full feeding, and through the want of exercise to expel the
same. The signs are a continual distilling Rheum, waterish Eyes, or his short
drawing of breath at the Nostrils, when the caves and passages of the breath
are ill stopped. The Cure is, put upon his head a double hood, and every morning
ride him when he is fasting, take two Goose-feathers dipped in Oil of Bay, and
thrust them up into his Nostrils, through the ends whereof with a Needle put
two threads to fasten the same to the head-stall, so as that the feathers may
not fall out, and to the Snaffle and Bit that he is rid with, fasten a Root or
two of Polypodium of the Oak, which has been steeped all night in Spike Oil,
and every time you ride him, anoint the same with the same Oil, and when he
comes home, put on his head the double Hood, and perfume him hot with
Frankincense, casting a cloth over his head: Use him thus nine days together,
and give him warm water or good Mashes, during the said nine days; for all
Rheums of continuance are very dangerous, and many times remediless, leaving
behind them a worse disease then themselves.

An excellent Remedy for the Canker in the Mouth.
Wash the Mouth with strong Vinegar, made thick with the powder of Alum, two
or three days together, to destroy the exulcerate matter; then take a quart of
fair water, of Alum four ounces, of Honey four or five spoonfuls, of
Maudlin-leaves, of Sage-leaves, and Columbine-leaves, of each a handful; boil
all these together till half be consumed, and then every time being warmed,
wash the same two or three days, and it will heal it.

Of the Lousie.
There are Horses that will be lousie; this distemper of theirs proceeds from
too much leanness, cold, and ill keeping: it is most commonly amongst young
Horses. We shall not insist upon the Remedy of it, as it is so familiarly
practiced by every Smith.

Of the Repairing of a broken Hoof, that it may grow.
Take of Garlick-heads seven ounces, of Herb Grace, three handfuls of Alum
beaten and sifted, of Barrows Grease that is old two pound; mingle all these
with Asses Dung, boil them together, and anoint the Hoof therewith.

A certain Remedy for the Fretting of the Guts.
Take in the morning a quart of good Ale, four ounces of Fenugreek, seven
ounces of Bayberries, as much long Pepper, an ounce of Ginger, two ounces of
Watercresses, an handful of Sage, another of Mints; beat them together in Ale,
then strain it, and give it him blood-warm, rope all his Legs, and tie him so,
that he lie not down; put him into a sweat, keep him hot, give him no cold
water for three days after, feed him with dry Beans and Oats, and the Horse
will recover.

Of pulling out of Shivers or Throns, and of Swelling.
The Cure is, to pull them out, if they may be seen; but if there be such a
Swelling, that they cannot be seen, then take Wormwood, Paretory, Bearsfoot,
Hog's Grease, and Honey, boil them together, and being hot, make a Plaster. It
is an excellent Remedy for any Swelling, so also is Wine-lees, Wheat-flour, and
Cummin boiled together, and when it is at a head, lance it.

Of the Strangullion.
It is an easy disease to cure, but the Horse will be sore sick with it; it
proceeds from a chafing heat, that will make him sweat, and afterward it
will rise and swell in diverse parts of his body, as big as a man's fist: It will
break of it self, if it be kept warm.

Of Blindness.
A Horse will be blind with too much labor: This distemper, if it be young and
taken betimes, is best cured by giving of him ease.

Of the Foaling of the Yard, with the Remedy.
The Cure is, to wash the same with warm white Wine, and anoint it with Oil of
Roses and Honey mingled together, then put it up with a Cod-piece of Truss,
keep it up still, and dress him every day once till he be whole.

Of the Millets, without Remedy.
This distemper appears in the Fetlocks behind; it causes the hair to shed
three or four inches in length, and a quarter of an inch in breadth, like as if
it were bare. It is seldom or never cured, but a Horse may live, being purged
with ordinary Purges, for a long time with this distemper.

An excellent Remedy for the String hault, or any old Strain or Lameness in the
sinewy Joints.
Take Boars Grease, Bole Armoniack, black Soap, and Nerve-Oyl, of each a like
quantity, boil them all together, and then apply it hot to the Grief, rubbing
and chafing it, and also heating it very well, either with a hot Brick,
Brick-bat, or hot Fire-shovel: Thus do once every day until the pain be gone.
The String hault is a distemper which makes the Horse to twitch up his Leg; it
proceeds for the most part from a cold: it seldom appears outwardly.

A Remedy approved for the Hide-bound, by some improperly called the Affreyde.
The cause thereof is a sudden cold after a great heat; when the Pores are
open, the cold enters, and makes an attraction of the Sinews, so as that the
Horse seems to go or travel with great grief, his skin being as it were
starched, shrunk, and clinging to his Ribs. The Cure is, to let him blood in
both the Flank-veins, being next the girding place and the Flanks; then take a
quart of white Wine, and put thereinto three ounces of Sallet-Oyl, and of
Cummin one ounce, of Aniseeds two ounces, Liquoris two ounces beaten into a
powder, and give it him warm, then let him be rubbed half an hour together;
cover all his Back with a Sack thoroughly soakt in a Tub of water, and the water
wrung out of it, and upon that cast many clothes, and gird them fast unto him
to bring him to a sweat, which is the only and chief thing to recover him; then
keep him with good Mashes, and every day let him be so used for seven or eight
days together, give him much sodden Barley and Beans for his diet, and green
Malt on the floor, and after the eight days, let him blood in the two
Breast-veins, about a pint, then give him to the quantity of a pint and a half
of Sack, and a quarter of a pint of Sallet-Oyl, four penny worth of the best
Treacle; ride him until he sweat, then presently set him in a warm Stable, and
keep him hot: at night give him a good Mash of Malt, with the powder of
Brimstone, to the quantity of two spoonfuls.

A Remedy for the Hurt of the Tongue with a Bit.
The Cure is, to wash it with Allum-water, then take black Bramble-leaves, and
chop them with Jard, and put them within a clout, and make them as round as a
Ball, then dip the same in Honey, and anoint the Tongue therewith until it be
whole.

A Remedy for the Giggs in the Mouth.
They are swellings with black heads growing on the inside of the Lips. The
Cure is, to slit them, and thrust out the corruption, and to wash the same with
Vinegar and Salt.

An excellent Receipt to fatten a Horse.
This way I have experienced, and found it to be good and certain: Take of
Elicampane, of Cummin-seeds, of Tamerisk, of Aniseeds, of each two ounces; of
Grounsel a handful: boil all these very well w^^h three heads of Garlic,
cleansed and stamped in a Gallon of strong Ale, then strain it well, and give
the Horse a quart lukewarm in the morning fasting, then ride him till that he
be warm, set him up hot. Thus do for four or five mornings, then turn the Horse
to Grass (if it be a fit and suitable time of the year) and he will feed
heartily. But if the time of the year serve not for Grass, then you must keep
him in the House, and over and besides the Drink before prescribed, you must
take fine powder of Elicampane, and the fine powder of Cumminseeds, of each a
like quantity; mix them well together, then every time that you give your
Horses Provender, which should be thrice a day, in the morning, noon, and
night, take half an ounce of this powder, and sprinkle it by little and little,
and a little into his Provender, for fear he should nauseate it, until it be
all eaten up. And thus do for fourteen days together at the least, and you
shall see the Horse prosper in a wonderful and strange manner.

An excellent Remedy against a Horses surfeiting with Provender.
When a Horse has eaten more then his stomach can well digest, he is in much
pain, so as that he is not able to stand, but lies and walloweth as if he had
the Bots. The Cure is, to let him blood, and to draw his Yard and wash it, put
a piece of a Clove of Garlic into it, to make him piss: give him also a
Clyster with the water of sodden Mallows, fresh Butter, and Sallet-Oyl; keep
him warm, and let him eat very little for four or five days.

These following things are most excellent to put into a Horses Provender, to
preserve him from Diseases.
The powder of Wolfes Liver, the powder of Enula Campana, the powder of
Polypodium of the Oak, fine cut pieces of Rhubarb, the powder of Brimstone made
fine, the powder of Liquoris, Aniseeds, Fenugreek, Turmerick, Bay Berries, long
Pepper, Agrimony, Chamomil, Wormwood, Savin, Linseed, Smallage, Parsley, Rue,
Hysop, Coltsfoot, Horehound, and such like.

Of the Catarrh in Hogs, with the Remedy.
It is a Rheum which makes their Eyes to water, and a moisture to ascend up
into the Head, which breeds a corrupt matter, somewhat of affinity with the
Plague. It seiseth upon them for the most part from their eating of too much
fruit that lies rotten under the Trees. For this distemper Marshmallows are
excellently good mixed amongst their meat.

Approved Cures for a Hog bitten by a mad, or by other Dogs.
If he be bitten by a mad Dog, take of strong Chamber-lye, and mix it with
Bay Salt and Soot, and put therein an Addle Egg or two, then beat them all
together, and make it boil a little, then rub the place as hot as he may well
endure it without scalding, with a stick, and a clout tied to the end of it.
Use this twice or thrice, and he shall do well. But if he be bitten by other
Dogs, that he is like to come by an Impostume, to avoid the danger thereof, you
must wash his Wound betimes with Stale, Salt, and Nettles bruised, or Vinegar
and Mallow boiled together, and some Hogs Grease put thereunto, and therewith
bathe the Sore; then anoint with Tar and fresh Grease mixed together, and he
shall do well.

An approved Remedy for the Staggers or stirring Disease in Hogs.
The Cure is, to put Sea-bur Knob in the roof of their mouths; cut it, and let
it bleed, and take the powder of Lemmon and Salt, and rub it therewith, then
let them have a little Stale, and they will recover.

To make a Hog to scour.
Give him smoaked Barley in the straw, as it is also stewed for the wethering
of a Cow to help her.

Of the Lethargy in Hogs, with the Remedy.
If this disease come, the Hog-herds shut up all their Hogs together in one
House, and let them there remain a day and a night together without any meat or
drink. The next day after give them water in which is stamped the Roots of wild
Cucumbers. And as many as have drunk thereof, will begin to vomit, and
afterward by vomiting are purged and cleared from the distemper.

A Remedy for the Lask in Hogs.
Give them dried Beans, beaten Savil, mixed with Broom.

To kill Maggots in Hogs.
If they breed in the Ear or otherwise, in any hollow place under the skin, you
must take the Juice of Hemlock, and pour it into the hole, and it will kill
them, or else they will immediately void them of a great bigness.

An approved Remedy for the Disease in Hogs, called the Milt.
The Remedy is, by making them Troughs to feed out, of a Wood in Latin called
Tamerix, which in English is called Quick Beanwood, out of which will come such
a moisture, that it will heal the inflammation of the disease; for sometimes
there proceeds such an inflammation from the Milt, that it breeds a Pestilence.

To cure Hogs that have eaten of poisonous Herbs.
Such as Henbane and Hemlock; to cure them, you must give them the Juice of
Cucumbers warmed, the which being drunk, will cause them to vomit, by which
they cleanse their stomachs, and recover their healths again. There are two
other Herbs, the Cameleon Thistle and the Goose-foot, which are death for them
to eat.

To cure the Impostumes under the Hogs Throats.
When they have Impostumes and Kernels under their Throats, they ought to be
let blood under the Tongue, and when that you have drawn blood sufficiently,
you must rub and chafe all his Throat and Groyn.

An approved Cure of the Garget in Hogs.
This is a dangerous disease, that many of them dye of; it is a Swelling and
Inflammation of the Throat, behind the Jaws of a Hog. I cannot be acquainted
with any other Remedy; for it is but this, that they use to slit it in the
midst, as long as the Inflammation or Sore is, and then to flay up the skin on
both sides of the slits, and so far as the Sore is, rub it with Nettles and
Salt, and lay Tar upon it, and he shall recover.

A Remedy, together with a Bath for a Swine that has the Swine-Pox.
For the Cure, give them the powder of Brimstone with some Stale. A Bath to
wash them, is as follows: Take Yarrow, Plantane, Primrose-leaves, Bryar-leaves,
old Oaken-leaves of a year, of watery Bet^ony, of each two handfuls: boil them
in two Gallons of running Water, till that they are tender, and then wash your
Hogs and Pigs therewith, and use this once or twice, and it will dry it up.

A Remedy for lousie Hogs.
This disease comes to them from Leanness, and want of good keeping in Winter;
for so long as they are lousie, they will not thrive. The Remedy is, take
Quicksilver, and kill it with Sallet-Oyl and fasting Spittle, then mix
therewith afresh Grease, or Neats-foot Oil, and so anoint them all over.

Preservatives against the Meazles, with the most approved Cures of them in
Hogs.
To keep and save your Hogs from being measled, take this course: You shall use
in the Summer, especially in the Dog Days (which last from the midst of July to
the middle of August) to give them amongst their Wash and other meat, chopped
cold Herbs, of Lettice, Endive, Succory, Violet-leaves, of Dandelion,
Sow-thistle, or Sumitors, and such like, chop a quantity of these amongst their
meat to keep them cool. Another is, to take a quart of stale Piss or men's
Urine, that has been kept very long, and therein put a good handful of a pound
of black Soap, stir and mix it well together with the Piss, then put therein a
quantity of Whey, force the Hog, if he be nice, to drink it. Let him rest two
or three hours after it, and then give him some other meat, not much: and so
let him rest without any other sustenance until the next morning, for a weeks
space or more, as you shall have cause, and you shall see this Experiment made
good.

To fat Sheep.
All things will fatten Sheep, which are mingled with salt water, as Vetches,
Bran, Chaff, and such like.

To make the Wool to come again.
If the Wool of the Sheep after they have been scabby, do fall off, as in some
places the Wool will go clear off: to make it grow again, and supply the same
places, grease them with Butter mixed with Tar, Oil, Goose-grease, or fresh
Grease; for Tar alone is too sharp, a fretter and a whealer, without it be
mixed with some of the aforesaid Ingredients.

Of the Red Water, with the Remedy.
This is a certain Bladder with water under the tip of the Heart, which scalds
and consumes the Heart, and at length will kill the Sheep. The best help is for
some nights to chase them with a Dog, which will preserve them from the
mischief of this distemper.

An excellent Remedy for the Cough of a Sheep.
You must give him in the morning with a Horn, a little of sweet Almonds, mixed
with a little white Wine. Let him take it warm; let him have new straw, and
make him to eat of the Colt-herb growing on Lands: some call it Horse-hoof.

Of the cloven Pesil.
There is no other Remedy, when he is a Lamb, but to keep it clean till it be
bigger; anoint him with Tar, and when he is in reasonable case, kill him, for
there is no cure for it.

A Remedy for the Phlegm.
Put the tender tops or branches of Savory into their Nostrils, or Basil into
their Noses, which will cause them to sneeze, but you must close their Eyes.
You may also take of the Juice of Briony with honyed Water.

To kill Maggots.
Take Oil of Olive, and the powder of Brimstone, and so anoint therewith; or of
the powder of Brimstone and Tar mixed together, and warmed over a soft fire.

A Remedy for the Water in the Belly or Head.
Stamp and strain of two-penny Grass, and give it him in boiled Wine. Against
any water in the Head, boil Purslane in honyed water strained, and so give it
him.

For the Worms in the Cuts, the Remedy.
Take a quantity of the Juice of Horebound, with some Leek-blades, and bruise
them, and so give it to him, and it will help him.

Of the Tin-worm.
It is a small red Worm with many Legs, much like to a Hogs Louse, they creep
in the Grass: if Sheep, or any other Cattle do eat one, they will swell, and
within a day or two dye, if they are not cured. To effect which, take a
quantity of Stale and Salt, and stir them together, and give it him so, chafe
him a while after: or give him the Juice of the Herb Robert, and it will
recover him.

A Remedy for the Looseness of the Teeth.
For the Cure, take the tender Crops of Briars, called the Black Bryar, and put
it amongst his meat, and his Teeth will fasten again in the eating thereof.

A Remedy for the Flowing of the Gall.
Give him half a spoonful of Aqua vitae, mixed with so much Vinegar, and let
him blood under the Tail, and he will mend.

A Remedy for the Choler in Sheep.
It Is cured by giving the stale Urine of men.

A Cure for the Lousie in Sheep.
Take Quicksilver killed in Oil Olive or Spittle, and therewith anoint him.

Of the Wildfire.
This is a disease counted incurable, the Shepherds have no other way but to
keep the Sheep warm, and to nourish him with Goats milk, the which will
mitigate the distemper of the violence of the fire.

A Remedy for a Sheep that has lost her Quide.
If a Sheep has lost her Quide, notwithstanding she will eat all the day, and
cast it up in the night again (which casting will be like to the Paunch of a
Beast) for she cannot digest it, but pine away by little and little. For the
Cure, you must take Quide-wort that grows amongst Corn like to Groundsel,
bruise a quantity thereof, and then mark when you do see another Sheep chew the
Quide, and take part of her Quide out of her mouth, and mix it with the bruised
Quide-wort, and roll it together, and so give it, make her swallow it, and she
will do well.

An excellent Cure for the Staggers in Sheep.
Take of long Pepper, of Liquorish, of Aniseeds, of Hemp-seeds, and of Honey,
of each a pennyworth; heat all these together, and put therein a pottle of new
Milk, and stir the Honey and it with the rest altogether, and thereof give to
each Lamb or Sheep two spoonfuls, or somewhat more lukewarm, and this will
cure them.

Useful Preservatives when the Pestilence rages amongst Sheep.
If it please God that all your Cattle are sick, first you must change your
pasture, and your watering places, and drive your Cattle further off into other
pastures. If the Pestilence or Murrain rush violently on them with great heats,
you must have them to coverts, shades, and cold places. If it proceed from
cold, you must have them into open places against the Sun, you must drive them
very softly, keeping them in a kind of gentle exercise, yet not to let them
rest and lie too much. And when that you have brought them to the appointed
place, you must part them into many Troops and Bands, and there let them be
carefully looked to.

A Remedy for the short Breath and Pursie.
You must cut their Ears, and change their pasture, also slit their Nostrils:
Some hold it necessary to give them Aniseeds, Liquoris, and Sugar Candy; all
finely beaten together, and mixed with old Grease, or of the powder of
Juniper Berries, administered to them with the Juice of Angelica, with a Horn in
Wine or Water, is excellently good.

To help the Wethering of a Sheep.
Stamp the Leaves of Mallows with strong Ale, and give it to the Ew, and she
shall do well; the Juice of Mugwort will do the like.

A Remedy for the turning Disease in the Sheep.
This distemper causes them to hold their heads on one side; if she hold her
head on the right side, you must strike off the Horn on the left side; for
under the Horn there is a Worm which you must anoint with Tar, then bind a
cloth on it, and the Sheep will recover.

For the Jaundice.
The stale Urine of men is accounted the best Remedy.

A Remedy for the Water in the Belly of a Sheep.
You must cut a hole in the Belly of the Sheep, put in a feather, and let out
the water, and stitch it up again.

A Remedy for the Water-bladder under the Chin.
If you feel it, you shall find it soft; there is no other way but to lance it
a little, and then to tar it.

A Remedy for the Lung-sick or Pursiness.
Stamp Lungwort, and strain it with a little Honey-water, and give them of the
Juice of Carduus Benedictus, called by some Sow-Thistle mixed with warm Ale, and
it will by Gods Blessing cure them.

To cure the Glanders or Snivel.
If this disease continue upon the Sheep two days, the best way will be either
to separate him from the rest, or to kill him. Some use for the Remedy to take
a stick, and therewith to take out all they can get out, and so to make the
sheep clean, when any occasion is, upon which he will somewhat recover. Others
give them the Juice of Bettony with honyed water, and the Herb called
Bucks-beard, which grows higher then that which in Latin is called
Pi^nomenon. This Herb stamped and given with Wine, is mavelous good against
cold or ^legm in any parts of their bodies.

To cure the Itch or Scab in Sheep.
Anoint with Goose-grease and Tar mixed together with the tender Crops of Broom
in May, stamp and boil them with Goose-grease, put Tar to them with a like
proportion, then make two shends on both sides of his Backbone, from his head
to his tail, and anoint with the aforesaid Grease, and you shall need no more
anointing. There is a scabbiness also amongst Lambs, being half a year old,
toward Winter, or the next Fall of the Leaf; (the Shepherds say) the cause is,
for that the Rams at that time are scabby that get them, and that then all the
Lambs shall be scabby at the next Fall. To heal this distemper, you must grease
them with Tar mixed with fresh Grease, or Neats-foot Oil, or Goose-grease. There
is another scabbiness which happens sometimes on the Mousel of the sheep, and
that proceeds from the place where there is great plenty of Furs and Gorse,
they by the eating of the tops and flowers thereof, do prick their Lips and
Mousels, from whence come scabs, which you must heal by anointing them with
fresh Butter. There is another scab which they have, which comes through the
negligence of the Shepherds, when they suffer them to feed on the Grass covered
with Dew. To remedy this, take Salt and Hysop a little quantity beaten
together, and therewith fret and chafe the Palate of the Mouth, the Tongue, and
all over the Mousel, and they will be cured.

An excellent Remedy for the Giddiness in Sheep.
This distemper proceeds from a Bladder in their heads, you shall find it soft
under your finger, and there you must cut it* For any other pains or Giddiness
of the head, these following Remedies are special good: Take the Juice of
Ivy-leaves, and put thereof into his Ear, and bind or close it, so that it may
not be cast out, or the Juice of wild Thyme, stamped with Ale strained and
given him.

Approved Remedies for the Haw in the Eye, and other Distempers of the Eyes.
Drop into the Eye Juice of Chamomil, or Crows-foot Herb, stamped and laid to.
Against any hot cause or pain of the Eyes, to let the Juice of Dragon Herb, or
the Juice of Lettice lie to it plaister-wise. For a cold cause, take the Juice
of Clary mixed with Honey, and drop it in. Also the Juice of Pimpernel put into
the Eyes, and laid to, will break and kill every Haw or other Impostumes in the
Eyes.

Of a stop in the Teats.
There is sometimes on Ews Teats a certain small Mote or Scab with a black
head, hanging unto it a hard watery string like phlegm, which is within the Teat,
which will stop her Milk: Therefore the Shepherd must have a preventive Cure in
lambing time.

How to set and see over the Sheepfold.
THe best time to set over the Sheepfold is in May. Let it be set upon
Rye-ground, if the Husbandman or Shepherd have any, and to flit it every
morning or night; and in the morning when he comes to the Fold, let him not
take out the sheep presently, but raise them up by degrees, and afterward let
them stand still a good while, that they may dung and piss. And let him go
amongst them, to see whether any of them have the Mathes, or be scabbed, and
let him see and peruse them three or four times upon the one side, as often as
upon the other side. And when that the Kells are gone beside the Ground, then
may they be let out of the Fold, and then let him drive them to the soundest
place of the Field. But he that has a fallow Field separate to himself, let
him occupy and possess no Fold; for folding of sheep makes them scabbed, and
breeds Mathes: and when a storm of ill weather comes, they cannot fly nor go
away, which must very much abate them of their flesh. But let that Husbandman
that has several fallow Fields, drive twenty, thirty, or forty stakes,
according to the number of his sheep, upon his fallow where he would set his
Fold, and that more especially in the furthest East part of the Field, from
thence as they came in, for their going upon the Ground does much good: and let
the Shepherd bring his sheep to the stakes, and the sheep will rub themselves
on the stakes. And let the Shepherd walk about them till they are set, and so
order them for two or three nights, and they will follow those stakes as he
flitteth them, and set by them. And if any ill weather comes, they will rise
up, and go to the Hedge: This manner of folding shall keep them from breeding
of Mathes and Scabs, nor in the least manner abate of their flesh; it will also
preserve them from rotting. In the morning let the Shepherd put them out of
their Pastures, he shall not need to have any Hurd^es or Sheepflecks.

What time of the year the Rams should be put to the Ews.
A Husbandman (as I have already said) cannot so well thrive of his Corn,
except he have other Cattle, nor by his Cattle without Corn; for otherwise he
shall be a Buyer, a Borrower, or a Beggar: and because that sheep, in my
opinion, are the profitablest Cattle that a Husbandman can have, I shall
discourse the more at large of them. It will therefore first be a necessary
thing for the Husbandman or Shepherd to know what time he shall put the Ram to
the Ews. In this particular I must make a distinction; for all times are not
alike to put to the Rams, for upon the mistake of time, there may be a great
damage or loss; for that man that has the best Sheep-pasture for winter, and
some springing in the beginning of the year, he may suffer his Rams to go with
his Ews all times of the year, to blissom or ride them when he will: but for
the common Pasture, it is time to put to his Rams at the Exaltation of the Holy
Cross; for then the Buck goes to the rut, and so would the Ram. But for the
ordinary Husbandman that has no Pasture but the common Fields, it is time
enough at the Feast of St. Michael the Archangel. And so for the poor
Husbandman of the Peek, and such others, that dwell in hilly or high Ground,
that have no Pasture nor common Fields, for them Simon and Judes Day will be a
very good time; and the reason is this: An Ew goes with Lamb twenty weeks, and
uses to yean her Lamb in the twenty first week; and if she have not convenient
new Grass to eat, she will want Milk for her Lamb, for want of which there are
many Lambs that perish and are lost, that through the leanness of the Dams, and
their want of Milk, are forced to forsake their Lambs, so that in some hard
Countries oftentimes they both dye.

To make an Ew to love her Lamb.
IF the Ew have Milk, and will not love her Lamb, put her into a narrow place
made of Hordes or of smooth Trouse, a yard wide, and put the Lamb to her to
suck it; and if the Ew strike or smite the Lamb with her head, bind her head
with a Hay-rope or Cord to the side of the Pen, and if the Lamb will not stand
side-long, call the Ew, and give her a little Hay, and tie a Dog by her, that
she may see him; and this fright will in a short space cause her to love her
Lamb: and if he have a Lamb dead, whereof the Dam has much milk, flay the
Lamb, and tie that skin upon another Lambs back that has a weak Dam with
little milk, and put the good Ew and that Lamb together in the Pen, and in one
hour she will love the Lamb; and then he may take the weak Ew away, and put her
in another place, and by this means he may save both hers and the Lambs life.

At what time Lambs should be weaned.
IN some places they never sever the Lambs from the Dams, which is for two
causes; one is in the best pasture, where the Rams go away with their Ew, there
it needs not; for the Dams will grow dry, and wean the Lambs themselves.
Another cause is, he that has no sound pasture to put his Lambs into when they
should be weaned, he must either sell them, or let them suck as long as the
Dams will suffer them. It is a common Saying, That the Lamb shall not rot as
long as it sucketh, except the Dam want meat. But he that has several and
sound pastures, it is time for such a one to wean his Lambs when they are
sixteen or eighteen weeks old at the farthest, and the Ew shall again the
better take the Ram. And the poor man of the Peek Country, and such other
places where they use to milk their Ews five or six weeks, etc. spoil their
Lambs, so as that they are never so good as those that suck long, and have meat
enough.

To draw Sheep, and to sever them in diverse parts.
WHen the Grasier has many Sheep in his Pastures, it will be convenient for
him to have a Sheepfold made with a good Hedge or a Pale, the which will easily
receive all his sheep that go in one pasture in a dry place, and adjoining to
the end of the same, let him make another little Fold that will contain ninty
sheep or more, and both these Folds must have either of them a Gate into either
pasture, and at the end of that Fold let him make another little Fold that will
receive forty sheep or more, and between every Fold a Gate. And when the sheep
are in the great Fold, let forty of them or thereabouts, come into the
middle-fold, and stake the gate, and then let the Shepherd turn them, and look
on every side; and if he find any sheep that needs any help or cure for any
cause, take that sheep with his Hook, and put him into the little Fold. And
when that he has taken all that need any curing, then let him put the other
into whether pasture he pleases, and let as many in of the great Fold, and take
as many in as need any handling, and put them into the little Fold. And thus go
them all over, till that he have done, and then let him melt Grease, and handle
all those that he has drawn, and then shall not the great Flock be tarried and
kept from their meat; and when he has cured them, let him put them into their
pasture.

To meddel Tar.
LEt the Shepherds Tar be meddled with Oil, Goose-grease, or Capons grease;
these three are the best: For they will make the Tar to run and spread abroad.
Butter and Swines grease, when they are melted, are good, so that they are not
salt, for Tar of it self is too sharp, it is a fretter and no healer, without
it be meddled with some of these.

To make Broom-Salve.
A Medicine to salve poor men's sheep that think Tar too costly, the worth of
which, if some of the richer sort knew, they would make use of it.

Let the Shepherd take a shere full of Broom, Crops, Leaves, Blossoms, and all,
chop them very small, and then sethe them in a Pan of twenty Gallons with
running Water, till it begin to grow thick like a Jelly, then let him take two
pound of Sheep-suet melted, and a pottle of old Piss, and as much Brine made
with Salt: Let him put all into the said Pan, and stir it about, and then
strain it through an old Cloth, and put it into what Vessel he will. And if his
sheep be new clipped, then let him make it lukewarm, and then wash them
therewith with a Sponge, or a piece of an old Mantle, or of a folding of such
soft Cloth or Wool, for spending too much of his Salve. And at all times of the
year he may use it as he shall have occasion. Let him make wide sheds in the
wool of the sheep, and anoint them with it, and it will heal the scab, and kill
the sheeps Lice, neither will it hurt the Wool in the sale thereof. And those
that are washed, will not be scabby again, if they are well fed; for that is
the best Grease that the Shepherd can grease the sheep withal, to grease him in
the mouth with good meat, which is a great preservation of sheep from rotting,
except there come Mildews; for a sheep will choose the best, if he have plenty.

To grease Sheep.
IF any Sheep be leabed, the Shepherd may perceive it by the biting, rubbing,
or scratching with his Horn, and most commonly the Wool will rise, and be thin
or bare in that place. Then let the Shepherd take him, and shed the Wool with
his fingers there where the scab is, and with his finger let him lay a little
Tar thereupon, and stroke it in length at the bottom of the Wool, that it be
not seen above, and so let him show the Wool, and lay a little Tar thereupon,
till he have passed the sore, and then it will go no further.

To belt Sheep.
IF any Sheep ray, or be filled with Dung above the Tail, let the Shepherd take
a pair of Shears, and clip it away, and let him cast dry Moulds thereupon; and
if it be in the heat of Summer, it should be rubbed over with a little Tar, to
keep away the Flies. It is necessary that a Shepherd have a Board set fast to
the side of his little Fold, to lay his sheep upon when he handles them, and a
hole bored in the Board with an Augur, and therein a grained stake of two foot
long, to be set fast, to hang his Tar-box upon, that it may not fall. A
Shepherd also should not go without his Dog, his Sheep-hook, and a pair of
Shears, and his Tar-box, either with him, or ready at his Sheepfold, and he
must teach his Dog to bark when he would have him; to run, and to leave running
when he would have him, or else he is no right Shepherd. His Dog must he taught
when he is a Whelp, otherwise it will be hard to make an old Dog stoop or to be
plyant.

To wash Sheep.
IN June is the time to shear Sheep, and before that they are shorn, they must
be very well washed, which as to the Owners sale of the Wool, is a very
profitable help, and so to the Cloth-maker: but let the Shepherd beware that he
put not too many sheep into a Pen at one time, neither at washing, nor at
shearing, for fear of murdering or over-pressing of their fellow, and that not
any of them go away till that they are clean washed. Let the Shepherd hold the
sheep by the head in the water, and let him hold it high enough to preserve
from drowning.

To shear Sheep.
LEt the Owner give his Shearers a special charge to take heed of their shears,
lest they twitch the sheep, and especially for pricking with the point of the
shears, and that the Shepherd be always ready with his Tar-box to salve them.
And let him be sure that they are well marked, both Ear-mark and Pitch-mark,
and Robel-mark, and let the Wool be well folded or wond with a Wool-wind, by
one that has good skill therein, the which shall very much advance the sale
thereof.

How to draw out and separaete the bad Sheep from the good.
WHen the Shepherd has shorn his sheep, it will then be his best time to draw
and separate them in diverse manners, the sheep that he will have fed by
themselves, the Ews by themselves, and the Share-hogs and Theves by themselves,
the Lambs by themselves, the Weathers and the Rams by themselves, if he have so
many pastures for them; for the biggest will beat the weakest with his head.
And of every sort of sheep, it may happen that there are some that like not,
but are weak; those should be put in the fresh Grass by themselves, and when
that they are a little cured, as he sees occasion, he may sell them. The often
change of Grass is very wholesome and healthful for all manner of Cattle.

If a Sheep have the Mathes.
THe Shepherd may perceive this disease by the sheeps biting, or frisking, or
shaking of the Tail: This distemper is most commonly moist and wet; and if it
be nigh unto the Tail, it is oftentimes green, and filled with the sheeps dung,
and then the Shepherd must take a pair of shears, and clip away the Wool bare
to the skin, let him take a handful of dry Moulds, and cast them upon the wet
to dry it, and then wi^e the Moulds away, and lay Tar there where the Mathes
were, and a little further. Let the Shepherd thus look to them every day, and
cure them, if there be occasion.

Of the Blindness of Sheep.
THere are some Sheep that will be blind for a season, and yet mend again. Let
the Shepherd put a little Tar in his Eye: this is the common Medicine that the
Shepherds use.

Of the Worm in the Sheeps Foot, and Help thereof.
THere are some Sheeps Feet that have Worms in them, which makes them to halt.
Let the Shepherd take the sheep, and look betwixt his Cleft, and there is a
little hole as much as a great Pins head, wherein grows five or six black
hairs, an inch long, or more. Let the Shepherd take a sharp-pointed Knife, and
slit the skin a quarter of an inch long about the hole, and as much beneath,
and put his one hand in the hollow of the foot under the hinder Cleft; let him
set his Thumb above almost at the slit, and thrust his finger underneath
forward, and with his other hand take the black hairs by the end, or with the
Knifes point, and pull all the hairs by little and little, and thrust after his
other hand with his finger and his Thumb, and there will come out a Worm like a
piece of flesh, nigh as much as a little finger. And when it is out, let him
put a little Tar into the hole, and it will quickly be cured.

Of the Blood, and the timely Remedy of it.
THere is a sickness amongst Sheep, which is called the Blood, of which they
oftentimes dye suddenly: The signs of his death are, that he will stand still,
and hang down his head, and sometimes quake. The Shepherds Remedy for this
Disease is, to take the sheep, and rub him about the head, and especially about
his Ears, and under his Eyes, and with his Knife let him cut off his Ears in
the midst; and also let him bleed in a Vein under his Eyes; if he bleed well,
he is like to live; if he bleed not, then kill him, and save his flesh; for if
he dye by himself, the flesh is lost, and the skin will be far ruddier, liker
to blood then any other skin shall be.

Of the Pocks, and the Remedy thereof.
THis Disease appears upon the skin in the likeness of red Purples, as broad as
a Farthing. This distemper destroys many sheep. To remedy this, the Shepherd is
to handle all his sheep, and to survey and look on every part of their bodies,
and as many as he finds taken therewith, let him put them into fresh new Grass,
an^ keep them from their fellows, and let him often have an Eye over his Flock,
and draw (...) he has need. And if it be in Summertime, that there be no
Frost, then let him wash them.

Of the Wood-Evil, and the Remedy thereof.
THere is a sickness amongst Sheep, that is called the Wood-Evil. It takes
them in the Spring of the year, and takes them most commonly in their Legs, or
in their Neck, and makes them to halt, and hold their Necks awry: For the most
part those that have this sickness, dye within a day or two. The best Remedy is
to wash them a little, and to change their ground, to bring them to a low
ground and fresh Grass; for this sickness is most commonly in Hilly, Ley, and
Ferny Grounds. Some for this sickness let their sheep blood in a Vein under the
Eye.

What are the things that chiefly rot Sheep.
IT is necessary that a Shepherd should know what things chiefly rot the sheep,
that he may the better preserve them. There is a Grass called Spearwort, it
has a long narrow Leaf, like a Spears head, it will grow a foot high, and it
bears a yellow flower as broad as a Penny. It grows always in low places,
where the water uses to stand in Winter. Another Grass is called Penny-grass,
it grows low, close to the Earth in Moorish Grounds, it has a Leaf as broad
as Twopence, but never bears flower. All manner of Grass that the Land-flood
runs over, is bad for sheep, because of the sand and the filth that sticks
upon it. All Moorish Ground and Marsh-ground is bad for sheep. The Grass that
grows upon Fallows is not good for sheep; for there is much of it weedy, and
oftentimes it comes up by the root, and that brings earth with it: and the
sheep eat both. Mildew-grass is very bad for sheep, and that we may find out by
the Leaves of the Trees in the morning, and especially of Oaks, take the
Leaves, and put thy tongue to them, and thou shall taste like Honey upon them.
Therefore the sheep should not be let out of the Fold till the Sun has the
power to dry up the Mildew. Want of food will cause a great Rot amongst sheep;
for then they will have neither good flesh nor good skins. White Sincles are
very bad for sheep in Pastures and in Fallows. There is another Rot that is
called the Pellet, which proceeds from great wet, especially in woody
Countries, where they find a want of dryness.

To know rotten Sheep diverse manner of ways, whereof some of them never fail.
LEt the Shepherd use both his hands, and twirl upon the Sheeps Eye, and if it
be ruddy, and have red strings in the White of the Eye, then the sheep is
sound; but if the Eye be white like Tallow, and the strings dark-colour'd, then
he is rotten. Let him also take the sheep upon the Wool of the side, and if his
skin be ruddy-colour'd and dry, then he is sound; but if it be pale-colour'd
and watery, then he is rotten. Also when the Shepherd has opened the Wool of
the side, let him take a little of it betwixt his finger and his Thumb, and
pull it a little, if it stick fast, he is sound; if it come lightly off, he is
rotten. When a sheep is killed, if his body be full of water, he is rotten, and
also the fat of the flesh will be yellow, if the Liver be cut, wherein will be
little quicknesses and live things like flocks, and also the Liver will be full
of knots, and white Blisters; if it be rotten, it will also break and crumble
in pieces; but if the sheep be sound, it will hold firm together.

BRIEF Experimental Directions FOR The Right Use of the ANGLE.
HE that addresseth the River for his pleasure, must be well prepared, as to
the setting forth of his Tackle. The first thing he must do, is to observe the
Sun, the Wind, the Moon, the Stars, and the Wanes of the Air; he must observe
the Times and Seasons to set forth his Tackles; to go for his pleasure and for
his profit. As for Example, the Sun proves cloudy, then must he set forth his
Ground-bait or his Tackles, and of the brightest of his Flies. If the Sun
proves bright, then must he put on some of the darkest of his Flies. Thus must
he go to work with his Flies; light for darkness, and darkness for light: he
must also observe that the wind be in the South, for that wind blows the Fly in
the Trouts mouth. But if the weather be warm, it is indifferent where the wind
stands, either with Ground-bait or Menow, so that he can cast his Bait into
the River. The very same observation is for night as for day; for if the Moon
prove clear, or if the Stars glitter in the Sky, there is as ill Angling that
night, as if it were high noon in the midst of Summer, when the Sun shines
brightest, there is little hopes of any pleasure. For the petty Thames
Recreation of catching of Bleaks, Dace, etc. as they are so generally known of
every young Beginner, I am unwilling to trouble the Reader with such a trifling
Discourse.

I shall begin, though not without some seeming digression, first with the
taking of Eels. When the Angler stays a night or two, let him take four or five
Lines, such as I shall inform hereafter will serve for Pikes of fourteen or
fifteen yards long, and at every two yards make a Noose, to hang a Hook armed
either to double thread, or silk twist: for it is better then Wyre. Let him bait
his Hooks with Millers-thumbs, Loaches, Menows, or Gudgins: Let him tie to
every Noose a Line baited. These Lines must be laid cross the River in the
deepest places, either with stones, or pegged, so that the Line lie in the
bottom of the River, there will be no doubt of taking of a dish of Eels; he
must also have a small Needle with an Eye, to bait his Hooks; he must make two
Flies, the Palmer rubbed with Silver or Gold, and the May-Fly: These are the
ground of all Flies. To make the Palmer Fly, he must arm his Line on the inside
of the Hook; let him take his Scissers, and cut so much of the brown of the
Mallards feathers, as in his own reason shall make the wings, then let him lay
the outermost part of the feather next the Hook, and the point of the feather
toward the shank of the Hook, let him whip it three or four times about the
Hook with the same silk he armed the Hook, then make his silk fast: Let him
take the Hackle of the Neck of a Cock or a Capon, or a Plovers Top, which is
the best, and let him take off the one side of the feather, then he must take
the Hackle-silk, or gold or silver thread; and let him make all these fast at
the bent of the Hook, let him work them up to the wings, every bout shifting
his fingers, and making a stop, then the gold will fall right, let him make it
fast: and work up the Hackle to the same place, and make the Hackle fast; and
let him take the Hook betwixt his finger and his thumb, in the left hand, with
a Needle or Pin, part the wings in two; then with the arming silk, as he has
fastened all hitherto, let him whip it about as it falls cross between the
wings, and with his Thumb he must turn the point of the feather toward the
bent of the Hook; then let him work it three or four times about the shank, so
fasten it, and view the proportion. For other Flies: if he make the grounds of
Hogs-wool, sandy, black, or white, or the Wool of a Bear, or of a two years old
red Bullock; he must work all these grounds upon a waxed silk, then he must arm
and set on the wings, as I showed before; for the May-Fly, let him work the
body with some of these grounds, which will do very well, ribbed with black
hair; he may also work the body with Cruels, imitating the color, or with
silver, suiting the wing. For the Oak-Fly, he must make him with orange, tawny
and black for the body, and the brown of the Mallards feather for the wings.

To take a Perch, the Angler in the first place must take notice that this fish
feeds well; and if he lights where they are, they will bite freely. My opinion
is (with some more then ordinary Experience) for to bait with Lobworms chopped in
pieces over night; let him go to his sport in the morning betimes, let him plum
his Ground, gage his Line, and bait his Hook with a red knotted Worm, or a
Menow, which some hold better; let him put the Hook in at the back of the
Menow, betwixt the fish and the skin, that the Menow may swim up and down
alive, being buoyed up with a Cork or a Quill, that the Menow may have liberty
to swim a foot off the ground: So doing, the Angler shall not question the
profit or pleasure of his expended time.

I do now think it convenient for me to show my opinion for floating for
Scale-fish in the River or Pond: the feed brings the fish together, as the
Sheep to the Pen. There is nothing better in all Anglings for feed, then Blood
and Grains, I hold it better then Paste; then let him observe next to plum his
ground, Angling with fine Tackles, as single hair for half the Line next the
Hook, round and small plumed, according to his Float: For the Bait, there is a
small red Worm, with a yellow tip on his tail, which is very good; Brandlins,
Gentles, Paste, or Cadice, which we call Cockbait, they lie in a gravelly husk,
under the stones in the River: These are the most special Baits for these kind
of fish.

There is a manner of trouling for a Pike with a Hazel-rod of twelve foot long,
with a Ring of Wyre in the top of the Rod, for the Line to run through: within
two foot of the bottom of the Rod, there is a hole made to put in a wind to
turn with a Barrel, to gather up the Line, and to loose it at pleasure: this is
the best manner of trouling. But I am of opinion that I can show a way, either
in Mere, Pond, or River, that shall take more Pikes then any Trouler with his
Rod. And thus it is: First, take a forked stick, a Line of twelve yards long
wond upon it, at the upper end leave about a yard, either to tie a bunch of
Sags, or a Bladder, to buoy up the fish, and to carry it from the ground: the
Bait must be a live fish, either Dace, Gudgin, Roach, or a small Trout: the
forked stick must have a slit in the one side of the Fork to put in the Line,
that he may set his live fish to swim at a gage, that when the Pike takes the
Bait, he may have the full liberty of the Line for his feed. He may turn these
loose either in the Pond or the River: in the Pond with the wind all the day
long, the more the better: at night let him set some small weight, that may
stay the Buoy, as a Ship lies at Anchor, till the fish takes. For the River,
he must turn all loose with the stream; two or three are sufficient to show
pleasure, gaged at such a depth, as that they will go current down the River,
where there shall be no doubt of excellent sport, if there be Pikes: for the
Hooks, they must be double Hooks, the shanks must be somewhat shorter then
ordinary: my reason, the shorter the Hook is of the shank, it will hurt the
fish the less, and it must be armed with small Wyre well softened. But I hold a
Hook armed with twisted silk to be better. If you arm your Hook with Wyre, the
Needle must be made with an Eye; then must he take one of those Baits alive
(which he can get) and with one of his Needles enter within a straws breadth of
the Gill of the fish, so pull the Needle betwixt the skin and the fish; then
pull the Needle out at the hindmost fin, and draw the arming through the fish,
until the Hook come to lie close to the fishes body: But I hold for those that
are armed with Wyre, to take off the Hook, and put the Needle in the hindmost
fin, and so to come out at the Gill; then let him put on the Hook drawn close
to the body, 'twill hurt the live fish the less, so knit the arming with the
live fish to the Line; then let him put off either in Mere or Pond, with the
wind, in the River with the stream: the more that he pulls off in Mere or Pond,
he is the likelier to have the greater pleasure. There is a time when Pikes go
a frogging Ditches, and in the River to sun them, as in May, June, and July,
there is then a speedy way to take them, and scarce to miss one in twenty. The
Angler must take a Line of six or eight foot, let him arm a large Hook, of the
largest size that is made, and arm it to his Line, let him lead the shank of
his Hook very handsomely, that it may be of such a weight, that he may guide the
Hook at his pleasure: he may strike the Pike that he sees, with the bare Hook
where he pleases: This Line and Hook does far exceed Snaring. The best sport to
take a Pike, is to take a Goose or Gander, or Duck; take one of the Pikes Lines
I have before described, and let him tie the Line under the left wing, and over
the right wing, about the body, as a man wears his Belt: turn the Goose off
into the Pond, where Pikes are, and there will be pleasant rare Feats betwixt
the Goose and the Pike.

To take a Carp either in Pond or River, if the Angler intends to have sport
with some profit, he must take a Peck of Ale-grains, and a good quantity of any
Blood, and mix the Grains and the Blood together, and cast it in the place
where he meant to Angle; this feed will gather the Scale-fish, as Carp, Tench,
Roach, Dace, and Bream: the next morning let him be at his sport very early,
plum his ground, and he may Angle for the Carp with a strong Line; the Bait
must be either a red knotted Worm or Paste, and he shall have sport enough.

The Angler may begin to angle for a Trout with Ground-baits, in this manner
following: First, he must be sure of a neat taper Rod, light before, with a
tender Hazel top, which is very gentle, he may Angle with a single hair of five
lengths, one tied to the other for the bottom of the Line, and a Line of
three-haired Links for the upper part, and so if he have good Sea-room, he may
take the largest Trout that swims. He that angles with a Line made of
three-haired Links at the bottom, and more at the top, may take Trouts: but he
that angles with one hair, shall take five Trouts to the other one; for this
fish is very quick-fighted* Therefore the best way for night or day, is to keep
out of sight. He must angle always with the point of his Rod down the stream;
for a fish has not the quickness so perfect up the stream, as opposite against
him, observing seasonable times. As for Example; we begin to angle in March, if
it prove cloudy, the Angler must angle with the Ground-baits all day long: but
if it prove clear and bright, he must take the morning and evening, or else he
is not like to do any good; for the times must be observed, and truly
understood: For when an Angler comes to the River for his pleasure, that does
not understand to set forth his Tackles fit for the time, it is as good keeping
of them in the Bag, as to set them forth.

The Angler that does intend to angle with the Ground-baits, let him set his
Tackles to his Rod, and let him begin at the uppermost part of the Stream,
carrying his Line with an upright hand, feeling the Plummet running on the
ground some ten inches from the Hook, plumming his Line according to the
swiftness of the Stream that he angles in; for one Plummet will not serve for
all Streams; for the true Angling is, that the Plummet runs on the ground.
For this Bait, let him take the red knotted Worm, which is very good where
Brandlings are not to be had: now that he may make these Brandlings fit to be
angled with, that they may live long upon the Hook, which causes the sport.
When he has gathered his Worms out of the Dunghill, he must get the greenest
Moss he can find, then wash the Earth very clean out of it, then let him have
an Earthen-pot to put his Moss into it, and let him put his Worms to the Moss
in the Pot, and within two days he shall find his Worms so poor, that if he
bait some of them on his Hook, he shall see that with throwing them two or
three times into the water, they will dye and grow white. Now the skill is,
when these Worms are grown poor, to feed them up, to make them fat and lusty,
he must take the Yolk of an Egg, some eight or ten spoonfuls of the top of new
Milk, beaten well together in a Porrenger; let him warm it a little until that
it curdle, then let him take it off from the fire, and set it to cool; when it
is cold, let him take a spoonful, and drop it upon his Moss into the Pot, every
drop about the bigness of a green Pea, shifting his Moss twice a week in the
Summer, and once in the Winter. Thus doing, he shall feed his worms fat, and
make them lusty, that they will live a long time on the Hook; thus he may keep
them all the year long. This is my true Experience for the Ground-baits, for
the running Line for the Trout.

The Angling with the Menow, called in some places Pencks, for a Trout, is a
pleasant sport, that takes the greatest fish. The Trout comes as boldly to the
Bait, as if it were a Mastive-dog at a Bear: The Angler may use his stronger
and greater Tackle, and it will be advantageous to him in his Angling, to use a
Line made of three silks and three hairs twisted for the uppermost part of the
Line, and two silks and two hairs twisted for the bottom next his Hook, with a
Swivel nigh to the middle of his Line, with an indifferent large Hook.

Let him bait his Hook with a Menow, he must put his Hook through the lowermost
part of his mouth, so draw his Hook through, then put the Hook in at the mouth
again, and let the point of the Hook come out at the hindmost Fin, then let him
draw his Line, and the Menows mouth will close, that no water will get into its
belly: He must angle (as has been said) with the point of his Angle down the
Stream, drawing the Menow up the Stream by little and little, nigh the top of
the water; the Trout seeing the Bait, comes most fiercely at it, the Angler
must give a little time before he strikes: This is a true way without Lead; for
many times I have had them come at the Lead, and forsake the Menow, which he
that tryes in time will prove.

My next task will be to instruct the young Angler how to angle with a Fly.
Let him fit himself with a Hazel, either of one piece, or two set together in
the most convenient manner, light and gentle: Let him set his Line to the Rod,
for the uppermost part he may use his own discretion; for the lower part next
his Fly, must be of three or four haired Links. If he can attain to angle with
one hair, he shall have the more rises, and take more fish; let him be sure
that he do not over-load himself with the length of his Line: and before that
he begin to angle, let him make a trial, having the wind on his back, to see at
what length he can cast his Fly, that the Fly light first into the water; for
if any of the Line falls into the water before the Fly, it had been better
unthrown then thrown. Let him always cast down the stream, with the wind behind
him, and the Sun before: it is a great advantage for him to have the Sun or the
Moon before him. Let him begin to angle in March with the Fly: but if the
weather prove windy or cloudy, there are several kinds of Palmers that are good
at that time. First is a black Palmer ribbed with silver: the second, a black
Palmer, with an Orange tawny body: thirdly, a black Palmer, with the body made
of all black: fourthly, a red Palmer ribbed with gold, and a red Huckle mixed
with Orange Cruel. These Flies serve all the year long, morning and evening,
whether windy or cloudy weather. But if the Air prove bright and clear, he may
imitate the Hawthorn Fly, which is all black and very small, and the smaller,
the better. In May let him take the May-Fly, and imitate that, which is made
several ways: Some make them with a shammy body, ribbed with a black hair:
others make them with sandy Hogs-wool, ribbed with black silk, and winged with
a Mallards feather, several ways, according to the fancy of the Angler. There
is another called the Oak-Fly, which is made of Orange-colour'd Cruel, and
black, with a brown wing: another Fly, the body thereof is made with the strain
of a Peacocks-feather, which is very good in a bright day. The Grasshopper which
is green, the smaller Flies are made of indifferent small Hooks, which are the
better: these several sorts I have set down, will serve all the year long,
observing the times and seasons: And let him take notice, that the lightest
Flies are for cloudy and dark weather, the darkest for bright and light, and
the rest of indifferent seasons, for which his own judgment, experience, and
discretion must guide him; so that he must alter these Flies according to these
directions. Of late days the Hogs-wool, of several colors, the wool of a red
Heiser, and Bears-wool are made use of, which make good grounds; they are now
very much used, and procure very good sport. The natural Fly is a sure way of
angling, and will catch great store of Trouts with much pleasure. As for the
May-Fly, he shall always have them playing at the Riverside, especially
against Rain. The Oak-Fly is to be had on the But of an Oak, or an Ash, from
the beginning of May to the end of August: it is a brownish Fly, and stands
always with his head toward the root of the Tree, very easy to be found. The
small black Fly is to be had on every Hawthorn-bush, after the Buds are come
forth. The Grasshopper, which is green, is to be had in any Meadow of Grass in
June or July: with these Flies, he must use such a Rod as to angle with the
Ground-bait; the Line must not be as long as the Rod: Let him withdraw his Fly,
as he shall find to be most convenient in his Angling. When he comes to deep
Waters that stand somewhat still, let him make his Line about two yards long,
and dop his Fly behind a Bush, at which Angling I have had very good sport. The
way to make the best Paste, is to take a reasonable quantity of fresh Butter,
as much fresh Sheeps Suet, a reasonable quantity of the strongest Cheese he can
get, with the soft of an old stale white Loaf: let him beat all these in a
Mortar, till they come to a perfect Paste; and when the Angler goes to his
sport, let him put as much on his Hook as a green Pease.

The Nature, Use, and Benefit of Marle.
MArle is a very useful thing; the Nature of it is cold, which is the reason
that it saddens the Land exceedingly; for it is very heavy, and will go
downwards. Some Countries yield Marle of several colors, as it is affirmed of
Kent, wherein is found both yellow and gray: the blew and red are counted best.
To marle together, I hold not proper; but when you are resolved to lay down
your Land to graze, be sure at the last Crop you intend to take (which may be
two or three more after marling) then manure your Land, for the less binding,
and the more light, loose and open, the more fruitful it is, so that it will
produce a gallant Clovery. The first year after you have laid it down upon the
Wheat or mixed Corn-stubble, you must run it over again with Dung, and it will
pay treble. Now the Lands upon which Marle is most natural for increase, is
upon your higher sandy Land, mixed of gravelly or any sound Land whatsoever,
though never so barren, to which it is natural and nourishing, as Bread to a
man's Life.

The best way of planting of Trefoyl or Clover-grass.
THere are several sorts of Clover, I shall only speak of the great Clover that
we fetch from Flanders, called Trefoyl, named by Clusius Trefolio majus
tertium, which bears the great red Honey-suckle, whose root and branches far
exceed our natural Meadow-Clover, and bears a very small seed like
Mustard Seed, not so round, but longer like a Bean; the best is of a greenish
yellow color, some a little reddish; the black, I suppose, will not do well.
Your Dutch or Low Country seed, or from the lower parts of Germany, is very
much of it, but very hazardous that comes over hither; but being well chose
there (for the choice is the Masterpiece of the work) the transporting of it
by Sea is no considerable prejudice to it; but much of it that was sold in the
Seedsmens Shops in London, was either corrupted by the Dutch before it came
thence, or else parched by our drying, or else by the Shopkeepers either
mingled with old or new, or keeping it another year, and then selling it for
new. The best way of sowing of this Dutch Seed, must be by mixture of it with
Ashes of Wood, or Coals coursly sifted, or with some Dust, or good Sand, or
fine Mould, or any thing else that will help to fill the Land, or spread well
forth of the Land: and after this I must press as the weightiest thing of this
Husbandry, to have a most special care of the even sowing of it, because the
wind, though very small, has power over this, and therefore you must choose as
calm a time as possibly you can. You may sow it upon any Land you intend to
graze upon, any fair places in a Meadow, or Highways trodden and poached, it
will soard them: but the usual way is thus advised; when that you have fitted
your Land by Tillage and good Husbandry, then sow your Barley or Oats, and
harrow them in, and after your Clover upon the same Land, covered over with
small Harrow or Bush, but sow not the Corn as you usually did; but if you will
lose this Crop, you may sow it of it self. The season of it is in the beginning
of April, or in the end of March, if it be likely to be a dry season. I have
heard of three Crops, and some affirm that it will bear, two to cut, and one
for to graze; the first Crop may be at mid- May ready to cut, and this Crop is
best always to be cut green, and before the stalk begin to grow too big, and
begin to dry and wither, unless it be for Seed; therefore as Experience will
teach, it will be best to cut it green and young, and give it to Cattle or
Horse in the Stable; for if you cut it to keep, it will go so near together, as
that it will do but little service dry; yet if being cut young, it will be very
good and sweet, and either seed or give Milk abundantly; and then after the
first cut, let it grow for Seed, and herein you must be careful, that you let
it grow till it be full ripe, for it will not be very apt to shed; and if it
grow to seed, I cannot conceive of what use those stalks that are so hard and
dry can be, unless it be for firing in a dear Country, so that the seed must be
the advance of that Crop only, and so it may well enough, and you may have a
good after-pasture, and may graze it until January, and then preserve it. But
if you would know when your Seed is ripe, observe these two Particulars. First,
observe the Husk when the Seed appears in it, then about one month after it may
be ripe. Secondly, try the Seed after it begins to turn the color, and the
stalk begins to dye and turn brown, it begins to ripen, and being turned to a
yellowish color, in a dry time mow it, and preserve it till it be perfectly
dry any manner of way, and then about the midst of March thrash it, and cleanse
it from the straw as much as you can; foulter and beat the Husk again, being
exceeding well dried in the Sun after the first thrashing, and then get out
what seed you can, and after try what a Mill will do at the rest, as aforesaid
more at la^ge: But I will give way to any that can make a better discovery. I
need not prescribe a time in July or August as best to cut for seed, because
some years and Lands will ripen it sooner then others will; therefore have
respect to thy seed and straw according to the former directions: but when you
are to go into good seed, you must graze it upon the Land, and then be sure not
to let it grow too rank and high; but if the stalk grow big, Cattle will balk
it, and stain it more, and it will not eat up so kindly at first, nor graze so
even afterward, but exceeding much Milk it will yield, and feed and nourish
very well. But to affirm, as some have done, and do confidently to this day,
that it will grow on the barrennest Ground that is, as on Windsor Forest, I
dare not; I have known that it has failed, and I am confident must, without
exceeding great cost on Husbandry; yet that very Land well manured and tilled,
dunged, limed, marled, or chalkt, or otherwise made fat and warm, will bring
forth good Clover, and other rich Commodities, as they do in Flanders: the
Nature of the Land is good, but the Spirit of it is too low to raise it of it
self. And this is all that is held forth in the Discourse of Brabant Husbandry,
exceeding barren Lands, but well dunged and tilled, and then clovered, not that
it is the barren Land, but the good and costly Husbandry; only the oldness of
the Land, and the restiness thereof, yields more spirit to the Grain or Clover
by far, then the tillable Land well husbanded, and laid down with Clover, will
do very well also. The quantity of seed for an Acre, as I conceive, will be a
Gallon, or nine or ten pound, though some are of opinion less will serve turn.
Therefore, as I said before, I say your old Land, be it course or rich, as it
is, or has been disused from Tillage long, is best for Corn, so also it is the
best and most certain Land for Clover; and when you have corned your Land as
much as you intend, then to alter it to Clover, is the properest season. This I
shall lay down for a general Rule, That whatsoever Land is neither too rank or
fat for any sort of Corn, is not too good to clover, and you shall always find
it to be the best Husbandry, unless you recover the barren Lands up to a good
and rich condition, which is also the far better Husbandry, then to let it lie
pelting and moiling upon poor mean Land unfatned by some soils or other;
therefore I advise every man to plow up no more then he can well overcome by
his Purse and Husbandry, and let the rest lie till he have brought up the
other, and then as he has raised one part, take up another, and lay down that
to graze, either with Clover or otherwise: and let him take heed that flatters
himself to raise good Clover upon barren Heathy Land, otherwise then aforesaid.
Let him take notice, he will pull down his Plumes after two or three years
Experience, unless he devise a new way of Husbandary: as to the annual profit
that may accrue thereby, I shall a little differ from the Flanders Husbandry,
but shall affirm, that one Acre, after the Corn is cut, the very next year if
it be well husbanded, and kind thick Clover, may be worth twenty Marks, or
twenty pounds, and so downwards, as it degenerates weaker, less worth. In
Brabant they speak of keeping four Cows Winter and Summer, some cut and laid up
for Fodder, others cut and eaten green; but I have credibly heard of some in
England, that about one Acre have kept four Coach-horses, and more all Summer
long; but if he keep but two Cows, it is advantage enough upon such Lands as
never kept one: But I conceive best for us, until we come into a stock of Seed,
to mow the first Crop in the midst or end of May, and to lay that up for Hay,
although it will go very near together; yet if it grow not too strong, it will
be exceeding good and rich, and feed any thing, and reserve the next for Seed;
and if we can bring it up to perfect Seed, if it but yield four Bushels upon an
Acre, it will amount to more then I speak of by far, every Bushel being worth
three or four pound a Bushel; and then after the Math or Eadish, that year may
be put up three midling Runts upon an Acre, and feed them up: all which laid
together, will make up an Improvement sufficient; and yet this property it has
also, that after the three first years of cloving, it will so frame the Earth,
that it will be very sit to corn again, which will be a very great advantage.
First to corn the Land, which usually yields a far better profit then grasing,
and sometimes a double profit, and sometimes more, near a treble profit, and
then to clover it again, will afford a wondrous strange advance. And if you
consider one Acre with the Clover and Husbandry thereof, may stand you the
first year in twenty Shillings, the Land being worth no more, which may produce
you yearly (if it thrive well) easily five, six, or eight pounds per Acre, nay
some will affirm, ten or twelve pounds, or more.

Of the Plantation of Hops, and how Land is improved thereby.
HOps is grown a National Commodity: But it was not many years since the famous
City of London petitioned the Parliament of England against two Anusancies or
offensive Commodities were likely to come into great use and esteem, that was
Newcastle Coal in regard of their stench, etc. and Hops in regard that they
would spoil the taste of Drink, and endanger the peoples healths, and for some
other reasons I do not well remember* but petition they did to suppress them,
and had the Parliament been no wiser then they, we had been in a measure pined,
and in a greater measure starved. This Hop-plantation will require a large
Discourse; but I shall contract my self to the briefest discovery thereof I can
possibly. 1. Choose the Land that is best for them, and best Sets to plant
withal. 2. The best manner of planting them and husbanding of them, until they
are fit for sale. 3. The profit and advantage that will accrue thereby, I shall
afterward, as plainly as I can, express. 4. Describe the manner of its growth
thus; it comes up with several sprouts like Asparagus, runs up and climbs upon
any thing it meets withal, bears a long stalk, hairy, and rugged Leaves, broad
like the Vine, the flowers hang down by clusters, set as it were with scales
yellowish, called in High Dutch Lupullus, in Low Dutch Hopssem, and in English
Hop. It is offensive upon this account, hot in the first degree, stuffs the
head with the smell, therefore use it not too much; yet the Leaves open and
cleanse. The best Land is your richest Land, it must be a deep Mould, that
which lies near the Rock, the Poles cannot be set deep enough to stand firm;
it should be a mixed Earth that is compounded of Sand and a little Clay, but
much solid Earth, a strongish Land laid dry and warm, will bear the weightiest
Hops. A barren Moorish wet Soil is not natural to Hops; but if this be laid
very dry, and made very rich with Dung and Soil, it may do reasonable well. The
Hop-Garden should stand warm, that it may be preserved from North and East
winds, rather by Hills then Trees, as near your House as may be, and that Land
you determine for your Hop-Garden, lay as level and as square as you can; and
if it be rough and stiff, it will do well to be sowed with Hemp, Beans, or
Turnips before; but in what state soever it be, till in the beginning of
Winter, make use of the Plough or Spade, and this not only the year before, but
every year as long as you use it; and the more pains and cost you bestow, the
more profit, and is the nearer to you, resemble the Flemming in his Hopping.
And for your Sets and good Roots, to procure them, you must go to a Garden
orderly kept, where the Hops are of a good kind, all yearly cut, and where the
Hills are raised very high, for the Roots will be greatest, be sure to buy
choice Sets; they may cost six a hundred in some places, and sometimes you may
have them for the taking up: leave your Husbandry orderly, their Hills well
dressed. You must choose the biggest Roots you can find, such as are three or four
inches about, and the Set nine or ten inches long, and have three joints in a
Root. Take heed of wild Hops, they are only discerned by the Root and stalk.
The unkindly Hop that likes not his ground, soil, or keeping, comes up green
and small in the stalk, thick and rough in the leaves like Nettles, much bitten
with a black Fly, but it destroys not the Hop, but somewhat injures it. The
manner of planting as soon as your Roots are got, is either to set them
speedily, or lay them in some Puddle, or bury them in Earth; but leave them not
in Water above twenty four hours: Then begin to direct your Hills with a Line,
tied with knors and threads thereto; the due distance had need to be eight foot
betwixt, because then you make the fewer and bigger Hills, the Sun comes about
them. Let the Poles reach not one another, that so it may be plowed yearly the
more easily, otherwise it must be dug, some say seven foot, and others say
six foot, as one lately accustomed manner is. And I am confident there is most
advantage by thin planting: but that I leave to each man's Experience. Your hole
under the knot of your Line, had need be a foot square and deep, then if you
can have the wind South or West it is best; if not, go on, having made many
holes; but be sure to take the month of April for the work, and take two or
three of your Roots, as a great old Gardener affirmed to me, by which they will
yield green Sciens or white Buds, and will have small beards growing out. Join
your Sets together even in the tops, and set them altogether bolt upright, and
there hold them in their place, till you have filled the hole with good Mould,
and set low, but just as the tops may be level with the ground, and then after
they must be covered thick with fine Mould; be careful you set not that end
downwards which before grew upwards, which you may know by the bad growing
upwards, and let no part of the dead stalk remain upon the uppermost joint
thereof; then press down the Earth hard to the Roots. Some will set them every
one at a corner of the foot of the Line, which I rather incline to, because
they have room, and stand round: But if you plant late, and have green springs
upon them, then be careful of not covering the spring; but to set more Plants,
lest some should fail, and in a bigger hole, round about the same set eight,
some say ten or more, which is thought tedious. Now at this time you need make
no Hills at all there, as aforesaid. Poultry must be kept from thence for
scratching, the Goose more especially, or any things that are mischievous. Now
for poling, if your distance be three yards, or eight foot, then four Poles are
required, else three will serve, but I incline to six or seven foot distance,
and four Poles, and as many this year as any. Elder Poles are very good, taper,
and rough, and suitable to the Hops desire. The time of cutting your Poles is
in December or in November, and then dress them, and pile them up dry; if you
leave some Twigs, it will not do amiss. For length fifteen foot is well, except
your Ground be very rich, or your Hills exceedingly heightn^d; or if they grow
too thick, your Poles need to be the longer. The Hop never stocketh kindly,
until it reach higher then the Pole, and returns a yard or two; for whilst it
is climbing, the branches that grow out of the principal stalk, grow little or
nothing. Let your Poles be strong nine inches above the bottom, they will stand
the faster: 150 Poles make a Load, which may be worth a little more then
ordinary Wood, a few will supply the standing stock. In setting your Poles, lay
all to each Hill you intend to set, which speeds the work When your Hops
appear, as you discern where your principal Root stands, then set to poling,
having a Crow of Iron to make entrance for the Pole: but if you stay longer,
then you will be more subject, either by running or making holes, to bruise the
Root, or else they will not so easily catch the Pole without flying. Your foot
of the Pole must be set a foot and a half deep, and within two or three inches
of the principal Root: but if your Land be rocky, then you must help your self
by making your hill higher to strengthen your Poles, for which you stay the
longer; lest that you bury your Sciens, your Poles of each hill, leave them
rather outward one from another, and then with a Rammer ram them outward, and
not inward. If a Pole should break, take away the broken Pole, the^ ^ye the top
of those Hops to a new Pole, then winding it with the Sun a turn or two, set it
in the hole; but if you take a stake, and tie it to without wresting the Wyers
of it, you may do well to piece it; but if it be broken at the nether end,
shove the Pole in again; and if your Poles break in the pulling, or will not be
drawn, by reason of the drought or hardness, you may make a pair of Pinsors of
four five foot long, with an Iron running Hook upon them, and with a Block laid
under upon the top of the hill, and so coleweigh up your Poles, the mouth
thereof made hollow. And for laying up your Poles, the usual way is to tie two
and two together in the top, being set in six opposite hills, and lay some
Hop-bands upon the three hills under your Hop-poles, and so draw your tops near
together, or farther off, as you see cause. When your Hops are grown two foot
high, bind up with a Rush or grass your binds to the Poles, winding them about
the Poles as often as you can, and wind them according to the course of the
Sun, but not when the dew is upon them: your Rushes lying in the Sun will grow
tough. Now you must begin to make your hills, and for that purpose get a good
strong Ho, of a good broad bit, and cut or ho up all the grass, in the Bowlers
betwixt your hills, and therewith make your hills with a little of your Mould,
but not with strong Weeds, and the more your hills are raised, the better, the
larger and the stronger grows the Root, and the bigger will be your Fruit, and
from this time you must be painful in raising your hills, and clearing your
Ground from Weeds. In the first year suppress not one Scien, but suffer them
all to climb up the Poles, and should you bury the Springs of any one of your
Roots, it would dye, so that the more Poles are required to nourish the Spring.
But after the first year, you must not suffer above two or three stalks to grow
up to one Pole, but pull down and bury all the rest; yet you may let them grow
four or five foot long, and then choose out the best for use. As soon as your
Pole is set, you may make a Circle how broad your hill shall be, and then
hollow it, that it may receive the moisture; and not long after proceed to the
building of your hills. Where you begin, and where your Hops are highest, there
begin again, and pare again, and lay them to your Hops, but lay the out-circle
highest to receive moisture, and be always paring up, and laying to the heap,
and with some Mould until the heap comes to be near a yard high; but the first
year make it not too high, and as you pass through your Garden, have a forked
Wand in your hand to help the Hops that hang not right. Now these hills must
the next year be pulled down, and dressed again every year. Some, when their
Hop is eleven or twelve foot, break off the tops, which are better then they
which have their Pole so long as the Hop runs: But if that your Hop by the
midst of July attain not to the top of the Pole, then break off the top of the
same Hop; for then the rest of the time will nourish the branches, which
otherwise will lose all, it being no advantage in running up to the stock, or
increase of the Hop. Now we come to the gathering of them; about St. Margarets
Day Hops blow, and at Lammas they bell: But when your Hops begin to change
color, it is a little before Michaelmas, but long before some will turn,
change, and grow ripe, which howsoever the best way will be to pull them, and
not suffer them to shed; they are called Midsummer-Hops. Let them not grow till
the other be ripe, and as soon as the seed of the rest begins to change, then
get Pullers amain, and as many as you can, taking a fair season; and note, you
were better to gather them too early then too late. Therefore for neatness
sake, pull down four hills standing together in the midst of your Garden, cut
the Roots, pare the same Plot level, throw water on it, tread it, sweep it, and
make it fat, wherein the Hops must lie to be picked. Then begin and cut the
stalks close by the tops of the Hills, and cut them asunder that grow one into
another, with a long sharp Hook, and with a Fork take them down; you may make
them Fork and Hook, one apt Instrument with which you may shove off all from
the Pole, and carry it to the place, and pick them off from the Pole. Straight
fine Poles are best for this way, but cut no more stalks then you can carry
away in the space of one hour aforehand; for either the Sun or Rain will
offend them when they are off of the Pole, they must all stand round the floor,
and speedily strip them in Baskets; for it is not unwholesom, though some
smaller Leaves fall amongst them. Clear your floor twice a day, and sweep it,
and if the weather be unlike to be fair, they may be carried into the house in
Blankets, but use no Linen, it will be stained to the purpose. And if you pull
them upon Poles, then lay them upon forked stakes, and dispatch them, be
careful of wet, lest they shed their seed, which is the marrow of them, and
carry out your straw, and so depart your Garden till March, unless it be to
bring in Dung. Lay on some in the Winter to comfort and warm the Roots, your
old Dung is best, rather none then not rotten. And in April help every hill
with a handful or two of good Earth when the Hop is wond upon the Pole; but in
March you will find, unless it has been tilled, all Weeds. But if you have
pulled down your hills, and laid your Ground as it were level, it will serve to
maintain your hills for a long time: but if you have not pulled down your
hills, your shall with your Ho as it were undermine them round, till that you
come near to the principal, and take the upper or younger Roots in your hand,
discerning where the new Roots grow out of the old Sets, but cut no Roots
before the beginning of March or end of April. The first year of dressing your
Roots, you must cut away all such as grew the year before within an inch of the
same, and every year after cut them as close to the old Roots. Those that grow
downward are not to be cut, they are those that grow outward, which will
incumber your Garden. The difference betwixt old and new easily appears: You
will find your old Sets not increased in length, but a little in bigness, and
in few years all your Sets will be grown into one, and by the color also, the
main Root being red, the other white: But if this be not yearly done, then they
will not be perceived; and if your Sets be small, and placed in good Ground,
and the hill well maintained, the new Roots will be greater then the old; if
they grow to wild Hops, the stalk will wax red, pull them down, and plant new
in their places. As for the annual charge of the Hop-Garden after it is
planted, the dressing the Hills, the Allies, the hoing them, the poling them,
and tying to the Poles, and ordering the Hops, is usually done for forty
shillings an Acre, together with pulling, drying, and bagging by the day. And
so I proceed to the drying of them, which may be upon any ordinary Kilne, with
any Wood that is dry, but not too old, or else good sweet Rye-straw will do
well, but Charcoal best of all. They must be laid about nine or ten inches
thick, and dried a good while on that side, and then turned upside down, and
dried as much on the other side: about twelve hours will dry a Kilne full,
which must be followed night and day, then laid up in a close Room upon a heap
together for a month, if your Markets will give you way to frume and forgive
again: when the stalk begins to be brittle, and the leaf also begins to rub,
then the Hop is dried sufficiently, but tread them not while they are hot, it
will tread them to dust, and then either against Sturbridge-Fair, or what other
Markets you provide for, you may bag them up close and hard, either to 200 a
Quarter. And so I come to my next Particular, to show you the profit of them:
One Acre of good Hops may possibly be worth at a good Market forty, fifty,
sixty pounds; an Acre may bear eleven or twelve hundred weight, possibly some
have done more, many ten, but grant but eight hundred, they may sometimes be
worth not above one pound four shillings the hundred, and some other times they
have been worth twelve or fourteen pound a hundred, and usually once in three
years they bring money enough. It is usually a very good Commodity, and many
times extraordinary, and our Nation may ascribe unto it self, to raise the best
Hops of any other Nation. There Is an old Saying: -- Heresy and Bear
Hopt into England in one year.


Of the Mystery of Saffron, and the way of planting of it.
THere is another very rich Commodity wherein our Nation has the Glory, and
yet it is a very Mystery to many Parts of it; they know not whether such a
thing grows in England; and yet none such so good grows in the World beside
that I have ever heard or read of, and that is Saffron. It is a most sovereign
and wholesome thing, and if it take right, it is very advantageous and costly
for price: It has its ebbings and its flowings, as all other things have. I
shall briefly give you the story of it: Good Land that is of the value of 20 l.
an Acre, being well husbanded, tilled, and fitted, or worser Land being well
manured, and brought to perfect Tillage, will serve the turn; but the better,
the better for the work. The season is about Midsummer, when it is to be set,
that being the season when they usually take up, or draw their Sets or Roots,
and old store, when they may be had, and no time else. The Land being brought
into perfect Tillage, the best way is to make a Tool like a Ho in operation,
but as broad as six of them, and with that they draw their Land into ranges,
open as it were a Furrow about two or three inches deep, and there place their
Sets or Roots of Saffron about two or three inches asunder (which Roots are to
be bought by the Strike, sometimes dearer, and sometimes cheaper, and are very
like to Onions, an Onion about an inch and a half over) and as soon as they
have made one Furrow all along their Land from one end to another, then they,
after that it is set, begin in another, and draw that which they raise next to
cover this, and so they make their Trench, and cover the other; they keep one
depth as near as may be, which Ranges or Furrows are not above three or four
inches distance, that so a Ho of two or three inches distance may go betwixt
them to draw up the Weed, which being set and covered, it may come up that
Summer, but it dies again; yet it lives all Winter, and grows green like Chives
or small Leeks. And in the beginning of Summer it dies wholly, as by the blade
of it is as to appearance; let one come and take a Ho, and draw all over it,
and cleanse it very well, and then will come up the Flower without the Leaf. In
September the Flower of it appears like Crocus that is blew, and in the middle
of it come up two or three Chives which grow upright together, and the rest of
the Flower spreads broad, which Chives is the very Saffron, which you may take
betwixt your fingers and hold it, and cast away all the rest of the Flower, and
reserve that only, and so they pick it, and they must pick it every morning
early, or else it returns back into the body of it, to the Earth again, until
the next morning, and so from one to another, for a months space it will bear
Saffron. You must get as many Pickers as may overcome it before it strike in at
the very nick in the morning. It will grow to bear a Crop, and then it must be
taken up, and planted new again, and then it will yield good store of Sets to
spare, which cannot be had any other way. It must be taken up at Midsummer, and
then set as aforesaid. And when that you have got your Saffron, then you must
set it a drying, and that you must do, make a Kilne of Clay, not half so big as
a Bee-hive, and very like it will be made with a few little sticks and Clay,
and serve excellently well for this service. A little fire of Charcoal will
serve to dry it, but it must be very carefully tended. Three pound of wet
Saffron will make one of dry. An Acre of Land may bear fourteen or fifteen
pounds of Saffron, if very good: but if seven or eight pounds, it will do the
work, and one Acre of it will be managed with no great charge. I do not believe
it can come to 4 l. an Acre, it has been sold from 20 s. a pound to 5 l. a
pound. It is an excellent advantage, and brings in at worst a saving bargain,
but it may possibly be worth 30 or 40 l. an Acre; but if it come to 7 or 8 l.
it loses not. The Saffron-Country is on one side and Nook of Essex, and some
part of Suffolk, at Saffron-Walden, and betwixt that and Cambridge has very
much of it in their Common-fields: And truly these Lands are but of a middle
worth. I have seen as rich Lands again in many Parts of England; but it is, as
I believe, Loamy Ground, and of a little saddest Nature. It will require to be
laid dry and sound, and the Land it self must be very sound and wholesome.

Of the Plantation of Liquorish at large.
I Proceed to another National Commodity, in the Plantation whereof we exceed
all other Nations, and that is Liquorish, our English Liquorish, as we call it,
being far beyond the Spanish Liquorish, or any other. The planting of it few
understand, and fewer practice. That I may be open and full in the discovery of
it, I shall under two or three Heads formalize what I intend to express. 1. To
discover the best Land to bear it. 2. The best way I can find practiced to
plant it. 3. The profits and advantages of it. The best Land to raise your
Liquorish upon, is your richest you can get or make, your warmest you can find
out, the soundest and the dryest that is possibly to be had, of a very deep
soil; you must dig and prepare your Land before you set, and it must be dug
three Spades deep, and two or three shovelings at the least, laid as hollow and
as light as may be: You must have it dug out of natural Land, if it be very
rich Land indeed, that it will feed an Ox in a Summer; it is the best for eight
pence a Rod at London, forty Rods make a Rood, which is a quarter of an Acre,
which comes to about 4 or 5 l. an Acre, and this is the main charge of all for
three years, there is no more, unless it be a little hoing, which rids off of
the hands very fast; I believe it will not cost above 20 s. an Acre more in all
the three years, both in setting, and all the dressings of it, besides the Sets
and Land: the Sets being doubly trebly worth your money. Sets have been sold
for 2 s. the hundred; but if your Land be not fresh old Land, or extraordinary
rich, and as rich as your best Gardens are, it must be made so with Soils and
warm Manures. Horsedung is excellent to be entrenched into the Earth, it both
warms and lightens it, and makes it fit for this service. About London are very
serviceable Lands for it, and so is any dry Soil whatsoever, where it is rich
enough and deep; that which bears this well, will also bear your Moulder Weed,
that rich Commodity. Having dug and prepared your Land, you may proceed to
the planting of it, and therein you must endeavor to get the best Sets you
can, and from the best and largest sorts of Liquorish. The best Sets are your
Crown-sets or heads got from the very top of the Root a little shived down; be
careful of this, of very sound Land; for how soon soever you come to water,
your Liquorish will check and run not one inch further: and having procured
your Sets, your Ground being cast into Beds of four foot broad, all along your
Plantation, from one end to another with a long Line, you may lay down a Set at
every foot along the Line, which Line may have knots and threads at every foot,
if you will be so exact, and then a man may come with a Tool made a little
flattish, or roundish, of the breadth or bigness of a good Pickforks-tayl, about
half a yard long, with a Crutch at the over-end, and sharp at the nether, and
that thrust into the ground, it being made of Wood or Itch: but if flat, an
Iron will do best, and open the hole well, and put in the Set, and close a
little Mould to it, and so you may overrun an Acre very quickly in the setting
of it, and if it should prove a very dry time, you must water your Sets two or
three days at the first, until that you see that they have recovered their
withered waneness, and then the first year you may plant your Garden with
Onions, Radishes, or any Sallet-herb, or any thing that roots not downward; and
I am confident it would be better too, because it will prevent some weeding,
and for the second, it must be hoed and kept from Weeds too, and a little the
third; but one thing be very curious of, in the taking up, and sudden setting
of thy Sets, as soon as took up, set again: but if you fetch from far, then as
soon as taken up, put a little Mould, and post them away by Horseback, and
get them into the ground as soon as possibly; the delay of setting spoils many
thousand Sets. The seasons of planting is in the months of February and March:
you may the second year take some Sets from your own stock, but be very curious
thereof: but the third year you may take what you please, and in the taking of
the Liquorish up, the best seasons for which is November and December, there
will run from every Master-root a Runner which runs along the over-part of the
ground, which has little Sprouts and Roots, or Sciens, which will yield
excellent Sets, if they be cut three or four of them in every Set, which may be
about four or five inches long, which is also to be planted, and is as good as
the Crown-set; also if it be any thing a moist time, you may take slips from
the leaf or branches, and set them, and then some of them will grow; but they
may be set betwixt the other to thicken, lest they should fall. The third
Particular, is the profit and advantage that may be made thereby, which is very
considerable; but it is also subject to the ebbings and flowings of the Market.
It must be taken up in Winter, and must be sold as soon as taken up, lest it
lose the weight, which it must needs do: You may make of an Acre of indifferent
Liquorish 50 or 60, Land of excellent good, 80, 90, or a 100 l. It is not of so
great use as other Commodities are, and so will not vent off in great parcels,
as others will, neither will it endure the keeping for a good Market, because
it will be so soon dry.

How good a Commodity Hemp is, with the manner of Planting of it.
HEmp is an excellent Commodity, and would be far better, but that it is not
made so National. This Staple-commodity in the product would bring a constant
profit for the stock, and would maintain the Poor at work, so as to get a
competent livelihood. Why should we run to France, to Flande^s, and to the Low
Countries for Thread and Cloth of so many sorts, and fine Linen, when we have
Hemp and Flax enough of our own? I shall now proceed to a brief Description of
the way of raising it. As for the Seed of it, that is familiarly bought and
sold in all places in the season; but the best Seed is your brightest, which
you may try by rubbing of it in your hand; if it crumble with rubbing, it is
bad; but if it still retains its substance and color, it is good. The best
Land for it, is that which is sandy, or a little gravelly, so it be very rich,
and of a deep soil: As for your cold Clays, they are not fit for it, the very
best Land can be picked for it is but good enough. The quantity that is to be
sowed upon our Statute Acre, is three Strikes or Bushels, and harrowed with
small Harrows, the which after the Land is made exceeding fine, as the finest
Garden; then in the beginning or middle of April, is the time they sow it: some
sow it not till the end of April: But if it be any thing a kindly year, the
earlier the better, and so preserved exceeding choicely at first, for fear of
Birds destroying of it, as you see in many Countries. Be careful that Cattle
never bite it, nor lie upon it, for they will destroy it. The season of getting
it, is first about Lammas, when a great part of it will be ripe, it may be
about one half, that is, a lighter Summer-Hemp that bears no seed, and the
stalk grows white and ripe, and most easily discernable, which is about that
season to be pulled forth and dried, and laid up for use, or watered and
wrought up as all good Housewives know, which you must pull as neatly as you
can from amongst all the rest, lest you break it; for what you break, you
utterly destroy, and then you must let the other grow for seed until it be
ripe, which will be about Michaelmas, or a little before: when seed and stalk
are both full ripe, and you come to pull them, you bind up in bundles as much
as a yard-hand will hold, which is the Legal measure; but for your simple or
Summer-Hemp, that is bound in lesser bundles, as much as may be grasped in both
your hands; and when your Winter-Hemp is pulled, you may stock it up, or barn
it, any way to keep it dry, and then in the season of the year, thrash it, and
get out the seed, but still preserve your Hemp till you set to the working of
it, which instead of breaking and tawing of it, as they do in most parts, there
they altogether peel it, and no more, and so sell it in the rough: But I leave
all at liberty for that, whether you peel or dress it up by Brake or Tewtaw. As
for the Seed an Acre will bear, is two or three Quarters, and it is usually
sold for about a Mark a Quarter, sometimes ten shillings. If good Hemp, then
store of seed, else not; but in many and most Parts of the Nation, it is sold
for about four shillings a Bushel: Your fimbled-Hemp is not worth above half so
much as the other; sometimes it is subject to Weeds, to Carlock, and
Muckle-weed, which must be weeded; but the best way to destroy them, is to let
your Hemp-Land lie one year fallow: I only speak of Holland, the cheapest place
for it, and the first fountain of it: But generally throughout the Nation, it
is of far more worth and value. The richer your Land is, the thinner; the
poorer, the thicker you must sow. One Acre of good Hemp may be worth 5, 6, 7,
or 8 l. an Acre, and sold as soon as pulled or gathered; but if it be wrought
up, it may come to 8, 9, 10, or 12 l. or more: it is a common thing in use,
every one knows the manner of working it to Cloth.

The Husbanding of Flax so as to make it come up as much of the Improvement as
we can.
FLax, as I may call it, is a Root, or roundation of advantage, upon the
prosperity whereof, thousands of people in good, honest, and laborious
Callings, are maintained; for the profit accruing thereof, i both general and
particular. For the Land capable of raising good Flax, is any sound Land, be it
in what Country soever it will, if the Land be good, either earthy, or mixed of
Sand or Gravel, and old Land; it is best, that has lain long unplowed, it had
need come up to the value of a Mark, or near twenty shillings an Acre to sow
Flax upon, within a mile of London; and yet in most Counties of England, I know
as good and as kind Land for that Husbandry, as any other, and at London they
have Workmen dearer too, and yet can raise (though they give so dear) a very
considerable profit. There is excellent Flax about Maidstone in Kent, it is said
the best Thread in England is made of it; one Acre of good Flax may maintain
diverse persons to the completing of it to perfect Cloth; consider how many
Trades are supplied thereby. 1. The Flax-Land must have the same Husbandry of
plowing and sowing, as Lands have for Corn; there is the Husbandmans business,
sometimes, yea many times weeding too, then pulling, stitching, and drying,
then repelling, and laying up, and preserving the seed, then watering is either
on the ground or in the water, then drying of it up, howing of it, then
breaking and towtawing of it, then better helling and dressing it up, then
spinning of it to Yarn or Thread, then weaving it, and bleaching, and then it
returns again to the good Houswives use, or Sempster, and then to the weaving
and usage; and all these a dozen good Callings. 2. For the carrying on of this
design, and making the best of this Improvement, I will here give you the best
and most profitable way of planting of it, that is discovered. As for the Land,
let it be good, and well ploughed, both straight and even, without balks, and
in due season, about the beginning of March, or latter end of February: and as
for the Seed, the true East Country-seed is the best, although it cost very
dear, one Bushel of it to sow, is worth ten Bushels of our own Country-seed;
but the second Crop of our own, of this Country-seed, is very good, and the
third indifferent, but then no more; but again to your best Seed: the quantity
of it is about two Bushels of it upon an Acre at least, some sow a Peck more;
but I conceive two may be enough, but of our Seed it will require half a Strike
more then of the East Country-seed: Our Flax-men in former days did not sow
above half so much, or little more; but now Experience has brought us to this
pitch. The season of sowing it, is a warm season, in the latter end of March;
but in the warmer parts, as Essex and Kent, I conceive mid- March may do well;
but in colder parts, as down toward Warwickshire and Worcestershire, the
beginning of April may be early enough; and if there should come a very wet
season, you must take care of weeding it also, that it grow not till it be
over-ripe, lest the stalk should blacken or mildew; yet to its full ripeness
you must let it grow, the which you may perceive, both by the hurl, and by the
seed. Some will ripen earlier, and some later; but against it be ripe, be sure
to have your Pluckers to fall in hand with plucking of it, and then tie up
every handful, and set them upright one against another, like a Tent, till they
be perfectly dry, then get it all into the Barn. It is indifferent whether you
ripple it, or take off the boles of it, as soon as you bring it home, or when
you intend to use it. As for your watering of it, whether in the Water or upon
the Land, that I shall not peremptorily determine; but thus much I say, that
both may do well, and he that gets store, will find use of both, because of the
one you make use as soon as your Flax is pulled, and then you need not stand so
curiously upon the drying of it; but after you have got your seed, you may
water it, and the watering of it opens and breaks the hurl the best; but then
you must be careful of laying up your seed, that it heat not, nor mould, and
that which you water then, get it forth upon your Grass-land, and spread it
thin, and turn it to preserve it from mildewing, and keep it so until you find
the hurl be ready, and willing to part from the Core, and then dry it up, and
get it in for use. And for the drying of it, a Kilne made on purpose is best,
so that you be careful of scorching it, this will make a greater riddance of
the same, and to them that have great store, Sun-drying will never do the feat,
though it may do well for a small quantity, or the Flax of a private Family. As
to the working of it, you must provide your Brakes and Tewtaws both, the one,
that is, the Brake which bruises and toughens, the Hurl and the Tewtaw that
cuts and divides out the Core; if you use the Tewtaw first, it may cut your
well-dryed Flax to pieces; yet both do well, but use the Brake first. It will
cost the Workmanship of it betwixt three or four pounds an Acre, to bring it up
to Sale: It lies much upon the Workmans hand, and therefore far more to be
advanced, by how much the more it raises employment for so many people to live
by. Where Wages are great, it comes off the hardest; yet where it is carried on
to the purpose, people stock hard that want Work, and because of constancy,
will work on easy terms, or else how could they possibly do good of it at
London, or near about it, where they work at double Rates? but there I have
seen the best Flax I ever saw. Lastly, the benefit that may be made thereby, an
Acre of good Flax may be worth upon the ground, if it be the East-Country-seed,
seven or eight, yea, possibly ten or twelve pounds, yea, far more, the charge
whereof, besides the seed until it be ripe, may not be above ten shillings an
Acre, which if you work up to be fit to sell in the Market, it may rise up to
15 or 16, or near 20 l. in the Market; but to bring it so high as 30 l. as in
Flanders, I dare not say. But an Acre of our Country-seed, will hardly come up
to above three pounds or four, unless very good indeed, to which if it amount
unto, and no more upon the Land, it will make a good advancement of it, which
it may be, Land, and Seed, and all Charges, may come to about fifteen or
sixteen pounds an Acre, the seed not being worth above two shillings a Strike.

A Discovery of Rape and Coal-seeds Husbandry.
THe planting of Coal-seed, or Rape-seed, is another excellent good means for
the Improvement of Land: this Coal-seed has been of late days in good esteem.
And it is most especially useful upon your Marsh-land, Fen-land, or upon your
new recovered Sea-land, or any Lands that are very rank and fat, whether Arable
or Pasture. The best seed is the biggest, the fairest seed you can get, it
being dry, and of a pure clear color, of the color of the best Onion-seed. It
is to be had in many Parts of this Nation; but Holland is the Center of it,
from thence usually comes your good seed. The season of sowing it, is about
Midsummer, you must have your Land plowed well, and laid even and fine, then
you may sow it, about a Gallon of seed will sow an Acre, the which seed must be
mingled, as before was directed about the Clover, with something, that you may
sow it even, and not upon heaps. The even sowing of it is very difficult; it
grows up exceedingly to great Leaves, but the benefit is made out of the seed
especially. You may sow it either upon the Lay, Turfe, or Arable, and both may
do well; but your Arable must be very rich and fat, having made your Ground
fine and fit to sow it. The time to cut it, is when half the seed begins to
look brown, you must reap it as you do Wheat, and lay it upon little Yelms, two
or three handfuls together till it be dry, and that very dry too, about a
fortnight will dry it, it must not be turned or touched, if it be possible, for
fear of shedding the seed, that being the chief profit of it: It must be
gathered in sheets, or rather a great Ship sail Cloth, as big as four or six
sheets, and so carried into the Barn erected on purpose, or that place on
purpose designed to thrash it that day; you may have sixteen or eighteen men at
a Floor, four men will thrash abundance in a day. I have heard that four men
have thrashed thirty Coume in a day. The seed is usually worth 16 s. a Coume,
that is, four shillings a Bushel, sometimes more, and sometimes less. It will,
if exceeding good, bear ten Coume upon one Acre, and raise a good advance upon
your Lands. It is a Commodity will not want of Sale, the greater the Parcel is,
the better price you will have. It is used to make the Rape-Oyl, as we call it.
The Turnep-seed will grow amongst it, and it will make good Oil also, you may
sell a thousand pounds worth together to one Chapman: It is best to be planted
by the Water, or near it. It cannot be too rank, the Eadish and Stubble will
exceedingly nourish Sheep in Winter. It has another excellent property, it
will fit the Land so for corning, for Wheat it may produce a Crop as good, or
better then it self, and for Barley after it. The charge of the whole Crop, I
conceive may come to betwixt 20 or 30 s. an Acre, and a good Crop may be worth
5, 6, 7, or 8 l. an Acre; the least is a very good Improvement, because it will
do excellently well, if well ordered, and a kind season upon the Land the very
first year after recovery, when it will do nothing else, if it can be but
plowed, when other things, as Corn and Grain may be hazarded.

Of Weld or Would, as some call it, or more properly Dyers-Weed.
IT is a rich Dyers Commodity, it bears a long, narrow, greenish, yellow
Flower, which runs to a small Seed, far smaller then a Mustard seed, very thick
set with seed. Pliny calls it Lutea, but Virgil calls it Lutum, and in our
English, Weld, Would, or Dyers-Weed. It flourishes in June and July. In many
places it grows of it self, in and about Villages and Towns, and is of a very
great use, and considering the easy charge of the raising of it, and the
hardness of the Land upon which it grows, is of incomparable advantage. For
first it will grow upon very indifferent Land, not worth above ten Groats or
half a Crown per Acre; yea, as some affirm, the veriest hilly, barren, chalky,
light Land, not worth twelve pence per Acre will carry it, and bear it to very
good purpose; but unto so barren Lands, I will not give encouragement, unless
where there is little or none better; but in any indifferent Land, so it be of
a very dry, warm nature, it will do very well. And secondly, it will cost but a
little the managing, it requires no tillage at all, no harrowing, it being to
be sowed where you sow your Barley or Oats upon that Husbandry, without any
other addition, unless you draw a Bush over it, or a Roll, either of which is
sufficient to cover it after you have sowed it. The difficult piece in the
managing hereof, is the very sowing of it, that is, that it may be sowed even;
for the seed being so very small, will require both skill and an even hand to
scatter it: Some sow it by taking it with one finger and the thumb; others with
the two fore-fingers, but neither of these do I affect as the best way, because
they cannot spread so well as they may with their whole hand: I therefore
prescribe a mixture with Ashes, Lime, fine Earth, or some such thing as will
best suit with the weight of the seed; for could you find out that which agreed
both in weight and bigness, then out of all question, none like to that to sow
it withal. A Gallon of this seed will sow an Acre, which had need to every
quart of seed to have two Gallons of some of the aforesaid. It must be often
stirred together, lest that the seed sink to the bottom, and sow that part
thicker then the other, and then cast it out at Arms-end at as good an even a
compass as you possibly can. This seed thus sowed, may grow up amongst the
Corn, and yet be no prejudice, because it grows not fast the first Summer;
but after the Corn is cut, it must be preserved. And the next Summer you shall
receive through Gods Blessing a comfortable Crop: you must be exceedingly
curious in the ripening of it; if you let it grow too long, your seed will fall
out; if not long enough, your seed will not be perfect, nor your stalk neither,
and therefore observe both the turning of the seed, and the ripening of the
stalk; for I cannot tell you which of either will admit of a dispensation, and
as soon as ever you perceive it to grow up to perfect ripeness, you must down
with it, that is, pull it as you do your Flax up by the Roots, and bind it in
little handfuls, and set it up to dry in little filches or stitch, until both
seed and stalk be dry, and then carry it away carefully, as that seed be not
lost, lay it up dry, and so keep it as you see cause for a good Market; for it
is to be sold for the Dyers use, who sometimes will give a very good price, but
at all times sufficient profit, and go far to buy it, from forty shillings an
Acre, to twelve pounds an Acre, some say more; you may barn it up, and keep it,
and the seed together until March, and then you may get out the seed by lashing
and whipping of it forth upon a Board or Door, which reserve for seed: the seed
is sometimes ten shillings a Bushel, and sometimes more or less, as the Market
rises or falls, it colors the bright yellow, and the Lemmon-colour. The
Stalk and Root are both useful, and must go together to the Dyer. The charges
of sowing, and all things till you come to pulling, is not above one shilling,
whipping and banning may come to four shillings more; the seed may be worth
half a Crown, so that all Charges and Rent of the Land may amount to less, but
I will say fifteen shillings, then the Improvement will be fourfold; if worth
four pound ten shillings an Acre, sixfold; if worth six pound per Acre,
eightfold, and much more, as some affirm to sixteenfold Improvement. It begins
well, and spreads and thrives very much in Kent in many parts thereof; the best
place to get the seed is in Kent clean down to Canterbury and Wye, where you
may see both the Land and the growth, and discover the Mystery thereof. It is
sold by weight, so much a hundred, and so much a Tun weight.

Of Woad or Wade, the Land best for it, the Usage of it, and the Advantages
thereby.
WOad is also a great Commodity, it lays the foundation for the solidity of
many Colors more: A Woaded color is free from staining, excellent for holding
its color, nay, sad-holding color must be woaded. It has been one of the
greatest Inrichments to the Masters thereof, until our late Wars, of any Fruit
the Land did bear. It is called Glastum or Garden-Woad, by the Italians called
Guedo, in Spanish and in French Pastel, in Dutch Were, and in English Woad or
Wade. It has flat long Leaves like Reben Rubrum; the stalk is small and
tender, the Leaves are of a bluish green color. The seed is like an Ash-key
or seed, but not so long, little blackish Tongues. The Root is white and
simple. It is a very choice seed to grow and thrive well; it bears a yellow
Flower, and requires very rich Land, and very sound and warm, so that very warm
Earth, either a little gravelly, or else sandish will do exceeding well; but
the purer, warmer, solid Earth is best, and exceeding rich Land, and though it
should be mixed with a little Clay, it will do well, but it must be very warm.
There is not much Land fit for this design in many Countries, especially your
hardest Wood-land parts, you have in many of your great, deep, rich Pasture
many Hills and Hills-sides good Woad-Land, when the bottom-ground will do no
service; but your chiefest is your home Corse, or lesser Ground lying near, and
bordering about the Towns. Your best and naturallest Parts in England for Woad,
are some Parts of Worcestershire, Warwickshire, Southward, Oxfordshire,
Gloucestershire, Northamptonshire, Leichestershire, some Parts of Rutland,
Redford-shire, and Buckingham-shire, and some other places here and there: All
these Parts have some admirable Woad-land in them. The Land must be sound, and
at above twenty shillings an Acre to graze in at least, or else it will not be
worth the woading. And to plow and sow Woad, it may be worth as much more as to
graze, yea, sometimes more, if it be extraordinary rich Soil, and Trading good.
And whereas some write, that it undoeth the Land, I answer as I judge in my own
Breast, that in regard it is so often cut, and grows so thick, and is so
often weeding, that it must needs do so, as I believe all Corn does draw out
some of the Spirit thereof; but no more then other Grain, if it could be so often
cut to grow again. Thus much I can say of it, that it prepares the Land
exceedingly for Corn, and does abate of the strength and super-richness, or
rankness thereof, which Corn would not well endure; for I am ready to maintain,
that the richest Land is not best for Corn: For though the one may overburden,
and be so rank; yet the other may bear as much to the Strike, and for goodness
your middle-land bears the Bell away for Corn, in my opinion. To acquaint you
with the use of Woad, I must do these three things. 1. Show you how the Land
must be prepared and sowed. 2. Show you how it must be ordered, when that the
leaf must be cut, and how ordered after the cutting of it. 3. And lastly, how
it must be tempered and seasoned to make the best Woad for use and profit: But
before I proceed, I must inform you, that this Commodity is not to be played
withal, as you may do with Liquorish and Saffron, etc. to make Experiments of a
little parcel, but a man must of necessity set forth and forward so much stock,
and land, and seed, as may keep one Mill or two at work to make it into perfect
Woad. It is the doing of a great quantity, and carrying on a great stock that
makes this work, and will carry it on to profit and credit: Some have as much
under hand, as will work six or eight Mills. The charge of it is exceeding
great in the management of it, and as well it pays for all charges, as any
Commodity I know of. The Ground must be of old Land, as aforesaid, and a tender
Turse, and must be exceeding choicely plowed; if very hilly, they must be cast,
and well cast, that you cast forth, lie not high to raise the Furrow: they
usually plow outward, or cast all their Lands at the first plowing, and having
broke the Ground with a Harrow, then they sow it, and sow about four Bushels or
Strikes of an Acre, which done, then cover it, and harrow it very well and
fine, and pick out the Clots, Turfes, and Stones, and lay it on the hollow
places of the Ridge in heaps, as is the usual custom: But now I should rather
choose to take a little Cart with one Horse, and as the Boys and Children pick
them up, cast them into the Cart, and carry them into some flank and hollow
place, and lay them down to rot, or else mend some barren place, because they
lose a good considerable part of Land, and so of Wood too, which otherwise
might be as good as the rest, and is now, by reason of the times, not worth so
much. The Land that is lost is very considerable, in regard it is so good of it
self, and the stock so good and rich that is sowed upon it, that all even
Ground had need be regained, that possibly may be. 2. I am to show you how it
is to be husbanded, and when the Leaf must be cut, and how used, and how often,
etc. After the Land is sowed, and that it begins to come up, as soon as any
Weed appears, it must be weeded, yea, it may be twice weeded, or more, if it
requires before it be ready to cut; but if it be special good, and come thick,
and cover the Ground well, it will ask the less weeding: to them that are
exercised in this same Service, and have their Work and Work-folks at command,
they will have it weeded for eight pence an Acre, and sometimes less: as soon
as the Leaf is come to its full growth, which will be sometimes sooner,
sometimes later, as the year is dryer or moister, more fruitful or less, which
when you perceive at the full ripeness, set to cutting of it off. As soon as
ever it is cut, your Mills being prepared, and great broad Fleaks, so many as
may receive the Crop prepared, and planted upon Galleries or Stories made with
Poles, Fir, Alder, or other Wood; your Mill is usually known, a large Wheel
both in height, and breadth, and weight does best, it is a double Wheel, and the
Tooth or Ribs that cut the Wood, are placed from one side of the Wheel to the
other, very thick, wrought sharp and keen at the edge, and as soon as the Woad
is cut, and comes out of the field, it is to be put into the Mill, and ground
one Kilne full after another as fast as may be; the juice of the Leaf must be
preserved in it, and not lost by any means, and when it is ground, it is to be
made in balls round, about the bigness of a Ball, without any composition at
all, and then presently laid one by one upon the Fleaks to dry, and as soon as
dried, which will be sooner or later, as the season is, they are to be taken
down, and laid together, ^and more put in their places: But because all the
circumstances will be too tedious to discourse, and the work is no common work,
and very many not well versed therein, I will rather advise you to get a
Workman from the Woad-works, which can carry it on artifically, rather then to
venture the experimenting of so great Work upon Words and Rules. Good Woad may
yield in a plentiful year five, or possibly six Crops, yea, ordinarily four,
and yet sometimes but three: but the Winter Crop is of good worth, excellent
for Sheep, conceived good against the Rot, and also it will maintain them well,
and it will contain them in good heart, and strengthen them till sowing time
again. The time of sowing is in the beginning and end of March. And thus when
you have cut all your Crops one after another till Autumn, the declining season
will not ripen it again, and your Mill is at leisure, then you must proceed to
the third Particular, which is to the ordering and seasoning of it, and working
it up to use, which must be done in the manner following: You must set your
Mills to work again, to grind it all over, and then season it up, and so you
may make it stronger or weaker, as you shall see occasion. There is so much
difference betwixt Woad and Woad, that the Dyers, though so experimental, will
hardly buy you any parcel till they have experimented it in coloring; and
therefore for me to prescribe a Rule upon such uncertainties, I hold it not
safe, the Woad-man that uses to make up three or four sorts of Woad, will make
it up as he intends to friend a Customer. The first years trial will put you
into sufficient Experience: As the Woad yields many Crops, so each Crop is
worse then the other; the first Crop is best, the second next, the third much
worse, the fourth far worse then that, and the fifth worst of all; if you get a
fifth, but that is not usual, four Crops is sufficient, and sometimes you must
be content with three, and as the first Crop is usually (in a good year) ripe
by the midst of June, so will the second be usually ripe in one month after
that, and so every month, or thereabouts, each Crop will be ready, and if the
latter end of the year prove kind, then you must expect a Crop the more. Now to
know when the Woad is ripe, and to take it in the very season, is a fundamental
piece, which is when the Leaf is come to a full growth, and retains its perfect
color and lively greenness, then with all your might set so many hands to
cutting of it, as that it do not fade, or wax pale or wan, before you have cut
your Crop; for then it will begin to be over-ripe, and the less sap and marrow
of it drinks in again, and will not yield store of juice, which is the spirit
of it, and best of the Woad. The Woad-man seasons the two first Crops together,
and some season the third by it self, and the fourth by it self, some put the
three first Crops together, which makes the worser Woad, but the very
Virgin-Woad is the first and second, and the better they desire to make it, the
more entire they compound it, not confounding it with diverse sorts. The manner
of seasoning is thus; after every Crop is cut, grinded, balled, and dried, as
dry as possibly it can be, and laid up in the Ball every Crop by it self, then
you must take the first and second Crops, and grind them all over again
together, or apart, as you please, but they must be then wrought as dust, as it
were, in the Mill, and ground very well the first and second Crop, or so much
as you will make of your best sort of Woad, and so laid upon the floor in a
heat or Couch, and then you must mix it with water, and turn it over, and mix
it again, and turn it over, and give it so much water as that it will be soakt
thoroughly, however you may over-soak and drown it, and that will be very
prejudicial to it: It must be turned in the Couch once for three or four weeks
together, and then every other day once for about a fortnight, and then twice a
week, till it comes to a right color. At the first many men must be employed,
carrying water as hard as they can, till it be wet and well soaked, and that
you may know the better how to temper it aright, you shall find it heat
exceedingly in the Couch, which you must look to keep in a moderate condition,
which over-heating you may prevent with turning, that it over-heat not by any
means; it may grow so hot, as you can possibly abide your hand in it, but not
to exceed that heat: and how to know its seasons kindly, and so will in time
come to perfect rich Woad; you must observe that it will alter and change
diverse times: first it will hoar, mould, and frost, and smell exceeding strong,
and then it will in a little time abate thereof, and grow toward a black
color, and then it will hoar and mould again, and change a little whitish, and
after this second change, it will come to a perfect black, which the brighter
and clearer color, the better. This must be the Winters work, and it will be
good for cold weather, and when it is thus wrought, and comes to its color,
then you may lay it up, or heap it up, to lie for a Sale, putting diverse Poles
into each heap to the bottom, to open and keep it cool, and you must be sure it
take not heat again; and thus all your sorts of Woad must be seasoned one after
another, and especially all such that you can dry that Summer: but to tell you
how to choose the best Woad, is scarce in the power of the Woadman, who can but
guess at it from that Experience he has in the mixing of it; but it must be
tried by the Dyers, who, as we said, usually do so before they buy it. I shall
end with the advantages thereof, which are very great. And first it is
National, in that it sets many poor on work. It is the staple and chief of the
Dyers Trade, lays a foundation for all enduring and holding Colors, and much
advantages Land in the Rent, it doubles or more, and in the usage of it upon
this Husbandry, trebleth or quadrupleth it, and many times more: And then
secondly, it is personally advantageous, the best Estates that have been got in
all our rich upland Countries, have been got by it: at some seasons, and when
they have a right Crop and good Markets, it will amount to as much more; it
has been sold from 20 to 30 l. the best Woad, and back again down to 6 l. a
Tun.

The Nature, Use, and Advantage of Madder.
ANd so I descend to my third Dyers Commodity, in relation to Dying or
Coloring, and that is to the story of Madder, that colors the rich and best
solid red. It is now very rarely planted in Gardens, and in some small Plots of
Ground, and it amounts to the very great advantage of the Planters that set and
sell forth by the Roots they draw to vent to the Apothecaries, and medicinably
to others; they make a most exceeding value of the Lands beyond all credence:
some have made, as I have been informed, after the Rate of three hundred pounds
an Acre in three years, for so long as it grows before it come unto perfection;
and others that have sold it by whole Sale a parcel together at the worst
advantage, to a hundred and sixty pounds an Acre, and some have out of small
Plots of Gardens, made more then I have or will here affirm; and however this
being a fundamental Fruit, and such a one as that the plenty thereof will not
much abate the Market, or dying Trade being supplied herewith from beyond the
Seas, that the Erection of such a Plantation as may bring it forth wrought up
and fitted to the Dyers use, and so to be a supply to our selves within our
selves. It would be a good design to the Nation, as it imploys so many hands to
bring it to perfection. It turns Land to as great an advantage as any Seed or
Root that is capable to receive it, and needs no more fear want of Markets for
the venting of it, than we need for Wool that Staple-Commodity of the Nation. I
shall proceed to the Description of it. There is but one kind of Madder which
is manured and set for use; but there are many things like thereto, as
Goose-grass, soft Cliver, Ladies-Bedshaw, Woodroof, and Crosswort: all which
are like to Madder-leaves, and are thought to be wild kinds thereof. It has
long stalks or trailing branches dispersed upon the ground, rough, and full of
joints, and every joint set with green and rough Leaves, in manner of a Star;
the flowers grow at the top of the branches, of a faint yellow color, after
which comes the seed round and green: the Root creeps far abroad within the
upper Crust of the Earth, intangling one Root into another, and when it is
green and fresh, the Root is of a reddish color, it is small and tender, but
gathers and runs into the ground, just like an Ivy along a House or Tree. It is
a Commodity of much value, Patentees strove hard for it, and Patents were
gained about it in the late Kings days. For the making out of a good
Plantation, I must observe these three things. 1. Show you what it comes of,
how to plant it and preserve it. 2. How to get it and use it, to bring it to
saleable Madder. 3. The benefit and advantage of it will be National and
Personal. Although it bear a seed, yet that seed comes not to perfection, it is
therefore to be planted from the Sets that are to be got from the Madder it
self, and they are to be bought in many Gardens in London, who keep up that
Plantation for the advantage of selling their Sets, and Roots Physically to the
Apothecaries only; all the skill is to distinguish of the goodness thereof: And
for the discovery thereof, first know the season of getting or rather drawing
them, which is in March and April, yea, as soon as they are sprung forth of the
ground two or three inches long, then you must be careful to get Sets rooted;
every Set having some suckers, or spinies of Root going out of them: they must
be slipped from the main Root, and these Sets as soon as ever took up, put into
some Basket with a little Mould, and posted to the place where they are to be
set, the sooner, the better; and then your Ground being very rich, it cannot be
too rich for this Commodity, however it must be of a warm and a very deep Soil,
and dug two or three Spades graft depth, and two shovellings also, raked and
laid even and level, and then by straight Lines trod out into long Beds about
one foot broad from one end of your Work unto the other, and set about one foot
asunder every way; and if it be a dry Spring, they must be kept with watering,
until they recover their fading wane condition. You may begin to dig your
Ground in the beginning, and along all Winter, till the very day of setting,
and then you must keep it with weed and hoing, until it have got the mastership
of the Weeds, and then it being a Weed it self, will destroy all others. One
Rod of Ground is worth seven pence a Rod digging; or if very dry strong Ground,
eight pence, but six pence the best. You may sow some early Sallet-herbs, as
Radish or Onions, of such things as will be ripe betimes, among it. The first
year good weeding is the best preservative unto it, and in your setting them by
a little Line, one goes before, and lays every Set in his place, and another
comes, and with a broad Dibble made for the purpose, thrusts down a deep and
open hole, and puts in the Set, and for the nourishing of it, in case any dye,
you must plant new in the room of it, for the time of the growing of it, until
that it come to perfection, is three years: The first year you may take off
some few Sets here and there, but that is somewhat dangerous; for that year, it
must be kept with hoing a while also, then the second year you may take up Sets
as fast as you will, and almost as many as you will, leaving but as you do in
the cropping of an Oak, the bough for the drawing up of the sap out of the
Root, being so thick and strong in the ground, that nothing will almost decay
it. If then you can get it for the use of the Drugsters and the Apothecaries,
and the Sets to plant again; in the taking up of every Root, there will be one
runner which has little buds on it, which may be divided and cut into a
fingers length, each planted with one bud out of the ground set upright, which
makes very excellent good Sets, one Runner will make many Sets; but these Sets
cannot be got up until the Madder be taken away: And having thus preserved it
until it come to a good Crop, having curiously dried it as you do your Hops, to
a just and perfect gage of drought. There is a Mystery, that is, so pare off
the husks, that it may, if it be possible, as the Wheat is ground, be flaked,
or flayed, that it may go all one way, which sort they call the Mull-Madder, is
little worth, not above nine or ten shillings a hundred; and then you must take
out the second sort, called the number O, which is the middle Rind, and is not
worth so much as the third sort called the Crop-Madder, by one sixth part, and
this Crop-Madder is the very heart and pith of it inclining to yellow; this is
lesser in quantity, but little, better in quality by far. Sometimes the best
Madder is worth 8 or 9 l. a hundred, and the number O is worth 6 l. 6 s. 8 d.
sometimes it is not worth above 4 or 5 l. a hundred. Some Dyers use of this
Commodity above an hundred pound a week a man. Now as it is planted in Gardens,
unspeakable advantages are made thereby, and should it hold a proportion when
it comes to be made up, and completed to the Dyers, it would prove the richest
Commodity that I know sowed in England.

THE YOUNG GENTLEMAN'S Heroic Exercise; OR THE Perfection of Horsemanship,
drawn from Nature, Art, and Practice of Riding.
BEfore I enter into the unfolding of the Parts of this Art, I do think it fit
to show the Natural Instinct and Temperature that ought to be in every perfect
Rider. He must be a person void of fear; for the true properties of his
fortitude should be to guide his most noble Nature, through hard and difficult
things, to the attaining of the end of his Heroic desires, because the
perfection of every good undertaking consists in this, that it be done by a
staid and constant reason without rashness. And because every Rider is a
reasonable Creature, he therefore ought to be able to yield a constant reason
without any contradiction, as not subject to any prejudice of the Inquirer, for
that he only teaches by reason for what he does, an inherent property peculiar
to man; yet it cannot be truly said, that every reasonable man is a perfect
Rider, because every man has not attained to the reason of the Art, and
therefore unable to teach, Number quod nemo didicit, nemo docere potest, for no
man can teach what he has not learned. And though it may be confessed, that
every good beginning comes unto us by Nature; yet the growth and progress
thereof we attain unto by Precepts of Reason, and the accomplishment by
knowledge and practice: For Nature without Knowledge is blind, Knowledge
without Nature falls short, and Practice without the former is imperfect.

From hence it proceeds, that unless Nature, Art, and Practice be conjoined, it
will be impossible to be a good Rider, to be able to know how and when to help
his Horse, the only principal things required in a Rider that is enriched with
Nature, Art, and Practice; and yet if he be so qualified, and bestow all his
labor and skill upon a Jade, let him assure himself he shall Oleum and operam
perdere, but lose his labor. For although every Horse be a sensible Creature,
moved by sense and feeling, as things proper to his Nature, and takes his
instruction by Speech, as man instructs man, which is either by
encouragement, or cherishing him when he does well, or by punishing him when he
resists his Discipline; yet nevertheless when a Jade begins to be taught, and
proceeds with a continual perseverance therein, yet shall he never attain the
perfection of Action, because all Art must imitate the Nature of the Horse,
which to content and please, is the end of the whole Art: but where contrary
Natures are, there of necessity must be contrary workings, and then must needs
ensue contrary effects; for every Creature works according to its Nature. For
amendment whereof, the ignorant and pretended Rider proceeds to violence,
which the Nature of the Horse abhors, as a perturbation; for then his Riding
becomes grievous and painful, so that he knows not what to do, no more then
an untowardly Scholar by whipping to say his Lesson delightfully; and were it
granted, that the Horse were of a good disposition to yield all obedience to
the most skilful Rider, yet shall he never attain to any perfection of Action,
because Nature has not shaped nor given him aptness fit for such a purpose, no
more then a natural Fool by Education can attain unto true Wisdom. And yet very
few Riders neither have nor do truly judge hereof; for that nothing is more
manifest in all their Writings and Actions, then provision and means to make
perfect that which is most imperfect by Nature, as though they had never
learned that Art can never overcome the necessity of Nature: wherefore I desire
all such as wish and desire to be good Riders, first to examine their own
natural dispositions. Secondly, to learn to know the true and perfect shape of
Horses. Thirdly, the natural Causes of their goodness and badness. Fourthly, to
be taught by an understanding Master, and not to begin without his direction.
Fifthly, to practice, and always to examine the reason of his Practice, then
shall he see what a Handmaid all Art is to Nature; then shall he discern in
the beholding of the actions of the perfect shaped Horse to be easy, quick,
and ready according to his perfection of Nature, as true qualities bred and
brought forth by Nature, not by correction, but with all mildness and
gentleness voluntarily performed, the which all true and natural Riders will
and ought altogether to cherish, seeing all Horses do in that beautiful form,
that he himself does express, when he desires to appear most comely and just in
his Pace, just in his Trot, just in his Gallop, just in his Carriere, just in
his Head, just when he stands still, just in union with the will of the
Rider, his Head and Neck will be so justly and rightly placed, of such
staidness, and his Mouth of such a sweet and perfect composure, as it seems as
if Nature strove to set forth her own glory: All which some call Natural, and
not so much Accidental in a perfect and a true shaped Horse.

It remains now to discourse of those things which most principally are
required by the Art for the true performance of such Actions, as Art requires
either for helps, corrections, or cherishings, for reducing the Horse to
perfect Action, fit for the most gentile use of man.

For he that knows how to correct and cherish a Horse in his due time, is,
and so ought to be accounted, the most grounded in this Art, the which cannot
in a small time either be attained or performed; and therefore for the true
attaining thereof, I wish that none undertake the same, as I said before, but
by the direction of an expert Master, lest it be said to him, as Timotheus the
best Player on the Flute of his time, who when that he took a Scholar, used to
demand of him, Whether he had made an entrance into that Play; which if he had,
he took a greater reward by half, then he did of them that knew nothing,
saying, That his pains were greater to take from him what was unskilfully
taught him, then in teaching that which was good to such as understood nothing
at all thereof. The things that are principally to be used for helps, are, as
has been said, corrections and cherishings, which may be contained in these
three Heads, viz. the Voice, the Hand, and the Leg; because the Voice by words
of Art helps, and with mild, meek, and gentle words cherishes, but by loud
and taunting terrifieth and corrects. The Hand (being the Instrument of
Instruments) upon the true use whereof the ground of the Art rests, by the
temperate and sweet stay thereof, it helps: by clawing, or gentle putting the
Horse, it cherishes, and by correcting or striking, frighteth. Again, the Hand
by the stroke, jerk or sound of a Rod or Wand, is sometimes very useful, it
often helps by practicing mildly and gently with it, clawing and scratching
the Horse, it incourageth and cherishes him; but by striking him too hard,
corrects to his displeasure. Again, the hand with a Bridle in slacking it,
eases and cherishes him, and by drawing it hard, oppresses and corrects
him, by the guiding thereof, it governs a Horse, as a Stern does a Ship,
which in all motions and actions answers to that motion which the hand
moves. The Leg, when it gently provokes with the Calf, helps; the Spur also
by gentle means helps, and when there is a just occasion by hard strokes
corrects; so as to bring a Horse to true obedience and perfection of action,
he is to be corrected, helped, and cherished; he is to be directed or helped,
to the end he should not err, therein is great knowledge required: he is
cheerfully to be cherished for his well doing, to accomplish which knowledge,
Reason and Experience are required, whereby appears how every good Rider
ought to be qualified; of which, namely, the Voice, the Hand, and the Leg.
Before I come to speak of Action, wherein the true understanding hereof is most
proper, I do propose to give a little further Instruction, and first of the
Voice. When you mind to help your Horse therewith, it must be with a most mild
and cheerful one, as to say, Hey, Hey, Hola, Hola, so Boyso, Hup, Hup, enough,
enough, no more; and many such like: but a correction is clean contrary, which
is with a terrible thundering Voice, as Villain, Traitor, and many such like,
whereas we in cherishing, the most mild and sweet Voice is used, as my good
Boy, so my good Boy, with an inclination of bending your body to him, and such
like encouragements; so as also the sound of the Voice is to be used, as well
as a Voice pronounced, by giving a Chirk with the Tongue, which may be called
Clacking, in pronouncing whereof, the tip of the Tongue strikes the roof of
the mouth, as it does in making the supposed sound drawing near the Greek word
Clognus, and so also there is another sound of the Voice to be used, as Hay,
Hay. The next is the Hand, which, as I said, is the Instrument of Instruments,
in the true use and government whereof, is the ground of the whole Art; and as
for the Bridle and the Rod, they are but dead and senseless Instruments,
without all use, when they are not appointed for the right use, of the
temperate and steady hand bearing up a firm moderate stay, neither too much
slacking, nor too much drawing in; every good Horse causes a true and a just
rain, a just bearing, a just staidness, with a light and sweet mouth in all
actions: so as whatsoever the Horse does, is both easy, ready, and perfect,
and being done with delight, must of necessity be best done, because it best
pleases both Man and Horse, neither of them being moved to any perturbation,
grief, or pain: And as for the Rod and Wand, being Instruments only for the
hand, how and when they are to be handled, offered, used, or not used. And for
the Bridle which the Italians properly call Il Manico del Timone, the handle of
the Stern: we shall for the present pass them by.

The third thing is the Leg, wherein the use of the Calves of the Legs, the
Heels, the Stirrup, and the Spur are to be handled. I shall, to avoid
repetition and all manner of tediousness, refer them also to their proper
place. And I shall for the present divide this our immediate Concernment into
certain prescript general Grounds or Rules, to follow which, the Rider shall
find of daily use in teaching the whole Art to his Scholars and Horse.

First, when the expert Rider begins to teach a young Scholar, let him
follow the Order of the discreet Schoolmaster, that teaches Children to write,
who inviteth them with his gentle usage to the Pen, Paper, and Ink, and in a
most mild and civil manner, teaches them how to use their arms and hands, and
how to hold their Pens; and then how to make the first Letter, the which when
the Scholars attempt, though it be very bad; yet in respect of the infancy of
their knowledge, and willing minds to do better, they are not only commended,
but rewarded for doing so; the Scholars being thus encouraged, desire to go on
to be taught to make many Letters, and then after in a gentle and slow manner,
he teaches them perfectly how to join their Letters. Even so should your
Scholars be taught in Riding, and young Horses in their beginning to be taught,
whereby all their actions might bring delight and admiration to their
Beholders. For mild teaching, slow, teaching not too much; for a Horse may be
wearied with too long teaching at one time, but giving him often breath, high
keeping in courage, often rewarding, cherishing, great familiarity, no change
of the Rider till he be perfect, no change of Bit, no rough Bit, no cutting or
galling of his Nose or Mouth, but gentle feeling, no beating or whipping, no
violence, no passion, but with all manner of Natures delight, makes the Horses
actions more then wonderful, because Nature has a natural love to it self, and
an innate hatred to all things that are enemies to the same, which is plainly
testified by that natural Sympathy and Antipathy, which may be observed in all
Creatures, as the Lamb which never had Experience of the Wolves cruelty; yet at
the first sight of him, does tremble and fly for fear.

CHAP. II.
Of Correction.
SEcondly, that the Rider never does correct his Horse, but when gentle means
and cherishing will not prevail; for no doubt but that he will willingly yield
by gentle means, if it be sensible to him, what, how, and when to do: but that
Horse that will not be moved by gentle means, let the Rider assure himself he
is of a bad Nature: But if any thing shall happen wherein of necessity
Correction is to be used, then let Solomon's direction be followed, who, as he
was the wisest man that ever was, or shall be, so did he keep more Horses then
any King, that History mentions, who says, That an untamed Horse becomes
fierce: but if he offend, in the instant time that he erreth, correct him;
wherein how many do offend, all men's Eyes are witnesses, beholding the common
Horse-breakers and ignorant Riders to minister horrible and most violent
Corrections, when the Beholder cannot so much as see a cause, nor himself
express a reason, but error evermore takes that for truth which is false: So
as it plainly appears, that when a Horse has been taught, and yet
notwithstanding erreth in his Discipline, that he has been truly taught,
Solomon would have him in that instant time punished for that error, but not
to correct him for ignorance, which renders the Rider either to be mad or as
ignorant as a Horse.

CHAP. III.
That Teaching is not fit for such Horses as Nature has not framed fit to be
taught.
THirdly, that all Riders lose no time in teaching of good Horses; but as for
those Club-headed, distorted, ugly-countenanced, fleshie, Gourdy-limbed, short,
thick-necked, low fore-parted, narrow, shallow-breasted, and evil-shaped Jades
and Roiles, turn them either to the Carts, Car-men, or Paris-Garden Stable: For
in every particular Nature (that is the temperature of the Elements in every
particular body without all contradiction) causes and maintains the
particular actions of the body wherein it is: and that such shaped Horses were
never compounded or framed of a true temperature of the Elements, and therefore
impossible to be reduced to the perfection of action, otherwise then by abuse
and great force, which Nature abhors. And that is but for a small time, such
Carrions as these made use of also, do shadow the Glory of the Kingdom,
disparage the Judgment thereof, discourage many Noble and Heroic Gentlemen,
either to become Breeders, Riders, or Maintainers of Horses; and lastly cast
mists over the perfections of our English Riders.

CHAP. IV.
Of the English Bridle, Saddle, and bringing of the Horse to the Block, the
mounting and seat of the Rider, and of the Execution of the Action of teaching
of the Art.
WHen the Horse is made gentle, familiar, and fit for the Rider to teach, put
on a Head-stall or a Canetsane over his Nose, with a pair of strong Rains, but
so loose and easy for his Nose, as may neither hurt nor abate of his courage,
or his quick and fresh feeling; and in a most gentle manner set a Saddle upon
him, with an upright short Pommel, so as that the true use of the hand may not
be hindered or injured, the Bolsters whereof should be broad in the top to
enclose the Thigh, and yet to bear so slope* that the Knee be not pinched, nor
the Thigh kept from the true resting place, the Seat whereof should be of a
reasonable length and largeness, the Bolsters behind bearing forward to enclose
and support the Thigh to the former Bolsters; the Strapper thereof broad and
very strong, with broad Girthes, and with very strong and broad Buckles
cross-girded, so as that the Saddle may rest firm on his Back, whereby the Seat
will be easy, sure, and certain, without motion, leaving the near
Stirrup-leather almost half a hole longer, than the right Stirrup; and although
that the Horse be gentle, yet because he has a new Master and Rider not known
unto him, being neither assured of himself, nor of that his Rider would have
him do, so as that it may be truly said, that he is not himself, but that he is
troubled in mind: Therefore to keep him from fear and perturbation, I would
have a quiet and staid Horse also saddled to be rid before him, and then bring
them both to the Block; but the old Horse first, and then the Colt, at which
time let the Rider use all the mild and gentle words to the young Horse, making
the Rains of the Bridle even and just, holding them in his left hand not stiff,
nor altogether remiss or loose; and as soon as he is mounted on his Back, let
him set quietly there a while, lest any sudden motion should breed any
perturbation in the Horse, and until the Rider have settled himself in the
Saddle, his Nose directly answering the Horses fore-top, betwixt his Ears, his
Legs hanging straight down, neither thrusting down the Toe, nor lifting up the
Heel, but with his foot with such evenness in the Stirrup, as if he stood upon
the ground, the Stirrup-leathers rather short then long, winding his Toes
somewhat nearer to the Horses side, then the Heel, holding the Rains even and
just with his Crest, even with the point of the Withers, a little above the
Main, with his Thighs and Knees close to the Saddle, and his feet resting in
the Stirrup in due place, not too far thrust into the Stirrup, with an upright
and straight body, his Ridge-bone answering the Ridgebone of the Horse, so as
the Horse and Rider may ever seem to be of one body in all motions; during
which time, let the Rider claw the Horse with his hand, to remove from him all
fear or hard conceit of his Riding: that done, let him go forward to paces fair
and softly, and stay again, making much of him, and so pace softly and quietly
to the place where the Rider intends to tread out a Ring; all which must be
done by the Rider boldly and without fear, and as he must be thus used in going
forward, so must he be used in treading and pacing out of the Ring in some
new-plowed Ground, that is most deep of Mould, where first let the old Horse
enter betwixt two Furrows, so far as the Rider may have space enough and Mould
enough, and follow with the young Horse close to him, which will cause him the
more willingly to go, because he is directed and guided by the old Horse, by
which means he shall not be any way discouraged: then let the old Horse (the
young Horse following) enter on the right hand, overthwart the Furrows, and
tread out twice together a round Ring, containing in circuit about 30 paces,
and being come about the second time where he began, let him tread out the like
Ring on the left hand, and after he has gone twice about, let him begin again
on the left hand, and so continue until he have gone four times together about
the left Ring, and the right six times; that done, let him go fair and softly
out of the Furrow where he began, about 30 or 40 paces, and there stand still,
keeping his head and his body right in the path, remembering always to have some
go by, to signify his true performance, and to help, if need be; and then let
him go very gently back from the place he came, and there let the Rider alight,
and make much of him, by coying him, and giving him a little Grass, Hay, or
Bread in his mouth, to procure and win Love: and thus let him be used two days
with a Horse before him, and after him. Let him then lead and begin himself, to
tread and pace the Ring in this gentle manner, for the space of ten days,
keeping a temperate, staid, and fine hand upon the Rains, with a sweet feeling
stay, carrying his Forehead as Rams do when they go to fight, whereby he shall
not only rein well, but bear his head staid and light; and when that he knows
what to do, and that for the same he is always cherished, he will strive to do
it faster: Through the Riders continual keeping of his hand steady, the Horse
will do it with a wonderful pride and delight, by giving him liberty; but a too
hasty treating of the Horse, will work the clean contrary.

In the pacing of the Ring, the Rider must not carry any over-hard hand, to
dull the sense; but so temperately, that the feeling may be always fresh,
otherwise by the violent, by much galling his Nose, whereof he would willingly
have ease; to avoid the same, he will set his Head and his Neck awry, the true
use whereof is that standing in the Furrow just and straight with his body, the
Rider moves him gently to go forwards, and in the very motion, turns him on the
right hand, by drawing very softly the right Rain shorter with his right hand,
lower under the Pommel of the Saddle, whereunto if he yield (as no doubt but he
will) especially having trod the same before, let the Rider presently make much
of him, neither drawing nor slacking the Rain: at which time, for his doing
both for the ease of the Rider and the Horse, if need shall be, let some
skilful person (but his Keeper were most fit) come on his right side to his
fore-shoulder, and thrust him in by little and little, and the Rider also by
the Calf of the right Leg, and the Clack of his Tongue to be a help to make him
go forward, if the Horse be such a one as I have described, he will do it; but
if he should not in the very motion of the turn, then let the Rider draw the
Rain with his hand, as before, whether it be on the right hand or on the left:
all which must (as has been said) be done by gentle dealing, so as that the
Horse may hope for rest and quietness, whereby he will be ready to do
whatsoever his Rider will: But if he be a rammage Jade (as I said before) and
of an evil disposition of Nature, for my own part I esteem him not of any
worth, not fit to be kept. Having spoken of Pacing of the Horse in the Ring, it
follows, that after the ten days are expired, the Horse be taught to trot the
Ring, which he must begin in a slow and gentle Trot, as he was in the first
beginning of pacing, increase his Ring-turns by two and two every day, until he
make ten turns for the left Ring, and twelve for the right, which will augment
his swiftness, whereof he should be restrained until he be most perfect, and
then he will do it with the greatest grace and pride that may be imagined,
which is the true property and quality of all Art, evermore to affect and
effect to perfection; during which time of the beginning of Trotting, he must
not be ridden with a Wand, nor wear any Bit, until he be most perfect in his
Trot, stop and turn well on both hands, and not by any means suffered to
gallop, until that he can also perfectly advance. By taking this course he will
be just in his pace, just in his trot, with a staid hand and neck, being the
chief luster and goodness that Nature and Art affords.

Wherefore when you begin to trot the Ring, be sure that at the first he be
moved thereunto, as gently and quietly as you can devise, and so every action
whatsoever, upon a restrained, temperate, and firm hand, with a sweet Stay, and
with a true Rain, that is, that his Nose be just under his Forehead, neither
too much out, nor too much in, which is the just placing and settling of his
head, which will make him to have a pleasant mouth, when he comes to wear the
Bit, in which consists the chief point of Horsemanship, because he is so to
be maintained in all his actions, the which is most easy to be done, and to be
continued, if the Horse be of perfect shape and spirit; but if he should make
resistance, for that he is either rammage or evil broken, then trot him swiftly
with quickness of Voice, Rod, and Spur; for the time of his trotting is the
fittest time to make him forget his toys, and to attend his way; and if all
this will not help, then spare not to gallop him; and if this fails, then be
sure he will be a Jade from the beginning to the end; for a Horse of a good
temper and perfect shape, can never be of so bad a nature and quality.

I shall now next discourse, how to make the Rider perfect in stop, after he
has ended the number of his Ring-turns, which is to trot his Horse right out
in the middle Furrow betwixt the Rings, until that he come to the place of
stop, and there to make a pretty stay, keeping his body right in the path,
wherein if his whole body or any part stand overthwart, seek not at first
through your too much passion to correct him for the same; but let a Footman
direct him to stand right in the path, as we said before, by thrusting in that
part that stands out of order, or that he may cause the Horse to go further
in the same path, and stop him, holding that Rain straighter on that side,
whereon he most forces his head, then afterward the other, which will enforce
him to keep right; which when he yields, ever cherish him, and after it will
be good to trot and stop him on a ground that is a little steepy, which
something falls, and immediately rises: but when he is perfect, then he may
do it on a ground that is very steep: But to teach him to go back, the Rider
must (as I have said) keep a firm staid hand upon him with some liberty, and
then gently striking him on the Neck with his Rod, in that instant of time say,
Back, Back: but if he refuse, let a Footman with his Rod gently strike him on
the knees, and so by the gentle pulling in of his hand, and fair means, win
him, and when he yields, cherish him.

Having showed how to ride a Horse without a Wand, Bit, or Spur, I will now
show the Rider how to manage all three, together with the true use of the hand
upon the Bit, one of the chief and only principal points of Horsemanship. First
therefore, when he rides with a Wand, let him take it very warily, that the
Horse be not frighted therewith, and to ascertain the Horse thereof, presently
after he has received it, toy and scratch him about the neck with the end
thereof, and for the carrying of it, it must be carried in the right hand, with
the point upright, and when that he must use it, let the point fall close unto
him, as occasion shall require; but in his management of it, let him lay his
hand upon his right Thigh, and and his hand cross the Horses Neck, and when he
is almost ready to turn on the left hand, let him lift up his hand and Rod, and
hold the point right forth on the right side against his Eye, and as he
changes turns, so let him change his Rod on the one side and on the other: but
if his Horse will not turn on the side he would have him, let him strike him on
the contrary side; and when he is any way disordered, let him carry his Wand on
the contrary side; and when he would have him carry his forepart right, strike
him gently on the shoulder or forelegs, and when he would have him lighten
behind, strike him on the Rump and Hanches: and thus much for the use of the
Wand, as occasion shall serve.

Now for the use of the Bit, which is an Instrument only guided and directed by
the hand, and because the ground of the Art of Riding depends only upon the
right use and true government of the hand, being guided by reason and
discourse, so as the Horse in all motions and actions, is, and ought to answer
to that motion.

First therefore, let the Bit that he first bit his Horse withal, be gentle and
pleasant; yet so that the gentleness cause him not to despise the Rider, nor
the hardness drive him to despair; for you must understand, that knowledge
always presupposes reason, and reason sense, and sense reason: all which
consist in a true mediocrity, and therefore amongst the most learned Precepts
that were written in the Temple of Apollo in Greek, this was in the second
place, Nothing too much.

For if he press him with the Bridle, if he carry his head well, yet must he
presently ease his Bridle-hand, and make much of him, because he shows
himself obedient to him; and whenever he does any thing well, and with
delight, the Rider must be very careful not to vex him, but ever so to win him,
that he may be willing to please him. So likewise when he bears a firm hand
with a stay, that thereby the Horse does bring in his head, and yield to his
hand; yet he must shorten the Rains of his Bridle, till his head be settled in
its due place, that is, as has been said, neither to carry his head too much
out, nor too much in, and still to maintain him in the form of his doing; yet
that it exceed not mediocrity or temperature, but remain light on the head with
a sweet mouth.

Thus having showed the Rider, that it must be done by keeping this order, I
proceed: Let him stay his Horse temperately with an even hand, as his
resistance shall require, without giving any other liberty, then with his Rod
to strike him gently upon the bowing of his Neck, provoking him mildly with the
Spur on that side on which he most wryeth his Buttock, to the end that he may
go just, until he draw back one of his fore-feet, which if he do, make much of
him, and then stay a while, and do the like, drawing away the Bridle; for the
former cherishing will make him to understand, and then will he go lightly back
with both the forelegs, when he is touched on the Neck with the Rod, saying
with a loud Voice, Back: at which Voice, with the feeling of the Rod, and
drawing of the Bridle, he will go back to the Riders desire; and always after
when he is out of the due and true way upon the Bridle, let him do the like,
that is, to go back in form aforesaid. And although some disorder be committed,
let not the Rider despair; for he shall find him easily won to a good mouth, by
this use of a temperate and a firm hand, which is the mediocrity of slacking
and drawing, which is properly named a sweet Stay, which the Italians call
Dolce Appoggio, making him light upon the hand, champing the Bit with great
pleasure, and a staid head in due place, the true tokens whereof are just
Rains: staid, and a light Come-head with pleasure on the Bit, being properties
inseparable in every perfect shaped Horses actions: But because it may seem
very difficult to have a continuance of perfection in any action, although it
is common upon stop, or standing still, to be in order; yet perhaps upon motion
he will leave playing upon the Bit, and bear up the head, especially upon the
main Carriere, which proceeds from a want of true knowledge, how to maintain
and continue the hand just and firm with a sweet stay, so that he may take
pleasure on the Bit; and therefore how to maintain a Horse both in furious and
quiet doings, is to be considered of. If then that at any time he make any
disorder, note it diligently, then stay him, and make him go backward, as you
did before; for in going back, he will bring himself to his right order again,
then presently make much of him, and forthwith move him forwards; so must he be
used in treading of the Ring, first gently upon the Pace, upon the Trot, and
upon the Gallop, in practicing whereof, he must precisely observe that it be
done with a temperate, staid, and firm hand, otherwise he will gape, thrust his
Tongue upon his Bit, or over the Bit, to defend himself, thrust his head out
suddenly, pluck in disdainfully, or else shaking or moving of his head one way
or other, to be freed from the pressing of the intemperate hand, which is to
him violence, and contrary to Nature, the which Art should evermore labor to
please. The true form and practice of drawing the Bridle, is also to be
learned, which is, that being mounted in the Saddle, let the Rains be drawn
equal; and if the Horse know not the Bit, then let the Bit be very slack, and
let the R^der hold the Rains in his left hand, with the little finger and Ring
finger between, under the Pommel of the Saddle, as near the Withers as he can
scarcely perceive, the which he must not remove until he feel the Horse to stay
upon the Bit, and there hold him without staying or further drawing, until he
perceive whether the head stand in the true form; which if it be not, then let
him a little yield his left hand again, and standing so a pretty while, bring
his left hand to his former place again, where the Horse made his first stay
upon the Bit; then let him draw his Rains with his right hand somewhat more
through the left hand, as before, but so little and gently, as scarcely to be
perceived; for so must all the motions of the hand be, and then keep it staid
and firm a pretty while; and if he yield, though very little, let him keep his
hand still at one stay, neither slackning nor drawing it, whereby he will feel
the ease that he has got by yielding of it, and then presently make much of
him. But if it so happen that the Rains fall slack, let him not remove his left
hand, as before; for they must not be slack until they stay again upon his
right hand, whereunto whenever he yields, make much of him, continuing
still in this same manner to solicit him, till his head be in its due place:
after which time, if he bear not light, let his Rider strike him gently upon
his Knees of his forelegs, to make him to go back, whereby he will bring in
his head, and then will the Bit move, and his hand find ease; but let him be
very careful at that instant, to keep his hand so firm, as that he neither
slack nor draw in, to the end that he may feel and retain the ease of his own
motion of yielding, which willingly he will not lose, it being delightful to
his Nature, but take some pleasure to stir the Bit in his Mouth, and go
backward withal with it, which when the Rider finds out being won, with
observation of good order, he may be brought to a more continual perfection.
Thus I have showed the Rider so much of the Art as may help him: but if the
Nature of the Horse be opposite and repugnant, as in the greatest number of
Horses, it is, as I have said before, to no purpose; however for a time he may
seem to be taught, yet questionless it cannot be of any continuance.

1. Therefore let the Rider observe, that when he is teaching of his Horse
herein, or any other Lesson, that he do not trouble him with any other thing at
that time.

2. That he do not suffer any one to ride him, until he be perfected by himself
in such Lessons as he taught him, lest he should be confused by the diversity
of Teachers, and their manner of teaching.

3. That when he is brought to a just stay of head, and an assurance of the
Bit, that then his Rider is to maintain him therein to a fullness of perfection.

4. When he is out of order, then let him stay him, and make him go back, as
before was mentioned.

5. When he is in order, as we have often expressed, make much of him, and not
stay long, but with a firm hand gently put him into his pace again.

6. If he continue in good order, cherish him, guiding his body with a pleasant
and gentle motion of the Calves of your Legs, move him to do it more
expeditiously, which if he be of a good Nature, he will speedily perform;
always remembering to keep a firm hand, unless he bring in his head.

7. If his Trot continue not lightly upon your hand, stay him, and cause him to
go back, which will bring him in order again, and then gently put him into his
pace, and so to his Trot, as before; which being well done, cherish and delight
him with all the sweetness that you may, so that the Rider may overcome in his
love thereby, and guide him by some leading Line, and give him a little Grass
or Hay out of your hand, tickle, scratch him, and speak to him most loving
words, which will make him at his next Exercise to do all to his Riders
greatest content, and within twenty days or thereabouts, he will pace and trot
in such order, as that the Rider may always afterward trot him most swiftly in
the Ring or in the Manage.

8. In his swift Trot, by all means keep your true seat and firm hand, so that
he lose not that excellent grace and form prescribed; but do not gallop him,
till he be just perfect in his swift Trot, and then out of that Trot, to put
him to a swifter and quick Gallop in the large Rings, even to the stop: but
beware that you draw not your hand hastily to you but by a little sway of your
body, back and hand together, and sway your hand there, until he retreat a step
or two, and there stay him, and suffer him not to go forwards, and at that
instant make very much of him, and so let your hand and body reassume the same
place again.

9. I dare to assure the Rider of the right use of what has been said, and of
the success thereof. Therefore let him follow his Practice, and continue it:
Let him pace his Horse overthwart some deep fallow, as fast as he can for half
an hour, but suffer him not to trot, keep his hand in a firm and temperate
stay, as before; and if he find his head in due place, his carriage light and
pleasant upon the Bit, he may assure himself that he has gained the perfection
of the hand, and the true use thereof for the teaching and making of his young
Horse; wherein observe, that if he be of the perfect shape, his head will be in
the due place, and light upon the Bit without Art.

I now intend to discourse a little of the Horse that is already taught, and
brought to perfection: with him the expert Rider has small use of a Rod, or
any other help, but to keep his true, just, and perfect seat, because his
Horse, by the least token of Bridle or Spur, will do all things in such time
and measure, as the Beholders will judge the Man and Horse to be but one body,
one mind, one will; and therefore how the Rains should be carried, placed, and
used, is the only thing to be spoken of.

The Rains he must hold in his left hand, placing the little finger and the
Ring-finger betwixt the two Rains, and the Thumb close upon the Rains, so as
that the hand remove not from the Crest of the Horse; for by the motion of the
hand, it is signified to the Horse which way you would have him turn, and
slacking it on the other: the order and manner whereof has been, and is yet
diversely used of the best Horsemen, and therefore I leave it to every man's use,
as he finds it to be most fit: But in the running of the Tilt, where the
Horse neither does nor can turn, the Rider must not draw the Bridle toward the
Tilt, but only strain the Rain that is next the Tilt, to make him carry his
head toward the same.

1. Because the true shape and goodness of the Nature of the Horse is it that
Art attends and works upon; in those Horses the Rules of Art have
perfection with continuance, so as that the Horse that is of perfect shape of
body, shall not endanger wind, or limb, or deformity of body.

2* Next his person shall never be in peril by rearing or running away.

3. Nor shall the Rider ever be grieved with heavy bearing upon his head, but
perform form all with great delight: neither shall he need Canetsale, Musrole,
Martingale, or such like, but only false Rains.

4. And lastly, this teaching will manifest the difference betwixt the true
knowing and ignorant Riders, which will be perceived by the very Horses doings;
the Horse does represent and express himself most beautiful, and thereby
renders the expert Rider and the Horse to appear most nobly, with such delight
to the Beholders, that they will seem to be ravished with it: all which is
attained by discretion, taking of time with moderation and temperance, which is
little regarded, and of very few, who will rather choose to ride out of order,
and that with such extremity of Spur and Rod, that for want of breath they
commit many strange disorders, whereby the poor Horse is most cruelly
tormented, having no other to ride him but one without discretion, a mad man.
After your Horse has perfectly learned swiftly to trot, and to stop, as well
to go back, then ought he to be taught rightly to advance, which is by lifting
up his forefeet just and even together, like to a Goat, somewhat above the
ground, and so to let them fall even and just, twice or thrice together: the
true doing whereof still cause him to make a just and perfect manage, and a
ready and true turn: For the attaining whereof, trot him gently forty or fifty
foot in some plain way, then give him a just stop, which he will truly perform,
because has perfectly learned the same. Let him always keep a perfect, steady,
and pleasant hand on the Bridle, then instantly with a mild voice say, Hup,
Hup, striking him at that instant with his Wand on the right shoulder, and also
on both the Calves of his Legs together, but spur him not, if possibly without
it he will advance, the which with a little labor and patient teaching, no
doubt but he will attempt to do twice or thrice together, which if he do, then
in that instant let his Rider make much of him (although he did it very meanly)
then let him pause a little time, and give him breath, and trot him again in
the same manner the like distance of ground, and as before, so gently use him
again: but if he do not better every time he is taught, he must be still
solicited, until that he do better; and then after that he can in plain ground
perfectly advance, then reach him gently upon the hanging knole of a Hill, to
bring him perfectly to stop, and run sliding upon his Buttocks or hinder Legs,
which is very handsome, beautiful, and graceful for Manage and Turn; and
therefore let him do it before he is taught any other Lesson, and then he will
do it upon a soft Trot, upon the swift Trot, and afterward upon a soft Gallop,
and not before; but never upon a swift Gallop, until that he be perfect both in
Turn and Manage. If he advance too high, and not just and even, with a good
grace as he ought, then may the fault be speedily found, and easily amended by
immediate correcting him with one even stroke over his Legs, the Wand again
ordered and conveyed out of his fight, with a sweet staid hand on the Bridle:
few such trials will amend and perfect what is amiss in the Horse.

And whereas some appoint many helps for Horses that are harder to turn on the
one side then on the other (although I do confess their general desire is more
apt to the left hand then to the right) yet to a Horse of good Nature and
perfect shape, a little Art will speedily teach him to teach others: but if he
be a Jade, one may as soon teach an Ass to play upon a Harp.

It now remains to show, when to make the half Turn and the double, the
Chambetta, the Manage, to pass a swift Carriere, the Cornet, and such like.

The next Lesson for him to learn, after he is perfect in those I have set
down, as I promised, is to make a true and a just half double Turn, which
should be in this manner. First, when the Rider has gently trotted, stopped,
and advanced his Horse the length of a short Carriere, let him teach him gently
and mildly to make the half Turn (beginning always on the right hand) that is,
for the Rider to turn him with the help of his left Leg, that his head may
stand that way, which before his Tail stood, which is called a Half Turn,
because he makes his half Circle: but if in the Turn he set his head that way
it stood at the first, that is a whole Circle, and therefore called a Whole
Turn: But let him first do the half Turn perfect, which must be done by helping
him with his Voice, and Calf of his Leg, and not at first by any means to have
him spurred, if he can otherwise be brought unto it; because a Spur is a
correction, which is not to be used but at that instant time when he has
committed an error, and not when he remains ignorant in what he do; by which
means undoubtedly, being a sensible Creature, he will perceive his errors and
offenses, whereby with little correction he will easily amend any fault. Let
the Rider never go about to make him despair, but continually encourage him;
for having formerly attained a perfection of a just, even, and swift Trot in
the Rings (the very true ground of all other Lessons) he will easily turn on
the right hand, setting his head that way that his Tail stood; the which being
perfectly attained, then let the Rider close it up with another half Turn on
the same hand, with the prescribed help, setting his head and all his body in
the same way it was at the first; then give him breath, and make much of him,
then make him do as much on the left hand, with those other prescribed helps,
and so change from hand to hand, leaving always on the right.

1. In the doing whereof, observe whether he bring on the contrary Leg orderly.

2. That he do it after the first bound of advancing, and after the second or
third bound.

3. That after he is perfect in doing the whole Turn, that the Rider make him
to do it swiftly and roundly, without stop or stay of the half Turn, and
speedily in the closing of every whole Turn, and in as narrow a compass as may
be.

4. That the Rider (as has been said) begin on the right hand, and end on the
right.

5. After he is perfect, as aforesaid, give him on each hand three whole Turns,
whereof let the first be very fair and softly, beginning at the right hand, and
ending on the right; in performing whereof, the Rider must always help him with
his Tongue, his Rod, and his Leg, by which continual use, before he teaches
him any other Lesson (which should never be done, unless he be perfect in the
Lesson he is learning, so that the Rider shall in the end, with discreet and
temperate teaching, bring him to an admirable perfection, keeping time and
measure, that the one be not swifter then the other; if either, the last, which
for the most part is as speedy and perfect.

Now to proceed to the Managing thereof, the true signification whereof is to
be rightly understood by such as intend to be expert in Horsemanship; for
ignoratis terminis ignoratur and Ars, to be ignorant of Terms is to be ignorant
of the Art: I take it to be a compound word of the word Manus and Ago (the hand
in this Art being the Instrument of Instruments) does guide and govern the
Horse to every action, and therefore may fitly be said, Manu agere, or as the
Italians properly call it Manegiare, which is as much as skilfully to handle.
And therefore when the Rider shall exercise the Horse perfectly and gracefully
in his place, trot, stop, advance, double, or single turn, gallop, leap,
capriole, cornet, assault, or whatsoever the hand being the principal Actor or
primus motor, may truly and aptly be called Manage; which cannot so rightly be
done without the general knowledge of the practice of the Precepts of the whole
Art.

And although many worthy Horsemen have and do only rest and rein Managing to
Galloping, and to bring a Horse to and fro one self same path, by a half rest,
whole rest, and when the Rider manageth with a half rest, causing the Horse at
the end of every managing path, after he has stopped, to advance twice together,
and at the second bound to turn and rest one bound: does not the Rider therein
exercise the Trot, the Stop, and the Advance, and the Turn which he formerly
learned, and according to the same manner? or when he manageth with the whole
rest, by turning him immediately upon the stop, without any carryance or rest
at all, which only is most common with us in England; and yet the managing of
the half rest is most necessary for the attaining of perfection: does not the
Rider keep and maintain the Horse in one path, one place of stop, making him to
keep his ground, and therein carry his Head, his Neck, his Legs, and his Body
just, closing his Turn roundly, and in a narrow room, with the true time and
measure in every action, as has been taught? How then can Managing be properly
referred to one only action, when it is the perfect acting of every Action and
Lesson he has learned? wherein when the Riders Horse is most ready and
perfect, he may increase the often doing of his Lessons as he will, and make an
alteration of his Turns and Exercises, to find out the truth of his obedience;
and when the same are first artificially and then exactly performed, then may
the Rider be truly said to be a perfect Manager.

Now are to be showed, what are the principal things that are to be observed in
the true Managing of a Horse.

He is taught his Manage with a soft Trot, and not with a Gallop: my reason is,
because thereby he may be at the first sensible of apprehension what to do, and
how to do, and that gracefully, by the bowing of his Houghs behind, by turning
round with the Chambetta, which is by holding up the fore foot on the side he
should turn, whilst he brings over the contrary Leg, and sets it not down
until he have closed his Turn, so as hereby he shall carry both his fore-feet
above the ground, not trailing upon the ground, which is disgraceful. When the
Rider teaches his Horse (which is after he can stop well) let him advance
before, and turn readily on both hands, then with a soft Trot come to the place
of stop about 20 paces in length, and make him advance twice together, and at
the second bound turn him on the right hand, as has been said, you must always
begin, helping him, so that by bowing of his Houghs behind, he move his
forepart orderly, then immediately in a gentle manner trot him back to the
place you came from, and then there after he has made his stop, at the second
bound of his advancing turn on the left hand, observing the like order, until
the Rider have gone ten or twelve times, and at last cause him to advance twice
together. And thus much for the half rest, which is to advance thrice, and at
the third bound to turn; but be sure he be perfect in one Lesson before you
teach him another.

In all the Riders managings, let his body still accompany his Horse with a
good grace; and when he has very perfectly learned his Manage on the soft
Trot, he may manage him with a Gallop, giving him on each hand one single Turn;
and a little before he is turned, let the Rider hold his Wand on the contrary
side, whereby he shall know on what side to turn; and at the stop, let the
Rider make him to advance, either with his Voice, Rod, or Spur, always being
careful to give him breath, evermore beginning with a gentle Gallop, until that
he be perfect. But I wish the Rider so to use and exercise his Horse, that he
may be long Master of so good and so perfect a Horse, and not to spend or spoil
him in a little time, in teaching him needless toys, as some ignorant Horsemen
use to do.

After the Horse is perfect in such Lessons as have been formerly taught, and
is grown to full and perfect strength, then let the Rider begin with him with a
short Carriere in a fair sandy way, and with a lively Voice put him forward,
forcing him to run swiftly, roundly, and smoothly, with a steady hand, and
lightly to stop himself on his Buttocks; then let him turn him on the left
hand, and softly pace him to the other end of the Carriere path, and there stop
him, and turn him again to the right hand, and so leave off, and rest him. And
as this passing Carriere or swift Gallop must never be done or taught, until
the Horse be, as has been said, most perfect in all the Lessons; so must it be
done very sparingly and seldom, as once in a month at the most.

CHAP. V.
Of the Bound, Leap, Yark.
SOme have a desire to have their Horses to bound, leap, and yark: and though I
know it might be most exactly done by the best spirited Horses; but tending
altogether to their destruction, and a matter rather of foolish delight then of
any use, I leave it to the disposition of the Owner, wishing much rather to
have such dangerous Exercises omitted then practiced, unless that there are
more plenty of Horses that are fit for the same; therefore any Reader cannot
admire that he meets with so short a Chapter.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Capriole and Cornetti.
THe difference betwixt these two is, that the Capriole or Goats-leap is always
in going forwards, and the Cornetti still in one place. These are to be learned
and taught by one order, but neither of them will be well learned, and therefore
never exactly done, unless the Horse be very perfect to stop, which must be by
much bending of the Elbow of the hinder Houghs, or Heels of the Horse. Now the
Cornetti may in some sort resemble the dancing of a Bear at a stake; for when
he danceth and pranceth up and down in one place, lifting his fore-feet even
and just together, seeming to turn, if he might be suffered; which is never
well done, unless the Horse be just and steady of head and body, bowing the
Hams of his hinder Legs, as if he would fit or slide on his Buttocks. And the
Capriole is in the same manner, but still going forwards, seeming as though he
would yark behind by advancing his Rump, but does not; and as he does it
forwards, so will he do it backward and sidelong.

Now the Rider need not to teach his Horse either of these, until, as has been
said, he be perfectly exercised in those Lessons formerly mentioned, because
these Lessons are only learned by stopping and advancing; the which, if he have
once perfectly, and have long practiced, then trot him sundry days upon some
hanging ground, and upon the Knole of the Hill on the same ground, make him to
advance twice together at the end of the two paces, all the length of the Hill
downwards, still remembering to cherish him when he does well, to give him
breath, that all his performances may be done with delight. And if he be helped
with the word saying, Hup, and by the Riders Rod, by striking him on the
forepart of the shoulder, he will go from stop to stop, advancing both the
fore-feet and hinder Loins, with time and measure, as often as the Rider
pleases, and in such a just, even, and staid manner, as will be very pleasant
to the Beholders.

Now because I would not have the young Rider to begin any Lesson, but by the
direction of a perfect Master, and in that course to continue; so must the
young Rider endeavor with himself to know the reason of all his Practices, and
therefore must be sure to be present at the Exercises of the most skilful
Horsemen; and as Solomon says, let his foot tread often upon their threshold.
Let him be acquainted with the most expert Practitioners, and when he is able
rightly to judge and to make a true difference betwixt good and bad; then let
him practice as often as he can, and never doubt with good advice to become a
perfect Horseman, so as to be able to teach whatsover is fit for a Horse to do,
and a young Gentleman to know.

CHAP. VII.
Short infallible Rules to be observed and practiced by every Horseman.
1. DO not gallop your Horse before that he can stop well.

2. Do not run him before he can stop in his Gallop.

3. Do not swiftly gallop him before that he can stop.

4. Do not make him a Runner before he be six or seven years old.

5. In all his doings, from the beginning to the end, keep his Rains true, and
his head steady; for this Rule is the foundation of all other Rules.

6. In the morning early, when that he is empty, before he eat any thing, teach
and exercise him until he be perfect; and after, twice or thrice in a week is
sufficient.

7. In all his teaching and exercise, do them moderately and temperately, and
leave him always after the well doings of his Lessons, both in breath, and with
a good mouth.

8. After he is perfect in his Lessons, let the Rider exercise him not always
in one place, neither let him confine him to a just and certain instant of time.

9. In the managing of his Horse, let him not gallop him swiftly at the first,
but with a soft Pace, and seldom with a Gallop.

10. In correcting of his Horse for an error, let him correct him even in that
instant of time when he erred, and not otherwise; and when he had done well (as
has been often said) let him be sure to make much of him, and cherish him.

These following Rules must be observed afterward, when he is ready in all his
Lessons, and in the greatest perfection of all his strength; for before that
time they do not much concern him.

1. Distemper gather roundly. 2. Go on smoothly. 3. Bear his Head steddily.
1. Distemper Hand and Mouth. 2. Diminish not his Strength. 3. Else it will
make him overreach.
In all his Teaching and Exercise to observe,

1. Begin softly. 2. To go afterward on more speedily. 3. To perform
courageously.
Lastly, let the Rider exercise and perform all his Actions and Motions with an
upright Body, his Stirrups being short; let him keep his Legs and his Seat
gracefully, in a comely and beautiful manner, and let him perform all he has
to do courageously, without the least perturbation of Mind.

A true and brief way of Planting and Ordering of all sorts of Orchards, either
Apple, Pear, Plum, or Cherry, according to the Experience of the Author; being
never before Published.
THe principal occasion that moved me to write this small Treatise concerning
Orchards, was, because very many of my Countrymen are so most abominably
cheated and abused by buying several sorts of Trees of our Nursery-men, which
having bought, are so much deceived in their expectation, of raising an Orchard
to some considerable growth and benefit in a short time, by buying Trees of the
said Nursery-men, which has proved so prejudicial to the Nation, that
thousands might have enjoyed the benefit of their labors in Planting of
Orchards, had they not been deceived in their Trees, besides the great charge
and uncertainty of their growing. Now I shall briefly show you how all sorts of
people are abused in buying Apple, Pear, and Cherry-Trees (but as for all sorts
of Peaches, Nectellings, Apricocks, and all sorts of such kinds of Fruit, they
can bring them up far better then any other, they having both, and giving them
extraordinary attendance, so it is not convenient to show the way of raising of
them) which is thus: A Gentleman or Countryman, Farmer, or any other having
provided his Piece of Ground, by manuring and enriching it with good store of
Soil (for I suppose no body is so ignorant to plant without his Ground be well
enriched) his next thing (as hundreds before him have done) is to inquire out a
good Nursery, which no question but he may find very good, but he will find it
bad enough before he has done with it, or else he will speed better then his
Neighbors or the Author of this has done before him, who having provided his
Catalogue of several sorts of Trees, comes to the Nursery-man, and desires to
let him see such and such Trees as are written in his Catalogue, which the
Nursery-man willingly performs. The Gentleman having viewed, marks them, and
likes them exceedingly, agrees for 300 or 400, according as his Piece of Ground
will take up; and are, questionless, very good Trees, straight, handsome, and
beautiful to the Beholder: but when he comes to take them up, they stand so
excessive close, that two thirds of the Roots are spoiled, and the Trees being
in extraordinary proof, that by such time they come into the Country, the Trees
are so withered and bruised, that not one in ten comes to perfection: And
further, the Trees that you buy of these Nursery-men come out of such a very
rich Soil, that when they come to be planted in the Country-mans Orchard, pine
away to nothing; and after six years standing, have been forced to plant them
afresh, to his loss of time, great charges, cost, and trouble. But still they
run on, and delight to be deceived, and are of this opinion, that those Trees
out of the Nursery, being four or five years grafted, will turn to an Orchard
far sooner then any other way of Planting. But I shall show you the true way of
Planting and Ordering your Orchards, whether Pear, Plum, Cherry, or
Apple-Orchards, with little or no charge, and yet shall be an Orchard much
sooner and better, and not come to the twentieth part which will accrue by
buying the Trees out of the Nursery, as the Author has proved by Experience.

In the first place you must seek out, if you can possible with convenience,
such a Piece of Ground that leanes toward the South, or being a Hill rising
toward the South, that the Sun may cast his beams to the root of every Tree
through the whole Orchard, which if it be upon an exact Level it cannot. Let
the Ground be good by Nature, if you can; if not, you must enrich it by soiling
it, which will be no loss, considering the several Crops it will bear after it
is planted. Now having found out a place fitting for the purpose, cast up a
high Ditch, and well quick-set it, that so it may grow up with your Trees, to
defend them as they grow up, if not quick-setted before. Now having found out
your Ground, and well fenced it, you must consider what kind of Ground it is,
whether black Mould, Clay, Gravel, sandy or mamsie Ground: according to the
Nature of the Ground, you must get such Fruits as may prosper therein
accordingly to the several Soils; which five sorts many times happen in an Acre
of Ground. I shall begin with the Clay-ground; all sorts of Winter-Apples do
abundantly delight in a Clay-Ground, being very well soiled and made rich: and
I have observed, that your Winter-Apples, as Pepins, Pearmains, Gilliflowers,
Cunnings, and Harvey-Apples, which if you have them of the best bearing sort
growing upon a Clay-Ground well chalked, have been larger, firmer, and have
endured two or three months longer then that same sort of Apples growing upon a
Gravel or sandy Ground. Your next Ground is your mamsie or chalky Ground, which
brings forth a very lovely sweet Apple, but not so big as the other, yet far
sweeter, and will keep full as long, being fit for all sorts of Winter-Apples,
and Summer-Pears, and Winter-Pears. Your next Ground is your sandy Ground,
which is only fitting for Summer-fruit and Cherries, which to make them thrive,
you must well chalk and dung, at least a yard round from the bodies of the
Trees, and a foot deeper then the Tree stands. Those Apples that love such a
kind of Ground, are your Lerding, French Pepin, Higthnig, Robbers, and all
other Summer-Apples and Pears, and your Duke-Cherries, and several others which
will not last beyond Christmas, yet are true bearers and excellent. Your next
is your gravelly Ground, which will bear excellent Fruit, being well ordered,
until the Trees have taken good root. You must dig the Ground above a yard
round from the body of the Tree, and dung it very well, that so the Tree may
gain good strength, and bigness of root before it come to touch the Gravel,
that so meeting with the Gravel, it may not stand at a stay, when it comes to
root in the Gravel, and then there is no doubt, but it will answer your
expectation. Your next sort is your black Mould, which is the best, and will
bear all sorts of Apples, Pears, Plums, and Cherries, with little help; I do
not mean your black sort of heathy Mould, which has neither heart nor
goodness, but to be cut up in Summer, and well dried, will make good fires in
Winter. Now having found out your Piece of Ground, and ordered according to
directions, measure your Ground, and so contrive to set the Row of Trees full
South, at what distance you think most convenient, according as you do you
intend the Trees shall be suffered to grow in bigness, after your first Row is
planted, which must be set at such a distance, that you may plant one between
every four Trees, which will make a fifth. Now having made you understand the
charge and deceit of your Nursery-trees, how they pine away coming out of so
warm a place, and so rich a Soil, into such a barren place; for make your
Orchard as rich as you can, it is barren Ground to your Nurseries; for
otherwise how could a man maintain his Wife and Children out of two or three
Acres of Ground, if it were not extraordinary good? Therefore when your Ground
is provided, and made fit, employ your Laborers or Servants to gather you so
many dozens of Crab-stocks, Pear-stocks, or Cherry-stocks, about three foot
long, or thereabouts, according as it best pleases the Planter to have them
out. See your Crab-stock and the rest be in good proof, and not old decayed
stock, but green, and as clear without knots as you can; let them not exceed in
bigness above three inches about. Now having considered your Piece of Ground,
what sort of Land it is, set it according to directions: having so done, bush
up every Tree, and lay some muckle Dung to every one about half a yard round,
do not cover your Tree too deep in Mould, three inches above the Root is
enough; for if you cover them too deep, a good shower of Rain will not reach
the Root. This muckle Dung keeps the Roots moist and warm, and kills all manner
of Weeds that would grow about the body of the Tree. After they have stood one
year open the Bushes, and prune all the Shoots off that stand a foot below the
top, leave not above three or four at most, and then you may put in Sheep,
Calves, or Beasts: But if it be well manured, you may plant Garden-Beans or
Pease, according as you find the Ground inclined. If your Orchard lie sloping,
as is best, then make a Trench to lead to every Tree; you need not have many
great Trenches, but two or three, and the rest small, and so you may water your
whole Orchard for the first year or two without any trouble. When the Trenches
are made, you ought to let your Crab-stock Pear of Cherry stand three years at
the least before you graft, and two before you bud; for you will find they will
bring forward your Graff more in one year then in two. You may graff according
as you see the Stock to prosper: be sure to have your Graffs of the best sort
of Fruit Trees, and of good Bearers; for some sorts bear fair Apples, but very
few.

When your Trees are grassed according to your mind, of all sorts of choice
fruits, then at the Fall of the Leaf view all your Trees, and stop up the cleft
where the Graft was, put in some Pitch to keep the Rain out, and then it will
be closed soon after, and the Tree grow the firmer. When your Grafts are two
years shoot at farthest, prune them all, and not suffer any to grow cross one
another, especially in the middle of the Tree. If you find some to shoot up
straight upright, hang a little stone at the end of the boughs, but one Spring,
and you will make them grow how you please. Those that grow straight upright
are seldom good Bearers, if they be suffered to grow; therefore you may remedy
it at the first: But when they are grown too old, they will not be half so
pliable. When they begin to bear, do not suffer them to bear above three or
four Apples or Pears, but pull them off; for if you suffer them to bear too
much at first, it will put a stop to the Trees growth. This I think is
direction enough for any reasonable man to order his affairs.

FINIS.
An Advertisement of Books worth Buying, sold at the Printing-press in
Broad-street London (which was formerly in Cornbil) by Ben Billingsley and
Obadiah Blagrave.
Nich. Culpeper Physician and Astrologer, his Last Legacy left unto his Wife,
being the choicest of his Secrets in Physic and Surgery* newly reprinted,
with an Addition of above 200 choice Receipts lately found out, not extant in
any of his Works before, in large Octavo.

Culpepers Translation of the London Dispensatory, large Octavo.

Culpepers English Physician Enlarged, showing the Use and Virtue of Herbs,
large Octavo.

Culpepers Directory for Midwives, both Parts, Octavo.

Culpepers Translation of Riverius Practice and Observations: The same you may
have also in Latin.

The London Dispensatory in Latin for the use of Apothecaries.

A Treatise of Wind offending Man's Body, in which is described the Nature,
Causes, and Symptoms of Wind: Together with its speedy and easy Remedy. 1 s.
price.

A Touchstone for Physic, directing by evident Marks and Characters to such
Medicines as without Purgers, Vomiters, Bleedings, Issues, Minerals, or any
other Disturber of Nature, may be securely trusted for Cure in all Extremities.

A Discourse touching Generation, collected out of Levinus Lemnius, a most
Learned Physician, fit for the use of Physicians, Midwives, and all young
married people.

A Treatise of the Scurvy, examining the Opinions of the most solid and grave
Writers, concerning the Nature and Cure of this Disease, determining the whole
matter from the latest Experiments and best Observations, with a considerable
Inquiry and true Account of Tobacco, relating to this Disease: By Edw.
Manwaring Doctor of Physic.

A brief Institution or Tutor to Astrology, for the better understanding of a
large Astrological Discourse of a notable Conjunction of Saturn and Mars, or
any thing of the like Nature, with a Discourse of the true System of the World:
By Rich. Edlen Student in Astrology.

The History of the World, or an Account of Time, compiled by the Learned
Dionysius ^etavius, and continued by others: Together with a Geographical
Description of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, in Folio.

Memoires of the Lives, Actions, Sufferings, and Deaths of those Noble,
Reverend, and Excellent Persons that suffered for their Allegiance to his late
Majesty in our late Civil Wars, and continued till 1666. with the Life and
Martyrdom of King Charles I. in Folio.

A Collection of all the Acts of Parliament of Charles I. and King Charles II.
until the last Session, in Folio.

The whole Trial of Mr. Christopher Love, with his Speech on the Scaffold,
diverse of his Letters to his Wife, his Wifes Petitions, etc. Published by John
Farthing, with Dr. Wilds Verses on his Death.

Dr. John Mayer his Exposition on the whole Bible, in six Volumns, in Folio.

Downhams Christian Warfare against the Devil, World, and Flesh, in Folio.

A complete Collection of several Sermons preached by the London and Country
Ministers, containing 42 Sermons, with their Prayers, being the most exact as
has yet been printed, in Quarto.

Mr. Jer. Buroughs rare Jewel of Christian Contentment, wherein is showed what
Contentment is, the holy Art and Mystery of it, several Lessons Christ teaches
to work the Heart to Contentment, the evil of Murmuring, the Aggravation of the
sin in Murmuring.

Hudsons Vindication of the Essence and Unity of the Church Catholic Visible,
and the Priority thereof in regard of particular Churches.

A Dialogue betwixt a Conformist and a Nonconformist, concerning the
Lawfulness of private Meetings, with Directions how to profit by Hearing.

The Isle of Man, or the Legal Proceedings in Man-shire against sin, the
fourteenth Edition.

Herberts Divine Poems.

The Poesy of Godly Prayers.

A large and curious Bible printed at Cambridge with Service and Apocrypha, a
new large Concordance thereto, in Quarto.

Vindiciae Pietatis, or a Vindication of Godliness in the greatest strictness
and spirituality of it, from the Imputations of Folly and Fancy: Together with
several directions for the attaining and maintaining of a Godly Life, the
first, the second and third Part: Together with the World conquered, or a
Believers Victory over the World: By R. Allen.

Two Cases of Conscience resolved, the one concerning the late Engagement, the
other of a rash Vow, deliberately iterated by Bishop Sanderson.

Owens Epigrams in Latin for the use of Schools.

Martials Epigrams in Latin for the use of Schools.

Some Improvements to the Art of Teaching, especially in the first Grounding of
a young Scholar in Grammar-learning, showing a short, sure, and easy way to
bring a Scholar to Variety and Elegancy in writing Latin: By William Walker,
Author of the Treatise of English Particles.

The English Rogue, or the Life of Meriton-Latroon, a witty Extravagant, in two
Parts, being a complete Discovery of the most eminent Cheats of both Sexes.

New Plays of diverse sorts, both old and new.

Cupids Courtship, or the Celebration of a Marriage between the God of Love and
Psiche, a Poem.

An Elegy on the Countess of Castleton.

An Elegy on the Lady Middleton.

A new Academy of Complements, with Songs a la mode for Ladies and Gentlewomen.

The Epitome of the whole Art of Husbandry, comprising all necessary Directions
for the Countryman, as Plowing, Sowing, Gardning, to cure Diseases in Cattle,
how to order Bees, etc.

Maps of the 17 Provinces colored and rolled, with or without the Cities.

Mr. Theophilus Buckworths famous and long approved Lozenges, for the Cure of
Consumptions, Coughs, Colds, and all Diseases incident to the Lungs.

The Sovereign and Universal Ointment.

All sold by Ben. Billingsley and Obadiah Blagrave at the Printing-press in
Broad-street, near the Church by Gresham-Colledge-gate; where you may also be
furnished with several sorts of Bibles, School-Books, Sea-Books, etc. And
Stationary Ware, as Paper, Paper-Books of diverse Volumes, Table-Books, Pencils,
Ruling-Pens, Pens ready made, Wax, and the best Ink for Deeds and Records.


