TWO Useful Cases RESOLVED.

I. Whether a Certainty of being in a State of Salvation be attainable? II.
What is the Rule by which this Certainty is to be attained?
LONDON: Printed for Henry Bonwicke, at the Red-Lyon in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1685.

TWO Useful Cases RESOLVED.
COuld we look into the hearts of most men, we should find some such reasonings
as these, soothing them in their Vices, and lulling them asleep while they are
in the ready road to Destruction. All men commit some sins or others, and most
men such as my self, or as great in another kind; and yet they believe they
shall not be miserable hereafter: And therefore why should I, notwithstanding
my sins, despair of Gods favor? why should not I hope that the Infinite Mercy
of God will extend it self to me also? But then, if his Conscience tells him,
that doubtless Millions have had hopes of Heaven, that never came thither; and
then puts the Question to him, What assurance, what certainty have you that
this shall not be your own case? He straitway replies, assurance indeed I have
none; but that I do not expect: for how should fallible man know certainly how
God will deal with him? but I am told that Christ died for sinners, and that
the Mercy of God is great; on that therefore will I depend. And so he goes on
very comfortably in his Swearing, his Damning, his Drinking, his Cheating, or
whatever other common Vices he is guilty of; and so Hopes himself into
Damnation. But now these men, if they have any real concern for eternal
happiness, (as I hope some of them have, by their conscientiousness in other
particulars) if they did believe they could come to a certain knowledge of
their spiritual condition, I cannot think but that their Consciences would not
let them be at rest under such answers as these: Christ died for sinners; and
the mercy of God is great; which the most profligate wretches have in their
mouths as well as they. No! their Consciences would be often asking them,
Whether the omission of this or that duty be consistent with a state of
Salvation? Whether a reverence of Gods Name; whether Sobriety and Honesty, and
whatever else is commanded in the Gospel, be not the indispensable terms of
everlasting Salvation? And so they would by degrees be brought to the
consideration of all their ways, and an examination of all the particular
actions of their lives, till by growing daily in grace, they grew up to the
perfect man in Christ Jesus. And then, O the Joy! O the Comfort! O the serenity
of mind they would then experience! With what assurance, with what confidence
would they approach the Throne of Grace? in the words of Simeon in the Gospel.
Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in peace, according to thy word; for
mine eyes have seen thy Salvation. And when they perceive their dissolution
drawing near, with what Alacrity? and with what transport of Joy would they
break out into the Apostles words? I have fought a good fight, I have finished
my course, I have kept the faith; henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of
Righteousness.

You see how naturally this opinion of the attainableness of a certain
knowledge of our spiritual slate, tends to a virtuous and holy life. But to
prevent mistakes, I deny not, but that many men who think it impossible to
frame a certain judgment of their state to Godwards, are very watchful and
cautious in all their ways, carefully avoiding all those things that seem to
have any contrariety to the will of God. But I say this their opinion is not so
apt to produce a good life, as its contrary. For the generality of men when
they are once persuaded that with all their care and industry they can never
come to a certainty, they are ready to cast off all diligence, and solicitude
about the conduct of their lives; and to rely on the Indefinite Mercy of God,
and to hope the best, by which means their sins and the vicious examples of the
world grow upon them; and their Hope, the best knowledge they think they can
attain to, suffers them to go on in their sins, without much interruption and
disturbance.

Nay, it may be reasonably presumed, that many of the good men of this
persuasion have a stronger assurance than their modesty and humility will
suffer them to utter: For, what fears? what anxieties? what racking thoughts
must pierce their minds, who have the least doubt or scruple in a matter
wherein they are everlastingly concerned? What horrors? what anguish must rend
and divide their Souls upon their deathbeds, who know not but that the next
moment they must pass into that Lake of Fire and Brimstone that burns for
over?

And this has been the case of many a pious and good man: For the holy
Biographers acquaint us with what hideous doubtings and terrors of conscience
some of their Saints and Worthies have departed this life: and they did so,
it is likely, for no other reason, but because a future state being then more
lively and nearly represented to them, they had not been able in their health
to frame a fixed and settled judgment, whether theirs should be a state of
Happiness, or eternal Misery.

Now, since the framing a certain judgment of our present spiritual state is a
thing of so great use toward our leading godly, righteous, and sober lives,
and of so great comfort to them that do so, both in their lifetime and on
their deathbed, I shall show,

First, That men may make a certain judgment of themselves, whether they are in
a state of Salvation. Secondly, I shall lay down the Rule, by which they may
make this judgment of themselves.
I know that many good and holy men are of opinion that no man can without
great pride, arrogance, and presumption, say, That he is certain of his
Salvation, should he die that moment: for they think the many woeful and
deliberate faults we are all guilty of; the innumerable secret ones that have
escaped our knowledge; the wanderings and coldness in our Devotions; the ill
thoughts that many times arise in our minds, and the imperfectness of our best
actions: These, and suchlike considerations, they think, are sufficient to
confound the most confident, and to baffle all pretenses to an assurance. And
they are ready to say, that they who are so certain of their going to Heaven,
by the immodesty of their persuasions seem to be farthest from it. But if this
certainty be attainable; nay, if it be our duty to attain it; if it be a
Doctrine plainly delivered in the holy Scriptures, and therein practiced by the
holy men of God; he must be a very timorous man that will be scared out of so
useful and comfortable a truth by harsh censures, and ill-grounded reproaches.

These Objections shall be duly weighed afterward.

I. But first, let us consider what the Scriptures say to my first Proposition,
That men may, if they will deal impartially with themselves, know certainly
whether there they are in a state of Salvation. St. John, who wrote against the
Gnostics vain pretenses to Knowledge, and spiritual illuminations, could not
fall into the same fault himself by pretending to a knowledge that was not
plain and obvious. And it is he that has told us, in his first Epistle, chapter 3.
v. 10. that the Children of the Devil are manifest. Now, who calls that
manifest, which no man has a certainty of? or who can think that the wicked man
should have a certain knowledge of his deplorable condition, and that the good
and just man has not the comfort of knowing that he is in a safe one? The same
Apostle tells us in the same verse, that the Children of God are manifest, as
well as the Children of the Devil. And in v. 14. of the same chapter speaking of
the faithful in general, he says, We know that we are translated from death to
life, because we love the brethren. That is, v. 16. with such a love as will
make us lay down our lives for them. And v. 24. Hereby know we that God abides
in us, by the Spirit which he has given us. That is, by the fruits of the
Spirit that appear in our lives. Again, By this we know that we know him, if we
keep his commandments: and he that keeps his word, in him verily is the love
of God perfected. Now, what reason is there for any man to doubt of his own
Salvation, who knows that he is translated from death to life, who knows that
he is the Son of God, who knows that the love of God is perfected in him? None
certainly! for the same Apostle has told us, If our heart condemn us not, then
have we confidence toward God.

Now, the pretending uncertainty after such clearness of evidence, would better
become the Pagan Sceptick, than the truly humble and modest Christian.

In the next place let us see what St. Paul says to this point. In the 5th. chapter
of the 2d. Epist. to the Cor. 1 v. he speaks of himself thus: For we know that
if our earthly house of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of
God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens. Again in the 2d.
Epist. to Timothy, and the 4th. chapter how unconceivable was his joy, which broke
out into these words? I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I
have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid us for me a Crown of
Righteousness, which the Lord the Righteous Judge shall give me in that day,
etc. Could these words be uttered by a man that had the least doubt, whether
his life was agreeable to the will of God, or that he should not receive that
eternal weight of Glory, the reward of an holy life? If, after this evidence
from the New Testament, we look backwards into the Old, we shall find good King
Hezekiah so well satisfied in his own integrity and sincerity, that when he was
a dying (and then we know that doubts and scruples are most apt to arise) he
durst call upon God to take a view of his past life; Remember now, O Lord, I
beseech thee, how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart,
and have done that which is good in thy sight. Likewise we may observe David in
the 17 and 18 Psalms, ^^ll of assurance and considence, as to his own
Righteousness, and future reward of it. As for me, I shall behold thy face in
Righteousness: I shall be satisfied when I a^ake with thy likeness. I have kept
the ways of the Lord, and have not wickedly departed from God: Therefore has
the Lord recompensed me according to my righteousness, according to the
cleanness of my hands in his eyesight. I will not tire you with the examples
of Job, Nehemiah, and where holy men, that have expressed the like confidence
(...) their own Holiness and Sincerity.

Nor is this assurance and confidence the peculiar privilege of these
extraordinary persons. For besides what you have already read out of St. John
concerning all true Christians in general; and besides that the forementioned
holy men grounded their assurance on the sense they had of their own Integrity
an Sincerity; it is plain from Scripture, that all persons may, nay ought to
arrive to this certainty. For are we not told, Gal. 5. That the fruits of the
Spirit, which all true Christians have, and are guided by, are Peace and Joy?
And St. Peter, in the 1. chapter of his 1. Epist. tells the faithful he write sto:
In whom, that is, in Christ, though you see him not, yet believing, ye rejoice
with joy unspeakable. Now, what Joy, what Peace can there be to those who
heartily believe a future life, when they the least doubt that Christ, when
they shall appear before him, shall prove an enraged Judge, instead of a
merciful Savior? What person can conceive an unspeakable joy at the
consideration of him, whom he knows not but the next minute he may pronounce
the sentence on him of, Go you cursed into everlasting Fire? Besides, we are
bid to give thanks to him, and praise him, as well as to rejoice in him. But
how can any man perform these duties from his heart, who is in an uncertainty
as to his future Estate? For certainly those Mercies cannot be the Object of
our unfeigned Praises and Thanksgivings, if we have reason to fear they do not
appertain to us.

But were there not one Precept or Example in the whole Bible to prove this
point, methinks the natural use of Conscience might be sufficient to clear it,
unless we dare say that God has given us Consciences only to ^ash and torment
us; for peace and comfort they could ^ot give any reasonable and considering
man, while ^here remains any doubt that he shall perish everlastingly: and so
the best of men would be Furies to themselves while living, whatever becomes of
them when dead.

I know there are many ready to ask, whether the most consident man in this
persuasion would be willing on his deathbed to declare his assurance of his
Salvation, and with such words in his mouth to breathe his last? But in answer
to this, besides that what a man would choose to do is one thing, and what
certainly a good man may attain to is another: Besides this, I say, he would
tell you, that as he had lived in the practice of all Christian Virtues, so he
would willingly die in the practice of the greatest; the pardoning others, and
begging Gods pardon for himself. He would tell you, that Humility, as it was
the constant duty of a Christian, so it more especially became him when a
stepping into the presence of God, and that he would therefore willingly depart
with his eyes and heart toward Heaven, humbly imploring the Divine Mercy. And
that among other reasons he was therefore certain that he should obtain it,
because he asked in Faith, because he in no ways doubted, but that he was a
proper Object of it.

As for the Objections that may be made against this Doctrine of assurance,
they will either be obviated, or best answered, when I have handled my second
proposition. For if a certain Rule may be laid down, whereby a man may judge
infallibly of his Spiritual state, few will be troubled with the Objections.
For their greatest force lies in the want of a clear Rule to guide us in our
judgment. And therefore I hasten to the giving the Rule, by which a holy man
may certainly judge of his Spiritual good estate, or the ill man may put
himself into a good one.

II. The Rule consists of these three parts:

First, The committing of no sin, though in violence of passion, that is
heinous in its Object; such as Blasphemy, Rash Swearing, Perjury, Idolatry,
Murder, Cursing, Adultery, Fornication, and the like.

Or, Secondly, let the Object be never so small, the committing no sin that is
heinous in its Cause; such as are all sins that are committed wilfully and
deliberately; that is, when we both know they are against the Commands of God,
and consider they are so, at the time of committing them; or we might have both
known and considered this, if we had not been highly wanting to our selves, so
that our Ignorance and our Inconsideration was voluntary, and so is the sin by
consequence that proceeds from these: which, in the Phrase of the Schools, is,
being voluntary or deliberate in its cause.

Thirdly, If we have been guilty of the forementioned sins, the repenting of
them in such a measure as we are sure will be accepted by our good and gracious
God, in and through the merits of our Blessed Savior. How and when we may be
sure that our Repentance is accepted, I shall show afterward.

This being the Rule by which men may judge of their Spiritual state, that they
may have a serious regard to it, and depend on it with safety, I account my
self obliged to do these three things:

First, To prove that nothing less than the observing of the three parts of
this my Rule, can give us any just assurance of Salvation.

Secondly, That the parts of this Rule, if observed, are sufficient to put any
man into a state of Salvation.

Thirdly, That it is plain and easy, such as all Rules ought to be, such as
any man of common sense may easily and securely apply to himself.

I. First then, That nothing less than the observing of the three parts of my
Rule can give us any just assurance of Salvation.

1. As for those sins that are heinous in their Object, they are so contrary to
the first dictates of the light of Nature, or are so repugnant to the express
Commands of God, that no man could possibly fall into them, who for any time
immediately before had conscientiously discharged his duty, and had had a
serious regard to the Laws of God: and he that has not had this regard, he was
in such a wretched and hardened state, that his ease had been desperate without
the addition of any of these grievous Crimes. Let the provocation be never so
great, and the passion never so strong, where there is any tolerable degree of
tenderness in the Conscience, it could not but withold the person from
villainies so opposite to his plain duty to God and Man, and that in the highest
instances of it. I know that there have been, and there are many men of fair
Characters in the world, that have committed one or other of these Crimes; but
assuredly they owed their Religion, as their Clothes, to the fashion: It was
that which put it on them; their Justice, their Loyalty, and all their Morality
in their other actions, was nothing but the Gallantry of the Age, or
Self-interest: the fear of God, if ever they knew it, was dead and rotten in
them, or else such stench and filthiness could never have come out of them. But
to pass from these heinous Indeliberate Crimes, if they are capable of being
Indeliberate; for I much doubt whether any Christians Conscience is so slow and
stupid, as at the time of doing them not immediately to admonish him, not to
stare in his face, and tell him, that he is a dashing himself against the
Natural or the Revealed will of God. And if his Conscience told him so much,
then certainly they were done with consideration and deliberation. And had he
staid a month or a year before the perpetration of them, his Conscience might
have suggested other Arguments, but not greater, nor more proper to dissuade
him. It Is true, Time it is probable would have abated the strength of his
passion. But no man is virtuous for not having a temptation, but for resisting
it; nor is he a true Christian, that does not resist the greatest. But enough
has been said to show such heinous Crimes, however committed, to be
inconsistent with Salvation, especially with a Security of it.

2. And so I pass (as I said) to wilful and deliberate sins; such as we know to
be sins, and at the time of committing them recollect that they are so. And
these also, nay one act of these, let them be never so small, very much
endanger a man's Salvation; for the Popish Casuists, by their distinction of
sins Venial into sins Light in their Nature, though acted willingly, such as
Foolish Jesting, Officious Lying, small Excesses, and the like; and Light in
their Object, such as stealing a Pin, a Farthing, or any Trisle: By these
distinctions, I say, they make the Salvation of their followers very doubtful,
if they do not utterly destroy it. And it is Security and Assurance that I
contend for. Now, can the allowing ones self in disobedience to any of the
commands of God, consist with an Obedience to him with all our heart, and with
all our soul? Can he that deliberately breaks the least of the Commands, assure
himself that he shall not be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven; that is, not
be at all admitted into it? Can that Soul that sins presumptuously, though
in never so small a matter, be certain that he reproacheth not the Lord, and
that he shall not be cut off? contrary to Numb. 15.30 v. He that will not part
with these ^andfuls of barley and morsels of bread, for his duty to God, seems
to have but little desire of Heaven, and I am afraid will have less of it for
his Portion. But to leave these miserable Guides of Souls, that thus unwarily
endeavor to widen the narrow way that leads to life, till they fall into the
broad road that leads to destruction: For the indulging ones self in the
smaller sins, lessens the fear of God, and the habit of doing well, and so
draws us into more and greater sins. But leaving these miserable Guides, I
shall betake my self more closely to the proof of the second part of my Rule,
viz.

That one deliberate sin will endanger our eternal happiness. I might say, will
certainly destroy it; but that is more than I am engaged to prove at present.

Does not St. Paul in his 1 Ep. to the Cor. 6 chapter tell us, that neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor abusers of
themselves with Mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor
Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God. Some, I know,
dispute, whether a single, though deliberate act, can give us one of these
denominations? In most of them it is owned it will; but why it should not in
all, in the sight of God, I can see no reason. But that this pretense may not
deceive us, we are told by the same Apostle in the 5 to the Gal. speaking of
the works of the flesh, Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness,
Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, and suchlike. We are told, that
those that do such things shall not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven. Now these
words, They which do such things, relate to single Actions, as well as to
Habits; and the doers of these things are debarred the Kingdom of Heaven. And
then the suchlike that follows this long Catalogue of sins, shows that it is
not only these species of sins, but the rest which fall under the denomination
of sin, which it would have been endless to have enumerated, are subject to the
like dreadful penalty. And there is good reason to believe it, for in the first
Epistle of St. John, chapter 3. v. 6. we are told, Whosoever abides in God,
sins not: and verse 8. If he does, he is no longer a Child of God, but of
the Devil. Accordingly, sin is defined by the Schoolmen to be an aversion from
God, and a cleaving to the Creature. Now, that the Apostle means single acts as
well as habits, is plain from the expression it self, He that sins, which is
applicable to acts as well as habits, and from the design of the Apostle in
writing this Epistle, which was to dissuade men from all sin, chapter 2. v. 1.
These things write I unto you, that you sin not. Now, who will offer to say
that the Apostles design was not to dissuade from single acts as well as
habits? And yet he says, He that sins, is of the Devil; that is,
voluntarily and deliberately, as I shall make appear afterward. Besides, let
us consider that under the old Law Saul was cut off for sparing an Agag and the
fat Beast against the express Command of God; let us consider that that man
that but once carried a bundle of Sticks on the Sabbath Day, was put to death
without mercy, and that there was no expiation allowed for sins, how small
soever the object was, if committed knowingly and willingly; but in the words
of St. James, c. 2. He that was guilty of one point, was guilty of all. Not
that he formally broke every Command, but that the event was the same; he was
as certainly punished with death, as if he had violated every particular. And
this with good reason; for in so doing he sinned against That which only could
engage him to the observance of the whole, the Love of God, and an earnest
desire to please him.

If this was the severity of the Jewish Law, and every transgression and
disobedience received the just recompense of reward, and the wilful offender
died without Mercy: how shall we escape, if we neglect so great means of
Salvation? which has been brought down to us, not by Angels, as the Mosaical
Law was, but by the Son of God. This is not mine, but the Apostles Argument, in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, and the other was made by St. James himself, and
therefore they are the more carefully to be heeded.

I foresee that there are many who will not easily be persuaded to think so
hardly of one wilful sin, (for it is a troublesome thing to be condemned by ones
own Conscience) and that therefore they will interpose as to the Arguments
drawn from the Old Law; That no man, unless he dies in the very moment of
committing a wilful sin, is immediately damned for it, as they were immediately
put to Death under the Old Law for one wilful transgression: for the Grace of
the Gospel has brought an Expiation for the most grievous crimes, and showed us
a way by Repentance to avoid their punishment. But all that I urged the former
passages for, was to show, That the Gospel teaches us, that to every wilful
disobedience, to the guilt of any one point now, Eternal death is as certainly
due in the next Life, as a Temporal one among the Jews was due in this. And
that therefore all persons ought as carefully to avoid every wilful offense
under the Gospel, as the Jews were obliged to avoid every wilful transgression
of their Law; in which the Penalty was not so great, nor was the Discovery so
certain. As for the refuge of Repentance which is allowed now against an
Eternal death, and was not ordinarily allowed the Jews against a Temporal one,
of this under my next Head: But if we make the Grace of the Gospel an inlet to
our sins, we highly provoke Gods Justice by thus abusing his Mercy; And when we
make use of it to take off the force, not of mine, but the two Apostles
Arguments, we are not followers of their Doctrine, but of our own deceitful
Lusts, and carnal Reasonings.

Besides these reasons from Scripture, there is a Natural one, and that a very
great one, that shows the danger that is in every wilful sin. The General Rules
of our duty relating either to God, our Neighbor, or our selves, are such as
tend to our Profit and our Interest, to our Credit and Reputation, to our
Prudent Pleasure, and our Health; And then he that looks no farther than this
life, if discreet, would carefully observe them. And therefore the ordinary
observance of our duty, cannot distinguish us from such a person as this, nor
give us a securer title to happiness than the Children of this world have, that
are wise in their Generation. But sometimes it falls out, and that perhaps to
try us, that in particular instances our Duty interferes with our Profit, our
Credit, or our Ease. And then we have the greatest opportunities of
experiencing whether our hearts are sound toward God; Then is our day of
trial; Then may we know whether we love God with all our hearts, and whether we
are willing to forsake Father or Mother, Brother or Sister, whatever is most
dear to us, for the sake of our Blessed Savior. If in these cases we fail of
our duty, and prefer our present concerns before the Commands of God, the Devil
may justly say, it is not for naught that we served God, Job 1.9. We pursued our
worldly Interests, while we flattered our selves we served the Lord. And then
who can safely depend on such an obedience, as is thus liable to be reproached
by his Accuser?

I know it may be objected, That a Reverend Divine has told us in his
Directions how we may judge of our Spiritual state, That if the General course
of our Actions be a doing of Righteousness, though we are sometimes born down
by the Violence of Temptations, the Grace of the Gospel accepts of this
Imperfect, but Sincere Obedience.

But (1.) What Assurance does he give, that this will be sufficient to any man's
Salvation? He says, that an Unsinning Obedience is impossible, and that
therefore somewhat less than a perfect Obedience is necessary, (if any man is
saved.) But is there no Medium betwixt a Perfect Obedience, and that in the
General course of our lives? Does not That Obedience which is spotted only with
sins of Infirmity, and which keeps the good Christian from all Wilful and
Deliberate Sins, come nearer to an Unsinning Obedience, than that which is
sometimes born down by the Violence of Temptations?

(2dly.) This Rule is not clear enough to direct any man in so weighty a
matter; For what one man calls Obedience as to the General course of our
Actions, another will not call so. And he that is but sometimes Drunk, and
Cheats but now and then, and is but seldom guily of Fornication, or any other
sin, may comfortably commit them, so that he does not turn them into an
Habitual Practice. And I verily believe, should I appeal to most men's
Consciences, that are not extremely Vicious, they would confess, that they
slacken the reins now and then to a Delightful Lust, or a Profitable Sin,
because they are of Opinion, that if in the Generality of their Actions they
observe their Duty, these not common Intermissions, will not endanger their
Salvation.

I think I need not oppose Authority against Authority, since the Uncertainty
and Looseness of the Rule is sufficient to confute it. And if the Arguments by
which I have proved the danger that is in every Wilful Sin, be Good, This Rule
must needs be Deceitful and Erroneous.

As for the other Species of Wilful Sins, that are Wilful in their Cause, when
we have neglected such means of Knowledge as were consistent with our
Circumstances, and so chosen our Ignorance; or when we had time and leisure to
have considered our actions before we did them, but we would run rashly and
inconsiderately upon them. Such Ignorance and Inconsideration are so far from
excusing an Action, that they highly aggravate it. They are marks that our
Spirit is strangely alienated from God; They show that we love Darkness more
than Light, and that we regard not the conforming our Actions to the Commands
of God; That we would not consider our ways, lest we should turn our feet unto
his Testimonies. And what will be the effect of such gross Heedlesness and
affected Ignorance, I leave every man's own Conscience to tell him.

Give me leave to back what I have delivered on this Head, with the Authority
of the Whole Duty of Man, a Book deservedly in most peoples hands. Chap. 6.
Sect. 21. we are told, That whosoever continues in any one Wilful Sin, is not
in Gods favor, nor can he, if he so die, hope for any mercy at his hand.

But now the man that is conscious to himself of any Wilful Sin, is ready to
say in his heart, Though every Wilful Sin is Damnable, yet is it not so to them
that have forsaken it, it is not so upon Repentance, and That I have performed,
and therefore this terrible Discourse does not affect me. And blessed for
evermore be the Infinite Mercy of our Gracious God, that has declared his
readiness to receive the Returning Prodigal, to receive us to Pardon, though we
have sinned with an high hand, and Presumptuously rebelled against Him; That
has extended his Expiatory Sacrifice, not only to our Sins of Ignorance and
Infirmity, as under the Old Law, but to our Sins against our Knowledge, to our
Voluntary and Presumptuous Sins.

(3dly.) But this confident person, that has lately been guilty of one Wilful
Sin, must be told, That before he can give Peace and Quiet to his Soul, he
ought to be certain that his Repentance has been of such a nature, and in such
measure, as will be accepted with God; which is the Third part of my Rule, by
which a man may judge of his Spiritual State.

But he that has lately been guilty of One Wilful Sin, cannot be sure that his
Repentance is accepted by God. For though he may be sensible of his fault, and
the danger it has brought him into; though he has several times begged Gods
pardon, and, if he be of a soft and tender temper, with groans and tears too;
though he has made satisfaction and restitution for whatever injury he has done
by his sin, (all which particulars are absolutely required of every True
Penitent;) His sin being lately committed, he cannot have had sufficient
experience of the Firmness and Soundness of his Repentance. It Is a strict
Obedience in all our Voluntary actions, to all the Commands of God, and that
when our Interest and our Pleasure run counter to them; It Is such a strict and
Universal Obedience that is the only Touchstone to distinguish between the
True and the False Repentance. For how often have we found our Resolutions of
amendment prove ineffectual? And how can we be sure, unless by experience, that
our present Resolutions shall not be as unsuccesful as our Former? We may truly
and sincerely resolve to please God for the future, as the Child, while the
delicious Bait is absent, may heartily promise his Father, that he will never
offend him again; But how know we that this our resolution is not built on a
Sandy Foundation, too weak to support it, when the Rains, the Floods, and the
Winds, the violence of Temptations shall assault it? I doubt not but St. Peter
did not dissemble with his Master, when he told him so briskly, Though all men
should forsake him, yet would not he; and yet it is upon Record how shamefully
he flew off upon Trial. Therefore the strength and goodness of our Desires and
Resolutions are best known by our Actions. Virtuous Habits in the Soul are to
be discerned certainly only by the Acts they produce. This makes Divines
commonly say, that no man can be sure that a Death-bed-repentance is valid.
This made St. Austin say, Lib. 50. Hom. 41. That a Christian living well, goes
hence securely. He that repents, and afterward lives well, goes hence
securely. He that repents at last, and is absolved, whether he goes hence
securely, I am not secure. Accordingly Salvian says, Sera cautione spondere
aliquid temerarium est. It would be a piece of Rashness and Presumption to give
any assurance to a Death-bed-Penitent. This made the ancient Church, as we
learn from St. Cyprian, refuse the Viaticum, the Sacrament, to persons that
deferred their Repentance till death; for these had given no proof of their
amendment. And when, after the decay of Ecclesiastical Discipline, they gave it
to such, it was de been esse, that it might do as much good as it could; but
what that would be, God only knew, to man it was wholly doubtful, as we are
informed in this famous expression: Poenitentiam dare possumus, securitatem non
possumus: We can give them the Sacrament, but that they shall receive the
benefit designed by it, we cannot assure them. We have but one Instance of a
dying Penitent, of the sincerity and sufficiency of whose Repentance we are
ascertained; it is that of the Thief on the Cross; and our assurance of this is
owing to nothing less than the Testimony of Him who was God as well as Man.

He that, notwithstanding what has been said, dares venture on a known sin,
hoping to make all well again by a speedy Repentance; I would desire him to
consider, whether if he had a Son or a Servant that should offend him,
especially several times, presuming on his kindness and good nature; whether, I
say, he would easily and quickly pardon such a Son or a Servant? Secondly,
whether such a person would not show himself to be of a very base, ungrateful,
and dis-ingenuous temper, and not to be reformed in a little time, or with
little pains? Now, why should we foolishly imagine, that God will suffer his
Mercy to be abused any more than Man? Or that such a behavior toward God,
does not argue so base a disposition, as is not quickly to be put off? Let such
a person but represent the Trumpet sounding, the Son of Man on the Throne, all
the Heavenly Host surrounding him, and the Books opened, and Sentence ready to
be pronounced; and then let him consider, whether he could depend on that Mercy
which he had so lately abused, and whether, for all his imaginary Repentance,
he would not with amazement and horror be frequently casting his eyes on that
Stain, which he had so lately contracted. Such a Prolepsis of the Day of
Judgment would show us there is much more danger in one Wilful Sin lately
committed, than we are apt to fancy, while we put that day far from us.

But if he that has been guilty of one heinous Indeliberate sin, or of one
Wilful one, in never so small a matter, be in so dangerous a case: What shall
we say to the Oppressor and Defrauder of Mankind, to the Customary Swearer, to
the Damner, to the Drunkard, to the Fornicator, to all that wallow in any one
habitual sin? Assuredly there is (...), a great Gulf between Them and
Happiness; They are as far from it, as Heaven is from Hell.

II. But not to grieve our selves any longer with so melancholy a Subject, I
shall hasten to give Comfort and Assurance to all pious persons, that for a
long time have lived conscientiously in the discharge of their duty, and have
carefully avoided all Wilful and Deliberate Sins. And the giving this assurance
is the proving the sufficiency of my Rule, which was the second thing to be
done.

For These are they that have brought forth works meet for Repentance; That
have put away the evil of their doings, by ceasing to do Evil, and by learning
to do Well. Is. 1.16, 17. They desire nothing more than their Eternal
Salvation, and their constant Resolutions are for the Observance of all the
Commands of God; and then the Conformity of their Outward Actions prove that
these their Desires and Resolutions are sincere and strong. So that if they
look into the Inward Man, they find themselves renewed in the Spirit of their
Minds; and if they take a view of their Outward Actions, they find nothing of
the Old. Now when the wicked forsakes his Way, and the unrighteous his
Thoughts; when he turns from the Wickedness that he has committed, and does
that which is Lawful and Right, we are assured by Ezekiel, that He shall save
his Soul alive; and by Isaiah, 55.7. That God will have mercy upon him, and
will abundantly pardon. Here it will be asked, what time is necessary for the
making this experience of ones self? But it is impossible for one man to
determine this for another. Trials and Temptations are not the same to all men
in the same space of time; nor is all true Christians Intenseness of Obedience
equal: for there are degrees even in Sincerity, as there are degrees of
Happiness, suitable to them. Wherefore every man's own Conscience must tell him,
whether he has been diligent to learn his Duty, and has had time to go stedily
through All or the Main branches of it as they arose: Whether he has daily made
the Natural and Revealed Will of God the Rule of all his Words and Actions,
even when his Pleasure or his Worldly Interest tempted to the contrary. Now he
that has done thus, may be reasonably presumed proof against the fiery Trial,
and the highest Temptations, if it be his happiness to suffer for
Righteousness-sake. And then, This is the man, and This only, that upon the
Examination of his Life, and the Consideration of his Ways, can give Peace and
Quiet to his Soul; that can say with St. Paul, If our earthly house of this
Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with
hands, Eternal in the Heavens.

But it will not be sufficient to the Doubting Christian to have thus proved my
Rule, unless I also answer his scruples: For he will put in, and say, I am
afraid God has made more things necessary than your Rule comprises; my own
Conscience condemns me, though You do not. I many times have wandering thoughts,
and want zeal in my Devotions; I fear I have many secret sins to answer for; I
often offend through Ignorance and Inconsideration, as I many times discover,
but too late; and some times ill thoughts and imaginations arise in my mind: So
that I am all over polluted with sin, and St. John has told me, He that sins
is of the Devil, and not of God.

These, and suchlike sins, if they proceed from our sloth and negligence, if
we do not strive and struggle against them, they seem to have the consent of
our Wills, and so may prove Damnable: but otherwise they hardly deserve the
name of Moral Actions. They aro not chosen by our wills, they necessarily flow
from the Imperfections of our Natures, and so are not the proper Object of
Laws, nor of Rewards and Penalties. But to speak to the Objections separately:
Our Zeal and Warmth in any Action does depend in a great measure on the general
temper of our bodies, and the particular one we are then in, when we undertake
any Action: which temper varies with the Weather, and an hundred other
Uncertain causes. The holiness of our Lives, and an humble dependence on God in
all our Concerns, does recommend our Prayers more than the Warmth of our
Affections, or the Volubility of our Tongues. As for our Thoughts, it is no
wonder they are desultory and wandering, since the Soul of man cannot bear a
continual stretch and intention, since the variety of Objects are apt to
distract us, and as it were compel us to mind them. Lastly, since the
Multiplicity of Affairs and Business which God himself has imposed on us, will
recur to our minds without our seeking. Next, for our sins of Ignorance and
Inconsideration; if we have been honestly industrious to learn our duty, and
watchful to prevent a surprise where we discerned danger of it, the effects of
these are unavoidable, and though in themselves they are deviations from the
Laws of God, they shall never be imputed as such to us. No good man will punish
another for that which was inevitable. Then for our ill Thoughts, when by the
looseness of our lives we do not give occasion to them, they have their Natural
causes, as well as the former: If we do not indulge our selves in them, if we
do not take pleasure in them, but dismiss them with a Get ye behind me Satan,
you savor not the things of God, they are the Objects of our Virtues, and not
our Vices, they are proofs of a resolute and steady Obedience. Wherefore it is
plain that the Apostle in these words, He that sins is of the Devil, means
not such Actions as are owing to the weakness of our Nature, but to the
Vitiosity of our Wills; Such as the Gnostics allowed themselves in, against
whom the Apostle directs these words, and the rest of this Epistle. All that
the best of Christians can do, as to these sins of Infirmity, is to humbly
acknowledge them, to strive against them, and to beg Gods pardon for them in
general. More than this is impossible, and that this is enough all Divines
agree.

The doubting Christian will reply, I have indeed used some endeavors to
correct the coldness of my Prayers, to restrain all evil thoughts, to better
inform my Judgment, and to prevent all Inconsiderateness: but I am sensible I
have not used my utmost endeavors; and this, if I loved God as I ought, with
all my heart, with all my soul, and with all my might, I should have done, and
so still I stand condemned by my own Conscience.

But certainly loving God with all our Heart, and with all our Might, is not
with all our Power strained to the utmost possibility; for this would not be to
prescribe a Law to Mankind, but immediately to put them All, how Innocent
soever, on the Rack, and that the severest. For the stretching the faculties of
the Soul to their utmost possibility, is much more grievous than the distention
of the Members of the Body. Besides, there is no way of judging when we have
done all that is possible, if we take it in this strict sense. Neither David,
who is said to have followed God with all his heart, 1 Kings 14.8. Nor
Zeehari^^ and Elizabeth, and others who are said to have walked in all the
Commands of God, in this of loving God with all the heart, as well as the rest,
ever performed it in this sense. We are told indeed that Jehu took no heed to
walk in the Laws of God with all his heart, because he departed not from the
sins of Jeroboam, 2 Kings 10.31. We are told, that they that worshipped strange
Gods, did not return to the Lord with all their heart, 1 Samuel 3.7. But we are
no where told that he who is careful to avoid all Wilful sins, that will
forsake his Father or his Mother, his Brother or Sister, nay his own Life, for
the sake of God; that is, rather than sin against him Knowingly and Willingly:
We are no where told, that This man does not love God with all his heart. Nay
it is probable this way and degree of expressing our Love to the Second Person
of the Trinity now, is but a more clear and distinct expression of the Love
that was owing to the First Person in the Trinity under the Old Law. David, who
best knew what it was to love God with all ones heart, because himself was an
Example of it, has taught us, That they seek the Lord with their whole Heart,
who do no Iniquity, Psalm. 119.2, 3. that is, Heinous and Deliberate sins. For
David knew that himself and all Mankind would always have their secret sins,
their sins of Ignorance and Inadvertency.

But the Objector will rejoyn in the third place, Though I am conscious to my
self of no wilful Damning sin, yet for ought I know I am extremely guilty
before the great Searcher of Hearts. And St. Paul in this is my Precedent, in 1
Cor. 4.4. Though he knew nothing of himself, yet, he says, thereby he was not
justified. Wherefore I must go down with sorrow to my Grave: If I am saved at
last, it must be by working out my Salvation with fear and trembling. And so
great a man as the forementioned Apostle says, He counted not himself to have
apprehended, but forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth to
those things that are before, he pressed toward the Mark, for the prize of the
high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3.13.

But you have read the words of St. John, If your hearts condemn you not, then
have you confidence toward God. You have seen St. Paul's great confidence and
assurance, Henceforth is laid up for me a Crown of Glory. Wherefore unless we
will make St. Paul contradict himself, and one Apostle to disagree with the
other, there is but little force in the Objection from the 1st. to the Cor. If
you consult the place, you will find him to speak to some that were very apt to
censure him, as to the discharge of his Apostolical Function. And to reprove
them for the rashness of their censures, he tells them how difficult it was to
pass a true Judgment. For says he, I know my own Intentions, my secret
Thoughts, and all my Carriage, and Behahaviour in this matter, and am not
conscious to my self of any failing in it; yet I am not hereby justified, for
some slip and omission may be undiscovered by me, and so I may not be wholly
Innocent. And if I may be thus deceived in my own Affairs, how much more likely
is it that you should? and therefore judge not. The whole Context runs thus?
But with me it is a very small thing that I should be judged of You, or man's
judgment; yea I judge not my own self. For I know nothing by my self, yet am I
not hereby justified: But He that judges me is the Lord. Therefore judge
nothing before the time, till the Lord come. But does he say, Tho I know
nothing by my self, yet I may be so far Criminal, as to have brought my self
into a state of Damnation? This would come up to the point, but nothing less
will. To go on then to the other parts of the Objection; It Is true St. Paul
advises the Philippians to work out their Salvation with Fear and Trembling;
but this imports only, that they should be careful and diligent in the
discharge of their Duty; just as the same Apostle bids Servants to obey their
Masters with Fear and Trembling; that is, to be careful to please them. Surely
he does not mean, they could not know when they do so. As for that other
passage, that St. Paul counted not himself to have apprehended, but looked
toward the things that were before, pressing toward the Mark: What is this,
but that he endeavored to grow and persevere in his virtuous course, lest by
his after-negligence he might lose the Prize.

Thus I have given a particular Answer to the principal Scruples and Objections
that may arise in some good persons minds. And now in short I shall give a
General One to them altogether, which will deaden the force of many more, that
are not so considerable, nor so close to my present Subject, the mentioning of
which would have swelled this Tract beyond its designed bounds.

My general Answer is this: Those considerations that would have overthrown the
Peace of Conscience, the Joy and the Comfort of the most Godly man that ever
was, and that would make our Saviors Yoke extreme uneasy, they ought not to
move any man. Nay they themselves are faults if they do disturb us; for they
lessen our Notion of Gods and our Saviors Mercy, and detract from the Goodness
of the Covenant we are under. Not but that a good man ought to strive against
these smaller sins, nay if he does not, he will find they will lead him
insensibly into greater: But if he disquiets himself because he has not wholly
conquered them, he is to blame. Since there are degrees of Glory and Happiness,
the higher our Performances, the greater our Improvements of our Talents; the
less we have of Infirmities, the nearer we approach to the Persections of the
Almighty, and consequently the more we shall partake of the Happiness, with
which he is blessed, for evermore. But if we do not reach the utmost height
that Humane Nature is capable of, (though that were to be wished) if we bury
not our Talent in a Napkin, if we are not among the bad and slothful Servants,
we shall as certainly enter into the Joy of our Lord, as he that had the Ten
Cities alloted him, though by reason of our smaller proficiency, we shall have
a lower place assigned us. In the Invisible, as well as the Visible Heavens,
there are Stars of a greater and a smaller Magnitude, and these are as much in
Heaven, though they are not so High.

Thus I hope I have given satisfaction to the Doubts and Scruples that men are
apt to question their Salvation upon, though they have lived for a long time in a
conscientious discharge of their duty, without the commission of any one Wilful
Sin: And by doing of this I have proved, even to the Doubting Christian, that
the Rule I have laid down is sufficient to secure any man's Salvation. What has
been said may serve also as a proof that we may certainly know our State to
Godwards, if we will carefully endeavor it. For it is chiefly the foregoing
Objections, that make men think it difficult, if not impossible.

But there remains one sort of Objections against this Certainty, and perhaps
necessary to be answered: They are taken from the words of the Prove. c. 20. v.
9. Who can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from sin? As also from
those of the Psalmist, In thy sight no man living shall be justified. And of
Job. 9.20. If I justify my self, my own mouth shall condemn me. These and many
more such passages signify only this, That we are all sinners, and that if we
say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; And that
therefore we all stand in need of the Mercy of God, and the Merits of our
Savior. Now, if good men may certainly know that both these belong to them, as
they may by the holiness of their Lives, the foregoing Texts may teach us
humility, and the necessity of Faith in Christ, but are far from overthrowing
the Certainty I contend for.

III. There remains only one thing more to prove my Rule to deserve that name,
which is, that it is plain and easy, such as every man of common sense may
apply to himself; which is the third and last thing to be done. Of which
briefly.

If we have been guilty of any Crime, through the violence of our Passions, we
are so far from being ignorant of it, that it will haunt us day and night; it
will speak louder than the noises of the world, and will thrust it self into
our most secret retirements; it will surprise us like the Passion that
occasioned it, and we cannot get rid of it, would we never so fain. Then for
wilful sins, they are of like nature, they will be constantly upbraiding us,
and flying in our faces. And then if we have any sense of Gods Displeasure, if
we have any serious Concern for Eternal Happiness, they will Both hunt us from
place to place, till they have driven us into the shelter of a severe
Repentance. And this being done, who cannot tell, whether for a long time
together he has diligently avoided the like dangerous sins? Whether he has
lived Righteously, Soberly and Godly in this present world, not offending
against his Duty to God or Man? He that has lived thus, why should he the least
doubt of his good Estate? why should not he give Peace and Comfort to his Soul,
since he has a Merciful God to deal withal, since at the Right hand of God he
has an High Priest, that feels his Infirmities, and who has also told him, that
his Yoke is easy, and his Burden is light?

From what has been said, it is plain, that they who obey God, as to the
generality of their Actions, but, yet for the gratifying of a Lust, or the
promoting an Interest, now and then venture upon a sinful Action; it is plain, I
say, that they can make no advantage of this my Rule, but to let them see the
dangerousness of their Condition. For they are still out of the Kingdom of
Heaven, though they are not far from it. For they resemble not the Merchant
that parted with all he had to purchase the Pearl of great price; they seem not
to prefer Christ before all things, nor to esteem their own Happiness
hereafter, above any Temporal and Sensual Good. But that we may manifest our
selves to be such not only to our selves, but to all the world, let us be
careful to learn the whole compass of our Duty, and then diligent in the
Performance of it, not falling into any either Heinous or Deliberate sin, and
striving against our Infirmities, though we can never wholly subdue them. For
which end, let us beg the God of Peace, that brought again from the Dead our
Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepherd of the Sheep, by the Blood of the
Everlasting Covenant, to make us perfect in every good Work to do his Will,
working in us that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ,
to whom be Glory for ever and ever.

FINIS.

