AN Earnest Plea FOR PEACE AND MODERATION: IN A SERMON, PREACHED At Barnstaple
in Devon to the Ministers, and Others, occasionally there assembled, October. 17.
1660.

By MARTIN BLAKE B. D.

Bernardus de Modo vivendi, Sermon. 41. Necessaria est nobis virtus Concordiae.
Quod si Ego volo facere voluntatem meam, and iste suam, and ille suam, fiunt
Divisiones, oriuntur Lites, Irae quoque and Rixae, quaesunt opera Carnis,
(sicut ait Apostolus) Qui talia agunt, Regnum Dei non consequentur.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Eglesfield, at the Marigold in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1661.

To the Right Reverend Father IN GOD JOHN Lord BISHOP OF EXON, Grace and Peace
through Jesus Christ.
Right Reverend,
WHile in a Charitable desire of the Churches and the whole Kingdoms Peace, I
first meditated the matters treated of in these ensuing Papers, though but for
the Excitation and Encouragement of a lesser Auditory; and was afterward
persuaded, that if sent abroad, they might (through the Divine Blessing)
conduce in some measure to the benefit of more: I was thereupon willing to cast
in this poor mite of mine into the common Treasury. For this cause, and merely
to this end, without any other respect that my heart knows, or any the least
desire to gall or grieve the Spirits of any; I do here humbly offer my
Well-wishings of this kind, to the public view, beseeching our Gracious God,
the God of Love and Peace, so to bless my weak (but cordial) endeavors, that
they may find in the first place, acceptance with Him, and then (through his
power) a prevalency with Them, who together with my Self (though of the meanest
and lowest rank) are concerned in this holy and great Affair.

It is not Ambition, but Reverence, that has induced me to send them thus
forth under Your Lordships Patronage, and so to transmit them (as through Your
hands) to the Prudent Consideration of my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the
Ministry; especially those whom it has pleased God, and (next under him) our
Dear Sovereign, to recommend unto Your Lordships care. Nor do I herein presume
to give Instructions, or to prescribe Rules to them, that are in my own just
esteem so much my Betters, (alas, who am I, that in so Grave and Venerable a
Society of Learned men, should harbor but a thought of so doing?) No, the bent
of my Soul is, with a soft and gentle breath to quicken up their Holy Zeal, and
humbly to beseech them (every one in his Place and proper Station) to employ
the choicest of their greater and more flourishing Abilities, toward the
allaying of those unkindly heats, and the making up of those destructive
breaches, which the irregular fancies of this loose age, (through the just
Judgment of God upon us for our sins) have brought upon the Nation, to the
downfull (almost) of our Religion, and consequently the undoing of this once
flourishing, and (let me speak it, on the one side without Envy, and without
Flattery on the other) truly Apostolical Church of England.

Unity in the Church, if founded upon Truth, is a sweet Ornament, and a great
support: and truly, whatever some may conceive, I believe the wiser sort will
Judge, that a decent and wholesome Uniformity is a special help, as to the
first begetting, so to the constant preserving of that Unity. Whereas, on the
other side, a Lawless Multiformity (such as that was which of late years has
born so great a sway, and by an impetuous violence carried down all before it)
may justly be reputed among the greatest and soarest Enemies of that desirable
accord, which Christianity persuades.

How Dolorous and Direful the effects have been of this many-headed Monster,
to the great disturbance of our Peace, and the dissolving (wellnigh) of that
goodly Order which St. Paul commended in the Church at Colosse, chap. 2. 5.
yea, and how much the Un-brotherly contending for some fancied particles of a
Negative Superstition, in reference to the mere outward Administration f our
Holy Things, has sharpened, I say not only the Tongues and Pens, but the
Swords and Pikes of the mis-guided Multitude, our own dear experience can sadly
recompt, and the late twicerepeated Insurrection of a Rebellious Crew (whose
design, it seems, was to have engaged us once more in a Desperate and Bloody
War) does sufficiently demonstrate.

The truth is, no better Fruit can be expected from such a Tree. And therefore,
what less can the consideration hereof work in us, (after an humble
Recognition and penitent Contrition, in reference to our own manifold demerits)
than a Prudent and Zealous care of contributing what we can toward the
Quenching of these unnatural and intestine Flames, together with our most
instant and hearty Prayers unto Almighty God, for his Gracious Direction, and
Fatherly Benediction, in and upon our diligence and endeavor that way. And, oh
that it would p'ease the Divine Goodness (in whose hand are the hearts of all
men) so to inlighten our minds, and fasten our affections upon the Fundamental
and Essential points of Faith and Godliness, that, laying aside these fierce
disputes, and heart-dividing contentions about Circumstantial Niceties, we
might all meet and join together in a just and Peaceable Consormity, and so (at
once) exercise our Piety to God, our Submission to Authority, and our
affectionate respects of love and kindly assistance one toward another, ever
studying (as much as in us lies) the preservation of the Unity of the Spirit,
in the bond of Peace; the best and readiest way (as wise men deem) to silence
the Clamours, prevent the Designs, and (if the good pleasure of God be such)
to rectify the Apprehensions, and reconcile the Hearts of the yet-remaining
Sanballats, Tobiaos, and Geshems of the time, who by force and fraud, do what
they can to interrupt and hinder us (as their Fathers sometime did that good
Nehemiah) in repairing the Ruins, and raising up the Walls of our English
Jerusalem.

And in Order to all this, that Your Lordship and the rest, who labor under
you in this part of the Spiritual Vineyard, may thrive and prosper in your Holy
Undertakings, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ so Bless and Crown
your actions with good success, that his Name in all things may be glorified,
his Truth settled, his Peace restored, your Souls blessed, and the whole Church
every day more and more both comforted and enlarged! So prays,

My Lord, Your most Humbly devoted Servant, Martin Blake.
From my Study in Barnstaple, Jan. 21. 1660.
Text. Psalm. 122. 8, 9. For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now say,
Peace be within thee. Because of the House of the Lord our God, I will seek thy
Good.


WHen the people of Israel, after their coming out of Egypt, were yet in the
way to Canaan, it pleased God by Moses to make known unto them his gracious
purpose, that when they should be quietly seated in that promised Land, and be
at rest from all their enemies round about, he would then appoint a Place,
where to six his Sanctuary, as you may read, Deuteronomy. 12. 10. etc. And accordingly
his will was, that at some certain times of the year, (viz. at Easter,
Pentecost, and the feast of Tabernacles) all the Males of the people should
come up thither, to perform their religious services unto him, as you may see,
Deuteronomy. 16. 16. compared with the former passage. So carefully did, the Divine
Wisdom project for the establishment of a well-ordered Uniformity of Religious
Worship in a settled State, to prevent distractions, and to preserve Unity
among the people.

After this, for the space of many hundred years, the Israelites
(notwithstanding) remained in somewhat an unsettled condition; and the
Tabernacle, with the Ark, were oftentimes removed (as in a state of migration)
from place to place, until the time of King David. So long it pleased God to
exercise his peoples faith, and to hold them in an humble expectation of his
performance.

But at length, when the season (which God had foredetermined within himself)
was now at hand, it pleased him to make known unto David, that Jerusalem in the
Tribe of Judab should be the City, and Mount Sion the place, where his Ark
should rest, and where also he would have a Temple built unto his Name, as you
may gather from those expressions of his, 1 Chronicles. 28. 11, 19. compared with
Psalm. 76. 1, 2. and 78. 67, 68. With much gladness did King David listen to
this Oracle of God; and accordingly he had it in his heart, to have performed
the whole work himself in his own days: but being commanded of God to leave
the building of the Temple to his son Solomon, that should succeed him, he
contented himself as to that particular; only he provided for it some materials
aforehand; and in the mean season addressed himself to bring up the Ark of the
Testimony from the house of Abinadab (where it then was) unto Jerusalem, which
from thenceforth became the solemn seat, both of Religion, and of the Kingdom.
And here by the way we may observe the Piety and Zeal of this good King, in
that, together with the well settling of the Civil State, he took into his
Princely consideration the right ordering of affairs in reference to the Church
and house of God.

Accordingly, he calls unto him the chosen men of Israel, and so with one
unanimous consent they cheerfully set upon the work. And although their first
attempt miscarried, by reason of some failing in the manner, at which God was
displeased: yet their second endeavors (which were undertaken with better
caution, and more regularity of Devotion) obtained a better success; for (as
we read, 2 Samuel 6. 15, etc.) They brought up the Ark of the Lord with shouting,
and with the sound of the trumpet, and set it in his place, in the midst of the
Tabernacle that David had pitched for it. Their failing at the first time was,
partly in that Vzzab, being but an ordinary Levite, presumed to touch the body
of the Ark, which God allowed not to any but the Priests: and partly for that
(in imitation of the Philistines) they carried the Ark upon a Cart, whereas God
had required that it should not have been borne, but upon the shoulders of the
Levites. The error in both these was now at this second time reformed, and so
the work succeeded to content. See 1 Chronicles. 15. 1, 2, 12, 13. verses.
So then, though the intentions of Men in meddling with the things of God be
never so right, yet the success will not answer our desires, unless it be
managed by such hands, as God has called and consecrated to the work.

Well, now all is right, and on they go, as full of Joy as of Devotion: and to
further them in both these, the King (as it is conceived by most Expositors)
had furnished them aforehand with this Psalm, with a charge to sing it by the
way, as the Ark of God was thus carrying up unto Jerusalem; and for this cause
partly, and partly also (it may be) for that it was to be sung with an elevated
voice, it was called a Psalm of Ascensions or Degrees.

An excellent Psalm indeed, and very opposite unto the occasion, whereupon it
was composed. It is of a mixed kind, as containing in it expressions of several
sorts: for it begins with Joy and Exaltation; it goes on with Praise and
Commendation; and then concludes, partly with Exhortation to the People, and
partly with Protestation for his own particular.

The Exhortation takes up the two first verses wherein this good Prince
professes his joy for the gracious temper of his people, expressed in their
cheerful forwardness, to frequent the place of Gods public worship, and their
resolution to be constant in their holy performances of that kind. I was glad
(says he) when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord: our
feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. See here, how much a zealous
and well ordered people in the matters of Gods worship do contribute to the
comfort of their Prince: and how apt a good Prince is to rejoice in their
well-doing, especially of that kind.

The commendation follows in the three next verses, and sets forth the praises
of Jerusalem in a threefold reference, that is to say, First, to the unanimity
and sweet agreement of the inhabitants among themselves, Jerusalem (says he)
is built as a City that is compact together, verse. 3. Secondly, to their devout
and holy deportment toward God, Thither (says he) the Tribes go up, the
Tribes of the Lord, unto the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name
of the Lord, verse. 4. Thirdly, to their care of Justice in the equal
distribution of rewards, For there (says he) are set Thrones of judgment, the
Thrones of the house of David, verse. 5. Lo here, the three great Ornaments, and
indeed the strong supports of a Kingdom, or Commonwealth, Love, Religion and
Justice.

The exhortation, which he annexeth to both the former, is briefly sum'd up in
the two next verses, wherein he advises them (every one in his place) to
solicit the Throne of Grace for the confirmation of this their sweet accord
and prosperous condition, without being interrupted by any, either hostile
opposition from without, or unbrotherly dissension from within. The first, in
these words, Pray for the Peace of Jerusalem; they shall (or as some read, let
them) prosper that love thee, verse. 6. The second, in the next words, wherein
he advises them to pray again, and say, Peace be within thy walls, and
Prosperity within thy Palaces, verse. 7. whence we may observe, that the favors
which God indulgeth to a Church or State, are rendered the more comfortable and
lasting by the blessing of Peace superadded to them; and that therefore in the
midst of all our enjoyments, we must beg that blessing at Gods hand, yea and
call in others to concur and join with us in their Devotions for that end.

In the last place, the Protestation, which King David makes for himself, and
wherewith he concludes the whole Psalm, is sairly laid down in the two last
verses, wherein he seriously declares his own hearty intentions to practice
what he did advise, and to do in his own person what he would gladly should be
done of others also. The inference is, as if he had thus said unto the people
then about him, You may perceive by what I have already spoken, how greatly
your forward zeal toward the house of God has affected me to joy: and I have
labored (as I could) to blow up that zeal of yours in a greater flame, partly
by minding you of the manifold blessings of God upon this place; and partly by
exhorting you (as much as in you lies) to promote the peace and welfare of it;
that so, not only you for your own particulars, but your Posterity also after
you, may live happily under the continuance of these mercies, and in your
several successive generations all along enjoy this liberty of coming into Gods
Courts, and partaking in his holy Ordinances. This I have urged: and yet, I
would not herein be mis-understood, as if, while I call upon you for this
performance, I my self would be exempted; or as if (in all this) I had no
further aim, than only the securing of my own affairs: No surely, but I will
join with you in this good work, and bring on the best of my endeavors for it:
and that also, upon four other and better motives, than my own Personal or
Domestical concernments. I can with truth enough say unto Jerusalem her self,
for whom I plead before you, For my Brethren and Companions sake, I will now
say, Peace be within thee: because of the House of the Lord our God, I will
seek thy Good. This I conceive to be the inference of these words upon the
former: and from hence we may conclude the sweet temper and candid disposition
of this godly Prince, in that, while he commended so pious a duty to the
observance of his people, he was no less forward to lead them to it by his own
example.

And thus having brought you home to the words of my Text, let us now stay a
while, and take a view of them as they lie; They are elegantly brought in by
the way of Apostrophe, wherein this good King, though in the hearing of the
people, does yet for the while look off from them, and turn his speech unto
Jerusalem, professing his hearty zeal for the promoting of her welfare,
together with the motives inducing him thereunto. They are in effect, as if in
other words he had thus said, Thy inhabitants, O Jerusalem, and the rest of thy
free Denisons, whose weal depends upon thy safety, are of my near and dear
Relation. I look upon them, first as my Brethren, not in the flesh only, but in
the faith; and then, as my Companions, not merely in the participation of the
same outward blessings, but in the profession and practice of the same holy
Worship: and therefore, even for their sakes, as much as for my own, I will now
say, Peace be within thee. Not only, Peace from without, but a blessed immunity
from the violence of foreign Power; (though that also I wish) but Peace also
within by a sweet accord and loving agreement of thy Children among themselves.
Nay further yet, thou art (O Salem) the seat of Religion, the place where God
has set his holy Tabernacle, and the Ark of his presence, where also he gives
forth his holy Oracles, and requires our Service, and communicates his
Blessings unto us his people in a more special manner: and therefore, even in
this regard, Because of the house of the Lord our God, I will (yet much more)
seek thy Good. Seek it (I say) not by my Prayers only, but by my endeavors
too; not only my tongue, but my heart, yea my hand and all, shall contribute
what they can toward thy preservation and welfare. This is (as I conceive
also) the true strain of these words being indeed no other than a holy mixture
of resolution and reason, while he says, For my Brethren and Companions sakes,
I will now say, Peace be within thee, because of the house of the Lord our God,
I will seek thy Good.

Words worthy to be written in Letters of Gold, and to be treasured up in our
dearest remembrance, that so they may serve unto us as a pattern, whereby to
regulate and square our practice: which also that we may the better do, let us
see the particular oppressions, as they are here couched in the Apostrophe of
King David to his Jerusalem. First, he tells her what he will say, and what he
is resolved to do in her behalf: What he will say, I will say now, Peace be
within thee: what he will do, I will seek thy good. Her peace and welfare is
the main of his intendment; and for the compassing of that, he will bring on
all his endeavor: he will not only wish well, but do well to his power: he
will begin at the heart, but not rest there: all that he is, and all that he
has, shall be employed about it. Secondly, he acquaints her with the grounds
and motives, whereupon he took this resolution to himself, and they are
specially two; the one more civil, an Argument taken from Humanity, For my
Brethren and Companions sake; the other more sacred, an Argument drawn from
Religion and Piety, Because of the house of the Lord our God. These were (as
indeed they thought) among the chiefest motives, which quickened him up to this
performance, that is to say, a tender regard to the good of his Brethren, with
whom he was in communion; and a hearty well-wishing to the thriving of
Religion, and the service of God, in that place where he had his being.

By this time I hope you see in some measure, the drift and meaning of these
words: I shall now proceed to make some Observations from the whole; and indeed
(as you may perceive) the Text is very fruitful in that kind; all which, if
pressed, would seasonably conduce to our instruction. But because the time, and
the business which is to follow, will not permit me to insist upon many, I
shall only (for this present) fasten upon one, which you may take (if you
please) in these words, That, It is both the duty and property of a Godly man,
to be affectionately zealous for the peace and welfare, as of the Church in
general, so of that Church in special, to which (in a more immediate manner) be
does relate. A point of needful consideration at all times, but especially
now; and accordingly I shall give you, first the proof of it, as by plain
testimony from the Scripture, so by many very pregnant reasons from the Bowels
of my Text; and then after a short Application of the whole, commend both you
and all that has been or shall be spoken by me, to the good blessing of God.
And the Lord for Christ's sake so enable me to speak, and you to hear, that in
the mutual discharge of our several duties, his Name may be glorified, his
Church comforted, and our poor Souls edified.

First then, I say this is a good man's duty, such a duty as I confess we owe
(in some sort) to the whole community of Mankind, for even they also (though in
somewhat a larger sense) are our Brethren and Companions; and it is likewise
possible (if God will) that they may be brought within the compass of Gods
house, and therefore we may not altogether exclude them, either from our
well-wishing, or well-doing in their behalf, as occasion shall present. The
very Law of Humanity does oblige us to the contrary; But then, in a more
special manner, we owe all this to the Society of the Saints, as those with
whom we are more nearly linked, and to whom we stand in a more intimate and
dear Relation. As therefore the bond of Nature prompts us to do good unto all,
so the bond of Grace calls upon us to do our best for these, in a more singular
regard.

This surely was the Judgment of St. Paul, as you may see Gal. 6. 10. As we
have opportunity (says he) let us do good unto all, but specially to them who
are of the Household (...) sanguinity, and Christianity; that you would heartily
incline to Peace and Love, and so study the composing of your minds, and the
tempting of your wills, together with your affections, passions, and
expressions, that though your heads may (in somethings of lesser moment) have
different notions, yet your hearts may be one; and that you may say, and say
truly, both of and to our Engl sh Sion, as it is here in my Text, For our
Brethren and Companions sakes we will now say, Peace be within thee: because of
the House of the Lord our God, we will seek thy Good. And to this end, among
many other valuable considerations, which your own wisdoms can reflect upon, I
do earnestly beg your practical assent unto these few Particulars, whereof some
refer to Almighty God, some to your selves, and some to your Brethren.

In reference to Almighty-God, I beg of you, that in the first place you would
humble your selves under his hand, and lie low at his footstool, under the
consideration of your miscarriages heretofore, in what kind soever, and
particularly of your failings this way among the rest. Secondly, that you would
earnestly implore the Divine mercy, for his gracious pardon of all that his
pure eyes have espied to be amiss in you to this very day, whether habitual
deordinations, or actual deviations, in every respect. Thirdly, that you would
petition him, out of his abundant goodness, to bestow upon you the Spirit of
Wisdom, Humility, and Love. Of Wisdom, that you may discern rightly between
things that differ, and lay no more stress upon the Conscience than Himself
has imposed. Of Humility, that you may, not only know, but also keep within
the bounds of your own station; and so, meekly and quietly submit your selves,
where you owe obedience, agreeable to his Command. Of Love, that in all your
demeanours you may be ever studious to observe that Golden Rule of the Apostle,
wherein he calls upon us, to preserve the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace, Ephesians. 4. 3. And this again, the rather, because (as St. Augustine De
Baptis. lib. 3. cap. 1^.
plainly tells us) Non habent Dei charitatem, qui non diligunt Ecclesiae
unitatem: They have not the Love of God, who do not love the Unity of the
Church.

In reference to your selves, my hearty desire is, that you would practice your
own Prayers, and bring on the best and choicest of your endeavors by all good
means to compass that which you have prayed for. And, as tending hereunto, give
me leave to present you with these ensuing Requests.

My first Request is, that you would distinguish between Theological Verities,
and Problematical Queries: in which latter (you know) many learned and godly
men have and may have apprehensions contrary to our Conceptions. And here, our
Duty is, not to be too confident and forward in our own Determinations. We must
remember, we are but men, and therefore not infallible, but subject (not
seldom) to mistakes. And upon this ground, it will become us (as sober
Christians) to be rather humbly modest, than peremptorily censorious.

My second Request is, that you would put a difference between the essentials
of Religion, and the outward circumstantial administration of it: that is,
between things of absolute necessity, as prescribed of God; and matters of
indifference, wherein our lawful Superiors have a just power to interpose, for
orders sake. And here we must remember, that in these latter (seeing God has
not laid either his Command or Prohibition) the Inferior is bound to submit
himself to his Superior. It is so in the Family, and in the Commonwealth: And
why not likewise in the Church?

My third Request is, that you would not believe, that, by the intervening
Command of your Superiors about Things indifferent, you are any way abridged
of your Christian Liberty. Your Liberty is the same still, as to the thing
simply in it self considered; and so you are taught: only your conformity to
the Command of your Superiors is for the time (while the Command remains in
force) of necessary observance: I say of necessary observance; for though the
thing commanded be still (as it was before) in its own nature in different yet
the use of it (for the time) becomes necessary to us by virtue of that higher
Command of God, which, does enjoin us (in such cases) to yield obedience to our
lawful Superiors.

My fourth Request is, that you would take heed, how under the supposed notion
of Religion, you slip (ere you be well aware of it) into the guilt of
Superstition. There is (you know) a two fold Superstition, the one affirmative,
the other negative. Affirmative, when a man conceives himself obliged to this
or that, as a thing intrinsecally holy, which yet in its own nature is but
arbitrary. Negative, when a man so judges of things arbitrary, as if (in the
very nature of them) they were wicked and ungodly. And truly (for my part) I
cannot say, which of these two is the greater Superstition. Only, this I know,
that in the second Commandment, where God forbids the worshipping of Images,
there also he forbids the worshipping of Imaginations. And to say truth, what
else are these Imaginations, than internal or mental Images, which the fancy of
man contriveth and carveth within it self, and so sets them up as the object,
or (at least) the Rule of Adoration?

My fifth Request is, that you would not hold your selves bound to maintain for
ever what you have once said or done upon a mistaken ground: or that it will be
any disparagement to your personal repute, if now (upon a true conviction) you
recede from those practices, which formerly you both allowed in your selves,
and pressed upon others. I fear, this has been to many (I do not, I dare not
say, it has been so to you) a great obstruction to ingenuity. But, my
Brethren, let us not deceive our selves; for certainly, what ever men may
think, we cannot (in this case) better consult, either for our acceptance with
God, or our credit with goodmen, than by professing our selves to be overcome
of Truth. Indeed, this is not so much as a foil, as an honor; for, in being
thus conquered, we our selves obtain a noble Victory. Let us reflect here upon
that famous Worthy, the great St. Augustine, who purchased to himself no less
venerable esteem in the Church of God by his Book of Retractions, than he had
done formerly by his other Writings communicated by him to the world.

My sixth Request, as consequent upon the former, is, that you would not
overmuch regard the applauses of the vulgar, or (it may be) the good opinion of
some well meaning (but mistaking) Christians. Oh, this itch after Popular
esteem is a thing of very evil consequence, and will surely hazard us (if not
seasonably cured) to many inconveniences. Indeed, it will make us unfit to be
Masters of our own judgment; yea, it will so weaken our sight, and for the
present so blind our eyes, that we shall not be able to discern Truth from
Error, Peace from Faction, or the Lovers of Peace from the Troublers of our
Israel.

These are the Requests, which I thought good at this time to present you with,
in reference to your selves, I told you, there is somewhat else, which I would
also beg at your hands in reference to others: and the Particulars are two.

First I would entreat, that in case you be not yet so clearly satisfied, as to
all your scruples, and in every circumstance, you would not however thereupon
grow clamorous, and by that means endeavor to engage the multude into the
participation of your discontent. Consider, Brethren, if the mistake be on your
side, your sin in so doing will be greatly aggravated, first in regard of the
Power, which you disobey; secondly in regard of the Persons, whom you mislead;
thirdly in regard of your selves, by adventuring so far (in a disputable point)
upon your own misapprehensions. But suppose (and for this discourse lake, I but
suppose it) suppose I say, you may be in the right, yet let me entreat you once
more to consider, whether the thing (you contend for) be of that importance, as
for the sake thereof to embroil a whole Church? Or whether (on the contrary) it
be not an act of as great imprudence so to do, as for a man to burn his house,
that he may wast an egg? Brethren, you know, that all Truths are not of the
same alloy; and that therefore (as the case may be) some harmless and quiet
mistakes in judgment may be (comparatively) better, than some unruly Truths.
Surely, he was a wise man, and an Orthodox and well studied Divine That sweet
natured and holy man of precious memory, Dr. Joseph Hall, late Bishop of
Norwich.
, who said, Though I love Peace well, yet I love main Truths better: and again,
on the other side, Though I love all Truths well, yet I rather conceal a small
Truth, than disturb the common Peace. Remember I beseech you, the Truths,
wherein we all agree, are fundamental: and me thinks, our agreement in them
should tie us faster, than for every petty difference to fall asunder. Give me
leave here to commend unto you that seasonable and wholesome advice of St. Paul,
Philip. 3. 15, 16* where he says, Let us (as many as be perfect) be thus
minded: and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this
also unto you. Nevertheless, whereto ye have already attained, let us walk by
the same Rule, let us mind the same thing. To be hot in our disputes about
Supposals, and in the mean season (even by the violence of such disputes) to
hinder the growth of Reals, Oh how unbeseeming! how much better would it become
us, in matters of this kind, to leave off contending, and to fall a
supplicating, first to God, and then unto Authority, that all these obstacles
and rubbs in the way of Peace, on either side, may be lovingly removed?

Brethren, we are now (thanks be to God for it) under the blessed influence of
a gracious Prince, whose heart (as we may gather from the effects) is composed
and made up (as I may say) of Truth and Justice, of Love and Tenderness, to God
and Man; To God, for the promoting of his Service; To Man, for the procuring of
his Good: and how can we but hope for an answerable Care in him to settle Peace
and unanimity among us, by a gracious condescension in things convenient to
weaker spirits? Besides, under the Government of so good a Prince, you may rest
assured, that no rational Expedient, which may really conduce to the Public
satisfaction of all sober and modest Christians, will be withheld: much less,
the indicting (if need be) of a free, National, and well*composed Synod, if you
will humbly wait the time for it. A fair way, I confess; and indeed a way which
God has blessed from the very infancy of the Church, toward the silencing of
disputes, and the repressing of stirs in this kind: which also our late Saintly
Sovereign of dear and glorious memory (of whom, nor we, nor, as the Apostle
phraseth it in a like case, the world was worthy) did Himself chalk out and
recommend unto us in his last dying words, when his precious Soul was (as I may
say) upon the wing toward his heavenly Rest. Now under the expectation of all
this, I beseech you quiet your own minds, and let my words find acceptance with
you, while I say (as Joseph sometime did unto his brethren) See that you fall
not out by the way.

But secondly, there is one thing more, wherein I must needs crave your
charitable endeavors: and that is, that you would not only be thus quiet your
selves, but also do your best to quiet others. As our Savior said to Peter,
upon another occasion, so shall my Exhortation be to every one of you, Et tu
conversus confirma Fratres. In a common combustion, it is not enough to forbear
the bringing of more fuel to maintain the fire: but every good Citizen must be
forward to his power toward the quenching of the flame. Beloved, you cannot be
ignorant, that there are (at this time) great thoughts of hearts for the
Divisions of our Reuben. Oh now, for the Spirit of meekness, humility, and
love (such as was in Abraham and Moses) to intervene, and say as they did in
effect, Sirs, why do ye strive thus, seeing you are Brethren? Why do ye revile,
and smite, and wound each other by your unseasonable janglings? Even thus
surely it would become us (each one in his place, and within the compass of his
own Calling) to expostulate with our Brethren, and to endeavor (as we can)
with a sweet and gentle calmness to allay the boisterous and tempestuous
violence of hotter spirit, and with a grave and sober importunity to call them
back (if possible) unto a right Christian moderation; that so, these sparks of
contention (which are but in appearance) may dye away, and never have the power
to kindle into a flame.

Give me leave here, as a hearty well-wisher to the Churches Peace, to tread in
the footsteps of a gracious Soul now at Rest with God, and (upon this
occasion) to revive the memory of that sweet and heavenly Spirit of holy
Augustine, who, when he saw the bitter contentions between Jerome and Rusfino
(two great and famous Doctors of the Church in his days) Heu mibi (said he)
qui vos alicubi simul invenire non possum, etc. Alas, that I can never find you
two together! How would I fall at your feet? How would I embrace them, yea, and
weep over them? How would I beseech you, either for other, and each for
himself, both of you for the Church, and therein especially for those weak ones
for whom Christ died, and who (not without their own great danger) do sadly
look on, and see you two thus fighting one against the other in this Theater of
the world? Lo here, the lovely temper, and peaceful disposition of the Holy
Man: a pattern, well worth our imitation. Indeed, we have the opportunity,
which (it seems) he missed, yea, and complained that he had it not: and
therefore, let us do (at least) what he said he would do; let let us beg and
seek for Peace, as we would for life.

For my own part, I do make it this day my humble Request unto you all; and
could wish now (if possible) that my Ribs were as strong as Brass, and my voice
as Ioud as Thunder, that the sound thereof might reach over the whole Land, to
the kindly affecting every heart. But Almighty God (I trust) has his Agents
abroad: And may his Blessing make their labors fruitful?

In the mean season Brethren, as to you that are present, I shall conclude my
plea for Peace and Moderation in a few words. It is to me an uncertain thing,
whether I shall ever meet you thus again together in this place: God only
knows, but it is probable I never shall. And therefore (as if now taking my
last leave of you) let me breath out the very longings of my Soul into your
bosoms, and shut up all with the words of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally
(Brethen) Farewell! Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in
peace, and the God of Peace shall be with you. To him, and to the Word of his
Grace, I commend you: and he mercifully grant, that every one, who both heard
me this day, may comfortably return to his own home, aut sanior, aut
sanabilior! either actually more sound, or (at the leastwise) in a nearer
disposition to be made sound!

And even so, O Holy Father, so be it; for the sake of thy dear Son Jesus
Christ! to whom, with thine own Majesty, and thy blessed Spirit, three Persons
and one God, be all Glory and Honor, Thansgiving and Obedience, now and for
ever, Amen.

FINIS.

