THE TRIAL OF THE LADIES.

HIDE PARK, MAY DAY.

OR, The yellow Books Partner.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Mr. Butler in Lincolns field, near the
three Tun Tavern, by the new Market place. May the first, 1657.

THE TRIAL OF THE LADIES.
MADAM,
MAY it please your Honor, you may well remember I was last May to wait upon
you in the Park, there were many Gallants, and many lookers on, and many will
be there again, but some of our old friends will scarce come by reason of the
late Act, and the County Generals; but however if you please we will take the
air, and the observation of the day once more; there will be old vyeing for
the honor of it, but in my mind the silver Coach carried it the last year,
however, we will be as plain as may be, and as private too: but do you hear the
news about the late Trial, and the Lords and Ladies that are likely to be
damned, with other great Sinners; the Trial was at Hell all it is to be feared,
there was at the Trial, twelve Apostles, four Patriarchs, four Prophets and
Evangelists, in all twenty and four, these were of the Jury; Mercy and Justice
sat that day: and it is well for some that Mercy sits every day, he waits and
pleads too for the worst of Sinners, however take heed of abusing it: the
Persons called to the Bar, were, Mr. Wilful, and Mr. Careless, Monsieur
Aulymoade de France, and Mr. New-come-over, Mr. Kill-devil that swears the new
oaths, there was the Lady Hoyden, and Mrs. Looseness, Mrs. Tittle-tattle, and
Mrs. Never-give-over, the Lord Never-be-good, and his Lady were both damned;
Mr. Duel, the Lord Heathen, and the Lady Christless are in great danger,
Money-bag the Usurer, Hard-heart the Sinner, and Shine-shooes the Citizen, are
all turned over; Mr. Inside, and Mr. Counter, and many rich Roundheads whose
God is their Gain, their Shop, and their Belly; Alderman Chinck, and Deputy
Tell-money, old Mr. Hugster, and old Mr. Starve-many, Mr. Swear and Lie, and
Mr. Cheat-many, Parson Flatter, and Parson Bitter, Doctor Nothing the Orthodox
Divine, and many Common Prayer Men, are all upon their Trial; Captain
Cutthroat, and Colonel Get-all, late Mr. Wagstick, and Now-we-will-be-quiet;
These and many Gallants are upon their Trial, and if they miss damning, they
will be at Park the next May day. Mrs. Never-repent, will go as long as she
lives, Mrs. Silver-stuff, Mrs. Jewel will be there, Mrs. Rant-about, swears,
stares, and spends all, and the poor Man sells all for a Whore, the Lord
Belly-god, the Lord Lye-a-bed, Mr. Sack-pot, and Mrs. Lemmon, and Mr.
Butterfly, Mr. Camester, and Mr. Gallop will be there, to the delight of many
Ladies, but the Lord abhorres them all in their present courses; but the Jury
being called, and the Malefactors at the Bar, Solomon made a great speech,
the sum and substance was, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity: old Father
Abraham that was called out of Ur, Genesis 11. 31. pleaded much for some of these,
saying they might be his Seed notwithstanding all their wickedness, and that
the promise was not to him as a single person, but even to as many as the Lord
our God should call, and said he, I have called my son out of Egypt, and my
servants from among the Heathens, Hosea 11. 1. But Elias cried out Fire, Fire,
Fire, Luke 10. 54. Stay, stay, said Abraham, I waited long for the Promise, and
God waits longer for the Sinner, Forty years he was grieved with one
Generation, Psalms 95. 10. and many years he waits still, and if any of these
will yet repent they may enter into his rest, Heb. 3. 19. True, his works were
finished from the foundation of the World, but our Salvation is but then begun,
when we once begin to look unto him, who cries, Look untome O all ye ends of
the Earth, and be saved, for I God and not man, Isa. 45. 22. I cried out of the
belly of Hell, says David, and I says Jonas out of the belly of the Whale,
Io. 1. 17. 2. 2. and the Lord heard me, and peradventure Neneveth may be
spared; and there may be a seed among this Generation of Vipers, yea who knows
but some of these at the Bar, God will have mercy upon, and give them
repentance never to be repented of, who are yet far from any thing of that
nature: A Lord or Lady may as well be saved as another Man, it is true, the
poor receive the Gospel, and not many rich, not many mighty, not many noble, 1
Cor. 1. 26. but who will say that none do, that are mighty, rich, and noble;
and if so, let us hope the best, O but says Saint Timothy, they that live in
pleasure are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 5. 6. yea said St. John, but the dead
shall hear the voice of the Son of God and live, John 5. 25. There were other
speeches, Isaiah made a long one, saying, God had laid on Christ the iniquity
of us all, and received from Christ satisfaction for us all, but that will
never do you any good says Peter, unless with me you do repent that ever ye
crucified, or with me denied the Lord of life and glory, Acts 3. 19. Paul cried
refreshing comes from repenting, and repenting from believing, and if you do
not believe in the Son of God, and the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of
the world, Ioh. 1. 29. ye shall be all damned, says John 3. 36. And said David
I made have to turn my feet unto thy Statutes; in some things there is more
have than good speed, but in believing and repenting there is great danger to
delay a day: I delayed said Lot and I had like to have been burnt; it happens
in an hour, what it does not in seven years again: yea the Flood came, and
Christ will come in an hour when they look not for him, Matt. 25. 50. If Christ
should come on a May day, there would be a brave show indeed, and a great
scuffle, for all his holy Angels comes when he comes, and some Saints, Jude
says thousands, and I believe thousands of thousands, yea ten thousand times
ten thousand, verse. 14. What do you talk of that day says the old Worldling,
and the young Gallant* God take me this is not a time to preach when we are in
our sports, said a Spark the last year, and swore a great oath; be gone with
your godly Book: but it is good preaching every day, and to be looking for his
coming, long looked for will come, long looked for comes at last, and is nearer
now than ever, Behold the Judge stands at the door, James 5. 9. yea he comes as
a thief in the night, blessed is he that watches, Revel. 16. 15. The Lords Son
has been long in France, and the Lord Christ comes as a man from a far
Country, so he says himself, Luke 19. 12. But these Princes of the world that
has power in their hands, and these Gallants that have pleasure in their eyes,
wills that he would never come; but poor men look hard, and poor Saints pray
hard, Come Lord Jesus, Revel. 22. 21. Make have O my beloved, says the Spouse,
Canticles 8. 14. And says David If I had the wings of a Dove, I would fly away
and meet thee, O thou whom my soul loves, Psalms 55. 6. But yet I am
constrained to dwell in mesheck among wicked men and devils, that flutter up
and down in Coaches some, and in poor attire others; but these golden Sparks
whose eyes start out with lust and fatness, in their slippery parts, from
whence they go down to Hell in a moment, Psalm. 9. 19. These are they that fill
the World and defile the World by their examples, they rule the Roast while the
Saints turn the Spit, and Christ will turn them and the tide too: And then
sneak Mr. Roundhead, and poor Mr. Goodman, with Conscience, and Honest the true
Man, with thousands of Believers more, will have a brave day, in the after part
of the Worlds day: after some is good manners, and after your Crispin pins,
Hoods, Scarfes, Vales, fine Linen, Jewels, Chains and Bracelets, are all
pulled off, as Isaiah speaks, Chap. 3. 17. O Ladies read this Prophecy, and
see if it may not reach some of you; ye point at that very condition, which ye
shall then be in, when God shall come to undress you by death and sickness,
which certainly he will err long do, yea he will strip you to your skins, and
leave nothing but sin, guilt, shame, misery, and baldness on you, whilst he
clothes his servants as it were with Suns and Stars, this will be a brave
change, and says John this change we all look for, 1 John 3. 2. and it is good
to look forwards and backwards too sometimes. Do not tell me what I was but
what I am, says some, but it is good to consider what we were, what we are,
and what we shall be; I was conceived in sin says David Psalm. 51. And I a
little spawn or lust in the loins of Mr. Such an one, says another, still I
am a shadow and an empty one; and so are most of you Gallants at the Park, you
know not what you would have, or should have, you know not what to do, yea, you
know not how to spend one day as you should, but are troubled and fain to send
one to another, what shall we do? where shall we go? pray present my service to
Mrs. such an one, and Mrs. such an one, and tell her that I am even sick until
I go abroad; but my Lady takes Physic, and the Devils go a Cat baiting when
they get one of them: if a poor man be damned, the Devil is very glad; but if a
Dives be, the Devils they cry one to another, make have, make have, great
Orlando is coming, great Orlando is coming; and truly when your great ungodly
Lords and Ladies come near to their confines, the Devils run and tumble, yea
they scramble for a wanton, young and silken bit. But I remember about twenty
years ago, I saw a Puppit play, called the Chaios or Creation of the world,
but the ugly Devils made such hayling and hissing about the Lord Dives with
their stub feet, and their short tales, that I was affrighted at the heart,
however there was two or three peales, and the ringers they were very merry,
and if a man were to be hanged, some would be so, but to see them that are
likely to be damned, go singing up and down the stairs with their silk and
silver Clappers, pit pat, yea in the streets and Coaches sometimes and never
think nothing, is a very sad thing; but few of these can play at have at all,
and yet teey'le leap from all in a moment, can you sing? leap soul, farewell
world, have at all, O Christ I come, I come; I come to thee, for I know that my
Redeemer lives, and I shall see him with these eyes, Job 19. 25. But this
posting for the Doctors argues fear, and this continual heighting up and down,
guilt, yea fear, guilt, sin, and you always lie together, and whilst the Lord
lies in the Ladies bed, the Devil lies in both their souls many times; but it is
a thousand pitties any sweet, young, and lovely good conditioned Lady, should
be ever bedded with the Devil, yet many times some sell as sweet conditioned
Children to him for a little Money and Honor as any are in the World: I know
the Lord Such an one, has a Daughter that he will give ten, twenty, thirty,
forty thousand pounds with, truly one is to much with such a man, though he be
of great blood, good blood is better than great, and a good man is better than
a heathen that knows not God nor the Devil; a good man with a bad woman, is in
a bad case, but a good woman with a bad man, is in the Devils Pound: but how
came you there? my Father (cries the poor Lady) and my old Aunt would have it
so, yea and it may be you your self were too forward; some mad Scabbs run away
with a mad Rogue, and that is like to like, somesing, and see never a merry
day, othets cry, and know not what to say when they are to be married, but they
that are put into such a Pound, or into the Devils Palace, are very miserable,
slaves to other men's lusts, though they have much money at command, yet some
have scarce enough to pay a poor debt when once married; and others spends so
much, that the poor husband fells all, while she plays all, and scarce pays
in six months, or seven years sometimes, when poor honest men pay according to
their words, and Tradesmen in three, six, or nine months time. But Unbeleevers
pay for all when they come to dye, and that is soon enough to pay for the
sweetest pleasures in the World, if our lives be but a vapor, as they are Iam.
1. 11. But their misery is, they are ever paying, and yet can never pay all,
though they lie in fiery burning flames for millions, millions, and millions of
years; as that young man an Apothecary once said: O consider this all ye that
forget God, and what if some of you should come to pay so dear for your Maying
and your gaying up and down, would it not be very sad, a man may better pay
some debts in a week, than he can for some sins in an hundred thousand years,
but of all sins of a kind, great men's sins are the greatest, a great Tree gives
a great swap when he falls, and a great man makes a great spudder at his
Funeral, but Lord whither does that man fall? that falls from room to room,
from the Coach to the Chamber, from the Chamber to the Bed, from the Bed to the
Floor, from the Foore to the Coffin, from the Coffin to Worms, and from the
Worms to the Devils at the last day, in the mean time the soul is there, while
the body is lugging down the stairs: when a General leaves a field, there is
so many at his heels, and something left behind, the slain, or the dead, the
trampling of the grass, and the carcass of the beasts; but when the Lord
leaves his house, there is triming up again for the new commer: the old
mourning and the old master being laid a side, nothing remains but the name,
the lusts, and the sins of the family, yea they run from Father to Son, and Son
to Son, and the curse of God after them all: some men leave great possessions
for all their Children, and great houses in good order, but if they go to the
Devil and leave a thousand houses to every Child, and a name to that which may
last to Dooms day, yet for all this, I would be loath to go along with them:
some men take Gold in their boots when they go to France, and others money in
their pockets when they go along journey, but I had rather take Christ with me
for eternity, than all the Lords and Ladies in the world to my grave. If you
stir an old Horse head, sometimes you shall see many flies; and if you stir an
old Swearer in his sick bed, you shall hear many oaths. An old gouty and
ungodly sinner, makes a great noise when he is punished for his sins, and a
pocky Surgeon tells a great lie when he says he will cure that in a fortnights
time with his cursed Pills; but some would do well to hang them that put forth
such Bills, they encourage many men to sin where the grace of God is wanting:
if a man want a member it is a sad thing, but if a man be noisome or
unwholesome it is worse; but Lord bring me to any shame or misery rather than
to perpetual condemnation. When Ladies dye of the Cancer or Ulcer in the belly,
the best side is put outward, but when Lords dye of the Pox, it is an ugly
business; the consumption of the Purse, is the want of take heed, and the
consumption of the Lungs, is the want of good diet; but the consumption of the
blood and bones, is brutish and immoderate love too, and foolish fondness of
the wife many times: bnt if a man kill himself this way, or his wife with too
many Children, he is near kin to a murderer, blood will be required if a man
shed blood; but if the soul be lost this way, who shall make amends: it is not
impossible that he may repent when he is old, and they that kill themselves
this way when they are young, shorten the days of grace and of nature, when as
he that never truly repents nor believes, shall be eternally damned, as sure as
the Lord lives. When Mr. Kill-devil was called to his Trial, he was taxed for
Swearing, Lying, and Whoring; some men are guilty of these sins, and almost
three thousand more, and yet all may be pardoned; but Lord have mercy upon me,
if a man shall answer for every idle word, as Christ speaks in the day of
Judgment, Mat. 12. 26. yea, and what shall then become of most of our Mayers,
and others too, whose words and conversations are altogether so. But most men
are wise when it is too late; O that God were mine, O that Christ were mine, O
that Heaven were mine, O that I might live a little longer, I would never do as
I have done, yea I would give for Heaven so much, when they are going to be
damned; but if the Sun be going down or setting, it is in vain to cry hold Sun
hold, good Sun hold; yet mercy, mercy may be found at the last minute, but to
cry then Lord Jesus, Lord Jesus, and not to think of God before, is a very sad
thing; what a Gentleman and never think on God, and yet a Christian, for shame
consider what you do and say sometimes in the open Sun; it is good to display
your bounty, but to display your lusts and sins night and day, as Sodom, crying
come, come, come Sir, let us go again, again and again to the Mask, to the
Ball, to the Tavern, to the Park, to the Fields, and delights of the World,
never minding going out of the World, or how vain these bewitching things of
the World are, until it be too late, is to imitate a fool: all men know they
must dye, and most men say they must be called to an account, but pray Mr.
Graceless what can you say for your self? to begin with one: O Sir you were at
Church once, and it may be but once in a month, and yet scarce in many months
did you mind what was said unto you, but to hear once of a Christ, and of Gods
love giving Christ for the worst of sinners is enough to stop thy mouth for an
hundred thousand millions of years, take him Devil cries St. Paul, if you
receive the Grace of God in vain: Hard-heart cried he could not repent, but
Peter asked him why so, because he sought it when it was too late, but whose
fault was that, when God gives repentance never to be repented of, and mercies
that should never be fotgotten; do not you remember Sir when you were sick? do
not you remember when you were like to dye, and what you promised then? when
the Doctors gave you off, and the Lord took you up from the grave again, when
the next news was; O Sir it was in my sickness that I said so and so, but if
sinners, Lords or Ladies will promise unto God when they are sick, and forget
him when they are well, they may be damned when they die, and that is time
enough: If a man has been twice or thrice at the Bar, and is once burnt in
the hand, it is ten to one but he hangs when he comes there again; yet a man may
go many times to the throne of Grace for one and the same corruption; some go
to Cheapside to fetch Flowers, and others hard by to get stuff, but few go to
God when they are young, for grace to serve him in their generation; yea I
think in my conscience some fine fools even think God is beholding to them, if
they should say their prayers, go to Church as other ordinary people do. And
because we cry to some, you are too fine forsooth to do this or that, they even
think so too in relation unto God; when as I tell you God and Christ is more
worthy of your service an hundred thousand times, than the best of you all, or
the best of all the Princes of the world, are worthy of this honor; namely to
be an unworthy servant of God, what do you condescend to serve a God? a God
that can damn you, and yet a God that will not damn you, if you serve him in
sincerity. Amongst many things, there are three great cares that lies on every
wise married man; first to serve God in his generation, secondly to provide for
his family, thirdly to get his wife well down without sinning, when she is on
the top of the house, it is not good to be both in a passion at once; yea when
either be, you are not fit (especially) to pray, or to do any thing else: if a
Parent correct a Child in his anger, it is ten to one but he will do it foolishly
or sinfully; half an hour after is best, and then with good words, and good
counsel in a friendly way: but if any of you Gallants (though never so vain
and profane) will yet serve God, he will save you and yours too, that so do,
with an eternal Salvation: but for any mortals to think, it is a little below
themselves to walk humbly with God, stooping down to the lowest things and
Ordinances of Christ: yea to kiss the feet of Christ, is an honor too great
for the greatest Potentate in the World. Mary washed them with her tears, and
wiped them with her hair, but what was Mary's love to Christ, who loved her
first and washed her soul in his blood. Some say washing in a Heart or Dears
blood, will make the white hands whiter; I am sure washing in the dearest blood
of all bloods, will make the fowlest soul of any sinner in the World, whiter
than the driven snow; yea there is none of you fair Ladies, that have commonly
the worst souls, but it will do so. About a fortnight since I was going into
the fields, to meditate about seven or eight of the clock, and that is the best
hour, and the best time in the day, is the dusk of the even; but as I was going
by yonder great house, I was thinking much upon the Lord that lives in it, and
whether he or no must answer for all the sins in the Family, and though there
be not half so many sinners there, as there used to be in the late Kings days,
yet I did conclude there were too many of one poor creature to answer for, who
has too many of his own, when as his whole estate will not make an amends for
one: Lord thought I then, it is better a thousand times to be a poor Nit, Gnat,
Worm, Nothing, than a great ungodly man or woman; but as I was thinking so, I
heard the passing Bell cry, tongue tongue three times, yet some do not mind it once
in twenty times when they hear it: if you hear a man swear, if you hear a man
lie, if you hear a man rant too much, or a Lady complement, crying Sir your
humble servant, and your very humble servant sweet Madam, fetching curches upon
curches down to the ground, it is no great hurt, but when they cry faith and
troth, and as they live, and as they hope to live, as they are virtuous, and as
they are vicious, Lord, Christ, God take me, and as I hope to be saved, nay God
damn me, as I heard once a Lady should say, who was a great Lords Daughter,
which was a word from the Devil, and the Devils tale was in her mough when she
said so, but the curse of God hangs over swearers heads and families, read this
text, Zak. 5. 3. In the mean time some pay to the poor two or three pounds at a
clap upon this account, yea I know a she Rant that lately paid more; but it is
well for some body and the Devils Kingdom that such Sparks be, for one of
these do him more grace, than a thousand poor sneaks: it is the Lords and Ladies,
and the brave Sparks, that brings up all the fashions, and the new oaths; but
new Devils, new Lusts, new oaths and new fashions, come all almost from one and
the same place, and the Devils Children are as much in fashion almost as ever I
saw. I heard three men swear, and I saw three men sit in Covent Garden Church,
more like Puppits than Saints or civil men; I wonder how they dare come so near
White Hall, or that any should venture to read there or elsewhere, a whole
Sermon at a clap, as they do near St Giles and Covent Garden; I would go a
hundred mile barefoot, that the Lord Protector would make one strict Act
against this lazy kind of pocket preaching, there is no business in the World
troubles me like this, that some should so much set by these Doctors, Parsons,
Deanes, Tryers and others, and so little by gifted Saints and Christians; when
I think in my conscience some of them do more hurt than good in the Church of
Christ, they are such bitter enemies to the spiritual appearances of Christ,
especially the spirit of Prophecy in the poor servants of Christ: I know a
rich man in the new Exchange, that might do more good than twenty of your
Parsons that have nothing in them, but civility, morallity, and a few legal
moral exhortations; but the man wants an heart, though his gifts and parts be
great, and a clear intellect withal, but it is a poor business to be a poor
Preacher until the thing be more set by; and yet 'twas once more set by among
the Soldiers than now it is by far, it may be they cannot so well tend it;
some think there is too much light, and yet there is too little and too little
practice; but more light, more love, and more living up to what we know would
do well together. If a man should be a professor, or Saint as you call him, ten
or twenty years together, and make it all his business to get money, money,
money, the curse of money light upon him I cry, and all such professors that
never have enough. I knew a Welsh woman, that was a very good and godly woman,
worth a thousand pounds at least, and never a Child in all the World, and she
cried what should she do with a thousand pound if she were a Widow: truly a
thousand pound will go a great way well husbanded; and a thousand Saints may do
more than they do a thousand times for Christ, and the World than they do; they
that do nothing are but Ciphers at the best, they that do little are but
Droans, they that do much are most their own friends; he that sins least,
wrongs his ow^ soul, but they that sin much are the Devils slaves: if a man
drudge in the dirt for a little Cheese, or if a man plead much for a little
Gold, or sin much for a little while, what will it avayle, if he must lie in
Hell an hundred thousand years: if a man go fine all the day long, and want a
bed at night, or if a man go poor and have a bed at night, which is best; if a
man play at Cards all Christmas, and loose all by Candlemas, he may chance to
go beg all the year after: if a man play with a strange Ladies bosom or a
Lords locks, it is a ready way to go down to Hell says Solomon, Prove. 2. 16.
and 6. 26. And the only way to want in the Winter is to play in the Summer,
but if a man play away, sleep away, or sin away one sermon, one Sabbath, and
one season after another (as a man may do) until it be too late to get grace,
Matt. 23. 38. Luke 13. 26. he may go like a wretch to Hell, and in Hell say
would to God I were out; I see the Emblem of a surety; a fool leaping with his
head into the great end of an Horn, but being got to the little end, he could
not get it back; how many such foolish ones are there now at Hide Park, that
leap into the Devils lap of sinful pleasure, then into the pan of sufferings,
sometimes in their bodies, and sometimes in their consciences, and lastly into
the fire of Hell: I saw a brave Coach go up Ludgate Hill, with a golden Arse;
and I saw them stand still at Saint Peter's Paul's Wharfe, but Saint Peter and
Saint Paul were never troubled with such kind of hearers as go thereabouts.
Three things spoil young Ladies, marrying too soon, ill edication, and such
kind of Parsons that preach little or nothing to any purpose: let a heart be
broken betimes for sin, and it will be saved in time from sin, death, hell, and
eternal burnings; yea Christ will love that Lady with an everlasting love, that
will love him when she is young and he poor; and poor Christ is as poor now as
ever, and it is as poor a business to be a servant unto Christ as ever I knew
it; if a man should pluck a Bible from his pocket among some, they would be
ready to laugh, but if a man should look into a Bible and seriously consider
what will become of them, it would make one weep* why weeps my Lord, cried
Hazael to Elisha, 2 Kings 8* 12. to think what evil thou shall do. And to
think what some shall suffer for an hundred thousand millions of years for a
moments pleasure, and all your lives are no more; yea the longest life of you
all is but a moments time in comparison of eternity: O Eternity, Eternity, when
I think on thee, how is time, ages, worlds swallowed up like tittle fishes by
the Whales; here one Generation comes, whilst another goes, but all moulters
into Eternity like flesh to dust: I truly says my Lady but all this we never
think on; why then you think your selves to Hell, or you go for want of
thinking unto Hell; but can you think your selves back: a man or woman never
act so beneath themselves, as when they cry they did not think of it, or
consider of it: nonconsideration is the cause of most men's damnation; what
should the Devil mind you of Hell as he does you of your lusts, sins and
pleasures, it were the way to loose you and spoil his own Kinkdome, I am sure
God minds you, Christ loves you, and has washed or would have washed you in
his own blood, Revel. 1. 6. and yet you mind not, the faithful Ministers tell
you this, and every line in the Scripture tells you that unless you do believe,
unless you do repent, unless you be regenerate, and become new creatures in
some measure* you shall be damned with all the Devils in Hell, as sure as God
lives in Heaven, John 3. 3. 36. and before next May day some of you may; yea it
may be before next Christmas: and when men are serious be not you light and
vain, I am upon damnation, and preaching damnation to the Gallants, yea and to
all you careless Gallants in general, that are now in Hide-Park, in the midst
of all your Gold and Glory, bravery and brave delights of the day, that ye
remember the night wherein no manocan work, as Christ speaks John 9. 3. And
therefore for all this great boasting and vyeing for the honor and glory of
the day, I say for all this, you must come to die and to Judgment, and upon
pain of damnation I tell you this, yea the Lord tells you, that if you still
go on to neglect so great Salvation as is freely tendered to you, despising
his Grace, his Love, and his Son and the delight of his soul, our only most
and ever glorious dear and blessed Redeemer; God blessed for evermore, Romans 9.
5. who has a thousand Crowns to give unto you, and a thousand pardons more
than you need, or ten thousand sinners greater than you, were they in the
world, yet I say Christ stands with these Crowns and Pardons for you: if a man
should stand with a Rainbow round about you, yea if a God should stand with a
Rainbow round about you, yea if a thousand Gods (although there be but one)
should stand with a thousand Rainbows round about you all, it were not half so
much as a God and Christ, and a God with Christ in his arms* a bleeding, dying,
living, longing, loving Christ for some of your Souls; and although Christ
would as fain have you as any in the world, and as much embrace you and reward
you as any in the world, yet I say, that notwithstanding all this, if you shall
despise him, and think to do below as Angels once did above, namely to be above
God; he will fling you down to Hell, and the darksome holes and dens in Hell;
do not deceive your selves, you may seek pleasures here and find, ease in Hell
but never find, sinners may find sinners, and old companions may find each
other, yea some of you may do so, but the Devils will find you all torments,
while God finds wrath and you guilt; yea the Devil will find power, though you
cannot death; yea an exquisite torture to torment sinners for evermore: if an
ugly Collier should but breath upon you, it would make you sick; but if the
Devil come to sit and blow upon you, this will make great change, for some of
you young Gentlewomen, that the Sun must now scarce shine on; and what a Hell
will this be, to go from golden Coaches and beds of Down, to fiery Litters and
beds in Hell, to fry and roar with ugly Devils in burning flames for evermore;
O for Gods sake consider this all ye that neglect God, or despise God and
Heaven for a moments lust. And if there be not a Heaven and an Hell, a real
place where Angels sing and Saints rejoice, Devils roar and sinners fly, yea
something that is equivolent unto this in the other world, burn your Bibles for
a cheating Book for they have deceived me and many thousand more: but if the
Scriptures be a Truth, and the very words of God, as certainly they be, they
are so searching into the consciences of every man that seriously looks into
them, that he must needs confess this truth, Heb. 4. 12. then I say I know
nothing of the Scriptures, if you are not much more likely to be with them,
that fry, and cry and houle at the grates of Hell, than any sinners in the
world* yea you and all you that do nothing but court sin, and complement your
time and days away. For of all sinners in the world, English sinners are the
worst and the least to be excused, because they enjoy the most mercies, means,
and light of any under Heaven; and of all sinners in England, you Lords and
Ladies and you great Gentry have the most reason to be eternally damned: you go
best, fare best, lie best, and have least to do of any in the world; you need
not care for your honors, it will be honor enough for to serve Christ, and
they that honor me, them (says Christ) will my Father love and honor, John
12. 26. but Lords and Ladies look for shadows and neglect the substance, the
substance of honors is to honor Christ, and to be a servant to Christ, yea
this is honor indeed a Crown to your honor, and that little thing you call
your honor. And therefore David cried, thy servant Lord, thy servant Lord,
making that and that alone his joy and glory* but for a man to be the Son of
such a Swearer, Liar, Belly-god, Heathen, or Idolater; yea to be the Son of
such or such a Flatterer, moneyed, rich or landed man, in comparison of being
the Son, the Saint, and the Servant of God, a faithful Covenant keeper, and a
man (...) of God in his Generation. But as for those that have God in their
mouths, power in their hands, only honor and profit in their eyes, let them
and their names rot, yea let the next Generation utterly forg^^ those that love
not our Lord Jesus* but seek themselves, and have no heart to do to the
uttermost for God, Christ, Saints, Souls, and Nations, but of all Nations I
still say this is the sinfullest; if you consider the love, light, means, and
mercies, which still we sin against, and of all sinners in this Nation, great
men and great professors that are naught, are the greatest sinners, and of all
professors the richest are the greatest; and yet of all rich and great
professors, gifted professors (in some sense) are the greatest that do nothing
in the Church of Christ, but bury their talents and their souls also in the
World, the love, lusts, and pleasures of the World; nevertheless many of these
may and shall be saved, because his mercy endures for ever, and his Covenant
he will and shall keep, with all the seeed of Abraham and David, Psalm. 88. 3.
4. But O ye seed of Abraham, Isack, and Jacob, mind this text, and what your
duty is to such a living, loving, giving, faithful, Covenant keeping God, But
when Money-bag the Usurer was called to the Bar, it was asked him what he
thought of Money, and what was the best improvement of it; he cried eight,
eight, or six in the hundred now as things stand, it is better than to buy Land,
for that is never paid for so long as the world lasts, if the the Tax so long
continue; a penny well got, and a penny well spent is better than a pound of
another man's, he that gets a little by birth right, moderate industry, faith
and prayer, gets well, but he that gets much by right or wrong, or continual
setting his heart upon the world, is but a fool or worldling at the best. I
knew a man that got a great estate, and he go^ it from a small and low
beginning, but he got nothing but money, for few loved him, and as few missed
him, and when he dyed he gave but one grunt, and cried I am sick, and by and by
dyed with the Curtains drawn to him, and he that (...) (as is likely) besides
what the Devil had, gave two or three mourning Suits, and so buried him
handsomely: but if a man bury himself or soul, with these self soul deceaving
cares and pleasures of this cursed and bewitching World, which lies altogether
in wickedness and under condemnation; yea the whole World does so upon the
matter, 1 John 5. 19. he may be raised again though not to glory, that which
every man sowes be shall reap, here or hereafter. When Dives was in Hell, he
thought upon his brethren: but when a Citizens Heir comes to be a Spark, he
seldom thinks upon the old fool that goes there, for the money which he so
profusely spends, or the portion of his daughter, yea few of these upstarts
think upon the old folks that go to the Devil; if a man should be hanged for
another man's stealing, it would be sad; but if a man be damned for another
man's vain glory, pride, gaming, carding, ranting, or whoring, it is much more:
truly some make no better use of that estate than this, or to piss again the
wall that for which many are damned; I will not say how many, but I believe
above an hundred every year within the walls of London. If a man steal for
another, suffer and be hanged, it is sad as I said before, but to be eternally
damned is much more; and it may be only to make him a fine Gentleman, a fine
Fool, a swearing Gentleman and a brave Spark, but the old fool has no carriage
in him, and the old mother must scarce be known where she lives by the fine
daughter: if the Ministers of London could preach themselves, and many of their
hearers, out of this cursed damning sin of Covetousness, it were a gallant
thing; some talk was of the Jews, and the coming in of the Jews, but if the
Devil be more covetous than many Gentiles, Priests, and Citizens I am mistaken;
for a Belly god to mind his gut, and a filthy swearer his ungodly lust, is a
common thing; but no Swearers, Drunkards, Whores or Harlots in the World, have
their hearts so much going after any sin in the World, than some noted
Ministers, and professors that are called Saints, have after this cursed sin of
Covetousness; they talk of Faith, and preach you must live by Faith; others
write Sermons all the year about, frequent meetings, and enter into fellowships
many of them, but Money, Money is their God, and for Money they will chop and
change, cheat and lie, and make any man a Saint. I knew two great men that were
about last year near St. Martins canonized for Saints; one was worth forty
thousand Pounds, and the other an hundred, but the Devil is Money, and in Money
if that will make a Saint; I will never believe he goes to Heaven that does no
good, gets a great estate and makes no profession at all of Christ, the ways,
Saints, and servants of Christ, say you what you will to please fools, friends,
and kindred, yet a little money and it may be mourning. If a man should look
into the sepulcher of a man newly buried it would be a loathsome business, but
if a man look into the lives of many rich men which Ministers make Saints in
their funeral Orations, it might be said the man was more a fool, a beast, a
muck worm, or at best a civil Gentleman, or an ignorant Christian, rather than
a Saint: truly I know nothing so much as three things that make a Saint, faith
in the blood of Christ, union with the person of Christ, and received measure
of sanctification from the Spirit of Christ, and these three things with
cheerfulness, thankfulness, fruitfulness or holiness, make a brave Saint
indeed: if my Lord or my Lady had such an only daughter, and a lovely Lady
also, she were a match for the greatest Prince in the world, and were Angelical
Spirits capable of marrying or giving in marriage, as they are not, Mark 12.
25. they would come to such virtues, but when blossoms, birth, and beauty have
nothing to ado^ne them, but spangles, gold and outward glory, they are far
short of the Church of Christ, the Kings daughter who is all glorious within,
Psalm. 45. 13. Inward glory is true glory, outward glory is false, inward glory
is pure, light, life, and heart purifying, but of outward honor, glory, beauty
and esteem, a man may have a great deal, and a great deal of Gold, with capps,
knees, and bowings to him for his portion, and go to the Devil when all is
done, but the Lord is my portion says the Church, Lament. 3. 25. And truly it
were a Lamentation well worth the taking up, to think how many brave Sparks and
Ladies that are now in midst of all their gold and glory, displaying of
themselves, and glories as it were for the glory of the day in Hide-Park with
leaping, lightsome hearts and souls through the pleasures of it; yet that the
night should and suddenly will come, that all these must undress and go away
hence to the darksome cold earth; yea to the darksome dens, or darkest dungeons
of Hell, if they have nothing but outward glory for their portion; and then
they will be more miserable than they that are acquainted with a kind of Hell
beforehand, Some say when they make a Nun in another Country, first they make a
feast as rich and noble as may be, then they invite their greatest friends, yea
they entertain all of quality with the greatest delights that this earth can
afford, and she her self to espouse her self to Christ as she thinks, is
dressed with all that youthful, virgin, rich and princely attire that is
possible to be thought on or adorned with, but the feast and the mask, the
music and the singing being over, the poor Lady is (...) to the skin, yea she
burns in the presence of them all, (her greatest ornament and glory) her hair,
and all for the Kingdom of Heavens sake, sequestring her self from all the
pleasures of this life for another, which she ignorantly hopes to find in a
wrong way: but sure I am you wilfully loose that which you may easily find in a
way of believing, though not in a way of working; and this is a lamentation;
and a thing to be taken up for a lamentation, that you the Lords and Ladies of
England, the Gentry and the greater part of the Gentry, and glory of the Nation
in a common sense, forgo for a present Heaven, which yet is but a Hell to a
heavenly man and an heavenmind, the true Heaven, and the God of Heaven whose
loving kindness is better than life, so says David, Psalm. 63. O Madam home is
home (as we use to say) though never so homely, and Heaven is Heaven when all
is done, but there is no home like to Heaven, and the God in Heaven, which you
forgot for a moments lust; were your pleasures as his are for evermore, it were
something, but for moments joys to loose a Heaven, the joys of Heaven and
Heavenly glories for evermore, is a loss indeed. And now I am speaking of
Heaven, let me give you one touch of that and I have done; only I shall make
your Funeral Sermon in conclusion, for I think verily you will be damned, and
never come there, yea most of you will be so, and though I am but a poor man,
yet I would not be in some of your conditions for an hundred thousand Worlds:
heretofore when I have been going to bed, I have thought when I saw my sins,
before I came to see them all freely done away and pardoned by the blood of
Christ, if I should have been sick in my bed and dye, what a miserable creature
should I be, sure I am in danger to be damned thought I; and yet there is no
man living but he may be easily saved, if he looks to God, and believes in God
in time, yea if a man believes in God and lives to God really, he shall as
certainly be saved, as ever any sinner in the World was damned, John 3. 36. But
now if some of you should go home and consider a little in the night, what you
have been doing all the day; yea what you have been undoing all your lives
along, it would make you sad indeed; some men live long enough to get Heaven
for their souls, and an estate for their Children, but if they get nothing but
an estate for their relations, let them have this for an Epitaph upon their
graves, here lies PENNY WISE, but POUND FOOLISH: and let them have a little
thatch in their hands also, for that will do them as much good as the welfare
of their wives and children, if their souls do miscarry in the other World;
but for a man to live ten, twenty, forty years or upwards, to undo his
relations, and his own soul as some do, yea most of you fine folks do litte
else, but sin a great deal, and live a little while to undo and damn your
selves for ever and ever; some fill the bag or bushel in a little time and are
carried away into the Land of Shinar, Zaph. 5. 5. and we remember them no more,
when they are once gone to the Devil: I believe you your selves have almost
forgot forty brave Sparks as heretofore used Hide-Park: Christ was thirty three
years old before he thoroughly saved one soul, and then he dyed and saved all
the world, John 1. 29. but it is that World that believes in him, repents and
lives to him: But of the world of Gallants that I saw the last year in
Hide-Park, I did not see above half a dozen of my acquaintance that looked any
thing Saint-like, or Sionward; some look as if they would never pray, others as
if they would never swear or sin they are so handsome; and yet they do nothing
else but sin and swear, or tittle tattle all the day long; for my part I did
not hear one word of Christ, and yet I was in the Park all the afternoon, but
it was upon a good account, and for my part I am resolved (for ought I know)
never to go again after this bout: I have witnessed twice against them, and
once against the Tryr^s at White Hall, and I believe they will make but a blind
business with the Keys of David now in their hands, which should be in the
hands of Christ alone, Isa. 22. 22. Nor will they ever put the power of
Preaching, for fear of spoiling their trade, into the hands of any in the
world, but they that will make an absolute trade of it; when as I am confident
an ugly knotty stick, being hewed and plained a little, will make a better
piece of timber, than some of them that they set up, will ever be builders in
the Church of Christ: But Mr. such an one, and Mr. such an ones Letter must
pass him, especially if he comes with a little of the old Synods Catechism in
his mouth, and some of them will so kon it upon the stairs when they are going
to be tried: but there is a young Gentleman that makes a sweet trade in getting
money for Passes and I know not what, yea one told me of a Parson Solicitor
that gets more than I can by my trade, by rerommending, helping, and putting
young Priests in a right way to obtain their business, and ye know he must be a
good man, such a Tryer commends him, and twenty more, and you know he is a
great Tryers friend, Country man, or Coosin, and therefore he must pass; and
there was old passing when the great scuffle was (as a door keeper told me) but
let them try, and try, and do what they will, for my part I profess in the
presence of God, I had rather preach, or be in the public speaking a word to
Christ for sinners, or a word for sinners to Christ in a way of prayer, than
eat my meat though never so hungry, and yet I would work for my living: yea
thousands in this Nation thirst after this liberty; who are holy, humble,
knowing, godly, blameless, self denying, gifted Christians; yea equally gifted
with most Ministers: things might be done in decency and order, and yet the
Minister never the worse, Christian liberty well used does not abuse or justle
out the Ministerial calling in the least, it is strange there cannot be a medium
found out by those that hold the helm, but for my part I am resolved not
willingly to pay one penny, until I have liberty to pray or some body else,
who is godly, in the room of most Clarks and Readers that are stark naught; a
good Minister and a good Christian, two or three would do more good in a
Parish, than he and an old sleepy Reader can or will do in many years. We have
a good Benefice, and a Minister will come there whether we will or no I think,
and yet he is beloved where he is, and we had pitched upon another that is
godly and blameless. But I fear I shall do little here this day, the Lords and
Ladies are resolved to go home, and so will I, yea I resolve to go home, and
mind home, death, grave, and eternity more than ever I have done, and yet I
have vowed much and writ vows, but a thousand vows will do no good unless God
give a man strength to live to him; and for you great persons, you can as well
come out of you skins as out of your sins and snares; yea if God Almighty do
not pluck you out of your present conditions all the Men on earth cannot help
you, no nor all the Saints on earth; O pray, pray, yea at night go home and
say, Lord Jesus help me, Lord Jesus look upon me, and make me now to apply my
heart to wisdom after all my former folly. A man may easily pull a man down
hill, or down to Hell, but he can hardly pluck him up to Heaven or Heavenward:
yea I find it very hard to come to the certainty of Heaven, and to be looking
off from working for Heaven, notwithstanding the promise is not to him that
works, but to him that believes in him that justifies the ungodly; a golden
text: O read, read Romans 4. 5. and upon this account the ungodliest man in
England may be justified, and to be justified, you know is to have all a man's
sins pordoned, hid and done away; O the blessedness of that man whose sins are
so done away, Psalm. 32. 1. And now if one of you Gentiles, or genteel sinners,
would go home at night and really believe them pardoned, they would be so; it is
but believing or not believing that makes a man to be saved or damned, yea
really it is no more, John 3. 36. yea it is believing, and believing more than
any thing that makes a man live to God and love God. I will warrant if one of
you Gallants could now but really believe God would love you and save you,
notwithstanding all your former sinfulness, you would be gallant Christians
indeed, and God loving Christians instead of the Devils slave: well there is a
new way to Heaven, or a nearer way I am sure than most men have hinted at, and
that is by believing before repenting, yea by fetching repentance and
reformation from believing Gods love in Christ to poor sinners, as sinners,
that is, while yet they are in their sins; when a Leapors Leaprosie is washed
off, he is as lovely as another man, when a sinner is reformed, he is as lovely
as a Saint in his conversation, but before God reformes, he loves, yea, I have
loved thee with an everlasting love, says God; He is nothing but Love says
John, 1. 4. 10. yea he is ever living, loving, and giving good things to you
the worst of sinners; else why are you out of Hell and here this day, out of
sickness, out of misery, out of want, though all these things come in love to
his Children; O for Gods sake love God, and if indeed you do but mind him a
little in his Son, you cannot but love him; He is the Fountain of Love, and a
loving Fountain, that has a thousand Seas of sweetness and divine delights,
for all those that come unto him, with the is the well of life says David,
Psalm. 36. 9. and at thy right hand are pleasures for evermore: but it is Christ
that is this pleasure, and that right hand that God stretches out to you the
worst of sinners, and if you will take hold of his strength upon his word, you
shall make peace with him, Isa. 27. 5. and he will make peace with you and your
souls, yea Christ will make peace between you both, yea to them that are afar
off he makes peace, and preaches peace by the blood of his Cross, Romans 5. 1.
Peace be unto you in this room says Christ, John 20. 19. And peace be to you
in Hide-Park say I, and if you will hearken to it there is peace in the blood
of Christ for you all, for that speaks better things than the blood of Abell;
and I beseech you to mind this night what it speaks: I know what your
ranting, and vaunting in a thing of naught speaks, namely Hell all it is to be
feared; but the blood of Christ speaks yet peace to the worst of you all: take
heed again, and again take heed, ye refuse not him that speaks from Heaven,
that which few of the Princes of this World which come to naught, do know, or
have known for many hundred of years, 1 Cor. 1. 18. But to you is it spoken,
not in a voice of thunder like God in Mount Synai, where no man durst come near
for fear of death, Exodus 19. 15. but in a love and dovelike spirit, the spirit
of love, and the Dove that is speckled with the blood of Christ, is yet at some
of your windows hearts and souls with an Olive brance an Emblem of peace,
from the God of peace and our Lord Jesus Christ to some of your souls; O taste
and see that the Lord is gracious: blessed is the man that puts his trust in
him, and if you will trust in him now and at all times, yea trust you in the
Lord Jehovah for ever, for in his arms there is everlasting strength to save
you and your souls for evermore, Isa. 26. 4. but if you make (as the manner of
you Gallants is) a push of God, he will make a mock and a laugh at you when you
come to die and be damned; so says this Scripture, Prove. 1 26. Most men say, O
that God were mine, O that Christ were mine when they are dying, and O that I
might live a little longer, I would never do as I have done; truly some of you
have lived too long already, and it were to be considered, whether it had not
been better for some of you to have been damned ten or twenty years-ago, then
to be heighting up and down in Coaches still, for if you will to Hell, the
sooner the better, the greatest surfeit begets the greatest fever, and the
longest sinner the greatest Hell, for I am of this opinion, that God is to most
men as they apprehend him to be, and a man's Hell, shall lie most in his bowels,
and come most from his own sins: so that the more light the more sin, and the
more sins against light, the more Hell still says Christ, if I had not come
unto them my self, they had not known sin, that is they had not known or
committed so much sin, or been guilty so far as now they are, John 8. 19.
Some ranting sinners will swear so lustily when they are well, and speak so
whiningly when they are sick, spent and even dead in a Consumption and likely
to go to the Devil; and some Saints look so cheerfully through the sense of
Gods love, when they are even loaded with afflictions, that it would do a man
good to see them. I saw an old beggar with a dish on his back, and a Lord with
a bunch on his, and two great Saints with the world in their mouths; one was
talking of this estate, and the other of that man's estate, and both of them had
too much, and care enough with what they had: there is none so merry as fools,
nor any so foolish as wise men that can never tell when they have enough, nor
how to do good with what they have: my Lord Needy and my Lord Greedy, will
never be good, nor satisfied though they have the Devil and all: and it is a
strange thing that a poor man and a Saint, can hardly satisfy himself in the
love of God, so as to look a little cheerful and walk very thankful in all
changes: let a man sneak through the world with a patcht arse, or flutter
thorough with a golden train, it is much a like, provided they be both damned;
for to be hanged in halters, or to be hanged in golden chains, is much alike,
if he must be hanged: and if you will be damned and go to the Devil, go how you
will it is all one, and to one purpose: but I know how poor Saints should go to
Heaven, and that is by singing and dancing, and ever having the high praises of
God in their mouths, and a two edged sword of zeal in their hands, to cut down
all ungodly lusts and Kings in their souls, Psalm. 149. 8. yea to hew them in
pieces, for the spirit of God and the word will spare none, as Samuel said to
Agag, 1 Samuel 15. 33. nor be at peace with the least traitor, when Iesabell
looked out of the window, she cried what peace, 2 Kings 9. 30. and when you
look out of your Coaches with your ugly faces, I cannot tell what to make of
you, you are so patched and peec'd with old taffaty and taffaty patches, yet
some of you young Ladies, would look like little Angels almost if it were not
for these sins, and some ugly things that you are guilty of. But to be guilty
of nothing is a gallant thing, and if any of you will be guilty of no sin when
you come to die, look to Christ while you live, and live to God till you die,
and you shall have a better husband than any Lord of them all. Strange Lords
and strange lusts have ruled you hitherto, Isa. 26. 13. but Christ is always
young and lovely; yea to look to, to lean on, to hope in, and to follow after
he is altogether so; and he dyed for you when he was thirty three years of age,
and yet lives and ever lives to make intercession for you; for God sake court
or think on him a little: here is old courting ill condition Mrs. such an one,
and Mrs. such an one, and she has so many servants, and so many servants, and
all it may be for the money, and nothing but the money: but Christ has few
enough, and yet he is as rich as ever, and will give more than ever any of you
yet enjoyed, for a dram of his grace is more worth than thousands of your
estates, who have nothing but a little dirt, and a little Gold, with a little
lace, and a little thing called Honor; but Christ has the dew of his youth,
and the youth of his age, Psalm. 110. 3. yea eternities is in his hands as well
as the keys of death and Hell, or the power over Hell, sin, death, men, and
Devils, Revel. 1. 18. and in his hand he holds a ring, a golden ring or a
reconciled God; yea and God holds him to the worst of you all, but you have no
mind to marry and be the sons of God, but to be the Children of the Devil
still, and his you are sure enough, John 8. 44. When God was on the earth Moses
had a great mind to see his face, Exodus 33. 18. would you had so to see his
Son; when the Lord General came from Worcester, there went many thousands to
see him, and when Christ shall come to England, I hope to see him and more done
for him than yet there is; but will you love him or will you not, he is
altogether lovely in his names, in his natures, in his person, in his promises;
yea and in his Kingdom which I hope is nearer then some men imagine: Mr.
Tillinghurst told us strange things in his Book, called the Key to mystical
Numbers, the man may be right in some things, and I believe he is; twenty Shops
in London have these Books of his, would as many of you had Christ in your
hearts and in your lives; but will you marry or will you not, will you marry or
will you burn, will you burn in Hell an hundred thousand years, or will you
take Christ for better or worse, nay it is worse to refuse Christ, than to take
all the shame in the world with Christ; and what a shame is this, that you
should be too fine for poor Christ, when poor Christ makes you rich and gives
the best of riches to you, yea durable riches. See page 11. of the yellow Book,
or the last May days Letter. But take my word if you do not take Christ; the
Devil will take you and tear you worse than poor Cocks are torn or Bears bated,
yea you shall tear your selves in a thousand pieces if it were possible, and
yet not destroy your selves; great Malefactors are hanged alive in Hell, and
their misery is they cannot die, nor get the fire out, Mat. 25. 41. This shall
be done to the man whom God will honor; he shall live with God and reign (as
it were) with Christ in the eternity of God, but all you that hate the Lord
shall be consumed as the fat of Lambs, Psalm. 37. 20. yea let them all be
consumed and confounded together that will not marry Christ, or ever hear of
being the servants of Christ; there is such a deal of service among you, but
pray what have you done for Christ any of you genteel heathenish sinners, yea
or any of you professing Saints; truly you that have done most, have done
nothing to any purpose, and you that have done nothing, have done enough to
have damned you in your best action that ever you did, if you were to be tried
by the Law or the purity of Gods Justice out of Christ; but the business is,
who almost does any thing, or does not at all mind every thing, and no man
minds the things of Christ, Phil. 2. 21. Truly Christ has a great many enemies
and a great many friends, and a great many lookers on, some men look which way
the tide runs, and some which way the gain comes; but godliness with content is
great gain, 1 Timothy 6. 6. and still I say the great stain of godliness is, they
are so greedy after it; but greedy lovers of profits, and greedy lovers of
pleasures, are little better than greedy dogs both, and will be shut out of
the new Jerusalem that comes down from God, or is above with God, Revel. 21.
2. And now if some of you Ladies after all this brave dressing of your selves,
should be shut out of Hide-Park, and made to stand in the ditch whilst all the
Nobles and rest of the Gallants were admitted in to take their fill of
pleasures and the pleasures of the day, it would be a great vexation; but if
thousands of you should be shut out of Heaven and the Kingdom of Heaven, as
Christ speaks Luke 13. 27. for minding nothing but pleasure, the pleasures of
the day and the pastimes of the night; how will you then weep, when you your
selves shall see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with thousands more sitting down
there, but you your selves shut out, ver. 28. Christ wept bitterly for
Jerusalem, Luke 13. 34. and if he were on earth, I think he would weep for you,
for you are the most to be pitied, for all your laughing and your singing one
unto another of any people; yea of any creatures in the world: yea I in my
conscience do verily think so, for a man to sing to a bird and catch him in a
net, or hearken to a Syrryan as they say, and be catched by a song, is a
misery* and a cheaty misery; none gets so much by gaming, as the Devil does by
playing his cards in some of your laps, and truly you frequently commit
adultery when you look so lustfully as you do Mat. 5. 25. on one another
faces, yea you make your selves Whores and Harlots by your talk many times:
Christian talk and Christian name, with Christian life and conversation would
do well together, and if Christ be your Master let him be your Copy, for I will
not give a farthing for that Christian, that is little better than an old
common Protestant: an old Protestant and an old Papish will agree better, than
either can with an honest Roundhead; and yet the old Religion is the true; ask
for the good old way and follow that says the Prophet, Ier. 6. 16. and not
these new lights and fangles, and now I am resolved to be half a Quaker to a
hair, but not a whole one for a thousand worlds; I resolve to be less
complementall, less a flatterer, more an inward and an outward Christian; yea a
circumspect Christian in all things: but to deny Jerusalems Christ, Gods
exalted, dear and only Son who is God over all blessed for evermore, Romans 9.
5. that has washed me in his own blood, Revel. 1. 5. saved my soul from Hell,
and reconciled me unto God; for a whimsey, I never will; nor shall they ever
pick my comforts by a many new words, forced humility or reformation that
arises out of self, and leads man to rest on self, a broken Reed a muddy
Cestern, and all that do so will lie down in sorrow; yea this is all you shall
have at my hands says the Lord: yea all you that compass your selves about by
your own sparks, Isa. 50. 11. for other foundations can no man lay than what is
laid Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 3. 11. O foundation, foundation, time and age
outlasting foundation, Heaven, Earth, Saint and Angel burying foundation, how
art thou neglected by Generations of self righteous men on the one side, dogs,
careless sinners, loose Christians, and despisers on the other, and yet thou
art all in all in life, death, and eternity, Col. 3. 11. yea thou art Gods all
in all, and our all in all, who have all our hopes, helps, and mercies in and
from thee, yea in thee and in thee alone is all our justification,
sanctification, and hopes of glorification; and yet how little do we live unto
thee, do or speak for thee, our dearest dear before the Sons of men: but O
Christ's time will come, and certainly come that we shall wish a thousand times,
that the best of us all had said more, and done more a thousand times for thee
than the best of us all have done: And therefore to you the powers of this
Nation, I humbly give this advice, (knowing good men in prosperity may easily
forget the vows in adversity) that you remember as long as you live the cause
for which so many tuns of blood were spilt, and millions of souls sent to Hell
sooner than ordinary; yea the cause of our ever blessed, dear, and glorious
Redeemer, and what ever men say he certainly once had, and still has a cause
and controversy to plead with the Natitions; however he will err long
certainly come and call all men to account: and then you the dry skuls, heads
and bones of the Caviliers shall rise together; yea with their dead bodies
shall you arise, or they with yours as the Prophet speaks in another case, Isa.
26. 19. In the mean time know the night is at hand wherein no man can work,
John 9. 3. And as Owner said of Ireton, so I say to all you; go your way and
take your lot, and at the end of your days you shall stand up again, Dan. 12.
last. And to all under you I give this advice, study to be quiet and at peace
in your own spirits; Gods ways are in the deep, and his designs take place in
all ages, yea they never slack nor stay. Children obey your Parents, Servants
your Masters, not with eye service, but in singleness of heart as serving the
Lord. To all good married men I give this, first to love your wives as Christ
loved his Church, if it were possible, and in loving, love their souls as much
above their bodies, as you do their bodies above their clothes; it will do the
wife the husband good to think the soul is in Heaven smiling, when absent here
on earth or present in a coffin; it is the condition of friends, that is more
than any thing, the true cause of joy or grief; if a friend be in prosperity,
you only mourn for his absence, but if in adversity you mourn double: and
truly there is a vast difference between a wife gone to Hell, and a husband
gone to Heaven, or a wife gone to Heaven and an husband gone to Hell, and so
for any other friends, now when we do what we can to go our selves and draw
others we have done our duty; but for you great ungodly Gentry, you draw all
almost to Hell that come near you; and yet I think it is a greater comfort to
bury two good wives than one bad: who would have a side of his house or body
burnt, yea his bedfellow go to Hell; and yet most of you and your Children
will go thither by reason of your examples. Whither do you think the Lord such
an one is gone that dyed lately, nay in your conscience speak as judging by the
rule of Gods Word, and Mr. such an one that kept his brave Coach and six
Horses, and never went without: but to your Children I give this advice, first
to read over the families they came of, what sins they have been guilty, and
what judgments have fallen upon Father, Grandfather, and great Grandfather;
one broke his neck, another his heart, a third lost his head, a fourth made a
miserable end in his bed, yea dyed suddenly and never said Lord have mercy on
me: it is good to observe these things, and it is easier to love, repent, or
begin to live to God before twelve or twenty years of age be past than after,
and so again before thirty than forty; but if a man mis forty years before he
begins to look to Christ, it is an hundred to one but he goes to the Devil;
yet hundreds turn civil and morally honest, and so go civilly to the pit:
there is four or five turnings before a man turns into the right way for
Heaven, and yet some hit on it at the first, and that is by throwing themselves
upon Gods love in Christ in a way of real believing, and that barely upon the
account of the promise, which is yea and amen without any qualification, Romans
4. 13. but some turn from wildness to sobriety, and so from bravery to
plainness, from Papistry to Protestantism, and yet are little the better, and
so back again without being much the worse; and some turn from the ordinary
protestants to be Professors, and yet are ten fold more the child of the Devil
than before. Every turn is a turn from God, if the heart be unturned to God;
and the white Devil is the worst, and will carry a man to Hell when he thinks
he is going to Heaven* and persecute another only for a Gospel spirit, and a
Gospel light, without a Gospel life, will certainly rise in judgment against
any man in the world; and so will all your Ladyships sins if you do not take
heed in time: Mouls see and Swans sing a little before they dye, and it may be
then most of you will be wise, and till then few are so: do you think Christ
made you so fine and so handsome, so rich and so noble for nothing; yea do you
think he made you Christians as you say, and brought you forth in England the
Garden of the world, and in some sense you the Flowers of this Garden, for
nothing but to sing and dance, make a French Courchy, complement for a husband,
and height about with a Servant, truly Christ will have little reason to damn
heathens and save you; it is true you are called by his name, but that should
teach you good manners and good lives; I believe some would be ashamed if we
should tell of a Cromwell that would not fight, or a Fayrfax, whose name I hope
will never be forgotten; and truly Christ will be ashamed of you, that will not
live to him as well as be baptized; and if you were not baptized, there is no
man living but would take some of you to be the Devils children you are so
wicked. But the end of all things is at hand, and that is your funeral text
with which I shall conclude, 2 Pet. 4. 7. But you will ask me what end, not the
end of Gods Mercy, for there is no end thereof, that is from everlasting to
everlasting, to them that fear him, Psalm. 103. 17. Nor is there any end of his
love, or the promises of his love, for they are numbe^less from one end of the
Bible to the other, and so is his providence to his Children, even from the
womb to the grave; yea that never leaves them till they come to Abraham's
bosom, and then God is all in all to them, 1 Cor. 15. 19. But there is an end
of your sinning, and Saints sorrowing, of your living, and the Kingdoms of the
world reigning; yea there is an end of this suns shining, the rains fulling,
the winds blowing, and the spirits breathing: yea that breaths where, when, and
as long as it lists, take heed of grieving and resisting that, for if ever
that finally leave you, and come no more to your consciences, beds, and
elbowes, saying go to Pelham, go to Pelham, go to God, go to Christ, look to
God, look to Heaven, Hell, mind both, for all these bewitching things and
fooling up and down, or else thon art undone for ever: Soul have thou ever
another if thou loosest this; have a care of loosing all for a moments lust,
but there is an end of all this kind of breathings, and your singing, yea there
will be no more May days after a few days more; I think you had best take
your solemn leave, and weep over one another backs, necks, and shoulders, and
say farewell Ladies, farewell Lords, farewell Coaches, farewell bravery and brave
delights, birds, fields, hedges, bed, Sun, Moon, Saints and sinners, farewell
all for ever, and farewell all for evermore, for I must now be damned for ever,
or I go I know not whither, as that great man said to his soul, when he cried
soul, soul, whither art thou now going, and then the fine fare, and the good
cheer, and the fine linen, with the Lemmon sauce, must have an end, and the
sweet singing; but the howling, that must be for evermore. But take a touch of
Heaven or ahout Heaven, though you never intend to come there, and I have done:
And for Heaven; first it is a place for divine discoveries, secondly of divine
rest, thirdly of divine joys, fourthly of divine glories; and in it God
discovers four things; the secrets of his heart, the fullness of his glory, the
nearness of relation, and greatness of his love: we shall know as we are known,
Gods decrees, purposes, and secrets, his glory, the fullness of his glory, and
nearness of relation; yea we shall come from the East and from the West, the
North and the South, and sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
Kingdom of our God and Father, and know him to be our Father even from
everlasting, Isa. 63. 16. Luke 13. 29. God shall so abundantly discover his
love unto us, calling of us by his own name; O Ephraim, Ephraim, my dear child
thou art mine: yea Lord God and Father I am, and so is all that glory that thou
have given me, as Christ speaks in another case. God gives to Christ, Christ
gives to Saints, and Saints gives to God all again: and so God is all in all
and ever shall be, 1 Cor. 2. 9. But secondly, Heaven is a place of divine rest,
from sorrow, sin and labor, tumults, noyses, fears, and troubles: in this
world you shall have trouble, but in me ye shall have peace says Christ, John
16. 33. internal, external, and eternal. A man's enemies shall be at peace with
him sometimes, and yet his friends war against him if his ways please God.
And so the soul is like the needle on the point, the Ark or Dove upon the
waters, she wants footing for the sole of the foot, and God is often wanting to
the soul of a Saint, thou did hide thy face says David and I was troubled;
and the greatest trouble in the world is Gods hiding of his face; but time
shall pass and time will come, that Isreal's God will be no more a hiding God,
Isa. 45. I5. nor they a wandering people in the barren wilderness of this world,
for in their Country which is Heaven, there is rest without weariness, for the
wavering Man and the wearied Saint; and the bed and pillow is not half so sweet
to the wearied man, as is this rest. And the Saints rest is God, yea God is
their sweetest, true, and lasting rest and home, and so is Heaven: yea this is
the Land of Canaan indeed, and that Canaan which every one would land in when
they come to dye. I knew one of you the other day, that always wore a feather
in his cap, but being sick, he sent a Bill to beg that he might be pardoned and
go thither: yea there is none of you all but would fain lay your bones, and
lodge your sinning souls in Canaan when you come to dye; Oh but you must live
in Canaan, or go the way to Canaan if ever you mean to come thither: it is not an
old fashioned priests benediction or absolution, with a little Common Prayer, a
sup of Wine with a bit of Bread, will lodge you there, this may seal your
damnation, but it will never bring you to salvation, no, no, these low things
shore none upon the Land of Canaan; it is Gods love, Christ's merit, and
regeneration of the spirit, a thing ye never knew what belongs to, John 3. 5.
that sets the soul there. But to go on, Heaven is a place of divine joys, and
they that live in Heaven live in joys, and yet the joys of Heaven can never
live in them, they are so great: Enter into thy Masters joy says Christ. Light
may enter in the eye, but not the body of light, joy may enter into the heart,
but not the body of joy: Men and Angels are but finite creatures, but the joys
of Heaven are infinite, unspeakable, unconceivable; earthly joys are but
shadows of spiritual, the joy of the Harvest is nothing to the joy of the
Elect, and the sweetest joys of the spirit is nothing in comparison to the
joys of Heaven: ye shall rejoice says Christ, and no man shall take your joy
from you, John 16. 22. and this is that joy which Christ speaks of: some
Fountains have their mouths or pipes by which they continually send their
Crystal streams into the artificial Wells with pleasant noyses; God has his
continual joys and glories, which he always sends forth by discoveries from
himself into the souls of his, which they being filled withal, sends forth (as
it were) from other golden pipes his continual praises; and herein lies the
joys of Heaven, and the Heaven above which you scarce believe: Angels and
communion with Angels are not the joys of Heaven, Saints and communion with
Saints are not the joys of Heaven, these may sing, and joy, and play together,
yet are they not the joy of Heaven, it is the music rather than the string, that
is the melody of music, and it is God rather than the creature, that is the
joy of Heaven, and hence it is that their joy is always fresh and green,
music dulls, beauty fades, yea the Sun appears sometimes darker than at other,
at leastwise unto apprehension, but this joy is always rising, more and more
delighting, now where there is a continual rising of divine joys and glories,
there can be no ebbing of divine delights, the echo rises with the voice; the
music with the string, joys by discoveries do the like, yea they rise
unanimously in all the Saints, and being risen in them, Heaven is made a double
Heaven, shout O ye Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for great is the Holy One in the
midst of thee, Isa. 12. 6. But howl ye Ships of Tarshish and pleasant
pictures; yea let the ungodly and rich howl together, Isa. 2. 16. Iam. 5. 1.
But shout O Inhabitants of Jerusalem, above, the City of the great King; this
shouting denotes the highest pitch of joy that Saints shall be filled with,
when they shall come to sup with God and Christ, by feeding on divine delights,
Rays, joys, and glories, which are the dishes of that wedding Supper, where
every Saint shall feed his full, Revell. 19. 8. 3 26. his full of joy, his full
of praise, and sing his part, yea every Angel his, and all shall try their
skill and strain their voices to make one melodious song of praises unto God,
and the Lamb for evermore, Revell. 7. 10. 15. 3. Some say that a Syrrian or the
song thereof, will so inchaunt a man, that irresistibly it shall draw him to
his fatal ruin; confident I am were one Saint or Angel to sing from Heaven
this day to you in Hide-Park, but one quarter of an hour, it would kill all
other delights, and make you mind the God of Heaven, and the joys of Heaven
for evermore; and all your former sinful sweetest pleasures, would be but as
the Asses braying, to the most melodious music in comparison of that. But
Heaven is a place of divine glories, and glorious things are spoken of thee O
City of God: all manner of precious stones are fetched to set up thy glory, O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Revell. 21. 19. and in the lies a Sun for every eye, a
Crown for every head; yea a Crown that fades not away: Crowns are the highest
pitch of glory that the aspiring soul of man can work unto, but the lowest
shadow of divine glory. Crowns and Kingdoms are but fading things, yea they
are now fading, while the glory of Christ is rising in our Land: yea in Ireland
which the Devil and the Pope thought once to have had for their share; but
blessed shall they be, who have been most instrumental to plant the Gospel
there, and some body here have been very much instrumental that way, and many
to pull down you and the Crowns of some of your families; yea the Crown of
these Nations, all which lie in the dirt: and yet you go on to sin as much as
ever, and never think how many was sent to the Devil in the late war standing
up for the Crown, yea how many great ones were sent in a day in some great
fights, (to wit) Naseby, York, Newberry, or Spinham land: and yet these kind of
Crowns are not worth contending for, they are such light, foolish, fading
things; But Saints Crowns are exceeding weighty, heavy, and massy; yea there is
an eternal weight of glory that attends every Saint, 2 Cor. 4. 17. An eternal
weight of glory can never be poys'd or fade away, but a present earthly glory
every age can discover to be light and vain; yea within these few days I have
discovered much my self, and many vain men (as David says) which now are not:
and where is Mr. such an one with his brave feather, and Mr. such an one with
his golden back: alas, alas, it is a thousand pi^tles their Heaven was so
short. And for your stately laying out the Carcass at the last that is much
more, I saw the fragments of a silly Bird which a ravenous Fowl had prayed
upon, and all that was left by the hedge, was a leg and a wing, and a few
loose feathers, may be the Surgeon brawns up the whole body bowels and all,
with a great deal of beating by his huge sledges, after which nasty and noisome
work, the Harril dresses that and a room, three or four some dark and some
light one within another, before you come where the Body lies in a thick sheet,
with a many popish Candles, Candlesticks, great Standards, Silk and Silver
Scutchions, half a dozen in the nature of weepers, to see who comes to stayr,
and some are even ready to say their prayers, but the spiritual man mourns,
others crying they never saw the like, nor shall they ever see more what is
become of the wing and the leg, the life and the soul, whilst death and
rottenness sleeps in the feathers; and is this all you call the laying in
state, Solomon sales, vanity of vanities all is vanity: and would this text was
ever sounding in your ears, and written in your foreheads, as well as in your
lives: but what All does the wise man mean, questionless this and all below the
Sun, and that is all indeed, but what is reserved for the Saints whom you now
despise and count fools, and their ends to be without honor, Wisdom 5. 4. O
read, read this text though it be Apocripha, We fools counted his life madness,
and yet his lot is among the Saints, we wearied our selves in wickedness, but
what has pride profitted us, and what has vaunting and riches profitted us,
all is passed away like a shadow, p^st, or ship that passes over the waves,
ver. 10. But their portion is above the Sun and yours below, theirs where no
moaths, thieves, or rust can come, Man 6* 9* but at all these things they can
and do come; yea they will come at all your glories* and there is a secret worm
at the roo^ of every glory, yea your sweetest pleasures have a thousand snares,
envy, pride, malice, and covetousness are always eating, always stealing and
staining earthly glories: this way Nation eats up Nation, and Time them again:
but time, death, grave, nor eternity it self can ever fade, steal or eat away
the least bit of a Saints glory, no, no, death and time puts them in, and locks
them safely up for that glory which eternity is always opening and unfolding*
but for all your earthly glories they are soon opened, one man and one age
opens anothe^s glory; pride and envy ^olds up that again to show it selt, but
death folds up all, yea all the sorrow, shame, and sufferings of the Saints and
glories of the world: yea it will fold up all your Maying and your gaying* and
your present glories, so that that which is the outlet, is the inlet both to
one and the other: darkness, hell, sin, shame and sorrow is the inlet of death
to such as you: yea this breaks in like mighty seas upon the strokes of death
and so does rest, peace, joy, and glory to the Saints: but what is the glory of
Heaven and the Sains in Heaven may some say: alas it is a question out of
question, or a question for eternity, but this may and has been said already:
God is the glory of and the Heaven of Heavens both to Saints and Angels: but
how much of (...) Heaven every single Saint shall have for his share, is a
question never to be answered: this we know a Crown shall be on every head, and
a Sun on every face, and the least Saint shall shine as the Sun in the Kingdom
of his Father, Mat. 13. 43. and Christ as a Sun to all: yea Christ humane shall
do so, and if so, what shall Christ divine and the Father in the Spirit do,
that is the question out of question, and beyond all answer: the eye that made
the eye, the ear that made the ear, the Snn that made the Sun, the Heaven that
made that Heaven which is called Heaven, cannot be spoken to: Men may look into
the beam^s, but not into the Sun it is so glorious; the rays of glory, on the
backs of the glorified may be looked into and spoken of, but not to one
thousand part, as once Queen Sheba said to Solomon, eye has not seen, nor ear
heard, that which thou O God have prepared for them that wait for thee, Isa.
64. 4. Nay it never entered into the heart of any man to conceive says St.
Paul, what God has prepared for them that fear him, 1 Cor. 2. 9. O how great
is that Goodness says David. But something is revealed by the Spirit, yea so
much that many wiser than any of you, have despised with disdain and
detestation all yours and this worlds glory for it, and others have desired to
die that they might be at it* when as all as you desire to live for, is only
to sin, or be a little longer out of Hell; but I believe many of you are
Sadduces, which scarce believe there is a Heaven, a Hell or Resurrection: but
fain would Paul die upon this account, and who would not do so and be
uncloathed, that he might be clothed upon with this house from Heaven and
glory of Heaven, yea crowd thorough and thorough the gates of death, for the
Crown of Crowns, this wreath of life and glory: O ^ut where is the Christian
that can say so now, and unstrip his dublet and affections to the creature,
freely laying down all that is near and dear at the feet of Christ, for love to
Christ, the joys of Christ, and glories of Heaven; the Saints cannot see now
as in Stevens time, the glory of God, and Christ at the right hand, nor the
immortal things that Paul speaks of, ^ Cor. 2. 9. And hence it is they cannot
desire to unstrip and be dissolved: O but were the least glimpses of immortal
Crowns and glory clearly in their eyes, they would leap into the grave and call
for death, as a man for a friend in a great distress: we have heard of some
that have thrown themselves into the Ocean for to catch the shadow, I am sure
the God of Heaven and the joys of Heaven are the substance which all men
should catch at, but the shadow most do; yea the Saints themselves are l^w and
dungy, sishing for the creature rather than immortal glories: But were they
minded as in former times, I make no question but the Saints of this age would
(Imperious like) as much scorn the dungy chaff, stubble, straw, and vanity of
this world, as the lofty Eagle does the poorest prey when she is flying toward
Heaven, yea were our thoughts upon our Fathers house, our Fathers home, our
Fathers glory; yea and our glory which is laid up for us where all our
faithful friends are gone, and longs for our communion, me thinks the pavement
and curtains of Heaven, the place where Sun, Moon, and Staries are pitched,
tells us it is a glorious place: yea if the outside of this Ark above the water
be so speckled and spangled, what is the inside where God and all the saved
creatures are; Sun, Moon, and Stars are but the (...) of Heaven, the (...)
beaten garmen^ which must pass away, and be folded up as an old thing, Psalm.
102. 26. And when this old thing shall be done away, God and the Lamb become a
new Heaven to the Saints; yea when God and the Lamb shall compass them, and be
their Temple, and they his Pillars in this Temple, bearing up his everlasting
praises, Revell. 3. 12. Then shall the glory of the Lord and the Lamb be for
Sun and Moon, Revell. 21. 23. Here Gospel, Spirit, Ordinances are in the Church
and Temple, the Sun Moon, and glory of it, and would it were so in all, and not
form and formality, but God shall immediately one day himself become their Sun
and glory, Isa. 60. 20 And the Lamb shall personally lead them to the fountains
of living waters; not to sup a little as now, but to bath and tumble in those
everlasting streams and Oceans of divine glory: yea when every Saint shall
have a Temple, Sun, and Sea of glory to himself, walk hand in hand as it were
with the Lamb, Revell. 7. 17. thorough and thorough the glorious high
discoveries of God, which are the Seas of glory, and the glorified Seas wherein
their souls shall always tumble, never sounding any bottom in those boundless
glorious bancks, carrying them by gales of divine joys further and further,
from all bounds and bottoms, rocks, and dangers. And now I conclude with this
advice, if you indeed think there is a Heaven, look for that, or if indeed this
be a fancy, And all that you call Divinity be a mere piece of knavish Policy,
to make fools and asses of honest men, then take your pleasure still, and let
the days of darkness never come near you nor your thoughts, or families, which
do but spoil your pleasures, for if you affright a child with a Bugbeare, you
may make hm fearful all his life, and if you your selves will fancy that which
is not, It will be great loss and trouble to the minds of such as you, who yet
want more pleasures, or time to pursue after more; nay do you not: O but if
after all there should be a God, O but if there should be a Heaven, and a God
better than Heaven a thousand times, or a thousand Heavens, which should at
last be lost for want of thinking or believing; what a sad case will you then
be in; yea I say what a sad case will you then all be in, when God is lost,
Christ, Heaven, Soul, Body, and all is lost for a moments lust: O Madam
consider this in time; yea this night, least the night of nights overtake you,
which that it may not, it is and ever shall be, the hearts desire and prayer of
him, who with St. Paul wisher^ from his soul that you and your Children, with
the whole Israel of God, may be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ,
Romans 10. 1. And so I rest,

Your humble Servant, W. B.

FINIS.

