AN ESSAY Toward Carrying on the Present WAR AGAINST FRANCE And Other Public
Occasions.

AS ALSO, For Paying off all DEBTS Contracted in the same, or otherwise.

AND New-Coyning of all Our Moneys, Without Charge, To the great Increase of
the Honor, Strength, and Wealth of the Nation.

Humbly Proposed, For the Parliament's Consideration, and Submitted to their
Great Wisdom, and Love to their Country, etc.

By JOHN BLACKWELL, etc.

London, Printed for the Author, 1695.

AN ESSAY Toward Carrying on the Present War against France, and other public
Occasions, etc.
Sect. 1. ABOUT Three Years since, I humbly Proposed (amongst other things) the
New Coining of all our Silver Moneys: And gave these Reasons for it, viz. 1.
They were generally so Bad, as to be Refused abroad; and so, were unserviceable
in other Countries.

2. The suffering them to Pass, gave advantage to the Further clipping them: as
is manifest in our Sad Experience; for, they are now much worse; And so
unserviceable at home.

3. It was Reproachful to us, That it should be Suffered to Pass; And therefore
worthy Consideration and Inquiry into the causes of it.

4: It was no otherwise to be Prevented or Reformed, than by New coining all;
and then, Prohibiting the Passing of any Clipped Money, from and after a certain
day to be Limited; under the Penalty of Seizure and Sequestration; in whose
hands soever the same should afterward be found.



Sect. II. Since which (and as the natural consequence thereof) the Value of
our Gold-Coyn has been enhansed, to about half as much more as the same was
Coined at. The inconveniences and damages whereof to the Nation and Trade
thereof, are, and will be at least as great, as the clipping of the Silver:
And, if not timely Prevented, will utterly Ruin us in Our Trade: And the
longer this is Suffered, the Firmer will the disadvantages be Fixed; till the
Root of all our Commerce becomes Worm eaten, and cankered; and we Lose the
Sweet Fruit thereof for ever.

Sect. III. In short, the whole Nation is almost destitute of Moneys: Not only,
For the carrying on the War (in, or by any Ordinary course of procedure) but,
For Our home Markets: And, Taken off from trade abroad, As, by means hereof,
So, Partly by their Losses at Sea; partly, By the More-advantageous Proposals
for Lending or Laying out their Moneys, on the Lotteries, and Other Ways and
Means found out, and pitched upon, by the Late Parliament, For carrying on the
War: And lastly, By the high Exchange of Moneys abroad, for Commodities
imported hither; and paying our Forces there, who must otherwise have had more
of our Moneys sent hence to our further streightening.

Is there any Remedy? viz.

Q. First, How shall the Silver be New coined; so, as to Become a due Measure
and Standard for Traffic? Q. Secondly, How shall our Gold be Reduced to its
Coined value? Q. Thirdly, How shall the War be carried on thereby? Q. Fourthly,
How shall the Trade be Recovered, so as to preserve our Coyns, and Augment
Bullion?
To the First, viz. How shall the Silver be New-Coyned? etc.
Sect. IV. I Humbly Proposed, That all the Clipped Moneys might be called in, by
a certain day to be limited: That the value in weight might be delivered out
again Newcoyn'd: And, That the Damage accrewing, as well to the Public as the
Private persons concerned, by the New-coinage thereof, might be made good to
Both, by issuing so many Bills of Credit, made Current By Act of Parliament, as
would Countervale the same; so, as there should be no Lessening of the Nation's
Stock; and would cost nothing. And, to facilitate this: That All unnecessary
Silver-plate (especially in Taverns, Inns, Alehouses, and Victualling-houses)
might be Prohibited, called in, Coined and delivered out, immediately, to such
as should bring in the same, at 5 s. 3 d. per ounce, deducting the Coynage.

To the Second, viz. How shall the Gold be Reduced to its Coined value?
Sect. V. I Humbly Propose: That all Coyned-Gold may be likewise called in, by
a certain day: And Each piece Punch'd, and delivered back again to the owner;
thenceforth to pass but at 20 s. each Guinney, etc. And that Like Bills of
Credit may be also delivered to the parties concerned, for 10 s. more, upon
each Guinney* and so proportionably for other Pieces of Gold, etc. And thus,
both Silver and Gold become Reduced to their Coined values, without Prejudice,
Loss, or Damage, either to the Parties concerned, or to the Public Stock of
the Nation: No body is injured, but all greatly obliged, in thankfulness and
loyalty to the King, for Recommending the care thereof; and to the Parliament
for their Enacting the same. For, thus, Our home-Markets and Manufactures will
be supplied, and carried on, in future, to General Satisfaction. And, for
preventing, as much as may be, this additional Charge upon Guinneys, I humble
propose, care may be taken, That from henceforth no Guinneys may be Coined,
till this Work be over; and, afterward, only such as shall be distinguished
from those already Coined, by some special mark in the Stamp thereof, to be
passed at 20 s. and no more. Which is, also, the Reason of Propounding, All
Guinneys already coined may be Punch'd viz. That they may not be twice allowed
for.

To the Third, viz. How shall the War be Carried on thereby?
Sect. VI. I formerly Proposed: 1st, That whatsoever Taxes or Assessments
should be thought fit and necessary to be Raised or Levied, for carrying on the
present War, and other public charges of the Nation, whether By or Upon Lands,
Tenements or Hereditaments, Poll-moneys, or Personal Estates, might be paid by
the Parties so Assessed, Quarterly (as had been done before) in ready Moneys,
or Silver-plate at 5 s. 3 d. per ounce. This, I argued to be necessary, upon
several accounts, (1) To assist and facilitate the Coynage proposed. And (2)
for Pay of our Forces abroad; though possibly not needful to be all sent over in
specie, but, partly Remitted by Bills of Exchange charged by Merchants, etc.
and partly supplied by the Products, Manufactures and Provisions that may be
sent from England, Scotland, and Ireland. [By which I mean, Not only of such
things as are needful for the Soldiers, or them only, but of others to be
transported to Our Confederate Countries, at Merchantable Rates, instead of
moneys: Out of the Proceed whereof, the Soldiers may be paid in the Respective
Moneys or Coyns of such Countries.] Which would be a meanr to keep much of Our
Moneys amongst us, And Afford Employment to Our own Manufacturers at home, in
this dead time of trade; And keep them in peace.

Sect. VII. 2dly, I also Proposed, That every person so Assesled, who should
voluntarily advance and pay in One full years tax, at One Entire payment, To
the Parish or County-Collector, or Receiver, within One month after demand made
of the first quarterly payment; might, in lieu thereof, Have Like Bill or Bills
of Credit delivered him, for the Re-imbursement of his said full Sum paid: And
so, Be out Nothing. And,

Sect. VIII. That, in case the Party taxed should not comply therewith, if any
other Person should (within One Month after That) Pay in the said whole years
tax; and should declare his willingness to Accept his Repayment thereof
Quarterly, from such tax'd-party's-Self, or from the said Collector or
Receiver, when it shall grow due, or be Receiver, when it shall grow due, or be
Received, He might, in like manner, Receive also Half the Value thereof in Like
Bills of Credit, for his encouragement so to do.

Sect. IX. 3. That the like Method Rules and Advantages might be allowed, in
case the Parliament shall Annually Repeat and pass Acts for that purpose,
during the continuance of the War, and for carrying on thereof. And not
otherwise.

Sect. X. 4. That, in case the Sums appointed to be Assessed, Taxed and Levied,
etc. shall not amount to the Respective Values or Sums, at which they shall be
declared, by the Parliament, to be Computed or Estimated [as for Example, if
4s. per Pound (or what ever other Proportion) chargeable on Lands, shall be so
computed and granted to His Majesty, for Two Millions (which, were it duly
taxed, no Doubt it would Raise) and, upon the Taxing and Levying thereof, it
shall appear to amount to no more than One Million and a half, etc.] who so
ever shall voluntarily Advance and Pay any Sum or Sums of Money, or Plate, as
aforesaid, toward the making up the same, might, For every Hundred Pounds
Sterling so paid by him, Receive and have like Bills of Credit delivered him to
the Value of 120 l. and so proportionably for any Lesser or Greater Sum that
shall be so paid in and Received on that Account. On which Terms, no Doubt, but
such Sums as the Parliament shall think fit to Raise, for carrying on the War
(from year to year) may, and will be Raised, in Money, for that Service; as
Long as there shall be so much Money in Trade, or hoarded up, in the Nation, to
be had: Which is our present Consideration and Care. And, further than that, is
to be Over-fore-sighted in the the present Christ's. And,

If any Object,

This will Reflect on, and Lower the Reputation of Our Nation abroad; as if we
were reduced to so sinking a Condition, as not to have Money sufficient to
carry on the War: And, thence, that we can not hold out, to the Length of the
French King, etc.

I Answer, First,

Sect. XI. Such as so think will but deceive themselves; and, if they be Our
Enemies, be necessitated to take New Measures; for, (which they might have
observed before) the King will certainly be supplied by this means with ready
Moneys, as much as he shall need, each Year, and that, in the beginning thereof
(and by no other way whatsoever) for carrying on the War. For, these Advantages
will bring out all the hoarded best Money which any have Culled and Laid by
against a more Clowdy Day. If means be used for promoting Trade (as is
hereinafter proposed) Otherwise, 'twill be in vain to conceal our Poverty: All
the World will see it, what ever Taxes shall be Laid on the Nation, cannot
otherwise be paid: So that, if Our Dependence should be thereon, they must and
will fail, for want of a Money-stock to pay them: But,

Sect. XII. Second, It Is well known, That all Nations, and Persons, improve
their Credit (some Banks of Credit) as well as Moneys for carrying on their
respective Trades, and Occasions, both at home and abroad; without the least
Reflection of Dishonor; and, Grow Rich thereby [to which many of our
Wealthiest Men in this City and Kingdom, must subscribe, who began with Little
of their own] And, much more may these Nations. For,

Sect. XIII. Third, His Majesty and Parliament [Designing Vast Improvements,
both of Wealth and Power, for these Nations, by their own Products and
Manufactures (which may be as well done by Bills amongst our selves, as by
ready Moneys) beyond whatever was in Prospect, Attempt or Attainment
heretofore, by us, or any Nation under Heaven, by all their or Our ready
Moneys] By this Medium of Bills of Credit, added to Our Money-Stock, for the
Enlargement and Increase thereof to what Proportion they please will be able to
carry on the same, Pari Passu, with this Expensive War: And thereby become more
Formidable to Our Enemies. And, the Rather,

Sect. XIV. For that, no other Nation will be able to keep Pace with, or go to
the Length of these Kingdoms, nor to imitate us considerably, in these
Undertakings; by Reason of our Products and Manufactures, to so great Excess of
theirs, etc. which must of Necessity bring in Great Plenty of Gold and Silver.
Nor, will they be able to hinder our Free Trading, during the Lasting and
Continuance of this War; if we be not wanting to Ourselves: And, consequently,
in an Ordinary Course of Providence, we shall find our Enemies disposed, or
necessitated to seek Our Peace and Friendship, when they shall find us
disposing Ourselves into such a flourishing Condition. Which brings on the
Consideration of the Ways and Means next to be Treated of, viz. Under,

The Fourth Question, viz. How shall Our Trade be Recovered? So as to Preserve
our Coin, and Augment Bullion? etc.
Sect. XV. I Answer, First, By the Parliaments owning and encouraging The Royal
Fishery Company and Trade, to the increase of One, Two or Three millions per
Annum Export, of that Sea-Product: Which, Added to Our other Products and
Manufactures, and they also improved and multiplied as aforesaid, must
necessarily produce and bring in great Wealth, of all kinds: And particularly,
Plenty of Moneys, for its Balance, from the Masters of it in all Countries,
etc. For, the Situation of these Islands, being such as may justly challenge to
be the Emporium or Mart of all Trade, beyond all others put together; and
Furnished thereby, at all times, with Magazines and Stores of all Sorts, for
war and peace; for Our selves and all our Neighbors, must needs be attended
with this Success (Our Ports being made Free for their Importation, and
Exportation after a time to be Limited.) And, we shall not need to fear the
Vent of such Surplusage of Imports as We shall not use, even for Ready-moneys
of all Countries who shall need them: Nor shall we have any occasion to Send
out our moneys, to Fetch in like Proportions yearly.

Sect. XVI. Secondly, By taking care, That Guards and Convoys be always in a
Readiness to attend, as well our Fishing-trade, as our Foreign Exports and
Imports: To which purpose, it is Humbly Proposed (as necessary hereunto) that a
Select Number of Ships of War be set apart for that sole use: and be under such
Conduct and Commanders as may be accountable for their Miscarriage, by the
Neglect of their duty therein. The Raising, Charge and Paying of which Ships
may be Born, and Provided for, by the Bills of Credit afore-mentioned, which
will cost the Nation nothing. And this May be called (in way of distinction)
The Trading Admiralty, or Fleet volant for Trade; as the other is The Navy
Royal. It may also be done by Commissions from His Majesty, and be but
Temporary, viz. whilst His Majesty, being engaged in Wars abroad, cannot so
well, or seasonably attend the particular consideration of such things, as may
encourage and enlarge so great trade of these Nations, Or Addresses cannot be
made to him in order thereunto.

If it be said, This seems to Lay the whole Foundation of our Trade and
Commerce, on Bills of Credit, which have Neither Intrinfick Value, Nor Fund.

Sect. XVII. Admitting that, yet (1.) If we have a Sufficiency of these Bills
in Our Counting-houses, Pocket books, or Lettercases, uncounterfeitable, made
Current (as Moneys) by Act of Parliament: which will answer all our occasions
at home, as well as moneys in specie; and particularly may as well be disposed
forth at Interest on Bonds, as Ready-money in Baggs: And consequently we become
as rich in these, for all Uses to which we would employ moneys, as now we are;
yea, and much more: Where then Lies the Force of this Objection? For,

Sect. XVIII. (2.) It cannot be denied, but that, If we were twenty times as
Rich, in that which will effectually carry on Trade and Manufactures, pay
Debts, purchase Lands, and manage our Markets, amongst our selves, as now we
are, or Ever were, We shall be able thereby to multiply and Export Our
Manufactures proportionably; and carry on our Fishing-trade (the Richest Golden
Mine in the Experience of our Neighbors; so called by them, for that it
infallibly brings them Gold in) to far greater value (from the Greatest Masters
of it) than our necessary Imports of Commodities from other Countries need to
be, for Our home Expense: And what is Imported more, may be Easily shipped off to
other Countries; as is aforementioned. As for Example:

Sect. XIX. If we were wont to Export Cloths, Stuffs, Lead, Tin, Iron, Moneys,
Bullion, etc. To the value of Two Millions yearly; And, by the Fish we may
take, to Export One, two or three Millions more, without any Moneys, etc. The
Product and Balance thereof must be answered to us in other Goods from other
Countries; or Remitted or brought to us in Bullion, or Ready-moneys, (as it has
with our Neighbors to above Five millions per Annum, on that account) Or it
must Remain in Our Factors hands abroad, for Supply of our Foreign Occasions:
So our Riches will increase, proportionably as the Export can be increased,
whether of our own Products and Manufactures, or other Importations; for, there
will be no occasion for Transporting Our moneys for goods: And it is
undeniable, That whatsoever means may be suggested for furnishing or keeping of
moneys amongst us, must be Fruitless: For, there will abide no more with us,
than such Proportion, as the Superbalance of Our Exports shall amount unto, let
what value will be set on our Moneys, above the Current price thereof here, and
in other Countries with whom we deal.

Sect. XX. (4.) It Is found by Experience, That, Bills are judged so necessary
(whether of Intrinsic value or not) as that, without them, these Kingdoms
cannot otherwise subsist, or pay Taxes much longer. And They are become so
useful and eligible already, as that most men desire them rather than our
present moneys: Upon which Presumption (since the Erecting the Bank of England)
Banks of Credit are multiplied, upon men's voluntary Undertakings; on various
Principles or Funds, Methods and Pretensions, also Uses and Ends: Most of them
for the private Advantages thereof to the Undertakers, and without any
Reference or Regard to the Supporting the Parliamentary Funds and Credit given
by them; Or, Having the least Respect to the present Exigences of the Public,
or How they shall be Provided for next Year. By which means, nevertheless, the
moneys we have are, for the present, Eek'd out for Our necessary occasions: And
both our Markets at home, and Bills of Exchange from abroad, have been Supplied
and Answered. And, if so,

Sect. XXI. Why may not such Bills of Credit as are Proposed, be made Current,
for the Service of the Public, By Act of Parliament; and Regulated or Kept
within Bounds by Law, for carrying on this Necessary War; wherein the King has
been engaged by Parliament. Particularly, why may not His Majesty be supplied
with such Number and values of them, as, Added to what present Taxes the
condition of the Nation will bear to have imposed, upon the terms aforesaid,
may complete the Sum needful, for Carrying on the Present War, this next Year;
and, so much Longer as that shall continue; and also, pay off the Debts
contracted Last Year, etc. through the deficiency, or falling short, of the Sums
or Funds settled for the same; in the way and manner before Proposed?

As touching that part of the Objection against the want of a Fund for these
Bills, etc. I Answer,

Sect. XXII. Tho some things might be offered (which possibly might silence
some Objectors) yet the Debt (should the War continue) would be so Vast, as,
Nothing Less than the whole Nation can be Equivalent: And, That can no
otherwise be engaged, than by an Act of Parliament. It cannot be Rationally
Expected, they should Expose Particular Estates of this, or that, or another
Sort of Men, to become liable, exclusive of Others: And it is manifest, if the
People were ever so willing, they cannot pay down so much Money, yet the War
must and may be carried on by Bills, etc.

If (then) the Parliament shall judge it necessary to make use of such Bills of
Credit, and to make them Current by Law, and for facilitating the New Coynage
of our present Moneys, and giving some Respite and Ease from greater Taxes,
shall Enact, That they shall be, and continue, Current until the Nation be in a
better Capacity and Condition to pay them off, by Laying Moderate Taxes on all
men's Estates and Persons in general; and shall rather choose to have them so
paid off, than to continue; That will be as good a Fund as can be expected. For,

Why should they be called in, at any time, to become so Burdensome?

First, They will be of such General Use and Great Convenience, when understood
and further experimented, as, People will choose to have them rather than moneys
in specie; as is found true in fact amongst Our Selves, to the value of many
Hundreds of thousand Pounds already given out by the 'foremention'd Banks
erected. Besides which, They have also been so found and approved of in other
places of the World, even where Money-Banks have been erected by Public
Authority, viz.

In Holland; where their Bills, or Credit in Bank, are ordinarily better than
Moneys, by at least Three per Cent. (sometimes Four, Five, and more.

In Venice also; where their Credit is better by 20 per Cent. and was Once at
above 30 per Cent. and with much difficulty Reduced to 20 per Cent. where it is
Fixed to be so. By which means also that State has answered a Debt of above Two
millions borrowed of their People, and spent on their public occasions. And,
all their Creditors are so satisfied, as, That, never will any of them ask 100
l. for the 100 the State had of him; being sure of 120 l. for the same from any
other hand.

Sect. XXIII. And if any enquire, What induced that people thus to Raise and
Value their said Bills or Credit? I answer,

1. The Ease of Counting, Carriage, and Preventing Damage to the Receiver by
Counterfeit, Clipped and Base Coin; which is as valuable with us, at this
Juncture. (As is obvious to All.

2. Their Safety in traveling, etc. (As visible as the other.

3. The Advantage that was to be made by the Exchange, on the Account of such
Conveniences, etc. Where then is the Necessity or Usefulness of a Fund, in our
Case?



Sect. XXIV. I answer, (1) Some late Proceedings, for Raising Moneys, have
given a Rise for such an Expectation; But, there, men parted voluntarily with
their Estates; whereas, in this case, men have these Bills for Nothing, And may
dispose them to the Uses of such Trading and Manufactures, as may bring in
Riches to themselves, and the whole Nation.

(2) It Is Objected, upon a Supposition, that some Persons, (perhaps of those
who will be concerned to give a Sanction to the matter of these Proposals) may
imagine, that the Bills delivered out must necessarily be called in, at one
Time or other, etc. whereas such consider not, that the Usefulness of these
Bills will make them Current for continuance, and preferable to Moneys, upon
the forementioned Accounts; as it has proved in the Two forementioned
Instances. And,

If still any doubt, That Bills may prove prejudicial in aftertimes, and, that
if any future Parliament shall conceive them to be so, they will make them void,
etc.

Sect. XXV. That Is thus Resolved, viz. Instead of prejudicing the Nation, they
will continue to Promote, Improve and Carry on Our Home-Trade, Manufactures,
and Fishery, as aforesaid. And thereby Answer Our Expectations as effectually
as Moneys in Specie: And, the rather, for that the Generality of the People (at
their First Receiving of them, (viz. for the Re-imbursing of their Taxes) will
be thereby Prepared to Esteem them, By their Propriety in, and Possession of
them, in the way and manner before proposed, and become enriched thereby. It
will therefore be, as far from any Parliament to pass a Law to make them void,
(without first paying them off) as, to pass an Act, for taking away all their
Lands, (which, their Justice, as well as Interest will not suffer them to do)
For every Parliament Man, and Person in the Nation, will have a considerable
part of their Personal Estates lie principally in these Bills. So, That Fear is
sufficiently removed, by Interest, which will not lie. But,

May not our Coin be so Raised in Denomination, Price or Value, as to bring in
Gold and Silver plentifully?

Sect. XXVI. I Answer, it is Evident, (even to a Demonstration) That the
Inhansing the Value of our Moneys, whether Silver or Gold, is, and will be a
very great impoverishing of, if not utterly Destructive to the Nation. For,
that, will, unavoidably raise the Price of all our Foreign Exchanges, and work
Confusion in our Trade. And, that Raises, consequentially, the Price of all
Goods; not only of Foreign but Domestic. Which, though it may not be any great
Damage (possibly) to Our Retaylers thereof, and such as bring to Our Markets
(for they will not sell to Loss) yet, to the Body of the Rest of the People
(the Buyers thereof) and, the Poorer Sort, especially, viz. Servants,
Day-Labourers, Artificers, Seamen, Soldiers, etc. it cannot be otherwise: And
what a Condition then will this bring the Nation into?

Sect. XXVII. Now, that it is, and will be so: I shall give Two Instances.
within His Majesty's Dominions in America, which occured to my Own Observation,
whilst I was the Unworthy Governor, of the Province of Pensylvania, viz. about
Seven Years since.

The One is, in New England; where the Government, conceiving they had power by
their Charter from the King, to Coin Moneys; Coined Shillings of about the
Value of Nine Pence Sterling, and Stamped the same Twelve Pence: They also
Raised the Value of Spanish Pieces of Eight, of above Seventeen Penny Weight,
from Four Shillings Six Pence to Six Shillings, (which held proportion with
their Shillings) This They did, upon this Vulgar Error, and misapprehension,
That, by this Inhansing the Price of Silver, They should, both keep their own
Coin, and, bring in and retain other Imported Moneys, amongst them. But, This
(instead of Answering their Expectation) Raised the Value of all Goods, to, at
least 25 per Cent. And likewise all their Exchanges, whether to, or from
England, or other Parts, proportionably: Or, so much more of their Moneys were
carried forth in these Species (though they were sufficiently severe against its
Exportation) to their Disappointment.

The other Instance (and more notable) is in Pensylvania; where, though they
Coined no Moneys, yet, suffering Spanish pieces of Eight, of not above 11 or 12
penny-weight, (and consequently not above 3 Shillings in value Sterling) to
pass current at 6 Shillings: And, though the Exchange did not Rise proportionably
(For, They had Little or very Seldom occasion to Return any in Trade); yet this
other Consequence attended their so doing, viz. That such as brought thither
any Goods or Merchandises, needful for that Plantation, from England, etc. when
any came to contract with them for their Goods, they treated them after this
manner, viz. (Says the Importer) The Cargo cost me 100 l. in English
Ready-Money, at about 5 s. per ounce Sterling. whereas Your Money is not half the
value: So, I must have 200 l. of your Money, or, I shall be a Loser of my First
Cost: And I cannot take less than 50 l. Sterling per Cent. for my Freight,
Risque, and Profit, which will be 100 l. more of your Money: And accordingly
Receives of the Retailer there 300 l. who, generally raises the price of the
same Goods to another 100 l. whereby, the price of the same Goods which cost
100 l. English-money, costs the people there, Four hundred pounds.

The Importer, having Received his 300 l. Buys therewith (only) such
Commodities of the Country-Products, as he needs for his Voyage; and carries
away the rest in specie (making Money, which ought to be the Standard of
Traffic, to be the Merchandise (as they must do who take it at enhaunc'd
values, etc.) And, Thus three pieces went for one, and their Moneys decreased
proportionably.

The Effect whereof was, The Generality of the People (except their
Shopkeepers, Artificers, Handycrafts-men, Carpenters, Bricklayers, Laborers,
and Servants) grew poorer. And, particularly, it had this influence upon the
Landed men (whether Proprietors or Farmers) viz. that they are forced to give
great wages to all these Sorts of poor people, especially to Ploughmen,
Carters, etc. viz. From 12 l. per annum wages to 27 l. (besides Victuals, etc.)
And, at this Charge, they get a little Corn; which, if they spend not all in
their own Families, they bring (what is left) to the Market, and sell that
there, at 2 s. 6 d. the Bushel of Wheat, which, in English Money, is but 15 d.
per bushel. Which impoverisheth the Masters (many of them) to such degree, as,
after a while, their Servants set up in their steads, on new Plantations given
them for their Encouragement to plant the Country: And their Masters Children
become their Servants: All which naturally ensues their enhaunsing the value of
their Moneys, amongst themselves: For, say their Servants, etc. We must have
such Wages, or we cannot live: We can Buy nothing we have occasion for, but at
four times the Rate of what is paid in England. And therefore,

Whilst we Plead (though under the most specious pretenses having Regard barely
to the Theory and Notions of things taken up thence, or from vulgar
misapprehensions) for the enhauncing of our Silver or Gold, to above the Par,
Intrinsic value and ancient Mete-yard of Traffic, between us and other
Nations, We are, in truth and reality, steering by the same Needle, or Common
Politics of Pensylvania; and discern it not. Which will (in time) be like
Ruinous to Us.

Nor is it any Answer to our Assertion, to tell us, Our Servants, etc. need
Nothing that comes from beyond Sea; (which may be as truly predicated of Our
selves too, could we be contented (with Sobriety) to use our own Products and
Manufactures): For, what does that avail? Such do not observe or consider, that
the prices (even of our Home-Commodities and Manufactures that are necessary,
(as well as Foreign, that are less necessary) are Raised alike upon us all,
since Our Coin has been at this pass.

Nor do such give us any Estimate of the Height to which Servants, as well as
their Masters, are grown, (since the last Act of State for enhauncing the value
of Silver and Gold) in their Expectations, and Deportments. Which yet can no
more be Reformed, than the Nation Converted from their Atheistical Profaneness,
and Impieties, etc. till their Superiors and Masters set them better Copies to
write by.

There is, then, A Necessity of putting a Stop to the enhaunsing of our Moneys:
And, if any Easier, Safer, More Probable or Advantageous means, ways, or
methods of doing it to general Satisfaction, than these before mentioned, and
humbly proposed, be offered; I shall readily Receive my dismiss from this
Controversy, having offered my Poor Mite. But,

There Remains yet One Stumbling Block, in the Minds of some; who do not duly
weigh and consider, That there is no Perfection attainable under the Sun, etc.
It Is this, viz. The Danger of Counterfeit Bills. Touching which, I shall offer
some Considerations, viz.

I Humbly Proposed,

1. That the said Bills of Credit should be printed or impressed on Paper, from
engraven Copper Plates; and gave Reasons for it. Which, together with a
Specimen of such Bills, being Uncounterfeitable, I shall readily Evince when
required.

2. That the said Paper should be of a Different Make and Mark from any yet
Extant in the World.

3. That the Indented Counter-parts of Each Bill, should be Filed up, and kept
in a Public Office or Offices, to be erected for that purpose; in order to the
discovery and preventing of Damage thereby, to the Public.

4. That the Printing or Publishing such Bills, to any greater Number, Value,
or Proportion than shall be allowed and appointed by Act of Parliament, (though
by the persons that shall be thereunto authorized) might be made as penal as
Coining or Counterfeiting the Current Moneys of the Kingdom. Or, That the same:
And, particularly,

5. That the engraving all such plates, and making, having, or keeping
undiscovered any such paper, so made and marked, as from time to time shall be
made use of upon this occasion: Or bringing the like into this Kingdom from
beyond the Seas, by any other person than by Order of such as shall be by such
Act of Parliament appointed and authorized thereunto, might be punished with
great Severity, both Corporal and pecuniary (in terrorem) viz. (Being Convicted
thereof) may be Branded in the Right Hand and Forehead, or Cheek: So, as to be
known thereby ever after; and thenceforth kept strictly to the most Severe,
Servile, Constant, Hard Work and Labor: Enjoined a daily Task; and on failure
of doing it, have Correction at the Keeper's or Workmaster's discretion: Never
to be pardoned, remitted, or mitigated, but upon the discovery and producing of
other his Partners, Accomplices, Associates or other Offenders in like nature,
and proving the same. Which, undoubtedly, if pursued, will deterr and keep all
men, who have the least Spark of Ingenuity or Humanity from attempting to
Counterfeit these Bills, if any thing will. And,

6. That though it is impossible in nature these Bills should be so
Counterfeited, as to Deceive the Office; Or, That in 20 millions of them,
printed off from the same Copper Plates, any two should agree, [as has been
acknowledged by several Engravers and other Counterfeiters of Writings
critically skilled in such Affairs, and called together for Advice in the like
Case] yet, That persons abroad may not, in all cases, be so critical as to
discern true Bills from false, through the Niceities of them. It may be
therefore Queried, viz.

Is there Any Course to be prescribed by way of Remedy for avoiding False
Bills?

I Answer,

1. Where the distance is not great, persons may Repair to the Office, where
the Counterparts of all True Bills Remain; and, have them examined, as
Exchequer-Tales by applying the Counterparts: And, if Remote, They may be sent
up per Post, etc. Or, The person who offers them, may be put upon the proof of
them; or, if suspected, give Security. And being made to continue but for a
Year, from the respective Dates of them, (as is proposed) They will then be
certainly Detected, and the Values of them known.

2. Suppose that there should be some Bills Counterfeited, which may be thought
fit to be Repaired (to the person deceived thereby) By the Public: It would
(in the whole) be far Less (being thus Annually detected) than the Twentyeth
part of the Interest-Money, hitherto allowed for Moneys borrowed upon the Funds
settled, and Laid upon the Nation according to Mr. Brisco's Computations, in
his Printed Treatise.) Besides, the Repaying of them might be by other Bills,
which would cost nothing. But,

3. The Risque of such is No greater than of Gold and Silver Coin, of which the
Nation has been, and daily is, and will be deceived: Nor than That of all
Merchants Bills of Exchange, and Letters of Advice from Foreign Parts: All
which may be more easily Counterfeited. Besides,

4. There Is no Sorts of Deeds, Conveyances of Lands, or Bonds given for Moneys,
But, they, also, are more Liable to be Counterfeited, both as to the Hands and
Seals of the Granters, Obligors, and Witnesses: All which, etc. may be so
Counterfeited, as, the Parties themselves will not be able to deny them to be
theirs. Yea, even Exchequer-Tales, are liable to be Counterfeited, so as
Persons may be doubtful, till they come to the Office, etc. Yet, By these more
uncertain Methods of Common Dealings, and Dangers, We are not affrighted, or
taken off from our Correspondencies, and Businesses, as Men.

Why then, in this Case only, and upon this Urgent Occasion? Wherein, if now we
become so singularly Wise or Cautious, as to stumble at the Threshold, we
endanger Our Selves, and these Nations and Government, to All Our unavoydable
Ruin, Rather than run the Hazard of (probably) some small inconsiderable Sum
per Annum, which will certainly come to be discovered, at each Years end, at
farthest, and Cancelled? This were to be Penny-wise, but Pound-foolish,
according to Our English Proverb.


