NEW and CURIOUS OBSERVATIONS On the Art of Curing the Venereal Disease. And
the Accidents that it produces in all its Degrees, explicated by Natural and
Mechanical Principles, with the motions, actions and effects of Mercury, and
its other Remedies. WHEREIN Are discovered on the same Subject the Errors of
some Authors, and the most notorious Cheats of Empiricks, Mountebanks, and
generally of Ignorant Pretenders, and Impostors.

Written in French by Monsieur de Blegny, Surgeon in Ordinary to the French
Queen.

Englished by Walter Harris, Doctor of Physic, lately Fellow of New College in
Oxford.

With the several Approbations of the most Eminent Doctors and Surgeons in
Paris.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Dring, over against the Innertemple-gate; and Tho.
Burrel, at the Golden-ball under St. Dunston's Church in Fleet Street. 1676.

THE PREFACE.
HAving had the happiness to be well acquainted with the Ingenious Author of
this Treatise, while I spent some considerable time in Paris, in pursuance of
those advantages in Physic, which are now found there to be very great and
extraordinary; by the universal care, and diffusive munificence of the present
Active Monarch; insomuch that the Curious and Inquisitive of Montpellier, and
their other famous Universities, do now continually flock to Paris, for their
better improvement; enjoying not only the pleasure of this Author's good
Conversation, but the opportunity of his great Practice, in the Cure of this
Disease; Finding his Principles established, not only by many good
Ratiocinations, but seconded by much Experience; And being an eye witness
there, how well success did answer his Pretensions, I have thought it not
altogether useless to make England enjoy the same benefit of these
Observations, that France did thereby lately receive. And that France did
indeed receive some benefit by this Book, we have reason enough to believe, if
we can trust the Judgment of all the best Physicians there. For hardly has
Book been favored with more numerous Approbations of Learned and Able men. The
most Famous Faculty of Paris was pleased to attest the usefulness of it, though
I believe no University in the World is more cautious of admitting or approving
New Principles, or New Practice in Physic: None can keep closer to the Ancient
Long-experienced Method than they. The King's first and chief Physician, the
chief Physicians of the Prince of Conde, and of Madam, the several Surgeons
also of the Royal Families, and most eminent ones in Paris did all agree to put
their Names to it, for to testify their particular approbation of this Book,
and the great Usefulness of these Observations. 'Twill therefore need no
Rhetoric to recommend it to the Public; the lamentable Practice, to say no
worse, that is here commonly used in the Cure of this Disease, by many who do
acquire themselves a Reputation by nothing else but good store of Confidence,
will sufficiently convince those that read and understand it, of what
consequence it may prove to the better performance of their undertakings.

I know that the Author nevertheless, before the public appearance of this
Work, whilst his Design was the Subject of men's ill-grounded Discourses,
wanted not enemies in abundance to censure and decry him; those who were
Masters in the Mystery, and had long and sweetly tasted the pleasant fruits,
and plentiful rewards of men's unhappiness and debauchery, became presently
apprehensive; thought there was Treachery in the case; and endeavored to
villifie the thing and person too, as much as they were able, 'till the Press
had cleared, or destroyed all their Jealousies.

Now the same exceptions may be made against its appearance in English, many
may perhaps shrink, and fear some diminution of their livelihood; others may
indeed plead against our thus exposing the foundation of this, as well as other
parts of Physic, to the small understanding of every Good Woman or illiterate
pretender. The first must only be pitied, for that they build their Fortunes
only on the Ignorance of others; but the latter may deserve a more ample
consideration. For many Sober and Learned men have been of the opinion, that
our thus discovering all parts of Physic in the Language of every Gossip, is
far from being beneficial to the public; that we hereby put edged tools into
the hands of Children, and teach men to play too much with their own and others
Healths.

But if we well consider what the most eminent Physicians in former Ages did in
this matter, we shall quickly dissipate such groundless fears, and reconcile
our opinions to this Condescension to the meanest Capacities. Hippocrates,
Galen, Celsus, and others, both Greek and Latin Oracles in Physic, did always
write their works in Greek and Latin, because those were the Mother-languages
of their Countries; and their Design was really to do their Countries good. How
easily do men grant, that every Good, the more it is communicated, the better
it is! And certainly that man does effectually do more good, who makes his
labors conduce to the benefit of the Generality, than he who desires to be
Admired only in the Closets of Contemplative men, or the Schools of an
University. The Honest Improvers of Husbandry, and Mechanics, were the men
Deified heretofore, and that will still deserve Immortal Honor in all future
Ages. Apollo could never procure that Favor for a man's being skilled in
Languages, or for the most admired Theories, that were useless, or little
beneficial.

And it is for this reason that I can never enough admire the truly Noble
Designs of our Royal Society, who do not lose their time in untying frivolous
Knots, and unfolding intricate Riddles: They take as large a prospect into
Universal Nature, as the Dioptricks of Man's Weak Understanding will give
leave; and though the Subject of their Disquisition seems sometimes low and
mean, yet their end is always Noble and Great, and adorned with all the
advantages that can be desired. I know giddy heads, and frothy spirits do often
make this Royal Assembly the sport of their little Wits, and the mockery of
such as have as little understanding as themselves; but they may know, that
long after their poor hearts are quite knaw'd with Envy, and become the proper
food of Worms, this August Society will remain the Admiration of all Wise men,
and the Glory of this Nation.

It is not a little Observable, that the Ingenious Members of it have
unanimously chosen to write their Works in English; and though they converse or
correspond with all parts of the World, yet they choose to confine a little to
us their vast Discoveries, and most considerable Improvements of Knowledge;
which shows, they had rather do much real good at home, than make Ostentation
of Learning and gain Reputation abroad.

Now notwithstanding what has been said on this Subject, though Galen and
Hippocrates did communicate their great Wisdom in their plainest Language, and
the most Ingenious of this Age do so now, yet this must not be an encouragement
for presumptuous persons to think themselves hereby grow wise on a sudden, or
that the reading of this Book, will sufficiently enable Ignorant men to become
Bold Undertakers. They are very much mistaken, who think the printing of an
English Dispensatory (as has been of late years indeed done, but with the
needless Additions of the most uncouth and silly Drollery, that ever Learned
men have had the ill fortune to be abused in, and this by one who thought
himself, forsooth, abundance wiser than so deservedly renowned a College, but
must expect to be thought so only in some poor Chimney-corners, and over the
Winter-tales of some few harmless deluded people, who must be pitied as well as
himself) it is not such a business, I say, that can set up Good women for the
Practicing of Physic. Much sweat, and many great Advantages, both Inward and
Outward, God knows, are required to the right performing so weighty an
employment. The most exquisite Fabric in the Universe, or the Anatomy of the
Microcosm, must be thoroughly understood; the most profound Principles of this
Art must be maturely considered, and well digested in the understanding; the
Nature of Diseases, their several Motions, and different Symptoms, be
diligently searched into, either through those great assistances men usually
meet with in other Countries in all manner of respects, or the particular
Introduction of some Friend here at home; the spacious Field of the Materia
Medica, must be often walked into, the many curious productions of Nature
known, and the excellent Compositions that Art abundantly furnishes us with,
must deserve Good Consideration.

If these things were but indifferently weighed, and the severe Obligations
that lie on every Honest man's Conscience, to the right performing what he
undertakes of this high nature, were but a little soberly thought on, it might
be able to deter many from so presumptuously venturing on the lives of others;
and turning Mountebanks, with a few Receipts. It is a sad and bleeding
reflection, what infinite mischiefs, and frequent Murders are daily committed
in this Great City, by those who slily lurk in corners, or else, who impudently
paste their senseless pretensions in all the public, but stinking places of
the Town. And indeed it is a thousand pities, that Able men had not more
commonly a Declared Honesty, and Known readiness to supply the wants of the
Multitude; who find themselves in a manner constrained through the Pride and
Avarice of some, and the Laziness of others, to commit the most precious of all
Temporal Blessings, their Health, into the Merciless Hands, and Dangerous
Experiments of such unsufferable Enemies to the Public Good. But the College
now intends in a short time to prevent the increase or continuance of these
unhappy mischiefs, by their particular Care and Charity; and they may thereby
expect more blessing from Heaven on their daily endeavors. For let profane
Bravo's, or conceited Naturalists, scoff, or smile, at the particular
Dependence I presume every man's Health and Affairs certainly have on the
Influence, and Providence of Heaven above us; if they will but seriously glance
into the History of their own past actions, and the most important events of
their lives, they will be easily confounded at their former folly, and
sufficiently convinced of the the truth of what I assert.

Those therefore who love their Healths in earnest, and do not place it in the
reach of Universal Pills, High-named Elixirs, and suspected Arcanums, may be
further pleased to know that Man's Body is a Machine of so very curious a
Nature, that its Diseases and Infirmities are capable of as great variety of
circumstances and alterations, as there are infinity of different parts in it;
that since Luxury and ease have so far prevailed upon us, as to render us
incapable of enduring those hardships little Cottages do still suffer, and
thereby receive the benefit of; since there is such variety of circumstances in
our several ways of living, and so great an inconstancy both in the quaility
and quantity of what we eat and drink, Diseases even of the same kind must
needs have a very great Latitude, not only in different persons, according to
their several Constitutions, but even in the same person at different times.

Nature does sufficiently declare the truth of this in the various
configuration of men's Faces; for seeing there is so great curiosity shown in
the outward contexture of so small dimensions, that not two persons in all the
World can ever be found exactly alike, if they are closely compared together;
what may we then think, or how many little instruments must we imagine
requisite within us, for the orderly motion of the whole Mass! We have no
reason therefore to wonder, that not only different Nations, but also
particular persons, we are once acquainted with, may be easily known, or
distinguished by their outward Gest, and particular Martch* because the subtle
diversity of their infinite little Organs, and various disposition of the whole
Fabric, must needs incline them to very different motions.

I shall not endeavor to fore-stall you with any Collection of the most
considerable Remarks of this Book. A very little Patience will be able to
conquer them all. Only I shall take notice to you, that he makes the Pox to be
as Ancient as Fornication and Adultery; that wanton men in the days of Old were
the Fathers of it, and Harlotry its Mother, when and wheresoever Beastliness
and Uncleanness have much prevailed on the practice of men. The Confusion and
Corruption of so precious a substance as is the Seed, is here supposed to
degenerate into so high a malignancy, when the Seed of many different persons
do meet together in the Womb, are there cherished by the natural heat, and at
length exert their acttivities in this heterogeneous Fermentation* and we may
the easier conceive the truth of this, if we consider what strange and dismal
effects, how numerous and dreadful Diseases the Womb is often the Mother of, by
Corruption of the Seed in one Woman alone; how much more exalted then must the
putrefaction be, and the unhappy Parent of how degenerate an Offspring, when
the additional successions of many new Corruptions do still conspire to the
same end, and still contribute to a further Advancement!

Now though this and several other things here, are very prettily conceived,
and have my entire approbation of them, yet I would by no means be thought
implicitly to embrace whatsoever is here established, or at random defend all
the delights of his thoughts, the scattered productions of his, or any man's
wandering Fancy. Every man has his roving, as well as lucid intervals; and
though they may very often be in the right, yet they may sometimes be in the
wrong too. We have all indeed our particular Talents, and it will be certainly
required of us, how we have employed or advanced them. It will not be enough
for us sluggishly to say, we have had such or such a Learned Master, and
carefully laid up the Treasure he committed to our charge, unless some
improvement be made of it, or at least we show our endeavors to make an
increase. I am very confident, nothing in all the World has ever put so
considerable a stop to the successive career, true Science would daily make, as
a blind Suffrage, and mean submission to the dictates of persons we have a good
opinion of. And for this reason I cannot but commend, and admire the declared
designs of some Worthy men among us; who, though they do not transact Wonders
every Month, and show themselves Chosen Sons of Nature, yet sure they deserve
good words at least, and that Petulancy, with which some do daily nibble at
them, might methinks be well spared. But to return again; as I do not profess
my self a Disciple of this Gentleman, in all things he is pleased to utter; so
I cannot but give him his due, and commend him much for his ingenious Attempts.
For whether Mercury be of such absolute importance to the cure of this Disease,
when Fermented a while in the Blood, and grown a little inveterate, as this
Author would have it; or whether the Ceremony of omission of a Flux in some
persons of Quality, and especially Women, be not the True and Latent Cause of
their continual Indispositions, I leave to every man to judge by his own
Discretion and Experience. For my part, as I do not assent to those who
violently maintain, that nothing at all can be done without Mercury; so I much
pity the poor Spirit of those who think of it as a Hobgoblin; and are as
apprehensive of giving or receiving the administration of it, as they would be
of meeting a hungry Lion. Men ought indeed to be Wonderful Cautious, how they
presume to make use of so suspected a Medicine; yet he has seen but little
into the Nature of things, or is wholly involved in a popular prejudice, who
knows not, that Quicksilver, as quick as it is, may be tamed by Art; and may
sometimes, by Discreet Masters, be very seasonably employed to good purpose. I
know it is very hard to speak of this subject without being mistaken, on without
being thought to have too great a kindness for it, if one does not utterly
Declare War against all who magnify its effects: Nevertheless, I am sure all
knowing men will interpret what I have now said, favorably enough.

There Is a famous Doctor in Paris, one of the King's Professors of Physic, but
one who can never hear speak of Mercury, without presently reckoning up twenty
Mortal Diseases it must needs be apt to produce: This person has told me, when
I took occasion to speak of the Salivation, that he has performed a Flux
before some Doctors of his Faculty, without the assistance, or use of Mercury;
and that he mixed the Ingredients, and gave them the Patient faithfully before
their faces. The truth of it is, I had so little Faith in the possibility of
raising a Flux, or at least a sufficient one, without Mercury; and had so much
condescension, as rather to submit with a complacent nod, than offer to dispute
so considerable, and perhaps beloved an asseveration, that I had not curiosity
enough to enquire the manner how it could be done, though I know the person to
be the greatest enemy in the World to such things as Secrets. But I am apt to
believe, that those Mortal Diseases he so zealously Fathers upon Mercury, do
rather arise from the indiscreet use of it, and gross abuse that is easily made
of so Active a Medicine; when Quacks or Ignorants boldly take it into their
hands.

Whatsoever is the Nature, and how dangerous or beneficial soever are the
effects of Mercury, certainly the Author of these Observations has made a fair
progrese toward the clear Explication of its various Activities; and deserves
to be commended for so considerable a Design. If the French are able to begin
well, and lead the way with Courage, our English, I am sure, can not only do
the same, but be very useful to them, in a brave prosecution of what they
undertake. Let the French with their nimble Fancies start, and Invent things
sometimes; the solid Judgment of an English man is required, to bring them to a
due Perfection. As particular persons, so particular Kingdoms have their
peculiar Genius and Abilities; we must, and ought to assist one another with
our Communications. One man's head is not big enough to comprehend, or
sufficiently contain the vast extent of the Great, or Infinite Curiosities of
the Little World. And the necessity of this mutual correspondence, and free
intelligence among men, especially of different Countries, (whereby Envy and
Jealousy are not able to breed the Poison, they usually do upon the same spot)
puts me in mind of those Advantages a Traveller may therefore meet with in
Foreign Countries, more than the Natives themselves are capacitated to enjoy.
For if he be not too raw and young, he shall easily gain admittance into the
Closets of their most Ingenious men: all the Rarities they pretend to, and
Observations they have made, will be discovered by them, it is doubtful whether
with more Ambition, of Delight. Lastly, all their Arcanums, and close Reserves
of Knowledge, shall with a slight Promise of silence, while among them, be
submitted to his open view. The truth of what I now say, I have indeed
experimented more than I could any way pretend to, from several Ingenious
persons abroad, and particularly from the Worthy Author of this present
Treatise; into whose House, I had a long time free access; there to see the
several Degrees of the POX treated not Speculatively, but Practically,
according to the different Progress it usually makes.

The Approbations of the Chief Physicians of the Royal Family.
I Underwritten, Counselor of the King in his Counsels, Chief Physician of his
Majesty, do Certify; that I have read and examined the Book of Monsieur de
Blegny, treating of Venereal Diseases; in which I have found his Principles
well established, his Therapeutick part very Methodical, and his Observations
Good, Curious, and such as must needs be very useful to the Public.

At Versailles, this 15th. of March. 1674. Signed, Daquin.

I Underwritten, Chief Physician of the Queen of Sueden, and the Prince of
Conde; do Certify, that I have read and examined the Book of Monsieur de
Blegny, containing many exact and useful Observations, from which he draws good
consequences for the Knowledge and Cure of the Venereal Disease; his Reasonings
are very clear, the whole Work is very solid, and Experience does confirm it:
So that I cannot but testify my Approbation of this Book.

At Paris, this 20th. day of May, 1674. Signed, Bourdelot.

I Underwritten, Doctor of Physic, Counselor of the King, Physician in
Ordinary to his Majesty, and chief Physician of Madam, do certify unto all to
whom it may appertain, that the New and Curious Observations made by Monsieur
de Blegny, the Queen's Surgeon, on The Art of curing Venereal Diseases; are
very advantageous for all such as are afflicted with them; and do contain the
most assured means of curing them.

At Paris, the 16th. of May, 1674. Signed, N. Lizot.

The Approbation of the Dean, and Doctors, deputed by the Faculty of Physic of
the University of Paris, for the Examination of this Book.
WE underwritten, Dean and Doctors of the Faculty of Physic, of the
University of Paris; after having heard the Relation of Dr. Philibert Morisett,
Antony Morand, Francis Gouell, and Antony St. Yon, Doctors of the same Faculty,
Commissioned and Deputed, for reading and examining the Book entitled
Observations on the Art of Curing Venereal Diseases, composed by Nicholas de
Blegny, the Queens Chyrurgeon; who submitted it to the judgment of the said
Faculty: do consent to the Printing of this Book: And though it establishes the
Cause of the POX upon Principles wholly New; yet we have not found any thing in
his Method of curing, that is not conformable to ancient received Maxims: and
we conceive, that the New Observations which it does contain, will serve to
increase an emulation for the future, toward a more diligent search of the
truth of things less known. In testimony whereof, we have signed.

At Paris, the 28th. of June. 1674. Signed, Moreau, Dean. Deputies. Morissett.
Deputies. Gouell. Deputies. Morand. Deputies. De St. Yon. Deputies.


The Approbations of the Chyrurgeons of the Royal Families.
I Underwritten, Chyrurgeon of Monsieur, the Kings only Brother, Duke of
Orleans; do certify, that I have read and examined a Book entitled, New and
Curious Observations, on the Art of Curing Venereal Maladies; in which I have
found nothing contrary to the true Method of curing them.

At Paris, the 13th. of July. 1674. Signed, Tanquered.

I Underwritten, Chyrurgeon in Ordinary to the deceased Duke of Orleans, and
Syndick of the Chyrurgeons of the Royal Families; do certify, that I have read
the Book of New and Curious Observations of Monsieur de Blegny: In which I find
the Principles very solidly established, and conformable to Experience; so that
it cannot but be very useful, both to such as are infected with the Venereal
Disease, as well as those who undertake the Cure of it.

At Paris this 30th. of June. 1674. Signed, Roberdeau.

The Approbations of the Sworn Master Chyrurgeons of Paris.
I Underwritten, Master, and ancient Provost, and sworn Guardian of the
Company of sworn Chyrurgeons of the City of Paris; do certify, that I have
read and examined a Book entitled, New and Curious Observations on the Art to
cure Venereal Diseases, composed by Nicholas de Blegny; Chyrurgeon in Ordinary
to the Queen; in which I have found his Principles well established, his
Therapeutick part very Methodical, and his Observations Curious and Useful to
the Public. In Testimony whereof, I have signed the present Approbation.

At Paris, the 8th. of May. 1674. Signed Forbett.

I Underwritten, sworn Master Chyrurgeon at Paris, and the Chyrurgeon in
Ordinary to the Hospital General; do certify, that I have read and examined
the Book of Monsieur de Blegny, the Queen's Chyrurgeon; in which I have found
his Principles well established, his Method of Practice very sure, and his
Observations good, curious, and useful for the knowledge and cure of Venereal
Diseases. In testimony whereof, I have signed this present Approbation.

Dated at Paris, the 28th. of May. 1674. Signed, Antony le Duc.

NEW and CURIOUS OBSERVATIONS On the Art to Cure THE VENEREAL DISEASE, And the
Accidents that it produces in all its Degrees.
SECT. 1. In which some useful Reflections and Observations are made on the
Names, Defininition, Origin, Causes, Differences, Signs, and prognostic of
the Pox.
CHAP. I. Of the Pox in general.
1. Of its different Names. 2. Of its Definition. 3. Of its Origin.

1. AMONG all the Diseases which afflict mankind, it is remarkable that none
has ever received more different Names, than this of which I am going to
treat. All Nations that have smarted under it have reciprocally endeavored to
reproach one another with its Origin, or at least with its Communication; and
every one in particular has bestowed the Name of it on that which was esteemed
an usual enemy. Whence it comes to pass that our Europeans have been pleased to
call it American, Spanish, Neapolitan, Italian, and French. Good men have given
it the Name of the Shameful Disease, to render it the more odious unto all, or
because it has really somewhat infamous in it, and is the mark as well as the
fruit of Debauchery and lubricity. The Poets have given it the Name of
Siphilis, because they have pretended a Shepherd of that Name was first
infected with it. But it is now generally known in this part of the World under
the Names of the Venereal Disease, or the Pox, by reason that the parts which
are submitted to the influences of Venus have heretofore served for its
Origin, and do now more often than any others serve for its Communication; and
because it very often produces spots and pustules on the skin, which are
commonly supposed to be like those of the Small Pox, though in good truth they
have no similitude at all.

2. But if there appears such difficulty in giving it a proper Name that may be
universally received, it will prove much more difficult to define it with all
the necessary circumstances to a regular Definition, by reason it is so obvious
to remark in its form almost all the kinds of Diseases that Physicians use to
speak of; or rather indeed because all the Accidents it produces are not able
to furnish us with one Essential Difference, they resembling many others which
nevertheless have Causes very different from that of this Disease. Wherefore
the Definition that you will here meet with is properly one of those that may be
called simply Accidental, or a Description.

The Pox is a contagious Distemper occasioned by Contact, and by means of a
Venomous Salt, proceeding from the mixture and corruption of the Seeds of
diverse persons, received and contained in the wombs of public Women; by which
all the liquid substances wherein it mixes do thicken and corrupt the nerves,
skin, and in general the flesh to which it adheres, become pricked, gnawed, and
dry; lastly the bones and cartilages that it penetrates, do rise up, rot, and
corrupt.

Some will perhaps say, that it might have been more exactly defined by a more
comprehensive Genus than Distemper, since the solution of Continuity, and a bad
Conformation do accompany it almost at all times; nay and that of Affection
against Nature, which I might have chosen too, may seem to do better, but
indeed would not have determined it so precisely. For Distemper is absolutely
Essential to this Disease, whereas diverse Examples may be given, which do prove
it may subsist without solution of Continuity, or a bad Conformation, and
consequently they ought not to be considered but as separable Accidents.

Now though this Definition be a very long one, yet there is but little need of
any ample explication. For though I do remark, for example, that the Pox is
contagious by Contact, there is no necessity of troubling you with the proof of
this Truth, because it is sufficiently known to Physicians, and the most part
of other Men; Again it may be easily remarked that the Venereal Matter is a
Venomous Salt, only by making some reflections on the effects which do result
from its mixture, adhaesion, or penetration; And lastly it may be easily
understood that this Salt is partly Fixed, having the quality of Acids, and
partly Volatile, as having that of Poisons. It should now remain to show you
how it can originarily proceed from the mixture and corruption of the Seeds of
diverse persons. But seeing this matter will be fully explicated in the
following Chapter, speaking of the causes of this Disease, I Will say nothing
more particularly of it here to avoid needless repetitions; Let it suffice to
tell you by the by, that the principles which it contains are as probable as
new, that they do agree throughout with the following Observations, and that
they consequently ought to be well understood by those who are desirous to
receive profit from them.

3. As for, the Origin, or first beginning of the Pox, nothing has been ever
canvassed with more heat, and differences of opinion by the Authors who have
written of it; some have maintained that it was an effect of God's Judgment on
Men, and that the source of it was to be sought only in the punishment that Men
had drawn on themselves by the Debaucheries of the last Age; Others have drawn
it from the Indians, Spain, Naples, and other places, from whence they tell us
it was not long since brought; Some have proposed the carnal copulation of a
Leper and a Strumpet, or the conjunction of a Man with a mangy Beast; and
others also have had particular Opinions on this subject, which we have reason
to believe have as little truth in them, as those I have already hinted at,
because all of them are either Theological or Fabulous, and consequently out of
the consideration of Physicians, who ought to have for their End nothing else
but the conservation of the Nature of Man, considered simply as a reasonable
Creature; or else the destruction of what is contrary to it: Wherefore it may
be said that they ought not to use any other means to attain this end, but only
such as are purely Natural, and that they should not draw their Knowledges and
Maxims but from things sensibly known.

In truth, if Natural Philosophy serv's for a Basis and Foundation to Physic,
ought not Physicians to demonstrate all things that depend on it, by the
principles of Nature, or of Art that imitates Nature? And is not it very fit to
leave Divines the consideration of whatsoever is Supernatural, and also to the
Poets by the same reason, all things feigned, Chimerical, and supposed? That we
may the better observe the Rules now mentioned, and satisfy Reason it self, by
searching into the Origin, Causes, and Remedies of all Diseases, in the true
Agents that have produced them, or may be able to destroy them: that is to say,
in whatsoever causes the diminution, depravation, or abolition of Natural
Motions, or else in the Medicaments that can correct their Defaults; for
otherwise we must be obliged to acknowledge Cures that are Miraculous, Magical,
or Superstitious for the Effects of Physic.

Moreover seeing the true Origin of the Pox is the same with that of its
Matter, and that shall not be particularly proved till the following Chapter,
for the reason before marked, it seems the Reader must be sent thither to learn
the account of it: Nevertheless as there have been at all times debauched
Women, who have prostituted themselves indifferently to all sorts of Men, it
may here be observed by way of provision that the Pox is almost as ancient as
the World, and that its Origin ought to be drawn from the Impurity of the
first Ages, in which it was but little less common than in the present times we
live in; since the most ancient Physicians have spoken of all the Accidens that
it produces, as well as other Indispositions that were then common and
familiar, and that they have known them as well as we, under the Names of Heat
of Urine, Gonorrheas, Virulent Ulcers, impure Buboes, dry Pustules, Tetters,
Warts, and lastly Nodes, and rottenness of the Bones.

We may also conceive that the settled inveterate Leprosy, which they speak of
as a Disease very rare and incurable, was what we now call Leprosy, and that
the other species of simple Leprosies, which they have mentioned as very
common, were the different impressions that Venereal Salts made upon the skin;
since they were accompanied with the greatest part of the other Accidents of
the Pox, and that they were cured by the application of Mercurial Ointments,
which we now make use of to anoint and cure those that are infected with the
Pox.

But it is very likely, that the regularity which our Forefathers observed in
their way of living, did render it more rare, and less apparent, than it is now
adays: As also it may be believed by the same reason, that the brutality of
the Indians has rendered them the more subject to it, and that the extreme
heat they suffer in most places they inhabit, renders its Accidents more
terrible, and apparent, by making the Blood boil more violently.

CHAP. II. Of the Causes of the Pox.
1. Reflections on the Divisions of some Authors. 2. Division of the Causes of
the Pox, and a Discourse of its Generation. 3. A remarkable Observation on the
same subject. 4. Diverse necessary Observations on the cause of its
Communication.

1. THose who despise common Expressions, and affect to use terms extraordinary
and unknown, to cast (as they say) dust into the eyes of their Readers, divide
the Causes of Diseases into Occult and Manifest, Sympathick and Antipathick, in
a word into Agents and Patients, to which they also often add by way of
subdivision, those which they pretend Efficient, Material, Formal, and Final;
Primitive, Antecedent, and Conjunctive; Near, and Remote; Internal, and
External. Nay some Authors seem to strain themselves to divide things that
appear indivisible. Nevertheless it is observed, that these sorts of Divisions
have no other profit, but to plung the minds of Men into confusion, into
ignorance and obscurity, though they are, or ought to be taught with the design
of instruction. An Example of this truth may be seen in the greatest part of
young Students, who often employ a considerable time to learn things that are
either unuseful, or of which they are not able to give any reason, whether it
be that they do not understand them, or that they are really inconceiveable,
and those who write of them have not been able themselves to conceive them.

2. But that we may not fall into the like inconvenience, and to enlighten the
matter I treat of, as much as it is capable, I shall consider but only two
Causes of the Pox; to wit, that of its Generation, which consists in the
Mixture and Corruption of the Seeds of diverse persons, received and retained in
the same Womb; And that of its Communication, which consists in the contact of
impure Persons.

It is so much the more necessary to prove the possibility of the former, as it
is a new Opinion, that will consequently be pretended false by those who admit
no Novelties at all: And I fear also that Reason and Experience do not furnish
us with proofs clear enough, to discover this truth before the eyes of
Opiniators, that love rather to follow blindly what they conceive through
prejudice, than take the pains to examine things, to distinguish rightly the
true from the false.

It Is after this manner I reason on this Subject. Philosophers, and generally
the Learned, do acknowledge no considerable change in Nature, that is not made
by a fermentation; of which no cause is found more evident than the motion and
action of contrary Bodies: An Example of this truth, which may particularly
serve for a proof of my Opinion, is observed in the Generation of perfect
Animals, and principally in that of Man; for the Seeds of which he is generated
do contain not only the Idea and Form of all the parts, but also the good and
ill Qualities, the Temperaments, and Natural Inclinations of those from whom
they are emitted; and this is so true, that the particles which convey these
powers, act one upon the other, after the Conception; and that Infants of the
same Family are sometimes Male, sometimes Female, now like Father, another time
like the Mother, and often partly like one, and partly like the other.

Now if it be true to say, that the different qualities which are found in the
Seeds of only two persons may be agitated so considerably, as to cause one to
overruled the other, whilst they are contained in the Womb, for Generation;
that of a third person, which is there received a little afterward, may be
looked upon as a matter extraordinary, which must hinder Generation, or at least
render it imperfect, by a more unequal mixture, and stronger agitation; this
serves to persuade me that Moles in Women may be as well the effects of
Cuckolding, or Adultery as the production of Imagination; since it is known
besides, that the best Anatomists do esteem great quantity of Menstrual Blood
(which is notwithstanding another principle of Generation) for one cause of
this confusion and disorder: To which may be added, that it is by reason of
this Confusion that common Strumpets never conceive at all, though they often
do the same with those that have Children, and perhaps also with more
advantageous circumstances; because the different Seeds that they receive, do
cause a more vehement and irregular fermentation, as they come from abundance
of persons, and are filled with a great many contrary and opposite particles;
from which fermentation there must consequently proceed a very bad change, and
further from Perfection, to which Nature does always tend. On this subject it
may further be observed, that Corruption is the change, which follows
fermentations that are absolutely against Nature; and it is easily to conceive,
how those Seeds being mixed together, may pass from their fermentation to
corruption, almost at one and the same time, since this mixture does render
them improper for their Natural Use, and that the heat and moisture of the part
which contains them, do quickly dispose them to be corrupted. Now the most
important thing that remains on this subject, is to let you see, how they can
become Venomous, that is to say, subtle, penetrant, and proper to coagulate
and corrupt the Blood, as other Poisons do. But as the Seed is generally
acknowledged for the best part of our Blood, and every body knows, that
Corruption is so much the worse, as the matters corrupted were more pure and
delicate before; It seems that this truth is sufficiently proved of it self,
and that there is no necessity of searching Reasons more strong or convincing
to sustain it. Nevertheless if we reflect on the great store of Spirits
wherewith all the Seed is filled, and on the quality of the Part that receives
them; we shall then see that there is no matter which can remain more
Spirituous, and consequently more Venomous after its Corruption; because there
is none better stored with Spirits, nor any more diligently preserved; this
change being made in the Womb, which is a part Naturally disposed to receive
the Seed, and conserve all the parts of it: And what is still observable, is
that in passing from its Natural subject into other subjects, it becomes so
much the more Venomous, as it has passed a greater number of new Fermentations.

3. Furthermore, we may say of this Opinion, that it is one of those that
cannot well, be proved by any other way but our Reason, and that it is almost
impossible to find subjects, on which Experiments sufficiently sure and
undoubted may be made; for besides that the Pox does not always appear, and
that there are but few persons who may be believed absolutely pure and clear
from it, there must therefore remain but few indeed who can be esteemed proper
for such an Experiment. Nevertheless I shall here report an Observation, that
mere chance was the cause of to one of my Friends, and which may also serve to
prove my thoughts on this subject.

A young Girl of between 14 and 15 years of age, being pursued by her Mother,
who would needs beat her, throws her self into the arms of one, who was a
Brother of a certain Community of Workmen, established in a part of the Town,
that it is not necessary to name; this Man conducts her to his Chamber, and
forces her; he presently communicates the opportunity to him that usually lay
with him, who failed not to make use of the occasion, and to discover it also
to another of his Camerades; in so much that in three days she was there, six
several persons made use of her. After this, the wisest among them, foreseeing
that this business was like to draw some dangerous consequence, sent her home
again by a Woman, that feigned to have found her in a Church; her Mother
presently shuts her up in a Closet, wherein no body was suffered to enter but
her self, and six days afterward she complained of great pains that she
suffered when she made Urine; her Mother caused her to be visited, and was told
that she had got a Clap; nevertheless they neglected to make use of any Cure,
because they would not believe it, and twelve days afterward there appeared a
Bubo in her right Groin: then they began to question her about it, and she
accused the persons she had been with; they were all visited by Order of
Justice, and were all found clean, and in good health; And the Surgeon that
imparted to me this story, assured me that he had familiarly frequented their
Company a long time afterward, and that he had never found any Venereal
Distemper among any of them, though it is now twelve years since it happened.

Though this Observation seems to be accompanied with all the Accidents that
can be desired, to maintain my Opinion, yet I do not pretend to make it pass
for a thing altogether unquestionable; both for that it is possible to be
false, and because there might have been some unknown Abuses under equal and as
good appearances, I therefore leave all curious persons the liberty of making
what other Experiments they please, and to every one in particular that of
judging the other circumstances of this Opinion, according to their own Ideas,
or particular Observations, as things Problematical, and no way absolutely
necessary to the Art of curing the Pox.

4. After having sufficiently explicated what I mean by the Original Cause or
Generative of the Pox, it is now necessary to observe the several sorts of
Contact, that can conduce to its Communication, and which are here considered
as Causes of this Disease, because it is by them principally gained.

But we must not imagine that this second Cause is always found in Coition, as
the first; it matters not after what manner the Contact is made, provided that
it permits an adhesion or entrance to some part of the Venereal matter; it may
be made either directly or indirectly, and here is an Example of it: A Woman
with Child, who in the Company of one that has the Pox, shall attract into her
Womb, the corrupted Seed that shall be there ejaculated, will catch the Pox
immediately, by reason of the Coition and Contact that preceded; and the Infant
that shall be in her Womb, will be also infected with it, by reason of the same
Coition, but not by reason of the Contact, because the remoteness of the Infant
hindered the Infection from being direct in respect of it. The same thing may
be said of Infants that are engendered of diverse like Seeds, according to the
ordinary course of Nature, or by way of Superfetation.

Besides the Example that I just now gave, many other sorts of Contacts may be
found, which are made by other ways, and yet fail not to cause the Pox: For
Example, if one should happen to drink after him that has the Pox, and by
chance put the Lips to the same place of the Glass, where some little Poison of
the Ulcers of his mouth, or else some of his spittle filled with Venereal
Salts, shall have stuck; it often happens, that this either causes other
Ulcers, by superficially adhering to the parts, or else without delay the
universal Pox; when the Salt that they contain is volatile and penetrant enough
to enter into the Veins and Arteries, without leaving any marks of its passage;
for let ever so little of it be once mixed with the Blood, it will work like
Leaven in a great deal of Dough, or rather it ferments and corrupts as other
Poisons do, which are always more pernicious by their quality, than by their
quantity.

Another Example of this nature may be drawn from those who are infected with
this Disease, for having unfortunately lain in the sheets, wherein one in the
Pox had sweated, or in which there might remain some of the matter that run
from his Ulcers.

Besides these sorts of Contact, all others may be said to be immediate,
because they are made by the application of one part against another: Among
them all the most ordinary is Coition, because this Disease does for the most
part begin in the parts that serve for Generation, and its matter is not always
dispersed universally through the Body: In this action, if a Man has Venereal
Ulcers on his Yard, some part of the Poison that nourishes them, and which is
nothing else but a dissolution of the Salts that constitute the Pox, does
almost always stick in some part of the Womb, or else in the wrinkles of the
neck of her Womb, that he lies with, wherein he often causes other Ulcers, by
adhering to the skin, or pellicules that cover those parts; on which matter it
may be observed, that I have just reason to add this last circumstance, by
reason that this matter does not always necessarily adhere in Women, either
because the Membrane that covers the Vagina, is very smooth, polished, and
covered with a slimy Humor, or because the Seed that is therein ejaculated
does often slide out at the same time, and carries away with it this Virulent
matter so much the more easily, as it has not had time to adhere, and as the
situation and form of this part do much contribute to its easier sliding out;
it is also for this reason that common Strumpets do sometimes give hurt to
others, though they have none at all themselves; because the approaching them a
little after they have enjoyed the Company of other men that are impure, does
give some part of the impurity they received, though themselves may be exempt
from any adhesion, or effect of the remaining matter, by the means that I have
mentioned.

It is observable that a virulent Clap, and the universal Pox are able equally
to render the Seed impure; in so much that if that of a Man who is infected
with it, be attracted and retained in the Womb of a Woman, it may cause in her
either a Virulent Clap by adhering particularly to the spermatick Vessels, or
else the universal Pox, by passing through the Oririfices of the Arteries and
Veins, that terminate in this part. In a word, a Woman that shall suffer such
Indispositions, may in like manner communicate them to a sound Man, that shall
converse with her, by the adhesion or entrance of the matter that can cause
them.

It is also observeable, that the Impurities of the Mouth of a little Infant
that has the Pox are able to infect the Nurse, by adhering to her Teats, or
else the air of his Respiration, that can easily penetrate them through the
pores that give passage to the Milk. In like manner an infected Nurse can
impart her Disease to the little One, by an adhesion of the matter of her
Ulcers, or by the use of the corrupted Milk that is sucked from her Teats.

To ly with one that has the Pox, and touch him naked while he sweats, or when
he has Ulcers and Pustules on his skin, is a thing that may well be believed
very dangerous, and chiefly for those that have their pores very open, and
therefore do easily receive the impression of any thing that touches them. The
custom of Kissing with open Mouth, is another very dangerous business, for the
reasons I have spoken of. Lastly, there are so many different Contacts which
are capable of giving the Pox to those who have it not, that when you shall
once know it assuredly by its Signs, you need not trouble your self but little
about the manner how it was communicated, since you cannot always find it out,
and since it is often unknown, even to the persons sick themselves.

CHAP. III. Of the Differences of the Pox, which may serve to make a
Prognostic.
1. An Advertisement on this Subject, and general Division of the Degrees; from
whence may be drawn some Differences. 2. Explication of the Differences that
the first Degree furnishes us with, and general division of those that may be
observed in the second. 3. What may be understood by Particular Poxes. 4. What
the Universal Pox is. 5. Explication of the differences that may be drawn from
the third Degree.

1. BEfore I come to speak of the Differences of the Pox, it is good to
acquaint you, that I do not conceive any different Species of it, nor own any
Sanguine, Choleric, Phlegmatic, and Melancholic ones, as some Men have
inconsiderately done; but on the contrary do always esteem it as the same, in
what degree, and whatsoever subject it may be found, since it is always
produced by one and the same cause, that always acts after the same manner, and
produces different Effects according to the various disposition of the parts
that receive its action.

This being once presupposed, you will easily grant, that the differences of
this disease can only be drawn from the diversity of its degrees; that is to
say, from the time that its matter has been received, from the progress that
it has made, and from the Accidents that it produces.

2. Though I consider the time that the Venereal matter has been received, for
one degree, from whence some differences of the Pox may be drawn; and that some
Authors do think to ascertain the Prognostic of it, by the consequences they
thence draw; yet it must be acknowledged that they are of no great
consideration. For though it may be said that this Disease is either New or
Inveterate, according to the more or less time it has been contracted, yet one
cannot judge for all that of the easiness, difficulty, or impossibility of its
Cure: because this same matter is more or less active according to its quality
or quantity, or else according to the particular dispositions of the Bodies, in
which it enters. For it is certain, as I have already observed, that it becomes
more Venomous, and consequently more penetrant and subtle, when it has had
duration in the change that may be made of it from different subjects; and the
great quantity of it does very much advance the disorder it is able to make, in
every particular person. To which may be added, that it acts the more suddenly,
when it is excited by the heat that is found in the Temperaments of Choleric
or Sanguine Bodies, which are so much the more disposed to suffer its
insinuation, as their pores and other passages are naturally more open; but on
the contrary it is sometimes so fixed, and shut up in the cold, or gross Humors
of Phlegmatic or Melancholic persons, that it can lie there a long time like
fire under ashes, and experience lets us see, that it can lurk 10 or 12 years,
before any effects of its Motions will be felt; whence it follows, that the
Judgment of the three Circumstances I related, do chiefly depend on the
examination that ought to be made, on the progress it has already made, and
the accidents it has produced. For by the consideration of the first
circumstance, the Particular or Universal Pox may be judged of: and this
distinction is of such importance to the right prognostic of the easiness, or
difficulty of its Cure, that it lets us see, in what degrees particular or
common remedies may suffice, or whether the stronger and more general are also
necessary.

3. Before we pass further, it seems very proper to explicate what I mean by
this Difference, that I may let you see how it does not serve only to
distinguish the degrees of this Disease, and that it is not any way contrary to
what I said of it at the beginning of this Chapter. I do call then a particular
Pox, when its matter does continue fixed to some parts, which suffer it to be
dressed and cured with particular Remedies, external, or topical; and for which
those are employed chiefly that are called General, or Internal, as well as to
hinder the progress it might make by the penetration of its Salts: such are,
for example, the Venereal Ulcers and Chancres, or else Claps, and Virulent
Gonorrheas; and which I call the Pox, as well as the others named before,
because they are all of them productions of an impure Contact, and of some
Venereal matter received; of which all the effects may be observed, though it
does still adhere to some particular parts, as well as when it is dispersed
over all the Body; for the coagulation and corruption that I have said does
happen by it in the liquid substances may be observed in the Seed that runs in
Virulent Gonorrheas, or else in the fixation of the Juice that nourishes the
parts in which the Venereal Ulcers are, that do by this means degenerate into
Chancres, or Carnosities; The pricking, gnawing, or drying up of the Flesh, may
be also observed in the beginning, augmentation, and changes of these same
Ulcers; in a word, the elevation, rottenness, and corruption of solid parts are
sometimes the consequents of these first Evils, when they happen upon Bones or
Cartilaginous parts; in so much that you may hence see with how much reason I
do reckon them for degrees of the Pox, since it is commonly by then that it is
found to begin, and they are almost never seen to advance into a higher degree,
when they ar^ dressed as they ought to be.

I do acknowledge nevertheless, that this name of the Pox was at first given to
this Disease, only by reason of the resemblance that was thought to be between
it and the Small Pox, through their spots and pustules; and it seems
consequently, that this Name should then only belong to it, when it is in the
degree that produces them. But we must observe, that it often passes from one
degree to another, almost insensibly; so that sometimes it cannot properly
deserve that Name, if we stick close to this Circumstance; besides it may be
said, that Names do not establish the essence of Diseases, and it matters not
how this Disease is called, provided that it be considered as always of one
Species according to my opinion.

4. When the Venereal Salts are subtle enough to penetrate through the pores,
without staying in the places through which they pass (as has been seen in
some persons) or rather when they there stop, and cause the particular Poxes,
of which I have spoken, without the persons taking care notwithstanding to
oppose its insinuation, by the means of fit Remedies that drive or attract from
within outwardly; they then cause what I call the universal Pox, by insinuating
into the Vessels that contain the Blood, and spreading universally over all the
Body, by the Circulation.

They who have read the Authors that write on this subject, will wonder
doubtless that I make the Venereal Salts pass from the superficial parts into
the Veins and Arteries, without speaking of that Species of the Pox they make
consist only in subtle Vapors and Spirits; but, as I have already told you, I
cannot acknowledge any different Species of it, and there is no reason besides,
for considering what they have proposed on this subject, as one of its degrees,
since it is not at all likely that these Spirits they pretend infected, are
able to circulate about the body, to penetrate the narrowest pores, cause
Itchings, Inquietudes, and fall of Hair, the consequences of it, without mixing
with the blood, by penetrating the Vessels I now spoke of which are but too
porous for this effect, and are generally dispersed into all parts of the body.

5. Moreover it may be said that the differences which may be drawn from the
Accidents the Pox produces, are very considerable; for it may be said to be
Mobile, during the ebullition of the blood, the dispersion and motion of its
matter: that is to say, when it yet causes those wandering pains, or other
Accidents that appear, and vanish away successively one after another; and on
the contrary, it may be considered as in a fixed condition, when this dispersed
matter does adhere more particularly to some parts, out of which it is not able
to get neither of it self, nor by the endeavors that Nature uses, unless
seconded by proper Remedies, which also do become useless, in those that have
their Internal and Principal parts much injured by the adhesion and action of
this matter. But as the dispersion of it, as well as of all other Humors that
are extravasated, is caused most commonly in the Extremities; the most familiar
Example of this degree may be observed in those that suffer in the night fixed
pains of these same parts, the elevation and corruption of bones and
cartilages. Lastly it may be seen by what I have said, that these differences
are able to furnish us with the most important consequences for the better
making a good Prognostic of the Pox; because we can easily judge that the
degree in which its matter continues still in Motion, can be carried off with
easiness enough, without leaving any impression at all of its ill effects; and
on the contrary, we may judge it sometimes incurable, where this same matter is
absolutely stopped and fixed, because it has made us see in some persons all its
effects on those parts that are necessary to life, and it is also rarely
carried off in those I mentioned for the ordinary Example, without leaving the
sad marks of its activity: since it is sometimes impossible to regenerate those
parts that have been consumed; for Example, the bones, and among others those
of the Palate and Nose, which are often consumed in this degree, and leave
after their entire corruption very considerable deformities, that can never be
repaired.

CHAP. IV. Of the Judgment of the Pox.
1. Its division, and how ignorant Men and Impostors do commit Abuses in this
Disease. 2. Many notorious Deceits and Impostures on this subject. 3. A general
division of the Signs that make us know this Disease. 4. Particular division of
the Symptoms that happen in all its degrees, by the means of which the
Prognostic, of it may be assuredly made.

1. THe Judgment of the Pox consists in knowing its Essence, or Prognosticating
(as I have already said) the easiness, difficulty, or impossibility of its Cure.

The Signs by which these things may be judged of, are the Symptoms that
accompany this Disease in all its degrees, and are of a very great number, and
do therefore deceive ignorant Men, because they do not all happen at a time,
and Symptoms do often happen that much resemble them, though they are indeed
produced from other causes. This is that which gives, occasion to Impostors to
make but ill use of the credulity of those that doubt of the condition they are
in, and therefore find themselves engaged in this uncertainty to ask Counsel,
and require succor of those from whom they in Justice ought to expect it, if
they had but Honesty and Charity, which are things very necessary for all such
as do profess Physic.

The Reason that I have to speak after this manner ^^ that the greatest part of
those who pretend to cure this Disease nowadays, do make the smallest
appearances pass for undoubted degrees of the Pox, and they do not fear to
establish their Reputation at the cost of those who are not wise enough to know
their own Folly, and yet have a blind confidence on others so mighty ingenious,
as to run the hazard of losing all their Employments, their Estates, and Lives,
for to be cured of an imaginary or supposed Disease.

Though I have learnt an infinity of Cheats of this nature, by the report of
those who have come to consult me after others on this subject, and by what I
have seen my self, by feigning my self sick, and several other ways; yet I will
not by relating them increase the bulk of my Book without profit, and I believe
it will suffice, to relate some of the most remarkable of these Impostures, to
serve for an Advertisement or Warning to those who may be for the future in the
like perplexities.

2. The greatest part of those who think they know the World well, do believe
themselves sufficiently assured, if they have escaped from falling i^^o the
hands of Empiricks, and such as distribute secret Remedies; nevertheless it is
too true that there are many of those who are contrary to this sort of Men,
that are not really Honest, but only in appearance, and do indifferently make
profit of all the occasions they meet with. This truth is sufficiently known to
many curious persons who have feigned themselves to have the Pox, and have
found among those I spoke of persons that love their interest enough to confirm
them in this Opinion upon the smallest suppositions; and I have seen my self by
chance that there are some among them, who do not so much as endeavor to hide
their Impostures by affected appearances, but without any fear make ill use of
the ignorance and easiness of those that go to consult them, with a very
strange piece of confidence: The story that I am going to relate may serve so
much the better for a proof of what I here affirm, as it happened to a man of
good credit, that is now living, and might be able to assert the truth of it.
This man came to consult me upon the account of several hard Pustules, that
grew over all his skin; Upon this occasion I made all the necessary remarks on
his past Life, his Temperament, the present condition of his person, his Wife
and Children; and by this examination I knew it was nothing else but what
Physicians call, the Gnawing or Corrosive Herpes, and I therefore proposed to
him the use of a Bath, and other Remedies both general and particular, that
ordinarily serve for the cure of this Distemper. But because he was afraid he
had the Pox, and people often think they have the misfortunes they are afraid
of, he still continued in the apprehension he was in before, and came to desire
me some few days afterward to conduct him to some famous Practitioner, to see
whether he would join his Opinion with mine, that so he might be better assured
what to believe of it. To this end I waited on him to a certain person, whom a
fair show of seeming Honesty, store of Riches, and a good Reputation of being
an Able man, have assuredly placed above the common Rank, but was guilty
nevertheless on this occasion of an action altogether unworthy of those good
qualities; for without giving leisure to the Patient, or my self, to relate
those things that the sight cannot discover, without making any examination at
all, and only after a precipitate inspection of these Pustules, he told him it
was a very fine sort of Pox, and therefore he had best presently resolve for a
retreat of six weeks.

This new way of judging of Diseases, will surely very much surprise all those
that shall make some reflections on the difficulty there is of knowing them,
and chiefly those Diseases whose causes are absconded in the secret internal
parts, such as is the universal Pox; since the difficulty of knowing them is
sometimes so great, that the most expert, profound, and most knowing
Physicians, do happen to be mistaken, in taking one for another; and they do
observe for this purpose, the common Rule of Lawyers, by which they do never
offer to give determinate Judgment, upon the presence of one Witness only. But
besides these considerations, it must also be remarked by the by, that those
words of Fine Pox, do show at the same time both the ignorance, and quacking of
those who make use of them: But after all, this same Patient was a little
afterward comforted again by one that proved more honest, who after an ample
knowledge of the circumstances I related, gave the same Name to this Disease
that I had done before, and so advised him to those Remedies that I had
proposed to him, by the use of which Remedies he was quite cured in a short
time. Moreover it may be said, that Interest was the sole Motive of this
treacherous dealing; for there is no likelihood that the ambition of appearing
a great Doctor, should have been the cause, since he might have appeared so
much more by reasoning on the Disease, than pronouncing such fine words. Nor is
there any reason to believe he did it to render me a good Office, since Offices
of so high a nature are but seldom done without the hopes of receiving equal
ones again, and we two were not of Intelligence enough for that. Therefore it
is much more likely, he thought with himself that I desired to put this person
under his hands, for some particular consideration, and so he might have no
other thought but of embracing the occasion offered.

Besides those that engage credulous persons to suffer the Salivation, when
there is no necessity of it, there are also a great many Mountebanks to be
found, who give a false Judgment of the Pox, and persuade men they have it when
they are altogether free. The easiness they have found in persuading men so,
has given them encouragement for another sort of cheating: They cause Billets
to be distributed in most parts of the Town, and clap up papers in the most
resorted places, nay and sometimes presume to write little Pamphlets, filled
with nothing but follies and lies, wherein they confidently boast that they are
able to cure the Pox, without Mercury, without guard, or keeping their Chamber;
and they have so much the more easily found persons who will believe them, and
render their Imposture somewhat likely by their own mistaken Experience, as
there are many persons who think themselves sick of this Disease, when they do
really enjoy most perfect Health. But that which plainly shows us it had not
subsisted hitherto but only by this means, is that they are known to give the
Salivation to those they think really in the Pox, for they do then suppose
their Disease in a degree almost desperate, and they are not able consequently
to cure them, but by making use of this Remedy, which they make pass for the
extreme one of all, and do nevertheless very familiarly employ it under this
disguise, with such a conduct as must always be believed very dangerous, in
those that have learnt nothing of it but by Receipt.

Though this Imposture be the more common and ordinary of all, yet it must not
be esteemed the only one, and there are some among them that do practice
another still more remarkable. Whatsoever Accidents those that have the Pox do
suffer, when they address themselves to these men, they will always assure them
they have no such thing as the Pox, and so will promise to cure them with such
Remedies as they call pleasant, mild and insipid, but are always
notwithstanding the strongest and most violent Sudorisicks, Purgatives, and
Vomitives, that do extremely exhaust and dry up the body, to make the Accidents
cease, by consuming the serosities that are spread abroad, and are the Causes of
them; insomuch that these Patients find themselves cured in all appearance,
till the next ebullition of the Blood begins again, and there happens a new
dispersion of the matter that is able to produce other Symptoms, which they
then make pass for unhappy Relapses, or else new Diseases, that must undergo a
new Cure. So that these persons thus affected do furnish them with continual
profit, as Cows with Milk, and a small number of them will be able to provide
them Employment enough.

But among all those that impose on credulous persons, there are none that make
use of a more abominable Stratagem, than these that follow; for they do
endeavor to persuade all their Patients that apply to them for help, that all
their bodies are filled with Mercury, or else with Venereal matter, that must
be driven out as fast as may be, if they desire to escape death; and to
convince them of the truth of this supposition, they tell them, they shall
presently see abundance of Impurities come out of their bodies, so soon as ever
their Remedies begin to be applied. In effect, as this pretended Remedy is
nothing else but an Ointment applied on their skin, that is compounded of
Cantharides; this promise of theirs seems true to many men, because it raises
Blisters full of serosities, that seem to come through their pores, and because
it makes them Urine prodigiously, nay often blood it self, by causing an
inflammation and exulceration of the Bladder, which are mortal Accidents.

3. But after having sufficiently spoken of the false Judgments of Impostors,
and the means they make use of for commiting their Abuses, it is time to let
you see what are the true Signs that candid men must take notice of, for to
judge aright of this Disease.

These Signs may be divided into such as are known to the Patient alone, and
such as are sensible both to Patient and Physician.

The former are the impure Contacts that have preceded this Disease, the pains
they feel while they Urine, the Inquietudes, and universal Itchings, the loss
of Appetite, the indifference for Coition, the Nocturnal pollutions without
pleasure, the suppression of the Terms in Women, or of the regulated
Hemorrhoides in some men: Lastly the mobile or fixed pains of the Head, the
Shoulders, and Extremities.

The latter Signs are Gonorrheas, Buboes or Poulains, Ulcers, and Chancres of
the Yard, and of the Privities of Women; or else the hardness that remains
after their Cicatrices, the fall of Hair from Head and Beard, the Wounds and
Ulcers that cannot be cured with ordinary Remedies, the Tetters, Pustules, and
Warts; lastly the Elevation, Rotteness, and corruption of Bones.

But we must be sure to observe that all, or most of these Signs that I have
named, are but Accidents of the Pox it self; that it produces not all of them
at all times, nor in all subjects, and that they become different according to
its diverse degrees; in so much that they do not happen always in a constant and
assured Order. For there have been some persons seen, whose bones have rotted
with the Pox, before ever any of those Accidents, Authors do call Antecedent,
have been at all felt; which Accidents I had rather call Consequent, because
they do most commonly follow those that accompany the particular Poxes, of
which I have spoken. Nevertheless as it is impossible to make a good
Prognostic of this Disease, without being able to distinguish all the degrees
it can happen in, it will be necessary to reflect on all that has been already
said, to the end we may the better find, how it passes out of one degree into
another, and why in each particular one it does produce very different
Symptoms.

4. It may with Reason be said, that the Ulcers which are caused by impure
Contacts, do constitute the first degree of the Pox, because they are the
effect of some matter that very superficially adheres; they cannot be
distinguished from ordinary Ulcers at their beginning, but by the preceding
Contact, and the parts in which they happen; and they may be cured in this
condition with common and ordinary Desiccatives. But when the Salts that caused
them, cannot be destroyed by these or other means, they then penetrate into the
Vessels that contain the blood, or else mix with the Natural moisture that
remains in the ulcer'd part, and fix it in such manner, that from Ulcers they
degenerate into Chancres; and then indeed they are much more dangerous and hard
to cure, but are known by the elevation of their white sides, by their obscure
color, and by their hardness.

You may easily judge that Claps, or Virulent Gonorrheas, are of a yet higher
degree than the Ulcers I now spoke of; because the matter that makes them is
more deeply driven into the bodies of those who suffer them, and the parts that
are infected with them are such as are inward and concealed: The Bladder, for
Example, and the parts adjacent or dependent on it, are the first that suffer
the Inflammation, which is sufficiently known by the heat and pains that are
felt in urining, and sometimes by an entire suppression of the Urine; the
seminal parts, and the Seed it self are not more free from an Alteration, since
the loss, thickness, and corruption of the Seed, are undoubted marks of it.
Lastly the passages through which these Impurities are carried do not long
remain free from their ill effects, but become exulcerated by the sharp points
of the Salts they contain, and this exulceration does cause them to suffer very
grievous pains, during the passage of their Urine.

While this particular Pox is but newly contracted, it can be cured with a
great deal of ease and safety, by preventing that which we ought otherwise to
fear, and taking away whatsoever appears, by the use and application of proper
Remedies to this effect. But when it has had a considerable duration without
necessary succor, it must be then believed to be of a much more difficult and
dangerous Cure, because all its Accidents become greater, and the further
penetration if its matter, that is, the universal Pox, may be then with just
Reason suspected. Therefore it must then be treated with more care and
precaution, and the Prognostic that is made of it must be more doubtful.

We may now observe that the Venereal Salts do often pass from the parts I
spoke of into the orifices of the Veins and Arteries, and do sometimes
penetrate more directly by the subtilty and keenness of their points.
Nevertheless what way soever they enter, it is always true, that they cause in
some a great ebullition of their blood, either by the particular dispositions
they find in it, or else by their own deleterious quality; during which
ebullition, the Impurities do separate, much after the same manner as Lees do
in the fermentation of Wine, and so are driven out after a while by the force
of Nature, or, if you will so, by the Faculty Expultrive into the Glandules of
the Groins, where it causes a Bubo, or Botch, that serves for a Crisis of the
Pox, if it be attracted and brought to perfect Suppuration.

It may be distinguished from other Tumors, that sometimes happen in those
parts, by the impure Contact that preceeded it, by the Claps, Gonorrheas,
Ulcers, and Chancres, that often happen a little before its discovery, but
principally by its slow advancement, its durity, and large Basis.

But this penetration of the Venereal matter into the mass of the blood, is not
always attended with so happy success as the extrusion of such a Tumor: the
Venereal Salts do sometimes participate more of fixed than volatile, and the
blood is not equally hot and subtle in all sorts of men, so that in some it
presently coagulates by this means, much after the same manner as some curious
persons have experimented, by syringing Acid Liquours into the Veins of Brutes;
and this coagulation is often the Cause of those suppressions I took notice of,
and of their loathing all Meat, a^^ of their indifference as to Coition,
because whilst it continues, the Circulation grows very slow, and consequently
the Natural Functions that depend on it, become interrupted. Wherefore this
time may be observed for another degree of the Pox, that can nevertheless be
clearly carried off, by the inward Sudorisicks, which do dissolve and attenuate
the blood, by new ebullitions, provided that Nature be also assisted in her
other evacuations.

At the time that this coagulation of the blood ceases, by the separation of
the different particles it then contains, we may consider the beginning of its
fermentation, which is performed so much the more gently, and by degrees, as it
met before with Obstacles to hinder it; whence it comes to pass that this blood
does but only rise and boil by little and little, though indeed this gentle
ebullition fails not nevertheless to cause Symptoms very much different from
those I have already spoken of, and such as I shall remark hereafter. For
whilst it lasts, light vapors arise from it, that are carried all over the
body, and do cause those inquietudes of mind, and body, those Itchings of ^^^
skin, and fall of the Hair from the Head and Beard.

Wherefore this time may be also considered as another degree of the Pox,
wherein nevertheless it may be absolutely cured, as well as in the former, by a
good use of ordinary Remedies, or else by a Critical Motion of some other
Disease supervening. But as these means do fail sometimes of the desired
effects, it were much better in this condition to provoke a light Salivation,
by which a quick, easy, and assured Cure may be hoped for.

When the fermentation increases, or that it is in its height, the Venomous
serosities do separate from the blood, and pass a travers the coats of the
Vessels that contain it, after which they slide along, the Nerves and
Membranes, and cause those wandering pains that are felt now in one part, and
now in another; sometimes also Nature strives to drive them forth through the
pores; but as these serosities are heavy and full of Salts, they adhere to the
skin instead of going forth, and there cause Ulcers when they are mixed with
some corrupted matter; or if on the contrary they are chiefly charged with fixed
Salts, they there raise pustules, that are flat, scaly, dry, and of a red
drawing toward an Orange color; or else if they are filled with volatile
Salts, they rise somewhat higher, and produce hard Tetters and Warts upon the
Yards, privities of Women, the Groin, and other places.

This degree of the Pox is not the most difficult of all to be cured, but it is
known very well by experience that there is nothing but Mercury among Remedies
that is able to excite the Crisis that can terminate it.

Oftentimes after these matters have been thus wandering about the body, they
altogether adhere and absolutely stay in some parts, and cause by this means
the last and most terrible degree of the Pox. For though their adhesion does
sometimes happen only in the Muscles and Periostium, they fail not to cause
most lamentable Accidents, because by pricking, gnawing, and continually drying
the nervous Fibers of these parts, they there produce those fixed and nocturual
pains, some persons have found insupportable. The Cartilages, and especially
the bones, are also other parts that suffer great changes by their penetration;
for they cause a sort of fermentation in the Marrow or Juice they contain, by
the means of which Tumors are seen to happen, that are called Nodes, and which
are nothing else but an elevation of their very substance, that is at last
rotted and corrupted by the presence and action of these Impurities.

Nevertheless though the Pox is very hard to cure, when its matter is thus
stopped, and sunk into the parts I named, it may be observed that it would be
always curable even in this degree, if this same matter were not sometimes
stuck to parts that are still more considerable. But it has been unhappily
proved in some Men, that the parts which are called Noble, and those that
immediately administer to the Noble ones have not been exempt from its activity
and cruel effects. Wherefore the Prognostic that may be made of it, is so sad
and lamentable, that it always consists in judging the extraordinary
difficulty, or else impossibility of the Cure.

But besides the general Considerations that I have marked, for making a good
Prognostic of the Pox in, all its degrees, there must be respect had to the
particular circumstances of each subject, as, for example, to the Temperament,
Sex, Age, Strength, and also Employment of him we pretend to cure. For I have
known by Experience that the inquietudes which important affairs do give some
men, do heat and inflame the Spirits, and thereby cause the Mercury to enter
into the Brain, where it finally causes most deplorable Accidents.

SECT. 2. In which necessary Observations are made on the means to cure the
Pox, while it is but Particular; on the Natural and Critical. Motions which do
terminate it when it becomes Universal, and on the Medicines which commonly
serve to raise the Artificial Crisis of it.
CHAP. I. Of the sorts of Particular Pox that are called Ulcers and Chancres.
1. Why the particular Poxes are here treated of in the first place, and of the
general division that may be made of them. 2. Of Venereal Ulcers in general. 3.
The particular Method of curing them. 4. Observation on the Purges that ought
to be employed in their Cure. 5. Of other Preservatives. 6. Diverse necessary
Observations on the Remedies that serve for curing them, when they degenerate
into Chancres. 7. Of the Phymosis and Paraphymosis.

1. AFter having thus remarked all the general things that I have judged
necessary for the understanding those that more particularly relate to the Art
of curing the Pox: It is now time to speak of its Remedies, and the
circumstances that must be observed for the using them well and without danger.
And seeing the matter that causes the Pox does in a manner always adhere to
some particular parts, before it advances to infect the whole body; some
Reflections shall here be made in the first place on the means of curing it,
while it does continue particular, and on the Preservatives that ought to be
used for hindering its becoming Universal.

But to the end we may avoid useless Repetitions, I shall say nothing more in
general of particular Poxes, nor of the Reasons for which I have so named them,
because these things have been already sufficiently explicated, when I spoke of
the Differences and Signs, which may serve for the Knowledge and Prognostic of
all the degrees of this Disease. It will suffice to say here, that they maay be
divided into such as appear only in the parts that may be seen and touched, and
into such as happen in other parts that our senses cannot discover: so that
according to this Division, different Remedies may be given the more
successfully, as occasion requires.

2. The first are the Ulcers and Chancres, which are caused by a light and
superficial adhesion of some matter, that has not penetrated more inwardly. I
add this distinction, because I do not now intend to speak of those that are
made in the Ureter, by the passage of Virulent matter in Claps or Gonorrheas;
nor of such as are the Symptoms of the universal Pox, since the manner of
treating them is much different, and that they do depend on other degrees.

This particular Pox is nothing else in the beginning, but the ruption or
dilaceration of the superficial Fibers of the skin, or pellicules that cover
the parts to which the matter does adhere; so that no other Name must
consequently be given to it, than that of Venereal Ulcers: especially if we
will not do like Ignorants or Impostors, who make the smallest Excoriations
pass for Chancres of a most difficult cure, and they do not indeed cure them,
but with a great deal of pains and time, because they dress them with caustic
burning Medicines, which make them become very painful, hard, and apt to
suppurate, though oftentimes the gentlest desiccatives are sufficient to cure
them in three or four days.

These Ulcers may indeed happen in all parts of the body, because they are all
capable of an impure Contact, but the more tender and delicate ones are most
subject to them, by reason that the impure Salts do more easily stick in their
susceptible substance; whence it comes to pass, that the Yards in Men, the
Privities in Women, the Teats in Nurses, and the Mouth in Infants, are the
parts which are most commonly infected with them.

3. That which ought to be done toward their Cure while they are in this
condition, consists principally in drying them up like other Ulcers, only
regard must be had to the matter that causes them, and proper Desiccatives
employed for breaking the points of the Salts they contain, and to oppose their
penetration, which is so much the rather to be feared, as it is done insensibly.

The following Liquours will very well answer this first respect, if you wash
the Ulcers twice a day with them, and lay Tents upon them, that are dipped in
these Liquours, observing always to give such a strength to them as is most
agreeable and proper to the particular Temperaments of the bodies and parts, on
which you shall apply them, and this by increasing the quantity of Pouders to
render them the stronger, or else that of the Waters to make them the weaker.

Take of the seventh Water of unslakt Lime one pound, Spirit of Vitriol, Salt
of Saturn, and Verdegrease, of each half a drachme.

Or else, Rose and Plantain Water, of each half a pound, Aqua-vitae two ounces,
Orpiment a drachme and a half, Verdegrease two scruples, Aloes half a dram.

Or again, white Wine a pound, Rose and Plantain Water, of each four ounces,
Orpin two drachmes, Verdegrease one dram, Mirrh and Aloes of each a scruple;
Make the Liquours according to Art, for the use above mentioned.

To answer the second respect that I remarked, you must use both Purgatives and
Diuretics, if the Ulcers are upon the Yard of a Man, the Genitals of a Woman,
or about the Groin of either of them; or else you may use inwardly Sudorisicks,
that drive from the Center to the Circumference, if they are in any other parts.

4. It must be especially observed, that the Purgatives, which you shall make
use of for this effect, be strong enough to move Nature, and help it to drive
by Stool any impure matter that might have penetrated a little more inwardly,
than the Ulcers which appear to you; and also that they be not violent enough
to attract the Humors from the remoter parts; for this attraction would help
the matter to make a further penetration, then it would otherwise have been
able to do of it self, and so cause by this means the universal Pox, which you
do endeavor to avoid: And here you may take notice that the greatest part of
Men are themselves the causes of the frauds and deceits that are done to them;
for there are very many who will never think themselves well purged, unless
they have felt excessive pains, and cruel gripes in their guts, and unless they
go to Stool fiveteen or twenty times at least: though to speak the truth,
Nature can never endure these extraordinary and violent Motions without the
diminution or depravation of their Functions, which nevertheless are the
principal Agents in the separation and expulsion of Impurities.

If you desire therefore to avoid these excesses, you will find nothing more safe
than an Infusion of Senna with Salt of Tartar, in which you may also dissolve
the Syrups of Roses or Peachflowers; proportionating the doses to the age and
strength of the Patient you take in hand.

5. The Diuretiks you must make use of to repel by Urine, are Crystal Mineral,
which you may give from half a dram to two or three, and the Spirits of
Vitriol and Sulphur, from six to thirty drops in Pellitory Water, or an
Aperitive Ptisanne, you may prepare with the Roots of Strawberries, wild
Succhory, Grass and Dandelion.

Those of Parsley, Fennil, Sperage, and Rest-harrow, are much more aperitive
than the former, and diverse forms of Ptisannes may be prepared with them, that
are useful indeed to some, but may have very ill effect on persons extremely
hot and dry, as well as Radish-seed bruised, and taken in white Wine, which is
notwithstanding a most powerful Aperitive.

For the Sudorisicks that are taken inwardly, you may successively make use of
the Spirit of Hartshorn, which you may give in half a Glass of Carduus-water,
from six to twenty drops, or a like number of grains of its volatile Salt
dissolved in the same Water.

But among all you will find none to have a greater effect than the Powder, or
volatile Salt of Vipers, if you give the first from ten to thirty grains, and
the latter from five to fiveteen, in equal parts of Cinnamon and
Carduus-waters, or in the Water that remains in the distillation of this same
Salt.

6. It remains to say, that these Evils do not long continue under the Name of
Ulcers simply; for it is well known that the matter which causes them does
sometimes insinuate more deeply, and by this means does make another degree of
the Pox; but it more often happens, that by long continuance in the exulcerated
part, it makes the Ulcers turn into Chancres, after the manner I spoke of
before. Wherefore it is good to observe, that you dress them in this condition
with Escaroticks and Suppuratives, because you must consume the hardness that
is found in them, for fear of leaving a ferment in the parts, that might
produce afterward a far greater Evil, than you are going to destroy.

They who follow the ordinary Practice in this case, are content to apply Red
Precipitate, which in truth makes a skar when it is good, but that a light and
superficial one, such as is not able to hinder the hardness from increasing in
latitude and profundity, and from remaining also after their Cicatrice, what
time soever is employed toward their consumption.

Some do make use of sublimate Corrosive, but besides that it causes
intolerable pains during the Operation, it attracts watery fluxions on the parts
it is applied to, which are very hard to dissolve, and do besides dispose the
parts to a Gangrene, and this principally in those parts that are near the
passages which serve for expulsion of the Excrements.

The causes of these misfortunes, and many others, is an Error of some ancient
Authors, that every body may easily be convinced of, yet has nevertheless been
received by way of Tradition, by the greatest part of those who have written
ever since, or do still write on this subject; according to which Error they
represent Quicksilver to be like a Ferret that goes and searches out the
Venereal matter in all parts of the body, for to expel it thence presently, as
this little Animal does the Connies out of their Holes: For which Opinion
nevertheless they have had no other proof than an indeterminate prejudice, that
has for its foundation nothing but pretended occult and specific qualities,
which no body can understand. Nevertheless we know they look on no other
Remedies to be otherwise than to be impotent of unuseful for these sorts of
Maladies. And so we must not at all wonder, that they are so stiff and
refractory, in never making use of any other Causticks than such as are made
with Mercury, which in good truth is the most assured Remedy for raising the
Crisis of the universal Pox: but this only by reason of such Motions and
Actions, as may be determinate and known. Whatsoever is the truth of it, you will
find by Experience, that the Caustic Stones, which are prepared of unslackt
Lime, and the Cineres Clavellati, have a much more certain effect, since they
cause a skar more profound than Red Precipitate, and act with less pain than
Sublimate Corrosive.

You must use them notwithstanding with prudence and discretion, and remember
that a part already exulcerated is more easy to penetrate, than when it is
covered with its skin; and consequently you must use them in a smaller
quantity, and they must be limited to fit places only, by means of a Plaster
with a hole in the middle of it, of the exact bigness you desire to make your
skar, and this to hinder the Salts from overspreading themselves, after they
have been dissolved by the moisture of the Ulcer.

But if you will be still more assured in what you do, you may then make use of
the Lapis Infernalis, with which you may see and conduct the Operation as it
were in an instant.

After having made a skar by some of these means, but more particularly by the
two last, you may procure the fall of it with the common Suppurative, in which
you may afterward mix a little Red Precipitate, and burnt Alum, to increase
the Suppuration, and consume the hardness that may remain. But if it is
considerable or you have to do with a body Dry and Melancholic; you may add
with good store of the foresaid Ointment, a little Sublimate Corrosive, and
wash the Ulcer every time you dress it with the last Collyre of Liquour I
described, adding a little Aegyptiack when there is need, to make it more
detersive.

You may also lay over the Tents the Plaster of Mucilages, in which you shall
have mixed 4 or 6 ounces of Mercury for every pound, and rub the places about
the part with the Neapolitan Ointment double or treble of Mercury, in the mean
time not forgetting the Purgatives that you must reiterate on this occasion, as
well as the other general Remedies I have proposed for a preservation from the
universal Pox.

7. When these sorts of Mischiefs are on the Yard of a Man, there happens
sometimes a Phymosis to the prepuce, either by the Patient's negligence, or the
ignorance of him that takes the cure in hand, and this hinders him from being
able to uncover, or dress the Ulcers or Chancres that are underneath. The
common way of remedying this Accident, is to make one or two Incisions, and
this Operation is so much the more subject to unhappy consequences, as the part
is already afflicted, and therefore more disposed for receiving Fluxions; and
therefore you will do much better to try some Emollient Fomentations, and
Cataplasms, that you may prepare with the Decoction and Residence of
Mallow-leaves, Roots of Marshmallows, and Lin-seed, not forgetting the
frictions of the Ointments, and application of the Plasters I named before.
During which, you must mundifie the Ulcers, and Chancres, as well as you can,
with the Collyres or Liquours before described; of which Liquours you may often
make Injections under the Prepuce, with a little Syringe, observing to stretch
it by little and little with your fingers, by drawing it toward the root of the
Yard, as often as you dress your Patient, till the Gland becomes again wholly
uncovered; but all this must be done very gently, and without any violence, for
otherwise there will happen a Paraphymosis, which is an Accident much worse
than the former; for besides that the Balanus is suffocated, and cannot by any
means be uncovered, this suffocation causes such a pain, as presently draws
Fluxion, Inflammation, and Gangrene, if all possible care be not suddenly used.

Some have indeed very happily cured this Indisposition, by only bathing the
Yard or Belly in cold Water, but this principally in its beginning.

All the Remedies described against the Phymosis are also useful in the
Paraphymosis, when there is time to make use of them. But oftentimes one is
obliged to practice and prefer the Incisions before any of the other.

Now I shall not say any thing of the means how to cicatrize the Ulcers and
Chancres, since they do principally consist in mundifying them well, and Nature
labors enough of her own accord to reunite the divided parts, when the
Physician knows how to remove the Impediments.

CHAP. II. Of the other particular Poxes, that are called Claps and Virulent
Gonorrheas.
1. That the Salts which cause these sorts of Poxes are very Volatile, and have
some similitude and some difference between them. 2. Diverse necessary
Observations on the Method of Curing them. 3. Concerning the Inflation or
Swelling, and Inflammation of the Testicules, with the means of Healing them.
4. Of Carnosities that sometimes follow these first Mischiefs, and of their
Remedies. 5. A very useful Observation on particular Poxes.

1. THe other particular Poxes, which I have said do happen to the parts our
senses cannot discover, are Claps, and Virulent Gonorrheas; which are the
effects of a very subtle, or rather volatile matter, since in Women it often
passes from the Vagina (wherein the Seed is received) into the Ejaculatory
Vessels, and into their Testicules; and since it passes in Men all along the
Ureters, to make their adhesion to the same Vessels, and to the Bladder,
without leaving nevertheless in the one or in the other any marks at all of its
passage, in the parts it goes through.

Though Virulent Claps, or Heats of Urine, do never happen without Gonorrheas,
that is to say, without the corruption and flowing of the Seed, yet they must
not be confounded indifferently together under these two Names, as some Authors
have very inconsiderately done; because this last Indisposition remains
sometimes a great while after the former, and it is seen sometimes to happen
alone, that is to say, without Exulceration, and apparent Inflammation, though
indeed it be actually caused by the presence of impure Salts which possess the
Spermatick Vessels. Nevertheless as the Gonorrhea is inseparable from a Clap,
and the Remedies which agree to it as an Accident, do also serve for curing it,
when it is a Disease apart, it will not be necessary to treat of it here more
particularly; it may suffice to acquaint you, that it is often taken in Women
for the Whites, for want of observing, that its Flux is continual, whereas that
of the Whites is almost always Periodical and Menstrual.

Furthermore I have sufficiently explicated otherwise what I mean by Virulent
Claps, and after what manner I conceive them to be produced, that there is no
need of making repetitions here; I believe also that all the divisions which I
could make of it be altogether useless, because I do not intend to speak but
only of those that are caused by the entrance and adhesion of some Venereal
Salt, or else because its Accidents do sufficiently distinguish it from such as
happen by violent Exercises, by the use of fermented Liquours, and by other
causes. Therefore I believe it will suffice to give you in this Chapter the
circumstances it is necessary to observe for the curing successfully all the
Accidents that accompany this I am now going to speak of, or else for assuredly
preventing the universal Pox, that might otherwise follow.

2. Inflammation may be said to be the most pressing Accident of all that
happen in this degree of the Pox, for it is by it that the matter which runs out
is rendered the more sharp and corrosive, that the Ulcers of the passages
become greater and more profound, that the pains grow insupportable, and lastly
that the means of making Urine become so extreme difficult, nay and sometimes
in a manner impossible: It Is therefore requisite to take care betimes of
preventing, or else curing it by cooling Remedies, such as may be those I am
now going to propose.

Some persons, whom we must by no means imitate, do begin with Bloodletting in
the Arm, which may be apt to attract or drive the Venereal matter more inwardly
into the body, and must consequently be suspected as dangerous; others are not
afraid to let Blood in the Foot, which also may have the same effect, or else
precipitate the Defluxion into the Stones; wherefore you should abstain from
them both, and prefer the use of the following Ptisanne, which will serve at
the same time to cool the parts, drive the matter outward, and diminish its
Acrimony.

Take the Roots of white Lillies, and Marshmallows, of each a pound, Sorrel
half a hand full, Liquorish a sufficient quantity, Barley three hands full,
Linseed two ounces, common Water four and twenty pounds; make a Ptisanne the
usual way, remembering to press the remainder well, for to draw out the Mucilage
the better.

Add in every Bottle of this Ptisanne ten or twelve drops of the Spirit of
Vitriol, and make, your Patient drink of it as much as his stomach will bear,
and this indifferently at any hour, day, or night.

Though this Ptisanne be often sufficient to answer the intentions I have
named, when you begin in good time to make use of it; yet it is found every day
in some persons, that the malignity of the matter, and disposition of the body
and parts, do cause the Inflammation to grow so great, as to communicate it
self to the Reins, and neck of the Bladder, so that the Patients do suffer
extreme pains, when they are in Bed, during the erection, and in urining: but
this more particularly in Men; for the Convulsion of the Nerves of their Yard,
which by retiring toward their origin do swell, and thereby render this part
crooked, or bended, does cause the degree of the Pox in which it is said to be
corded and stringed; and in which also you must add to the forenamed
Ingredients for the Ptisanne, two ounces of the Cold Seeds, half an ounce of
white Poppy Seed, and the Juice of two or three Limons, for to render it more
Anodyne, more refreshing, and agreeable.

You shall also give from time to time emulsions made of Whey, sweet Almonds,
and the Seeds and Juice I have now named.

You may for the same intention rub the Reins, and Perineum with the Cerecloth
of Galen, which you must afterward cover with Linen dipped in Oxyerat that is
made of one part of Vinegar, and six of Rose Water.

The use of cooling Clysters must be frequent too, as well as Injections of
this quality, which must be made into the Yard, by means of a little Syringe,
and this with lukewarm Milk, for Example, which is mavelous for this effect,
and one may make use of it much more successfully than of common Water, to dip
the Yard in whilst he urines, and so facilitate the passage of the Urine.

Some of those who do not esteem things that are common, choose rather to make
use of the Waters of Nightshade, Roses, and Plantain, to make Injections,
which are indeed Refrigerant and Anodyne, because they hinder the matter from
flowing, and drive it back by their astriction; but it is a dangerous thing to
do so, and therefore you must have a care of using them, unless the matter be
grown thick, and has run sufficiently.

Turpentine of Chios, or in defect of it that of Venice, has a mavelous
effect for asswaging and qualifying the matter, and driving it out, because it
very easily slides into those parts, and is very Diuretic. You may give it in
Bolus or Pills from two drachms to half an ounce, or its Spirit drawn
Chymically from five drops to fifteen, in Aperitive Waters or Ptisannes.

Experience will let you know that the Salt, which is called Polychrest, is a
powerful Remedy to drive out the Venereal Salts, if you dissolve two drachms of
it in two glasses of the former Ptisanne, or of Pellitory-water, to give it a
little after the Inflammation is past, and reiterate it after this manner two
or three times, augmenting the Dose each time with a dram more.

After the use of these Remedies, you must begin to purge gently, with a light
Infusion of Senna, Crystal Mineral, and Cassia, and may reiterate this Purge
some days afterward, augmenting the Dose, or else adding other Medicaments
that are most convenient to the present Dispositions.

When the matter shall come to run more white, more thick, and in less
quantity, you may then hinder its effluxion for altogether, shutting up and
closing the Spermatick Vessels by astringent and inward Remedies, whilst you
are cleansing and desiccating the Ulcers of the Ureter, with detersive and
desiccative Injections.

Some of those that abuse Physic and its Remedies, do strive to stop the
matter that runs in Claps, only with astringent Injections; which causes the
matter to sink into the more inward parts, and so consequently there happens a
greater Evil then they pretended to cure, or at least the effluxion begins
again so soon as they have left off the use of these pretended Remedies: in so
much that they are compelled sometimes fifteen or twenty times to reassume the
use of them, without attaining the end they proposed themselves. For these
Injections cannot go in Men further than the inward extremity of the common
passage to the Seed and Urine, nor in Women further than the neck of the Womb,
or the neck of the Bladder; but this happens chiefly, because by this means
they hinder the evacuation of such Impurities as may still remain sometimes
after the Operation of the former Medicaments, and are too often the only cause
of the duration of this Disease. Now none of this happens, when Stiptick
Remedies that are taken inwardly, are used with prudence; for they close the
Spermatick Vessels by little and little, which by this restriction or
compression do discharge themselves of their remaining Impurities; so that you
may always make use of them with good success, observing only that you give
them at first in a very small quantity and this a little after the Purgatives
spoken of before. To this we must add nevertheless, that it is sometimes
needful not to make use of them at all, and that Circumstances do sometimes
happen wherein they are unprofitable, or dangerous. For it is remarkable in the
greatest part of those that are thus affected, that the matter which runs out
toward end of their Cure, is nothing else but the Virus of some of the Ulcers
in the passages, and so consequently its effluxion must not be hindered by any
other Remedies than such as are cleansing and desiccative. Sometimes also the
extraordinary heat of the Bowels does nourish and continue the Inflammation and
Dilatation of the ejaculatory Vessels; so that the alteration and loss of Seed
cannot be hindered but by a proper Diet, and cooling Remedies. At other times
again the Gonorrhea is caused by Virulent serosities, that fall into the
Testicules, and cannot be consumed but by the use of the Decoctions of
China-root, Salsaparilla, and the other Sudorificks. Lastly it may be perpetual
and incurable in Men, when the Caruncula Mammillaris (which shuts the Holes
through which the Seed passes into the common passage from the Glandulae
Prostatae) has been unhappily consumed by some Ulcer, or else by corrosive
Medicaments.

But you must observe that the greatest of these Exceptions do not commonly
come to pass, and you must consider the Astringents, of which I have spoken, as
the most assured Remedies in the Cure of Gonorrheas; and besides it is by the
use and effects of them, that you may best judge of the necessity of these
others; wherefore you may always try them without danger, and make use of to
this purpose, for Example, a great Glass of Water, wherein you shall have
boiled, half a quarter of an hour, half an ounce of Myrobalans beaten together.

Or else, of the Tincture of red Roses, drawn in common Water, or the Juice of
Berberries, with the Spirit of Vitriol, and given Morning and Evening from two
to six ounces.

Or again, four parts of Electrum, or instead of it Amber, with one part of
Camphire poudered, and incorporated into the Conserve of Roses, the weight of
both, to give of it every Morning from half a dram to a dram and a half.

But among all the Remedies that may be used to this intention, you will find
none more assured in their Operation than the following Pills:

Take of Mastick in Tears, red Coral, and chosen Amber, of each two drachms,
Camphir one dram, Laudanum eight grains; make Pills according to Art, with a
sufficient quantity of Syrop of Quinces to make a Mass, of which you may give
from a scruple to a dram, for each Dose.

As for the Ulcers which may happen in the passages, you may mundifie them with
detersive Injections, made with the decoction of French Barley, and Agrimony,
in which you shall mix the Syrop of Wormwood, or Honey of Red Roses, with some
drops of the Spirit of Vitriol.

After the detersion you may dry them with the seventh Water of unslackt Lime,
in which you shall dissolve a little Salt of Saturn.

Or else, take white Vitriol, Iris of Florence, and Camphire, of each half a
dram, Roch-Alum one dram, Rose and Plantain-water, of each eight ounces,
make Collyres for the foresaid intention.

The Troches of Abbot Rhafis, mixed in the same Waters, in the Water of
distilled Alum, or its dissolution in common Water may also serve to the same
effect.

3. When the Patients way of living is very irregular, and licentious, or else
when the matter has been driven back too soon by astringent Injections;
lastly, when it has been precipitated by Purges, that are too violent, or
inconsideratly given, it spreads into the proper Membranes of one of the
Testicules, or of both together, where it causes a great and painful Tumor,
which sometimes creates more trouble to cure than all the other Accidents.

The situation of the parts where the Evil lies, does indicate to you the
necessity of repose; the defluxion of Humors, Inflammation, and great pain
that draws them thither, do also indicate to you the necessity of revulsive
Phlebotomys, and Anodyne and cooling Clysters, which you must reiterate as
often as shall be found necessary, to stop or divert the Motion of the matter.

Cataplasms made of Cows-milk, Crumbs of White-bread, Yelks of new-laid Eggs, and
Oil of sweet Almonds, are here very profitable at the beginning.

Fomentations and Cataplasms made with Mallow-leaves, Marsh-mallow roots,
Flowers of Camomille and Melilote, Line-seed and Fleawort-seed, may much
contribute to the Cure of this Indisposition.

When the Inflammation and pain shall be taken away by all these Remedies, and
the Tumor a little mollified, you may begin to use resolvent Cataplasms, such
as are made with the four sorts of Farine or Meal boiled in Oxymel, adding to
them a little Ointment of Roses, and Saffran.

Cummin-seed well bruised, and boiled also in Oximel to the consistence of a
Cataplasm.

Lastly, the Balsom of Sulphur applied alone, or mixed with Myrrh, in the
consistence of a Cere-cloth, as it is described by Rulandus.

4. If the Ulcers of the passages have not been cleansed and dried, as they
should be, the remaining matter thickens, and fixes the Humor, which flows
into the ulcerated part; in so much that the Flesh there grows hard, rises by
little and little, and at last hinders the entrance of the Yard, when it
happens in the neck of the Womb of a Woman, but does more often hinder the
passage of the Urine in both Sexes, if it be not consumed before it possesses
the Circumference of the Ureter.

It is more particularly requisite in Men to take care of preventing this
extremity, and endeavoring to consume these excrescencies, so soon as ever it
is perceived, that the Urine does not make so large a stream as usually, or
that it runs out forked and divided. For when it comes to go out but only drop
by drop, or is altogether thus suppressed, we are almost always obliged to open
the Perineum by an Incision, or at least to introduce a Catheter into the
Bladder, which in passing along does cause very grievous pains.

You may easily consume a Carnosity in its beginning, by excoriating it with a
Catheter, and applying thereupon (by the means of a little Candle made of Wax
and Turpentine) red Precipitate, calcined Alum, Verdegrease, the powder of
Sabine, and yellow Orpiment; of which Drogues you may prepare several sorts of
Remedies. But when it is become very great and hard, you must first of all try
to render it tractable, by the application of emollient Remedies, such as are
the Fomentations that I have described for the swelling of the Testicles, or
else the residence of the Decoction, with which you may make Cataplasms for the
same effect, beating it and boiling it to the consistence of Pap.

You may also make Liniments with the Oil of Lillies, Man's Fat, or the
Neapolitan Ointment, and apply thereupon the Plaster de Vigo, or rather that of
Mucilage with Mercury.

Some have found a great deal of help from a Fumigation that is raised from
Aqua-vitae, or Vinegar, cast upon hot stones or bricks.

When the Carnosity shall have been a little mollified by these, or other
means, you may make use of the Corrosives described before, or put twelve grams
of Sublimate Corrosive in an ounce of the Plaster of Mucilage, which will
assuredly prove of great effect, if you use it dexterously; that is to say, if
you apply it in a small quantity, and this directly upon the excrescence.

Moreover, I shall not speak particularly of those that happen to Women in the
same passages, by reason that you may also consume them with the Remedies I
have already described; and this also with much more ease than those, which
happen in the common passage or the Ureter of Men.

5. You must observe that the particular Poxes of which I have spoken are found
to be sometimes accompanied with the universal Pox, because it sometimes
happens to appear just at the same time; or the Venereal Salts are now and then
so volatile and penetrant, that they force against the opposition of Nature and
its Preservatives. In this case it is to no purpose to make use of the greatest
part of the particular Remedies I have proposed; since by taking away the
universal Infection of the body by the general Remedies that will be described
in the sequel of this Book, you will destroy the Cause of the Disease,
wheresoever it may ly, and the Accidents will easily vanish almost all of
themselves by this means.

CHAP. III. Of the Natural Crises of the Universal Pox.
1. General division of the Crises of the Pox, and why the Evacuations that
follow the Application of its Remedies, may be so called. 2. Of the Natural
Crises of the Pox, and first of those that terminate it with other Diseases. 3.
Of those that are produced simply by the Opposition of Nature. 4. Of Buboes and
Poulains in particular.

SEeing the universal Pox does consist in a general Infection of the body, it
cannot be-terminated but by such Crises, as are able to carry away all its
Impurities.

These Crises may be raised either by Motions purely Natural, or else by the
proper Actions of Mercury, and the other Remedies.

I know well enough that those who stick closely to what the Ancients have
taught, will not allow of this division, because according to them the Crises
of Diseases are only the productions of Nature, and not the effects of
Remedies; Whereupon it is necessary to remark, that the Evacuations which
follow the application of Remedies against the Pox, and particularly that of
Mercury, must not be considered simply like those that are seen to follow, when
the Vessels are opened, or after the use of Vomits and Purges; because these
last have always determinate Motions, whereas those others I speak of are made
either by the mouth, or by the pores, or siege, or by urine, according as
Nature finds the Impurities or passages best disposed; whence we may easily
conclude that they are properly the works of Nature, and that the Remedies
which are employed for this effect, do principally serve to move and dispose
the bodies to their purification by an agitation of all the Humors.

2. But to return to those which are caused by Motions purely Natural, they may
may be distinguished into such as are provoked by the Causes of some other
Diseases, which do render the Pox sometimes complicated, or into such as are
made simply by the opposition of Nature.

The Diseases which may cause the former, are, for Example, the Plague,
Pleuresie, and generally Feavours, but principally those that are called
Malignant, whose Crises may be able to carry off the Pox, because they never
happen but after their Causes have procured a great ebullition in the blood, by
which Nature is sometimes so violently moved, that she makes an extraordinary
effort to separate all the Impurities that are mixed with it. But seeing the
Pox may be carried off after this manner as different ways as there are
different Natural terminations of it, and because this matter cannot be treated
of here without confusion, I shall not speak more amply of it, but do believe
it will be sufficient to explicate in this Chapter the other sorts of Crises,
which may be said to be peculiar to the Pox.

3. Seeing the Venereal matter is venomous, subtle, and penetrant, it rarely
makes its Attache any considerable time on the superficial parts, without
entering into the Vessels, and mixing with the blood; and as there is nothing
more ordinary than those sorts of adhesion, there would consequently be nothing
more familiar than the universal Pox, if Nature did not oppose its
introduction, and make use of all its force to hinder a mixture and insinuation
that is so contrary to it. Nay we see, that she prevents as much as possible
the disorder that this poison may be apt to make. For when she is not able to
escape its Introduction, she knows how to act against it another manner of way,
by separating it from the Humors that are pure, and driving it away with the
ordinary Excrements through commodious passages.

These passages may be the same as serve also for Natural Purgations, such as
the Terms of Women, and the regulated Hemorrhoides of certain Men, or for
extraordinary Evacuations, as sordid Ulcers, or lastly for the universal
purification of the blood, and the Emunctories. But as the Venereal matter is
driven almost insensibly through the former ways that I have mentioned, and
seeing Nature has no need of assistance in this Operation, I shall not give
any more precise explications of them, and shall be contented to describe the
means of making the Crise succeed well, that often happens through the latter.

4. Whereas the Genital parts do serve oftener than any other for the
introduction of Venereal Salts, the Groin which is very near them does suffer
the impure Tumors by which they are driven out, more commonly than the other
Emunctories; after the same manner as the Humors that serve for a Crisis to
the Pestilence, do rather happen to swell under the Armpits, because they are
nearer the Breast, which first received by inspiration the infected Air that
caused this Disease. But though it be easy to remark that those sort of Tumors
are always made by some Critical Motion, it is known nevertheless that the
efforts, which Nature makes on this account would often prove to no purpose, if
she were not seconded by the application and action of Remedies that Physic
does furnish us with. An Example of this truth is observed particularly in
Buboes or Poulains, that often appear in the Groins, when the impure matter
has been driven thither, but yet disappear again sometimes, when it has not
been stopped there by Attractives; which happens not in the Crises that are made
the other was I have spoken of, by reason that they have nothing to hinder the
passage of Impurities, and because the Humors that run through them do at the
same time serve to extend and dissolve the Venereal Salts, which are easily
driven out by this means. But it is not the same when a Bubo begins to rise,
the little Humor that there is mixed with those Salts, thickens by this
mixture, because it remains a long time under the skin, and can have no issue
at all but by piercing it; so that these Crises can seldom become perfect,
unless Nature is assisted with Art.

The intention which you ought to have for to answer this respect, does
principally consist in augmenting the Emotion of Nature, and procuring a
Suppuration.

This Augmentation may be made two manner of ways. The first is, by driving it
from within outwardly, by the use of hot Aliments, for Example, of Wine, or
else of Remedies of the same quality, such as Treacle, or Treacle-water. The
second is by attracting and digesting the Tumor by Topics.

The attraction and digestion of Buboes is wont to be made ordinarily, with the
Plaster Diachylum, that is compounded of Galbanum, Opoponax, and the other hot
and attractive Gums. But I know by experience, that it attracts but weakly,
when the Gums enter into it in a small Dose, and that it becomes on the
contrary Resolvent, when too great a quantity of them enters; so that its
application does not hinder the Tumors from disappearing sometimes, and this
chiefly in Melancholic and Phlegmatic persons, whose Natural heat is but
weak; wherefore you must prefer at least for such persons the following
Cataplasm, which has for certain a much better effect.

Take eight or ten Snails with their shells, six Lilly-roots, two ounces of
fresh Butter, and three ounces of old Rye-leaven, make Cataplasms of it, and
apply them hot, and renew them every six hours; remembering to augment the Dose
of the Leaven, when you would attract more strongly in robust Bodies, and also
to diminish it for those that have their skin tender and delicate, to avoid
those excoriations which might otherwise be feared. Moreover, this Remedy has
not only the virtue of attracting, but also that of stopping and fixing the
Humor in the part, by contributing much to the Suppuration.

When the Tumor is rebellious, and advances not so much as may be wished, a
great Cupping-glass may be successfully applied upon it every twelve hours,
which must be left each time, till it has made a considerable attraction;
after which you may take it off, and put upon the point of the Tumor a Tent of
the bigness of a farthing, on which you may put an Ointment made of equal parts
of Basilicum, and Leaven fermented with the Spirit of Vitriol, to apply
afterward upon it the Plaster, or ordinary Cataplasm.

After you shall have brought the matter to Suppuration by these means, you
must open the Bubo in the most eminent part of it, or a very little lower,
according to the Longitude of the Fibers of the Groin, with Potential Cauters,
and the Lancet; after which, you may make use of the ordinary Suppuratives and
Mundificatives, by putting at first upon it the Plaster Diachylum, and
afterward that of Mucilage with Mercury; and at last you may treat it like
other impure Tumors, remembering to purge frequently toward the latter end by
Stool, and by Urine.

It is remarkable that there are some Impostors here, and other where who do
make ill use of these Remedies, and do make artificial Buboes appear, on those
that have none really, but sometimes doubt of it, by reason of some Glandules
filled with serosities, or other edematous Tumors, which happen either during,
or after some particular Poxes.

CHAP. IV. Of the Plants which have been esteemed capable to carry off the Pox
by Sweat.
1. General Observations on these Sudorifick Plants, by which is proved that
they are not able to Cure the Pox neither in Europe, nor in the Indies. 2.
Particular Observations on Guaiacum. 3. On Sassafras. 4. On China. 5. On
Sarsaparilla.

1. Before we speak of the Crises that are artificially raised to cure the
Universal Pox, I have thought it convenient to remark some useful Observations
on the Sudorifick Plants, which were heretofore accounted infallible for this
effect, and some others upon Quicksilver; which are of so much the more
importance, as they are at present also acknowledged for its most assured
Remedy, without any body's endeavoring nevertheless hitherto to understand
why and how they come to have such power.

These Plants, or their parts which are ordinarily in use, are, for Example,
the Wood Guaiacum, and the Roots of Sassafras, China, and Sarsaparilla, which
have been brought hither from diverse places of both Indies, and at several
times; they have all had their turns of the common advantage new things usually
meet with; the Dearest, and Newest have been always most esteemed, and the
greatest part of Authors have used this occasion to speak Wonders of them* and
make profit by this means of the prejudice of Men's minds; so that they have
been generally acknowledged for the sovereign, specific, and assured Remedies
of this Disease.

These Abuses have made way for many others, Empyricks have distributed them
for things of a most precious value, the Chemists have drawn their Extracts and
Quintessences out of them, which they have sold at the price of their weight in
Gold; Mountebanks, and such as distribute secret Remedies, have put a disguise
upon them by the mixture of many other Ingredients; lastly, ignorant people
have preferred the use of them before all other Remedies.

Because the Stories and Relations of those that have made Voyages into the
Indies, did persuade us that the Indians were perfectly cured by a Decoction of
these Plants, and the Impostors of Europe took care to render their success
good in all appearance by the deceitful Cure of imaginary Diseases; All people
were a long time entertained in this Error, and every body continued obstinate
in the use of them, notwithstanding the false Experiments that were daily made,
which were rather imputed to the indiscret and careless use of them, than to
their proper fault. Wherefore Men tried several ways of preparing and employing
them, which nevertheless were acknowledged to be useless, as well as the common
and ordinary Preparations.

This obliged those that had especially strived to keep them in vogue, to
acknowledge and declare that the same advantages could not be drawn from them
here, as were pretended to be infallible in their Natural Climats. But lest it
should seem ridiculous to condemn absolutely such things as have been generally
approved but a little before, some of them therefore taught, that the
Providence of God had made them grow only for the Cure of those Countries,
where this Disease was supposed to have its origin, but that they could not be
transported so far as us without the loss and alteration of their Virtues.

These Propositions do not prove nevertheless that the Indians are better cured
than we by the use of these Plants; since I have proved in another place that
the Pox has still been in all places, and at all times; And it may be further
added, that if God had permitted the transportation of this Disease without
alteration of its form, he would also by the same Reason have permitted the
transportation of its Remedies too, without diminution of their Virtues.
Besides there would have been no need, but only of augmenting the Doses, to
render the Compositions that were made of them more strong and active. But that
which particularly lets us see, those people are not cured but only in
appearance too, by the Decoction of these Simples, is, that they do desiccate
the bodies here as much or little less than they do in the Indies; and that
this desiccation does make the Accidents often disappear for the present, and
leave only the appearance of a Cure; in so much that they do always cause a new
fermentation afterward, and appear some other time more terrible than before.

Whatsoever you please to think of it, it is certain this Opinion was at last
found and acknowledged to be true, and the greatest part of our Physicians
began at last to disabuse themselves; so that diverse Essays were made to
discover some other Remedy for this Evil. Our Apothecaries prepared for this
effect diverse sorts of Purgative and Vomitive Potions, Antidotes, and Cordial
Confections, Plasters, Ointments, and generally all kinds of Compositions of
the Galenical Pharmacie. The Chemists did not fail on their part to try their
Elixirs, their Arcanums Magisteries, Quintessences and Extracts, both Emetick,
Cathartick and Diaphoretick. Lastly, after a great many proofs of the like
nature, it was happily found out, that those who had the Pox could be cured
indeed by Frictions with Mercurial Ointments, which served heretofore for the
pretended Leprosy, of which I have spoken before. Nevertheless seeing these
Sudorifick Decoctions did heretofore take away the appearance of it in some
persons, they were not neglected altogether; and the esteem that had been made
of them formerly did still contribute much to the use that has been made of
them since, and is continued now a days, which is to give them for preparing
the Bodies, on which Mercury is designed to be applied.

Moreover it is not hard to understand how the Accidents of the Pox can
disappear for some time, without destroying its Cause, since it is evident
enough, by what I have already said in the First Section of this Book, that it
essentially consists in a venomous Salt mixed with the Blood, which ferments and
sets it a boiling; so that during this Ebullition there continually arises out
of the Vessels that contain it many vaporous or serous matters, which produce
different Symptoms, according to their Quality, or Quantity, or Parts where
they adhere. Now seeing these same Matters can be easily consumed by
Sudorificks, Diuretics, and generally by desiccative Remedies; we must not at
all wonder, if their Effects do not appear for a time after the use of a
Decoction of these Plants, and if nevertheless the Ferment that raised up those
Vapors, do still continue mixed with the Blood, since it is a Salt dissolved,
fermented and confounded with it, that cannot be sufficiently carried off by
matters that pass away so quickly.

I know very well it may be said, that one can hardly believe how the Indians
should be cured only in show, and should be so long deceived without perceiving
their error. But observe how I conceive that may be done: Strumpets are there
wonderful common, and they make use of them with the Brutality that is usual to
such as have little Religion in them; which makes this disease so familiar
among them, that they have reason to think they contract it still anew again.
For indeed it is not at all likely, that they should be obliged so frequently
to reiterate their Cures, as Histories and Relations tell us they do, if they
really had any assured Remedies to destroy this Disease in its Root.

I do not mean (as I have already said) that the Universal Pox can never be
cured by these Sudorificks, or by other Remedies more ordinary and common,
whilst it is yet but in its first degree, that is to say, when its Matter has
not been perfectly united with the Blood by a Fermentation: But besides that
this Degree does continue but a little while, it is not always liable to be
rightly distinguished, and Mercury does carry it off with so much promptitude
and facility, that it were indeed vain to try other Remedies.

Notwithstanding that these Observations are founded both upon Reason and
Experience, and do prove by these two means that these Plants are not Specific
against this Disease; we must avow nevertheless that there are some
Occurrences, wherein they may much contribute to the Cure, seeing there are
some Bodies that must be absolutely desiccated before the application of
Mercury; Wherefore it is necessary to take notice of the Observations that I
have made on each in particular, to know more precisely the use that must be
made of them.

2. The Wood Guaiacum gives a yellowish Tincture, more sharp, and more
distasteful, but also more desiccative than that of the other three Simples
named before. Some Authors pretend that this Effect proceeds from its
Sudorifick virtue; and others contend to prove that it is much more Diuretic:
but which soever it is, it is always true that it consumes the Phlegm and
Serosities, carrying them off either by Sweat or Urine. And that these
different motions do principally proceed from the internal disposition of those
that use them, since it is found by Experience that it does make some sweat and
others urine. I have often observed, that it may be rendered more proper to open
the Pores, by adding to its Decoction some French Barley, which does also
render it sweeter and more agreeable.

We have reason also to believe, that the manner of using it among the greatest
part of Americans does not a little contribute to the rendering of it
Sudorifick; for they first heat themselves by violent and extraordinary
Exercises, before they presume to drink of its Decoction, and after they have
drunk of it, they lie in Cotton-beds hung up, and so continually swinging,
which gives a new agitation to the Humors by such continued motions, and makes
them evaporate more easily by ways already disposed.

We must grant indeed that the Volatile and Essential Salt, which causes it to
produce this Effect, does more abound in that which they employ, than this that
is brought over to us; because they cut it fresh from young Trees, and the
Sprigs of old ones, in which the Universal Spirit, that causes the Vegetation
of Plants, is doubtless more active, and less divided; and it is for this
reason requisite to make choice of the smallest and yellowest, because the
greatest and blackest is most likely to be taken from old sapless Trunks.

Such as make the goodness of Remedies to consist in the strength of their
activity do rather employ the Bark of this same Wood, which is in good truth
more drying than all the rest of the Tree, but is accompanied with so much Heat
and Acrimony, that I would not counsel any body to make use of it; and it would
be much better on an occasion to render the use of the ordinary Decoction
longer and more frequent.

3. The part of Sassafras which is commonly made choice of, and which I esteem
also to be the best, is its Root, of which nevertheless there is little use
made at present; either because its Virtue is not well known, or because the
other Sudorifick Roots are dearer, and so consequently more esteemed. It is
true notwithstanding, that its Decoction has a very pleasant and agreeable
Smell and Taste, and that use may be made of it as well as of Guaiacum, to
consume the superfluous Humidities, in driving them either by Sweat, or Urine,
or else by siege, adding some light Catharticks to it.

I have observed nevertheless that its Root does not desiccate so powerfully as
Guaiacum, and that it is consequently good for such as must be more moderately
dried. But more force may be found in the Bark of its Wood, which also gives a
Tincture yet more Aromatic, more quick and sharp.

4. Whereas the Root of China is the dearest of sudorifick Druggs, that serve
to prepare or cure such as are infected with the Pox, the Merchants and
Travelers, who have brought it hither from the places where it is found, have
all endeavored to boast its good effects very much to its advantage, that they
might thereby have the better Market of it; and its Virtues have been also so
much exaggerated by some Authors, that such as have preferred their Report
before the Experience and Observations which they might have made themselves,
would have thought they had labored in vain, if they had presumed to cure the
Pox without employing it to this intent. Nevertheless we must acknowledge, that
this preoccupation deserves to be blamed, and that this Root has nothing in it
proportionable to the esteem that has been made of it, nor to the dearness
with which it has been sold: seeing the Decoctions that are made of all these
Drugs, do principally and most properly serve to dry the Bodies of such as use
them, and the Decoctions of the other two I now mentioned may be employed to
this effect with more success.

Not that this may not be very useful, to prepare such as should be more gently
desiccated. Yet it may be also let alone, when occasion serves, only by
diminishing the Doses of those that are stronger, or augmenting the quantity of
those that are weaker.

5. The Root of Sarsaparilla is nowadays more commonly employed to the
abovesaid use, because it gives a Tincture very like that of Wine, and its
Decoction has nothing disagreeable for Smell or Taste. Nevertheless I have
observed that it dries something less than the other three Sudorificks of which
I have spoken, and that it passes more willingly by way of Urine, than through
the Pores: whence it comes to be of great use for the curing Gonorrheas, that
are caused by virulent Serosities, which do sometimes occupy the Testicles and
and other parts that serve for the Concoction and Distribution of the Seed.

CHAP. V. Of the Observations it is necessary to make on Mercury, to know
whence the different Effects that follow its application do proceed.
1. Whence it comes to pass that the Qualities of Mercury have not been yet
known, and the necessity there is of knowing them. 2. That it easily joins it
self with sulphurous and metallic Bodies, and that it is by consequence
necessary that it be revived from Cinnaber, to become pure. 3. That it is
always in motion, and that it never loses its mobility but only to retake it.
4. That its Sulphurs do render it volatile and penetrant, but its Gravity
inclines it to search downwards. 5 That Resinous substances do serve for the
division of its particles, but Acids do dissolve it more perfectly. 6. That
Heat sublimes it, but Alkalis does precipitate it. 7. That Acids do diminish
its Volatility, but that it is so much the more Corrosive as there are Acids
mixed with it. 8. That the diversity of Bodies with which it joins makes the
diversity of its Actions and Effects. 9. That it is no way poisonous in it
self, and that the diverse dispositions of Subjects on which it is applied, do
cause the different Effects that do result from its application.

1. Seeing the Ancients have not explicated the Qualities of Medicaments, but
only by the different degrees of Hot and Dry, Cold and Moist, and these same
degrees have not been at all known or distinguished more precisely than by the
Actions and Effects that result from these Qualities; we must not at all
wonder, if they have held Opinions so very different on the subject of
Quicksilver, since that this Mineral does act so diversely, and does produce
such different Effects, not only in the several Bodies that receive it, but
also at different times, when received in the same subject: Whence it comes to
pass that some have maintained it to be cold, by reason of the cold Diseases
that it creates; and others have esteemed it to be hot, because it does consume
Phlegm, and desiccates the bodies in which it is made to enter. Some also have
judged it to be Venomous, by reason of the Accidents that ordinarily arrive to
such as draw it out of the Mines, to Gilders, and other Artificers that make
use of it; and yet some others again have asserted that it is an Antidote of
poisons, and an Enemy of Corruption, because it generally kills all Vermin,
and is used with success in malignant Feavours, the Pestilence and Pox; lastly
all their Conceits on this subject have been so opposite, that they have
determined nothing at all yet; and modern Authors who have ordained this Remedy
against certain Diseases, have been contented to say, that it acts by unknown
occult Properties.

Though there is nothing less known or understood in all Physic, it is true
nevertheless that nothing does really deserve to be known more, since the use
of it now adays is acknowledged to be equally familiar, profitable, and
dangerous, and the little knowledge that is generally had of its true Motions,
is perhaps the only cause of all the misfortunes that follow its application.
This therefore ought to engage you and I (good Reader) to use our utmost
endeavors to render them more sensible, that we may by this means avoid the
Reproaches Posterity might otherwise make to our Memory, much more justly
indeed than to that of our Predecessors, since we now live in a more knowing
and inquisitive Age, and the Lights that this Age has furnished us with are
sufficient for the discovery of an infinity of excellent Truths, by making
rational Applications of what they and our Ancestors have taught us, to what we
do now see, and what curious and new Experiments do continually supply us with.
This is that which I do hope to advance your knowledge in, by the sequel of my
Observations, wherein I shall endeavor to omit nothing of what may any way
serve to render that Manifest, which has been hitherto supposed to be Occult.
Nevertheless as it is not my design to play the Naturalist altogether, you must
not expect to find here the complete History of Mercury. So that if you desire
to know the Etymology of its Names, its diverse Definitions, the Mines from
whence it comes, the manner of drawing it thence, the means of counterfeiting
it, and infinite Circumstances of the like nature, you may have recourse to
many Authors that have amply written of all these things.

2. The common ways of dividing Mercury in the Galenical Pharmacy, do show us
that it easily joins with Sulphurs, seeing that Turpentine, Rosen, and fat
Bodies that serve for this effect, are of sulphurous and inflammable
substances. But the truth of this does principally appear in the composition of
Cinnaber, which every body knows to be a mixture of Sulphur and Mercury
together, sublimated Naturally in the bowels of the Earth by the force of the
Centrical Heat, or else Artificially in Furnaces by the violence of Actual
Heat; which proves the Chemists do with reason make its principles consist of a
subtle and sulphurous Earth, seeing it it true that Homogeneous Substances do
always unite more willingly, and the particles of some mixed bodies do very
easily quit those to which they were joined for to adhere to other bodies that
are more Natural and agreeable to them; from whence it comes to pass, that
Metallic Water which passes through one of its principles and may be said to
be the most evident, does suffer the mixture, union, and amalgamation of this
Metal with the greatest part of other Metals: which gives occasion to Impostors
to augment its quantity with Lead and Tin; so that it now becomes very
difficult to find any of it truly pure, unless one mixes Cinnaber with the
shavings of Iron to draw out pure Mercury by distillation. For by this means we
are sure to have it in its purity, because the other Metals are not volatile
enough to mount with it, but remain in the Retort united with the Sulphur and
the Iron.

3. Though Mercury unites it self easily with other Metals, and a Metallic
matter is sensibly perceived in its composition, yet it must be considered but
as an imperfect Metal, seeing the crudity of its Water, and volatility of its
Sulphurs do hinder it from being liable either to dissolution by Fire, or to
extension by the Hammer; and that those two substances are tied and united
together after a manner so proper for Motion, that it always escapes the power
of those Agents, and never submits it self to their violence, unless it be fixed
by the mixture of other bodies that serve to hold it in dissolution.

That which renders the Mercury of such a mobile, rolling, and fugitive Nature,
is its Sphaerical or round Figure, which is Natural to it, and conserves it
also in the separation of its parts; so that after having dissolved it with
Acides, and reduced it into a most subtle Powder, it may still be perceived to
continue in its ancient Form by the means of a Microscope; its Nature being so
altogether admirable, that it seems impossible to find means for the absolute
destruction of its accidental and exterior form.

But seeing its roundness seems lost only by false appearances, it may be also
said that it loses its mobility only to retake it again, seeing this last
Accident is but a production of the former; and it is very certain besides that
nothing in all the World has been able to fix it in such manner, but that it
may be revived by the force of Fire, though some Impostors do maintain the
contrary.

4. That which is most surprising in this Mineral is, that notwithstanding its
Gravity, it rises up with the gentlest heat; that though it is Volatile, yet
its own weight serves to precipitate it downwards. The first of these
contrarieties may be proved, by putting some of it upon burning Coals, or else
by observing the Sublimations that Chemists make of it; the other contrariety
may be sufficiently discovered by putting it upon Tin, Lead, Wood, and
especially upon the Earth, which it does penetrate so violently, that some have
pretended to be able to dry up a great pond, only by casting into it some store
of Mercury that might be able to make a hole big enough to give a passage to
the Water which should follow its Motion.

We know easily enough that Gold and Lead are gross and sulphurous, by their
malleability, but the Sulphurs that enter into the Composition of Mercury seem
to discover themselves chiefly by its volatility, and conjunction with
sulphurous substances. I have observed nevertheless that Metals which abound
with this principle are more weighty than others, because their parts are more
perfectly tied and united together; so that they always have so much the less
weight, as they are better digested, or become more perfect, because the parts
do continually separate in digestion, or else because the greatest part of its
Sulphurs do exhale, and so leave empty spaces in the mixed. Now seeing Mercury
is a Metal very crude and weighty, we may for this reason say, that it is also
very sulphurous, as you see by the things spoken before, that its Sulphurs do
render it very proper for Motion; and so you ought not to wonder, that it is
Volatile, when moved or excited by any Heat, or that without Heat it is proper
to penetrate, and sink deep into bodies, since its weight, fluidiry, and
agitation of its Sulphurs, are things sufficient to bear it downwards.

5. Notwithstanding you must observe that it does not always necessarily sink
downwards, but that it may be rendered purely penetrant and volatile by its
division; this truth appears in the Composition and Application of Mercurial
Plasters and Ointments, in which it is held divided into imperceptible
particles by the means of resinous substances, that they may the more properly
be able to penetrate the pores of all the skin on which they are applied.

But though this division be very useful, it is nevertheless very imperfect,
seeing the gentlest Heat is able to melt the resinous matters that held the
Mercury so divided, and by this means it easily reunites to appear again in its
ancient form; which does not happen, when it has been dissolved with Acids;
for putting the Dissolution over the Fire, the Moisture will evaporate, and the
Mercury remain at bottom in form of Salt, or else continuing the Fire, it
sublimates to the middle of the Vessel; so that after having been thus several
times sublimated, it remains at last alone, or mixed with very few Acids,
without losing nevertheless the form of Salt.

6. I do not mean that Mercury cannot be sublimated by Heat without being
divided, but it is very certain that the Heat must be more or less strong
according as the Corpuscules of Mercury are gross or heavy; whence it comes to
pass that it is divided into very subtle particles in the Troches that are used
for Fumigations, that it may the easier be carried of, and with the less
violence.

But though it loses its weight when so divided, and its lightness renders it
improper for precipitation, we know notwithstanding by experience that Alkalis
will precipitate it, since by casting Limewater, or the Oil or Liquour of
Tartar, on the Dissolution of Sublimate Corrosive in common Water, the Mercury
is seen to precipitate in a yellow powder by the first, and in a green powder
by the second.

7. Furthermore I am not able to understand why the Red powder of Mercury is
nowadays called Precipitate, seeing it is nothing else but its Dissolution
with Aqua fortis, or the Spirit of Nitre, which is afterward made evaporate to
siccity; unless it be because the Acids do unite to all parts of it in these
sorts of Dissolutions, and so by this means render it more fixed, heavy, and if
you will too more penetrant than after the ordinary divisions that are made of
it with resinous bodies. Whatsoever is the Reason, it is always true that this
is no Precipitation at all, and that the Acids thus incorporated with the
Mercury, do not hinder it from being sublimated, but only from mounting so
high, as it would do if alone, or mixed with resinous Drugs; if so be the
Mercury be not in too small a quantity, or driven by too violent a Heat.

We may easily conceive, that nothing but the different quantity of Acids does
render it more or less Corrosive, if we make reflection on the manner of
dulcifying Sublimate; one part of Sublimate Corrosive is mixed with another
part of crude Mercury, till the whole Mass appears greyish; afterward it is
sublimated again, and after this second Sublimation is found to be less
Corrosive than it was before; because some part of the Acids of its Nitre and
Vitriol do fly out of the Sublimatory Vessel, and others stick to the neck like
mill-dust, but are easily separated from the sublimated Mass besides also that
those which still remain are more extended by the augmentation of Mercury; so
that by thus powdring and sublimating it three or four times, it becomes at
last so ducified, that it may be safely given inwardly in a considerable Dose,
though it were at first the strongest Corrosive and poison.

8. From the foregoing Observations may be drawn several Circumstances very
useful for knowing the Motions of Mercury; but chiefly, that it always tends
downwards by its own weight, when alone, and in its Natural form; and on the
contrary that it penetrates indifferently upwards, downwards, and on every
side, when it is divided into subtle particles; that it is heavy and corrosive
when mixed with Acids; and on the contrary very benign and volatile when
separated and extended by resinous bodies; that Alkalis can precipitate it,
when dissolved and mixed with Liquours; lastly that the diversity of bodies to
which it joins does serve to distinguish its Actions and Effects: to which may
be added also some following Observations, that serve for a proof of this
truth, as well as the Applications that I intend to make of them, when I shall
speak of the Crises that it excites. The first is, that Natural Cinnabre taken
inwardly drives the Impurities by Sweat, or insensible Transpiration, and that
there are Sulphurs in our bodies which do mix with it, when taken alone, and do
make it produce this effect. The second is, that there are a great many Acids
with which it may join too, because all Natural Fermentations are made by their
means, and the Venereal Salts do change all the Phlegm into this same quality.
The third is, that the effervescences it produces do also show that there are
some Alkalis too, which may serve to precipitate it.

9. By what I have now said, and particularly by the last three Remarks, you
see that the diverse matters which are found to abound in bodies on which
Mercury is applied are the Causes of its different productions, seeing you may
be also satisfied, that it is not poisonous in its own Nature, and that all its
unhappy effects do principally proceed from the inward dispositions of mind and
body; for when the Spirits are agitated by violent passions, they may then
sublimate the Mercury with Impetuosity, even into the very Brain, and cause by
this means the most doleful Accidents that are found to follow its Application.
So there may happen Accidents very dangerous too, for not having well corrected
the extreme Inanition or Repletion of bodies ill disposed for its Reception.
Lastly, every body knows, or every body may know, that it is given inwardly
without any danger at all against the Disease called the Miserere mei, and
there is the less fear, when a great quantity of it is given, which will then be
the easier carried off by its own weight, for otherwise it might possibly stop
in the Intestins, and there become Corrosive by its joining with the Acid
Juyces, which there abound.

SECT. 3. In which the true Method of Artificially raising the Crises of the
universal Pox is explained.
CHAP. I. Of the Crises that are provoked by common Remedies, and of the
Seasons proper for the Application of Mercury.
1. That the general Observations which were related in the preceding Sections
are absolutely necessary for the right understanding of particular Ones. 2.
General Division of Artificial Crises, and why common Remedies are tried
sometimes to provoke them. 3. What are those Remedies, and why they are not
here treated of to the bottom. 4. Of the choice of proper Seasons for the
Application of Mercury. 5. Means to correct the soulness of the Air and Weather.

1. WHen Nature is not able of her self to raise Critical Motions, and one
infected with the Pox requires the speedy Application of your Art, to terminate
his Disease by Artificial Crises: You must then take into your thoughts those
general Ideas I have given you, and recall all the Circumstances that may
conduce to the particular use you would make of them, if you desire to complete
happily the Cure of this Disease. For it is certain that they are of so great
importance, as you cannot expect to succeed well without the Observation of
them, and by judiciously applying them to the particular Maxims you will find in
the sequel of this Book, you will establish for your selves and for others an
infallible Practice.

2. You must first of all observe that the Crises of the universal Pox, which
are Artificially made by Remedies, may be distinguished into such as are
excited by common Evacuatives, or such as are provoked by Mercury.

Though these first Remedies have less assurance in them, yet they are often
put in practice, and chiefly when a person's Health is in a doubtful condition,
because they are very useful to assist Nature in preventing this Evil, and are
sufficient to Cure it, while it is but in the first degree; besides that it is
according to the Order of Physic to begin with things that are most easy, and
if they do not absolutely Cure the Pox, they can serve to take away the present
appearance of it which is a Circumstance very considerable sometimes in the
Junctures wherein, persons may find themselves engaged to retard their Cure.

3. Moreover these Remedies are such as open the principal passages of the
bodies and expel Impurities through the ways that are most Natural; for Example
the Sudorisick and Diuretic Decoctions of the Simples I have spoken of, which
do carry off impure Humidities either, through the pores of the body, or by the
way of Urine, or else all the other Drugs that may serve for this effect;
Lastly all the Purgatives that evacuate grosser matters by siege, and in a need
Emeticks too which Purge by Vomit. But seeing these Remedies are so very
common, and well known, and that their quality and quantity can never be
regulated but by the Judgment and Experience of such as employ them, I cannot
think it necessary to treat particularly of them, because all expert and proper
persons have a perfect knowledge of them already, and those that are ignorant
of them should never dare to practice, or use them, without first demanding
Counsel of such as can inform them, and that especially in things of so great
Moment.

4. If you have tried in vain all the Remedies I now spoke of, if the Pox has
past its first degrees, lastly if your Patient is willing to be cured once for
all, without endangering the loss of his time, money, and pains, to little or
no purpose, you must procure the Crisis of his Disease by means of Mercury; and
to do it the more successfully you must choose the most temperate Months, such
as are March, April, and May, which do make up the Spring of Physicians, or
else September and October, which make up their Autumn. For the Summer by its
excessive Heats does cause a dissipation of the Spirits, and by this means the
diminution of the Natural Heat and strength, without which you cannot effect
your Cure; and the Winter by its extreme Cold does condensate the pores of the
body, closes up all the Natural passages, concentrates the Natural Heat,
Spirits, and Humors, and does after this manner hinder Nature from acting as
she ought to do in raising the Crisis you desire to procure.

Nevertheless it is not necessary to stick precisely to the Months I named; for
though they are commonly the most proper for this effect, it sometimes happens
that they prove very intemperate, as on the contrary there often happens very
seasonable mild Weather in the others. Neither is it so very requisite, that
all the days of the Crisis should be temperate; it may suffice the time of
provoking it be mild enough in Winter, that the Humors may the more easily be
set in Motion; and not so extreme hot in Summer, as to keep the Pores too open,
and to divert the Salivation by importunate Sweats. For when Nature has but
once well begun a good motion, she perseveres to the end, though the Physician
co-operates but little.

5. Though the Seasonableness of the Weather, and other Circumstances that I
have remarked, be very useful indeed for the well performing this business, yet
occasions do sometimes happen, wherein they cannot be exactly observed. The
Accidents which the Pox produces, or the particular affairs of sick persons do
sometimes require so sudden and pressing a Cure, even in very unseasonable
times, that there is a necessity of present treating it, notwithstanding the
unhappy occurrences which may then come to pass; and you must not be too
fearful in undertaking such a Cure at this time. For it is certain, that the ill
quality of the Air may be corrected, with a great deal of care and necessary
application. You may, for example, put your sick in the Shades of the excessive
Summer-heats, by choosing a Chamber large enough, whose Windows are exposed to
the North, and closely shut in the daytime, to hinder the Air and
reverberation of the Rays of the Sun from entering into it; the Coverlets of
the Bed must be very light, and the place round abound it may be sprinkled with
Oxycrate, made of one part of Vinegar, and six of Rose Water, and the rest of
the Chamber may be also sprinkled with common water, in which you may mix a
little Vinegar too. Lastly the Windows may be opened some hours of the night to
let in the cool refreshing blasts.

On the contrary, during the extraordinary colds of the Winter, you must choose
a little Chamber, whose Windows open to the South, and shut them very exactly
in all places where the wind may enter; then see that the Bed be not far from
the Chimney, in which you must be sure to keep a good fire day and night,
remembering to cover your patient carefully; and, if it may be had, a skreen
about the Bed, to keep it the warmer.

CHAP. II. Of the Preparation of Bodies in which Mercury must enter.
1. Confutation of the ordinary ways of preparing Bodies for the reception of
Mercury. 2. That the true Method of preparing them cannot be perfectly
described, but that a sufficient Idea may be given of it, for such as have been
Experienced. 3. Particular Preparation of Bodies of a good Constitution. 4.
Means of correcting the Temperament of such as are extremely Hot and Dry. 5.
The manner of diminishing the extreme Repletion of those that are Cold and
Phlegmatic.

1. AMong those that employ Mercury for the procuration of the Crises of the
Universal Pox, some prepare their Patients by Abstinence, Fumigations,
Sudorificks, and drying Decoctions, for to consume the Phlegmatic humor, to
which they pretend the Venereal Matter does particularly adhere; others use
Baths, Ptisannes, and whatsoever is able to moysten and cool the Body, to
facilitate the following Salivation hereby, and render the actions of Mercury
the less pernicious; some others use partly things that moisten, and partly
such as dry; and others again make use of Infinite different means, which I
find to be all alike ridiculous, because they are used indifferently to all
persons, and they all differ only because each have found them practiced on
several persons; whereas in truth the Age, Sex, Strength, Temperament, and
generally the present dispositions of the several Patients ought to constitute
all the difference.

Indeed if it be by the means of Mercury alone that the Crises of the Universal
Pox are intended to be raised, there is no need of employing the other Remedies
both Alterative and evacuative, before the application you would make of it,
but only perhaps for the opening and dilatation of the passages that serve for
Expulsion of Excrements, in such as are of a good Temper, or else to correct
the faults of those that are remote from this good Constitution. For if you
should offer to desiccate a Body that is of a middle Age, moderate Temper, and
that rightly performs all its natural Functions, it is certain it must receive
great Alteration, and this Alteration must necessarily remove it from the
Equality and Moderation it was in before, which nevertheless is exactly the
estate in which Nature keeps its true vgour, and in which consequently it must
be better able to second the force of Remedies; whence it follows, that it
comes to be less proper for the Critical motions which do follow the
application of Mercury, in those in whom a sufficient quantity of acid Humors
may be found, to stop and detain the Mercury in the several parts, for the time
it ought to remain in them.

But if this Alteration can be so considerably pernicious, even to such as are
in a state of perfection; you will not at all wonder, if the Salivation cannot
be safely procured in Dry, Choleric, or Melancholic Bodies that have been
prepared after this manner: nay, you will find on the contrary, that all the
parts will receive injury from the activity of Mercury, seeing it is now
agitated by an extraordinary Heat, and finds nothing that is able to fix and
detain it.

It is no less dangerous to make use of things that cool and moisten, for the
preparation of those that are replete and phlegmatic; for by this means the
repletion is augmented, and the Humors become so disposed for Fluxion, that
Mercury soon draws them along with it in great abundance, and very often all
the parts about the Throat do fill and swell in such manner, that the Patients
are soon suffocated thereby.

But now speaking of the danger there is in making use of the same Remedies in
all different Subjects, it comes into my mind, that I have read in a famous
Author a certain Dispute that he raises and resolves himself; it is whether
those that have the Pox ought to be bled in their Preparation; he relates some
Authorities and Reasons Pro and Con, and at last concludes in favor of Blood
letting, of which he makes so general a Rule, that he will not except even such
as are Hectict: Whereupon you must observe, that this Maxim does seem so much
the more authentic, as it appears to be established by a Learned Doctor, and
founded on the examination and comparison of contrary Opinions; from whence we
may conclude that the faults which are committed by such as blindly observe it,
are so much the more excusable, as they are often irreparable; since there are
a great many persons who never dare go a step further than the Ideas of those
that taught them. But I dare say, it is a shameful thing, and disparages
Physic very much, that the greatest part of those who practice it, do apply
themselves so little to things of such moment; and that many who have by their
own industrry acquired some particular knowledges, are so covetous and fearful
of communicating them, that they affect to keep them secret, even when they
pretend to teach and discover them. Let this be said by the by.

2. Nevertheless you must not imagine that infallible Rules can be given, for
correcting exactly all the degrees of Temperaments, and several dispositions of
all Bodies that are of different Constitutions. For besides that there are some
inward and secret dispositions, which can no way be known; the number of such
as may be known are in a manner infinite, and the endeavor I might here make
for reckoning them up, would cause nothing but confusion in this place.
Notwithstanding it is certain, a sufficient Idea may be given of the Method
that ought to be followed, for well preparing those that are infected with the
Pox, by the discovery of such Remedies as may very happily serve to dispose
Bodies of a good Constitution, and correct the faults of such as are extremely
removed from this good estate by Repletion and Inanition; because these
patterns may serve to discover the comparison of the Mean and two Extremes,
from whence Formules may easily be drawn for all the greater and lesser
degrees, by joining a good Judgment, Application, and Experience (which are
Qualities absolutely necessary for establishing a sure practice) to the
following Rules and Observations.

3. You may cause a light Emotion in Bodies of a good Disposition and middle
Age, by some gentle Purge; such as may be an Infusion of two Drachms of Senna,
mixed with an Ounce of new-drawn Cassia, which will sufficiently open the way by
siege, if you continue to repeat it four times, every Second day.

In the intermediate days you may Bathe your Patient morning and evening, to
dissolve the coagulated Humors, and dispose the Pores of the Body for a
dilatation.

During all this time you may make the following Ptisanne serve for his
ordinary Drink, which will open the Pores too, and also the passages of Urine,
that serve for expulsion of Serosities.

Take half a Pint of good white Wine, in which infuse and steep beforehand
half an Ounce of Guaiacum; then take two Ounces of French Barley, four Quarts
of common Water, and so much Licorice as may be sufficient for rendering your
Ptisanne pleasant enough to drink; in each Quart you must mix ten or twelve
Drops of the Spirit of Vitriol.

4. The faults which are opposite to this good Temperament of which I now
spoke, are chiefly Inanition and Siccity, or else Repletion and Humidity.

The former are the effects of a boiling Heat, and therefore require for
Correctives, whatsoever is capable of moistning and cooling at the same time;
whence it comes to pass that Blood-letting which cools by allaying the
Ebullition of the Blood, is notwithstanding dangerous and to be suspected on
this occasion, because it also carries off the Humors, which are there already
in too small a quantity.

You may thence judge that Purges, and chiefly such as are violent are also
dangerous; for besides that they consume the little Moisture which remains,
they are extreme hot too; which are two Qualities absolutely contrary to the
Intention you ought to have.

It will be good nevertheless to keep the Body open, by giving every morning
half a Pint of Whey, in which you must infuse every fourth day, a Dram of
Senna, and half a Dram of Crystal Mineral, to dissolve in it afterward half
an Ounce of new-drawn Cassia.

Seeing Clysters that serve to cleanse the Guts are able to cause some
Alteration, you must have a care of giving them, unless it be a Decoction of
cooling Potherbs, with two Ounces of Honey of white Lilies in each.

You must Bathe him morning and evening for fifteen days together, and take
care that the Bath be not hot enough to provoke Sweat.

You may prepare a Ptisanne for his ordinary Drink with French-Barley, and the
Roots of wild Succory, Sorrel and white Lilies, to which you may add some
Lycorice, and a little Lemmon, to render it more agreeable and cooling.

Broths and boiled meat must serve for his nourishment, which you must diminish
the quantity of by little and little; so that the Patient may find himself
insensibly reduced to the constant use of liquid Aliments toward the end of his
Preparation.

5. Excess of Repletion and Moisture is chiefly found in Bodies of a cold and
Phlegmatic Temper, which you may correct by evacuating and drying them with
the following Remedies.

You may frequently give them Clysters made of the Decoction of the Leaves of
Mallows, Marshmallows, and Mercury, the Flowers of Camomile and Melilot, Seeds
of Anise and Fenugreek, adding to them Honey of Mercury.

You may here practice Blood-letting without any scruple, and repeat it several
times, if you judge the Plenitude of the Vessels to be very considerable.

An Infusion of three Drachms of Senna, one dram of Agarick Trochiscated, and
as much of the Salt called Polychrest, mixed with half an Ounce of the
Confection Hamech, and an Ounce of Syrup of Peach flowers, will make up a Purge
that may serve to evacuace abundance of Phlegm, if you repeat it seven or eight
times every second day.

You may prepare your Ptisanne with two Quarts of ordinary Water, two Handfuls
of French Barley, and three Ounces of Guaiacum, which you must have steeped
beforehand in a hot place with a Pint of white Wine, and you may render it fit
and easy to drink, by adding to the things aforesaid, a little Cinnamon
Coriander-seed, Licorice, or Lemmon, according to the Taste and Palate of your
Patient.

You may make him sweat every evening, by giving him a good large Glass of the
foresaid Ptisanne to drink, in which you shall have dropped fifteen or twenty
drops of the Spirit of Hartshorn; remembering to warm his Bed and Chamber as
much as you can, and to put at the feet of such as difficultly sweat, Bottles
filled with hot water. But if these things are not able to cause some persons
to sweat, you will infallibly force them to sweat sufficiently, by making them
receive the Vapor of the Spirit of Wine in a certain Stove made on purpose.

You must diminish his Nourishment by degrees, as I have already told you in
the former Preparation; only you may make those I now speak of fast with much
less danger, than any others, and you must prefer Rost-meat before Boiled, as
being much more drying, because the Particles of Fire do act more directly upon
it.

Besides the Middle Temperament and two Extremes, of which I have now spoken,
you will find many Bodies that require a less alteration, whether by Heat or
Cold. In such cases you must use Remedies of a more moderate strength; and for
such as are but indifferently Replete and Phlegmatic, you must lay aside the
strong Sudorisicks, and only use the Decoctions of Sassafras, China and
Sarsaparilla, according as there is more or less necessity of drying. In like
manner you may bath less those that are very hot and dry, or else forbear the
other cooling Moistning Ptisanne. Lastly, for them all you must be careful in
augmenting or diminishing the strength of Purgatives and in general of all
Remedies that serve for Preparation, according to the foresaid Considerations.

CHAP. III. Of the different ways of making Mercury to enter into the Bodies of
such as are infected with the Pox.
1. General Division of the ways, and that the practice of giving it by mouth
is none of the best. The Preparations of Mercury that are given inwardly. 3.
The different ways of making it enter by the Pores of the Body; and first of
Plasters that serve for this effect. 4. Of Ointments. 5. Of Troches for
Fumigations.

1. HAving let you see after what manner you ought to prepare the Bodies in
which you would have Mercury to operate; it is now time to speak of the several
ways of using it, and the choice that ought to be made of them according to the
degrees of the Disease, the supervening Accidents, and unhappy Circumstances,
in which persons thus diseased do sometimes find themselves.

Mercury is usually made enter into their bodies two manner of ways; either in
at the Mouth, or else universally by the Pores.

It is worth observing, before we proceed further, that the first of these ways
is indeed none of the best, because the Mercury that is thus taken at the
Mouth, descends presently into the Stomach, whence it is suddenly Sublimated
upwards by the Heat of this part; which causes the Salivation that is raised by
this means to continue but a very little time, and not to terminate completely
the universal Pox, unless the Natural Heat be found strong enough to supply
this defect by vigorously following the Motion of Mercury.

I know well enough that some persons do mix Purgatives with it, which do
hinder its Sublimation, by precipitating it downwards. But this custom seems to
have as little certainty as the former, because only passing through the Guts,
it cannot purify at most but that which is called the second Region of the
body; for there is no likelihood at all, that it should be able to penetrate
into the most remote parts, to mix with all the Acid Humors that are there
extravasated, and so draw them into the places I have spoken of, by a contrary
Motion.

By this way of arguing, and by the proof that I have made in this matter, and
seen others make too; I cannot but think, such as indifferently practice this
way of administering it, and make it pass for infallible in all that have the
Pox, and in all the degrees of it, ought to be esteemed Ignorant, or Impostors;
and Patients should in all reason rather rely upon the Honesty and Experience
of true Physicians, who do find but too many Occasions for discovering this
truth, and are not wanting to advertise ingeniously such as have an unhappy
inclination to run the hazard of a false palliative Cure, because they have
been once falsely persuaded, or because they are engaged by particular Motives
to search out Remedies they fancy more easy, and less troublesome. I do not mean
but there may be found abundance of persons, who will maintain they have been
cured by taking Mercury this way. But you must observe, that among them there
are many who never had the Pox but only in their imagination; that in some
Nature did procure a Critical Motion of her own accord, near about the time
they made this use of Mercury; that in others she had been strongly moved to
the same effect, by the activity of other Remedies which have been mixed with
it; lastly that those who have used it in the first degree of this universal
Pox, that is to say, when its matter remains still in the Vessels, and has not
yet caused the ebullition of the blood, and consequently diffusion of
serosities, might have been perfectly purified, by receiving through the rough
Artery some part of the Mercury that is sublimated from the Stomach up to the
Mouth, and might by that means be carried to the Heart, from whence it becomes
universally spread through the Vessels by the Circulation; or else by
attracting through the Lacteal Veins some particles of that which is
precipitated downwards by the conjunction of Purgatives, out of which Veins it
may be also carried to the Heart, and thence dispersed by the Motion of the
blood, after the manner I now spoke of.

2. Nevertheless if you will be desirous of trying to raise the Crisis of the
Pox after this manner, you had best cause a looseness with it, by mixing crude
Mercury or sweet Sublimate with purging powders, such as Aloes, Colocynth, and
prepared Scammony, which you may reduce into the consistance of Pills, of which
you may give every day a Dose proportionable to the present condition of your
Patient.

You may also provoke the Salivation, with these two sorts of Mercury, by
incorporating as much as you can of the first with Turpentine and the Crust of
Bread dried and powdered, to reduce it afterward into the form of Pills, of
which you may give from half a dram to one dram; or else by mixing the
second from fifteen to thirty grains for each Dose in a little Conserve of
Roses; remembering always that this last ought to be preferred, and that the
former is much more suspicious, because it may reunite it self in the Stomach,
or in the Guts, after the Turpentine is dissolved.

Besides sweet Sublimate, there are several other Chemical Preparations of
Mercury, that are pretended to be Purgative too, and do really Purge both by
Vomit and Stool: Such as are red and white Precipitate, which are given from
four to eight grains, and Turbith Mineral from three to six. But you must
observe that this effect does principally proceed from the Corrosion and
Acuteness of corrosive Salts, that hold Mercury under these several forms, and
so the inward use that is made of them is always to be accounted dangerous,
unless you break the points of these Acids beforehand, by burning more then
once these powders in the Spirit of Wine.

Almost all the Receipts, and pretended Secrets of Empyricks, and generally of
such as promise to Cure the Pox without obliging their Patients to quit their
Employments for some time, or any way changing their usual way of Living, do
consist in the use of the Powder of Algarot, and some other Preparations of
Antimony, which have no considerable effect, besides that of spoiling the
Stomach and disordering all the Natural Functions; or else in the several ways
of giving Turbith Mineral, and the two Precipitates I now spoke of. For some of
them give these things simply, and without any other Preparation, in the
Conserve of Roses; and pretend to make them pass quickly into all parts of the
body, by giving presently afterward to their Patients as much Wine as they are
able to drink; on which subject you must observe, that Wine taken in good
quantity is mighty Diuretic, and that Mercury thus impregnated with Salts is
easily dissolved, and carried off by Urine, which for that reason then becomes
very Salt and Acid, and is therefore the cause that there is but a very small
part of them that can enter or continue in the sanguiferous Vessels, and so
very small help can be expected from them. Others again give these powders
mixed with Gum Gutta, the Resine of Jalap, and other Purgatives alike
violent, which truly do preserve it in Motion, and do hinder it from adhering
to the Stomach and Guts, but do often cause most terrible Accidents by the fire
that they enkindle in the body, and by the violence of the^^ activity.

3. It remains then to make Mercury enter through the pores of the body, b^
applying Mercurial Plasters or Ointments upon it, and by reducing it into a
Fumigation when mixed with resinous Drugs.

Mercurial Plasters and Ointments are applied to the same places, and have very
near the same effect; the manner of using them does not differ neither, only
the first must be spread upon Leather before they are applied, whereas the
latter are applied directly upon the skin, which is afterward only covered
with some Linen.

That which is particular in this matter, is that the Mercury which enters into
Plasters requires a longer time to penetrate the Mass, than that which is put
into Ointments, because it is more closely confounded in the solidness of the
matter, and therefore you must not change them but seldom or not at all, and
cover from the beginning all the parts that ought to be covered.

The Plaster which is ordinarily made use of, is that which is described by,
and called de Vigo, and is found prepared in all Shops, simple, double, or
treble with Mercury. But for as much as it is of too hard a consistence, and
does not easily adhere to the skin, you may to better purpose prepare another
with eight ounces of Mercury, four ounces of Turpentine, and two pounds of the
Plaster of Mucilages.

4. That which is commonly called Emorbo, or the Gray Ointment, and by the
Physicians Neapolitan, is found prepared in Apothecaries Shops, and some make
the friction with it. But because the Dose of Mercury is very small in it, and,
because it is of an unsavory smell; you may prepare another, more effectual
Ointment, with four ounces of Mercury, two ounces of Turpentine, one ounce of
the Oil of Bays, two drachms of Saffron, and a pound and a half of the Ointment
of Roses.

You may employ about two ounces of this Ointment for the first friction, which
you must make from the Ankles till above the Knees, and from the Wrists to the
end of the Shoulder-blades.

Though this quantity of Mercury be seldom sufficient to bring Nature to a
Critical Motion, nevertheless some persons have been found so tender and
delicate or easy to put into this Motion, that they have received a Salivation
even from the, very first Friction, and in which persons a second would have
proved very dangerous; so that you must observe narrowly the Patient you
undertake, so soon as you have thus given him Mercury, and you must diligently
examine whatsoever happens to him anew, to the end you may presently leave of
your Frictions, so soon as the signs of a Salivation do appear, and this to
avoid Suffocation, which does always happen, when the Humors are carried up to
the Throat in too great an abundance.

In the second Friction which must be made four and twenty hours after the
first, you may employ up to four ounces of your Ointment, and rub the Legs and
Thighs with it from the middle of the Foot to the upper part of the Hips, the
Chine or Backbone from the end of the Os Sacrum to the middle of the Neck, and
the Arms, from the Wrists again to the Shoulder-blades, not forgetting the
places where the Glandules are seated, which serve for Emonctories to the
Nobler parts.

This second Friction is sometimes sufficient, but we are often compelled to
make a third too, with the same Circumstances of the quantity of Ointment, and
parts whereon it is applied, which does almost always produce the desired
effect, when the body is rightly prepared as it ought to be.

But you must not despair, though it should fail to come yet; you must then use
your best prudence and discretion, and have a care of going too fast in your
intention, lest Nature should chance to surprise you on a sudden. For Example,
you must let it alone for a day or two, before you begin a new Friction, and
you must employ but a small quantity of your Ointment, if you perceive any
appearance of Commotion. Be not obstinate neither in filling a body with
Mercury by fifteen or twenty repeated Frictions, as some Authors do unadvisedly
Counsel, because it is a thing of very dangerous a consequence, and the Crisis
you must desire should rather depend on a good Preparation, than such an
abundance of this Medicament.

Howsoever you will find by Experience that a Dose of sweet Sublimate will now
prove wonderfully beneficial, if you give it after a reasonable number of
Frictions.

There remains something still to be said of the time and manner of performing
them, because there are some very useful Circumstances which depend on them;
For Example, in a Cold Season, it is needful to make choice of Noon, for the
rubbing your Patients, because the Air of our Climate is then rendered a little
more benign; and in hot Weather on the contrary you must prefer the Mornings
and Evenings, lest the extraordinary Heat that is joined with the Fire you must
make should weaken them too much; but in mild Weather you may indifferently
make use of any hour of the Day, observing only that the distribution of
Aliments be then finished, that Nature may have no other Employment to take her
off from conspiring together with the Mercury to raise the Crisis you desire.

As for the manner of making this Friction, it is necessary to say it must
always be made before the Fire, which must be very great, but especially in
Winter, and enclosed with a Skreen, or some such like thing, to hinder the
Wind, and serve to reverberate the Heat, that the Mercury may the better
penetrate through the pores, and the Patient may not be molested with any Cold;
the Friction must be repeated several times on each part to facilitate this
penetration.

5. Among the three ways of making Mercury enter through the pores, I have
found by practice that the Fumigation is the worst of all, and is so much the
more dangerous, as it is commonly performed by the Smoke of Artificial Cynabre,
which may prove a kind of poison in its self, but is thought to be corrected by
the mixture of Sublimate Corrosive, yellow Arsenick, and other like Druggs,
which are indeed poisons much more pernicious.

Howsoever I grant it may be sometimes preferred before the others, when the
Pox comes to be in the last degree of all, by reason that the Mercury being
thus turned into Vapors, does penetrate the bones the better. But if you
desire to draw the best effect that can be expected from it, make use of crude
Mercury reduced into Troches with Turpentin, Coals made of Willow, and Orris
powdered, and leave all the other Formules to such as Ignorance does engage to
continue in a certain road they dare not stir a step out.

To conclude, there is nothing more common than the way of giving the
Fumigation; a certain Couch is covered all round with a sheet, and a little
Stool turned upside downward is put under it, and upon it a Chaffendish of
lighted Coals, in which Troches are burnt, whose Vapor the Patient receives
all naked under the Covering, always excepting the Head, which is only kept
within from time to time, when there are Ulcers in the Nose, Mouth, or other
parts of it.

CHAP. IV. Of the Critical Motions that are wont to be caused by Mercury.
1. That no Author has ever yet explicated the Causes of these different
Motions, and the necessity there was of doing it. 2. Of the ways that serve for
the Crises which are excited by Mercury, and how that by sweat comes to pass.
3. Of the Critical Evacuations that are made by Siege. 4. Of those that are
made by Urine. 5. Of the Salivation. 6. Of the signs that do always demonstrate
a Salivation. 7. Remedies against the Accidents that do commonly happen, and
general Rules of the time it ought to last.

1. THere are some Authors who have maintained, that Mercury applied
exteriourly on the skin, does act on the body only by an irradiative virtue,
and that the Dose which was employed to this effect, might easily be found
again entirely in the Linen and Plasters, after provocation of the Crisis;
others have endeavored to prove on the contrary, that it penetrates the pores,
that it acts on all the inward parts, and lastly that it goes out so sensibly
with the Impurities of the body, that a piece of Copper may be whitened only by
rubbing it a while in the Phlegm that runs out in the Salivation. But no body
ever yet took the pains to enquire, why its Motions and Actions, and the Crises
that result from them do appear so very different, though it be prepared and
given in the same form and manner.

Those who have made some Reflections on this subject, are contented to admire
this Mineral, and consider it as an Hydra with many Heads, or as the Proteus of
Physic; they have pretended that there was some Analogy between it and the
Mercury of Astrologers, which produces different effects according to its
different Conjunctions with other Planets; without taking notice of
nevertheless, or presuming to teach us, what are those matters it usually joins
with, for to act so differently. They have made indeed many Elogiums of its
virtues, without offering to give any explication of its effects; Lastly they
have told us that no Drug in all the Medicinal matter is fit to serve for a
Substitute in its place, but have never discovered to us any reason of its
singular qualities, or what is the matter that those who have employed it have
only acted like blind-men in it; so that young Students who have turned over
all manner of Books for some illustration of this matter, have never been able
to find any satisfaction, but have still been compelled (as others have) to
remain in their former obscurity; and Patients who have been surprised with
Events contrary to what they were made expect, have found no persons capable of
building the comfort they give them on sufficient or solid Reasons.

Nevertheless the explication of these things was not really so difficult; Men
might have made comparison between the Principles of Art and those of Nature,
and between things Artificial in Mechanics, and especially in Chemistry, with
what passes Naturally in the bodies wherein Mercury does enter. The
Observations which I have made on this subject, and which every body might have
made as well as I, may perhaps prove sufficient for the Evidence of what was
hitherto hid, being also joined with the Applications of them, persons may make
themselves. In a word, the many Experiments and Events would clearly have
discovered the truth, if men had been but curious enough to seek it out.

But whether it be that the knowledge of it was not judged necessary, or that
no body was willing to take the pains of acquiring it, or else that those who
possessed the knowledge of it were not willing to communicate what they knew;
it is very certain that no Author has yet undertook to teach it, and yet I
cannot conceive, how the Artificial Crises of the Pox can be perfectly
explicated, without letting see at the same time what it is that renders them
so different.

2. The ways through which the Venereal matter does ordinarily pass in these
sorts of Crises, are either such as serve for Sweat, or for passage of the
Urine, or expulsion of the grosser Excrements, or especially those that serve
for the Salivation.

The Crisis that is made through the first of these ways does happen, when the
Mercury finds a great many Sulphurous Vapors which do serve for the matter of
fat, in bodies wherein it enters; for as it does ever mix willingly with
Sulphurs, and is already disposed to it by the division that has been made of
it with Resinous bodies, it does easily unite with fat and vaporous matters,
which render it more light, more volatile, and consequently more fit to follow
their Motion from the Center to the Circumference. But as this same Motion is
in some manner contrary to the penetration which Mercury ought to make for
sufficiently purifying the blood; it often happens that this Crisis is but
imperfect, unless Nature her self be that way exceedingly disposed.

3. Some bodies are found to be so filled with a Tartarous Salt, or other
matters of the Nature of Alkalis, that the Mercury which enters into them
precipitates downwards by their means, and the Impurities are carried off by
Siege. But as these matters do not hinder the Mercury from-penetrating into all
the parts, this Crisis is much more certain than the former, especially when
the Physician helps Nature to act, by often-repeated Purges and Diuretics.

4. That which causes the Mercury and Venereal Salts to be sometimes carried
off by Urine, is that Acids are found in some bodies, near in as great a Number
as Alkalis is in others: The truth of this Opinion may be easily proved; for
every body knows that Acids taken inwardly become Diuretic, and the
Observations upon Mercury do show, that they may be sublimated by Heat, when
joined with it, and that they can be precipitated by Alkalis, even after this
Sublimation. Now you may perceive by what I have said, that the property of
Acids is to carry off Phlegm and Serosities by way of Urine, but that they are
not able to produce this effect, when joined with Mercury, and agitated by the
Natural Heat, unless Alkalis do also sufficiently abound, to precipitate it
downwards. Furthermore seeing impure Salts are easily dissolved in watery
substances, and this Crisis has very much affinity with that which is made by
Salivation, I conceive it must be more perfect than the other two, when its
Evacuations continue long and large enough.

5. As it is the property of Leaven to extend it self in the things that
ferment, and render them hereby of a like Nature, so the Venereal Salts do
dissolve in the blood, extend themselves into all parts of the body, and render
by this means almost all the Humors sharp and Acid. This is the reason why the
Salivation is the most ordinary Crisis of the Pox, that is provoked by the help
of Mercury, because it charges it self with these Acid Liquours in so great a
measure, that nothing is able to carry it off so well by the other ways I
mentioned; And it is this which may be esteemed the surest of all to cure this
Disease; for besides that it is very seldom seen to fail, when well managed,
the Circumstances which do accompany it make us judge the better of its
goodness. It is remarkable in the first place, that its Motion is from below
upwards, and is commonly equal, moderate, and without any interruption, which
shows that Nature acts rather of her own accord, than by the mere force of the
Remedy. Moreover all the Acid and impure Humors do ascend so sensiby with the
Mercury, that this mixture is near of the same quality with the dissolution of
this Mineral in the Spirit of Niter, or Aqua fortis, in so much that being
driven up by the Heat, there is made a kind of Sublimate Corrosive which
exulcerates all the parts of the Throat and Mouth, and penetrates them so
exceedingly, that their Vessels are opened, and blood runs out of them for some
days, until the matter becomes less acrimonious by a smaller quantity of Acids.

Impostors who give the Salivation to such as have not the Pox, make these
Ulcers pass for effects of the Malignity of Venereal Salts* that they may the
better conceal their Villainies by such persuasions. But you must observe, that
they do indeed happen as well to such as have not the Pox, as those who really
have it, because they are produced by the mixture I lately spoke of, or by
reason that there are Acid Juyces in all Men generally; in a word because the
Mercury is soon sublimated, passes quickly, and does but lightly heat the Mouth
in those who have too few Acids to govern its Motion, unless the other matters
which I have spoken of do train or draw it some other ways: So that the Ulcers
of the Mouth and Throat ought to be considered as inseparable Accidents of this
Crisis, whatsoever Indispositions it may be intended for.

6. Moreover you may know it in its beginning by the agitation of the Pulse,
the inquietudes of Mind and Body, the diminution or entire loss of appetite, by
the retiring of the Eyes, heat of Mouth, swelling of the Gums and Lips,
thickness of the Tongue, stink of Breath, pain of Teeth, whiteness of the
Palate, and interruption of sleep.

When you shall find the Crisis to approach by all these Signs, you must
forbear your Frictions, Fumigations, and generally all Mercurial Remedies, to
avoid Suffocation and other accidents which Mercury does cause, when given in
too great a quantity. But if its application has been reasonably well
performed in a Body rightly prepared, there will succeed to the Signs I named a
continual trickling of white phlegm in a long thread, which will at first run
but gently, but will augment by degrees for nine days time; so that the more
Phlegmatic persons may be able thus to spit up to eight pounds in four and
twenty hours, and others in proportion.

In the first days of the sublimation of Mercury, the Belly receives some
commotion from its passage, and this causes a Flux downwards, which lasts
indeed but a small time, and requires no particular consideration. It may be
also observed in the increase of the Salivation, that the Ulcers which I spoke
of do enlarge in latitude and profundity by the action of the matter that runs
out of them; and that the motion of the Artery appears almost as strong and
unequal, as in burning Fevers, because impurities cannot be thus separated from
the Blood, without raising a great Ebullition in it, by the motion of Mercury,
or strength of the natural heat. But seeing these things do happen through an
indispensible, necessity, and are not at all contrary to what may fairly be
expected from the Action of Mercury, you need not trouble your selves to think
of preventing or curing them by contrary Remedies.

7. Nevertheless you may mitigate the pains in the Belly, when they become very
hard to endure, by the means of Anodyne and cooling Clysters; or else diminish
the corroding Acrimony, which causes Ulcers in the Mouth, with gentle affwaging
Gargarisms; such as are, for example, Cows Milk lukewarm, or the Decoction of
French-Barley, Linseed, and Fleawort-seed; to which must be added, that it is
sometimes necessary to consume the corrupted flesh about them with Spirits of
Wine, Vitriol, or Sulphur.

It should remain to say something of the Quantity of the Matter, and time of
its running; but seeing these two Circumstances do absolutely depend on the
Temperaments of persons, and degrees of the Disease, they cannot be precisely
regulated, but by the Judgment, Application and Experience of him that treats
them. Wherefore I shall not detain you to no purpose on this Subject, but
believe it may suffice to say generally speaking, that you ought not to begin
counting the days of the Flux, until it is able to furnish at least two pounds
of Matter in four and twenty hours, and that it ought to continue a fortnight
at least, and a month at most.

Nevertheless there are some Authors who pretend that the cessation of
Accidents, and especially of the Flux, are undoubted marks of a complete and
perfect Cure. But you may easily perceive this Rule not to be infallible, since
I have proved in another place, that the Cause of the Pox may still remain,
when the ordinary Accidents are vanished away; and that there are other
Accidents on the contrary, which can never wholly disappear, but by the
application of particular Remedies, either during, or after the universal
Purification of the Body; for example, the Rottenness of Bones, which must be
corrected by actual Cauteres; the Consumption of Flesh or Skin made by Tetters
or profound Ulcers, which can never be regenerated but by mundifying Medicines;
lastly the Relaxation and weakness of the Spermatick Vessels, which causes in
some persons a continual Effluxion of the Seed, until they be closed up again
by styptick and astringent Remedies. Besides you will find by experience, that
the Flux often ceases before the Disease, and that it is sometimes necessary to
renew it; or at least to assist the former Evacuation with Remedies that purge
through other passages, especially when Nature is so inclined.

But you must not do like those who think they can never enough drain the
Bodies that are thus infected, who consume and exhaust the Radical Moisture it
self, which is the foundation of Life, after having drawn away all the other
Humors. But remember rather, that it is of as great importance to preserve
what is natural to the Body, as to destroy whatsoever is enemy to or against
Nature. And to the end you may the better avoid this Excess, you must observe
very exactly, how far the Body is dried, how the forces are spent, and all the
other Circumstances, which I gave you before; that so you may timely stop the
Salivation after a sufficient continuance of it, by change of Linen, Bed, and
sometimes Chamber too, or by the Precipitation of Mercury, which may be made
with the Salt of Tartar taken alone in a Broth, or mixed with the ordinary
Purges and Diuretics.

CHAP. V. Of the Diet of such as are in the Artificial Crises of the Pox.
1. In what this Diet does consist in general, and why it is necessary to give
particular examples of it. 2. The manner of governing those who are of a good
Complexion: 3. Who are Hot and Dry: 4. Who are Cold and Moist. 5. General
Observations for them all.

1. THE Method of governing such as are in the Crises that are raised by
Mercury, does in general consist in preserving them from the violence of ill
Air and bad Weather, in regulating the Quality and Quantity of Aliments and
Medicaments, and if you will also, in a Moderation of the Passions of the Mind.

The means of answering the first point have been already given, when I spoke
of the proper seasons to treat the Pox; and it seems that the prudence and
discretion of the Physician ought to make Rules for the other two. Nevertheless
seeing it is often impossible to correct perfectly in the Preparation, all the
preternatural Dispositions which proceed from the diverse Temperaments of
persons, and it is consequently necessary to persist until the end of the Cure,
in a regular use of things that are contrary to their pernicious Qualities; it
may be expedient to do as I have here done in delivering the Method of
Preparing such as have this Disease, that is to say, of showing here the proper
management of Nourishment and Remedies for such as are of an even and good
Temperament, and for those that are removed from this good Mean, by great
Repletion and Inanition; after which you will here find some general
Circumstances it is convenient to observe, in all those persons who are treated
with Mercury.

2. There are two Rules particularly important for the Diet of one of a middle
Temper; the first is, Not to give him any more Aliments than will preserve his
forces in good plight, that Excrements and Superfluities may not too much
abound: and the second is, That you give him light Remedies for to open the
chief passages, that Nature may not be diverted in her operations by contrary
motions.

You will sufficiently answer the first Rule, if you give him two new-laid Eggs
at noon, and a Broth every fourth hour, all the rest of the day and night,
which you may make with a Leg of Beef, Pullets and some Succory.

The Ptisanne which I have before described for preparation of Bodies of this
consistence, may also serve them very well during the Crisis, to answer the
second Rule I gave you; because it is Sudorifick and Diuretic, and may be also
rendered proper for gently loosning the Body, by making a cold Infusion of two
Drachms of Senna four and twenty hours in a Quart of it, which you may make him
drink every second day at several draughts.

3. When you shall come to treat a Body that is very Hot and Dry, you must
remember it would be a dangerous thing to nourish him too little, or give him
Aliments of a Heating quality. Wherefore you must prefer Broths before new-laid
Eggs, and give him one at least every third hour, made of a Leg of Veal, Beef
and Pullet, adding to it in Summer Sorrel, Lettice and Purslain, or in Winter
Succory. But if your Patient nauseates this kind of Nourishment, you may make
him a Gelly with the abovementioned meats, French-Barley, a little of the cold
Seeds and Sugar.

You may safely make use of the moistning and cooling Ptisanne, which I
described when I spoke of the means of preparing these persons; in a Quart of
which you may infuse a Dram of Senna, and so much Crystal Mineral to give him
every fourth day.

Clysters that cool and moisten the Body will prove very effectual, if you make
them of Whey, or a Decoction of Potherbs, mixing with each an Ounce of Honey of
Violets or white Lilies.

4. On the contrary, during the time you treat a Body that is extreme
Phlegmatic and replete, you must not be contented only with the Critical
Evacuations that are commonly made by the Mouth; but you must endeavor al
manner of ways besides to exhaust his Humors; so that some Broths or new-laid
Eggs given every six hours will suffice for his Nourishment, because you must
give him but only just enough to keep him alive.

The Ptisanne made of Guaiacum will also serve to dry him the more, if you
prepare it according to the Dose I mentioned in the Chapter of the Preparation.

You may often give Clysters made of common Honey, and a Decoction of the
Leaves of Sage, Wormwood, Rue and Fennil.

You may prepare laxative Potions, whose use must be frequent, with a Decoction
of Sage-leaves, an Infusion of Senna and Hermodactyls, and the Syrup of Roses
or Peach-flowers; taking care of giving them to such a Dose, as may not be apt
to divert the Salivation in its beginning, or diminish it when it is in its
vigor.

5. By the Examples I have given you, and by what has been already said in
delivering the means of preparing Bodies for the Motions and effects of
Mercury, you will easily frame different Methods, for such as are in the
several degrees of more or less; and there is no necessity of prescribing any
others more particularly on this Subject. But it is so much the more necessary
here to remark the following Observations, as they ought in general to serve
for all those who are in any Crisis that follows the application of this Remedy.

In all fainting and swooning fits you may prefer a little Wine before Cordial
Liquours, or Acid Fruits, and you will find by experience that it has a better
Effect.

You must forbear Biscakes, Comfits, and generally all sweet sugared things,
because they make the Teeth black, and increase the acrimony and pain which
they do then suffer in the Throat.

After the Evacuations have been sufficient, and you have stopped the Flux, or
hindered the others, you must draw your Patients by little and little, out of
the great weakness they then subsist in, by a gradual augmentation of their
nourishment, after the same manner as you diminished it in their Preparation;
remembering always that you cannot suddenly change them out of Inanition into
Repletion, without endangering their Suffocation, or putting them into some
desperate and mortal Disease.

So soon as they shall be re-established a little by this means, you may
reassume the use of Purgatives, Diuretics and Sudorificks, to set Nature at
work again, and help to drive out such Impurities as do sometimes still remain
after all these former endeavors.

Moreover the Tranquillity of the Mind is so necessary during all the Cure, that
there is always a great deal of danger, where it is wanting, and consequently
it is your Duty to remove from your Patients all things which may stir up the
Passions of the Mind, and especially Fear, Sadness, Anger, care of any business
of concernment, or any kind of particular application of the Mind; so that you
must always be sure to entertain them with the hopes of a safe and happy Cure,
you must relate to them only things which may please and rejoice their hearts,
and you must give them all manner of satisfaction as far as you are able; or at
least pleasantly represent to them the prejudice they would be apt to suffer
from things which cannot be granted to them without danger. Nay, you must also
take care of their affairs, where there is occasion, either really or else in
shows; Lastly, you must take away from them all Books, Manuscripts, and
generally all such things as are capable of engaging them in two much
thoughtfulness, especially after that Mercury is once applied.

CHAP. VI. Of the particular Circumstances that ought to be observed for
treating Methodically Women and little Infants.
1. Necessary observations for the treating of Women. 2. That Infants are
susceptible of the Pox at all times, but that there is no necessity of giving
different Methods for all degrees of Youth. 3. The manner how to treat the
smallest Infants, and a Precept of moment on this Subject.

1. Whatsoever has been hitherto said concerning the way of curing the Pox,
may equally serve for both Sexes, as well as also for all Ages, if you do but
proportionate your Remedies to the strength of your Patient. Only there are
indeed some particular Circumstances it is necessary to observe, for the better
curing of Women, and little Children. For if the first of these persons have
their Terms suppressed, you must in the first place of all labor to provoke
them, while you are in their Preparation for the reception of Mercury, because
you must always make the application of it, so soon as, or presently after they
have sufficiently flowed, for fear lest if they should renew their Course too
soon, they might create a great disorder in the Economy of Nature, by a
contrary motion to that of the Salivation.

You must also take notice that there sometimes happen very urgent Accidents
which engage them to be treated while they are with Child; and you will find by
experience that they can then undergo the Cure without danger, by observing to
manage them gently, and especially to choose a time wherein their grossness is
a little advanced; because the Infant is too weak in its beginning, to resist
the disturbance which Mercury and the other Remedies do cause in the Body, and
because it might be apt to accelerate celerate the Childbed toward the end,
before the Off spring does receive a perfect maturity.

2. Infants are capable of catching the Pox, either in the Womb of their
Mother, or by sucking diseased Nurses; in a word, by being kissed or touched
several ways by persons infected with this Disease. Whence it comes to pass,
that it may happen in all the times and degrees of Youth, and so consequently
cannot be treated after the same manner, since the stripling that sucks his
nourishment from the Teat, is infinitely less fit to bear the violence of
Remedies, than he that is able to live like other men, by advancement of years.

Notwithstanding there is no necessity of giving different Methods for all
Ages, because the many various Intentions, Respects and Remedies, which I have
already mentioned, may also serve for the Cure of Infants, only observing a due
proportion of them to their small condition. But it is needful nevertheless to
prescribe the particular Method of curing well the smallest of all; that so
having examples before you of the greatest and least, you may the more easily
judge of the quality and quantity of things which ought to be employed in the
different degrees of mediocrity.

3. So soon as you shall have discovered the Pox in an Infant that sucks, you
must first of all endeavor to discover the person that did communicate it, to
the end you may remove such person before you entreprise any thing. After which
you must choose a good Nurse, to contribute toward the purification of his
blood by the use of wholesome Milk, which you must carefully preserve in all its
purity by prescribing her a good Diet, and separating your little Patient from
her; and you must give him Milk only with a little spoon, or else with fine
Linen, that he may suck after it is dipped in it. But you must know that the Milk
of a Goat well fed is infinitely to be preferred before that of an unsound
Woman.

It will be necessary to purge him in the beginning of all with a little Water
of Cassia, or the Syrup of Roses, and repeat this Purge several times,
according as he is more or less replete.

You may prepare a Ptisanne for him with a handful of French-Barley, and three
or four drachms of China-root, which you may boil in three Quarts of common
Water, to the diminution of the third part, adding to it toward the end a
little Licorice, and after you have passed it ten grains of Crystal Mineral,
for to give him to drink or suck of, from time to time day and night.

After having opened by this means the common passages of the Excrements, you
may rub the bottom of his Feet every third day with a dram of the following
Ointment;

Take a dram or a dram and a half of Mercury revived from Cynnabre, and
kill it in two ounces of the Balsom of Arceus, adding afterward six ounces of
Hog's Grease well washed, and make use of it six or eight times the way I have
told you.

If these first Frictions don't procure a Flux, or do cause some other sort of
Crisis, you must even continue them without other Mystery as long as they shall
be thought necessary; or else you may make them stronger by the augmentation of
the Dose of the foresaid Ointment, with half a dram, or more for each
Friction, and by employing it partly on the Feet, and partly on the hands.

During the time of the Critical Evacuations, you may give him every six days
two or three grains of the volatile Salt of Vipers, dissolved in a little of the
Tisanne described before; and you may prefer this same Remedy before all the
Treacle, Philosophical, and Sudorifick Waters, from whence some Authors do
promise such false wonders.

Now the most important precept I have to give you on the account of little
Infants, is to treat them as gently as they have but little strength, and to
spare neither time nor pains to increase their small strength, or at least to
preserve it; for if you weaken them by the force of your Remedies, you will
miserably drive them into an inevitable death, instead of curing them as you
designed; seeing the Operation of Medicaments is always either dangerous, or
unuseful, if it be not seconded by the efforts of Nature.

CHAP. VII. Of the Misfortunes which may follow the Application of Mercury.
1. The Causes of the Death of some that are infected with the Pox, and the
Causes of the Accidents which sometimes happen after the Application of
Mercury. 2. What are those Accidents. 3. General Remedies that serve to put a
stop to their Violence. 4. Particular Remedies for the Cure of them.

1. THough the Pox be not a Disease mortal of it self, and I hold it curable in
all its degrees, it is true nevertheless that Men may dye of it (as I have said
before) when its matter has corrupted or destroyed the parts without which
there is no living; when one infected with it has fallen into the unhappy
practices of Ignorants and Impostors: Lastly when careless Physicians do not
soon enough remedy the Accidents which sometimes happen after the Application
of Mercury.

Not but the precepts which I have given are almost infallible, for curing this
Disease suddenly, easily, and surely, and hardly can they fail in one of a
thousand, when they are regularly observed. But there are some dismal
Circumstances, which it is impossible to remove. For besides that Men are
necessarily mortal, the true Cause of their Death is often unknown, the time of
it cannot be avoided, and the Cacochymie of bodies is now and then so very
great, that it cannot possibly receive Correction; to which may be added that
there are some inward Dispositions, which can no way be known, or there is no
possibility of taking away. Whence it comes to pass, that the success of this
undertaking is not always so happy as we could wish, and Accidents may indeed
happen which could in no wise be expected, to which nevertheless we ought to
adhibite Remedies with all manner of care and exactness, which are things
greatly necessary in all Occasions where Life and Death are concerned.

2. Now though all these Causes are of the same consequence, it would be but a
vain attempt to deliver the means of destroying them all, since that some of
them cannot be known, and others cannot possibly be removed. It may be
sufficient to say something of the ill Tempers of Bodies, and the too great
quantity of Mercury which may be made enter into them, because they are the
usual Causes of all the Accidents which follow its application, and there are
none but may happen by reason of them. For when all the things that cool and
moisten have been used to no purpose for quenching the Fire, and correcting the
dryness of an extraordinary Melancholic body, there is often found to follow a
looseness accompanied with unsufferable gripes and pains, and which soon leaves
a constipation behind, that causes an Inflammation of the Entrals, Breast,
Throat, and Mouth, with difficulty of Breathing, Swallowing, and Speaking;
which Symptoms soon begin a Fever, that in a small time becomes violent enough,
to sublimate the Mercury up to the Brain, and thereby cause Swoonings,
Phrensies, Convulsions, and very often Deafness, and Blindness, Apoplexies, and
Palsies, or lastly Death it self, if care be not suddenly taken to prevent it,
by due applying fit Remedies against this train of misfortunes.

In like manner if the Diet, drying Decoctions, and strong Sudorificks have not
been used sufficiently to make a convenient alteration of a very Phlegmatic
and replete body, or else if Mercury has been applied in too much have, it
will sublimate along with it all on a sudden, so great a confluence of Humors
that the most part of the Accidents I now reckoned up will also appear, but
more particularly an extraordinary Swelling of the Throat, Tongue, Cheeks, and
often of all the whole Face, with considerable hardness, and looseness of Teeth,
and with an immoderate Flux of Blood from the Ulcers of the Mouth, which in a
short time become great, spreading, black, stinking, and gangrened, and which
do at last cause Death, if a Suffocation don't prevent their malignancy.

3. In all these miserable Conjunctures the best means to be used do consist in
hindering the Activity of Mercury, in the diminution of its quantity by change
of Bed, Linen, and Chamber, and in the precipitation of the rest downwards by
astringent Gargarisms, Clysters, Phlebotomies in the Foot, and especially by
often repeated Purges, in which you must be sure always to mix the Salt of
Tartar, proportionating the rest of the Ingredients to the Age, Strength, and
Temperament of your Patients.

Some do make use of a Golden Pill, which they cause to be swallowed several
times after as many Lotions, and which always indeed carries off some very
little Mercury on its Superficies; but it is so very small a quantity for so
long a time, that no great effect can be expected from it, and its use must by
no means hinder that of the former Remedies.

4. After having thus provided against all these Accidents in general, by the
means that I have proposed; it is time to think of such as demand particular
Correctives, and apply Cupping-glasses with scarifications on the nape of the
neck, or on the shoulders, for all Phrensies, Convulsions, Apoplexies,
Deafness, Blindness, and in general for all Indispositions of the Brain and
Nerves.

A Gargarism made with a Decoction of Plantain, red Roses, and Agrimony in
which you must drop a little Spirit of Vitriol, will prove astringent enough to
repel the Blood or Phlegm that runs out of the Mouth, and detersive enough to
cleanse the Ulcers which shall be touched from time to time with the Chemical
Spirits before named.

It is observable, that this same Gargarism may also serve to strengthen the
loose Teeth, by closing of the Gums, which nevertheless may be much better
fastened by touching them with the Aqua secunda.

An Oxyrrhodin made of one part of Vinegar, and two of Oil of Roses, outwardly
applied on the Throat, asswages it, takes down the Swelling, and diminishes the
Inflammation.

You may also for the same effect make use of the Cere-cloth of Galen, mixed
with the Oil of sweet Almonds.

A few spoonfuls of good Wine will do a great deal of good in all Faintings,
and Swoonings, for to fortify the Heart, and disperse again the suffocated
Spirits, which you must prefer in this occasion, before all the Confections,
Cordial Potions, and other artificial Cardiacks.

Cows-Milk lukewarm will wonderfully appease the pains in the Guts, if you
make Fomentations of it outwardly and Injections within, in which you may add
some Yelks of Eggs, and some grains of Laudanum, to render them yet more
Anodyne.

Besides these Ordinary Remedies, the knowledge which you ought to have of
things that appertain to Physic, the Instructions which you may learn, and the
Counsel you may please to take, will furnish you with an infinity of others on
particular Occasions.

FINIS.
INDEX.
SECT. I. IN which some useful Reflections and Observations are made on the
Names, Definition, Origin, Causes, Differences, Signs, and Prognostics of the
Pox.
Chap. I. Of the Pox in general. Chap. II. Of the Causes of the Pox. Chap. III.
Of the differences of the Pox, which may serve to make a Prognostic. Chap. IV.
Of the Judgment of the Pox.
SECT. II. In which necessary Observations are made on the means to Cure the
Pox, while it is but Particular; on the Natural and Critical Motions that do
terminate it, when it turns to be Universal; and on the Medicines that serve to
raise the Artificial Crisis of it.
Chap. I. Of the kinds of Particular Poxes, that are called Ulcers and
Chancres. Chap. II. Of other Particular ones, that are called Claps and
virulent Gonorrheas. Chap. III. Of the Natural Crises of the Universal Pox.
Chap. IV. Of the Plants which have been esteemed capable to carry off the Pox
by Sweat. Chap. V. Of the Observations it is necessary to make on Mercury, to
know whence the different effects that follow its application do proceed.
SECT. III. In which the true Method of artificially raising the Crises of the
Universal Pox is explained.
Chap. I. Of the Crises that are provoked by common Remedies, and of the proper
Seasons for the application of Mercury. Chap. II. Of the Preparation of Bodies
in which Mercury must enter. Chap. III. Of the different ways of making Mercury
to enter into the Bodies of such as are infected with the Pox. Chap. IV. Of the
Critical Motions that are provoked by Mercury. Chap. V. Of the Diet of those
who are in the Artificial Crises of the Pox. Chap. VI. Of the particular
Circumstances which ought to be observed for treating Methodically Women and
little Infants. Chap. VII. Of the Misfortunes which may follow the application
of Mercury.
FINIS.

