The Yellow Book, OR A SERIOUS LETTER SENT BY A Private Christian TO THE Lady
CONSIDERATION, The first day of May, 1659. Which she is desired to communicate
in Hide-Park to the Gallants of the Times a little after Sunset. ALSO, A brief
Account of the Names of some vain persons that intend to be there, whose
company the new Ladies are desired to forbear.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Tho. Butler in Lincolns-Inn-fields,
near the Three Tun-Tavern by the Market place, and by The Brewster at the three
Bibles, at the West End of Paul's, 1659.

A serious Letter sent by a private Christian to the Lady Consideration, the
first day of MAY, 1658.
LADY,
I Am informed, fine Mrs. Dust, Madam Spot, and my Lady Paint, are to meet at
Hide-Park this afternoon; much of pride will be there: If you please to take an
Hackney, I shall wait upon your Honor in a private way: But pray let us not be
seen among the foolish ones, that ride round, round, wheeling of their Coaches
about and about, laying of the naked breast, n^ck and shoulders over the boot,
with Lemon and a Fan, shaking it at young Mrs. Poppet, crying, Madam, Your most
humble Servant, your very humble servant sweet Madam, while some are doing
worse. Young Sir William Spruce, Monsieur Flash, and the Lord Gallant, will be
all on horseback: Mr. Belt, and Mr. Feather. Mr. New Exchange and Mr. Old, will
be there: Sir Thomas Cavy is poor and ashamed to come, some of the name will be
there, and some Commanders of the Army, but the Ladies hate then generally:
Mrs. Come-up, Mrs. Totherday, and Joan hold my Staff, they cannot abide
neither, nor indeed any of the new Gently, which I hope God will keep from their
vanities, Pride, Covetousness and Hypocrisy; Mrs. Contempt and Mrs. Envy will
be there Mrs Luxury, Mrs. Wanton, Mrs. Faith and troth, Mrs. Hop about, Mrs.
Never pray, and Mrs Never go, Mr. Church, and Mr. Careless, will be all in a
Coath together; Sin, Guilt, and a little, Content will be with them, Time and
Vanity swiftly driving them away, as upon the wings of the mighty wind, but
Death, Hell and Eternity follow after. Rev. 6. 8. After the black Horse, and
the pale Horse, death and hell follows, and a cursing of the Ministers, who are
apt to dine with them, speak to them, and yet wink at them: Martins, Paul's,
Covent Garden, this is a judgment of God, and the greater, because so little
minded.

Madam, I had rather beg my bread from door to door, then be in the case of
some of these Ladies, which are as beautiful as Angels, but more miserable and
poisonous than Toads. Let me live with one of them under a stone, and die with
a dog in a ditch, ^ather then in a golden bed in one of their conditions.

And your vain Roysters are as bid: young Gallants that are sporting and
courting these dancing shadows at the brinks of hell: and are ever studying how
to please their lusts, and their lmps, one way or another, which they are ever
waiting on; they think there is no heaven, but if there be, and a hell too,
What will become of them? I had rather fear the worst, the best will help it
self: But if they go to that, farewell Hide-Park, May day, and pleasures too.
The Fishes never get up, that once fall down into the dead Sea, called Mare
mortuum; the River Nilus carries them thither, but fetches not them back:
Pleasures carry thousands, but sorrow fetches none, from the dead Sea, and the
deadly Lake, where streams of brimstone ever run over and over their heads,
hearts and souls, that fall into that. Tophet is prepared of old, yea for the
King; that is the greatest* and the breath of the Lord like a Stream of
brimstone kindles it, Isa. 30. 33. I know many will not mind this, and Mrs.
Busy is putting on her gown, but I would she would put on Christ and his
righteousness. Rev. 6. 18. Buy of me glod, says he, that than may the rich,
and white raiment, that thou may the clothed, that the shame of thy nakedness
may not appear. This raiment I had rather have, than a skin to cover my bones,
naked souls are more common and miserable than naked bodies a thousand times,
but not half so much pitied by the world; some had rather be dead than not in
the fashion, and clothes to put on, on such a day as this; others rather
buried alive, than want Christ, and the righteouness of Christ. Run to my
Tailor, bring them done or undone cries Mrs. Would be gone; fetch my green
petticote and my white satin mantle, my Lady Impatience stays for me; yea;
and some body else too, and will have you when you take your short journey, if
you have not Christ to go a long with you to your long home, and you may chance
quickly to be there as well as at the Park: what is your life but a vapor or a
shadow says James, chapter 4. v. 24. Some Ladies get the Pox, and die with a fear,
others get a Cold and die with a Fever, few live long that do not die soon,
eternal life is the fruit of a short living unto Christ, and eternal death is
the wages of an old sinner, the wages of sin is death, Romans 6. 23. Yea, of all
sinners that have not Christ, and the righteouness of Christ; for cursed is
every one that continues nor to do all that is written in the Law* Gal. 3. 12.

Madam, some are of the opinion that no unsanctified Ladies shall go to heaven,
nor no ungodly Lords go to hell, providing they believe and repent; but if they
do not so, and be thoroughly washed in Judah's Fountain, Zic. 13. 1. the
fountain which God has set open for sin and uncleanness; both Lords and Ladies
too shall be eternally damned, and thrown into the midst of slames, hell and
devils: Lords and Ladies, have more reason to be damned than poor people a
thousand times, for where much is given, much will be required, Matt. 25. 30.
they sin more, and draw more to sin, and yet may best serve God, besides they
are many of them the very factors and purveyors of hell; a great road leads to
a great Town, and a great man to a great devil: some goes to the bridge foot
to drink wine, and others to the devils mouth in following them, they ride on
poor men's backs, and devils ride on theirs, the Prince of the Air that now
rules in them; Ephesians. 2. 2. yea, both are carried sometime in close Sedan, but
to day they are more open; do not you see the Lord of Kill Chicken, and the
Lady Be graceless, one eats both full of sin and good creatures; it is pity
mountain Larks should feed such Swine, Kites are too good for them that do
nothing but eat, drink, and put it out; some study Music, Doctors kill many,
but a good book never hurts; O Timothy, give thy self to reading, says Paul,
but many go to hell a pick-pack, more through the dirt and cares of the world,
for that brings death, yea, double death often. I had rather fast, then least
where there is nothing but chit-chat, sin and my Lady Complement; but the
masking is a wicked thing, where the woman comes in man's habit, like the Devil
to a Witch, the Imps hire is the soul: The Lady gives her Hector money, he has
his pleasure, the other has the soul, all loose that for a moments lust, which
is more worth than a thousand worlds, Matt. 16. 26. If a man be worth five
hundred pound a year, and spend it in racing, he shall go on foot, and young
Mr. Fool that does the like in Coaching, this and that and the other Mr. Sucker,
who has nothing but a bold face, and a trusted suit, with a lime-twig in his
lips; let hangers on be sh^ken off, and the old customs of the world, it is no
hurt to keep Christmas, so you do not eat too much, sin, forget Christ, play,
and do no good, though it be the devils term; and this May Day may be kept
also, if it be for the air and pleasures of the fields, which are fruitful,
green and lovely: but most a Hide-Park die upwards, in the face is beauty, fine
clothes an green leaves are on the back, knots and bl^ssomes on the h^ad,
j^wels in the ear, thousands in the p^cket, and yet they die upw^rds, the soul
is dead, the heart is dead, and the body is little better, Ephesians. 2. 1. dead in
sins and trespasses.

I saw a Beggar put into an open Coffin, with an abundance of Bay leaves,
Rosemary, sweet Bryar, and Flowers, who was a drunken rogue, and his wife
worse, yet she cried at the putting of him in, (O Christ) my dear heart; The
Surgeon wraps up some in a Sear-cloth, for which many mourn, but not one of a
thousand minds where the soul is, when the body is in a green bag: the Lord of
Rack-tenant had sixteen great lights, silver Candlesticks, a velvet
foot-cloath, three mourning women, and a many taffity scutchins about his Lady,
but their sins were these, they were devilish hard, miserable to their
servants, and worse to their tenants, proud and discontented at the tax, but
their great sin was unbelief, and yet they heard much: I had rather be guilty
of many sins, than some one sin, espeically of that of unbelief, which damnes
thousands, John. 3. 35. some will not believe a wise man, others, a friend, nor
the wife the husband, if she be a little jealous, but one of five hundred, I
think, do not believe there is a Christ, or at leastwise live to Christ,
amongst your Gallants, which come to naught. 1 Cor. 2. 6. And if a man does not
really believe in Christ, and in some measure live to Chirst, he can never be
saved by Christ, John. 3. 3.

But that man that is damned takes little pleasure when the devils tells him,
there was such a Coach, and such a Coach, so many six Horses, and so many
mourners, and but two or three rejoycers among them all, little legacies were
straight forgot, to morrow is a new day, and the pleasures of this is gone
already: The Lady Be weary is going, Mrs. Moredelight is gone to spring Garden,
Mrs. Unsatisfied is coming back again, but the Lady Rack-tenant comes no more,
nor any from the dead; If one could come out of hell, that heretofore used Hide
Park, but that cannot be, Luke 16. 26. would they hear what he would say? I
believe no, If they do not hear Moses and the Prophets, and they that speak by
the same spirit, they will not hear him, verse 29. besides, such an one will
scarce come there, nor to Mrs. Wantons Chamber neither, where there is nothing
but four or five naked Picttures, a Song book, a Play book, a Lute, a History,
two or three great Looking-glasses, a jackalattostick, and a Mystery in a
little pot, namely, a face, to put on or off, a fair for a foul, a smooth for a
wrinckled.

Madam, your name is Consideration, and what do you think of these things? are
these books for Christians, that hope to be saved by poor crucified Christ? and
the bulk of them you see in day, scarce have, o^ read any other, truly they are
the glory of the Nation in one or or two respect, to wit, in beauty, b^avery
and riches, bu^ the shame of Christianity in pride, ignorance, and wantonness;
one inviable Angel would put them down all in beauty and glory, Christ has
millions to attend him, Heb. 1. 6. this Christ they despise, yea loath in his
ways and members, and yet pretend to own, and at sometimes will say and swear,
they hope to be saved by him; that they may be, if they take a new course, but
if they miss of it, they shall certainly burn as many thousand years in hell,
as there be speres of grass in Hide-Park so says Christ, Mat. 25. 41. It Is
pity, Beauty and such fine Virgins, as some there be, should ever come to be
embraced by ugly devils, and that they should be both tormented together in one
and the same place, as they must, Verse. 42. here one room is for the Lady, and
another for the Lord, scarce is there one for such and such a poor Christian
servant, at least in their families; yea, if he be a strict one, he is hated
and loathed exceedingly; but God shall make a separation, an eternal
separation, for one shall eternally be saved, and the other eternally damned,
Mal. 4. 1. 2, Pray Madam, read this little Chapter and the former, and then see
there what will become of most of you, not for being rich, not for being
beautiful, not for being brave, not for being honorable, but for being fools,
graceless and Christless, living in pleasure all your days, minding nothing
but that, and all that do so are dead while they live, 1 Timothy 1. 5, 0. The
woman that lives in pleasure is dead while she lives: in the mean time, every
dead man's eyes is not closed, nor every dead body stretched out; they that live
and delight in sin have their eyes to close, and their dead bodies to stretch
out, friends will do that one day, and God another day will call call them to
an account what they did, what they saw, and what they said in Hide-Park, and
why they went so often there; what, every afternoon? and never to the Closer,
crying, Lord, What am I? What do I? Why came I? Whither go I? Lord, I am but a
poor little gnat, worm, or a vain shadow, Psalm. 39. 6. and we all do fly about
like so many butter fties; there is more glory and variety of beauty in the
weeds of one Corn field; yea, in a little Dasie, than in one of us, Luke 12.
27. But why came I, Lord, why came I into this world? was it to play, sport,
court and complement my soul away? or was it to mind, love, fear, serve, own
and honor thee? Do thou give me being, beauty, riches, outward honor, glory
and esteem among men, to be a She-witch, snare and devil to the souls of men,
drawing them off from thee; or should I be as an Angel, owning and honoring
thee as the Son of all joy, life and fountain of all glory, the first and last,
and only being of all beings, that nihilates the creatures, and disposes of
them how, where, and when thou pleases, for light life and glory, or wrath,
hell and darkness, and that in a moment, and this moment Lord, thou may and
do dispose of some poor creature, in some place or other, to his unchangeable
condition, yea and this moment thou may say, Lords and Ladies come to
judgment, you must be no longer ranting, sporting, coaching up and down, but
come away to judgment, however Lord, if not now, I must ere long, the end of
al things is at hand, 1 Pet. 47. the Sun is setting, the glory going, and all
the company from the Park, and this May Day will come no more, nor we nor they
from the grave which are once there; let this be my last to the love, to the
life of sin, and delights of this world, and let me take my leave; farewell,
farewell Ladies, Lords, farewell pleasures of the day, I shall never see you more,
fields no more, nor hedges, Sun Moon nor Stars, Saints nor Sinners, Churches
nor Stages, Houses of Prayer, or Houses of Sin; yea, nothing more that I now
see shall I ever see again, in the way, in the manner, in the state and
condition that I now see, I shall never see more. O Christ, where am I? Oh
Christ, what do I here? help me to be up and looking, help me, to be up and
doing something for eternity; yea, for my soul, and the glory of thy name,
before I go hence and be seen no more. Oh Christ, if it must be now or never,
that I must believe, that I must repent and live unto thee, let me do it, and
seeing that the night comes, when no man can work, Joh. 9 4. let me go home and
set about the work in good earnest, and in thy strength, Oh Christ, or else it
will come to nothing: I cannot believe, I cannot repent, lead a strict life,
and be crucified in any measure to these present things, pleasures and
delights, and yet thy word pronounces woe upon woe against me, and such as I
am, Woe to them that live at case in Sion, that chaunt to the music Amos 6, 1,
4, 5. that stretch themselves upon beds of ivorie, and feed upon the fat of
lambs, go to you rich men, weep and howl for your misery, James 5. 1, 2. and
woe unto you says Christ, Luke 6. 24. and woe unto you that be full, for ye
shall be hungry; and woe unto you that laugh and rejoice, for ye shall weep and
howl, verse. 25. and woe to you when all men shall speak well of you, smooth and
flatter you, which too many do when they should pluck you by the hair as brands
out of hell.

But Madam, all these woes and judgments must and will come upon this
generation of Creatures, whose skins are as full of the sins of Sodom,
ignorance, pride luxury and wantonness, as a Taber is with wind; and sor those
damning pleasures which now they so eagerly pursue, they will be gone like a
flash of lightning, yea, they are gone already upon the matter, the sable
clouds and curtains of the night wraps up the glories of the day; yea, it has
done so, sin and drakness does the soul of man in greater, the sweetest music
leaves but sadness in the mind of man, the sweetest enjoyments of the world do
the like; yea, the more delights, pleasure, and enjoyments here, the more hell
in hell to all eternity: who would sell his soul for pleasure? who would sell
his soul for profit? yea, if it were to gain the whole world, what would it
profit? says Christ, Luke 16. 26.

O ye Nobles of England, Lords and Ladies and others, do ye indeed think upon
this te^t, or do ye think there is a God, a soul in you, a heaven or hell for
that to go into and dwell for evermore? these things that are, could never be,
if there were not a God; and if there be (as certainly there is) he will call
you of all the whole Creation to a strict account, you that drink the sweet,
and seed upon the choice of all the Creatures among the Fish, and Fowl; you
that drink down golden bolls of Nectar at your costly banquets; you that cloth
your selves in Silk, and Satin, and golden cloth of Tussue, and often ride on
poor men's backs as well as in your golden Coaches; you that say, like the
Harlot, we will take our fill of love, our fill of pleasure, crying, Away, away
to the Woods, and to the Groves, to the Fields, to the Parks and places where
the Nobles are, and let us hear the Nightingale, I and the death,-watch too I
pray.

Oh Madam, when all is done the bell must toll, and you must dance to deaths
pipe, who are now singing like to so many she Nightingales, your new enchanting
tunes and S^rlan songs, and have thousands to bow and cryinge to you, though
you be as the leprous houses to be pulled down, Levit. 14. 40 But remember the
golden boll was in Belshazzer's hand, his Nobles round about him, then the
judgment came, Mean mean Tokel, Daniel 5. 5. this night shall thy soul be
taken from thee says Christ, Luke 12. 20. and some have been taken from the
Park to the bed, from thence to the judgment, before a few days have been
expired.

O ye sinning and sinful fading flowers of England, consider what is said, and
dedicated to you in a serious way, one sheet shall wind you up, let another or
two convince you: had I wrote more, your leisure not your pleasure would have
perused them, but this I hope it will, yea, take it and peruse it well, and
although at first I might a little seem to be light, yet my aim was and my
closure shall be very serious, as from the Lord, who I think inclined me to it.

And let me tell you, that if you, or some of you shall read this, and then go
to hell after for fleighting this, and former better counsels, it will little
advantage to weep and say, Oh that I were out of these internal and external
flames; Oh that I had hearkened when time was to Christ and that the sweet and
silver voice of the Turtle and the Gospel might again once more yet be heard:
the groans and sighs of dying Lords and Ladies are many times very sad and
dolorous, but the groans, sighs and tears of a damned creature can never be
immagined. I have heard of a Gentelewoman in Northamptonshire, that was burnt
for poisoning her husband, her skreeks by some could never be forgotten they
were so loud, so shril, and to here the shrils, skreeks and cries of one damned
soul is a hell in hell beyond all imagination; and were there no other hell
than this, for one sinner to hear the skreeking of another, no man nor Angel
could express it.

O ye that now sing one unto another, and cause the woods to echo to your
melodious sweet and pleasant voices, take heed, and again take heed ye be not
one day lest to weep over one another backs in the flames of hell; certainly
whole Coachfuls of you will go there, one foot and one wheel is in already, and
none c^ies out, the other will be there also, if the Lord Jesus be not
infinitely merciful unto you, in the forgiving of your sins, and changing of
your hearts, deceive not your selves, with v^in thoughts and sanciers, what you
sow you certainly shall reap, if you sow to the flesh you shall of the flesh
reap corruption; yea, if this be all, thousands of you so (as I doubt it is)
know when the harvest is ripe, I mean, you and your sins, then shall God thrust
the sickle of death into your sides, his wrath into your soul, and bundle you
up for hell for ever, Joel 3. 13. Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground
says Christ, and who can dwell with everlasting burnings, says the Prophet,
Isaiah 33. 14. And who shall dwell in thine holy hill? says David, the man
that is so and so, Psalm 15. 1. But you that are so and so profane, to sport,
and court, and pin and paint your time away, not at all minding that God, that
has made you little Gods in respect of others, for your birth, beauty, riches,
honor and esteem amongst men, know that God shall make you die like men, and
perish like one of the Princes of Horeb, Psalm 82 ^. To perish in prison is
nothing, to perish on a dunghill is nothing, to perish at a rich man's door is
nothing, Lazarus so did for want of crumbs, whilst Dives perished in his
stately bed, for want of Christ, with golden hangings round about him, Luke 16.
22.

O you Gallants of the times, and Princes of this world, that have hangings
upon hangings, yea golden hangings and Coaches too, which we grudge you not,
you pay enough to slutter up and down the world withal, but know if you have
not Christ, you will perish in your beds of down, and all your Doctors and
pearled Cordials will nor cannot save you, and if you perish for want of
Christ, you perish with a vengeance.

O Christ, let me beg my bread here with Lazazus, and not my water hereafter;
the air is sweet, the Woods and Parks are so too, but Christ is more sweet than
all thing or things, and if he be not so to you, you shall one day want this
air; yea, you shall have no other air to breath in, but hell shall be your air,
and hell shall be your fire, and itell shall be your bed, devils your
companions, yea, they shall lie upon you, with you, by you, ever dragging and
tormenting of you, from one place to another: It is storied, that Dido's ghost
tormented Aeneas Prince of Troy, ghost, devils, damned Spirits, and all the
cursed furious Fiends of hell shall drag you up and down in the flames of hell;
yea, you shall drag one the other, curse and spit one at the other, who are now
playing one with the others bosom, locks and lips, companions in sin,
companions in hell: yea, I think that is very near the meaning, where it is
said, the Satyr, the screech Owl, the Cormorant and Dragon shall call for their
mates, Isaiah 34. 14. 15. sinners shall call for their mates, read that
chapter, and one sinner for another, some will curse and call for their Whore
when they are dying, others for their gold, every one minds that which
heretofore he most delighted in; yet some will send for an honest man, let him
come and pray, and oh that I might die the death of the rihteous, and that my
last end might be like unto his, Numb. 23. 10. but sinners in hell shall call
for their mates, not to ^e^l them stories from a play book, nor to sing some
new delightful Tunes and Songs, called such a Rant, and such a Rant, but to
tell of their misfortunes, and such misfortunes which can never be recovered.

Oh says one, I have lost the heaven of heavens and the heavens of my God for
a few vain delights, which were more transient then thoughts, never in any
measure soul-satisfying: And I also, says another, have lost the joys of
these heavens and the favor of my God, for the savor of my Mistress such an
one, this or that Lady, whose vain love and pleasure I more delighted in, than
in the love and pleasure of God, whose pleasures are pleasures for evermore,
but mine are gone in a moment, yet I never got the savor I so unhappily
sought, yet it may be, sought a duel for, but I have lost the favor of God,
as Wolsey once dying said, to please my Prince. Oh unhappy man, oh, unhappy
soul that loses all for a moments lust; well may it be said, ill tide the
time, and cursed be the day that ever thou wast born.

And Oh that you now, would timely fancy those unhappy soul-peircing relations,
poor unhappy sinners, make one unto the other, whilst others curse, tear and
spit one at the other, whose damnations were furthered by each other; for as
certainly as one man may be instrumentally to farther the salvation one of
another, so sinners may be under, the devil, the next and chief means of
damning one the other, and these excessive pleasures, wherein you now so
abundantly abound, to the spending and consuming away almost all your pretions
time, will cause the damnation of many; and then they that made first to them,
most pressed and cried, Away, away to the Park, to the Tavern, to the Ball, to
the Masque, to the musick-house, to the Groves, to the Gardens and delights of
the world, will certainly be found the greatest enemies to your souls, next to
the devil and your own hearts lusts; yea, lust and long for day, and when it
comes, you long for night and the courtings of the chamber, and then you long
again for day, the sports and pleasures of the day, so that night and day ye
are unsatisfied, and think you have never enough of soul-deceiving pleasures,
yet a little of the world will content a gracions heart; give me food and
raiment, and thou shall be my God, says Jacob, though a young and lovely man;
give me pleasures, give me sports, give me the glories of the world, and let me
swim and tumble night and day in these streams and oceans of delights say you,
let me have my fill and full of love, of lust, of wine and women, music,
chambering and wantonness, and it suffices:

O Christians, are these your wishings; I would you were but almost christians,
or rather altogether so as Paul once said to King Agrippa, Act. 26. 28. yea, I
would to God you were so, but truly for the present, call your selves what you
will, I judge you little better then heathen that know not God, nay worse a
thousand times in many things, your condemnation will be greater, Mat 11. 21.
And woe unto you, as Christ says, for if cursed be all the familes of the
earth, which call not upon him. Jer. 10. 25. what will then become of you, who
never call nor think upon him, unless it be to blaspheme and dishonor him?
Truly, if Christ be the Son of God, as certainly he is, he can never own you,
who are so unlike to him for the present: Be ye holy, for I am holy (says the
Lord, and) without holiness no man shall ever see the face of God, Heb. 12. 14.

Oh mind that and this Text, I and my farther are one, says Christ, and must
not all his members be in some measure like him, this likeness is not wrought
in an hour, but by the continual working of the holy Spirit, which is called
the Sunctifier of them that believe, and if you believe in Christ, or hope to
be saved by Christ, do you think it shall be without any work of
sanctification, or change in your hearts; truly, if you think so, you think
amiss, and are the most deceived of any in world; it is true, works shall save
none, nor in any measure contribute to the saving of any, the Lord Jesus Christ
is and will be all (...) that particular; yea, he is all in all in point of
Justification, Sanctification and Glorification; and if he do not thoroughly
justify you, and in some measure sanctify you, he will (...) you, and yet if
he save you, it shall not he for work (...) works, for not unto him that
works is the promise, (...) him that believes in him that justifies the
ungodly, Psalm. 32* 2. Rom 4 5. two golden texts, for mark the expression, I am
sure you are ungodly, an I am sure you may be easily saved; yea, you (...)
great ones that never minded salvation all your days, may be saved, if you
will look unto him who is God alone, Isaiah 35. 21. but will you, will you look
to him it is but looking and be saved from the wrath to come, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
for all other salvations, though never so great, are nothing; but will you be
saved from being shut out of the new Jerusalem, with dogs, sorcerers,
whoremongers and liars, Revel. 22. 15. And from being cast out with the
children of this kingdom, Luke 13 27. whose pleasures, joys and glories are
in the things of this life, never minding that kingdom, where Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob are: I say, will you be saved from being so cast out into utter
darkness, where shall be wailing, weeping and gnashing of teeth for evermore,
Verse 29

Oh would you escape all this, and stand in the evil day, when they shall sting
their gold and their silver to the moles and to the bats, Isaiah. 2. 20. the
day wherein sinners shall move out of their holes like Worms, Mich. 7. 17. and
lick the dust like Serpents, the day wherein many shall run with Kings and
Captains, and mighty men, to the rocks, and to the hills and mountains, crying,
Fall onus, and hide us from the presence of the Lamb, Revelation 6. 15, 16. for
the day of his sierce wrath is come.

I say, if you would escape all these things, which the Lord Jesus grant you
may, consider a little how vain those pleasures are that you pursue, how great
that salvation is, that you neglect, Heb. 2, 3. How free, how full, how easy
to be had; it stands at your doors, it waits upon you, it cries after you,
Hear, hear, and your souls shall live, Isa. 55. 99. I will make an everlasting
Covenant with you says the Lord, even the sure merices of David, your sins and
your iniqui^es I will remember no more; and though they have been as red as
scarlet, I will make them as white as wool: your pride, your glory, and your
boasting is a thing of naught; yea, your stout words against me, wherein you
say, It is in vain to serve me, Mal. 3. 13. And what profit will it be so to
do, calling proud ones and they that contemn me happy, when as the day comes
that shall burn as an even, and all they that do wickedly, and all the ungodly
of the earth shall be burnt up, says the Lord of Hosts, and it shall leave
them neither root nor branch, for the wicked shall be as stubble, and the day
that comes shall burn them up, Malac. 4. 1. and all the wicked shall go down to
hell for ever, Psalm. 9. 17. and all that forget God.

Oh you that do so, hear and hearken unto the voice of God; yea, hear his voice
to day, to morrow is another day and you know not whose it may be; to day if
you will, harden not your hearts, as in the day of provocation, this day is
salvation tendered to you, if you will accept it, do not say, to morrow, do not
say, we will have none of this salvation which Christ and all the Prophets of
Christ yet tender unto you, and abuse not that rich and free grace, which
brings and tenders salvation to all men, but to you especially; nor entreat him
to be gone out of your course and companies, as once those unkind and churlish
Gadarens did, Mark 5. 16. preferring their swine before Christ the Lord of life
and glory, who only has immortallity dwelling in himself, and dwells in that
light which is unaccessible, the only Prince and Potentate, who shall be
revealed in due time, 2 Timothy 6. 14, 15. In the mean time, charge them that be
rich to be rich in good works, and prefer not every lust, rattle, toy and baby,
before the Lord of life and glory, who has the keys of death and hell in his
hand, Revel. 1. 18. an absolute power over you Saints, Angels, Men and Devils,
to dispose of you and them all as he pleases, either for light, life, and
glory, or wrath hell, and darkness, Phil. 2. 10. Why should this Lord of Lords
and Ladies too, Revel. 16. 19. be set at naught, who has a name written on his
thigh, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; and though his Kingdom be not of
this world, yet his Kingdom shall break in pieces all the Kingdoms of this
world, Dan. 2. 44. 7 9. And they that will not kiss this enlightening Son,
shall be broken with an iron rod, Psalm. 2 9.

Be wise O ye Lords and Ladies of England, and kiss with a kiss of obedience,
subjection and affection, this Son and Son of Sons, Angels are the Son of this
Son, which now we do behold, and Christ who is fairer than the Children of men,
is the Son of Saints and Angels too, shall he be yours, O ye Stars of England,
and glory of our Nation in a common sense, shall he be your Sun, and shall he
rise this night with healing in his wings on some of your souls, who are as
black as the nether Hell, notwithstanding all your outward luster. Oh let him
arise there now, the Sun and glory of the world is setting, if he shall let
him, his wings are the wings of true affection, his wings are the wings of safe
protection, who shall harm if God be (and he will be) with you, he will and
shall keep you in life, death and eternity, in the hour of temptation, yea, in
that hour when all those whose souls are built upon the sands of common
Christanity, much more of vain delight, shall come tumbling down with a
vengeance, when the winds, and the rain, and the storms of conscience come with
Hell, death and a thousand despairs at their heels. But that they may never
come, shroud your selves under those wings that will now embrace you, and let
the everlasting arms of mercy fold you up in the bosom of divine love, joys
and sweetness, and that it may so do, stand open, yea stand open, O ye
everlasting doors, and let the King of glory enter in, Psalm. 24 7. who is the
King of glory, ver. 10. the Lord of Host is he, and the Lord over hosts of
Angels, Men and Devils is he, and therefore lift up your heads and gates, O ye
everlasting doors of the soul, and let the King of glory into your hearts,
where nothing but sin and Sattan for the present is, yea let this King of glory
enter in, and though ye be as the Devils den, a desert land, a barren
Wilderness, where is nothing but the howling of cursed lust and nature, ye
shall be as the Eden and Garden of God; yea ye shall certainly be as a
fruitful field tilled and blessed of the Lord, instead of the briar shall come
up the myrtle tree, read the 35. of Isaiah, and that sweet promise in the 65.
of Isaiah 13. Mind these promises, O ye (...) Lords and Ladies, for God is able
to make you as a fruitful tree, and the Eunuch shall say, I am no more a
batren tree, Isa. 50. 4, 5, 6. not shall it be said, ye are still as
Reprobates; we trust you are not so, though for the most part ye are dead to
all good works, yet we trust as Paul says, we shall not find you Reprobates, 2
Cor. 13. 5, 6. for the future, we know there is in you a noble spark, a free
and gallant spirit, an humble and ingenious disposition, affable and courteous
to all, some of you are so, and the sweetest natures in the World, truly noble
in all things, only the blood of Christ, the blood of Christ is wanting in
your veins, the spirit or the appearances of Christ in your life's, and (...)
Owls dwell where mountains larks should sing; this blood and this spirit, and
the merit of the former, is as freely tendered unto you as to any in the world.
Oh ye that have a freedom and equality of right unto the winds that blow, and
showers that fall, and lights that shine, know ye have the like to all the
tenders of grace in the Gospel of grace, and though your present greatness do
and may exceedingly cumber you, yet it can never absolutely hinder you from
Christ, the loves, joys and tenders of Christ, who once stood up and loudly
cried, and still does, oh every one that thirsts come to the waters of life,
high, low, rich and poor yeaif any man thirst let him come unto me and drink
says Christ, Isa. 55. 1. Io. 7. 37. Rev. 22. why should ye refuse these sweet
waters of Shiloh that run softly, and that voice which speaks from heaven, and
shakes both heaven and earth, and all these sublunary glories here below. O
see, and again see, see, refuse not him that speaks from heaven, that which
ages, and few of the Princes of this world which come to naught, have done or
known for many hunpred of years, 1 Cor. 1. 18. but to you it is spoken, not in
a way of thundering and lightening, like God to Moses in Mount Sinai, when he
gave the Law, but like the Angels to the Shepherds, when they sung glory to God
in the highest, peace and good will to men on earth, Luke 2. 14. for to you is
born a Savior, and his name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins, yea, and ye as well as they if ye will accept of him,
and now is the acceptable time, and to you is born a Jesus, and with this song
I shall conclude; but do not you for another resuse this Christ, and this
Jesus, who will save you with an eternal salvation, if indeed you do believe
in him. O ye that are singing like the fool in the Gospel, you have this, you
have that, you have goods enough, soul, soul take thine case, thou have beauty,
riches, honor and esteem amonst men, it is no matter now for Christ, know
before your song is half done your soul shall be taken from you, Luke 12. 1^.
and whose shall all this be? it is said the Swan never sings but once and then
dies, ye have sung once and again to your selves, take heed, and again take
heed death catch not you, or some of you up, as a Kite catches a Chick, before
you have half that content and pleasure which you now promise unto your selves,
we will buy, sell, and get gain, say they, and yet their life was but a vapor,
James 4. 13. I will take my case, says the fool, and I will take thy soul
says the devil, and this night it shall be says God, but will you sell what
you have, and get you bags that wax not old, Luke 12. 33. and lay up for your
selves treasures in Heaven: It is the counsel of Christ now tendered to you,
will you sell your glory? will you sell your beauty? will you sell your
pleasure? and all these things that wax old, and get you bags that will last
you ever, that is, the righteousness of Christ, which blessed and for ever
blessed are all they, and only they, that hunger and thirst after it, Mat. 5. 6.

O Madam, it is nothing but Christ, yea nothing else but Christ and the
righteousness of Christ that will last you ever, al things else are sading, the
sweetest rose and the fairest beauty fades in time, the richest robe and the
lasting garment do the like, time and the moth will consume them all, but time,
death grave, nor eternity shall ever fade this righteousness, however if they
should not, death will strip you to your skins, naked came I cut of my mothers
womb, naked must I return, toe and toe must be tied together, the silken
stocken and the silver shoe, the holland shall and all most off, and naked
must you return. O Madam, as you came you must go, only your mothers blood
shall be washed off, Princes, Kings, and Queens, must do so too, yea to death
must all lay down their Crowns, and Parliament men pull off their robes, death
will strip them to there skin, but it cannot strip a Saint of this
righteousness, no, no, worms may eat and eat his skin thorough and thorough,
and the grave consume his bones and flesh to dust, but it cannot touch this
righteousness, no, no, Christ keeps that for him as in a Cabinet of gold,
until the day of resurrection, and then his dead body, though consumed to
dust, and that again to nothing, yet shall that nothing be raised and arrayed
too like a Princess in the morning of her esponsal, and all by virtue of that
power, which sa^es to the North and to the South, give up, and bring back my
sons and daughters from fat, Isa. 43. 6. And oh that this almighty power might
bring back you, or some of you, the captive daughters of Sion, and oh that you
might return like the rivers in the South, from all your lying vanities to the
living God, and from all your follies to the wisdom of God, which is better
then fine gold or silver, yea, then Rubies, Prove. 8. 10 11. Riches and honor,
yea, durable riches and honor are with me, says the Lord, my fruit is better
then gold, yea then fine gold, and my revenue then silver, verse 19. therefore
hearken O ye Children of men unto me, for blessed are they that keep my ways,
but cursed are those that go a whoring after other Gods, sorrow shall be
multiplied, yea, they shall lie down in sorrow Isa. 50 11. this sorrow is the
daughter of sin, but the mother and the daughter shall sit down, and lay down
upon the heads, hearts and souls of all that will not hearken unto me, says
Wisdom, Wherefore O ye foolish ones, turn ye turn ye at my reproof, Prove. 1. 22.
hear ye and your souls shall live, and if you will hear, hear, ye young and
lovely Lords and Ladies and Gallants of the times, and for Christ's sake
remember ye your Creator in the days of your youth, before the evil day
comes wherein the Lord shall say, I have no pleasure in you before the Sun
and blossom of your virginity, and flower of your age be darkened, yea before
Christ and the things of Christ be hid from your eyes, before the Moon, the
Stars, and the Clouds return after the rain, Eccles. 12. all the lesser means
and helps of your salvation be blown away like a cloud or a rain that is
carried away by the clouds, ye before the day, when the keepers of the house,
the spirit and noble courage of your souls shall tremble at the approach of
death when he comes climbing in at your windows, and up to your beds, where you
lie panting like the poor Partridg in the tearing tallents of the Falcon, and
what is a bed of state in such a condition, though surrounded with a thousand
Lords and Ladies, who are but vain comforters, or as flesh flies, when the
strong men shall bow themselves, the legs, arms and sinews of strength all
shrinked up, yea the whole man turned to the wall like Hezekiah, and weep like
a child, the grinders cease, as not able to do there office, and they that
look out of the windows be darkened, the light and sight of thine eyes, dim and
creamy, the throat rattle, and the breath earthly, when the doors shall be shut
in the streets, all the intellects of the soul, that take in and shut out
vissible appearance be locked up, then the sound of the grinding shall be low,
no noise or motions hardly heard, when you shall rise up at the voise of the
bird, the secret chirpings of conscience, the private bird, that tells all old,
and almost forgotten things, and ungodly acts, when the daughters of music are
brought low, all your former vain, and sinful vanities, and delights are hushed
still, blown over and gone through the fear of that which is coming on,
namely, death, hell, and he that has the power over death, yea, the keys of
death and hell too in his hand, Revel. 2. 18. but the Almond tree shall
flourish then, that is, the righteous man, yea, mark, for the end of that man
is peace, Psalm. 37. 37. but woe to the transgressour, the Grasshopper shall be a
burden to the wicked, and all his desires shall sail, because he goes to his
long home, whether he will or no, yet he goes, and the Mourners about the
streets, the silver cords be loosned, the golden bow and pitcher broken, at the
fountain, the veins and strings of life all broken, through the invisible
shouting of the immortal soul into another world, whereby the pitcher of man's
body becomes broken as at the fountain head, in the return of the spirit to
that God that gaive it, the dust returns to the dust for a while, and the
spirit to God for a final sentence. O vanity of vanities, how is all but froath
and vanity, besides Christ and the knowledge of Christ; this knowledge ^
recommend to you, and every one of you in Hide-Park after your unwearied
pursuit of lying vanities, and if you refuse it, your blood and the blood of
your souls will be upon your own heads Acts. 20. 26. I am more free from that
then thousands of your Chaplains and others too, that deal not so faithfully
with you as they ought, God Almighty bless and turn you from your sins; though
Israel be not gathered, yet my labor is and shall be with my God, Isaiah 49.
5. but my hearts desire and prayer is and shall be, that Israel may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus, Romans 10. 1. and that you may, the eyes of al mercy
look upon you to convince you one by one: and oh that you dare, or that he
would take you alone a little this night, to mind and meditate what you have
done this day, and all your days for him, or rather against him, but you dare
not walk alone or be in the dark one hour, nor will the Devil let you think on
Christ, heaven, hell death, or Judgment. And now, O Christ how few lives to
thee, O Christ how few mind thee, O Christ how many diss^mble with thee, and
when shall the Nobles lick the dust of thy feet, whilst Kings and Queens
attend on thee, and count it honor enough to own and honor thee in the most
contemtible way and manner? when shall they bring their gold and silver and
offer unto thee? who art all in all in life, death, and eternity, Coll. 3. 11.
But poverty parts good company, thou at present appears not in thy glory, 1
John 3. 2. but art as it were upon the wain, while the World, and Nobles of the
world are in their full sun and splendour; but appear O Christ, and le^ the
world see thee that art invisible, and yet thou rulest the stars, and bounds
the tumbling seas, while thou stands knocking at the sinners heart, Rev. 3. 20.
courting as it were, this or that, or to other gnat-worm, nothing, for a little
admittance: O Christ fling them down to hell, yea fling them down quick, that
storm and contemn thee, because they are fine, and tricked up in the offiles of
thy creature, and if these golden Sparks and Ladies will not own thee, make
them like a wheel, and let them perish as the stubble, Psalm 84. 13. yet, if any
man love not our Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha, so says
Paul, 1 Cor. 10. 22. but I say, love him Lords, love him Ladies, he and he
only is altogether lovely, in his name, in his nature, in his person, in his
promise, to look to, to hope in, to follow after, and to lean upon he is
altogether lovely, the last, present, and the future hope of sinners: But do
what you will, I have chosen him, and he has washed me in his own blood, Rev.
1. 5. Glory Honor, and Salvation be ascribed to him world without end.

W. B.
For Christ's sake do not tear nor fling this about, but tell the Lords and
Ladies of it; and ask for the green Book, or, the Ladies Trial.




