BLAGRAVE'S Astrological Practice OF PHYSIC DISCOVERING, The true way to Cure
all Kinds of Diseases and Infirmities which are Naturally incident to the body
of man. BEING Performed by such Herbs and Plants (...) grow within our own
Nation, directing the (...) to Distill and Extract their Virtues and making up
of Medicines. ALSO, A Discovery of some notable Phylosophical Secret worthy our
Knowledge, relatin^ to a Discovery of all kinds of Evils, whether Natural or
such which com-from Sorcery or Witchcraf^ts or by being possessed of an evil
Spirit: directing how to cast forth the said Evil Spirit out of any one which
is ^ossessed with sundry Examples thereof.

By Joseph Blagrave of Reading Gent. Student in Astrology and Physic.

London, Printed by S.G. and B.G for Obad. Blagrav. at the Printing Press in
Little Britain, 167^.

(...) The truth is, I find by good experience, especially in very cold
infirmities, as Agues, Dead palsies, and such like, its impossible to make a
Sympathetical Cure when Saturn is strong, were it not so that those
Observations before-going were in force, and approved: as for example, If the
Patient be old, his grief cold, his Complexion cold, the season of the year
cold, and his remedies to be applied cold, it must needs destroy nature, for
where heat is wanting there can be no life: but if Saturn be the afflicting
planet and weak then herbs which are under the dominion of the Sun and Jupiter
being of known virtue to cure the Distemper or grife will do it; they being by
Nature hot and moist, whereas Saturn is by nature cold and dry, clean differing
in Elemental qualities, and this is called an Antipathetical Cure; but in all
infirmities whatsoever which are caused by the evil influence of Mars, he being
strong in the Heavens, the remedies used must be by such Herbs and plants which
are under his own Dominion, together with herbs of the Sun but if the
Complexion of the patient, their age, and the season of the year does naturally
produce heat, then to use some small numbers and dose of such herbs which are
under the Dominion of Venus, may be proper at some convenient times to give the
patient toward the refreshing of nature, yet chiefly in point of Cure you must
adhere unto those herbs and plants which are under Mars and the Sun whereby to
work your Cure, for if you should give cooling remedies in hot Distempers when
Mars is strong, 'twill destroy the patient as I have sufficiently proved; but
as I have elsewhere expressed if Mars be the afflicting planet and weak, then
those herbs and plants under the Dominion of Venus and the Moon; together with
a select number of Herbs under the Dominion of the Sun will do it.

In all Cures whatsoever, a select number of herbs under the dominion of the
Sun must be used.

These Rules being well observed and carefully followed, may through Gods
blessing produce wonderful Effects; as I have sufficiently proved in my many
years practice and experience, as you will find in this Book.

To the truly Learned, and my most Honored Friend Elias Ashmole of the Afiddle
Temple Esquire Windsor Herald at Arms, and Comptroler of the Excise for his
MAJESTY.
SIR,
ALthough somewhat abashed (when I consider those admirable gifts, both of
Learning and Knowledge which are seated in your worthy Person as by your
admirable works in Print are manifest) to Dedicate these my Laboues, yet being
imboldned not only by our former acquaintance, as having ever found those noble
parts in you, both of Wisdom and Affability: but also considering the great
love and affection you did always bear unto Philosophy: and so by consequence,
a true lover of such, who are well-willers thereunto, according unto that
Maxim in Philosophy, Every thing delights in its own Element, and does
sooner adhere unto it, than to its contrary: and should this Book come into
some men's hands who are not delighted in these kinds of Studies, although wise
and well learned in other things, yet they will assuredly slight, and not
regard what I have written, nor yet willingly show any love or countenance to
the Writer, for according unto that notable expression of yours to the Reader,
in your excellent Book, entitled, The way to Bliss: That it is as possible to
shape a Coat for the Moon, as in writing to please every Genius: so various
are the generality of our inclinations, etc. What I have written in this Book
is no Translation, but merely the Subject of (...) many years Practice and
Experience in the ^^^rological way of Physic: and Published, not (...) for my
own vindication in point of Art (...) Practice, but also to instance others to
do the like Cures as I have done; for I may truly say, (...) Wonders have been
wrought, as in this Book will appear: yet many people I find are unsatisfied
concerning any way of practice in Physic, the reason I conceive is, because
many illitterate persons, and others who are ignorant of the Art of Astrology
do foolishly speak against it, verifying that notable saying of the Poet Ars
non habet inimicum nisi ignorantem. Concerning the lawfulness of the Art, I
have sufficiently given satisfaction to the wise, in the Epistles of those
Almanacks of mine, Dated Anno, 1658. and 1659. Besides, there are many
excellent Men who have written both learnedly and largely thereupon; should I
mention your most worthy self, who is known to be a great Master herein, and
not only in Astrology but also in Philosophy, the most excellent part having I
dare say, few or no equals living. Sir, for the love I bear unto your most
Worthy Person, and to those most excellent gifts which God has endowed you
withal, I heartily wish I had higher and more excellent things to present you,
that so you might take delight in reading, and increase in Knowledge thereby:
however, I question not, but that when you have read it over, you will find
somewhat herein worthy your perusal which may (if ad nothing unto your wisdom
and Knowledge) put you in mind of greater Mysteries: even as in Motions, the
lesser wheels being moved, causes the greater wheels to be set on work.
Craving pardon for the boldness of him who heartily wishes your increase, both
in Celestial, and Terestial Wisdom, Health, and Happiness in this Life, and
Eternal Joy in the Life to come; and who shall ever remain,

Sir, Your assured Friend and Servant to Command Jos. Blagrave.

To the Right Worshipful Sr. John Davis Knight, one of his Majesty's Deput.
Leift. and Justice of Peace for the County of B.
Right Worshipful,
HAving for many years past had the happiness to be acquainted with your
Worship, and having ever found seated in your most Worthy Person, those most
excellent gifts of Knowledge, both in Divine and Moral things; but most
especially, that most excellent gift and noble quality of Affability, being a
virtue of the greatest Demonstration of true Generosity. We find it Recorded,
that this noble Virtue did abound with Antonius the Emperor (called for his
wisdom the Philosopher) who would permit the meanest of his Subjects to come
unto his presence and to converse with him; for which quality, he was ever held
in high esteem, and well beloved: but on the contrary, such who have abandoned
this virtue, ill have befell them: I shall instance one Example hereof, In
Julius Caesar who so long as he continued affable and loving unto his Subjects
they entirely loved him; but when once he lest off this virtue, and fell into
pride, they quickly forsook him, altering their good affection of love unto
disdain; and shortly after conspired his Death: and would he but have
vouchsafed to have read a Note which a me in person delivered him when he went
to the Senate, he might for that time have saved his life, there being written
in it, the whole discovery of the Plot. Sir, I needed not to have mentioned
these things, presuming your Worship is sufficiently acquainted therewith
already, as having read these Moral Virtues, and Vices: not only in Antonius,
and Julius Caesar, but also in many others. Sir, I want words to express the
love and good affection I did always bear unto your Worthy Person; having ever
found you to be a true lover of such, who were studious in all lawful Arts and
Sciences. That which I here present your Worship withal, is not only Astrology,
which is the first and chiefest of all Liberal Arts and Sciences; but also the
true Astrological way of my many years practice in Physic; for without
knowledge in Astrology, it is impossible to be either a Philosopher or good
Physician, for has the Theory and Practick thereof is derived from Astrology.
In all Ages Astrology was ever held in high esteem; the knowledge whereof (as
testi^ieth Josephus) was taught by God himself unto Adam, and from him, unto
Posterity; this worthy Author further says, that he saw the Art of Astrology
graven in Stone in Assyria, done by Seth before the Flood: also those Magicians
or Wisemen which came to worship Christ, were great Astrologers, without
question (next unto Divinity; its the most excellent study in the World; for
those who are but me only read in this Art, must needs know, that a mighty and
powerful hand has wrought those wonders which ^^^^is^^^y ^^en in the Heavens,
as the Sun, Moon, Stars, and P^ane^s with their M^^ions and powerful
App^ri^ians upon all su^^una^y C^^^ure^. Sir, I know I need an Arguments to
persuade you unto the lawfulness o^ excel e^^y of this worthy Science, well
knowing, that your Worship, as I have already declared, was ever a true (...)
th^re^f: I question not, but that when you have read once ^h^se my Labors, you
will not only be the more confirmed in your good ^pinion hereof, but also find
somewhat ^e^^in which may increase your knowledge in these secret Mysteries.
Sir, may these my Writings prove acceptable unto your most Worthy hands, I have
obtained the end of my (...), which was in some measure to Demonstrate the
great affection which I did always bear unto your most Worthy Person, and shall
ever remain,

Your Worships Servant to Command Jos. Blagrave.

To all my loving Contrymen in general, but especially to those of Reading,
being the place of my Nativity.
IT was the saying of our Blessed Savior That a Prophet could not be without
honor save in his own Country. Although I count my self no Prophet, yet by the
Rules of Astrology I have predicted such things which (to our sorrow) have come
to pass as may appear in my Almanac for the year 1665. and others formerly
written: I presume, I have both Friends, and Enemies amongst^y u^; its well
known unto many, that I have done very great cures both in the Town, and places
adjacent, although I have not mentioned their names in this Book, yet I find
that many being unsatisfied concerning the legality of my way of Cure, have
refused to come or send unto me for help to cure their infirmities: and many of
(...) wh^ did come, c^^me for the most part privately, fearing either loss of
reputation or reproaches from their Neighbors, and other unsatisfied people;
and also fear^^^ then what I did, was either Diab^lical, or by unlawful means.
I question not but when you have read over this Book, although some things may
seem mistical at the first, especially unto such who never before read any
books of this nature, yet by often perusied and well heeding what I have written,
I am confident it may, and will give satisfaction unto any of reasonable
capacity: and for the benefit of those who desire Knowledge in the Astrological
and Chemical way of Physic (which is the most assured way extant) I have both
briefly and plainly instructed the learner herein, so that those who can but
read and will take pains may assuredly attain unto it, and be enabled thereby
to do the like Cures as I have done: and as concerning the resolution of
questions by Figures, a thing much questioned by some, I have in this book
given sufficient reasons thereof according unto Art, thereby inabling others
(if they please to take the pains) to do the like. What I have formerly done
herein, was more to satisfy the earnest importunity of others, than for any
gain or profit which came unto me, for I always (although some reward was
given me for my pains therein) accounted my self a loser thereby, in regard of
my Practice in Physic; and let the Artist be never so careful to give content,
yet what will the most men say, (especially such who are ignorant of the Art)
if we discover the thing sought after, surely he does it by the Devil,
otherwise, how could he do it, but if we chance to fail, as sometimes we may by
taking a wrong Ascendant, then they will assuredly say, they are cheated of
their money: I speak seriously I take no pleasure in such questions, for the
reasons aforesaid, having denied many which came unto me therefore. Kind
Country men and Women, my thoughts are better of you then wholly to blame you,
for I dare say it was either false reports, or ignorance of the way I profess,
which caused many of you to be enemical unto me; wherefore, I have the rather
published this Treatise that so f^r time to come, you may not only be settled in
your opinion, but also be fully satisfied, that what I have already done, or
shall for time to come do in the Astrological or Chemical way of Physic, which
is the way of my Practice, is both honest, just, and lawful; and is no more
then what every industrious Physician ought to know, and without knowledge
therein, its impssible to be an expert Physician, as in this book will appear:
Concerning the Legality of this Art of Astrology, if any are unsatisfied they
may read ^y Epistles of those Almanacks Dated, 1658. and 1659. besides there
are many Authentic Authors who have written both learnedly and largely
thereupon, for I intend not at this time t^ trouble my self or reader much
farther herein, only thus much at present, I say, next unto Divinity it is the
most to be admired and most excellent study in the World, and worthy our
knowledge; for there is so much seen of the wonderful Work of God in it, that
it must needs convince the most unbelieving persons whatsoever, and cause them
to know that a mighty and powerful hand has wrought those wonders which we
visibly see, is the Heavens, Sun, Moon; Stars and Planets, with their Motions
and powerful Operations over all sublunary Creatures; and has given unto man
so much Knowledge thereby (Next unto the Angels) that he is able to reveal and
make known in a great measure his Heavenly Will thereby unto his People, that
so they may be forewarned of his wrath to come. If I find this Book has
acceptance with you, I shall be encouraged to labor in my study and profession
to do you and the Country farther service, and shall ever remain, your assured
loving Country man and Servant.

Jos. Blagrave.

In nobilissimi, and magni Astrologi Encomium.
INtima sanguinei scrutatur pectora Tauri
Agmine plebeo cinctus spect ante sacerdos,
Imperiumque suum est quoties argenteus alti
Solis avis tendit Romana insignia bello.
Augur cede viro, cede o Geometria magno
Astrologo, claroque Jovi summeque perito
Ad sua multiplices deducere sydera morbos.
Non Aesculapius talem cognoverit artem,
Nedum Virgilius magnus, non Thessala Tempe
Talem frugifera conspexit vertice doctum.
Ex tripode haud quaquam sacro Grynaeus Apollo
Verius ad sortem humanam dedit ore loquelas.
Astra regunt morbos, morbi sacrantur avitis
Planetis, veluti summis piacula sanctis.
Aurea mundanis celebratur regula velis.
Quis super atra silex jamjam casura cadentique
Imminet assimilis, veniunt hic Circis ad antrum,
Contenti rediere omnes.
H. Pratt. Generosus.

The Contents of this Book.
A Catalogue of the Herbs and Plants appropriated unto their several Planets.
pages, ^, 2, 3, 4. General rules whereby to know under what planet every herb
or plant is Governed, p. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Rules concerning the gathering
of herbs and plants at the right planetary hours. 12, 13, 16, 17. Concerning
numbers attributed unto the planets with the reason thereof. p. 18, 19. The way
to find the Disease by the Sun or Moon afflicted. page 21. To know the time of
Death or Recovery by the Critical Figure. page 22.23. Judgment upon a
Decumbiture Figure, and also upon acute and perperacute sicknesses. p. 24.25.
Judgment upon another Decumbiture of a sick person. pages 25, 26, 27. The
Characters of the seven Planets: Twelve Signs; and the five usual Aspects: and
the houses of the Planets. page 28, 29. The sick-mans glass, with the use of an
Eph^meris. page 30.3^. How to Erect a Scheme or Figure for any time given. p.
32 A Decumbiture Figure set for the time of my Friends falling sick: with
judgment thereupon. p. 3^, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38. Observations concerning the
Ascendant. page 39.40. Brief Rules concerning long or short sicknesses: and
whether the Patient is like to live or dye. p. 73.74. The bodily shape and
infirmities atributed unto the twelve Signs. page 75. The bodily shape with
the parts and members of the body together with the diseases which the planets
generally rule. page 77. Concerning the Moon of Mars or Sol afflicted in any of
the Twelve Signs. page 79. Concerning the Moon of Saturn or Jupiter afflicted
in any of the Twelve Signs, page 82. How to make Dyet-drinks, or to extract
the spirits of plants or Herbs. How to make Syrups, Lambitives, Pills,
Glisters, Fa^mes, Fumigations, Cataplasms, Oymments, and Bathes. pages. 86, 87,
88, 89, 90. Of Purgations and the manner of Purging, Vomiting, Bathing,
Sweating, Blooding, with some other additions necessary to be known. page 91,
92, 93. A Catalogue of Choice herbs or plants, collected for the curing of all
kinds of grief^ or infirmities whatsoever, Alphabetically expressed, beginning
at page 94, and ending at p. 113. One cure done at Oxford, Anno Dom. 1658.
Another cure done at Oxford, Anno Dom. 1659. p. 64.65.115, 11^, 11^. One cure
done at Tylehurst near Reading, Anno 1667. page 118. The way to cure the Evil,
commonly called the Kings Evil, with an Example. Another kind of Evil and the
Cure thereof. 119, 120, 121, 122, 123. Another kind of Evil which comes from
Sr^m Sore^ry or Whichcraft with the way of cure. 127. A Boy suddenly struck
dumb and so continued three years how cured. page 144. How to make the
Sympathetical powder with its application. page 131. The Unguent its making and
use p. 131. Concerning Witchcraft and Sorcery, with the way of cure. page 135.
Some experimental Rules whereby to afflict the Witch. page 154. The way to cure
both Witchcraft and Sorcery. p. 155. Some notable Phylosophical Secrets whereby
to cure sundry distempers. page 15^. Two pretty secrets in Philosophy page 160.
Some practical and experimental Rules whereby to give judgment Astrologically
upon Thefts, Strayes, Fugitives, Decumbitures of Sick Persons, Vrines, or any
other H^rary Question, from page 161, to page 168. Concerning the casting forth
of Devils out of such who are Possessed, and how performed by the Author. form.
p. 168, to 17^. Concerning Agues and Quotidian Infirmities with the way of cure
thereof 176, to page 183. Concerning all kinds of Madness, its cause and cure.
Postscript to the Reader page 184. A short Epistle unto those who are Students
and well-willers unto the Art of Astrology, page 108.
AN Introductory Preface TO THE READER.
Having formerly spent some of my youthful years in the Study of Astronomy and
Astrology, and since that, in Philosophy and the practice of Physic, and
finding by good experience how each part does depend upon the other, for
without some knowledge in Astronomy, one can be no Astrologer; and without
knowledge in Astrology, one can be no Philosopher; and without Knowledge both in
Astrology and Philosophy, one can be no good Physician: and whosoever desires
to make practice, either in the Astrological or Chemical way of Physic (as for
the Drug way, there can be no certainty in careing thereby, as will plainly
appear in this book) having laid his foundation as aforesaid (which if any
Practitioner or Student in Physic be ignorant of, this Book will sufficiently
instruct them therein) must build and rely upon these five substantial Pillars
following, without which, there can be no admirable cures done, or wonders
wrought in this noble Art of Physic, Viz. Time, Virtue, Number, Sympathy, and
Antipathy. First, Time is of great Concernment whereby to gather each Herb or
Plant at the right Planetary hours, which this book will sufficiently inform
you; and likewise to know the hour and time when to administer your Physic
aright, for if the Physic be administered at a wrong hour, be it Purge or Vomit
it will work contrary effects, as I have often times proved: Example, If you give
a Purge when the Moon is in an Earthy Sign, Aspected by a Planet Retrograde,
and that the Ascendant with its Lord does Correspond, then the Purge will turn
unto a Vomit: and on the contrary, if a Vomit be given when the Moon is in a
Watery Sign, Aspected by Planets swift in Motion out of Watery Signs, the Signs
Ascending with its Lord Corresponding, then the Vomit will turn to a Purge:
also an exact time must be obtained whereby to erect your Figure aright,
whereby to give judgment upon the disease, its cause and termination, which
this book will sufficiently instruct you in. For by Urine alone, no true
judgment herein can be given, except in some few infirmities which proceed
from the blood, or passages of Urine, for Urine is but the excrement of blood:
there are many other considerations to be made use of by virtue of time, which
I for brevities sake am willing at present to pass over, and so shall proceed
unto the word Virtue, which is in brief, a right knowledge and understanding of
the Nature, Properties, Elemental Qualities and Effects which each Herb or
Plant has, whereby to cure all kinds of griefs or infirmities whatsoever,
either by Sympathy or Antipathy, as this book will sufficiently inform you; and
all growing within our Nation. I shall not trouble my self or Reader in setting
forth the dangers in using Foreign Drugs, yet I deny not, but that some Drugs,
whose virtue and operations are well known unto us may in many respects be
useful, by reason our Climate does not afford some ingredients which are
necessary to be used in some Distempers, as Figs, Raisons, Currants, Sugar,
Wine, and Spirits. etc. which are often times made use of, whereby to make our
Dyet-drinks and spirits of Plants extracted the more savory, and does help to
work a more forceble effect in many distempers, as you will find in this book:
and I have accordingly in some infirmities made use thereof.

Thirdly, concerning Number: there are certain Numbers attributed unto the
Planets, which every Astrological or Chemical Physician ought to know; more
especially, such who use this way of cure by Herbs or Plants which is the most
assured way extant as best agreeing with our English bodies, yet as I have
already declared both in Decoctions, and in Chimical Extractions, Ingredients,
together with Herbs may be used to make it the more forceable and savory; but
should we take all Herbs or Plants which are accounted good for every grief,
not having regard to any select Number, there being so many sorts of Herbs
approved good for the same, there would be no certainty either for the
gathering of the Herbs at a right hour, or yet know when you have enough
whereby to work your cure: the certainty of a select Number is not only
according unto my own experience, but also its the Opinion of Cornelius
Agrippa, an excellent Philosopher, and many others: What Numbers are attributed
unto each Planet, and the reasons thereof, I have elsewhere in this book
expressed.

Fourthly, Concerning Sympathy, that is, when any Planet who is strongest in
the Heavens by essential dignities, shall afflict the Principal significator of
the sick: especially, if more strong than that Planet which is of a contrary
nature; then those herbs or Plants which are under his Dominion, shall
according unto their Virtues and Numbers be collected to cure the infirmity,
always provided, they are gathered at the right Planetary hours, which this
Book will inform you; Example, If Mars be the afflicting Planet and is more
strong in essential dignities than Venus, then you must make choice of such
Herbs which are under the dominion of Mars to cure such infirmities which he
usually produces, which this Book will also acquaint you with. There is no
infirmity or disease whatsoever, but in a second Cause proceeds from the evil
influence of the afflicting Planets; and what infirmity soever any Planet
causes, he has Herbs by Sympathy to cure it: in this condition, heat must
fetch out heat, even as if one should burn ones Finger, and then heat it
against the fire, which cures by Sympathy: Likewise, I have known a great cold
taken, to be cured by a Pippin taken in cold water, Venus being strong in
essential dignities; and if we should give cooling remedies when Mars is
strong, it will destroy the Patient, as I have often proved; for it stands by
reason, that if a weak man contend with a strong man well armed, he must needs
be worsted: but if Mars be the afflicting Planet, although strong, and Venus
also be near equal in strength, then we must chase a select lesser Number of
her herbs to join with Mars, and so the dose must be proportionable according
to their strength and weakness, and so the remedies will be between both,
rather adhereing unto the strongest Planet.

Fifthly, Concerning Antipathy, admit the Moon or principal Significator of the
sick be afflicted by Saturn, a Planet Cold and Dry, and he weak in the Heavens,
and the Planet which is of a contrary nature is strong, as instance Jupiter who
is Hot and Moist, then a select Number of Herbs under the dominion of Jupiter,
being of virtue to cure the distemper must be used, provided they are gathered
at the hour when Jupiter raineth, which this book will inform you. But if
Saturn and Jupiter be near equal in strength, then use a medium between both,
and let one part of your Herbs be by Sympathy under Saturn, and the other part
under Jupiter, always adhereing unto the stronger Planet, both by Number and
Dose; and ever remembering in all Cures whatsoever to use a select number of
Herbs which are under the Sun, in regard he is Fountain of Life, and sole
Monarch of the Heavens; and all those Herbs which are under his Dominion are
always approved good to comfort the Heart, Brain, Nerves, Arteries, and Vital
Spirits, and are likewise good to resist: Poison: Likewise in all Cures
whatsoever, you must have regard unto the age of the Patient, together with
their Complexion, and the season of the year, that so you may help to support
Natures defects, for a Choleric or Sanguine Man or Woman by nature requires
things more cooling then Phlegmatic, or Melancholy Man or Woman, and a
Flegmatique or Melancholy man or woman requires things more heating than a
Choleric or Sanguine man or woman; consider the like between Youth and Age,
and the season of the year. Note, that each herb or plant mentioned in this
Treatise, is set down by way of Catalogue under the Planet which owneth the
Plant or Herb, it being done according unto their Elemental Qualities and
Virtues; Having given sufficient reasons thereof, I confess I much differ from
Authors, for what I have written in this book is no Translation, being merely
according unto my Practice and Experience for many years, by virtue of which
Herbs and plants (through Gods blessing) I have done many great and wonderful
cures, I dare say, greater has not been done since the Apostles times, for I
have caused the blind to see; the deaf to hear; both lame and bedrid people to
go; the dumb to speak, such who have been in extremity of pain, I have eased
them; likewise I have cured all kinds of Evils, and all kinds of Agues;
together with all sorts of Madness, having in this Book given sufficient
reasons for the same: I have likewise inserted in this Book, the Names, and
places of dwelling of sundry persons who have been by me cured of such
infirmities and griefs aforesaid, and how performed; that so others may be
informed how to do the like: I have also instructed the Learner, how by the
Moon in acute, or Sun in Chronick griefs, or infirmities to find the disease
with its cause, and termination. I have also showed the way how to Erect a
Figure, and thereby to give judgment, either upon the Decumbiture, sight of the
Urine or any strong fit of the Patient. And for the benefit of such who desire
farther inspection into this Art of Astrology, having by the Rules in this
Book, or by their own study attained unto the perfect way of Erecting a Figure:
I have showed the way how to give judgment upon any horary question, as Thefts,
Strayes, Fugitives, and Urins, etc. it being according unto my way of Practice
and Experience for many years. I have also showed the way and manner how I
have cast forth Devils, out of such who were possessed, that so others may be
informed to do the like.

Courteours Reader, what I have written in this Book, is not only for my own
vindication against all scandals and false aspertions which are usually cast
upon me, by such who are ignorant of my way of Practice, but chiefly to
instruct others, and to enable them to do the like Cures as I have done, that
so many hundreds may be kept from perishing. There are many who do admire at
the Cures by me done, but being unsatisfied of the Legallity of my way of Cure,
do thereupon refuse to come, or send to me for help, to cure their infirmities.

And as for the vindication of the Art of Astrology, I shall not at present
trouble my self or Reader therewith, but shall refer those who are unsatisfied,
unto those Epistles in my Almanacks, Dated Anno, 1658. and 1659. and unto many
other authentic Authors in Print.

Some Observations Concerning Sympathy of Cure.
Whereas in the Catalogue of Plants, the Planet Saturn has but very few Herbs
or Plants allotted unto him: yet notwithstanding in my Epistle before going, I
told you, that what griefs or infirmities soever any Planet caused, there are
herbs by Sympathy, as well as Antipathy to cure it; wherefore know that,
although an Herb or Plant may by Elemental qualities be under the Dominion of
Mars, as being hot and dry, and so gathered at his hour, yet in regard of his
virtues, and being approved good to cure such infirmities which are under the
Dominion of Saturn, it may justly and rationally be called a Sympathetical
Cure, by reason Mars is exalted in Capricorn the house of Saturn. Example,
Agues, especially Quartans, are usually caused by Saturn. Now Wormwood,
Carduus, and such like Plants being hot and dry, are properly attributed unto
Mars, both in point of gathering and numbers, yet in regard these Herbs and
Plants are of known virtues to cure Agues which Saturn causes; and Mars being
exalted in Capricorn which is the house of Saturn: therefore it may properly be
called a Sympathetical Cure: And so Herbs under the Dominion of Sol, cure
infirmities by Sympathy caused by Mars, because the Sun is exalted in Aries the
house of Mars: And so herbs under Venus cure by Sympathy infirmities under
Jupiter, by reason Venus is exalted in Pisces the house of Jupiter; and so
herbs of Jupiter cure by Sympathy such diseases which are under the dominion of
the Moon, by reason Jupiter is exalted in Cancer which is her house: The
benefit which we have from this observation is as follows; If Saturn, Mars or
any other Planet, be the afflicting Planet, and strong (which argues a
Compliance) then those herbs which are under the dominion of that Planet which
is exalted in his house, being good for to cure the infirmity may be used and
(for the reason aforesaid) it shall be called a Sympathetical Cure, for when
Planets are strong and afflicting we must comply with them, as I have elsewhere
expressed. Note, that in all Sympathetical cures whatsoever, there must be one
Elemental quality in the Planet of compliance, with the nature of the Planet
afflicting; as for Example, Herbs under Mars have the quality of drith with
Saturn; and Herbs under the Sun have the quality of heat with Mars; and Herbs
under Venus have the quality of moisture with Jupiter; And Herbs under Jupiter
have the quality of moisture with the Moon,

BLAGRAV's Astrological Practice of Physic.
A CATALOGUE Of the HERBS and PLANTS in this Treatise mentioned being rightly
appropriated unto their several Planets, according unto their elemental
qualities and virtues, and agreeing with the Author's experience and practice
for many years: There are many other herbs, which might have been incerted
herein, but these here mentioned are the most material and useful, being all
english Plants and well known, and without question, if rightly applied, may
well serve to cure any infirmities, whatsoever that are cureable, as I have
sufficiently proved. But those that please may insert-others, having knowledge
of their elemental qualities and virtues, according unto the Rules hereafter
expressed.
Saturn.
ALder-black ^irds-foot. Bull se. Clounds woundwor^, Cats-tail. Hauk weed.
Hemlock. Henbane. Mandrake. M^sse of Oak. Night shade Oak. Poppey black. Poly
podium of the oak, Tway blade, or two. Leaved-grass.
Jupiter.
Agrimony. Alexanders Aromatical-reed. Beans-blew Bittony of the wood. Bittony
of the water. Borrage. Cinkefoil. Cammels-hay. Columbi^es with blew flowers.
Cresses. Comfrey with bluish or purple flowers Bugloss. Bugloss wild. Dodder
of time, or of any other Jupiter plant. Dog stones. Elm-tree leaves and bark.
Fell-wort. Fetherfew. Flower-de-luce. Fooles-stones. Fox gloves, with purple
flowers. Fumitary. Goats-beard, or Joseph's flower Gromel, flowers and leaves.
Gander-gosse. Hearts tongue. Hyssop. Knot grass. Lark-spur with blew flowers.
Mallows. Orach with blew flowers. Poppy with blew flowers Perwinckle.
Purplewort. Parsnip. Parsnip wild. Spleenwort. Satirion. Saracens consound.
Scurvey-grass. Smallage. Time. Mother of Time. Wild flax.
Mars.
Agnus castus. Ale-hoofe, or ground ivy. Anemony. Anet. Archangel, with red
flowers Assarabacca. Arsmart. Asphodil. Beans red. Beets red. Bell flowers Bend
weed. Birthwort. Bishopsweed Bitter-sweet. Blites, with red flowers. Box tree.
Bramble. Brooklime. Broom. Butchers broom. Broom rape. Briony. Buckthorn.
Butter-bur. Butter wort. Carduus benedictus. Catmint. Coloquintida. Charlock.
Cotton-thistle. Cockle. Crowfoot. Crossewort. Danewort. Darnel: Dittander.
Dittany or paperwort Dock* Dogs tooth. Dragons. Doves foot. Dropwort. Dyers
weed. Elderbuds Fern. Filipendula Fleabane. Furzbush flowers. Gallanga.
Garlic. Germander. Gladdon stinking. Glassewort. Goutwort Ground pine. Heath.
Hellebore. Helmet flower. Horehound. Haw thorn. Hemp. Hops. Holly. Horse tail
Jack by the hedge. Ivy. Knapweed. Louse berries. Leeks. Monkshood. Mouse ear.
Mustard Mercury. ^edge-mustard. Nettles. Nep. Onyons. Osmond royal both flags
Osmond water both flags Park-leavs, or Tudson Poppey red flowers. Pilewort.
Pepperwort. Radish. Ragwort. Rocket. Rhubarb. Bostard-rhubard. Rupturewort.
Sawwort. Savin. Saxifrage. Sciatica cresses. Scabious. Scorpion-grass. Spurge.
Self heal. Seen. Shepherds needle. Sheapheards purse. Sneesewort. Sopewort.
Spearwort Solomo's seal. Swallowwort. Tamaris. Thistles. Tarragon. Toothwort,
or dentory. Our Ladies thistle. Wake Robin. Cuckoo pint. Wormwood. Wood waxon.
Woad. Wallwort. Wood sage.
Sun.
Ale cost or costmary. Angelica. Anise. Ash-tree. Almonds. Allgood. Atens.
Bazil-street. Birds eye. Burnet. Bugle. Calamint. Cammomil. Centory. Chervil,
or sweet Cicely. Celandine. Clary. Catmint. Cowslips. Comfrey with yellow
flowers. Crown imperial good for palsies. Daffydils, or Daffydowndilly. Dill.
Ditany. Eglantine. Elecampane. Eyebright. Fennel Figwort. Golden rod.
Gilly-flowers sweet. Herbs ears. Holly rose. Hig^aler flowers yellow with
woolley leaves. Saint Katherines flower Saint Johnswort. Saint Jameswort. Ladies
bed-straw: with yellow flowers Juriper. Lavender. Lavender cotton Ladies
man^le. Lovage. Lillies yellowish flowers. Mary golds. Marjerome sweet Maudlin
sweet. Masterwort. May weed. Melilo^ Mints garden. Misletoe. Mugwort.
Motherwort. Mallein. One blade, or herb true love. Oxlips. Parsley Saint Peter's
wort. Palma bristi. Penny royal. Pimpernel Piony. Roses red. Rosa solis.
Rosemary. Roses damask. Rue Saffron. Sanicle. Sage. Sampire. Saunders.
Scordium. Setwall. Savory, summer. Southern wood. Sun-flower. Sundew. Spignel.
Tansey Tree of life. Tormentil. Valerian. Vervain. Walnut leaves. Woodbine
flowers, or honey suckles. Wood-rose. Vipers bugloss.
Venus.
Adders tongue. Apples. Arrach stinking Archangel; white-flowers. Arrow head.
Artechokes. Alkanet. Barley. Beans-white. Bears-breach. Beech-leavs.
Blites-flowers white. Beets white. Bucks horn plantane. Cleavers, or
Goose-grass. Colis foot. Columbines with white flowers. Crab tree, Cherry-tree
and fruit Cranes-bil. Cud-weed. Comphrey roots. Daisies. Dandeli^n. Ducks meat.
E^de^ flowers. Flea-wor^. ^elli-^ry^ Flixweed. Groundsel. Gourds. Harts-ease or
herb of the Trinity. Herb True love. Herb two pence, or money wort. Hounds
tongue. Larks spur, with white flowers. Lillies with white-flowers. Maiden
hair. Moss on Apple Trees or crab-trees. Mulberries leaves Navel wort. Orrach
flowers white Peach flowers. Pellitory of the wall. Plantane. Perwinckle, wild.
Pond weed. Poppy flowers white. Paul's bettony. Primrose. Ribwort. Roses white.
Rushes. Saunders flow. white Snakeweed. Sorrelwood Sowthistle. Stich-wort.
Spinach. Staw berries. Sycomore tree. Thro^^-wort, or bell flower. Three leaved
grass. Turnip root. Vine leaves. Violets, leaves and roots Water cresses.
Mercury.
Alkanet, All good. Barberries. Blood wort. Bell flower. Blew bottle. Dog
grass. ^ndive. Fluellin. Liver-wort. Loose-strife. Loose-wort. Lung-wort
Mede-sweet. Medlar tree. Maddir. Millet. Privet. Quinces. Succory. Rampion.
Sorrel-garden. Star-wort. Wh^r^e-berries. Willow-tree. Wood bine-leavs. Wild
Tansey. Yarrow.
Moon.
Cabbage. Chick-weed. Coleworts. Cucumber. Housleek or sengreen. Lettuce.
Mellions. Orpine. Pompions. Pompions. Purslane. Moon wort.

General Rules to know under what Planet every Herb or Plant is governed by the
only use of an Herbal, with the true reason thereof, according unto the
Author's experience and practice for many years; as follows.
THe first thing considerable, is to take n^ (...) of the Elemental Qualities
of each Planet; viz. whether hot and dry, hot and moist, cold and dry, or cold
and moist* and of what decrees; as first, second, third or fourth. Secondly, we
must by an Herbal find the nature or Elemental quality of the plants; if you
find that both the Planet and plant do accord in Elemental qualities then we
may conclude, that such an herb or plant is under such a Planet: for any
reasonable Philosopher well knows, that every Element does naturally
sympathize with its own like, even as the actions of men does naturally
sympathize with their complexion and condition of that Planet which has
predominancy over them, as I have elsewhere expressed

Example
Saturn is a Planet cold and dry in the third and fourth degree: Now by the
Herbal I find, that hemlock, henbane, nightshade, and such like, are cold and
dry in the third and fourth degree; and therefore may justly be attributed unto
the Planet Saturn.


Jupiter is by nature hot and moist: Now by the Herbal I find, that burrage,
mallows, and the herb or plant called dogstones, are by nature hot and moist;
and therefore may justly be attributed unto Jupiter.


Mars is by nature hot and dry in the third and fourth degree: Now by the
Herbal I find, that carduus, wormwood, tobacco, rhubarb, hellebore, box, and
such like, are all under the dominion of Mars, as being hot and dry in the
third and fourth degree.


The Sun is by nature hot and dry in the first and second degree, and near unto
the third: Now by the Herbal I find, that angelica, baum, marigolds, rue* sweet
marjoram, and such like, are all hot and dry in the first and second degree,
perhaps rear unto the third; and therefore are all attributed unto the Sun.


Venus is by nature cold and moist in the first and second degree: Now by the
Herbal I find, that violets, spinach, white beets, white beans, and such like,
are all under the dominion of Venus, as being cold and moist in the first and
second degree accordingly.


Mercury is by nature cold and dry in the first and second degree: Now by the
Herbal I find, that endive, succory, woodbine, lung-wort, liver-wort, and such
like, are all cold and dry in the first and second degree, and are therefore
under the dominion of Mercury.


The Moon is by nature cold and moist in the third and fourth degree; and by
the Herbal I find, that cabbage, seagreen, chickweed, orpine, purslain, and
such like, are all cold and moist in the third and fourth degree; and therefore
are under the dominion of the Moon.

Another way whereby to attribute each herb or plant aright unto the Planet,
that so hey may agree both in elemental qualities and virtues, more especially
of the first part in the degrees of heat or cold, it being the way of my
practice, and that with good success.
FIrst, having by an Herbal found the virtue of the plant which is approved for
the curing of such infirmities or diseases which are under the dominion of such
a planet, as causes them, although the herb or plant agree but in the first
elemental quality of heat or cold, yet the herb or plant may justly and
rationally be attributed unto the Planet which owns the grief, and so thereby
make a sympathetick cure: As instance, Jupiter who is by nature hot and moist,
and has predominancy over the liver, lungs, blood, veins, plurisies, and the
like: Now by the Herbal we find, that lung-wort, wood-bittany, agremony,
scurvigrass, and such like, are all good to cure such infirmities,
notwithstanding they are all hot and dry in the first and second degree, yet
having the first elemental quality of heat, together with virtue to cure such
defects which Jupiter causes, they may justly be attributed unto Jupiter; and
so plantane, white beets, and dandelion, accounted by Authors cold and dry, may
justly be attributed unto Venus, as having the first elemental quality of being
cold ^n the first or second degree, and has virtue to cure by sympathy such
defects which Venus causes, or otherwise by antipathy unto Mars, as does
plantane, which cures cuts and wounds which Mars causes: Now white beets and
dandelion cures by sympathy; the first brings down women's courses, the other
helps to cleanse the passages of urin, always provided in these particular
applications, that the first elemental quality of heat or cold does agree, as
aforesaid, without which there can be no true gathering or attributing the
plant aright unto the Planet, as I have showed more at large elsewhere. And
farther, should we not sometimes use this particular way herein expressed, both
Jupiter and Venus, who are great friends unto Nature, would have very few herbs
or plants allotted unto them, especially Jupiter who is the greater fortune;
for by the Herbal you shall find very few herbs or plants which does accord in
elemental qualities of heat and moisture with Jupiter; and the truth is, I find
that Authors do most of them agree in the first elemental quality, or part of
heat or cold, but in the latter part of drith or moisture somewhat differing;
and without question they do but guess thereat, or otherwise by tradition
follow each other; neither do they give true knowledge therein (especially in
many herbs and plants) as instance dandelion, which has a known virtue to open
and cleanse the passages of urin: Now if this plant were cold and dry, which
most Authors hold, how could it have this virtue to open and cleanse? for of
necessity moisture must do it, for all plants which are drying, are usually
stopping and binding; and so Saturn, a Planet cold and dry, when afflicting the
in earthy signs, always produces bindings in the body: Also the blossoms of
plants are somewhat to be regarded, more especially when they agree in the
first elemental quality of heat or cold; as instance, wood-bittany, hyssop,
bugloss, burrage, and such like, whose blossoms are blew, a color which
owneth: And notwithstanding they are all hot and dry (except burrage) yet they
are rightly appropriated unto Jupiter, by reason of their virtues, as curing
such defects which causes. But should we grant that herbs and plants, which
are by Nature cold and dry, to be under Jupiter (as many learned Authors do
hold as I could name) as instance endive, succory, and such like, there can be
no reason given for it, by reason they are so much differing in elemental
qualities, for the plants are cold and dry, and the Planet Jupiter hot and
moist, clean opposite unto each other; wherefore it stands by reason, and is
rational to be under Mercury, whose nature does sympathize, as being cold and
dry, and so to cure by antipathy unto Jupiter, the herbs being of known virtue
to cure such distempers, which Jupiter causes; likewise I find that many
Authors do attribute, clary, mints, penny royal, and many Others, unto Venus a
planet cold and moist, whereas the herbs are all hot and dry, of a clean
contrary nature. Now these plants do properly belong to the Sun; and the
rather in regard of their virtues, as being comfortable unto the heart and
vital spirits, and being of sweet smell and pleasant taste: I could instance
many more, which Authors do wrongfully apply, as instance they attribute
angelica, sage, box, and such like to be under the planet Saturn whereas the
herbs are all hot and dry especially box who is hot and dry in the fourth
degree, both the first plants are without question under the dominion of the
Sun, as being of a good smell* and taste, and are of known virtues to comfort
the heart, arteries, and vital spirits and to resist poison. The other being
very hot, and of bitter taste rightly belongs unto the planet Mars as
agreeing in elemental qualities, I confess, I have read many Authors, and I
find many of them accord, but clean out of the way of truth: The reason is, as
I conceive, because their works are many, or most of them but translated, and
so following by tradition each other, not well weighing the reasons have
likewise erred, but as to the virtues of herbs and plants they do for the most
part accord, giving reasons for the same. What I have written in this Book i^
not by imitation of others; but from my own daily practice and experience. And
should I set down the many, difficult cures, which I have done by virtue of
herbs I should hardly be believed, except by such who are well versed in the
secrets of Astrology and Philosophy: for many country people think, they make
a bold adventure, when they come unto me for cure, presuming that what I do is
more than natural. They not considering, or at least being ignorant of the
extraordinary virtue of herbs and plants more especially being gathered at the
right planetary hours together with the right numbers of herbs and plants
belonging unto each planet being collected and being truly in due times
administered; for time, virtue and number, together with the right understanding
of the way of cure by sympathy and antipathy are the five principal pillars of
our work in the Astrological or chemical way of physic, as I have already
declared in my before Epistle to the Reader.

Here follows some necessary Rules to be observed concerning the gathering of
each herb or Plant aright according unto the true planetary hours, without
which no great cures can be done or wonders wrought in the Astrological and
Chemical way of Physic. I have also set down the way how to reconcile any
difference, which may sometimes arise by way of application of the plant unto
the planet: For I must confess by reason of the difference amongst Herbalists
concerning the qualities and virtues of some particular plants there may
happily be some rational contest therein.

The Way to gather such Herbs and Plants which are of known Elemental qualities
and virtues out of contest is as follows.
BEfore we proceed herein it will be necessary for the Reader to understand the
planetary hours, which are inserted at the beginning of the second Book
together with the Almanac perpetual adjoining for both the planet, which is
Lord of the hour and the plant which is to be gathered must both agree in
elemental qualities especially of the first part of heat or cold. Example, If I
were minded to gather baum, rosemary, marygolds angelica, and such like plants
or herbs, which are under the dominion of the Sun; upon Sunday the fourteenth
of March 1699. Now from the Suns rising until he is an hour in highth which is
until seven a clock, is the hour of the Sun, likewise the Sun reigns again
the eighth hour, which is between one and two a clock after upon At which times
you may gather any herbs or plants under the dominion of the Sun. Now if any
one were minded to gather any herbs of the Sun upon Tuesday the sixteenth day
then between seven and eight a clock in the morning is the hour of the Sun. And
likewise between two and three a clock afternoon, as appears in the Almanac
answerable unto the day of the Month, also by the same Rules you may gather any
other Herbs or Plants at the right planetary hours accordingly, which are out
of controversy.

Rules whereby to gather such Herbs and plants, which are in Controversy, that
so you may have the true planetary influence notwithstanding as follows.
When you are minded to gather any herb or Plant in controversy, as instance
dandelion before mentioned, this Plant being by my rules under Venus, but by
some Autho^s appropriated unto Jupiter by reason it has a virtue to open the
obstructions of the Liver (being under Jupiter) But it has also a virtue to
open and cleanse the passages of urine, as I have already declared (which is
under Venus) but chiefly it has the first elemental quality of being cold,
agreeing with Venus, whereas Jupiter is hot. Now to reconcile this or any other
difference of the like nature, do as follows; Let both Planets in question at
the time of gathering be in Conjunction, Sextile or T^ine, aspect unto each
other. Or otherwise let the Moon be seperating and applying by any of those
aspects from the one planet to the other, by this rule you may have the true
planetary influence of both planets in question: Always provided that the Lord
of the Hour does accord with the first elemental quality of the planet be it
hot or cold, wherefore in this condition Venus must be Lord of the Hour at the
time of gathering the herb or plant accordingly. I shall instance one herb
more; Suppose, I was minded to gather Sweet-marjerome, which plant is by many
Authors appropriated unto the planet Mercury, the reason they give is because
Mercury is conjoined in some particular operations of the brain, and this plant
is of known virtue to comfort the brain. But by my rules and daily experience,
I find it to be under the dominion of the sun; First by reason of its elemental
qualities as agreeing with heat and drith: Secondly in regard of its virtues,
for all herbs and plants, which are of sweet smell, and are of approved virtues
to comfort the heart, brain, nerves and arteries, and vital spirits, as this
plant is are justly and rationally accounted to be under the dominion of the
Sun who is the fountain of life, Lord of Leo and exalted in Aries, whereas
Mercury has only predominancy over some particular operations of the brain, as
he has in all the five senses. Its Generally approved of all Authors that the
bulk of the brain in all creatures, is under the dominion of the Moon. The
vital and quickening part under the Sun, the operation of Mercury as aforesaid.
Now to gather this plant at the right planetary hour, that so you may have the
influence of both planets in question, you must do as before expressed, let
those planets concerned be in either Conjunction, Trine, or Sextile, aspect
unto each other, at the time of gathering, or otherwise let the Moon be
separating and applying from the one planet to the other at the time of
gathering by any of the before going aspects: Example, If I were minded to
gather the said sweet marjerome in September, 1669. about which time such like
plants are in their prime to gather. In which month upon the fourteenth day
the Sun and Mercury are in partil Conjunction, but their influence holds above
a week before and after, for until they are separated ten degrees from each
other their Orbs, Rays, or Influence holds strong unto perfection, wherefore
you may gather this plant aright upon Sunday the fifth day, or upon Sunday the
tenth day or upon Sunday the fifteenth day from the Suns rising until the Sun
is about an hour in hight; and likewise in the afternoon between one and two of
the clock as appears in the perpetual Almanac for the day appointed. Also
you may gather any days of those weeks, when the Sun is Lord of the hour, and
if the Moon be in friendly aspect its the better how to find the Lord of the
hour, I have showed elsewhere at the beginning of the second book-

NOTE, That in gathering all kinds of herbs and plants whatsoever, more
especially, when you intend to do any great cure, you must get the influential
virtue of one of the fortunes, viz. the Sun, Jupiter, or Venus to be joined or
be in some friendly aspect with that planet, which owns the plant having regard
unto the infirmity or grief which either by simpathy or antipathy has any
relation to the fortune, as instance endive, which is cold and dry under
Mercury yet in regard its approved good to cool the heat of the liver, which is
under Jupiter, therefore let Jupiter be in Conjunction, Trine, or Sextile
aspect unto Mercury or the Moon separating and applying by any of those aspects
from the one planet to the other, when you gather the plant, this is to be
done, when an infortune owns the plant or herb you are minded to gather.

A Plain and Easy may how to gather herbs or plants aright that so you may
have the benefit both of the day and hour, when each planet reigns, which
owneth the plant throughout the year: And will generally serve to gather any
Herbs or plants aright for the use of physic, Being fitted for every ten days
of the Month throughout the year and so for ever.
NOTE,
All Herbs and Plants, which are under the dominion of the Sun are gathered on
Sundays: and all those herbs and plants which are under the dominion of the
Moon are gathered on Mondayes: and all those under Mars on Tuesdayes: and all
those under Mercury on wednesdayes: and all those under Jupiter on Thursdayes:
and all those under Venus on Fridayes: and all those under Saturn on
Saturdayes* Now every planet which is Lord of the day, ^uleth the first and the
eighth hour of the day, each day being divided into twelve equal parts, which
we call the planetary hours (and so the planetary hours are near twice so long
in the highest of Summer, as they are in the midst of winter) Example, Suppose
I were minded to gather herbs or plants under the dominion of Sol upon one of
the first ten days of January: Then upon Sunday from the Suns rising, which is
six minutes after eight a clock until 46 min. past eight in the morning, and
likewise from 40 minutes past noon until 20 minutes past one, you may gather
any herb or plant under the dominion of the Sun by which account you have the
benefit both of the day and hour as aforesaid as appears in the Table
following, you may do the like for any other plant or herb whatsoever, always
remembering that the planet which is Lord of the day ever rules the first and
the eighth hour, divided as aforesaid into twelve equal parts.

January the first 10 days. Length of the planetary hours Bef. noon From the
Suns rising which is 6 min. after 8 until 46 min. past 8. h. m. Aft. noon From
40 min. past noon, until 20 min. past 1. 0 40 January from the 10 day to the 2^
day. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 47 min. after 7 until 30 min. past 8.
h. m. Aft. noon From 43 min. past noon until 20 min. past 1 0 43 January from
the 20 unto the end. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 26 min. past 7 until
30 min after 8. h. m. Aft. noon From 43 min. past noon until 26 min. past 1. 0
46 February the first 10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 12 min.
after 7 until 8 a clock. h. m. Aft. noon From 48 min. past noon until 36 min.
past 1. 0 48 February from the 10 day to the 20 day. Bef. noon From the Suns
rising being 57 mi. past 6 until 40 min. past 7. h. m. Aft. noon From 51 min.
past noon until 14 min. past 1. 0 51 February from the 20 day unto the end.
Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 36 min. past 6 until ^8 in min. past 7. h.
m. Aft. noon From 54 min. past noon until 48 min. past 1. 0 54 March the first
10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 7 min. past 6 until 5 min. past
7. h. Aft. noon From 58 min. past noon until 58 min. past 1. 0 58 March from
the 10 day to the 20 day. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 6 a clock until
7 a clock. h. m. Aft. noon From one a clock until 2 a clock. 1 0 March from the
20 day to the mon. end. Bef noon From the Suns rising being 28 min. after 5
until 33 min. past 6. h. m. Aft. noon From 5 min. past 1 until 11 min. past
two. 1 5 April the first 10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 3 min.
after 5 until 13 min. past 6. h. m. Aft. noon From 10 min. after 1 until 19
min. past 2. 1 13 April from the 10 day to the 20 day. Bef. noon From the Suns
rising being 45 min. past 4 until 58 min. past 5. h. m. Aft. noon From 13 min.
past 1 until 25 min. past 2. 1 13 April from the 10 day to the end. Bef. noon
From the Suns rising being 8 min after 4 until 48 min. past 5: h. m. Aft. noon
From 14 min. past 1 until 29 min. past 2 1 14 May the first 10 days. Bef. noon
From the Suns rising being 8 min. after 4 until 37 min. past 5. h. m. Aft noon
From 19 min. past 1 until 37 m. past 2. 1 19 May from the 10 day to the 20 day.
Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 56 min. after 3 until 17 min. past 5. h.
m. Aft. noon From 22 min. after 1 until 42 min. past 2. 1 22 May from the 20
day unto the end. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 45 min. after 3 until 8
min past 5. h. m. Aft. noon From 23 min past 1 until 45 m. past 2. 1 23 June
the first 10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 39 min. after 3. until
3 min. past 5. h. m. Aft. noon From 24 min. past 1 until 47 min. past 2. 1 24
June from the 10 to the 2 day. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 39 min.
after 3 until 3 min. past 5. h. m. Aft. noon From 24 min. past 1 until 47 min.
past 2 1 24 June from the 20 unto the end. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being
44 min. past 3 until 7 min. past 5. h. m. Aft. noon From 23 min. past 1 until
46 min. past 2. 1 23 July the first 10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising
being 35 min. after 3 until 16 min. after 5. h. m. Aft. noon From 21 min. past
1 until 42 min. past 2. 1 22 July from the 10 day to the 20 day. Bef. noon From
the Suns rising being 8 min. past 4 until 27 min. past 5. h. m. Aft. noon From
19 min. past 1 until 37 min. past 2 1 19 July from the 20 day unto the end.
Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 26 min. past 4 until 49 min. past 5. h. m.
Aft. noon From 16 min. past 1 until 22 min. past 2. 1 16 August the first 10
days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 45 min. past 4 until 58 min. past 5.
h. m. Aft. noon From 13 min. past 1 until 25 min. past 2. 1 13 August from the
10 day to the 20 day. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 3 min. after 5 until
13 min past 6. h. m. Aft. noon From 6 min. past 1 until 13 min. past 2. 1 10
August from the 20 day to the end. Bef noon From the Suns rising being 23 min.
after 5 until 47 min. past 6. h. m. Aft. noon From 6 min. past 1 until 13 min.
past two. 1 6 September the first 10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being
47 min. after 5 until 47 ^in. past 6. h. m. Aft. noon From 2 min. after 1 until
4 min. past 2 1 2 Septem. from the 10 day to the 20 day. Bef. noon From the
Suns rising being 6 min. past 6 until 5 min. past 7. h. m. Aft. noon From 59
min. after noon until 58 min. past 1. 1 59 Septem from the 10 day to the end.
Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 26 m. after 6 until 22 min. past 7: h. m.
Aft. noon From 56 min. after noon until 50 min. past 1. 1 56 October the first
10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 50 min. after 6 until 42 min.
past 7. h. m. Aft noon From 52 min. after noon until 43 min. past 1. 1 52
October from the 10 day to the 20 day. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 11
min. after 7 until 8 a clock. h. m Aft. noon From 19 min. past noon until 37
min. past 1. 1 49 October. from the 20 day unto the end Bef. noon From the Suns
rising being 27 min. past 7 until 14 min. past 8. h. m. Aft. noon From 46 min.
past noon until 31 min. past 1. 0 46 November the first 10 days. Bef. noon From
the Suns rising being 48 min. after 7 until 30 min. past 8. h. m. Aft. noon
From 43 min. past noon, until 24 min. past 1. 0 43 Novem. from the 10 day to
the 20 day. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 3 min. after 8 until 43 min.
past 8. h. m. Aft. noon From 40 min. past noon until 19 min. past 1 0 40
November. from the 20 day unto the end. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 45
min. past 8 until 53 min after 8. h. m. Aft. noon From 38 min. past noon until
15 min. past 1. 0 38 December. the first 10 days. Bef. noon From the Suns rising
being 20 min. after 8 until 57 min. past 8. h. m. Aft. noon From 37 min. past
noon until 14 min. past 1. 0 37 December. from the 10 day to the 20 day. Bef.
noon From the Suns rising being 20 mi. past 8 until 57 min. past 8. h. m. Aft.
noon From 37 min. past noon until 14 min. past 1 0 37 December. from the 20 day
unto the end. Bef. noon From the Suns rising being 15 min. past 8 until 53 min.
past 8. h. m. Aft. noon From 38 min. past noon until 15 min. past 1. 0 38

Concerning Numbers attributed unto the seven Planets with the Reasons thereof,
agreeing with Cornelius Agrippa an excellent Philosopher, besides my own daily
practice and experience.
Saturn. Numbers attributed to the plan. TO this Planet belongs three
numbers, viz. two, seven, nine; The number two as being next beneath the starry
firmament, and also as being one of the two infortunes, the number seven, as
being the seventh in order, and highest from the earth. Its also a number fatal
and climacterical* as joined with the number nine. Also the number nine is a
number fatal and climacterical, as joined with the number seven: For nine times
7 makes 63, which number all philosophers do hold to be fatal and climacterical
by reason the nines and the sevens do meet. 2 7 9 Jupiter Jupiter has three
numbers, allotted unto him, viz. one, three eight; The number one, as being the
head and chief fortune; the number three, as being the the third star or planet
in order from the starry firmament beneath Saturn also, as being one of the
three fortunes. The number eight as containing the mystery of Justice and
Religion: for Jupiter in astrology does always represent the sober Priest or
Minister, according unto which number Christ was circumcised: also we read of
eight degrees of blessedness, etc. 1 3 8 Mars. Mars has four numbers alloted
unto him, viz. two, four seven, nine: The number two, as being one of the two
infortunes: The number four, as being the fourth in number from the starry
firmament next unto Jupiter: The number seven as being a number fatal and
climacterical as joined with nine: Also he has the number nine as being a
number fatal and climacterical, as joined with seven. This planet as likewise
Saturn are both enemies unto Nature. 2 4 7 8 Sol. The Sun has five several
numbers alloted unto him, viz. one, three, four, seven, ten, twelve. The number
one as being sole Monarch of the Heavens: The number three, as being one of the
three fortunes: The number four, from the four quarters of the year: The number
ten* as being the number of the end of life, as multiplied by seven: The number
twelve as passing through the twelve signs of the Zodiac. 1 3 4 10 12 Venus.
Venus has three numbers alloted unto her, viz. two, three, nine: The number
two as being female. The number three as being one of the three fortunes: The
number six as being the number of generation consisting of two threes. 2 3 6
Mercury. This Planet Mercury has two numbers alloted unto him, viz. two five:
The number two, as being part male and part female. And therefore called the
hermaphrodite. The number five as having predominancy over the operation of the
five senses. 2 5 Moon. The Moon has three numbers alloted unto her, viz. two,
six, nine: The number two as being female: The number six as being the number
of generation: The number nine, as being the utmost receptacle of all
celestial influences. 2 6 9

The Astrological way, whereby to discover all kinds of Diseases, or
Infirmities incident unto the body of Man: And likewise how to know whether the
Sick shall live or die: also the time, when either Recovery or Death may be
expected; with the true Astrological way of curing each Disease which is
cureable, as follows.
IN the first place, before we come to set forth the Method of cure, it will be
necessary to find what the grief is, and from what cause; without which its
impossible to do any great cures. There are two ways by which Judgment may be
given herein: The one Astrologically by a Figure of twelve Houses, which is
accounted to be the most assured and exactest way: the other is by the Moon
according as she is afflicted by the malevolent Planets, having regard to the
signs or constellations, wherein she was afflicted, at the time of decumbiture:
This way may serve generally in acute diseases, and I do find by my daily
practice, that one shall seldom err herein, but in case of such Diseases, which
are natural from the birth, or have been of very long standing, or more
especicially, if there be any suspicion of Witchcraft, a Figure of twelve
houses is most rational I shall briefly show the way of both: But in regard a
Figure of twelve Houses and the astrological way in giving judgment thereupon
may seem difficult at the first, especially unto those, who have never formerly
read or studied any whit in this Science: And farther considering that many,
who are well willers hereunto either may want time, or be unwilling to take the
pains herein, may neglect the study hereof, and so this my writing may prove
useless unto them, I have for the satisfaction and encouragement of all well
willers unto this study and practice of Physic, set forth one general way in
giving judgment, either by the Moon afflicted in acute diseases, which
terminate in a month, or by the Sun in Chronick diseases, which are of above a
months standing: This being the very way of my own daily practice and
experience for many years, wherein you shall seldom or never fail, especially
in acute diseases, as for other Chronick and long lasting griefs there will be
more time allotted to consider of them: The truth is long continued infirmities
(and some others) does require more inspection than that only of the Sun and
Moon afflicted and therefore a figure of twelve houses will be proper to give
judgment therein for many times the ascendant, sixth and twelfth houses with
their Lords will be concerned therein, as shall be showed in order. Also it
will be necessary after the grief is known, to know the critical,
intercidental, and judicial days and times; being the times for change either
of life or death* which is done by a critical figure divided into 16 equal
parts, as shall be showed in the next paper.

The way to find the disease by the Sun and Moon afflicted.
In the first place by an Almanac take notice, what sign the Moon is in, when
the Sick first takes their bed, and by what planet or planets she is afflicted,
whether of Saturn or Mars (or Mercury, which is much of the nature of Saturn)
Then having recourse unto the rules elsewhere in this Book under the titles of
the Moon by Saturn or Mars afflicted; there you shall find the disease and the
cause thereof. The Almanac, which you use herein must be such a one which
sets forth the daily motions of the planets: I shall give one or two
examples hereof, as follows, A Friend of mine took his bed the 10th day of
October 1667 at a quarter past one a clock after noon, the Moon being of nine
degrees in Sagitary and Mars in eight degrees thirty five minutes in Virgo,
which argues that Mars is in platick square to the Moon, we call that a
platick aspect, which does not perfectly accord in degrees and minutes, and if
Mars had been but one degree in Virgo, yet we should account it a platick
Square, by reason that the Orbs, Rays, or Influence of the Moon unto any
planet does begin to opperate, when she is within ten degrees aspecting any
planet (as is showed at large elsewhere) Now to find the Grief with its cause,
you must repair unto the place in this book entitled, The Moon in Sagitary of
Mars oppressed, as in page 57 which shows that the Sick is tormented with a
strong fever and choleric passions, etc. occasioned by surfeiting or too much
repletion as there more at large appears: the next thing considerable is to
know whether the Sick shall live or die, and the time when either death or
recovery may be expected: Now in regard that the Moon is applying by a friendly
Sex to aspect unto Venus a fortune, and free from combustion and not in that
part of the Zodiac called via combusta (as shall be showed more at large
elsewhere) I did conclude that the sick would recover (and so he did) had the
Moon applied unto the infortu^s or ^ and no fortune interposed his friendly
Rays, then I should have concluded that the sick would have died of this
sickness, to know when the time of recovery will be is found by a critical
figure or circle divided into 16 equal parts, I shall not stand or spend time
to give you the definition of each term of art; Only thus much I say, the
intercidental time, or divident part of the circle is not so dangerous, as the
judicial time or part, nor yet the judicial time so dangerous as the critical
time.

The: Cui Steali. Cirkle of 1C equal pts Beginning whear The moon WAS at The
^lecum Litus Doict 4/9


Note, That in this critical figure each part contains 22 degrees. 30 min. you
must begin where the Moon was at the decumbiture, viz. in 9 degrees. unto which you
must add 22. degrees. 30 min. Now in regard there is 30 degrees. in every sign you most
set down 1 degrees. 30 min. Capricorn for the first intercidental time into which 1
degrees. 30 min. you must add 22 degrees. 30 min. which makes 24 Capricorn, for the
first judicial time: Now if you add 22 degrees. 30 min. unto the last number it
makes 6 degrees. 30 min. Aquarius, which is the second intercidental time and if
you add 22 degrees. 30 min. unto the last number, it makes 9 degrees. Pisces, which is
the first crisis or mortal time, according unto which account you must go round
the circle, as appears by the figure, now to know when the time of recovery
will be you must observe by a critical figure, when the Moon upon a critical
day does meet with any friendly aspect of either of the fortunes, viz. Jupiter
or Venus or Sol or Leo, for then the time of recovery may be expected. This
critical figure being set for a friend of mine at the time aforesaid. I did
observe each change, and alteration of his distemper; and I always found that
upon the critical and judicial days and times, he was ever most afflicted. The
reason is because the Quartiles, Oppositions, and Semi-quartile aspects are
more pernicious and hateful aspects, then any other, as the intercidental
times, which happen between the critical and judicial times consisting only of
22 degrees. and a half, which we call a Semi Semi Quartile aspect, they seldom
prove mortal, by reason the aspect is not so bad and forceable as the other, it
being but half the half quartile aspect, yet notwithstanding sometimes in
perperacute mortal sicknesses, I have known the Sick depart, when the Moon came
unto a partile evil aspect of the infortunes, no fortune interposing their
friendly rays upon an intercedental time, but this is not usual; but as
concerning the time of recovery of my Friend before mentioned it was upon the
fourth and last critical day, the Moon being returned unto the place she was in
at the decumbiture: at which time she applied to the Sextile of Venus and Trine
of Jupiter, which happened upon the sixth day of November after midnight, would
my friend have been let blood, he might questionless have recovered upon the
second crisis, at what time the moon applied to the Trine of Venus, now had
this Sickness continued longer, than we account the grief Chronick, and then we
give judgment by the Sun afflicted, as before we did by the Moon But all acute
griefs do end usually before the moon goes round the Zodiac; some griefs are
peracute and those end sooner, others are perperacute, and those commonly make
a quick dispatch one way or other. But of this I have treated more at large
elsewhere.

Judgment upon an Imaginary decumbiture,
For the better explanation hereof I shall instance two or three Imaginary
Decumbitures as follows. Suppose one should take his Bed April the 10th 1668.
at Noon, the Moon being then in 12. degrees. 50 min. in the Sign Leo and Saturn,
in 12 degrees. 50 min. in the Sign Aquary now this is called a partile opposition
aspect, by reason the Moon and Saturn are just in the same degrees. and min.
opposite unto each other: had the sick took his bed 16 hours sooner, or later,
then it would have been called a Platick opposition, for as I have said
elsewhere, the influence of the Moon and Planets does begin to appear when she
is 10 degrees. distant from any aspect which will take up near 20 hours motion
before and after separation; Now to know what the Grief is, you must seek out
the place in this Book entitled the Moon in Leo of Saturn oppressed, which
argues the Sick shall be troubled with unkindly heat in the Breast, and a
violent Feavour, with faintness at the heart, or swounding fits, and inclining
to the Black jaundies occasioned from ill Melancholy blood, etc. Now to know
whether the sick shall live or dye, and the time when either recoverie, or
Death may be expected, is as follows.

First the Moon is increasing in light. Secondly she is not in that place in
the Zodiac called via combusta, which is from the midst of the Sign Libra
unto the midst of Scorpio Thirdly the Moon seperateth from Jupiter a fortune,
and applies unto a friendly Trine aspect of the Sun fountain of life.
Fourthly, the Moon is free from combustion of the Sun. A Planet is under
combustion when he is not fully elongated 7 degrees. 30 min. from him. We have only
two Testimonies of Death, which is first, Saturns being in opposition of the
Moon at the time of decumbiture. Secondly his being more strong then the Moon,
yet commonly a Planet strong is not so malicious as those which are weak and
peregrine; however it appears that there is four testimonies of Life and but
two (...) Death, wherefore we may conclude according to the Rules of Art that
the Sick shall recover: Now to know the (...) when* you must by a Critical
figure of 16 equal parts, (...) when the Moon upon any Intercidental, Judicial
(...) day does meet with any benevolent aspect of the (...), be it Sun,
^upiter, Venus or Dragons head, no evil (...) interposing their bad Influence
for then the Sick shall (...), which according unto the Critical figure will be
upon the 12th. day of April about one a Clock at night, at which time the Moon
will be in 14 degrees. of the Sign Virgo and Jupiter in 14 degrees. of Taurus making a
partile Trine to each other, but the sick shall begin to recover sooner at the
first intercidental time, which is about six a clock in the morning (at which
time the Moon will be 5 degrees. 20 min. in Virgo, which is 22 degrees. 30 min.
distance from the place she was in at the decumbiture) for as I have already
declared the influence of the Moon does begin to opperate, when she is ten
degrees distant from any aspect of the planets.

Concerning Acute Griefs.
Note, That at the time of decumbiture of any sick person, if the Moon be free
from the bad aspects of the infortunes, which is Saturn, Mars, Mercury, or
Dragons tail that then (more especially) if the infortunes Jupiter or Venus
attend upon the next judicial or critical day or time that the Moon meets
with any friendly aspect of the fortunes, no ill planet opposing the Sick shall
recover: but commonly acute griefs are seldom ended before the first critical
time, at which time the Moon makes a Quartile aspect unto the place she was in
at the decumbiture, consisting of 90 degrees. The Moon always goes this 90 degrees or
fourth part of the Zodiac in less than eight days; sometimes acute griefs
last until the Moon has passed over three critical days or times, Viz. until
she returns unto the place she was in at the decumbiture making the fourth
crisis; An Example hereof is of my friend before mentioned: and if by the Rules
aforesaid you find that the grief is mortal, then you must proceed forward
round the critical figure, until you find the mortal time, according unto the
rules before mentioned, and you must do the like upon the rules for the time of
recovery.

Concerning Peracute griefs.
There are are also some Infirmities and Sicknesses which end* usually before
the first judicial time is over (called peracute griefs) at which time the Moon
makes a Semiquartile aspect to the place she was in at the decumbiture,
consisting of 45 degrees. now this aspect is not so pernicious as the Quartile, yet
oft-times the Sick dies before this aspect is over; more especially when the
Moon at that time meets with the infortunes, and no fortune interposing their
friendly rays. This Semi Quartile aspect or judicial time, the Moon finisheth
in less than four days likewise on the contrary by the rules aforesaid the Sick
may recover at the said judicial time.

Concerning Perperacute Sicknesses.
There are also some Sicknesses perperacute, and such griefs commonly terminate
before the first intercedental time is over at which time the Moon makes a
Semi Semi Quartile aspect to the place she was in at the decumbiture, which
consists of 22 degrees. 30 min. containing the 16th. part of the critical figure,
more especially when the infortunes does afflict the Moon, at that time no
fortune attending: It was observable, that in the time of the plague, that many
thousands died before the first intercidental time was over, which number or
time the Moon finisheth in less than two days. And many lived not one day,
dying immediately so soon as they were struck, which we call the time of
decumbiture or first mortal time. I have known the like both in Appoplexies and
Convulsions, mother fits, and risings in the throat, and such like griefs.

Another Judgment given upon a decumbiture Figure.
I shall take an imaginary time, and so give judgment thereupon for the better
informing of young Students herein I could have inserted many exemplary figures
of my own, but considering that new Almanacks may be had when happily old ones
may be lost I therefore thought this way most profitable to instruct the
learner. I shall instance the 22 day of April 1668 about nine a clock at night,
at which time I will suppose one took his bed: Now the question is what the
grief is, and whether the Sick will live or die: And when either death or
recovery may be expected, you must in the first place by an Almanac find in
what sign the Moon is, and how aspected: Now at the hour and time aforesaid,
the Moon will be in 5 degrees. 48 min. of the sign Aquarius, and at the same time.
I find Mars to be in 5 degrees. 48 min. of the sign Scorpio, which makes a partile
Square aspect consisting of 90 degrees.: Now to find what the grief is you must
repair unto the place in this book, where it is written, The Moon in Aquarius
of Mars oppressed, which argues, that the Sick shall be troubled with great
pain at the heart and with swooning fits also very feavourish, likewise a pain
in the breast with difficulty of breathing, and the blood swelling in all the
veins, the cause of this sickness proceeding from violent affections and
vehement passions, etc. Now the next thing considerable is to know whether the
Sick be like to live or die; and the time when either death or recovery may be
expected. First the Moon is decreasing in light, Secondly the Moon departs
from the Square of Mars and applied unto the Conjunction of Saturn both
enemical planets: Thirdly, neither Sol, Jupiter, or Venus does cast their
friendly rays or influence at the time aforesaid unto the Moon, wherefore
according unto the rules aforesaid, the sick person will die: To find the time,
when you must frame a critical figure of sixteen equal parts as aforesaid,
beginning at the place where the Moon was at the decumbiture, making that the
first critical or mortal time, which if the Sick escape, then at the next
critical or mortal time, you must observe how the Moon is aspected, at which
time you shall find the Moon meets with the opposition of being upon the
29th. day of April in the Month aforesaid at one a clock after noon: Now in
regard there is no fortunate planet interposing their friendly rays at that
time we may conclude that the sick will depart, and not before, because the Sun
at intercedental and judicial times meets with no bad aspect of the
infortunes. Yet notwithstanding I have known some, who have been mortally
struck according, unto any rational man's judgment at the decumbiture in acute
griefs, who through Gods blessing, having an expert and skilful Physician, and
having withstood the bad influence of the afflicting planets, at the first
mortal time beyond expectation upon the next critical time have recovered, and
so it may happily prove to some, who shall take their bed at the time
aforesaid. The reason is because between the time of decumbiture and first
crisis, there is usually near seven days time, during which time (especial
remedies being applied) the Sick may happily be the better enabled to
with-stand the encounter, more especially if the intercedental and judicial
times be freed from the evil aspects of the infortunes, as here it falls out
at this last decumbiture. The truth is life and death is in the hands of God,
and whatsoever stars foreshew, yet he by his power and blessing upon the means
used can preserve life, when he pleases, wherefore the sick ought not at any
time to despair, For I my self have often times recovered my Patient having out
lived the first mortal time as aforesaid, but I must needs say such changes and
chances are seldom seen, for where one does escape many dies, for the stars
are God's Messengers, and what they do foreshew, do assuredly without miracle
come to pass. Concerning the way and manner how to cure each distemper, I have
showed elsewhere.

Concerning the Astrological way of giving Judgment by a Sign of 12 Houses.
Although what is already written, I have known by good experience to hold true
by many examples it being for the most part the method of my daily practice;
yet for the benefit and better satisfaction of Practitioners, and others,
well-willers thereunto, especially such who desire further inspection into this
Art. I shall in the next place show how in an Astrological way judgment may be
given by a figure of 12 Houses. For I must confess that in such infirmities,
which are natural from the birth, and likewise some chronick griefs, which have
been of long continuance, and likewise such infirmities, wherein there is any
suspicion of witchcraft, cannot so exactly be discovered by the Sun or Moon
afflicted, as by a sign of twelve houses for the ascendant sixth, eighth, and
twelfth Houses with their Lords will be for the most part concerned therein as
shall be showed in order as follows. In the first place you must erect your
figure; either for the time of decumbiture, or for the time of any strong fit
(if any be) or upon the receipt of the Urin, or time of the first visitation of
the Patient, and you must be sure for to frame, and vary your ascendant, that
it together with its Lord may exactly personate the Sick. Secondly you must in
order set down the Cuspe of every House. Thirdly you must set down the
Characters of the Planets in every House, which for to do, and likewise how to
frame the ascendant, I shall briefly declare. But before you can proceed
herein, you must perfectly know the Characters of the seven Planets, and twelve
signs, and the five Aspects of the Planets, and the Houses of each Planet.

The Characters of the seven Planets with the Dragons Head and Tail.
Saturn Jupiter Mars Sol Venus Mercury Luna Dragons head Dragons tail
The Characters of the twelve Signs, with the parts of the Body by them
signified; And how they stand opposite unto each other in the Zodiac, as
follows.
Aries Head and Face. Taurus Neck and Throat. Gemini Arms and Shoulders. Cancer
Breast, Stom. and Ribs. Leo Heart and Back. Virgo Bowels and Gutts. Libra Reins
and Loins. Scorpio Secrets and Bladder. Sagitary The Thighs. Capricorn The
Knees. Aquary The Legs. Pisces The Feet.
The five Aspects of the Planets.
Conjunction, That is when any two Planets are in one and the same degree of
any Sign. Sextile, That is when any two Planets are 60. degrees from each
other: And contains a sixth part of the Zodiac. Square, That is when any two
Planets are 90. degrees from each other: And contains a fourth part of the
Zodiac. Trine, That is when any two Planets are 120. degrees from each other:
And contains a third part of the Zodiac. Oppsition, That is when any two
Planets are 180. degrees from each other: And contains half the Zodiac.
NOTE, That there is 30 degrees. in every Sign, and two Signs make a sextile
aspect, three Signs make a square, four signs make a Trine, six Signs make an
Opposition, which contains half the Zodiac. The whole contains 360 degrees,
which is 12 times 30 degrees.

The Houses of the Planets.
Saturn has two houses; viz. The signs Capricorn, and Aquarie: Jupiter has
two Houses Sagitary, and Pisces: Mars has two Houses Aries, and Scorpio: Sol,
has but one House, which is Leo: Venus has two Houses Libra and Taurus:
Mercury has two Houses Gemini and Virgo, the Moon has but one House, which is
Cancer.

How to Frame the twelve Houses, and what every House concerns, in a
Decumbiture Figure.
The Sick: man's: Glass Showing What Every House Concerns In Case oF Sickness;
1 The Sick Man's ^son:

2 his Estate:

3 his kindred

4 his Father Sometimes his grave

5 his Children

6 his Sickness and Servants

7 his Wife his phissi^ion and public Enemies

8 his Death

9 his Religeon

10 his Mother And phissick

11 his Frindes

12 his private Enemies and Selfendings



THe next thing considerable is, to have knowledge how to insert the twelve
Signs upon the cusp of every House, and likewise to set the seven Planets in
those Signs: But before we can proceed therein it will be necessary to
understand the use of an Ephemeris or Almanac, which sets forth the daily
motions of the planets. And for the better informing of young Students herein,
I shall for example set down in order for the month of October, 1667. the form
as usually is printed, and show the use thereof until the tenth day of the said
month; which will be enough whereby to understand, not only the residue of that
month, but also every other month throughout the year, provided always that
your Almanac must be such a one which sets forth the daily motions of the
planets, whose Title page to every month is as follows,

October has XXXI. days. Month days Week days The daily motions of the
Planets and D 1 a 25 35 1 59 3 8 18 2 7 21 3 25 1 48 10 29 2 25 36 1 51 3 45 19
1 8 36 5 9 14 25 10 26 3 c 25 37 1 43 4 21 20 1 9 51 6 45 27 25 10 23 4 d 25 39
1 35 4 57 21 1 11 6 8 25 10 16 10 20 5 e 25 40 1 27 5 33 22 0 12 2 10 6 24 48
10 17 6 F 25 42 1 19 6 14 23 0 13 37 11 47 8 18 10 14 7 g 25 43 1 11 6 48 24 0
14 52 13 28 21 47 10 11 8 a 25 45 1 3 7 23 25 0 16 7 15 9 6 18 10 8 9 b 25 47 0
55 7 59 26 0 17 22 16 50 23 39 10 4 10 c 25 49 0 47 8 35 27 0 18 38 18 32 8 31
10 1

Concerning the use of the Ephemeres.
The first Column on the left shows the days of the month, the second column
sheweth' the week days, the next column shows the daily motion of Saturn,
the sign next beneath his character shows what sign he is in, and the numbers
next beneath that shows how far Saturn is entered into the sign for every
day, the first number is for degrees, the the second minutes, and so forwards
fot every planet accordingly: Example, Saturn the first day is 25 degrees. 35 min.
in the sign Capricorn: the second day he is 25 degrees. 36 min. in Capricorn: the
third day he is 25 degrees. 37 min. in Capricorn: the fourth day he is 25 degrees 39
min. in Capricorn and so forward. In the next column is Jupiter and the sign
Taurus beneath which argues that Jupiter is in the sign Taurus, and over
against the first day is the numbers 1 degrees. 59 min. which shows that he is so
far in the sign: the second day is but 1 degrees. 51 min. the third day he is 1
degrees. 43 min. the fourth day he is 1 degrees. 35 min. the and so onward, this
planets numbers decreaseth daily by reason he is retrograde and moves
backward, as sometimes all the rest will, except the Sun and Moon In the next
Column is Mars and underneath the sign Virgo, and under that the numbers 3 degrees.
8 min. which argues that Mars the first day is gotten so far in the sign
Capricorn, the second day he is 3 degrees. 45 min. in the sign Capricorn, the third
day 4 degrees. 21 min. The fourth day he is 4 degrees. 57 min: in Virgo, and so
downward as you find in the Table; you may do the like for the rest of the
planets accordingly.

How to erect a Scheme or Figure according unto any time given.
The usual time whereby to erect a Figure concerning any Patient, is first by
the time of falling ill, or most properly, when the patients first betake them
to their bed, which we call the time of decumbiture: But if that may not be
had, as sometimes 'twill fall out, especially in Chronick griefs, then you must
take the time, when the urin is first brought, or the time of any strong fit,
if any be. Or the time when you first visit the patient, provided always that
you so vary your ascendant, that it together with its Lord may exactly
personate the sick, without which no true judgment can be given, by reason the
Ascendant, fourth, sixth, eighth, and twelfth Houses are concerned, now if you
fail in the first, there can be no certainty in the rest, how to know what
bodily shape belongs unto each Figure, and planet is showed elsewhere in this
Book: for the better understanding hereof I shall insert one example as
follows, A friend of mine being very ill took his bed, October the 10 1667,
at a quarter past one a clock in the afternoon, according unto which time I did
erect a figure as follows, having by an Almanac found out that page
entitled The daily Motions of the Planets, as is before expressed for the
Month of October, you must seek for the 10 day of the said month, and move
forward in a strait line, until you come unto the sixth column, and under the
Characters over head thus expressed there you shall find the number 27, which
shows that the Sun is gotten into the sign Libra 27 degrees. upon the tenth day
aforesaid, with this number 27 you must enter the Table of Houses, which you
shall find at the end of the Almanac, and seek out the page, where it is
written Sol in Libra. And in the column under 80 min. the signs going down in a
strait line, there you shall find the number 27, and in the column next
adjoining on the left hand under the title of time from noon moving downward
unto the same line where is the number 27 before mentioned, there you shall
find the numbers thus printed, viz. 13, 40, 12, but the number 12 being but
seconds you may leave out and so take only the two first numbers 13, 40, which
you must set in some place by it self, then you must add to that number the
time of the day, when the sick first took his bed being a quarter past one a
clock afternoon, as for example h. m. Time from noon 13 40 The time of the day,
when the Sick took his bed 1 15 14 55

Note that the 15 min stands for a quarter of an hour, there being 60 in an
hour.

Now had the Sick took his bed at one a clock at night, then its called the
thirteenth hour, for in Astrology, we begin to account both the days and hours
from noon The numbers before mentioned being added together make 14.15. This
number you must find out under the Title of time from noon or the nearest unto
it being 14.59, which wants but one minute from which sum, or place, you must
move forward in the same time, and under every column belonging unto each
house, you shall find both the sign over head and the number beneath, which is
the sign and number you must set down upon the Cusp of every House in the
figure as follows: For A Figure For The Time of Dccum Biture October The 10th
h / 1-m / 15 p:in. Annc doni 1667: a= ad
the cuspe of the tenth House Scorpio 16. For the eleventh house Sagitary 1:
56. For the twelfth house Sagitary 17.14. For the first house, called the
ascendant Capricorn 10.6. For the second house Aquarius 2^.26. For the third
house Aries 20.4. Now these first six houses being finished, the other six,
whose signs are opposite are of the same numbers: What signs are opposite unto
each other I have already declared. Example Over against the sign Scorpio 16.
being the cusp of the tenth house is Taurus 16 the cuspe of the fourth house,
and over against Sagitary 1 56 being the cuspe of the eleventh house is Gemini
1 50. the cuspe of the fifth house, and over against Sagitary 17.14. the cusp
of the twelfth house is Gemini 17.14. the cuspe of the sixth house and over
against Capricorn 10.6. the cuspe of the ascendant is Cancer 1^.6. and over
against Aquarius 2^.26 is Leo 27.26. and over against Aries 20.4. is Libra
20.4. as appears by the figure.

The next thing material is to set the planets in those figures, and houses,
which for to do you must by the Almanac find out the page before mentioned,
for the month of October. And from the tenth day moving in a right line, you
shall in each column find the numbers of degrees and minutes according as each
planet has gotten into each sign: Example, The first number is 25 degrees. 49 min.
and Saturn is over the head of Capricorn, which argues that Saturn is so many
degrees and minutes entered into Capricorn, which degrees and minutes you must
set in the first house, as by the Figure appears.

In the next column is 0 degrees. 47 min. and Jupiter is over the head of Taurus,
which shows that Jupiter is forty seven minutes in Taurus, which number with
the character of Jupiter must be set in the third house.

In the next column is 8 degrees. 35 min. and Mars is over the head of Virgo, which
argues that Mars is gotten so far into Virgo, and must be set in the eighth
house.

In the next column is 27 degrees. and Sol is over the head of Libra.

In the next column is 18 degrees. 38 min. and Venus is over the head of Libra.

In the next column is 18 degrees. 32 min. and Mercury is over the head of Libra.

In the next column is 8 degrees. 31 min. and Luna is over the head of Sagitary,
which argues that the Moon was at noon so far entered the Sign Sagitary, but
in regard it was above an hour after noon when the Sick took his bed, there
must be half a degree, which is 30 minutes added unto the Moons motion, for by
reason of her quick moving, she gets one degree in two hours, wherefore we
must set the Moon in nine degree^ Sagitary; you must do the like in all other
figures: Had he took his bed at midnight you must have added six degrees, and
then the Moon would have been fourteen degrees thirty one minutes entered
Sagitary. Now having set the signs on the cuspes of every house, and the
Planets in those signs as by the figure appears: I shall in the next place
show how to give judgment thereupon, and so thereby discover the grief as
follows

How to give Judgment by the Figure of twelve Houses.
THe general way, especially in acute griefs, is to give judgment by the Moon
being in any of the twelve signs and by the infirmities afflicted, as I have
already declared: And this being an acute grief, judgment must be given
accordingly, yet notwithstanding I shall by this figure set forth his natural
infirmities or griefs, and so instruct ^^e Learner how to give judgment in any
other chronick griefs by the signs on the ascendant, sixth house and their
Lords afflicted. For some lasting and obscure griefs cannot be discovered by
the Sun and Moon afflicted In the first place you must observe whether the
ascendant, which is the first house, or the sixth house or their Lords be any
way afflicted by the malevolent planets Saturn, Mars, Mercury, or the Sun, for
sometimes the Sun may and will afflict more, especially if the grief lie^h
about the heart, or in the arteries, or vital spirits. In the ne^t place it
will be necessary to know whether the grief be natural, or whether it came by
Witchcraft or Sorcery: Now if you find the Lord of the twelfth house in the
ascendant or if the Lord of the twelfth being in the sixth, or Lord of the
sixth in the twelfth, or if the Lord of the ascendant be combust, that is, when
the Sun is not above eight degrees thirty minutes distant from him, or if one
planet be Lord of the ascendant and twelfth house, and an infortune, then you
may conclude that the grief is more than natural, more especially where there
is any just suspicion thereof, which may be somewhat deferred by heeding well
the nature of their distempers, as I have showed elsewhere: But in this Figure
I find no such thing; wherefore I did conclude, the grief was natural;
occasioned by his own disorder of body: as shall be showed in order.

Sometimes I have known the ascendent, the sixth house, or their Lords have
been afflicted by the Lord of the twelfth house and yet the sickness was not
from Witchcraft, notwithstanding, those suspected evils; for if Jupiter and
Venus, or the Sun, do cast their friendly aspects unto the afflicted Planet or
Cusp of the House aforesaid, that then the grief came by some disorder of body:
Also, if that Lord of the ascendant be in the twelfth, or in the sixth, the
grief is natural: For from the twelfth house, we give judgment of self-undoing
so well as otherwise; but any rational experienced practitioner may easily
distinguish, the natural diseases, from the unnatural, by heeding well the
manner of their distempers, as aforesaid: And generally I find that those who
are taken in this snare of Witchcraft, that at the time of any strong fit, or
when they are more than usually tormented, that then the ascendant together
with its Lord does exactly personate the sick; and at that very time, the Lord
of the twelfth house does one way or other afflict, either the ascendant, or
its Lord; or that an infortune Lord of the ascendant and twelfth house, which
may so happen, when the proper ascendant is intercepted in the first house, as
I have often times experimented.

I shall now proceed to give judgment upon the decumbiture figure before
mentioned; and in the first place, describe the person of the sick.

Secondly, y rules discover, whether the sick shall live or die, if live, how
long time before recovery.

Thirdly, I shall by rules set forth, what the grief is, and from what came.

Fourthly, How and which way he was recovered.

The man's person is described by the ascendant Capricorn, and Saturn his being
therein who is Lord thereof, viz. one of a middle stature, full and well set,
of a dark or swartish complexion, ^ad brown hair, as you may find more at
large in this book.

Signs of recovery, was first Saturn Lord of the ascendant, being his
significator is strong as being in his own house, and is more strong than Mars
who is the afflicting Planet. Secondly the Moon does separate from Mars, and
apply first unto Venus and from thence to the Sun and Jupiter, all fortunes.
Thirdly, the Sun is increasing in light. Fourthly neither the Moon, or Saturn
are combust; Planets are said to be combust, when they are not elongated eight
degrees. thirty min from the Sun. Fifthly, she is not in that part of the Zodiac
called via combusta, which is from the middle of Libra to the midst of Scorpio.
Lastly, Venus Lady of the fourth house, which usually shows the end of all
things of this nature, was in friendly aspect to the Moon, at the time of
decumbiture; all which are arguments of recovery. The time when follows,
First, the angles of the figure are part fixed, and part common. Secondly, the
Moon was in a common sign which argues, that the grief was not perfectly,
acute, nor yet chronick, but between both and so it proved, for upon the last
critical day the fever left him, at which time the Moon came to the place, she
was in at the decumbiture viz. unto the ninth degrees of Sagitarius: yet
notwithstanding, at the last critical time he had a very strong fit, the Moon
being then in square to Mars; but Venus fortune and Lady of the fourth house,
being in friendly aspect to the Moon, and she together with Saturn being both
more strong than Mars, who was the afflicting Planet, put an end to this
sickness at the time aforesaid.

The next thing considerable, is to discover the grief, and from what cause;
and likewise, what infirmities she was naturally subject unto from the birth:
Now concerning the present acute grief, I found the Moon being in the sign
Sagitary, was the platick square of Mars afflicted, for between the sign Virgo,
the place where Mars is, and the sign Sagitary, the place where the Moon is,
contains ninety degrees. which number makes a square had the Moon been but one
degree in the sign Sagitary yet that would have been a platick square, for if
we consider the moity of each Orb, there will be ten degrees. allotted, at which
time and distance, the influence of those Planets does operate, both before and
after any aspect. Now to know what the present distemper was, by reason it was
an acute grief; you must find out the place in this book entitled, the Moon in
Sagitary, of Mars oppressed, which argues a high and strong fever with the
flux, or lask and choleric passions; the pulses few and taint heating slowly,
his blood over heated. The bright Star of the Harp: and the Star called the
Swans-bill, both of the nature of Mars and Jupiter in the?a cendant? made the
fever the more violent: The cause of this sickness was from inordinate
exercise, surfeiting, or too much repletion, as you may find more at large at
the place aforesaid.

The way of recovery was by application antipathetical unto Mars the afflicting
planet by reason that Venu was more strong in essential dignities, as being in
her house. Now in regard that Mars is by nature hot and dry, I made choice of
such herbs and other remedies, which were cold and moist; wherefore I advised
that such decoctions, syrrups, or cordials, which were administered should be
cooling and cleansing, also glisters the like, ever remembering as in this, so
in all other cures, to fortify the heart and vital spirits with herbs under
the dominion of the Sun: Would the Patient have been persuaded to let blood,
the fever would without question, have left him, upon the second critical time,
the Moon meeting then with the friendly aspect of Venus a fortune and strong.

Note, That as we give judgment by the Sun and Moon afflicted, in acute and
chronick griefs, so by the same rules you may give judgment by the Lord of the
ascendant or sixth house afflicted,

Example, In the last figure, Mercury being Lord of the sixth house, and in the
sign Libra, is in platick square to Saturn, and conjunction of the Sun, who is
much of the nature of Mars, only the Sun strikes more upon the vital spirits:
Now according unto the rule in giving judgment by the Moon afflicted in the
sign Libra, it shows a severish distemper and blood over heated, occasioned
from surfeiting.

The next thing considerable is to know, what infirmities naturally he was
subject unto from the birth. In this question judgment must be given from the
ascendant, sixth house, and their Lords afflicted; first the ascendant is no
way afflicted, save only by the presence of Saturn, who is Lord thereof: Now
in this question Saturn is not accounted an enemy, notwithstanding he is
naturally evil, as being in his own house, and Lord of the sick man's person,
for according unto the old saying, the devil will not hurt his own. Also the
sixth house is no way afflicted, wherefore we have only Mercury Lord of the
sixth considerable herein, and he I find is in Libra in platick conjunction of
Venus Lady of the fourth. Now any planet although he be naturally a fortune may
afflict so well, as the infortunes being Lord or Lady of the fourth, sixth,
eighth, or twelfth houses, for every planet must do his Office to know what the
grief is; you must take notice of the sign, where Mercury Lord of the sixth
house is, videl. in Libra, and what parts of the body is signified thereby,
also what griefs or infirmities are under the dominion of Venus: First under
the sign Libra is reins, and loins, and under Venus is also the reins together
with back, belly and members of generation and passages of urine: To my
knowledge he has for many years past been oft-times perplexed with difficulty
of making water, and with pains in his reins, back, and belly. What I have
written I presume will be sufficient to instruct the learner, but practice and
experience will be the only means to enlarge the practitioners ^^dgement
herein, for it is impossible for any man to write, be he never so curious and
exact in any art, but that somewhat may be added unto it.

Observations concerning the Ascendant.
THat which I have found by daily practice and experience, is carefully so to
erect your figure (either for the time of decumbiture, or the time of any
strong fit, or when the Patient was more than ordinarily sick or afflicted, or
for the time when the urine is brought, or when you go to visit the patient)
that the Ascendant together with its Lord may exactly personate the Sick, for
if neither the ascendant nor the Lord thereof does agree in shape, complexion,
and hair with the body of the Sick, you cannot safely give judgment by a
figure of twelve houses, especially in many infirmities, as I have often
experienced; for the first, fourth, sixth, eighth, and twelfth houses will be
especially concerned therein; wherefore if you fail in the first foundation,
the whole building must needs be obstructed and out of order.

Example, In the decumbiture figure before mentioned, ha^ I erected the figure,
but for one hour sooner, Sagitary would have ascended, whereof Jupiter is Lord,
and then the person of the sick must have been described accordingly. Now
Jupiter signifies a man of an upright and tall stature, complexion ruddy, face
oval, full, and fleshy, and a kind of a bourn brown hair: Also the sign
Sagitary represents a man much after the same shape and likeness, by which it
appears what a vast difference it might produce by taking a wrong ascendant,
both in regard of the personal shape, and likewise in the discovery of the
grief of the sick: Whereas it appears by taking the true ascendant, that it
does not on-only dilineate his person, as is before expressed, but does exactly
discover his present distemper, and natural infirmities: For let the time of
decumbiture or the time for receipt of the urine, or the time of any strong fit
be brought, and the Artist never so curious by enquiry, except by chance, he
shall not get the true ascendant, for many reasons may be objected to the
contrary: First clocks may fail, and so sick persons will hold out longer then
others before complaint, and the urine may by the messenger be hastened, or
retarded, you see one hour makes a mighty alteration. I shall quote another
Example, Suppose a Man or Woman, who is under the dominion of Sol Lord of Leo,
should fall sick, which represents one of a large stature, fat, full, and
fleshy, complexion sanguine, and yellowish hair. Now perhaps when the urine is
brought, or through mistakes of clocks or time, Gemini should ascend, whereof
Mercury is Lord, what a mighty difference could this produce: For the planet
Mercury represents one of an upright and tall stature, spare body, long face
and nose, of a dark swarthy complexion, and sad hair: Also the sign Gemini
signifies a tall body, a dark and obscure complexion, and sad or black hair. I
could instance many more, wherefore advise all practitioners in this art so to
vary their ascendant, that it together with its Lord or planet posited in the
ascendant may exactly personate the Sick, without which no true judgment can be
given especially in many chronick griefs or infirmities, and in case of
Witchcraft and Sorcery.

Some brief Rules concerning long and short sicknesses; and whether the Patient
is like to live or die.
First of long or short Sickness.
i A Fixed sign on the Cusp of the sixth, or the Lord of the sixth, or Lord of the
Ascendant, or the Moon in accute, or Sun in Chronick griefs be in fixed signs
afflicted by the malevolent Planets, or by the Lord of the 12, 8, or 4th,
argues long and lasting griefs or infirmities; if adhering unto a partil
aspect, the grief increases; if drawing from partil aspect, the grief
diminishes: Also fixed signs gives months, and sometimes years before
recovery; common signs gives weeks, and sometimes months, moveable days or
weeks before recovery. Now concerning the number of days, weeks, months or
years, you must observe how many degrees is wanting before the influence is
over, accounting by the moity of their Orbs, and so many months, weeks, days
or years it will be before recovery; but if the figure shows death, then you
must account how many degrees is wanting to make the partil aspect of the
principal Significators, and so account so many days, weeks, months or years
before the time of death

2 The principal Significator of the Sick changing his sign, argues a change
of the disease, either for life or death

3 The latter degrees of a sign on the Cusp of the sixth House, or the
Significator of the Sick in the latter degrees of a sign, argues a sudden
change either for life or death.

4 The Lord of the Ascendant, or principal significator of the sick person,
being stronger then the afflicting planets shows recovery, in moveable signs
the sooner; but if the afflicting Planets be strong, and the principal
Significator of the sick weak, more especially if the afflicting Planets has
relation unto the eighth or fourth Houses, it shows death.

5 If the Lord of the Ascendant, or Lord of the sixth, or if the in accute, or
Sun in Chronick griefs be afflicted in Azemine degrees, it shows a continued
sickness, if not sudden death.

6 If the Lord of the Ascendant, or principal Significator of the sick turn
retrograde, it shows a relapse, and the cure goes backward.

7 The Lord of the Ascendant, or principal Significator of the sick strong,
swift in motion, with a fortune attending especially in a moveable sign,
shows a speedy recovery

Lastly, We must heed the nature of the disease, for strong Fevers,
Convulsions, Apoplexies, risings in the Throat, with some pestilential
infirmities, and such like desperate griefs, will sooner terminate, then such
which are usually lasting, as Consumptions, Dropsies, Agues, Gouts, and such
like.

Some brief Rules concerning recovery.
First, A fortune, or the in accute, or in Chronick griefs strong in the
Ascendant, and not afflicted, nor yet being Lord of the sixth, eighth or
twelfth Houses, shows recovery.

Secondly, The Lord of the Ascendant strong, and more strong then the
afflicting Planets, shows recovery.

Thirdly, The Lord of the Ascendant, or the in accute, or in Chronick griefs
joined unto, or friendly aspected with a fortune, or applying unto a fortune,
shows recovery.

Fourthly, The increasing in light, swift in motion, and strong applying unto a
fortune in accute griefs, shows recovery

Fifthly, If the Lord of the ascendant does dispose of the afflicting Planet,
especially being equal in strength, shows recovery.

Signs of Death.
First, The Lord of the Ascendant weak and afflicted by the malevolent Planets,
and no fortune interposing, shows death.

Secondly, The Lord of the ascendant, or the afflicted in the fourth or eighth,
or by the Lord of the eighth, argues death, or if the Lord of the eighth be in
the ascendant.

Thirdly, The Lord of the ascendant combust in the ascendant fourth, sixth,
eighth, or twelfth, or in the way called Via Combusta, shows death.

Fourthly, If the in accute, or in Chronick griefs is ^^^^cted by the
infortunes, or by the Lord of the eighth or ^^ar^h, no fortune interposing
their friendly rays, more especially if the Lord of the ascendant be weak, it
shows death.

Fifthly, The ascendant, or Lord of the ascendant, or the in accute, or the in
Chronick griefs meeting with fixed stars of the nature of the infortunes, no
fortune interposing his friendly rays, shows death.

Sixthly, The applying unto combustion in the ascendant fourth, sixth, eighth,
or twelfth Houses, or Via combusta, shows death.

Seventhly, The applying from the Lord of the ascendant to the Lord of the
eighth, and the Lord of the ascendant weak, shows death.

Eighthly, An eclipse of the in accute, or of the Sun in Chronick griefs upon a
critical day, and the Lord of the ascendant weak, no fortune strong interposing
their friendly rays, shows death, generally in all decumbitures, the nearer
the afflicting Planets are to the earth, the worst.

The bodily shape and infirmities attributed unto the Twelve Signs.
Aries signifies one of a reasonable stature, dry body, strong limbs, and big
bones, but not fat, somewhat long face and neck, complexion somewhat brown,
their hair and eyebrows inclining unto blackness: the diseases incident unto
this Sign is Pushes, Whelks, Polipus, or Noli me tangere All diseases which
proceed from the head, as Convulsions, dead Palsies Cramps, Madness, Virtigo,
Megrims, Falling Sickness, and such like

Taurus signifies one short, but full and well set, full face and eyes, broad
forehead, large strong shoulders, full hands, thick lips, and black rugged
hair; under this Sign are all diseases incident to the throat, as Kings Evil,
Quinzies, Fluxes of Rhumes falling from the head into the throat, Impostumes
and Wens in the neck.

Gemini those persons usually who ate under the dominion of this Sign, are tall
and straight of body, with long arms, of a dark sanguine complexion, and
blackish hair, their body strong and active; under this Sign are all diseases
in the arms, hands and shoulders, with windiness in the veins, corrupted blood,
sometimes it produces distempered fancies.

Cancer signifies one of a low and small stature, bigger made from the middle
upwards then downwards, face big and round, of a whitely pale complexion, sad
brown hair, one apt to be sickly; under this Sign are all imperfections of the
breast and stomach, as Cancers, Ptisick, Salt-flegms, rotten Coughs, weak
digestion, cold stomach, dropsical humors, and Impostumations.

Leo signifies one of a large fair stature, full and fleshy, narrow sides, and
broad shoulders, full and great eyes, sometimes goggle-eyed, yellow or dark
flaxen hair, sometimes curling, of a sanguine or ruddy complexion; under this
Sign are all tremblings or passions of the heart, violent burning Fevers, pains
either at the heart or back, sore eyes, Plague, Pestilence, and Yellow Jaundies

Virgo signifies one of a mean stature, but well composed, a brown ruddy
complexion, black hair, shrill and small voice, well favored, but not very
beautiful: The diseases which are incident unto this sign, are all such which
belong to the belly, as obstructions in the bowels, and miseraicks worms, wind
Colic, Spleen, Hy^ondriack Melancholy, and such like

Libra personates one of a well shamed body, straight and tall, a round and
beautiful visage, a pure sanguine complexion but not very high colored, the
hair yellowish or sandy-brown, and somewhat smooth; under this Sign are all
diseases of the reins and kidneys, also all diseases proceeding from wind, and
corruption of blood.

Scorpio signifies one of a middle stature, strong, full, and well set,
somewhat broad-faced, of a muddy or darkish complexion, sad or black hair,
bow-legged, short-necked, and somewhat hairy: The diseases incident unto this
Sign, are Ulcers, Inflammations. Gravel or Stone in the Bladder, all
imperfections and difficulties of Urine, Ruptures, Hemorhoids, the French Pox,
and Running of the Reins, Priapismus, and all diseases which infect the
Privities both of men and women.

Sagitary signifies one of a fair stature, and strong body, long face, but full
and fleshy, complexion sanguine or ruddy, the hair a kind of Chestnut color;
the diseases which are under this Sign are Fevers, and such infirmities which
are occasioned through heat of blood: The Sciatica, and all pains i^ the Hips
and Thighs, falls from horses, and hurts by four-footed beasts.

Capricorn signifies one rather short then tall, narrow, (...) ^ace, thin
beard, black hair, narrow breast, small neck, complexion swarthy; under this
Sign are all diseases in the ^^^^es and Hams, Leprosies, Itch and Scabs, all
diseases of ^^^ancholly, all schirrous tumors, sprains, fractures and
dislo^^^^^^s.

Aquary represents one of a thick squar corpor^ture, strong and well composed,
not very tall, visage long, complexion fair and clear, hair sandy-coloured, but
if be in this House at the birth, then black hair, and the complexion will be
more sanguine, with distorted teeth; under this Sign are all diseases incident
to the legs and ancles, and all melancholy winds coagulated in the veins and
blood; also Cramps

Pisces represents one of a short stature, not decent, but rather ill composed,
a large face, complexion pale, the body fleshy or swelling, and somewhat
incurvating with the head; the diseases subject unto this sign is all lameness,
and aches incident to the feet, and all diseases coming of salt phlegm, and mixed
humors, all blood putr^fied, as Scabs, Itch and Botches, or breakings out about
the body, Small Pox and Measles; also all cold and moist diseases, and such
which come of catching cold and wet at the feet.

The bodily shape, with the parts and members of the body and diseases which
the Planets generally rule.
Saturn represents one of a middle stature, broad and large shoulders,
sometimes crooked, his thighs lean, his feet and knees indecent, many times
hitting or shovelling one against the other, broad forehead, eyes little,
complexion muddy or swarfish, looking downward, thick lips and nose, thin
beard, black hair: Diseases and sicknesses subject unto this Planet are Quartan
Agues, and diseases proceeding from cold, dry, and melancholy distempers; the
retentive faculties, all impediments in the right ear, and teeth, also Rhumes,
Consumptions, Black Jaundies, Palsies, tremblings, and vain fears, Dropsies,
the hand and feet Gout, the Spleen and bones.

Jupiter signifies one of an upright and tall stature, a large deep belly,
thighs and legs strong proportioned, his feet long, face oval, full and fleshy,
complexion brown, ruddy, and lovely high forehead, his hair soft, and a kind of
a (...) brown, much beard, his speech sober: The diseases under this Planet are
Plurifies, and all infirmities in the liver, lungs, ribs, sides, veins, blood;
the digestive faculty, Cramps, pain in the backbone, Squinzies, windiness, and
put^efaction in the blood, Fevers proceeding from wind, and ill blood.

Mars signifies one of a middle stature, body strong, big bones, not fat
visage, round complexion, ruddy, the hair between red and sandy flexon,
crisping or curling, hazel eyes, a bold confident man or woman, and fearless:
The sicknesses incident to this Planet are ^ertian Fevers, and pestile^^
burning Fevers, the Plague, Bloody Flux, Small Pox, a^^ diseases of choler, the
Shingles, Gall, and left ear phrensies, and sudden distempers in the head,
Carbuncles Fistulaes, all scars and hurts by iron.

Sun Those who are under the Sun are of a strong large corporature, and well
composed body, fat and fleshy, of a yellow saffron ruddy complexion, goggle or
large eyes, hair yellowish: The sicknesses under this Planet are all diseases
of the heart and brain, palpitations, tremblings, sudden swoundings, Catars,
the Nerves and Arteries, the right eye of men, the left eye of women, and vital
spirit of both; all infirmities of the eyes, and diseases of the mouth, rotten
Fevers, and stinking breaths.

Venus signifies one somewhat short, but full and well set, fat and fleshy
face, round complexion, dark, but lovely light brown hair, and smooth, a
rolling eye, and full of amorous inticements, a body well shapt, and
delightful: Sicknesses under this Planet, are all diseases of the Matrix, and
members of Generation, Running of the Reins, French Pox, also griefs of the
Belly, Back, and Navil, any disease arising by inordinate lust, Priapisme,
Diabetes, or pissing disease, Hernias, and impotency in the act of Generation,
the throat, women's breasts, and the milk in them.

Mercury denotes one tall of stature, spare body, long arms and hands, long
face and nose, thin lips, little hair on his chin, but pretty store on his
head, inclining to blackness, an olive or sallow complexion, eyes between black
and gray, ofttimes much partaking of the Planet he is joined withal: sicknesses
under this Planet, are all diseases of the brain, as Madness, Vertigoes,
Lethargies, or giddiness in the head, Ptisick, stammering, memory, dry coughs,
snufling in the head or nose, dumbners, all evils in the fancy, or intellectual
parts, and tongue, the Nerves, the defects of the Uvula, or Gargareon.

Moon The Moon generally represents one of a fair stature, phlegmatic full,
fat, and fleshy round face, complexion whitely, lowering looks, hair light
brown, gray eyes: Sicknesses and diseases are Apoplexies, Palsy, Colic,
Belly-ake, the Menstrues in women, Dropsies, Fluxes of the Belly, all ^ old
Rhumatick diseases, and cold Stomach, Surfeits, rotten ^^^ughs, Convulsions,
Falling Sickness, Kings Evil, Apostems, ^^^all Pox and Measles, the Colic,
Bladder, and Members (...) Generation.

Concerning what effects the Moon works in any of the twelve Signs upon the
Body of the Sick, she being afflicted by the Conjunction, Square, or opposition
Aspects of Mars at the decumbiture. Note, that the Sun afflicting the Moon,
does work near the same effects, only the strikes more upon the Heart and
Vital Spirits.
The Moon in Aries of Mars afflicted or oppressed.
If at the time of Decumbiture the Moon be in Aries of or oppressed either by
or, then the Sick shall be tormented with continual Fevers, with little or no
rest or quietness, a continued extreme thirst, and dryness of the tongue and
breast, an inflammation of the Liver, tending unto a Frenzy, high and
inordinate Pulses, sometimes a deprivation of senses, and the Patient ready to
run mad, or has some extreme pain or grief in their belly, or small guts,
occasioned by choleric obstructions: The original cause of this disease shall
proceed from a distempered affection of the Membranes, or pellets of the brain,
and excess of choleric matter. If Venus be stronger then Mars, then cooling
remedies will be suitable; however 'twill be necessary to let blood. Concerning
the way how to cure each distemper, is set down elsewhere in this book.

The Moon in Taurus of Mars afflicted.
Those that take their bed under such configuration, as aforesaid, shall be
afflicted with a continued Fever, the whole frame of the body obstructed, with
an inflammation of the Throat, Neck, and hinder part thereof, and ach of the
bones; also insomniation, or inordinate watching, very thirsty, longing after
cooling things: Often time the sick will be afflicted with the Strangury, or
Stone, with Gravel in the Reins and Kidneys, pestilent sore throats, or
hoarsness, or some ill matter settled there: The cause is from much ill blood,
choler, and sweet phlegm.

The Moon in Gemini of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed under this configuration, shall he afflicted with a
violent burning Fever, and with obstructions, their blood extreme windy and
corrupted, some great pains or lameness in their arms or joints, the pulses
long and inordinate; oft-times the Patient is troubled with the Stone or heat
in the Reins, and sometimes spitting of blood: The cause of this distemper
usually is from ingurgitation, or too much drinking of strong Wine or Beer, and
some choleric matter.

The Moon in Cancer of Mars oppressed.
Those that take their bed when the is in Cancer of Mars afflicted, the sick
will be troubled with much phlegm, and ill matter settled at their Breast and
Stomach; also with eversion, and turning of the Ventricle, oft-times desiring
to vomit, with some defect in the blood: This disease comes from surfeiting,
or too much ingurgitation, and oft-times turns unto a looseness, or a rotten
Cough, and sometimes spitting blood.

The Moon in Leo of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed when the Moon is in Leo of Mars afflicted, shall be
subject unto a strong Fever, with a disturbed brain, and strong raging fits;
also they will be subject unto much drowsiness and heaviness all over their
body; also the heart oppressed with faintness and swounding fits, and the party
almost raging mad, with little or no appetite: The cause of this distemper is
from excess of choler, and blood abounding, overheated.

The Moon in Virgo of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed under this configuration, shall be subject unto a
Flux in the belly, small Fevers, the Pulse, remiss avertion of the Ventricle,
also tormented with wind in the Belly or Guts, and Chollick, bad stomach many
times, weakness or pains in the legs near the anckles; the cause from original
choler, melancholy, and sharp fretting humors.

The Moon in Libra of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed, the Moon being in of oppressed, will be subject unto
an inflammation all over the body, also Fevourish, unapt to sleep, their Pulses
high, troubled with wind and plenitude of blood, many times they have the stone
or gravel in the kidneys or great heat therein: The cause is from surfeiting or
disorder in diet, also plenitude of blood.

The Moon in Scorpio of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed, the Moon being in Scorpio of Mars oppressed, argues
that the sick is afflicted, or has some grievous infirmity in their privy
parts. If children or Young-people, then it argues the smallpox or measles.
Also it shows (more especially in times of pestilential diseases) the
pestilence, or some poisonous or pestilential grief: many times it causes
boiles or scabiness to break forth. The cause is from blood extremely
corrupted, or from some infectious and poisonous grief, accidentally taken into
the body by smell or taste.

The Moon in Sagitary of Mars oppressed.
Those, who take their bed the Moon being in Sagitary of Mars oppressed shall
be tormented with high fevers, and choleric passions, with the flux or lask,
the pulses few and faint, the sick burns extremely many times, it shows the
hand and foot gout with breaking out, and sore throats, sometimes sharp rheums
offend their eyes. The cause is from surfeiting or gluttony, or too much
repletion. Also from inordinate exercise, and blood overheated.

The Moon in Capricorn of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed, the Moon being in Capricorn of Mars oppressed, shall
be troubled with excess of choler, and with great desire to vomit, no perfect
concoction, and often returning fevers, a puffing up the sinews, and a flux of
the belly immediately follows an inflammation of the breast; some exulceration
in a Choleric humor offends the party in his hands or joints of his fingers,
also the sick is inclining unto the yellow jaundies. Their blood all over the
body disaffected. The cause is from choler, and evil digestion, and blood
corrupted.

The Moon in Aquary of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed the Moon being in Aquary of Mars oppressed, are
troubled with swooning fits, and pained at the heart, and are very feverish,
pulses are high, and the blood swelling in all their veins, oft-times
complaining of great pain in their breast, drawing their wind with great
difficulty. The cause is from most sharp and violent affections or vehement
passions.

The Moon in Pisces of Mars oppressed.
Those who take their bed when the Moon is in Pisces of Mars afflicted shall be
tormented with sharp burning fevers and vehement thirst, and usually oppressed
with a violent looseness* complaining of great pain in their bellies, or an
extraordinary rotten cough, also a deflux of rhuem falling from the head to the
throat, they being near suffocated therewith, their bellies swollen and in
danger of a dropsy, oft-times they are troubled with itching and a salt humor
in the blood. The cause of the distemper is from two much ingurgitation, and
drinking of wine and strong drinks, and the body abounding with choler, and
salt phlegm, and blood corrupted occasioned by disorder.

Concerning what effects the Moon works in any of the twelve Signs, upon the
body of the Sick, She being afflicted by the Conjunction, Square or Opposition
of Saturn at the time of decumbiture. Note, That Mercury afflicting the Moon
works the same effects only be strikes somewhat more upon the brain and
nerves.
The Moon in Aries of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
THose who take their bed, the Moon being in Aries of Saturn or Mercury
oppressed, shall be troubled with headache, and a distillation of Rhuems
falling from the head into the throat and windpipe, also a stuffing in the
head, with dullness of the eyes, inordinate drowsiness, and dullness of mind, and
bad stomach, intemperate sweats, being hot within and cold without, more
afflicted in the night then by day. The occasion of this distemper is from
great cold taken, and want of exercise, and sometimes by eating trash contra^^
to Nature.

The Moon in Taurus of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, the Moon being in Taurus of Saturn or Mercury
oppressed, shall be feverish proceeding from obstructions aod distempers of
the precordiacks and arteries, viz. of the inward parts, near the heart, liver,
and lungs, some ulceration there abouts, their pulses are lofty and high, and
an inflammation of the whole body. The disease proceeds from too much luxury,
or from surfeiting or inordinate repletion, also melancholy and ill diet.

The Moon in Gemini of Saturn or Mercury oppressed,
Those who take their bed under this configuration shall be endanger of a
fever, and the pain disperses it self all over the body, but principally in
the Arteries and joints: Also the Sick is inclinable to a Consumption: the
vitals much afflicted, the pulse low and little: also they will be subject unto
frequent sweatings with Symptoms of the Spleen. The disease more troublesome
in the night than in the day. The cause of this distemper is from much waiting,
weariness of the mind, and overburdening with multiplicity of affairs, excess
of labor, or violent exercise.

The Moon in Cancer of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, the Moon being in Cancer of Saturn oppressed, shall
be afflicted in the breast with tough melancholy matter or thick phlegm: also
troubled with Coughs, Catharrs, hoarseness, and a distillation of Rhuems or
Humors falling into the breast, their pipes are narrow and obstructed,
inordinate fevers, pulses little and low, oft-times a Quotidian, but now
especially a Quartane Ague follows with belly-ake, or some infirmness in the
reins or Secrets. If the Moon be decreasing and near the body of Saturn, the
sickness is like to be long and lasting. The cause is from great cold and
inordinate eating or drinking, and want of moderate exercise.

The Moon in Leo of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, the Moon being in Leo of Saturn oppressed, shall be
oppressed with much heat in the breast and intension of the heart strings, with
augmenting fevers, the pulses keeping no course annoyed with external and
internal heat: also great faintness of heart or swooning fits, after some time,
if not cured the sick will be subject unto the black jaundies. The cause it
from grief taken, and ill melancholy blood.

The Moon in Virgo of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their beds, when the Moon is in Virgo of Saturn oppressed,
shall be troubled with in ordinate fevers, pricking or shooting under the
ribs: also viscous phlegm obstructing the bowels, sometimes the wind chollick
afflicts them: also the gout and aches in the thighs and feet: I oft-times find
they are much troubled with worms. The cause of this distemper is usually from
crudities, and evil digestion in the stomach and contrary diet.

The Moon in Libra of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, when the Moon is in Libra of Saturn or Mercury
oppressed shall be troubled with pains of the head, breast, and stomach
disaffected; the cough, hoarsness, and distillation of rhuems shall afflict
them, and loss of Appetite, small fevers troubling them by night, oft-times
great pains in their joints, knees, and thighs: also some defect in their
reins, kidneys, and bladder. The cause is originally from surfeting or glutton
and meat not fully digested or excess of Venery.

The Moon in Scorpio of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, the Moon being in Scorpio of Saturn afflicted, shall
be subject unto some defects in their secret parts, hemorhoids, piles, or some
exulceration, their no retention of urine, oft-times vexed with the stone or
stop in the bladder, sometimes if a man* the gonorrea, if a woman too much of
menstrues. The cause is of corrupt phlegm, or disorder of body.

The Moon in Sagitary of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, when the Moon is in Sagitary of Saturn oppressed,
shall be tormented with defluction of thin sharp humors, and aches of the
sinews, and arteries, extreamities of heat and cold, and oft-times a double
access of a fever, and most commonly a violent burning fever at the first
being ill. The cause is from blood infected with choler and melancholy, and
sometimes by great pains taking or violent exercise and cold taken thereupon.

The Moon in Capricorn of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, whilst the Moon is in Capricorn of Saturn oppressed
shall be afflicted with heaviness at the breast and stomach, and difficulty of
breathing, and dry Coughs, their lungs oppressed, more pained by night than
day, with intended fevers, often times troubled with headache, and noise in
their head. The Cause is from great cold, melancholy and disorderly diet.

The Moon in Aquary of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed the Moon being in the sign Aquary of Saturn or
Mercury afflicted, shall be troubled with much melancholy, winds coagulated in
the veins, the malady cease on them unequally with remission and intension,
their heads pained with wind or noise. Also troubled with faint fits or passion
of the heart, sometimes a sore throat, or troubled with a rising there, being
in danger of suffocation. The cause is from excess of labor want of sleep
whereby to refresh nature, and much trouble of mind.

The Moon in Pisces of Saturn or Mercury oppressed.
Those who take their bed, when the Moon is in Pisces of Saturn oppressed shall
be troubled with much sighing and pricking or shooting of the breast and under
the paps, and continual augmenting fevers, with extensions of the precordiacks
and heart strings, or arteries; also their throat is oppressed with thick
phlegm, and their breast with a rotten cough, and store of watery matter lodging
there. The cause is from extremity of cold taken by bathing, or otherwise by
much wet.

The Way to make diet drinks by decoctions or to extract the Spirits of Plants
or Herbs: Also to make Syrups, Lohochs, or Lambetives, Pills, Gly^^ers, Fumes,
Suffumigations, Cataplasms, Ointments, Bathes: Also the making and
administrating of Purgations and vomits, and concerning blood-letting, etc.
Concerning Decoctions and Dyet-drinks.
HAving by the Rules elsewhere expressed in this Book collected the herbs
together suitable to the cure according unto their virtues and numbers, always
remembering in all cures to fortify the heart with herbs proper, you must take
the herbs and chop them small: But unto all diet drinks I usually add as
follows, to make it the more strong and useful, viz. raisons, currants,
(sometimes figs) liquorish, and aniseed, and if the Patient be much troubled
with wind, then you may also put into it sweet fennil-seed, coliander-seed and
such like, which are good to expel wind. These additions must be bruised well
in a mortar, and so boiled with the herbs, when its boiling you must keep them
close covered, whereby to keep in the spirit, you may boil these herbs, with
the addition in bear or ale. If you desire to make it strong and nutritive,
then when it is new boiled you may put into it white wind, muscadel, or brandy,
according unto the temper of the Patient. A good handful of all sorts of herbs
put together will be sufficient for three or four gallons of liliquor; you may
let it boil until a forth part or thereabouts be wasted, for if you keep it
close covered it will not waste very much in the boiling: Now of this diet
drink we usually give the Patient thereof three times a day, viz morning,
afternoon and at night, and every morning about an hour after they have taken
the diet drink, you must give the Patient water grewel or broth made with
either the same herbs, or other herbs which are suitable to the Cure, according
unto their virtues and numbers.

How to extract the Spirits of Plants and Herbs.
If the Patient be weak, and must take small quantities, then you must do as
follows, having collected the herbs together suitable to the cure, shred them
small with the addition according as in the decoction aforesaid, and put them
into a limbeck still, and put into it a quantity of bear or ale with some
white wind, muskadel, and brandy to make it proportionable unto the quantity of
liquor and herbs before expressed, viz. a good handful of herbs with the
additions unto two quarts or better of liquor, this will keep a long time.
There is yet another way to extract the Spirit as follows. Take the herbs
with the additions, being shread small and bruised put them into warm water,
and put some berm unto it, let it work three days, as does bear, and then
distill it in a limbeck still, if you desire to have it strong you may put
brandy or Spirit of Wine unto it, and put fresh herbs to it, and still it over
again.

The way to make Syrups.
Take the Roses, herbs or flowers, and bruise them, put them into a convenient
quantity of fair water, my usual dose is about three pints of water to a pound
of flowers, roses, or herbs: let the water be hot, and let it stand with the
herbs or flowers in it, about twelve hours, then strain it and infuse more of
the same herbs or flowers, and heat more water and put unto it; you must
sometimes infuse the roses, herbs, or flowers whole without bruising to make it
have the smell of the plant: The more of the roses, herbs, or flowers you do
infuse into the liquor, the stronger it will be, and the oftener you do infuse
the better: The last infusions I usually boil, and then gently strain it, and
to every pint of liquor add a pound of the best Sugar at the least, you must
cimber it over the fire, until it be a Syrup, you may know when it is enough by
cooling some in a spoon, when it is made you must keep it in glasses or stone
pots, bound over only with paper, or such like, you must not stop it close
with cork, least it break the glass.

Concerning Lohochs or Lambatives the making and use.
Having made your election of such herbs, which are of virtue to cure, such
inward defects required, shread and boil them by way of decoction, and when you
have strained it, put twice its wait of honey or sugar, and so boil it to a
Lohoch, which is somewhat thicker than a Syrup, if the grief be of phlegm, then
honey is best. These lambetives are usually taken with a liquorish stick. And
are most usually taken for inflammations and ^ulcers in the lungs, Coughs,
Asthmaes and difficulty of breath, and such like infirmities.

Concerning Pills their making and use.
All kinds of Pills are made only by beating the substantial matter into a
powder, and so with syrup (or little gum Tragacanth dissolved in distilled
water) made up into Pills. They are usually taken at night. If it be one^y to
cause the Patient to go to stool the next day, then so much alloes as will heap
on a two pence for a strong body or less for a weak body mixed with a little
mirrh and saffron will be enough, these Pills are also good for the head and
stomach. There are many forts of Pil^ made for several infirmities, as you may
find in the London Dispensatory, unto which I shall refer you. I confess I
seldom use any Pills, except what I have mentioned; for I find the Astrological
way of cure by herbs does (if rightly applied) cure all distempers, and griefs
whatsoever, loosen the body and alay any pain of the head, and the like as you
shall find in this book, yet sometimes when the patient is bound in body and
the destemper requires a decoction made of such herbs, which are commonly
heating, and so for the most part binding, such as are palpetations,
convulsions, palsies^, apoplexies, and such like. Then I usually give the
Patient Pills at night made as aforesaid, if need require.

Concerning Glysters.
If the Patient be much afflicted in the belly and Guts, or is very costive in
body, as sometimes it will fall out, more especially when the grief requires
herbs heating and binding to work their cure, then I usually apply Glisters and
ointments made of such herbs, which are antipathetical to the afflicting
Planet: But most especially such herbs, which are good to comfort the heart, to
expel poison, and cleanse the Guts. Also you must be careful that the herbs be
gathered at the right planetary hours, not omitting their numbers which he
longs to each Planet. When you have gotten the herbs together, shred them
small, and boil them in milk, together with such seeds and roots, which are
good to expel winds, about a pint and a half of milk boiled until it be near
half wasted will be enough, for any reasonable man or woman; after its boiled
and strained I usually put into it three or four spoonfuls of sallet oil, and
a spoonful of honey or course sugar. And so give it the Patient blood warm. But
my usual way is first to give the Patient a suppository made of Sal-Gem. to
bring them first to stool, by which means I find the Glyster works the more
effectual upon the humor offending. For many times if no suppository be first
given the glisters, will not stay, by reason the Patient cannot keep them in
their body.

Concerning Fumes.
If the head and brain be disaffected by reason of superfluous moisture, then
fumes are proper to be used by reason they have a drying quality, provided they
be made antipathetical unto the afflicting planet, you must shred, bruise, and
dry those herbs, plants, or roots, which you intend to use, and so bring them
into powder, and when you intend to fume their heads put some of this powder
upon hot coals, and let the Patients hold their heads over it, twice a day is
enough, viz. morning and evening. They must be careful to keep their head and
feet warm.

Concerning Suffumigations.
If the head and brain be disaffected by reason of great drought, be it hot or
cold drought, you must make choice of such herbs according unto their virtues
and numbers, which are antipathetical unto the afflicting Planet, shread them
small and boil them, either in strong bear, ale, or strong maulted water, and
while it is hot, let the Patients hold their head over it, and be careful they
take no cold afterward.

Concerning Cataplasms.
Cataplasmes are oft-times used to help cure Agues and sometimes to apply unto
the feet to draw from the head, and more especially in such infirmities and
defects wherein the Nerves and arteries are concerned being laid to the pulse,
neck, and other parts of the body, as occasion is offered, I commonly use them
in convulsions, appoplexies palpitations, and such like distempers. The way to
make them is thus, you must make choice of such herbs according unto their
virtues and numbers, which are good to cure the grief as you shall find in this
book, shread them small and pound them in a mortar, with a quantity of white
Salt, and a few raisons, honey, a little Venus turpentine, or burgelary pitch to
make it hold together, you must lay it on hot.

Concerning Ointments.
Those Ointments which are made heating must be made with sallet-Oyle, and
those Ointments, which are cooling must be made with either neats foot, oil,
or sweet lard; I usually put into both a little sheep suet, so make it thick:
the way to make each kind is as follows: And first of the oil heating, having
by the rules in this book made choice of such herbs, according unto their
virtues and numbers, which are proper to cure the desect, shread them small and
bruise them well in a mortar; then put them into a convenient quantity of oil,
imagine unto two handful of herbs about a pint of oil; If you cannot stay to
make it by reason of your present occasions, then set it over the fire, keeping
it close covered, and when its near crisp strain forth the oil, and if you
desire to make it very strong, then shread more herbs, and bruise them and boil
them in the same oil again, until it be crisp, and so strain it, and keep it
for your use. But if you desire to make it strong, and have convenient time to
do it, then bruise the herbs and put them into the oil, and set them in the Sun
for a week or two, then strain it and infuse more herbs, and at length boil
them until they be crisp, and having strained it keep it for your use. If you
intend to make a cold oil, then infuse the herbs being shread and pounded, as
foresaid, into sweet-lard or neats-feet oil, you may take some of each, and
make it after the same manner, as you did the hot oil aforesaid. If these
ointments be used about wounds, running sores, or ulcers, then ^twill be
convenient to dissolve half an ounce of turpentine in two ounces of oil by the
heat of the fire, more especially if you use the hot oil thereunto, otherwise
not for every cure, for the most part is antipathetical unto the afflicting
Planet, except the afflicting Planet be very strong in the heavens, for then
you must in some measure comply as I have else where in this book expressed.

Concerning Bathes or Fomentations.
Bathes are used either in case of hot or cold swellings, sometimes for aches,
ulcers, wounds, burnings, or scaldings, and such like, having by the rules in
this book made choice of such herbs and plants, which are necessary for the
cure, cut them small and boil them in strong maulted water. My usual way is to
boil the water and malt together, about three or four pints of malt, to seven
or eight pints of water; when the liquor is strong strain it from the malt and
put the herbs into the liquor, and so soon as it boils take it from the fire;
you must bathe or foment the place grieved warm with the bath, and then
immediately use such ointments, as are proper for the cure, and so by swath or
otherwise according, as the grief is make it up. I commonly use the same herbs
in the bath which makes the oil: once a day, being at evening, is my usual time
to do it.

Of PVRGATIONS.
When you give a Purge, let the Moon be in a watery sign, or let a watery sign
ascend, and let the Moon be aspected by any planet which is direct, if swift in
motion and under the earth the better. But by no means let the Moon be aspected
of any retrograde planet, for then the Patient will be apt to vomit.

Secondly, If you desire to purge any humor, or element predominant, do as
follows. Let the planet be weak which is of the nature of the element
offending. And let the Moon apply unto or be in Trine or Sextile with that
planet, which is of contrary Nature; as instance Mars, who rules choler, being
by nature hot and dry, Now if you desire to purge choler, then let Mars be
weak, and let the Moon be applying unto Venus, and if you desire to purge
melancholy, which is under, then let be weak, and the Moon applying unto
Jupiter: And if you desire to purge phlegm let Venus be weak, the Moon
decreasing and applying to the Sun by Trine or Sextile aspect: And if to purge
blood let Jupiter be weak, and the Moon applying unto Mercury: You must do the
like in purging any other parts or members of the body, by observing what
planet has predominancy over it, as instance Saturn rules the spleen, Jupiter
rules the liver and lungs, Mars the gall, Sol the heart, Venus the reins and
vessels of generation, yet notwithstanding if any planet, which owns the
infirmity, be Lord of the ascendant of the Patient, and if he be strong its the
better, but let the Moon apply by any friendly aspect unto a fortune, and if
she be in the sign, which represents the part of the body grieved its the
better.

Of the manner of purging the Body.
If the body require a strong purge be sure to eat no supper, but if any let it
be light of digestion, and take it early before you go to bed. Also before you
go to bed take a little aloes in the pap of an apple, so much as will heap on a
single penny, but not bruised too small, or otherwise take two or three small
pills made suitable to the humor offending; and if the Patients body be much
bound, take either a suppository made with Sal-Gem, or a glyster to open and
prepare the body, before the physic works: Take the purge in the morning
early, and let the Moon be in a watery sign or else let a watery sign ascend, as
is above expressed; take either water gruel or thin broth, about an hour
after, and likewise after every stool, and fast at the least six hours after (I
mean from meat) or any other diet.

How to Purge the Heal, or remote parts.
When you intend to purge the head or remote parts of the body, you must give
the patient ^^ls made up in a hard form, for the longer it remains in the
body the better it works upon the remote humors offending.

How to purge Choler.
That which purges Choler gently is peach-flowers, blew-violets, damask Roses,
cent^ury: But I chiefly use aloes, and Rubarb, provided the body be strong,
else not.

How to purge Phlegm and water.
Elder-buds, elder-flowers, broom-flowers, flower-de-luce roots, hyssop, Spurg,
dwarf-elder. orri: but I chiefly use bryony-root or jallop, the body being
strong.

How to purge Melancholy,
Pollipodium, sumitory, white and black Hellebore, dodder, Epithimum, Inde
Mirabilaus, lapis lazuli. But that which I chiefly use it sena and Seamony.

How to purge Blood.
To purge the blood is best done by decoctions made with such herbs, which are
suitable to the grief, as you may find elsewhere in this Book; But if you
desire to purge gross humors, proceeding from corruption of blood; as boils,
botches tumors. itch, or scabs: Then I commonly use the powder called pulvus
sanctis, or holy powder, made according to the London Dispensatory.

Of Vomits.
When you intend to give a Vomit, let either the Moon or Lord of the ascendant
be in an earthy sign aspected by a Planet retrograde, and let the sign
ascending be an earthy sign, when the vomit is taken; or let the Moon be
aspected by planets stationary or slow in motion, if about the earth the
better: Any one of these observations will serve where there are no testimonies
against it.

Of Bathes, or Sweats.
Enter bathes or sweats for hot diseases, when the Moon is in a a watery sign,
as,,.

Enter bathes or sweats, for cold infirmities, when the Moon is in fiery signs,
as,,.

Of Fluxes. Rheums, and Laxes,
To stay fluxes, Rheums, and Laxes let the Moon be in an Earthy sign, as,,.

Of Clysters.
Take Glysters when the Moon is in aerie or watery signs, especially in or.

Of Blood-letting.
Let blood on the right side at spring, and on the left-side at the fall.

Choleric persons must be let blood, when the Moon is in watery signs, as,, or.

Phlegmatic persons must be let blood, when the Moon is in fiery signs, as,,
but not in, because that sign governs the heart.

Melancholy persons must be let blood, when the Moon is in aerie signs, as and,
but not in, because that sign governs the arms, except you let blood in some
other part of the body.

Sanguin persons may let blood, when the Moon is in my sign except, or the
place signified by the sign where the Moon is.

Young people may let blood before the first Quarter is over. Middle age from
the first Quarter to the Full. Elder people from the Full to the last Quarter.
Old people from the last Quarter to the change.
Good to comfort the virtue. Attractive the Moon in Retentive Degestive
Expulsive

Here follows a Catalogue of such choice herbs, which cures the most usual
infirmities and diseases incident unto men and women (being discovered by the
Sun and Moon afflicted in any of the twelve signs, or by a figure of twelve
houses) out of which you may make diet drinks, intments, baths, glysters,
fumes, suffumigations, cataplasms, and the like, according unto the humor
offending: And without question, if rightly understand, may serve to cure all
griefs and infirmities whatsoever, although not by me named, as for example, if
one shall desire cure for the Asthmah or shortness of breath, these herbs which
opens obstructions does it.
Note, That all inward griefs or infirmities are usually cured only by
decoctions and the spirits of plants, which are extracted from them: And such
diseases or infirmities which proceed from the heart and brain, and lie in the
nerves and arteries and vital spirits, such as are convulsions, appoplexies,
palpitations, palsies, and such like are not cured only by decoctions, but
also by ointments and cataplasmes applied unto the pulses and other parts
suitable: And as concerning all pains, aches, humors, and swellings, baths and
ointments, suitable to their condition are most proper: not omitting diet
drinks, corresponding in all cures whatsoever.

Note, That I do not use all the herbs named for every Cure, but only a select
number, as is else where expressed.

A A
ABortion to hinder, Snakeweed or bistort, madder, moss, sage ^anfie, tresoil.
Aches coming of cold, or taken under cold planets to help, rosemary, camomil,
rue, bays, Saint John's wort, lavender, marjerom, sage, cink-foil, broom,
wormwood, ragwort, mugwort, elmpeel, smallage, comphrey vervain, wildtansey,
brooklime, arsmart, goutwort, calmint, hyssop, charlock, scabious,
southernwood, marigolds. Aches coming of heat, or taken under Mars, Camomil,
Saint John's wort, baume, arsmart, grouncel, sorrel, archangel, mallows,
honey-suckles, violet leaves, elmpeel, elder-flowers, comphrey, mugwort,
smallage, henbane, chick-weed, seagreen, turnip, cabbage, cinkfoil, plantain,
orpine, daisie, lettuce, spinach, endive, adders-tongue, pimpernel, trefoil,
sow-thistle. After-hirth and Secundine to expel: angelica, camomil, chervil,
horehound, mallows, mugwort, marygolds, penyroyal, time, wake robin,
alessander, fennel, garlic, house-tongue. Agues, If you intend to cure all
kinds of Agues you must take notice under what planet the patient is most
afflicted, whether under Saturn or under Mars or both as I have elsewhere
expressed in this book, and so make choice of herbs accordingly: rosemary,
lovage, camomil, rue, centaury, southernwood, wood-bitany, sage, vervain,
fetherfew, horsemint, savin, assarabacca, carduus, wormwood, tobacco, burdock,
mustard, rhubarb, sorrel, grouncel, plantain, calamint, cinquefoil, fumetary,
black hellebore, smallage, satirion dodder, bryony, agrimony, hyssop,
vipers-grass, endive, succory, burrage, trefoile, periwinckle. Appetite to
procure: sorrel, sloes, apples, barberies, capers, black-cherries, mulberies,
mints, goose-berries, grapes; generally such herbs, plants, or fruits, which
are sower, having no unpleasant relish are good. Saint Anthonies fire: rhubarb,
rue, saffron, bugloss, brooklime, adders tongue, houseleek, chickweed,
nightshade, white poppy, pondweed, crab-tree, dane-wort, hounds-tongue
adders-tongue, henbane, lentils, mandrake, hemlock. Appoplexies: misletoe,
lavender wall-gilly-flowers, melilor, box wild citruls, lilly, marjoram, sage,
pellitory, fennel, master-wort. Apostumes, adders-tongue, bears breech,
melilot, onions, rye, chickweed daisie, liverwort, privet, vervain, flax,
mugwort.
B B
Back and Reins to strengthen: Saint John's-wort baum, angellica, rosemary,
misletoe clary, mints, cowslips, comfrey lungwort, burrage-blossoms,
sweet-maudline, costmary, mace, Solomons-seal, wood-bittany Barrenness to help:
Barren-wort, clary, Saint James-wort, Ladies mantle, mercury, horsmint, sage,
shepheards-needle- Belching sour to repress: Aniseed, bitony, cammomil,
marjoram, wormwood, hares-foot, wood-bitony, burnet- Belly-ach: Cammomil,
centory, sweet-marjoram, plantaney, smallage, rue, angelica, sage southernwood,
time, hyssop, gronnd-ivy or alehoof fenel-root, and fennel-seed, fern, stinking
gladwin, marshmallows. Belly to looson: basil, baise, white-beets, elder-buds,
fumitory, hounds-tongue, laurel mallows, maidenhair, mercury, mirabilan,
mulberries peach flowers, roses, poppy, potatoes, rhubarb, satirion, scabious,
seen, spurg, spinach, violet-flowers, leaves, and roots- Belly to bind:
bulleys, caltrop chestnuts, cowslips, eglantine, Saint John's-wort, lentils,
ginger, dates, medlars, quinces rice, services, whortleberries, hot stued
pruens, red-wine. Bladder to cleanse: angelica, rosemary, pimpernel, dandelion,
burrage, burdock, assarabacca, furzbush-flowers, featherfew, chervil, dodder,
amphier southernwood, spignel, vine, white wind. Vide, Stone in the Kidneys,
Reins and Bladder. Bleeding to stay: aloe, red-beans, golden-rod, hawes, ladies
bedstraw, liverwort, moss, archangel, plantaney, yarrow, saunders oak,
drydates, chestnuts, comfrey, tormentil, roses, rosemary, burnet cats-tail, herb
two pence, horse-tail: moon-wort, mulberries: If the Bleeding be at nose, my
usual way is to tie the small of the leg and the hand-wrist on that side which
bleedeth, and to dry some of the patients blood to a powder, and let them snuff
it up into their nostrils. Blood to cleanse: angelica, rue, sage,
scurvey-grass, rhubarb, blood-wort, liver-wort, scabions, burrage, Hyssop,
blew-bottle, broom-buds, fox-gloves, watercresses, elderbuds and berries,
burdock, chervil. Breast and Stomach to cleanse, Vide, Obstructions to open and
remove. Breath-stinking to help: rosemary, cowslips, rue, wormwood, balsome,
butchers-broom, smallage, pomecitron, burnet, angelica, sage. Broken-Bones to
help knit: bugle* elm-peel, butchers-broom, holly, mastick-tree, self-heal,
Solomons-seal, yarrow, bugle. Burning and Scalding to cure: adders-tongue,
asphodil, balm-apple bears-breech, burdock chick-weed, cat tail, coltsfoot,
danewort, daffodil, elder* henbane, water-bitony, housleek lettice, orpine,
plantane, purslain, tobacco, friers-cowle, cabbage, juice of crabs, or sower
apples, sheeps-dung. Burstings or Ruptures to cure: Saint John's-wort comfrey,
cinkfoil, Solomons-seal, sanickle, rupture-wort, elme-peel, vervain, calamint,
yarrow, daisie, golden-rod, knapweed, mouse-ear, valerian, tway-blade,
adders-tongue, horse-tail-baum, century, bugle, juniper, Venus wake-ro, bin
Saturn tway-blade, germander, birth-wort, Saturn hawk-weed, Saturn birds-foot,
Mars Osmund-royal, Mars and water-Osmund.
C C
Carbuncles to cure: spurge, tobacco, walnut, vetch, fennel, colewort, or
cabbage. Catarrhs or thin Rheums to stay: saffron, angelica, sweet-marjoram,
sweet-maudlin, cost-mary, lavender, Saint James wort, bugloss, calamint,
tobacco, spignel, storax. Childbirth to help: bugloss, balm-apple, horehound
mother-wort, mugwort, parsely, wood-bind, sun-dew columbine, carrawaies,
cinnamon, parsnip, vine, trefoil, spikenard, mallows, and marshmallows. Choler
and Phlegm to purge: black-alder, aloes briony, centory, elder-buds, endive,
fennel, stinking gladdon, black hellebore, hyssop, lungwort, mercury, spurge,
sycomore, tamarind, tormentil, woad, violet leaves and roots* glasswort,
gourds, flower-de-luce, fleawort, Saint John's wort, mezereon. Chollick of wind
to ease: agrimony, aniseed, angelica, apricock, bettony, bezar-tree, briony
cammomil, sweet-sennel-seed, coliander-seed, carroway-seed centory,
cranes-bill, daisie, danewort, eglantine, fethersew, galingal, herb true-love,
jack by the hedge, lavender, parsley, peach-flowers, horseradish, ribwort,
rue, saxefrage, tobacco* tamarisk* zedory yarrow, mouse-ear Colds, Coughs, and
Hoarseness to cure, angelica peny-royal, bettony, borage, coltsfoot,
cinquefoil, clary, horehound, calmint, cumfrey, daffodil, elecampane, figs,
fennel, germander, stinking gladdon, jack in the hedge, juniper liquorice,
maidenhair, moss, parsely, mouse ear, rocket, rue, sage, sun-due, time,
tobacco, valerian, vine* zedoary. Consumptions to cure: balsame, barley cicely,
mouse ear china, cullians, melons, moss, vine, burdock, snails, aniseed,
arrow-head, borrage, bugloss, dandelion, hore-hound. Convulsions to cure, Saint
John's wort, misletoe, centaury, bame, angelica, clary, mints, cowslips
wood-bitany, wall-gilly-flowers, sage, sweet-marjoram, lavender, southern-wood,
elecampane, bryony, haukweed mellilot, wormwood, carduus, garlic, hyssop,
asphodil, calamint, dane-wort, stinking gladdon, hearts ease, sea-holly, sage,
time, valerian. Courses of women or monthly terms to provoke: flower-wort,
motherwort, nep, sage, dill wood-bittany, bayberies, elecampane mercury, wild
carrots hactaper, germander, clary white-beets, mugwort stinking gladdon,
flower-de-luce, euckopint, birthwort, calamint catmint, fetherfew,
gilly-flowers, gooseberries, groundsel, honeywort, hore-hound Saint John's wort,
lovage, peny-royal, piony rosemary rue saffron, savin, savory, briony,
southernwood, spignal, tansie wake robin, woolfs-bane. Courses of women or the
Reds to stop: Saint John's wort: red beers, red-nettles arrach, comphrey roots*
yarrow, red corral, red pibble-stone, ribwort, corriander, rind of oak, in fume
to sit over, juniper, ladies mantle, lentils, periwinkle, quinces, sanickle,
saunders, red poppy, tamarisk tree. Cramps to ease: asphodil, bazil, bears
breech, calamint, wild carrat, elecompane, dane-wort, flower-de-luce, garlic,
sea holly, misletoe, peniroyal, rosemary, saffron, southern-wood, tobacco,
turpentine, vine, woodbine, wolfs-bane, fennel, camomil.
D D
Deafness to cure: angelica, bay, bawm, lavender, wood-bettony, holly, ivy,
rue, wall-nuts, tobacco, hellebore, savory, seen, wormwood, carduus, henbane.
Digestion and Concoction to help: angelica, bawm, sweet-marjoram, peniroyal,
spearmint, elecompane, sweet-maudlin, costmary, rocket, tarragon, Jack by the
hedge, lovage, radish, camphire, vine, carroway, eglantine, cinnamon, cloves,
coriander. Dogs mad their bitings to cure: hounds tongue, bawm, bettony,
burdock, eglantine, sea-dogs grass, hore-hound, mug-wort, mercury, pimpernel,
mints, seen, yarrow, box: The flesh of the same dog present cure. Dropsy to
cure: agrimony, asarabacca barley, bazil, camomil, celandine, centory, burdock,
broom, broocklime, ash, bryony, coffee, dittany, elder, flower-de-luce, garlic
hellebore, box, sea holly, laurel, marjoram, sweet-maudlin, peniroyal,
pimpernel, moss, spurge, tobacco, wormwood, cardus, rosemary, lavender, bays,
rue, smallage, sage, St John's wort, hyssop, varven, tamarisk, rubarb, saffron,
bettony, anniseed, parsley.
E E
Ears pain and noise to help: jews ears, bettony, bazil, asphodil, clivers,
coriander, danewort, dittany, fennel, hemp seed, ivy parsley, pellitory rubarb,
tamarisk, melilot bays, leeks, peach, plantane, marjoram. Eyesight to quicken:
eyebright, celandine white roses archangel, angelica, bawm, centory,
germander, hawkweed, heath, lavender, lovage elecompane, melilot, medesweet,
rue, savory, vine, vipers grass, sparagus, wake-robin, valerian. Eyes inflamed,
red or blood-shot to cure; blew bottle, clary, eyebright, housleek, ivy,
larkspur, marjerom, mede-sweet, marygold, moss, mullein, plantany, poppy,
southern-wood, tansey, trefoile, wolfs-bane yarrow, myrtle, violets, endine.
F. F.
Falling sickness, piony, misletto rosemary, sweet-marjerom, southern-wood,
lavender, Elecompany, germander, hysop, wood-bittany, sage, costmary,
cinquefoile, burrage, master-wort, staggerwort, wormwood cardus garlic,
cowslip, fox-gloves, pennyroyal, elder-buds, violets grouncel, mallows, box,
bryany, black cherries, ditany, fennel, rue* hellebore, sea-holly juniper
laserwort, moss, mousear, purslain, satirian seen, sundew, time vine, trefoile
Fevers to cure, marygolds, roses, hysop dandelion, blew-bottle, herb two
pence, purslain, snakeweed, worm wood. Fevers burning to cure, adders-tongue,
barley bourage, butter-burr, crowfoot, currants, daises, dandelion, endive,
hazel-tree lilly, limons, violets Fevers Pestilential to cure, angelica, rue,
saffron, bishops-weed, carnations, dragons, ducks-meat, fluellin, sorrel,
scabious, wormwood, sage, burnet, violets. Phlegm to purge, bryony,
butchers-broom, daffedil, dodder, feverfew, fox-gloves, fumitory, stinking
gladdon, endive, succory, birthwort, hawk-weed black hellebore, henbane,
hissop, holly-berries, bind-weed, alheal, butter-wort, elder-buds. Flowers of
women, see courses. Flux of the belly, and humors to stop, red beets,
blood-wort, box, brambles, bugloss, burnet cinquefoile, cocks-head, cud-weed,
flower-de-luce, cranesbil, germander, golden-rod, hart's-tongue, holly,
ore-hound, ladies-mantle, moss, orpine, periwinckle, pimpernel, plantainy,
quince, rice, rupture-wort, services, sheapherds-purse, spikeneard, wormwood
Flux bloody to stay, addders tongue, agrimony, barberries, red beans, bullais,
burnet, chestnuts, cinquefoil cowslips, pruens, hot dry dates, dock, hazle-nuts,
herb two peace, holly, rose, house-leek, lilly* madder, maudlin, costmary,
mede-sweet, moss, mulberries, oak, oxlips, rosemary, sorrel, whortle-berry,
yarrow, tormetil, periwinckle, quinces, tansey, self-heale. French Pox to cure,
rue, smallage, hissop, sea-holly, sage, alloes, marsh-mallowes, southern-wood,
plantany, damask-roses, asarabacca, cowslip, primrose, hemlock, angelica,
wormwood, violet-leaves and flowers, box, dane-wort, hounds-tongue, tobacco,
tormentil, vipers-grass, hops, vine, tamarisk, dodder, pellitory: there is also
two sorts of wood used in dyet-drinks, viz. Guaicum, and fraxinus, or the gums
of them. Note, that in curing this disease, those herbs which are used for
bathes must be drawing, clensing, and healing, such as is rue, smallage,
hissop, tobacco, marshmallows, box, eringo, etc. And the herbs used for
diet-drinks must be good to expel poison, purge and cleanse, as rue, aloes,
angelica, sage, bays, cowslips, primrose, plantany, violets, roses, etc. Also
the wood or gum called Guiacum, and Fraxinus. The herbs which makes the oils
or oyntmenes must be good to resist poison, cooling and healing, such as rue,
angelica, cowslip, damask-roses, plantany, violets, prim rose^, henbane,
hemlock, etc. in this distemper, you must let blood in the neither vein of the
yard: by this rule you may cure, if begun in time, but after long continuance
in this condition fluxing and other extremities must be used. Fundament*
falling to remedy, snake-weed, gals, blew pimpernel, star-wort, cuckowpint,
wake-robin.
G. G.
Gall, to open, asarabacca, buggle, calamint, rubarb, hemp seed bitter-sweet,
celandine, centory, endive, saffron, ale-hoof, or ground ivy, cammomil,
dandelion, dodder of time or other dodders, quich-grass. Green Sickness to
cure, asarabacca, broom, centory, marygolds rubarb, maudlin, vine, powder of
steel. Guts stopped, or the illiack passion to cure, ivy, mints, sheapheards
needle, plantane mallows, southernwood, summer savory. Gout to cure, see aches
hot and cold.
H. H.
Headache to cure, aloes, bazil, betony, bryany, butchers-broom, cudweed,
cummin dodder, fluellin, frankincense, hellebore, housleek, ironwort,
medesweet, melilot* mints, mugwort, moss, nightshade, enny-royal, spickneard,
roses, sycamore, tobacco, time, vine, vervain, woodroof. Headache, to draw unto
the feet by way of cataplasm, rue, smallage, bryony, henbane, worm-woo, cardus,
mallows, lavinder, hissop, hactaper. By this way I cured one Mrs. Forest in
Oxon a Stationers wife who was a long time pained after she had tried many
others. Heads giddiness and swimmings to cure, aniseed, catmint, bryony,
fennel, bears-ears, beets, severfew, pellitory, peniroyal, seen, solomon's seal,
maudlin, master-wort, olives* saffron, box, time, tobacco, wolfs bane,
vipers-grass vine Head to purge: celandine, elder-buds, stinking gladdon,
laurel, sweet-marjoram* maudlin, costmary, dragons, pimpernel, rosemary, seen,
sneeze-wort, solomon's seal, sow-bread, clary, vine Heart to fortify against
infection, and likewise to comfort, angelica, rosemary, marigolds, bawm,
borrage, bugloss, carnations, saffron, rue, sage, seen, zedoary, mother-wort,
cinnamon, damask roses, lavender. Hearts fainting or palpetations to cure:
angelica, marigolds, borrage, bawm, rosemary, bay berries, costmary, burnet,
cinnamon, cloves, endive, sage, saffron, nutmeg, strawberries, damask roses
spikenard, galingale, hearts tongue, lavender, saunders vipers grass: Also the
hearts of creatures which are good to eat. Hearing lost to cure: bawm,
lavender, bay, briony, henbane, wood-bittony, rocket, southern-wood, tobacco,
wormwood rue, cardus, sweet-marjoram, eyebright, cocks head, turpentine,
woodbind Hickock to stay: birth-wort, fennel, hearts tongue, marjoram* shepherds
needle, time, skirrets, woodbind dill. Hemorhoids or piles to cure: pilewort,
cuckopint plantany wall peniroyal, pelatory of the wall, chickweed, catmint,
stinking gladdon, gout-wort, hounds tongue, laurel, leeks, tobacco, lupine,
fig-wort, fig tree, garlic, vine, fumitory: The root of hounds tongue dried
under embers in paste, or wet paper made into a suppository gives present ease.
Hoarsness, and loss of voice to help: burdock-root, cherry-tree gum chervil
cinkfoil, liquorish, horehound, violets, leeks, rosemary, saffron, coltsfoot
turnop tobacco, lavender. Humors gross to expel: aloes, bay, camomil, costmary
calamint, centory, catmint fox-gloves fumitory garlic, hyssop, juniper,
lavender liquorish, misleto, mother-wort, sage rue, scurvigrass southern-wood,
sycamore parsley, heart-wort fennel nettle, scabious, turbith vine horseradish
lovage, spearmint, peach-tree peniroyal, St. Peter's wort, pollipody of the oak,
roses.
I I
Iaundies yellow to cure: aloes agremony, the inner yellow bark of black elder,
asarabacca, bay, wood-bittony, calamint, doder of time, flower de-luce,
furz-bush flowers, hemp, mouse-ear, hedge-mustard, eringo and sea-holly, hops,
horehound, madder, rosemary, rupture-wort, succory roots, wormwood, bazil,
butchers broom, briony, centory, docks, liver-wort, marjerom, roses, rubarb,
rue, saffron, spikenard, tormentil, tamarisk, vine, broom-blossoms, fumitory.
Inflammations to assuage; apples, barley, beets, bugloss, claver, colewort,
colts foot, endive, succory, gooseberries, hemlock, henbane, horsetail,
housleek, Saint John's wort, knot-grass, ladies mantle, lilly, liquorish,
liverwort, melilot, moss, mulberries, nightshade, orpine, pimpernel purslane,
ribwort, saunders, Solomons-seal, sorrel, sowthistle, violets, wheat, woad,
madder, marjerom, clavers. Joints pained, See Aches hot and cold. Illiack
passion, See Guts stopped. Itches to cure: alehoof or ground ivy, bay, calendine,
chick-weed, cuckow-pit, dock, fumitory, vinegar, hyssop, hops, plantane, roses,
cockle, elecompane, mugwort, rhubarb, seen, tobacco, wormwood, vine, stinking
gladdon, madder, pondweed.
K
Kernals and knots in the flesh to cure: archangel, cinquesoil, mandrake,
mugwort, mustard, lupine, pondweed, rib-wort, rue, spikenard, tormentil, woad,
figwort, white-lilly root. Kidneys to cleanse: kidneywort or wall peny-royal,
garden-tansey, furz-bush-flowers, dodder, elder, fluellin, hops, juniper
maidenhair, parsley, piony, plantane, fennel, broom-blossoms, southernwood,
saxifrage, shepheards-needle time, spignel. King's Evil to cure: angelica,
bay berries, cammonil, baume, burnet, eyebright, marigold, primrose, costmary
celandine, clary, wood bittony, burrage, sweet, marjerom, archangel, melilot,
lavender, bugloss, endive, misletoe, sorrel, hearts-tongue, fox-gloves,
pimpernel, southernwood, barley flower or meal, pilewort, rosemary, or the
lesser celandine, cleavers, figwort or throat-wort, stinking-gladdon, burdock,
mints, broom-blossoms.
L
Lasks or Looseness to stay: agrimony, barberries, bulleis, burnet, Chestnuts,
couslips, barley, black-cherries, cinnamon, clivers, darnel, St. John's Wort,
mints, nutmeg quinces, yarrow, sage, hart's-tongue, furzbush, flowers,
hazel-nuts, filberds, oak, wheat, prewons hot, red wine, red pibles broke into
powder, rupture-wort. Leprosy to cure, ash-tree-bark, bryany, stinking
gladdon, black-helebore, darnel, the mealior flower, calamint, elm-tree-bark or
leaves, flaxweed, mustard bay, saffron tamarinds, time, vine, virgins-bower*
viper-wine, a snake first roasted with salt, and afterward burnt and brought
into powder of which give the Patient a dram every morning in liquor
convenient. Lethergy or drousie evil to cure, sow-fennel, watercresses,
lavender, mustard, onions, pennyroyal rosemary, sage, summer savory, jack by
the hedge time, vine. Liver obstructed, to open and purge liverwort, agrimony,
dandelion, asarabacca, bay, wood-bittany, angelica, celandine, centory,
costmary, daisiees, hart's-tongue dodder, elder-buds, cammomel, elecompane,
broom-blossoms, furz-bush-flowers, horehound, hemp, sea-holly sweet marjerom,
plantain, saffron, sorrel, scurvy grass, seen, tormentil, juniper, liquerish,
fox-gloves, germander, peach, spicknel, shepheards-needle, vine. Lungs to open
and cleanse, longwort, hounds-tongue, pollipody of the oak, hissop, alexanders
borrage, chervil, cinquefoile, cudweed, horehound, coltsfoot, burdock,
vervain, St. James-wort, rubarb, sundew, liquerish, bay, tormentil, angelica,
apples, feverfew, sweet marjerom, saffron, seen, dodder, alexander, birth-wort,
figs, time, vine rubarb, zedoary.
M. M.
Melancholy to repress and purge, apples, bacom, angelica, burrage bugloss,
elecompane, archangel flowers, cowslips, costmary, burnet, dandelion,
feverfew, fumitory, madder, pennyroyal, bazil, dodder, frankincense, lavender,
saffron, marygolds, time, scurvy grass, tormentil, seen, vine. Mirth to cause,
angelica, bawm, burrage, burnet, carnations, chervile, rosemary, marygolds,
saffron, time, rise archangel, blossoms, sweet marjerom, also all pleasant
fumes. Mother-fits, suffocation or rising to cure, motherwort, stinking arrach,
bawm, bay, burdock, cammomil, mugwort, ele-companie, sparment, rosemary,
wood-bittany, bishops-weed burnet, butter-bur, caraway, fetherfew masterwort,
catmint pellitory of the wall, peony, summer savory, walnut-tree, fennel,
germander, jack by the hedge, juniper, lovage, marigolds, mustard peny-royal,
rosemary, rhubarb, tobacco, southernwood, spignel, wolf-bane, vine. Milk to
cause in women's breast: burrage buglos, lettuce, vipers, bugloss, barley,
cabbage purslane, rocket, sow-thistle, turnip, milk-wort trefoile anemony*
herb-frankincense, Saint Katharines flower, bel-flower. Milk to dry up in
women's breasts: asarabacca, basil red-beans, rue, vine. Monthly courses, See
Courses of women.
N N
Nose bleedi^g to stop See Bleeding to stay. Numness to remove: hyssop,
lavender bears-breech, nettles, wormwood, rosemary, clary, chervil, burrage,
angelica, costmary.
O O
Obstructions to remove: angelica, baum, centory, loveage, rue, rosemary,
cammomil, Saint John's wort, penyroyal, mints, tansey, costmary, sweet-maudline,
wood-bitony, endive, succory, dandelion, liver wort, blood-wort, burrage,
lung-wort, hyssop, sage, elder-buds, sweet-marjerom, elecampane, germander,
fumitory rhubarb, saffron, scurvy-grasse, vervain, vipers-grasse, vine,
liquorish, hore-hound. Opening plants: angelica, bettony, cammomil, calamint,
borrage, broom asphodil, bishops-weed, bay, dandelion, docks, fennel,
fethersew, figs, fox-gloves, lovage, fea-holly, rose, sage, marigolds, peach
rue smallage, taragon, time, dragons, dropwort Saint John's wort, germander,
sampire, radish, roses, ditany, cucumbers, wild citruls, horehound, tamarisk.
P P
Palsy to cure: angelica, bag^^, rosemary, clary, misletoe, mase marigolds,
borrage, blossoms, cowslips, sage cammomil, chervil, hissop, lavender
southernwood, Saint John's wort, burnet, blew-bottle- fetherfew balsome,
bears-ear, box, daffodil, parsnip, sage, summer savory, saxifrage seen
mother-wort, juniper, oxlips, pelitary, pepper, pine, vine, tobacco Piles to
cure, See Hemorrhoids. Plague or Pestilence to cure or prevent, Angelica, baum,
celandine, carnations, cicely, colombines, elecampane, dyers-weed, sage,
fumitory, marigolds, snakeweed one blade, blew-bottles, but turbur, chervil or
cicely, cinkfoil, cuckow-pint, devils-bit, germander, herb-true-love,
horehound, ivy, mary-golds, pimpernel, rue, scabious, vervain, wheat-meal, jack
by the hedge, juniper, rhubarb, saffron, southernwood, vipers-grass, yarrow, a
chicks fundament laid to the Plague sore kills the chick and cures the
Patient. Pleuresie to cure, angelica chervil, flea-wort, lovage, marshmallows,
hedg-mu^^ard, scabious, violets, clary, cummin, haukweed, rhubarb, sage,
trefoil, aloes, centory, Saint Katherines-flower, mullein, laser wort netle,
almonds. Ptisick to cure: bilberries, chervil or cicely, costmary,
sweetmaudlin, knapweed, liquorish, marshmallows, parsley, plantane, polipody
of the oak, rosemary, bay, bears-breech, daffodilly, lungwort, mouse-ear,
purslain, ribwort, sundew, saffron, master-wort, cranes-bill, moss. Purples to
cure: bishops-weed, snakeweed, fleawort, purplewort, tormentil,
water-germander. Purging the body of ill humors: aloes, asarabacca, briony,
box, butter-wort, alder-tree danewort, endive, featherfew, laurel, juniper,
rhubarb, saffron, tobacco, scabious, spinach, marjoram, swallow-wort, spurge,
broom, blossoms, saxifrage, turbith, bindweed, herb-terrible, vine.
Q Q
Quinsey to cure: cudweed, cinkfoil, lovage, orpine, ragwort, violets,
wormwood, calamint, mulberries, vine, broom-blossomes, leeks, madder, rhubarb,
Saint James wort, dane-wort.
R R
Reins to cleanse: sparagus roots, sea-holly or eringo, featherfew, filipendula
the roots, hops, Saxifrage, succory, tansey, grass, pellitory, pimpernel,
rhubarb, mercury. Running of the Reins to cure: blites liverworr, dock,
aromatical reed rupturewort, Solomons-Seal, spleenwort, artichoakt, apples,
comfrey, dandelion, sea-holly, bares-foot, sanicle, Venus Turpentine, snake
weed, yarrow, flower-de-luce, knot-grass, saunders, red-roses, Amber and Venis
turpentine given with the white of an egg roasted morning and, evening cures,
Probatum* Rheums to stay, costmary, sweet-maudlin, sciatica-cresses, knotgrass,
dogs-mercury, nep or catmint, plantane, red-roses, sage, bay, bugloss,
hounds-tongue, hazle-nuts, aromatical-reed, corriander. Rest to procure, See
sleep. Rickets, ashen-keys, coffee. Herbs which are good to open obstructions,
and are cleansing strengthening and cordial, bein made into ointments and diet
drinks will cure. Ringworms, barberries, borrage, bugloss, celandine, hemlock
hops, sengreen, liverwort, dogs-mercury plantane, rue scabious, sorrel, oil of
wheat, Alcanet, garlic, hellebore vine. Ruptures, see Burstings.
S. S.
Scabs and Scurfs to heal, alehoof or ground ivy, black alder-tree,
ash-tree-bark, bay, barberries, beets, wood-bittany, bryany, bugle, bur-dock,
clary sciatica-cresses dock, flaxweed foxgloves, golden-rod, hops, hore-hound,
cow-parsnep, pellitory of the wall, agrimony, catmint, fumitory, scabious,
savin, seen, tobacco, spurge, dodder, elecompane, beech, beets, bloodwort.
Scaldings to cure, See Burnings. For a Scaldhead the bark of ash-tree burnt, to
ashes, and made into a lie to bath withal does cure, probatum est Sciatica or
hip-gout to cure, alehoof or ground ivy, angellica, archangel, sparagus,
burdock, cinkfoile, sciatica-cresses, dock, flaxweed, fumitory, stinking
gladwin, groundcel, henbane, St. John's-wort, kidney-wort, or wall penny royal,
mustard, nettles, the white poplar, ragwort wild-tansey, asarabacca, broom,
lesser centory, goutwort, jack by the hedge, madder, rue, southern-wood,
tobacco, time, trefoile, laser-wort, mallows. Serpents-stingings, or
venemous-bitings to cure, adders-tongue, alexanders, asarabacca, calamint,
elecompane, sern, asphodil, bittony, buglosse, hart's-tongue, sea-holly,
horehound, housleek, madder, moss, nettles, piony, bays, rue, scabeous,
sperage, sycomore, trefoile, woolfs-bane, burdock, cudweed, germander,
scorpion-grass. Spleens, diseases, obstructions- and inward swellings to cure,
alehoof or ground ivy, alexanders archangel, asarabacca, baum, baise. beets,
wood-bitony, calaminnt, cammomil, centaury, dandelion, water-fern,
furz-bust-flowers, germander, stinking gladwin, hearts tongue hauk-weed, hops,
horehound, ivy, lavender, broom-flowers, marsh mallows, misletoe, mustard,
horseradish, southernwood, ladies-thistle, tormentil, winter-gilly-flowers,
woad, marjerom, rocket, tamarisk, time, vervain, wormwood, dittander, dodder of
time, angelica rhubarb, scurvy grass, spleen-tree, sumitory, seen, rosemary,
peach-flowers, parsley, sampire, elder-buds. Stomach bad to help, cleanse
strength: agrimony, aples, avens, baise, wood-bitony, chervil, costmary,
sweet-maudlin, crossewort, endive, elecampane, flower-de-luce, haukeweed,
hounds-tongue, peach-flowers or leaves, dock bastard, rhubarb, the seed or
root, sorrel, currants, angelica, baum, alexander, sweet-marjerom quinces,
capers, succory, dandelion, dodder, jack by the hedge, liquorish, lovage,
mints, moss, young charlock, mustard, tansie, time, wormwood, roses, scurvey
grass, horseradish, vine, cammomil, peny-royal, goose-berries, purslain,
spinach, lettuce, oranges, straw berries, moss, vine, walnuts, mirobalans,
fennel, rue, Spignel, limmons, Saint John's wort. Stiches or side-pains to ease:
avens, wood-bittony, briony, cammomil, wild-carrots, parsley sage, our ladies
thistle, garden valerian, asphodil, birthwort, chervil elecampane, cammomil,
fennel, germander, larkspur melilot, misletoe, rupturewort stichwort, trefoil,
time, rue vine. For the STONE: saxsfrage, pellitory of the wall, mother of time
parsley, radishes, stilled out of milk in a cold still. Stone and Gravel to
expel: apples, apricock, bean, bramble, brook lime, broom blossoms,
fursh-bush-flowers, bittony, dandelion, baise, burdock, cammomil, carnations,
adonis flower, wild carrots, blach-cherries, colombine, cockle cowslips,
fetherfew, sorrel, mugwort, pimpernel, cranes-bil, dittany dodder, dropwort,
eglantine, fennel, golden-rod, couch-grasse, haws, jack by the hedge, Saint
James wort, Saint John's wort, ladies bed-straw, liver-wort, marshmallows,
master-wort, maidenhair, medlar-stones, melilot, mints, moss, netle, nutmeg,
ox-eye, parsley, parsnet, pellitory, peny-royal, periwinckle, piony, purslane,
violet, radish, rhubarb, spignel, tansie, time, vervain, wolfsbane, trefoil,
vine. Stone in the Kidneys and Reins to expel aromatical reed, balsome, beech'
birch-tree, bramble, cabbage, dane-wort, golden rod, mayden-hair, parsley
pennyroyal, rupture-wort, saxifrage, dandelion, furzbush flowers
straw-berries, medler-stone, young turnip-leaves, butchers-broom broom,
groundsel. Strangury or Pissing stopped to help agrimony angelica, alexanders,
rosemary, pimpernel, aples, bazil, bettony, brooklime, dandelion, dasies,
broom, sweet marjerom, asarabacca, butchers-broom, fetherfew, fennel-root,
borrage, bramble, liquorish, centory diptany, dropwort, Eglantine, germander,
stinking gladwin, couch-grass, gromwel, hawkweed, hops horse-tail, juniper,
lark-spur, mercury, mints, pellitory, spikenard radish, saxifrage, southern
wood, tansey, time, tormentil, trefoile, valerian, vine, groundsel. Swellings,
See Aches hot and cold. Swounings and ^aintin^s to cure aromatical reed, bazil
borrage, balm, dodder of time mother-wort, sweet marjerom, pennyroyal
rosemary, angelica, sun-few, vine, cinnamon, endive, costmary, tobacco vine,
vipers-grass, quinces, cherries. Sinews shrinking to help, cammomil, chickweed,
elmpeele, comfry, oil of trotters, sow-fennel, laserwort, turpentine oil of
young puppies under nine days old. Sinews to strengthen, balsom, centory,
cowslip, fennel, flower-de-luce Ladies bed-straw, mints, rosemary, sage,
pellitory, yarrow, tansie, St. Johns's-wort. Spitting of blood to stay*
clowns-woundwort, borrage, comfry, dock, elecompane St. Johns's-wort, inner
bark of oak, plantane, sage, bettony, fennel, hart's-tongue, red beets, red
archangel, leeks, long-wort, bramble moss purstain, ribwort, sanickle,
trefoile, blood-wort, rubarb, shepheards-purse, arrowhead, barberries, almonds,
horehound, holly rose. Spots, Freckles, and Pimples in the skin to clear,
bazil, bays, bell-flower, broom blossoms, bryony, elecompane, fetherfew,
fumitory, roses, calamint, celandine, coleworts, daffodil, dittander, endive,
flower-de-luce, hawk-weed, lovage, onions, parsley, penne-royal, radish, roket,
rosemary, savin, scurvey grass, Solomon's-seal, strawberries, tansie, vervain,
wheat. Sleep to procure, anet, barley cowslips, endive, lettuce, saffron, white
poppy, purslain, roses, sensitive herb, tobacco, virgins bower, wormwood,
henbane, hemlock, lilly, parsley, nightshade, nutmeg, onions, herb true-love,
vine, mandrake, moss, dandelion, plowmans-spikenard, stinking gladwin. Scurvey
to cure, brooklime, watercresses, horseradish, cuckow-flower, danewort,
juniper, scurvy grass, horse-taile, fluellin, vine, wayfaring-tree, tamarinds,
cloud-berries, coffe. Shingles to cure, cinquefoile housleek, rue, pellitory,
olive tree, Egyptian-thorne, lentil, cow, parsnip, plantane. Surfeits to cure,
angelica, coleworts, liverwort, wormwood, broom-blossoms, red poppy, saffron
violets, red roses, clove-gillie-flowers, aniseed, coleander, figs, reasons.
T. T.
Terms. See Courses. Tetters to heal, beech-tree, celandine, hops, horehound,
liverwort, plantane, sorrel, oil of green wheat, darnel, alcanet, almonds,
cresses, fluellin, jessemine, hellebore, St James-wort, limons, myrtle, pine,
rubarb* swallow-wort, vine. Throtes-Almonds to help, dil, boxthorn, bramble,
cedar, cink-foile, divils-bit, caltrops, elder, fumitory, mustard, pellitory,
primrose, smallage. Throates-kernels and swellings to waste, sorrel,
black-thorne-leaves, alder, clivers, fumitory, hyssop, St James-wort, orach,
plumbs rampions, rubarb, snake-weed, start-wort, throat-wort, or bell flowers,
cammomel. Throat-sorenes and Diseases to help, ground ivy, pellitory of the
wall, red-roses, sage, self-heale, black-thorn leaves, vine-leaves,
elder-flowers, barley, bulleis, columbine, fig tree, hissop, toad stools,
wood-bine, golden-rod, cammomel. Throates-Inflammations to assuage,
cuckowpint-root, walnut-tree, straw-berries, throat-wort, toad-stools,
vine-leaves, violets, wormwood, cammomel. Toothache to help, black-alder,
arsmart root or seed, sparagus-root, red beet-root, broom, ivy-berries,
broom-rape cink-foil-roots, flower-de-luce roots, pennyroyal, tamarisk-tree,
angellica, asphodil, bazil, box, burdock, cammock, celandine, crow-foot,
dentary, henbane, hemlock, mustard, neetles, pellitory, poppy, pockweed,
rubarb, saffron, spurge, sundew, tobacco; tamarisk, taragon, vervain, wormwood,
yarrow, hissop.
V. V
Vertigo See Heads-giddiness. Venemous-beasts or Vipers-bitting to cure, ash
tree, sweet-bazil, white-beets, borrage, burdock, cabbage, centory, dane-wort,
or dwarf-elder, elecompane, flower-de-luce, hart's-tongue, hounds-tongue,
hissop, hore-hound, St. John's-wort, knot-grass, mustard pennyroyal, cliver,
woad, or dyers-weed, wormwood, scorpion-grass, juniper, vipers-grass,
woundwort, yew, tresoile. Ulcers and sores to heal, agrimony, black-alder,
alheale, aloes, angellica, balsam, barley, bettony, birthwort, bu^le, bryony,
broom-blossoms, bramble, centory, clary, butterbur, campion clivers, cockle,
coltsfoot coleworts comfry, dandelyon, dodder, elder-blossoms, eleeompane,
cudweed, winter-cresses, fox-gloves, ground pine, goats-beard, gourds,
germander, harts-ease, herb true-love, hellebore, henbane, horehound,
misseltoe, pimpernel, sage, savin, St. John's-wort, juniper, hissop,
hounds-tongue, master-wort, cudweed, holly, rose, lilly, mullein, pondweed,
plantain, pine, rubarb, poppy, roses-red, smallage, snakeweed southernwood,
self-heale valerian, wakerobin or cuckowpint, zodoary, yarrow, lentils,
bares-ears. Ulcers or sores running and spreading to cure, adders-tongue,
avemony, arsemart, asphodiss, endive, Egyptian-thorn, darnel dodder,
camels-hay, celandine, crossewort, dragons, figwort, fluellin, friers-cowl,
bares-eares, holly, rose, hemlock, jack by the hedge, hops, horse-tongue,
housleek, ivy, knapweed, medesweet, moss, oats, oyl-pulse, olive tree,
poud-weed, rose-wood, smallage, tobacco, tamarisk-wood, woolfes-bane, vetch,
foxstones, cinksoil, blewbottles, red wild campions. Vlcers-hollow, and
Fistuloes to cleanse St. James'-wort, hellebore, hounds-tongue, fox-stones,
fryers-cowl, spurge, knapweed, juniper, ivy, plantane, rib-wort, tormentil,
vervain, yarrow, winter-green wound-tree. Ulcers hollow to fill with flesh
honey-wort, frankincense, lentills, maudlin, costmary, pitch, thorow-wax
juniper. Ulcers in the privy parts to cure, apples, aver baum, bramble, bugle,
cranes-bill, plantain, cresses, ducks-meat, senugreek, golden-rod, holly, rose,
knot-grass lung-wort, sage, tansie, woodbine, throat-wort, galingale, privet.
Vomiting to repress, spearmint, craks, onyons, adders-tongue, cinnamon,
ash-leys, cranes-bill, currants, sennel, couch-grasse, Egyptian thorn, ladies
mantle, liverwort, marjerome, mastick-tree, mirabalans, moonwort, moss,
peny-royal purslain, quinces, Sol^mons seal, snakeweed, tormen- V^til,
tresoile, wortle-buries, wormwood, zedoary, vine (...) ^ine to provoke:
alexanders, aniseed, apples, aromatical-reed, artichoke, assarabacca, asphodil
bazil, bays, white-beets, bramble, bryony, burdock, butchers broom, calamint
cedar, bears-breech, carrowaies, carrots, black-cherries, chervil, cocks-head,
corrander, crabs, watercresses, do^d^r, dragons, dandelion, dropwo^t,
dyersweed, elecampane, endive, fennel fluelline, fumitory, furz-hush-flowers,
galingale, garlic, germander, stinking gladdon, golden-rod, gooseberries,
hartwort, he^b two pence, seaholly, hops, horse-tongue, jews-thorn Saint John^
wort, juniper, ivy, knot-grass, lavender, laurel, leeks, liverwort, lovage,
lupine, madder, sweet-marjerome, master-wort, maudl^ne, costmary, medlars
maidenhair melilot mercury, miller, moss, myrtle, netle, oak, onions, parsley,
parsnip, pellitory, peny-royal, petiwinckle, radish, poley, rocket rosemary,
rhubarb, rue, safron, sage, sampier, savin scabious, shepherds needle,
smallage, southernwood, spiknard taragon, time, tresoil valerian-wood-bind
vine. Uvula fallen to help: columbine, dittany, hart's-tongue, mouse-ear,
mulberries, prim-rose, cowlli^s cuckow-pint, or wake robine.
W. W.
Wind to expel: angelica alexanders, aniseed baise, dil elecampane, balsome
birth wort bryony, cammomil, fetherfew fennel, masterwort, mililot carawaies,
carmint, cinnamon, coffee, cummin, dragons, mints, oats, parsley, elder-buds,
galingale, garlic ginger, hemp seed, holly, rose, hissop, juniper, ivy,
loveage, jack by the hedge, winter, and summer savory, valerian, walnuts,
nutmeg pepper, pockweed red-poppy, rosemary, rue, safron, sage, tobacco,
tansie, time, toothwort wormwood, motherwort, zedoary vine, tamarish. Whites or
reds to stay: agrimony, adders-tongue, red-beets, red archangel, snake-weed
cinkfoil, comfrey, liver-wort, red-roses, myrtle, oak, rosa solis or sun dew,
rosemary-flowers. Womb to open and cleanse: angelica, bishops-weed, balsame,
betony, birch-tree, birthwort briony, fetherfew, butchers-b^oom, cammomil
fennel-figs, flower de-luce, lavender, dogs-mercury, mandrake, rue, mouse ear,
savin, vine. Worms to kill: agrimony, aloes arrow-head, arsmart, sweet-apples,
pearmain and pippin, butter-bur, celandine, devils-bit, box calamint, century,
ivy-berries, onions, dane-wort, horseradish, wormwood, garlic, wormseed,
fetherfew, eglantine elecampane, fern, gall of an ox, hazel-tree, hemp, henbane
hops, horehound hissop, juniper, lavender, sweet-maudlin mustard, rocket,
rhubarb, southernwood tobacco, tansey, time, vervain, walnut-tree, wolfs-bane,
zedoary. Make a plaster with wormwood, garlic, celandine, fetherfew, and
mints, stamped together with the gall of an ox and vinegar; apply this
plaisterwise to the belly, and it will both kill and bring forth the worms.
Wounds green to help: adders-tongue, agrimony, wood bitony, birds-foot, blew
bottles, al-heal, arsmart, broom, bugloss, celandine, cranes-bil, diers-weed,
elecampane, elm, plantane, bugle, burnet, fluellin, fox-gloves, herb true love,
hissop, Saint James wort, Saint John's wort, lungwort, melilot, mallows, moss,
orpine, self-heal, sensitive herb, tobacco, yarrow, shepheards-purse, trefoil,
clowns wound-wort, comfrey, cud-weed, sanicle, devils-bit, fern, fig-wort or
throat-wort, hounds-tongue, loose-strife, pear tree. Wounds, inflammations to
assuage: adders-tongue, chick-weed, daisy, hore-hound, loosestrife, one blade,
straw-berries, ve vain, yarrow, balm-apple housleek, sopewort, primrose orpine,
purslain. Wounds to heal: asarabacca, balm-apple balsame, baum, bears-ears,
addars-tongue, birds eye, blew-bottle, arsmart, bugle, buglosse, burnet,
cranes-bil, crossewort, daisie, fern, elder-buds or flowers, golden-rod, herb
twopence, bea sears, horehound, Saint John's wort, ivy, hounds-tongue,
loosestrife, lungwort, madder, mastick. maudlin, costmary, moonwort, oak,
plantane, rue, sanicle, self heal, satirion, Solomon's seal, southernwood, sun
dew or rosa solis, to mentil, turpentine, valerian, twayblade, woad, yarrow,
zedoary, wood-roof, tobacco, ladies mantle, clowns-wound-wort, fox-gloves,
hissop.
Y Y
Yellow Jaundies, See Jaundie^
Here follows some examples of such griefs and infirmities which were by the
Rules aforesaid both Astrologically Discovered and Cured.
I shall relate only two Cures done at Oxon: I could have inserted many more
done within that City during the time of my abode there, but I am unwilling
overmuch to enlarge my Book, or trouble the Reader therewith; these two being
enough for satisfaction.

1. I cured the Daughter of Mr. Brown living in High Street in Oxon, Anno 1658.
This was the first cure I did within that City: This Maid having been about
Twelve months under the Cure of several Doctors, and her Father finding that
her grief rather increased than diminished, and hearing by some what great
Cures I had done in other places, came unto me, and after some communication I
erected a Figure, by which, according unto the rules of Astrology I quic^ly
found what was the Distemper and the cause thereof; which I am confident no
Drug- Doctor could do by the Urine: her grief proceeding from an extraordinary
distemper of the heart and brain, and not without some rising in the throat by
Phlegm, and ill Matter settled between Throat and Stomach; her condition for the
time being, was as follows; She had near a dozen firs a day, which took her
somewhat like the falling sickness but mixed with Convulsion, for during the
time of her fit, she seemed senceless with some small striving and so revived
again, but not without some sighing and sadness: She was afflicted under the
Sun and Mircury, the one having predominancy over the heart, the other the
brain and so by consequence the Nerves and Arteries oppressed; the one causing
deadness, the other sencelessnes for the time being of her fit: I judged it to
be one kind of Evil, which would without question (if not cured) have turned
unto that which is usually called, the King's Evil; for in length of time* when
the Nerves are oppressed, it many times causes white kernels, swellings
sometimes in the Throat, and at other times in the Eyes, and indeed in any part
of the body, more especially in that part signified by the Sign wherein the
principle significator of the sick is afflicted, and then, but not before it is
usually called the King's Evil: The way of cure, was as follows in the first
place I gave her three solary herbs to wear about her, having a ^ertue agreeing
with the uature of Gold, and serves instead of Gold, for as Gold is under the
dominion of the Sun as being a Metal, so likewise are many herbs and plants
under the dominion of the Sun accordingly as being vegetable, and being
gathered at the right Planetary hours according unto their number works the
same effects in cure, being worn or otherwise. This cure was effected by such
herbs suitable to the grief which were by antipathy unto Mercury, a Planet cold
and dry, viz. under Jupiter, a Planet hot and moist, but by herbs which were by
sympathy, under the Sun, for let the Sun be strong or weak there it no opposing
of him, as being fountain of life; for in all cures whatsoever, herbs of the
Sun must be used, and the rather in this cure, by reason the Maid was by nature
Melancholy, and likewise afflicted under Mercury a Melancholy Planet. In all
kinds of Evils, the plants and herbs used for cure, must be gathered at the
right Planetary hours according unto their virtues and numbers: had this Maid
been by nature Choleric, then we might have used herbs under Venus, or the
Moon, as being afflicted under the Sun, for in all cures we must help to
support Natures defects, so well, as to fortify the Heart; but most usually
Melancholy People are afflicted under Melancholy cold Planet: and Choleric
People under hot planets, more especially in Evils, for every Element Naturaly
does sympathise with its own like, and does more vehemently strike thereupon
then on the contrary, even as the actions of Men and Women do naturally
sympathise with their Complexions be it Choler, or Melancholy, etc.

An other Cure done in* Oxon on the Daughter of Mr. Collens a Baker, Anno 1669.
THis Maid for some time was troubled with Convulsion-fits, now her Parents
being willing to have remedy, went unto several Doctors, and others for remedy,
who used such Physical means, and other remedys as they thought meet: at length
they used hot bathes wherein they shrunk up both her legs, after which, not
knowing what more to do for her, they willingly left the Cure; by which it
appeared, that the remedy was worse than the disease; for instead of curing her
distemper, they left her limbs useless; whereupon, hearing of me, and the many
great cures which I had done for others, they came unto me, desiring to know,
whether I could help her distemper, and cure her limbs? for as they said,
having spent much money upon her already, they would not willingly part with
any more, except I would undertake to perfect the Cure: After some discourse,
having taken an exact time whereby to erect my Figure, and finding that it was
Radical by the rules of Astrology, I found that the Maid was curable;
whereupon, having agre'd with them for the Cure, at a price, provided if I did
not perfect the cure, I was to lose both my charges and pains: I made entrance
thereupon, and within some short time I did (through Gods blessing) reco^er
both her health and Limbs, and she has s^ continued ever since. By the Figure,
I found that the Moon and Mercury were Principally concerned, as having the
greatest Predominancy over her distemper, the one ruling over the bulck of the
brain, the other over the acting and sensitive part of motion, and so between
them making her fits violent and strong: These afflicting Planets having
relation to the Twelfth House, (and no Fortune* or Lord of the Tenth House,
enterposing, gave strong suspicion of an Evil upon the Maid, neither in my
opinion was it otherwise and that was one great reason why the Doctors and
others could not help her; for Evils are of that nature that except they be
cured by the rules of Astrology (without a Miracle) they are seldom, or never
cured, for the more they are tampered with, the worse commonly they will be;
for in this condition, those herbs and plants which are used, must be gathered
at the right Planetary hours, and according to their Numbers, Elemental
Qualities, and Virtues, as I have elsewhere expressed; the manner of cure was
as follows, First, having gotten three solary Plants which were gathered at
the hour of the Sun, I gave them the Maid to wear about her Neck instead of
Gold, for as Gold is a Metal under the Sun, and has a strong virtue to
withstand the Evil, so likewise such herbs which are under the Sun are approved
to have the same virtue accordingly, being gathered as aforesaid. Secondly I
made choice of such herbs and plants which were Antipathetical unto the Moon
and Mercury; and so to oppose Mercury, I took herbs under the Dominion of
Jupiter a Planet hot and moist, whereas Mercury is cold and dry and to oppose
the Moon, a Planet cold and moist, I took herbs under Mars and the Sun both hot
and dry, out of which herbs being collected according unto their Numbers,
Elemental Qualities and Virtues, and gathered at the right Planetary hours: I
made Dyet-drinks Oils, and Cattaplasms. The manner how to make them I have
showed elsewhere in this Book: only to the Oil applied unto her Le^s, I did mix
it with oil of young Puppies under nine days old* and with the jelly of Calves
Legs which did help cause the sinews being shrunk to extend and stretch forth:
after I had used this oil about nine days, having gotten good help, we
stretched forth her Legs and did splet them fast, and about a week after she
assayed to move with Crutches, after which continuing the ointment, and keeping
her Legs splitted in some short time being young she recovered: also by
Dyet-drinks* and applying Cataplasms to the hand-wrists, not omitting Planetary
oils, applied to the heart and brain made out of those herbs collected as
aforesaid, she was likewi^e recovered of her Convulsion Fits, but against the
good will and liking of those who had her formerly in cure, and some others
their partakers, for it seems they were so troubled about the cure by reason
they could not do it, that they made the Vice Chancellor acquainted therewith,
pretending that I had cured this Maid by unlawful means, whereupon, Mr Collins
this Maids Father was sent for, to give him account concerning the way and
means used for his daughters cure, who it seems gave him such ample
satisfaction therein, that I never was much troubled more, only the said
Chancel^our sent two Scholars to dispute with me, the one was, as I was
informed a Doctor, the other a Master of Arts, who after two or three hours
discourse, were fully satisfied concerning the Legallity of my Art and
Profession and as they told me at parting, they did believe, I should have no
more trouble therein, yet notwithstanding, those who were my adversaries would
not rest contented, but did on the Sabbath day put up Bills unto the Ministers
to Pray and Preach against me, and my Art; which when I understood, I could not
forbear to smile, remembering a pretty story of a rich Usurer who lived in
London* A Friend of his desired him to go with him hear a Sermon, the Preacher
having notice of his coming spoke much against Usury and Usurers, and all those
that went unto them; whereupon, the Sermon being ended, the Usurers Friend asked
him how he liked the Sermon, he said very well, and wished there more such
Preachers, why said his friend? to speak against you, and all those of your
Profession? I care not for that said the Usurer, for the more its cried down,
and the fewer there be of my Profession, the more custom I shall have; for the
Usurer was resolved Preach while they could against it, never to give over his
Trade. And the truth is, after the Ministers had Preaehed against me and my
art, I had twice so much custom as I had before, for they could not have done
me better service for many which before had not heard of me made much enquiring
after me, hearing what great cures I had done. Not long after came two men who
warned me to depart by a day, pretending they had order, I was informed they
were Apothecaries however to avoid trouble, in regard I was no graduat Doctor,
nor yet free of the City, I thought it best to depart and live where I formerly
had done in the Parish of Aldermarston near Reading: but the Citizens never
left me, for unto this day, I have many cures out of the City, and places near
adjoining notwithstanding, I live ten miles distant Would I have been at the
charge of a License I would have lived there in spite of all my adversaries,
but I am well plea^ed to live where I am having practice enough.

One Cure lately done in Bark-shire, Anno. 1667.
One Mr. Peter Wickenss, living in the Parish of Tile-hurst, in the County of
Berks, having lain Bedridden for some time past, who could wagg neither hands nor
legs, he made trial of many Physicians, Mounte-banks and others, but could find
no help, continuing rather worse than any whit amending: at length he sent to
me, for as I have already declared, I am seldom employed but in case of great
necessity, (the reasons I have showed elsewhere;) and having by the rules of
Astrology discovered the grief with its cause and termination: I did undertake
the cure at a price, and did perform the same in about eight weeks time, he
has been since at London and has gone several other journeys, and has
continued well unto this present time of my writing hereof: The cure was
performed as follows, Having by the rules of Astrology discovered Saturn to
be the afflicting Planet who was both weak and peregrine, I effected the cure
by antipathy, viz. by herbs under the dominion of Jupiter, and Sol, what herbs
are good for dead-Palsies I have set down elsewhere in this book, and likewise
under what Planet each herb is governed out of which having collected a select
number agreeing unto each Planet by the rules before going: I did make both
Oils Cataplasms, and Dyet-drinks with the Oils we annoinred the brain reins
of his back, cliches of his arms, groyn, knees and anckles, together with
heart and stomach. The Cataplsams we applied to the feet, and hand-wrists. The
Dyet-drink I ordered him to take three times a day* viz. morning, and after
dinner, and at night. I also ordered him to take Water-grewel made with herbs
suitable unto his condition every morning about an hour after he had taken the
Dyet-drinks; sometimes in this infirmty we use suffumigations to the head more
especially when we find the Patient under a cold dryth: also the diet and food
which they eat who are in this condition must be nutritive and of easy
digestion; the Patients in this condition will be very apt to be bound in their
body, not only for want of exercise, but also by reason the applycations are
for the most part hot, wherefore sometimes we give them Glisters, Pills, or
Suppositers according unto discretion.

Here follows the way Astrologically not only to discover but also to cure
all sorts of Evils, together with that commonly called, the Kings-Evils.
Concerning the Evil commonly called the King's Evil, and the Cure thereof as
follows.
IT IS generally called the King's Evil, In regard it pleased God to give the
Kings of this Nation that great gift of curing these kinds of infirmities: It Is
not as many foolishly do imagine, called the King's Evil in regard of any sins
by them committed, and so for that cause it should fall upon the Subject: for
the Evil is directly from themselves occasioned by some extraordinary distemper
of the brain, and so from thence dispersed by the Nerves into several parts of
the body sometime I have known it fall into the Eyes and at other times into
the Neck and Throat with white kernels, swellings; and sometimes 'twill be in
any other parts of the body and the swelling is always white. Now in regard
that Chyrurgions and Doctors in former times were ignorant, not only of the
Cause but also of the way of cure by reason it lay wholly in the Nerves, for
these kinds of Evils coming wholly from the Brain as aforesaid: at the first
beginning never touches upon the Flesh, Brain, or Blood only the Nerves are
puffed up and rises in kernels white, whereupon such applications which
usually cured other swellings were clear antipathetical unto these kinds of
swellings, and rather increased than any way diminished their pain: I have
cured many of this kind of Evil also, as is well known unto many in the
Country. Many times it falls out to be in the Optick-Nerves, and then the
Eyes are in a very sad condition. About a year a go I cured the Daughter of one
John Alexander, living in Mortimer in the County of Berks, she was taken in
both Eyes, they were so cloased up, that she could not endure to have them
opened whereby to apply any remedy, she lay thus above six months quite blind,
besides what time the grief was drawing on before, and the more they tampered
with her the worse she was; at length they were fearful that her Eyes would
perish in her head, (as it seems one Maids did who was of their acquaintance.)
whereupon they came to me and having agreed upon the price for the cure* I did
undertake and perform it in about a months space; the manner how I did perform
it I shall relate before I conclude, I do find that in, former ages multitudes
perished through these kinds of Evils, by reason (as I said before) that
Doctors and Chyrurgeons were ignorant of the true cause of the distemper, and
so by consequence of the cure; whereupon it pleased God to give this gift of
healing, first, unto King Edward the 1. who for his piety was called the
Confessor, who was the first English King, who suecceeded after the Deans wete
extinguished, and after him successively this great gift has continued unto
the Kings of this Nation: I shall now proceed to set forth the way of cure, not
only of this man's Daughter in question, but also how to cure it in any part of
the body, provided it be taken in hand in time, before the Nerves, Flesh, and
Bones are perished, for in length of time, if it be not cured, 'twill get into
the Flesh, Bones, and Blood: and then in the end, commonly that Limb or Member
of the Body, be it arm, foot, leg, and sometimes thigh and all is cut off: The
way of curing this Maids eye, was as follows. In the first place I made
choice of three solary herbs which are esteemed good for the Nerves viz.
rosemary, Angellica, and bawm, these herbs I cau^ed to be made close up in a
linen cloth (taking a small quantity of each, being all gathered at the hour
of the Sun) and gave it her to wear about her Neck instead of Gold, for as Gold
is a Metal under the Dominion of the Sun, and has a virtue to comfort the
brain; for the Sun has predominancy over the brain, as I have showed
elsewhere: see also these herbs being under the Dominion of the Sun has the
like sympathetick virtue to comfort the brain: accordingly also I made choice
of a select number of solary herbs to make a Dyer-drink by way of decoction;
and likewise to make an oil to annoint the brain. But unto the Eyes I applied
only Celandine-water, given in a small tincture of Roman-Vitriol; but at the
first beginning of the Cure, I did for a few days apply raw-fresh meat to the
powl or Neck to help dry and divert the humor from the Eyes; by this means
through Gods blessing she was soon recovered. Now the way to cure this kind of
Evil when it setleth in any other part of the body, is as follows, You must
in the first place make use of three Solary Herbs, as aforesaid, to wear about
their neck: also you must make a bath of Solary Herbs, according unto the
number before mentioned, belonging unto the Sun, and being gathered at the
right Planetary hour: also out of the same herbs, you must make an ointment,
and once a day you must bath the place grieved pretty hot, and then immediately
with this ointment anoint it, and keep it moderately warm, you must be sure to
make choice of such solary herbs, which are esteemed good for the brain and
nerves, as you will find in this Book elsewhere: I shall relate one Example,
This year I cured a Maid, who was the only daughter of Mr. Henry Bulstrode,
living in Warfield Parish in the County of Berks, she had the evil in her ear
and right side of her head, being most grievously pained therewith: Her Father
tried many Doctors and others to his great cost and charge, but instead of
mending she grew worse every day than other, and the more they tampered with
her, the more she was afflicted; the swelling was white, she was in this
condition about nine months: at length finding no remedy, and hearing by some
of his Neighbors, what great cures I had done for others, her Father came unto
me, and having agreed with me about the charge, I did undertake the cure, and
in about six weeks time did perfect the cure accordingly. The way which I used
was according to what I have already declared: Viz. By Diet-drinks, Baths
ointments, and herbs to wear about her neck, as is before expressed. All the
herbs used were Solary. and gathered at the true planetary hour, agreeing with
the number attributed to the Sun.

Note, That when the Sun or any other planet, whose herbs you intend to use be
strong in the heavens, the lesser numbers will serve; but when they are weak
then the greater numbers must be used: A planet is said to be strong when he is
in essential dignities, and weak when out of dignities in the heavens, the
reasons I have showed elsewhere in this Book.

Another kind of Evil, commonly called Atake.
MOst People call this kind of Evil Atake, by reason, that the Patient is on
the sudden perplexed with great pain, whereas usually natural infirmities do
first mind the Patient, before it increases unto extremity, according as the
influence of the afflicting Planets draws unto partile aspect of the
significator of the Patient; and if a figure be set for the time, when the pain
did first assault the patient, one may by the rules of Astrology easily
discover from what cause the grief came, and whether natural or from Witchcraft.

The way which the Witches usually take for to afflict Man or Beast in this
kind, is as I conceive, done by image or moddel made in the likeness of that
Man or Beast they intend to work mischief upon, and by the subtilty of the
Devil made at such hours and times, when it shall work most powerful upon them
by thorn, pin, or needle pricked into that Limb or part of the Image, which
answers to that limb or member of the body afflicted. For Example, I shall
relate what happened lately as I am credibly informed. An Old woman, who lived
near the Devises in Wiltshire, (she was imprisoned about the time, when I began
to write this book, in ^nno 1667. for the fact) being in a lone place was
observed to stoop and employ her self in digging or making a hole in the earth.
Now immediately after she was gone, they went to the place, and there found an
image like a man with a thorn pricked into it, at which time there was a man in
the Parish, who was in great tormenting pain in one of his limbs, which by
compare did answer to that limb pricked with a thorn into the image: and when
they took forth the thorn, the man had present ease, but when they put the
thorn in again the man was tormented. When witchcraft is wrought only by image
pricked as aforesaid, the Patient is usually pained outwardly, in one limb,
member, or part of the body and the swelling if any is usually white: There is
no pain whatsoever more tormenting, than it, and commonly such pains are white
swellings; and usually with most people called evils or Takes, not thinking
from what cause it comes. Yet I am of opinion and do find by experience, that
all white swellings are not such evils, which comes from evil persons, for it
may proceed from some extraordinary distemper of the nerves, such as is the
evil commonly called the Kings evil, as I have already declared. Its observable
that in all kinds of evil, the more they are tempered with the worse they are;
for except the right way of remedies be applied, the Patient will be but the
more tormented: I know many have lost their limbs and sometimes life, and all
in regard those who have undertaken to cure them, being unskilled in the way of
Astrology could not effect the cure. I have cured many, who have been taken in
this condition, and to my knowledge have never failed, where the Patient was
cureable but when the bones, sinews, nerves, and arteries, and flesh is
perished before one begins, and joints dislocated, then there can be no perfect
cure expected, although some good may be wrought in staying farther
proceedings. There is no grief or infirmity whatsoever, but may through
Witchcraft and Sorcery, by the help of the Devil be wrought upon the bodies of
men and beast, and I could instance many, which I have cured. I shall mention
two examples: The first being a cure done upon a Maid living at Newton near
Newbery in the County of Berks, she lay two years bedridden, and could wag
neither hand nor foot; her father told me he had tried many Doctors, which cost
him above an hundred pounds, but she was never the better, but rather the
worse; she took no sustenance, save only verjuice posset, For if at any time
she took ought else, she soon did vomit it up all, her body and limbs outward,
were taken in the nature of a dead Palsy and her inward parts with a great
stop at the breast and stomach, her Father told me the time when she first took
her bed, by which I erected a Scheme, and according unto the rules of
Astrology, I told her Father, I found she was taken either by Witchcraft or
Sorcery, if not both, and that was the reason why the drug Doctors* could not
help her; I undertook the cure at a price, and within eight weeks, I recovered
both her body and limbs, and she has continued well ever since, it being above
nine years ago, since the cure was done. The Way how to cure either Witchcraft
or Sorcery is set down in another place in this Book.

The Cure was effected.
In the first place I endeavored to afflict the Witch; and then by diet drinks
and ointments made of planetary herbs antipathetical unto the afflicting planet
(being Saturn) gathered at the planetary hours, their qualities, virtues, and
numbers, corresponding; the herbs used were under the dominion of the Sun and
Jupiter. It appears that both Witchcraft and Sorcery had been wrought upon
the Maid, by reason that both her limbs outward, and body inward, were
afflicted as aforesaid. Objection, If Witchcraft works alone only but upon
one limb or member of the body as before is declared; then how comes it to
pass, that her whole body and limbs generally were thus made useless, To which
I answer that if the thorn, pin or needle were pricked in the head, when the
sign that is the Moon was in Aries, and that the infortunes as instance Saturn
were in bad aspect unto her (as probable it was) when the Witch first began her
mischief, then it might unhappily work mischief or damage unto the whole body:
for it stands by good reason that if the brain, which is the fountain from
whence the Nerves do proceed be oppressed, that then the motion of the whole
body must needs be obstructed, for the Nerves which is a small string that
runs under the veins throughout the whole frame of the body proceeding from
the brain are the only sensitive part of motion; Insomuch that if a Surgeon
happen to prick a nerve, when he lets any one blood, the limb will be in
danger to be useless, and I heard of two, who lost the use of their arms
thereby When I lived in Oxford, and as it fares with the body to be senceless
and so useless, when the brain and nerves are oppressed, so likewise it fares
with the body, as being dead, and void of life, when the heart and arteries are
oppressed, I shall instance one example hereof, about eight or nine years ago I
cured a Maid, whose name was Mary Boyer, she was about eighteen years of age,
her Father, together with this maid did live in Glassenbury, being above eight
miles from my dwelling: he brought her to my house where I now dwell to be
cured; her condition was as follows, Every day near the same hour she was
taken with a great pain and pricking at her heart, and then immediately,
sounding fits followed, lasting two or three hours; she was above twelve
months in this condition before I undertook the cure; and as her Father told
me, he had been at great charge going after many Doctors, and yet
notwithstanding, was rather worse, than any whit amended, and no marvel, for
how can any Doctor cure such distempers, when they are ignorant of the cause,
for Witchcraft or Sorcery can no way be discovered, nor yet cured, but by the
way of Astrology, except a Miracle be wrought, it is true, God can do what he
pleases; but I never knew, or heard of any Man or Beast that was cured (since
the Apostles times) that were bewitched, any other way, than by the
Astrological way of Physic: and it is a great mercy, that God is pleased to
raise up, and to give knowledge unto a mortal man to do it; for, although the
afflictions of this kind comes from the Devil and his instruments, which we
commonly call evils or takes, yet the cure comes by, and through Gods blessing
upon the honest industry of the Astrologers and Philosophers, who are the men
only acquainted with these kinds of cures: and as it pleases God to suffer the
Devil and his Instruments the Witches to afflict his people, by reason of their
neglect of duty and Prayer: so again, it pleases God through Prayers joined
with lawful means, to take off their power, and to return the evil back from
whence it came, and so to have their infirmities and diseases cured: these
cures are not done as many foolishly do imagine, by such who are called white
Witches, for the white Witches and the black Witches are all one, as I shall
make appear, and it is but a m^e* cheat or delusion, for the one Witch by image
or meddel afflicts the Patient by thorn, pin, or needle pricked into it. The
other Witch being Confederate gives forth, that she can cure, whereupon, when
the Patient comes, these two confederate Witches divides the gain, and the
cure is quickly done, for it is but pulling forth the thorn or pin, out of the
image, and the Patient is cured; but I have known sometimes when the Patients
have been ill of long Continuance and so the grief being gotten into the flesh,
bones, blood, nerves, arteries and the like, that then they could not cure
them, for then Remedies proper made with planetary herbs, as dyet-drinks,
bathes, ointments, and such like remedies, as I have elsewhere expressed, must
be used, for it is not enough when gotten into the flesh and blood, to take out
the thorn or pin; and those who go unto such cunning women, if they stay too
long as aforesaid, are afterward enforced to come unto me, or some others, who
are skilled in the Art of Astrology and Philosophy for cure, for Witches cannot
help them; and I have known sometimes, that suspected Witches when they could
not help their Patients, have come unto me for remedies, and I have cured them.

I shall relate the manner how the Cure was effected upon the Maid before
mentioned, with some passages which happened thereupon.
IN the first place, for the encouragement of all such who are conversant in
daily Prayer unto God, I shall relate what I have proved by many examples, for
in all my Practice, I could never find, that ever any man, or woman that did
daily pray, especially in the morning, were ever taken in the snare of
Witchcraft that day: and this maid now in question, was as a man may say, taken
napping; I shall relate the manner how she became ensnared: but first I shall
declare, what happened between her father, and my self concerning her devotion:
after her father and my self were agreed about the Cure, I told him, 'twas
pity that she did neglect her duty toward God, for if she had used daily
Prayer, she had never been brought into this condition; he answered, that to
his knowledge that could not be the cause, for she did usually every morning
pray, before she went forth of her Chamber: then I told him, that if she would
affirm it upon oath if called thereunto, would cure her for nothing, more
especially, if she prayed that day she was took in this condition, whereupon he
called in the maid, and after some exhortations given, I asked her the question,
she answered, that she did not pray that morning when she was taken in this
condition and desired her father not to be angry, and she would declare the
reason of her neglect, which was as follows, her Mother being minded to brew,
called her up very early in the morning to fetch water from the Conduit, now
the custom is, first come, first served; it so fell out, that this maid and
another maid meeting at the place, fell together by the ears concerning who
should be first served, whereupon, the other maid being worsted vowed revenge;
and the same day immediately after, she was taken in this condition, as I shall
relate: now her Father told me, that the other maid lived with one who was much
suspected to be a Witch, and according unto my Figure which was set for the day
and hour when she was first taken in this condition, I found, that she was
afflicted by the Planet Saturn, Lord of the twelfth, which is the house of
Witchcraft, which Planet, according unto the rules of Astrology did exactly
personate the suspected Witch. The power of Witchcraft was so strongly wrought
upon this maid, that for twelve months together she could not go into any bed
until after midnight; besides her daily fits, which usually took her near one
hour of the day as follows; first, when the fit began it would prick about
her heart, as if needles were thrust into her, and then immediately after it
would disperse throughout her whole body by the arteries, and then for some
hours she would seem dead: and further, the power of Witchcraft was so strong
upon her, that if at any time of the day, or night, (before midnight) she did
but touch any bed, she would immediately fall into a fit, as I at her first
coming did make several trials, I conceive, that the Witch did not only work by
Witchcraft alone, by Image pricked into the heart which by sympathy, through the
subtilty of the Devil did work upon the heart and arteries of the maid, but
also did use some way of Sorcery whereby to aflict her inward parts, for she
was much troubled with griping pains in her belly and stomach, whereas formerly
she was healthful: now the way used for the curing of this maid, was as
follows, first, according unto the rules hereafter mentioned, I did endeavor
to afflict the Witch to the end, she might forbear to act any farther in her
villainy. Secondly I made her diet drinks, by decoctions with such herbs being
gathered at their right planetary hours, which were under the dominion of the
Sun and Jupiter, being antipathetical unto the afflicting Planet Saturn; and
likewise with those herbs I made ointments proper to comfort the heart and
arteries, with cataplasms to the hand-wrests, sometimes when I found the veins
high, I let her blood, fearing the arteries might be oppressed thereby, for as
I have already declared the arteries and nerves run both under the veins: I
likewise for a time accustomed her to eat hearts ^oyled, baked, or stewed,
which might by sympathy help to fortify her heart: I also gave her water-grewel
made with such herbs which were agreeable to her condition, to be taken an hour
after she had taken her dyet-drink every morning as indeed we usually do in all
distempers, according unto which rules before going this maid was well and
perfectly cured within ten weeks, notwithstanding, she was above twelve months
in this condition before she came unto me: and notwithstanding, her Father as
he told me had tried many Doctors to his great charge, for as in this, so in
all other kinds of evils, the more they are tampered with the worse the patient
will be, except they had the knowledge by the rules of Astrology and Philosophy
to understand the way of Cure.

Another kind of Evil which comes from Sorcery.
I find by experience, that there is another kind of Evil wherewith many are
infected, and I shall instance one example. A woman living at a place called
Nutbeam within a mile of Way-hill where once a year the great fair is kept, was
taken with this kind of evil as follows: the cause of this woman's distemper
was from Sorcery, as by my Figure was discovered and the party suspected was
the Minister of the Parish, by my Figure described to be a man of Saturn, in
the times of Mercury, which signifies a man of reasonable stature swarthy
complexion, and of a lumpish countenance, and sad or black hair; he was a man
of small wealth, only hired to execute the office or Function, for the time
being: the occasion which moved him to do it, was, as the woman told me,
because she would not trust him for malt; whereupon he threatened revenge, and
at a gossiping feast he had the opportunity to do it, as follows; First, he
moved to have a health go round the table, and so did undertake to spice every
ones cup, but when it came unto this woman's turn to drink, she did observe,
that he took spice out of another paper which he had prepared, pretending that
it was all one: this woman told me she was not willing to take it, fearing
least he should do her some mischief; but being unwilling to disturb the
company, well-hoping that his malice would not have lasted so long, she drank
it, after which, before the day was ended, she began to be very ill, being
taken with a great pain and griping in her belly, and likewise every day
increased in bigness of body, being grown so big as three ordinary women,
insomuch, at length a reasonable horse could not well carry her* she tried many
Doctors, and spent much money* but could find no help, at length hearing of me,
her husband brought her unto me; she was above two years in this condition
before I did undertake the cure, yet notwithstanding I did recover her in about
three months time, staying not only her griping pains in her belly, but also,
did very much lessen the extreme groth of her body: The way which I used for
her recovery was, by decoctions, ointments bathes, sweats and glisters: she was
taken under Saturn who was Lord of the twelfth house, and in the ascendant: the
cure was performed by antipathy, viz. with herbs under the Sun, Mars, and
Jupiter: what herbs are good for Dropsical humors under the Planets before
mentioned, you may find in this Book; and likewise, how to make decoctions,
bathes, oils, and glisters, suitable unto her condition. Now concerning this
Minister, I shall relate what followed, I having by my Art made some discovery,
and this woman for the reasons aforesaid, justly suspecting him, both she and
her husband were minded to have him before a Justice, but that I somewhat
disheartened them, and told them, that the discovery which I had made, could be
no evidence against him, whereby to implead: but not long after, this Priest
having upon some other occasion differed with an other of his Parishioners,
after Prayers ended, his Son standing in the Churchyard, this Minister came
unto him, took off his hatt and gave him a tap on the head, saying, (before
some of the Neighbors) Thou shall lie by it some time for thy Fathers sake:
immediately after, this Boy, being very sick, took his bed, and came no more
abroad in a long time: whereupon, this Woman's Husband, and the Boys Father
resolves to prosecute against him, and accordingly, sent for a Warrant,
intending to have him before a Justice, but the Priest having some notice
thereof fled, and as I am informed, was never heard of unto this day.

Another Cure done upon a Boy living at Throxford, in the County of Berks, who
was suddenly struck dumb, and so continued during the space of three years.
I Shall in the first place relate the manner how this Boy was taken in this
condition: as follows, This Boy living with his Uncle (his Father being
dead) was employed to drive, and fetch home milch beasts, being kept for a
dairy; now in a morning being holy day having on his best array, being somewhat
pleasant, meets with a woman, who was very much suspected to be a Witch, and
minding to make sport with her, calls her old witch, demanding whether she was
going, she not answering, he threw several stones at her, with that she began
to be angry, and says unto him (as the boy after he could speak related)
sirrah I will make you hold your tongue, using many threatening speeches; and
endeavored to run after the boy, who was too nimble on foot for her: After
which time during three years, as abovesaid, he became speechless and seeming
simple, and so might without question have continued unto this day (without
miracle) had not the Astrological way been used both for the discovery and
recovery of his distemper. The Friends of this boy told me they had spent much
money about his cure, but to no purpose, having as they said tried many Doctors
and others, insomuch that they thought him uncureable: But by accident hearing
of me, and of the many cures by me done, the friends of this boy came unto me,
desiring to know whether I would undertake to help him to his speech again: I
asked them, if they could tell the time, when he first lost his speech, which
they readily told me. It being done upon a holy day, they could the better do
it, whereupon having erected a figure, according unto the day or time given, I
quickly found the cause of his distemper (without which there could be no cure
wrought) and told them, that I was confident through Gods blessing, that I
could help them The Planet afflicting was a cold, dry, melancholy, earthy,
evil Planet: the defect lay wholly in the Uvula or Gargarean; and as men who
are taken with extreme cold, which usually settleth in this part, are seemingly
speechless, or at least speak with little or low voice, so this boy being more
vehemently afflicted under so sad a cold planet, could not speak at all: And
likewise he seemed to be foolish, for there was a great cold defect in the
brain and head, so well as in the Uvula. Now having by the Rules of Art
discovered the cause so well as the distemper it self; the friends of this boy
and my self agreed upon a price for the cure, which I performed in less then a
months space. The cure was effected as follows, having in the first place by
the rules hereafter mentioned, endeavored to afflict the Witch, that so she
might be discouraged to act any further in her mischief. I used herbs
antipathetical unto the afflicting planet being Saturn, viz. Herbs under the
dominion of the Sun and Jupiter, according unto their numbers and virtues,
being gathered at their right planetary hours, three of which hetbs being under
the domion of the ^un. I caused him to wear about his neck, it being in virtue
answerable unto gold, and a number which properly belongs unto the Sun, as I
have showed elsewhere, and as gold is a metal under the dominion of the Sun,
and has a virtue to withstand all kinds of evils, and to comfort the heart,
arteries, and vital spirits, so likewise has these herbs under his dominion
the like properties, as also the ruby amongst stones; Generally all those
pains, aches, distempers* or afflictions, which are caused by Witchcraft are
called Evils, and sometimes these kinds of Evils will turn into white kernels,
swellings, proceeding from some extraordinary distemper in the nerves (as I
have elsewhere expressed, and then its usually called the Kings Evil.) Having
collected my herbs together according unto their numbers and virtues, being
under the dominion of the Sun and Jupiter, as aforesaid, and caused a mixture,
then out of these herbs, we usually make diet drinks ointments, and
suffumigations; of the diet drink, I gave him three times a day, viz. Morning,
afternoon, and night, also every morning we usually give them water-grewel made
with some of those herbs about an hour after they have taken the diet drink, by
which means through Gods blessing the boy within a month was cured, and has so
continued ever since. I believe it will be a warning unto him, how to meddle
with such Creatures in a morning without prayer. I shall relate one passage,
which happened between the Boys Uncle and my self, as follows* The month
being expired, wihich was the time set for the Boys cure, he came to see
whether the Boy could speak or no, whereupon I called in the boy and bad him
speak to his uncle, which he did, desiring to know how all his friends did;
whereupon his Uncle seemed to be much troubled, and sad, for as he told me
afterward, he did verily believe, that I had infused a spirit into the boy to
make him speak; and his reason was because the Doctors and others, who had
undertaken to help him (but could not) said he would never be cured, as they
verily believed by any man whatsoever: whereupon the boys Uncle desired me to
keep him somewhat longer, and then he would come and bring money for the cure:
The reason why he brought no money with him, was, because he did not believe I
could help him; and he made his bargain so, that if I did not cure the boy, I
was to have naught for my charge and pains. And about a week after he came
privately to my Servants, desiring to speak with the boy, which he did, and
then, but not before he was satisfied, for the boy could both pray and readily
give answers unto questions. After which, about a week following, he came again
with one of his Neighbors, who both heard the boy speak and pray again, and
was fully satisfied, paying me, what we had agreed upon for the cure. It seems
they were not only disheartened by Physicians, but also hearing that I did
many times set figures, concerning Nativities, thefts, strays, and fugitives,
etc. As though I had wrought the cure by unlawful means. But before we parted,
I gave them both such ample satisfaction, that they went away well contented
and satisfied, being joyful, that it was their good hap to come unto me.

Now whether this Boy was by this woman bewitched or whether it pleased God to
lay such an affliction upon the Boy. It may be a question worthy of answer;
unto which I shall briefly reply in point of art, That in regard the only
afflicting planet was Lord of the twelfth and an evil planet, I did conclude
that the infirmity might proceed from fascination or witchcraft, but not
without Gods permission, for (as I have elsewhere declared) if we neglect daily
prayers, we lie liable unto the assaults of Satan, and his Instruments for the
time being; especially in our bodies: For our Savior Jesus Christ taught us to
pray daily, not only for bread but also to deliver us from evil, wherein, if we
fail, the fault is ours.

How to make the Sympathetical, Powder with the way to apply the same, for the
curing of wounds, and sundry distempers: Especially such which any way concern
the blood or vital spirits.
TAke of Roman vitriol six or eight ounces, beat it very small in a mortar,
then search it through a fine search, do it when the Sun enters Leo, which is
about the twelfth of July, then spread it finely upon an earthen glased pan,
set it daily in the heat of the Sun during forty days, and keep it warm at
night, and be careful it takes no wet or cold, afterward you must continually
keep it dry, with this powder alone kept dry and warm, great cures may be done,
I shall instance one Example, A Brother of mine living in Southcote near
Reading in the time of the late war had a Mastiffe Dog shot into the neck and
head, with a brace of bullets. The dog being very much swelled, lay pining away
and was in appearance near unto death. A Gent. who came by accident having some
of this powder in his pocket was desirous to make some trial thereof upon this
Dog, whereupon with a linen cloth we took some of the corruption, which was
about his neck, and immediately applied a small quantity of the powder unto it
keeping it very warm, whereupon presently the Dog revived, stood up and wagged
his tail; then presently for further trial, we laid the powder with the
corruption to the air, and then the Dog fell down as dead again, shivering, and
then immediately we closed it up again, and ever afterward kept it warm, and
the Dog in a short time recovered.

The Way to apply this Powder for the curing of distempers and infirmities,
especially such, wherein the Blood and vital Spirits are concerned.
When you are minded to cure any disease or infirmity, you must by the help of
this Book take notice what herbs are good to be used to cure the grief or
infirmity, out of which you must take a select number according unto their
elemental qualities and virtues, being rightly appropriated unto their several
planets, and gathered at the right planetary hours, which this Book will
sufficiently instruct you, dry them so that you may pound them and searce them
into fine powder. Then take the quantity of half a dram thereof, and the like
quantity of the Sympathetical powder, and mix them well together in a Mortar,
ever after keeping the powder warm and dry: and when you are minded to cure
thereby* you must warm the powder very well over a few coals, and while its
warm put a small quantity of the Patients blood into it, and mix it very well
together, always keeping it warm, and so make it up in a little bag, and let
the Patient wear it next their skin, that so it may always be kept warm. I have
by virtue of this powder done many very great cures, and should have still
continued in this way of practice, but that I found many were unsatisfied,
concerning the legality thereof, taking it for a kind of charm, by reason I
ordered the patient to wear it about their necks, and I believe they did the
rather conceit so in regard, I did use to resolve many questions in Astrology,
as Thefts, Strays, Fugitives, etc. There is but one danger in this way of cure,
which is as follows. If the Patient happen to lose this mixture from their
necks or body wheresoever worn, or otherwise let it take cold, the grief will
be apt to return a^ain, more especially if the Patient be not perfectly
recovered. But when the Patient is through well, than they may burn it. I could
have inserted many cures, which I have effected by virtue of this powder, I
shall only mention one for example, as follows about nine years ago, there
lived a woman in Newbery, in the County of Berks, she was daily troubled with
fits, which at the first, would begin with a kind of trembling about the heart,
and from thence by degrees set all the arteries to work throughout her whole
body, after which, for some hours she would be as seemingly dead, and could
wagg neither arm or leg; for cure whereof, I let her blood in the heart vein,
and having my powders made in readiness, according unto what is before
expressed; I mixed some of her blood with the powder, and while it was warm made
it up into a little bag, which I caused her to wear about her neck, by virtue
of which, not omitting dyet-drink suitable to her condition; she was in about a
months space recovered; notwithstanding, she was near twelve months in this
condition before she came unto me: The cure being perfected, her husband,
according unto our agreement paid me for the cure, but it so chanced, that
within some small time after, she carelessly lost this from her neck, whereupon,
her fits began to mind her again, and more and more increased, insomuch, that
she was almost so bad as at the first, for as I said before, except the patient
be for some time perfectly well, at least a month, the grief will be apt to
return, especially, when the principal matter of cure is lost or neglected, for
its not sufficient in any distemper whatsoever* only to cure, except for a time
there be a perfect settlement for we daily find, that relapses are very
dangerous and apt to befall many who think themselves well recovered. This
woman's husband came to me again, and told me, that his Wife was so bad as ever
(being much discontented) he not knowing the reason; I asked him, whether she
had not lost the little bag from her neck which I gave her to wear he told me
he thought she had: the truth is, through carelessness she had lost it,
whereupon, I once more let her blood, and did as is before expressed, desiring
her to take care of it, which she did; after which, she became well again, and
her fits left her, and so has continued well ever since, as I am informed.
This cure being effected about eight or nine years ago.

The Unguent, or wonderful Ointment for Wounds: Composed of the four Elemental
parts of Man's Body. The Seven Planets being applied thereunto: Its making, and
use; follows:
The Ingredients.
The Moss of a dead Man's Scull 2. ounces. Of Man's Grease 2. ounces. Of Mummy.
ounce. Of Man's Blood. ounce. Oil of Lindseed 2. ounces. Oil of Roses 2. ounces.
Bolearmeniack. ounce.

The three last ingredients are the rather added unto it because it helps to
bring it unto a subtle ointment: and without question, there is also great
virtue in them.

Elements. Nature. Complexion. Planets. Water. Cold and Moist. Phlegm. Venus
and Luna. Fire. Hot and Dry. Choler. Sol and Mars. Earth. Cold and Dry.
Melancholy. Saturn and Mercury Air. Hot and Moist Sanguine. Jupiter.

ALL these things before mentioned must be mixed together and beaten well in a
mortar until it become an ointment then keep it in a close thing from air for
your use. The way to use this Unguent whereby to cure, is as follows: Take
the blood or matter of the Wound upon the Weapon or Instrument which made the
Wound: or otherwise, dry it upon a piece of wood, then put the wood into the
ointment, or else anoint the blood, being kept dry upon the wood with the
ointment, and keep it from air; you must every day wet a fresh linen rag with
the Urine of the Patient, and so bind up the wound: do it early every morning.
Also you must be very careful that the ointment which is applied to the blood
take no cold, with this Unguent wonderful things may be done if it be rightly
managed according unto the directions aforesaid. I shall quote one example
concerning the trial of this Unguent as follows, One day being at dinner with
Sir Humphrey Forrester of Aldermaston in the County of Berks. The Gentlewoman,
who usually waited on his Lady was extremely tormented with the toothache, we
caused her to prick her teeth with a tooth pick, and to blood it, immediately
we put the tooth-pick into the ointment, and the Gentlewoman had present ease;
after some short time, we took forth the tooth-pick, and put it into vinegar,
whereupon she was presently in extreme pain: We took the tooth-pick forth of
the vinegar, and applied it to the unguent, and she was immediately well, and
so continued. I could have inserted many great cures done by virtue of this
unguent, which for brevities sake only I am willing to omit.

Concerning Witchcraft, and Sorcery, with the cure thereof, as follows.
THe way to know whether the patient be bewitched or not I have already set
down, elsewhere in this Book. I find by experience, that those, who are taken
in the snare of witchcraft are usually afflicted in some outward limb or member
of the body caused by an image made in the likeness of man or beast, and
through the subtilty of the Devil made at such hours and times, when by
sympathy it shall reflect upon the man or beast whom they intend to hurt or
destroy; it being done by thorn, pin, or needle pricked into that part of the
image, which answers unto that part of the body of man or beast wherein they
are pained or grieved. An Example hereof I have already mentioned, concerning
the Woman lately taken at the Devises in Wiltshire: But that which I conceive
is the most usual way practiced by Witches is most properly called Sorcery: For
by the help of the Devil some poisonous matter is prepared, and mixed with some
blood and vital spirit of the Witch, and so by smell or taste infused into the
body of man or beast bewitched, or rather by which they are infected: For its
observable in Philosophy: Si acceperis terram cadaverosam cujuscunque viri
mulierisve, qui notabili quocunque morbo moriebatur, eandemque des ullo masculo
aut foeminae, eodem morbo contaminabuntur; in morbis aliquibus odore tantum hoc
efficitur, Exempla gratia, in peste, Lue Venereae, seu morbo Gallico
Elephantiasi sive Lepra.

Those who are thus wrought upon by sorcery may be infected with most kinds of
diseases whatsoever: As I have sufficiently discovered in my Practice of
Physic* Besides I have known many things, which through sorcery have been so
infected and spoiled, as instance bear cream, and milk, whey, and such like,
that neither Housewife or Dairy Maid could make any good use thereof. I shall
relate one Example hereof. when I was a Boy my Father kept a Dairy at a place
called Shenfield near Reading, and one of my Sisters had the charge thereof,
upon a time my Father desired her to make some wild curds, and to send them
home; which she did endeavor to do, but could make none. The reason was, as
she conceived because an Old woman (suspected for a witch) was at that time
denied whey, who went muttering away discontented. The next day my Father came
with one of his Brothers, named John Blagrave, a man of great knowledge in
Astrology and Philosophy, as appears by his many works in print Now my Father
asked her why she sent him no curds, she told him, she could make none,
notwithstanding she had used her best skill; and related what is aforesaid
concerning the Woman suspected: Now my Fathers Brother aforesaid being desirous
to make further trial hereof went into the House, and caused the whey to be
hung over the fire again which no sooner was done, but presently it rumbled,
and made a noise, as if many bullets had been in it, whereupon he caused the
Kettle and whey to be taken from the fire, and caused a greater fire to be
made: He also called for a cord and an iron wedge, he took the cord, and bound
the Kettle round about, and wrested it very hard, and then caused the Kettle
with whey to be set over the fire again, and having heat the wedge red hot, put
him into the whey, and immediately there was abundance of curds rose up, after
which my Uncle sent a messenger to the suspected Witches house to know how she
did, who brought word, that after much knocking at length she opened the door,
where he found the Witch or suspected person shrunk up like a purse or leather
put into the fire. By which it appears, that part of the vital spirit of the
Witch was infused into the whey, for otherwise it could not have wrought so
violently upon her, for should the poisonous matter, or thing be given or used
alone without some blood or vital spirit of the Witch mingled with it, the
burning of the patients blood or urin would not hurt them, or the putting this
red hot wedg into the whey, could no way have afflicted her, which it did by
Sympathy, as appeared by her body being shrunk up as aforesaid.

The true way to Cure both Witchcraft and Sorcery, according unto the Authors
experience and Practice.
THe curing of such who are bewitched, is not done only by such, who are called
white Witches, (as many foolish do imagine) for the white Witch and the black
Witch are all one, as I have elsewhere expressed, they are but confederate
Witches, the one Witch by thorn, pin, or needle pricks into the Image through
the subtilty of the Devil causes the infirmity, pain, or lameness; the other
Witch gives forth, that she can cure, and so when the friends of the bewitched
comes unto the white Witch, or cunning woman (they divide the gain) and the
cure is quickly done, its but pulling forth, the thorn, pin or needle, and the
Patient is cured, and I have been credibly informed by some who have gone to
these cunning women, or white Witches; that their Cattle, or the Patient
afflicted have been perfectly well before they have gotten home: but as I have
already declared, after either man or beast have been bewitched above month,
they cannot cure them, especially, if the pain continue in one place all that
time but sometimes they will move the thorn, pin, or needle into some other
part of the body, that so they may have remedy when they come unto them; for
after the pain or infirmity have been of above a month standing, the grief
will get into the flesh, blood and vital parts, and then the pulling forth of
the thorn, and the rest will do the Patient but little good, and cannot
possibly help them, wherefore in this condition the Patients friends must of
necessity repair unto such who are well skilled in Astrological and
Philosophical way of cure as I shall declare in order hereunto, but before we
proceed unto the way of cure, it will be necessary to show, how to afflict the
Witch, that so she may be discouraged to act any further in her mischief: for
notwithstanding their witchcraft by image, as aforesaid, yet I seldom find,
especially where the Patient has been above a month bewitched, but that
Sorcery is wrought so well as Witchcraft, upon the Patient; and sometimes
immediately together with the Witchcraft, especially, where there are no
confederate Witches, for the white Witches cannot help, where Sorcery has been
wrought upon the Patient, by reason it breaks forth immediately into some
Poisonous or infectious inward grief or infirmity, which can no way be cured
(except by accident) but by the Astrological, Philosophical way of Physic.

Here follows some experimental Rules, whereby to afflict the Witch, causing
the evil to return back upon them.
1. ONe way is by watching the suspected party, when they go into their house;
And then presently to take some of her thatch from over the door, or a tile, if
the House be tyled; if it be thatch you must wet and sprinkle it over with the
patients water, and likewise with white salt, then let it burn or smoke through
a trivet, or the frame of a skillet: you must bury the ashes that way, which
the suspected Witch lives. Its best done either at the change, full, or
quarters of the Moon: Or otherwise, when the Witches significator is in Square
or Opposition to the Moon. But if the Witches house be tiled, then take a tile
from over the door, heat him red hot, put salt into the patients water, and
dash it upon the red hot tile, until it be consumed, and let it smoke through a
trivet or frame of a skillet, as aforesaid.

2. Another way is to get two new horseshooes, heat one of them red hot, and
quench him in the patients urine, then immediately nail him on the inside of
the threshold of the door with three nails, the heel being upwards: then
having the patients urine set it over the fire, and set a trivet over it, put
into it three horse nails, and a little white salt: Then heat the other
horshooe red hot, and quench him several times in the urine, and so let it
boil and waste until all be consumed; do this three times and let it be near
the change, full, or quarters of the Moon; or let the Moon be in Square or
Opposition unto the Witches Significator

3. Another way is to stop the urine of the Patient, close up in a bottle, and
put into it three nails, pins, or needles, with a little white Salt, keeping
the urine always warm: If you let it remain long in the bottle, it will
endanger the witches life: for I have found by experience, that they will be
grievously tormented making their water with great difficulty, if any at all,
and the more if the Moon be in Scorpio in Square or Opposition to his
Significator, when its done.

4. Another way is either at the new, full, or quarters of the moon; but more
especially, when the Moon is in Square or Opposition to the Planet, which does
personate the Witch, to let the patient blood, and while the blood is warm, put
a little white salt into it, then let it burn and smoke through a trivet, I
conceive this way does more afflict the Witch, then any of the other three
before mentioned by reason the blood has more life in it then the urine; for
the urine is accounted, but as the excrement of blood: The reason why the Witch
is tormented, when the blood or urine of the patient is burned, is because
there is part of the vital spirit of the Witch in it, for such is the subtlety
of the Devil, that he will not suffer the Witch to infuse any poisonous matter
into the body of man or beast, without some of the Witches blood mingled with
it, as appears by the whey before mentioned. For it is the Devils policy,
either by this means to detect them or otherwise by torment to bring them unto
their ends: for the devil well knows, that when the blood or urine of the
patient is burned, that the Witch will be afflicted, and then they will desire
to come to the place, for to get ease, for by the smell thereof, their pain is
mitigated by sympathy; even as by sympathy, when the blood and urine is
burning, they are tormented, yet sometimes they, will rather endure the misery
of it than appear, by reason country people often times will fall upon them, and
scratch and abuse them shrewdly. I conceive the only reason the devil does
suck the Witches blood is mearly to detect them, or otherwise one way or other
to bring them to their ends, and sometimes they are discovered by their tet, at
which place the Devil usually sucketh their blood, whereby to mix with the
poison, which they by their wicked ways do infuse into the body of man or
beast, and so infect them. I do find by practice and experience that few or
none are bewitched by Image or Moddel alone, but that there is Sorcery wrought
with it for otherwise the burning of the blood or urine of the patient could no
way afflict them in any sympathetick way, as aforesaid; having by the rules
aforegoing set forth the way, how to afflict the Witch. I shall in the next
place discover the general way of cure.

The way to cure both Witchcraft and Sorcery, commonly called Evils or Takes.
HAving by a figure discovered under what planet the Patient is afflicted, and
in what part of the body the grief or pain lies; whether outward in any limb
or part of the body, or throughout the whole body, as it will sometimes fall
out when the Nerves or Arteries are oppressed, proceeding from the heart and
brain, or whether inward in the bowels, guts, liver, lungs, heart, breast, or
stomach; or be it what other disease or distemper whatsoever, for as I have
already declared there is no disease or distemper whatsoever, but may be
brought upon man or beast by witchcraft and Sorcery, as I have already in
several examples demonstrated: If the grief, pain, or distemper, be in the
outward parts, limbs, or members of the body, then the cure must be by bathes
and ointments made antipathetical unto the afflicting planets; As instance if
Saturn be the afflicting planet, then herbs must be used under the Sun and
Jupiter. If Mars be the afflicting planet, then herbs must be used under the
dominion of the Sun and Venus: Always provided that the herbs be gathered at
the right planetary hours, according unto their virtues and numbers: If the
^rief lies inward at the breast, stomach, and heart, then you must choose such
herbs, which are under the dominion of that planet, which is antipathetical
unto the afflicting planet, and are good to open obstructions, and to comfort
the heart and arteries, ever remembering in all cures to use a select number of
herbs, under the dominion of the Sun, in regard he governs the heart and is
fountain of life, and sole Monarch of the heavens. It the grief lie in the
bowels and guts, then sometimes glisters must he used made with such herbs
especially which are good to expel poison, being under the dominion of Sol,
which this book will sufficiently instruct you in, together with such herbs,
which are of a contrary nature, unto the afflicting planet, but if the
afflicting planet is more strong than the planet which is a contrary nature,
then you must choose a small select number of herbs of his own nature, which are
good to cure the infirmity, and mix them with the other herbs before mentioned,
concerning the way to make glisters, bathes, oils, decoctions, or diet drinks,
and what else is meet to be used in all cures whatsoever, I have already
elsewhere in this book expressed.

Note. That in the curing of all kinds of evils, I do usually cause the
patients to wear a select number of solary herbs gathered at the hour of the
Sun, the reasons I have showed elsewhere in this book. I could have been more
copious in setting forth the way of curing both witchcraft and sorcery, but
that I have sufficiently treated thereof in the way of curing all kinds of
evils before mentioned, for I conceive, that generally those evils before
mentioned, came from witchcraft and Sorcery, only some particular evils may
proceed from some extraordinary distemper of the nerves as I have elsewhere
expressed with the reasons thereof,

Here follows some notable Philosophical Secrets worthy our Knowledge.
How by the Magnet of ones Body to extract a Spiritual Mummy whereby to cure
most Diseases incident unto the body of Man: It being done either by seminaion
or transplantation hereof into a growing vegitable, as follows.
THe Magnet of ones body is the Dung or Excreement, which must be dried seven
or nine days in the shade, and kept from wet This Magnet thus prepared must be
laid unto that part of the body, which does naturally evacuate by sweat from
the vital or natural part of the body defective But if we make a general
medicine, then the Magnet must be applied unto all parts, which does naturally
evacuate by sweat. This Magnet must be so prepared, that we may transplant the
same, when the Moon increases, and if she apply from that planet, which is
Lord of the Ascendant of the patient, or from the planet afflicting unto one of
the fortunes, 'twil work the stronger, provided that the fortune, which the
Moon applies unto be antipathetical unto the afflicting planet; as if Mars be
the afflicting planet then let the Moon apply unto Venus, if Saturn afflicts
then unto Jupiter, if the Lord of the ascendant or the afflicting planet be a
fortune, then let the Moon apply unto the other fortune, the manner how to
transplant the imbibed Magnet whereby to cure by semination is, as follows.
Take the imbibed Magnet, and mix it with a reasonable quantity of earth, and
then sow in it such seeds of herbs, which are proper to cure the infirmity,
which this book will sufficiently instruct you in, let the earth thus mingled
be placed in as fruitful a place as conveniently you can, that it may grow the
better, you must sometimes more especially when the Moon is in Conjunction,
Trine, or Sextile of the Sun or one of the fortunes, mix the patients water
with some of their excrements* and so water the seeds, but you must not do it
too often, once a week will be enough, for fear you should destroy the seed,
for the rain and other fertile waters will be most proper and natural to make
it grow.

There is yet another way, by me used, which is to take the imbibed earth,
prepared as aforesaid: And having a plant, which either by sympathy or
antipathy is most rational to cure the infirmity taken up clean with its root,
place it into the imbibed earth, and so water it as aforesaid: Both ways are
effectual to cure if rightly ordered. Lastly, when you find that by semination,
or transplantation, the grief is changed into a (...), we must do as follows;
If the disease be dry, and of a combust nature, as the yellow jaundies or the
like; then you must take the herbs or plants with its earth and cast them into
running water: If the disease be of moisture, then burn the earth and plants.
If the grief be aerie, then hang the earth and plants in the smoke to dry, and
the Patient will be firmly cured.

How to Cure any Swelling, Sore, S^irrhous Tumor, or Warts.
TAke the flesh, hand, or any part of any man that is newly dead, with it rub
or stroke any place defective, and then bury it: As the dead man's hand or flesh
perishes or wastes in the earth, so the swelling, sore, or schirrous tumor,
or warts will fade away, and the Patient be recovered. The reason in Philosophy
is thus, as the northern property is an enemy to southern heat, so by his
contact it causes all unnatural things growing to fade away, in changing the
vegetating nature growing touched, into the mortifying nature dying.

How to work the same Cure by Herbs or Plants.
TAke Arsmart or Adders-tongue gather it at the hour of Mars the Moon
increasing, let Mars be in Trine or Sextile to Venus or the Moon applying from
Mars to Venus, or from Venus unto Mars; steep the herb or weed first in fair
water, until it be well moistened, then apply it unto the place defective,
until it be warm, after which bury the plant or weed, and as it perishes in
the earth, so the Patient will recover.

How to Cure an Atrophy or wasting Limb.
BOre a hole in a Willow-tree with an augur unto the pith; save some of the
bored stuff, and apply it unto the limb or Member of the body defective, at
the new of the Moon 24 hours, then take the paring of the nails, with some
hair, and the scraping of the skin from the limb or member of the body
defective, put all these into the hole of the tree, and stop them up close with
a peg of the same wood, do this when Saturn is weak, the Moon increasing, the
fortunes in some friendly Aspect to the Moon, in fruitful Signs: also a hole
bored in the root of a Hazel-tree, and ordered as aforesaid, the bark being
taken off, and laid on again, and then covered with earth will do it.

How to cure the hot or cold Gout.
BOre a hole in an Oak to the pith, then take the bored stuff and apply it to
the Limb or member defective, three days before the change of the Moon; then
take the pairing of the nails, and hair of the Limb or Member defective, and
put it together with the bored stuff into the hole of the tree, and stop it up
close with a peg of the same wood: do this, when Saturn is weak, if the Gout be
of cold, or when Mars is weak if the Gout be of heat, and let the Moon be in
Trine or Sextile to Venus: if the Gout be of heat, or unto Jupiter if the Gout
be of cold, you must be sure to stop it up close, and semon it up from air.

How to Cure a Plague Sore, and draw forth the venomous matter.
TAke a living Chick and apply the Fundament of the Chick unto the Plague Sore,
it will draw forth the Venom, kill the Chick and cure the Patient. Also a dried
Toad macerated in Vinegar, and laid to the soar will draw forth the venomous
matter, and cure the Patient.

How to cure the Hernia, or Rupture.
BOre a hole in an Oak to the pith: but first so, take off the bark that it may
glutinate and grow: lay on the bored stuff to the place defective three days
and nights before the new Noon; then take some hair from the privy parts,
together, with the pairing of the nails* and the boared stuff, and put them
into the Oak, and so stop it up with a pegg of the same tree, then lay on the
bark, and with tree-wax, or tempered clay, or paste, seament and daub the place
up from air: And as the bark does glutinate and grow, the Hernia, or Rupture
will close; also a hole bored in the root of a Hazel-tree will do it, being
ordered as aforesaid, and kept close covered with earth; this is best done in
the spring quarter* by reason the bark will glutinate and close the better.

Here follows two pretty Secrets in Philosophy.
How to know how any kinsman, friend, or acquaintance does during their
absence, being traveled into any far Country.
YOu must cause your Kinsman* or Friend to be let blood, and while its warm,
infuse a small quantity of the Spirit of Wine into it, and keep it close stopped
up in a glass from air; now if your friend be well and contented, the blood
will look lively and fresh accordingly, but if he chance to be ill, or
discontented, the blood will be changed, and the ^ore ill or discontented your
friend is, the more will the blood be changed accordingly; if he be much
perplexed, vexed, or fevourish the blood will be high colored; if melancholy,
weak and faint, the blood will be pale and wan. And after sickness, if he
recover health, the blood will look lively and fresh again, as at the first;
but if they happen to dye, the blood will putrify and stink accordingly, as
does the rest of his body.

How to know each others mind at a distance, it being done by Sympathy of
motion as follows.
LEt there be two Needles made of one and the same Iron, and by one and the
same hand, and touched by one and the some Load stone, let them be framed
North, and South, when the Moon is in Trine to Mars, and applying unto one of
the fortunes: the Needles being made, place them in concave boxes, then make
two Circles answerable unto the Diameters of the Needles, divide them into
twenty four equal parts, according unto the number of letters in the Alphabet
then place the letters in order round each Circle, now when you desire to make
known each others mind, the day and hour being first concluded on before hand;
you must upon a table or some convenient place fix your boxes with the Needles
f^^^d therein, then having in readiness pen, ink, and paper, and with each
party a Lodestone, those who intends first to begin, must with his Lodestone
gently cause the Needle to move from one letter unto another, until a word is
perfected, according unto which motion the other needle will answer: and then
after some small stay, they must begin another word, and so forward until his
mind is known, which being done, the other friend with his Lodestone must do
as before, moving gently from letter to letter until he has returned answer
accordingly: this will hold true if rightly managed.

Here follows some Practical and Experimental Rules whereby to give judgment
Astrologically, either upon Thefts, Strayes, Fugitives, Decumbitures of sick
Persons, or Vrins, or any other Horary Question Whatsoever.
IN regard it has been my custom together with my daily practice in Physic
for many years past, by the rules of Astrology, not only to give Judgment upon
Decumbitures and Urines of sick persons, but also upon Nativities; and to
resolve all Horary Questions, as Thefts, Strays amongst Cattle, and Fugitives,
and by reason whereof, many foolish and ignorant people, and other, who think
themselves wise also has rashly and unadvisedly judged my ways and actions of
this nature, to be Diabolical; and thereupon, has not only themselves refused
to come or send unto me for help, in case of sickness, but has also diverted
others upon the like occasions whereupon to satisfy both my friends, and
others, Antagonists; I have inserted these Judgments following, according unto
the rules of Astrology, which may serve, together with other directions in this
Book elsewhere expressed, if well heeded; not only to satisfy the learned in
this Art, concerning the legallity of my way of Practice herein, but also to
instruct others who are young students in this Art: I could have inserted
Figures for every question, having many hundreds lying by me, but being
unwilling to spend time, or blot paper therewith, presuming that what I have
written will be sufficiently satisfactory unto each friendly Reader, yet for
farther satisfaction I shall refer the desirous herein unto my Ephemeris for
the year, 1658, Wherein I have not only by Scripture, and reason vindicated the
Art of Astrology, but also have inserted therein three Schemes with judgments
Astrological thereupon, The one concerning strays amongst Cattle: The second,
concerning Thefts: The third, concerning Sickness: I confess, I have denied
many, concerning questions of Thefts, for it neither brings credit, nor yet
much gain to the Artist: for let a man be never so exact herein what will they
for the most part say? If by the Art we discover the thief, and way of the
goods, surely he does it by the Devil, how could he so exactly else discover
the Thief and way of the goods; but if we chance to miss, as sometimes we may
do by taking a wrong ascendant; and more especially, when a wrong time is given
for the time of loosing: then they will assuredly say: we do but cozen and
cheat people of their money, besides it often times brings trouble to the Artist:
I shall relate one accident which besel me herein: Once a Butcher of our Parish
having lost some linen, and linen Clothes, came with his wife to my house,
desiring me to Erect a Figure, and thereby to inform him who had it, or what
became of the linen; Now by the Figure, I did discribe a Maid servant* who
lived in the house; when he came home, he unadvisedly caleth his Maid thief,
saying, she had stolen his linen, whereupon, she goes to the Justice for a
Warrant, to bring her Master before him, pretending, that he had done her much
wrong, in defa^eing her; now, her Master to excuse himself, lays the fault on
me; whereupon, I was sent for by Warrant, to appear at a day set, which
accordingly I did, where I met with a Minister of Reading, who was a great
enemy unto Astrology, who, as I was informed came on purpose to aggrevate the
matter against me, maintaining, that the Art was Diabolical; whereupon having
heard all my accusations with many vile reproaches, with so much patience as
possibly I could, I at length, desired the Justice that I might be heard, and
not interrupted until he had fully heard, what I could say, which was granted;
whereupon in the first place, as touching the Maid, I told the Justice that
what I said unto the Butcher, was no more than what I discovered by the Art of
Astrology, which Art was known, and allowed in all Schools of learning through
the World; and that I could both by Scripture, and reason prove it to be
Lawful, it I might be heard; the Minister replied, he would maintain the
contrary, I asked him, if he would argue it with me in point of Art, which I
thought he understood not; or, in Divinity, that which he professed* he said,
by Divinity, I answered, that I was content: after some arguments I desired his
answer, concerning the 1. of Samuel, the 9, Chapter Where we find that Saul,
together with one of his Fathers Servants was sent forth to search for his
Fathers Asses that was lost, who after three days search in the Wilderness
could not find them: whereupon, they communed together what to do, who
concluded, to go to the Seer; which was Samuel the Prophet: for Prophets, as
the Marginal Notes testifies, were sometimes called Seers, without question, a
byword given them as sometimes Astrologers are called Cunning-men: But says
Saul to the Servant, What have we to give the man? by which it appears, they
thought he would take money (and good reason for his pains) the servant
answered, I have four shekles, then come says Saul, let us go; and when they
came to Samuel, after some communication, he tells them, the Asses are found
and at home, bidding them, return in peace. The Minister hearing this after
some pause, said, Samuel was too blame: Now the matter of discovering goods
lost was the only thing urged against me (for he could not be ignorant of the
strong influence which the Stars and Planets have upon all sublunary Creatures
in other regards:) The Justice hearing his weak reply, told him plainly, that
for ought he could perceive, I was too hard for him, and wished him to give
over his discourse, unless he could produce better matter; not long after,
notwithstanding this Maids impudence, maintaining the contrary against her
Master and Dame and my self: at a fair she was apprehended at Reading and
brought before the same Justice with some of her Dames linning clothes upon
her, and then she kneeled down and begged for mercy, but what punishment she
had, or what became of her afterward I never inquired, neither do I desire as
I said before, to be troubled with such questions.

Of Horary Questions.
BY a Horary Question, any one matter or thing may be resolved which concerns
the querent, provided, that the ascendant, together with its Lord* or Planet
posited in the ascendant, or Sign where the Lord of the ascendant is, does
personate the querent: and that the figure be radical. There is no matter or
thing whatsoever, but will be concerned in one of the twelve houses: as for
example, if it concerns the querents person, then the first house does it; if
his estate the second house; if his kindred or neighbors, the third house; if
his Father, or lands, or dwellings, or the end of any thing, the fourth house;
if his children play, messengers, or agents, then the fifth house; if his
servants, sickness, or small cattle, the sixth house; if love questions, his
wife, public enemies, or thefts, the seventh house; if wills, legacies, the
dowry of the wife, or manner of death, the eighth house; if long voyages, or
journeys, church matters, religion, or dreams, the ninth house; if honor,
office, or preferment, then the tenth house; if his friends, the eleventh
house; if private enemies, great cattle, or witches, then the twelfth house;
there may be many other matters or things resolved by the twelve houses, but
these are the most usual, and material.

Of Thefts and Strays amongst Cattle.
THere are two ways in giving Judgment, in case of losses: The one is by
Erecting a Schem for the time of a thing being lost or strayed, or otherwise;
if the party be present that lost the goods, or that was trusted with the
goods, to take the present time when first the question was propounded, and so
to Erect a Figure, taking care that it be radical, and that the ascendant
together with its Lord, or Planet posited in the ascendant does personate the
Querent; If it concerns Cattle or any other thing lost or mist, and that the
querent is uncertain, whether it be stolen, straid, or casually lost, you must
in this case examine by an Ephemeris, or Almanac, which has the daily motions
of the Planets, Whether the Lord of the first, or second house, or Lord of part
of Fortune, or the Lord of the house of the Moon, or of her term, does separate
from any Planet by any Aspect whatsoever; then you may conclude, that the thing
is not stolen: all Planets which are lowest in their Spheres. are said to
separate from a higher Planet* when they depart from them by any Aspect
whatsoever; But if a higher Planet happen to be Retrograde, that is, going
backward in motion, then the higher Planet may be said, to separate from a
lower; Now if on the contrary you find, that neither the Lord of the Ascendant,
or second house; or Lord of part of Fortune, or Lord of the house of the Moon
or of his term, does separate from other Planets, but that other Planets does
separate from them, then we may conclude, that the Cattle or thing lost is
stolen, if the separations be near equal, then the Plurality of testimonies must
be regarded; if you find by the rules before going, that the Cattle or thing
mist, is straid or casually lost, and not stolen; then you must have regard to
the Moon, and Lord of the twelfth, if it be great Cattle; or to the Lord of the
sixth, if it be small Cattle, as Sheep Hogs, Goats, and such like; and observe
what signs the Moon, and Lord of the house of the Cattle are in; or part of
fortune, or his Lord, and judge by the strongest; and then observe the nature
of the Sign, whether Fiery, Farthy, Airy, or Watery, and what places they
represents and then observe, whether the Planets be in Angles, succedant or
cadent houses and whether in moveable, fixed, or common Signs; and how many
Signs or Degrees there is, betwixt the Ascendant and Planet which represents
the Cattle lost, and so judge accordingly; fixed Signs, and cadent Houses
always signify the greatest distances, and we usually allow for every fixed
Sign, four miles; for common signs, and succedant houses we usually allow
somewhat above half so much as we do for fixed signs, that is about two miles
and a half for every common Sign; moveable Signs and Angles shows the Cattle
to be near the place, and for every moveable Sign, we usually allow but half a
mile: Now had the goods lost been Gold Rings, or Gold, Plate, or Silver, or
Linen, or Precious Sons, as Rubies, or Diamonds, or the like; then we must
take notice, what Sign the Lord of the second is in, and likewise, what sign
the part of Fortune is in, and his Lord; also the Lord or significator of the
thing lost, what sign he is in, as if Gold which is under the Sun, or Silver
under the Moon, or Linen under Venus, likewise a Diamond is under Venus; and
the Ruby under the Sun; also the fourth house, and his Lord are to be regarded,
as showing the end of all things, and you must judge according unto the
Plurality of testimonies; if the significators be in Fiery Signs, it shows,
the goods lost to be near the Fire, or Chimney; if in Earthy Signs, then in
some low place, or with earth; if in Watery Signs, then in, or near some Water,
as sink, pump, or sestern, or such like: if in Airy Signs, then above stairs
or in some high place. But if on the contrary, by the rules aforesaid you find
the thing stole, then the description of the thief, and what became of the
goods, is as follows* first the thief is described by that Planet which is
peregrine in an Angle, if no peregrine Planet be in an Angle, or second house,
then the Lord of the seventh house shall be significator of the thief,
sometimes the Lord of the hour will do it, when the time of losing is certainly
known: if many peregrine Planets be in Angles; more especially, when a double
bodied Sign ascends, then it shows so many thieves. A Planet is said to be
peregrine, when he is out of all essential dignities, viz. neither in his
house, exaltation, triplicity, term, or face, having found by Ptolomies Table
in the Almanac what Planet or Planets are peregrine, you may describe their
persons in this Book, under the title of the Bodily Shape, and which of the
Planets generally rule. The way of the goods if found thus, if the Lord of the
second house, and significator of the thief be joined together, or have any
friendly Aspect unto each other, or be in one triplicity, or if the
significator of the thief does dispose of the Querents part of Fortune, or the
Lord of the second house, or the significator of the goods, Then we may
conclude, that the goods are with the thief, and at his disposing; but if the
significator of the Thief be separated from what is aforesaid, and does apply;
or if the Moon, or any other other inferior planet does separate from the
significator of the Thief and apply unto another planet, he shall be the
receiver, which is signified by that planet, you must judge the way and
distance of the theif according unto the signs and quarters of Heaven, where
the significator of the thief is accounting from the ascendant, as is before
expressed.

Of Fugitives.
AS in questions of thefts and strays, so the like in Fugitives, judgment is
given either by erecting a scheam, for the time of straying or going away, or
otherwise, for the time of the querents coming: If you have the exact time of
the fugitives going away. Then the Ascendant, its Lord, the Moon and Planet
posited in the ascendant or angle, especially if he personate the fugitive,
shall be significators of the fugitive, and according unto the Nature of the
Signs, and places by them signified and quarters of heaven, wheresoever we find
them together with their applications unto other Planets judgments is usually
given: If those significators be in or apply unto the sign Gemini, then we
conclude they are traveled toward London, if in Capricorn then Oxford; if in
Virgo, Reading; if Cancer, ^cotland; if Taurus, Ireland; if the principal
significator as in the ninth house, or joined to the Lord of the ninth, then we
conclude they are for a voyage or long intended journey: north signs show
northward, East Signs castward, West signs westward, South signs southward:
Always observing the quarter of heaven: if the planets concerned be swift in
motion, and in movable signs, then they go apace, if in fixed signs and slow in
motion then they go but slow; but if the time of flying be not perfectly known,
then we erect the figure according unto the time when the question was
propounded, and so the Lord of the seventh house joining there with Mercury and
the Moon, but more especially that planet, which does own the fugitive
according unto shape and profession: also we must consider what relation the
fugitive has to the querent, whether wife or husband, kindred or servant, and
the like, and if the personal shape of the fugitive does correspond with the
planet which is Lord of the house inquired after, you may with the more
confidence give judgment thereby, I have oft-times given judgment upon these
questions, and I find they will hold true, if well heeded.

Of Vrines.
THe Astrological way whereby to give judgment at the view or first sight of
the urine, both in acute and chronick griefs, is immediately to erect a figure,
and so to vary your ascendant that it may be radical and that the ascendant
together with its Lord may personate the sick, and if the griefs be acute, then
the time of decumbiture or first falling ill, must be inquired after, that so
the assured place of the Moon in any of the twelve Signs may be obtained, for
by the Moon in any of the twelve Signs afflicted of the infortunes, the grief
is discovered together with its cause and termination. But if the grief be
chronick that is of above a Months standing then from the Sun the ascendant
sixth house and their Lords afflicted, judgment is usually given. In regard I
have already at large set forth my way of practice herein, I shall in this
place only in brief set down, what I find concerning my experience in urins,
for although an exact judgment both concerning the grief, together with its
cause and termination (by urine) cannot be obtained, yet some general
judgments thereby may be given, which may well serve for a four penny reward:
First if the urin be of an amber color (and the patient ill) for generally
that colored urine shows health of body) Then the grief or infirmity lies
in the vital and animal spirits from whence does proceed palsies, palpetations,
and convulsions, and such like distempers: In this condition the urine is not
concerned by reason the blood and those passages from whence the urine does
proceed, are not infected, for the urine is but the excrement of blood; if the
urine be white or paleish, it shows great weakness both in stomach and body,
and if the urine be high colored and red, it argues a fever, or that some
extraordinary pain does afflict the Sick, but the place where and cause why
cannot be known without a figure: sometimes it shows plenitude of blood;
especially if the veins be high, if gravel or red sand appear at the bottom it
shows the Stone in the reins, kidneys, or bladder. If the urine be of a light
sandy color, and somewhat thick, it shows great cold taken, and often times it
turns unto an ague, and if the urine be slimy and somewhat thick, it
threatens worms in young people, and consumptions in elder; but if the urine
be green or black colored it usually shows death to ensue, also if the urine
be of a sad brown color it threatens death, I question not but that Authors
have largely and learnedly written hereupon, unto whom I shall I do seldom
trust, or rely upon my judgment herein, neither do I administer any Physic
thereby for the Astrological, Sympathetical and antipathetical way of
administering Physic cannot be done without a Figure, for the strength and
weakness of the Planets afflicting and afflicted must first be discovered;
those who are well versed in the Art of Astrology need no urine, for I my self
often times, when the urine has been brought in a stone bottle have described
what kind of urine it was, and how colored by my figure, more especially in
acute griefs, when the time of decumbiture or first falling ill have been known.

Concerning the casting forth of Devils out of such, who are possessed, with
the true way and manner how to do it according unto the Authors experience and
performance thereof, with some observations, whereby to know whether they are
possessed or no.
THe occasion which first moved me to undertake the casting forth of Devils was
as follows. One Goodman Alexander a Turner by trade, living at Basing-stoke
in the County of Southampton had a Daughter, who was not only perplexed with
very strong fits, which usually took her every day near the same hour, every
fit lasting above twelve hours, being very terrible to behold, during which
time with many shrieks and cries, and through extreme torment she was brought
so low, both in body and Spirit, that she could not move or wag any part of her
body or limbs from the middle downward; her Father told me he had spent much
money upon several Doctors and others but they could do her no good, whereupon
hearing by some, what great cures I had done, he came and told me what her
condition was, as I have in part related, desiring me to undertake the cure. I
desired to know at what hour and time her fits usually did begin, which he told
me, according unto which time I did erect a Scheam, and according to the Rules
of Astrology in this book elsewhere expressed, I did find she was either
bewitched or possessed: Her Father was very earnest with me to undertake the
cure, and I could not blame him she having been in this condition, above twelve
months; and besides he made his bargain so, that it I did not effect the cure,
I was to lose all my pains and charges upon which, agreement being made; the
Maid was brought to my house, whereupon observing and taking notice of her kind
of sits, and having made some trial upon her by way of questions, and her
answers, for she could not say, or once name God, Jesus Christ, or Deliver us
from Evil, or the like but that immediately she would be tormented, falling
into strange fits; whereupon, I told her Father, that she was possessed by the
Devil, and that it would be impossible to cure her, except the Devil were first
cast forth; I also advised him, to get one godly Minister or other to try what
he could do by his means, and devotion; whereupon, and not before he told me
that he had done that already: For the Minister of the Parish, whose name was
Mr Webb one reputed to be a very honest, godly, and Learned man did undertake
to do it: and came to his house two several times to that purpose, but could
not prevail; notwithstanding he spent about three hours time in trial thereof
at his first coming, yet he was forced to desist: but withal, told her father,
that at the next coming he would be better prepared, and accordingly he did
come the second time, but could not prevail then neither, during all the time
that he was in action about this business, the Maid was extremely tormented, it
being as before near three hours before he ^nded, who then said to her Father,
Lord have mercy upon me I cannot do it, wherefore I advise you to look out
farther, per adventure you may meet with one another who may have strength of
faith, and a gift to do it, and likewise to cure her distemper. I confess, when
I heard by her Father, what the Minister had done, I began to be somewhat
danted, but when I considered that it would much reflect upon my reputation, to
send the Maid home again uncured; and farther considering, that by Prayers, and
strength of Faith it might be done; more especially, where it pleased God to
give any one that gift, which gift is obtained by Prayer, and strength of
Faith: I also farther considered, that both before and since Christ's time
Devils were cast forth out of such who were possessed, as appears by the
answer of our Savior Jesus Christ unto the Jews, who taxed him, saying, He
casts forth Devils through Beelzebub the Prince of Devils If I say our Savior
cast forth Devils through Beelzebub, by whom did your Fathers cast them forth:
by which words it appears, that the Jews had done it before Christ's time: And
further tells them, That a Kingdom divided cannot stand etc. Considering
these reasons aforesaid, according unto the method hereafter expressed, I did
undertake and through Gods blessing perform this great work, unto whom be
ascribed all honor, Power, and Glory, with Thanksgiving, for ever more, Amen.
Before I proceed to set forth the way and manner, how I did through Gods
blessing perform this great work, I conceive it will be necessary to say
somewhat concerning the trial of the Patient, whereby to know, whether they are
possessed or no, which is as follows, If they can without stop or starting
say the Lords Prayer: also pronounce God, Jesus, Christ, and likewise say, I
defy the Devil and all his works, and other such like Godly expressions: then
it is probable they are not at that time possessed: and then you must try them
again at another time: for as we find in Scripture, there are some which are
possessed at certain times, and at other times the Devil leaves them. But as
concerning this Maid in question, the Devil did never forsake her, from the
time he first entered into her. Also some are possessed with Devils which speak
within them at certain times, as instance, this Maid was: others are possessed
with dumb Spirits which will not speak, nor yet many times suffer the Patient
to speak, nor yet to pray, or pronounce God, Jesus Christ, the holy Trinity, or
any other such like expressions, for fear of being tormented with fits. I have
cast forth of both kinds, out of s^^h who were possessed, as shall be showed in
order. I shall first begin with this Maid in question, whose fits began about
nine a clock at night, and lasted until eight a clock the next morning; during
which time she was most sadly afflicted, making many kinds of noises, as
sometimes crying, sehritching, howling, also sometimes using strange actions
and gestures of her body, as twisting, and twyning her self about, sometimes
crawling about the room with many other strange passages Now from eight a clock
in the morning until noon, she would resolve all questions whatsoever, and give
true answers unto them as have many times been proved, more especially, if
propounded by her Mother, for she did not desire to talk with any other body
except by accident; during this four hours they did usually put many questions
unto her, as sometimes asking, what became of any one that was dead, whether
they went to Hell or to Heaven, and she would instantly resolve them; and so
far as they could guess she answered truly; for those who had been evil livers
she would tell all their faults and misdemeanors, and how they lived, and
dyed, and what disease, and where they were buried likewise: such who were
godly persons she would say they went to heaven and point upwards, although
they were such whom she never saw or knew. Also she would tell the names of any
ones Father, or Grandfather, (although they were strangers) and where they
lived and dyed, and of what disease. She would likewise during the time
aforesaid resolve any question of ^est, whereof they had many trials, I shall
instance o^e example, upon a market day, one chanced to lose a sack of Corn out
of the Market: The man having pitched his sack down in the Market, and went
away to set up his horse, but before he returned, his sack of Corn was stole,
and no body could tell what became of it: at length understanding that this
Maid could tell any thing that had happened for any time past, he went to the
said Goodman Alexander the Father of this Maid, desiring him to use the means
that so his Daughter might discover what became of his Corn, whereupon, the
Mother of this Maid desired her to tell this man, who had his Corn, and what
became of it, and where it was at that instant: This Maid said, that one,
calling him by his name, had the Corn, and had set it under his stairs; the
man that stole it, was a Porter that used to carry burdens in the Market, more
especially Corn, when it was bought or sold. The man who lost the Corn went
presently to the place aforesaid, where he had his Corn accordingly. I could
instance many more such passages, but I suppose this one is enough for
satisfaction herein. Now as concerning the way and method by me used, in
casting forth of both kinds of Devils; or evil Spirits before mentioned; I
shall relate as follows, (there are three principal causes or things
considerable in casting forth of Devils, viz. Prayer* Faith, and the especial
gift of God thereupon, for except that you find that your Faith is strong, its
in vain to undertake this business:) First, you must heartily pray that God
would be pleased to give you this great gift, and to strengthen your Faith, and
to enable you to perform this great work: this was the substantial matter of my
Prayer, as for matter of form I had none; the room being made in readiness so
close as I could, I made a fume of three substantial matters, or things which,
were Solary, which number three I conceived to be a most choice select number
for many persons, and is attributed to the Sun, its the number of the blessed
Trinity, its also the number of time, viz. past, present and to come; also I
considered, that the three wise men brought gifts unto Christ, viz. Gold,
Frankincense, and Myrrh, which gifts are all of a Solary quality and virtue,
and are under the dominion of the Sun, whereupon I made choice of the two
latter, viz. Frankincense and Myrrh, but instead of Gold I took Rose-mary with
these I made the fume, which I continued until the work was ended: I also often
times gave the Maid of the distilled waters of Marygolds, Rosemary, and
Angelica, or such like Solary plants, being all three under the dominion of the
Sun, and gathered at the right planetary hours, when I first began, I laid my
hand upon the Patient, but finding that she, together with the Devil began to
strive* and so to get from me, she being mavelous strong, yet I held fast,
and desired her Father (who was by me all the while I was about it) to help me,
which he did, but for the most part I held her my self, having gotten her at
the best advantage I could: I often prayed, and repeated these words following,
viz. by this high and mighty Power and Name Tetragrammaton, and in the name of
the blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and holy Ghost, I charge, and command the
Devil and unclean Spirit to come forth of this Maid, and to depart from her in
peace, and not to molest or trouble her any more; after this, when I saw that
the unclean Spirit would not come forth, I said three several times, In the
name of Jesus of Nazareth I charge thee to come forth, yet notwithstanding, (as
yet) the Devil would not come forth: the truth is, I find that all Devils or
evil Spirits, when once they are gotten into the possession of any one will be
very unwilling to come forth of their habitation; more especially, when they
have been long settled in the body: I often gave the Patient of the distilled
waters before mentioned, and then prayed again as at the first; I also repeated
those words before mentioned oftentimes, resolving not to give over until the
Devil was enforced to leave her, and during the space of above two hours I
continued sometimes in Prayer, and between whiles repeating the words over
before rehearsed; at length the Devil came forth but invisible, with a great
cry and hideous noise-raysing a sudden gust of wind, and so vanished, doing no
harm either to her Father (who was present all the while) nor yet to my self,
or any part of the house: her Father seemed to be very fearful, and sat
trembling, (and truly I do not much blame him for I believe he was never
present at any such business before) but I cheared him up so well as I could,
bidding him fear nothing, and willed him to trust in God not doubting: the
truth is, when I saw him so fearful I willed him to depart, telling him, that
except he found that his Faith was strong, and he thoroughly resolved to endure
the danger, cries noise, and trouble of it, he might unhappily interrupt me
when I was most busy; for he knew by what the Minister had done before, that
we should have some struggling, but his answer was, that what ever came of it,
he was resolved to live and dye with his Child, rather than fail; whereupon I
went on with the work, but before I had half done my task, he hearing, and
seeing how grievously his Daughter was tormented, his Spirits and Faith began
to fail him, desiring me by all means to desist, and give over; but I being
very earnest with him, and telling him of his breach of promise, and using some
arguments unto him, and telling him that except he would either sit still and
not any more interrupt me, or otherwise depart the room, I would not meddle any
further in the Cure, whereupon he resolved to endure it, and promised me once
more, that he would be silent until I had finished, which accordingly he did
perform; immediately after the Devil left her the Maid began to speak, and he
fitts never troubled her any more; and within a few weeks after, with
Dyet-drinks, bathes and ointments, this Maid was perfectly recovered both of
her health, and limbs; notwithstanding, for a year past, she could not move
from the middle downwards, her limbs being useless, and of no strength, except
during the time of her fits, and then sometimes she would be very strong and at
other times seemingly dead, someing at the mouth, sometimes she would shreek,
cry, and groan, sometimes crawle about the room, as in part I have before
related: I shall relate one passage more which happened, constantly in the time
of her fits, there was always brought unto her three pins and but one at a
time, at the receipt thereof she seemed to rejoice and smile, saying, ah and
then presantly she would put the pin into her mouth, which when her Father and
Mother perceived, they would instantly get it from her, fearing she should
choke her self with it; sometimes they were much troubled to get it from her,
for she would be very unwilling to part with it; they showed me a box near full
of them for she had three brought her every night during twelve months; and
that night when I cast the Devil forth of her she had two brought her in my
presence but no more ever afterward; also 'twas observable, that during the
time that I was employed about this business, there was seen by my people and
servants three Women to walk about the house, and more especially near the
Window where I was employed, which women her Father did judge were three
suspected witches, who had spoke some words, and were afterward prosecuted by
the Maids Father, one of them dyed, as I was informed at the Prison in
Winchester, and weat became of the other two I knew not, for I never inquired
more after them.

I shall now proceed to set forth the way and manner how I did cast forth a
dumb Spirit out of one who was possessed, as follows.
THat which confirmed me and others of this Maid now in question, of her being
possessed of a Dumb Spirit, was in regard that she could not say or once name
God, Jesus Christ, nor yet endure to pray, or suffer any one else either to
pray, or repeat any Sacred words or expressions, but that immediately she was
tormented, and sometimes would fall down dead: This Spirit would not answer to
any question as the other speaking Devil did, not yet suffer the Maid: in her
fits she was always dumb and silent, her fits usually began about five a clock
in the morning, and lasted four hours, during which time she would not utter
one word, but would sometimes leap about with her arms and legs like a Frog,
sometimes she would play cop-head, over and over; sometimes with all the might
she had, she would knock her head against the Beds-post or Wall, which was
nearest. Also being in a Chamber she would strive to get to the stairs that so
she might through her self down. Now the way which I used to cast forth this
dumb Spirit, was as follows, In the first place the room being made so close
as I could with convenience, I made a fume of such solary ingredients as is
before expressed; which fume I continued all the time I was in this action: the
time which I took to cast forth this dumb Spirit, or Devil, was between the
hours of nine and twelve a clock upon the Sabbath day: the prayers which I
used, was according unto what I have already related in casting forth the
speaking Spirit; and likewise I often repeated the same ways as aforesaid. But
this dumb Spirit would not come forth until the third Sabbath day:
Notwithstanding, I was near three hours every time in action, and during all
the time I was employed in this business, she would be much afflicted; upon the
third Sabbath day between the hours aforesaid, this dumb Spirit came forth in a
kind of vomit, no shape or form of any thing appearing, after which, by diet
drink and ointment made of Planetary herbs, antipathetical to the afflicting
Planet, she was soon recovered and never had any more fits after the third
Sabath day before mentioned. Note, That dumb Spirits are far more difficult to
be cast forth than those which speak: and that was the only reason why I took
the benefit of those hours upon each Sabbath day, it being the usual hours of
Prayer in all Churches, and Congregations.

I know there are some foolish people, who being ignorant of the Scripture,
that do, and will judge unrighteously concerning this great work, unless they
are convinced, and truly I need not use any other arguments then what we find
written by the holy Evangelists and Apostles, as first, the answer of our
Blessed Savior to the Jews, as is before mentioned. Secondly, we find that our
Savior gave that especial gift unto his Apostles and Disciples; and without
question unto all other Believing Christians, who may through strength of Faith
do it; as appears in Mark Chap. 16. ver. 17. And when the Apostles told our
Savior that they did forbid some who did undertake to do it, our Savior said,
forbid them not, etc. But unto such who presume to do it who wanted Faith and
did not Believe: nay, although they used the very words of the Apostles, yet
the Devil would not obey, nor yet be commanded forth by them: as you may find
in the 19. Chap. of the Acts of the Apostles, there you shall find, that one
Sevah a Jew had seven Sons who were exorcists, or Conjurers, these following
Paul and the Apostles, and hearing the words which they used, assayed to do the
like, presuming to cast forth a Devil out of one who was possessed, saying, I
adjure you by Jesus, whom Paul Preaches to come forth, but the evil Spirit
answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? and the man
in whom the evil Spirit was, fell upon them, heat them and tore all the
clothes from their backs, and without question put them into a great fright,
for we find, that they all seven ran out of the house wounded, and naked, and
glad (I warrant you) that they escaped so, this act of theirs was noised
abroad, and also known throughout all the City of Ephesus, and fear fell on
them all, insomuch, that I believe never any Jew durst to attempt any such
thing afterward unto this day; for St. Mark says plainly, These Signs shall
only follow those that believe in Christ Jesus: in his name shall they cast out
Devils; wherefore, unto those who believe not in Christ Jesus, it plainly
appears they shall not do it. And whosoever does, or shall undertake this
business, his faith and belief must be strong without doubting, otherwise he
may fail in the performance, for although some ceremonies may be used herein as
I have before related, yet without Gods especial blessing upon the words,
ways, and means used, together with strength of Faith, believing, no man can
prevail herein, as plainly appears by those seven Exorcists, or Conjurers
aforesaid.

Concerning all kinds of Agues, and quotidian Infirmities, with the
Astrological way of Cure.
THere are three kinds of Agues, viz. Qutidian / Tertian, and Quarta^; of all
which kinds I have Cured many: And to my knowledge and best remembrance I never
failed where I have undertaken, I once cured a Woman who had a Tertian Ague
nine years, being brought so low therewith, that she was not able to go without
help, she had without question as she told me, taken many things for it, but
without success. I find there are many receipts by Authors set forth in Print,
but I could never find any certainty in them: I dare say, there are so many
ways invented for the curing of Agnes, as there are people sick of them: there
can be no certainty in curing any of these kinds of Agues, or daily fits, or
griefs, except it be done by the Rules of Astrology, for many reasons, for some
are afflicted under the Planet Saturn* and then their fits will be most of
cold: others are afflicted under Mars, and then their fits will be most of
heat: and some are afflicted under both Planets, viz. Saturn, and Mars, and
then their fits will be never equal both in cold and heat. Secondly, sometimes
the afflicting Planets are weak in the Heavens, and sometimes strong, which
must be considered in the cure Thirdly, the Age and Complexion of the Patient
must be taken Notice of. Lastly, you must by a Fi^ure discover whether any
Witchcraft or Sorce^y has been wrought upon the Patient, or from what natural
cause the sickness began I shall now briefly discover the reason of each kind
of Ague, or Quotidian Infirmity, and then set forth the way of cure as
follows, I shall begin with the Quotidian Ague, which usually assaulteth the
Patient daily, near one and the same hour, at which time as also in Tertians
and Quartans the sick usually is troubled with wind and cold watery phlegmatic
matter settled at the stomach, which at the first beginning of the fits causes
a shivering, after which follows a fevorish burning hot fit; also I find,
that not only the Quotidian Ague, but also there are many other infirmities, as
Appoplexies, Convultions, Palpitations, Risings in the Throat and Stoppings at
the Breast and Stomach and some kinds of Evils which daily begin to afflict the
Patient near the same hour: Now upon observation upon all these kinds of daily
Agues or Infirmities before mentioned. I constantly find, that the Sign
Ascending, at or near the beginning of each fit, together with its Lords does
exactly personate the sick, and without doubt was their proper Ascendant at
their Birth, by virtue of which Ascendant, together with the sixth and twelfth
houses, and their Lords afflicted, I always discovered the grief, with its
cause and termination: the truth is, except a Figure be set for either the time
of Decumbiture, or first fit, or some other strong fit, there can be no true
discovery made from what cause it began, and if the true cause be not known,
there can be no certainty in cure; for although the Moon in acute and the Sun
in Chronick sicknesses by the Planets afflicting, does generally discover each
distemper with its cause, yet in these particular infirmities as Quotidian
griefs before mentioned, I find by experience, that the fits have constantly
kept their course, and have been very strong when neither Sun or Moon have been
afflicted, wherefore it appears, that the sign or Constellation under which the
Patient was born (which Sign we usually call the Ascendant) does wholly reflect
upon the Patient both at the beginning and durance of their daily fits
aforesaid; and truly I find even as in Quotidian Agues, and other infirmities
aforesaid, so likewise in Evils* The Ascendant does usually personate the sick,
more especially when the fits are usually near one hour, or at the time when
the Patient undergoeth any strong pain or torment more then other; for such is
the subtilty of the Devil, that he knowing each bodies Ascendant, can thereby
the better instruct the Witch how to frame the Image, that so it may thereby
work the stronger upon the Patient when the Sign ascends, and by that means
the Witch may by the rules of Astrology be the more easy discovered, and
ofttimes are thereby detected, for its well known unto many, that in a
Philosophical way when a Talesman is framed for the destruction of vermin, as
instance, the Scorpions, the way to make it is when the Sign Scorpio Ascends,
etc.

Concerning the Tertian Ague.
THe Tertian Ague usually keeps one hour, as the Quotidian Ague does, only
there is one days respite between, now I find, that in Tertian, and Quartan
Agues the Moon is much to be regarded, for, from the time of the first fit,
which may probably be called the time of decumbiture, The place of the Moon in
the Zodiac must be observed, and so by account according unto the Critical
Figure of sixteen equal parts (what the Critical Figure is, and how framed, I
have showed more at large elsewhere) each fit does answer unto the
Intercedental, Iudical, and Critical days and times, and so the second fit
makes the Intercedental time; the third fit the Iudical time, the fourth, the
second Intercedental time, the fifth the Crsis, and so you may go round the
Zodiac: after which the grief is Chronick, and may unhappily continue a long
time, if not cured. Note, that notwithstanding by account, according unto the
Critical figure, of its equal parts there is but 22. degrees. 30. min. allotted for
two days motion of the Moon, whereas usually she moves 24. degrees. at the least;
yet if we consider the beginning, and duration of each Ague fit, and likewise
what Degrees are allotted unto the Orbs or Influence of the Moon; it will
sufficiently satisfy those Degrees in question. Now as in the Quotidian Ague
so in this, If you fear Sorcery or Witchcraft, and make doubt of the true cause
of the Ague, a figure set for the time of the first, or any other fit, more
especially when its very strong will be needful, which to do I have showed
elsewhere.

Concerning the Quartan Ague.
THe Quartan Ague usually gives two days respite between every fit and as in
the Tertian Ague so in this, the Moon has an especial Influence upon both, all
Ague fits comes sometimes sooner, and sometimes later, according as the Moon
is swift or slow in Motion more especially, when evilly aspected of the
infortunes. The Degrees of the Moons Motion which by account are numbered
between each Quartan Ague fit are 45. degrees. making a Semi-quartile aspect to the
place she was in at the decumbiture, or first fit: and so the second fit may be
called the Judical time. The third fit the Crisis or Mortal time consisting of
90. degrees. making a square Aspect to the place she was in at the decumbiture
aforesaid; in Quartan Agues the Critical figure is divided but into eight
parts; the Intercedental time being left out as useless, in regard the fits are
at such known distance from each other; It seems Hypocrites and Galen never
used any other division in their times: But since we find by experience, that
at the Intercedental time many have departed, as I have showed else where,
especially in perperacute griefs All Quartan Agues are under the Dominion of
Saturn, and usually, if the Moon be evilly aspected of him, at the time of any
Quartan Ague fit, then it will be more violent and strong; although these
Quartan Agues are usually of long continuance, yet they are seldom mortal; the
reason is (I judge) because there is usually two days respite between every
fit, whereby nature has time to rally up its forces against the encounter.
What I have written concerning Agues, and Quotidian infirmities is from my own
daily Practice and Experience, for I never met with any Author either in Print
or by Manuscript which did show the reasons of each kind of Ague, nor yet any
certain way of cure: I shall in the next place set forth the certain way of
Cure, as follows.

The way to Cure each kind of Ague according unto the Rules of Astrology: there
being no certainty in any other way, as I have oftentimes experienced.
IN the first place (according unto the Rules in this book elsewhere expressed)
you must erect a Scheam either for the time of the first fit if that may be
had, or for any other strong fit; you must be careful so to vary the Ascendant,
that it, together with its Lord may exactly personate the sick, for if you take
a wrong ascendant which you may easily do for many reasons, as first the
difference in Clocks, secondly, the swiftness or slowness of the Moons motion,
thirdly some men and women being strong hearted will not yield to lie down in
bed so soon as others who are more weak and faint hearted, etc. wherefore if
you fail in the Ascendant no true judgment can be given* except in ordinary,
natural, acute, and chronick griefs, or where there is no suspicion of Sorcery
or Witchcraft, for then judgment may be given by the Sun or Moon afflicted, as
is showed elsewhere: when your Scheam is Erected, and the Figure Radical as
aforesaid, you must take notice, whether the Lord of the Ascendant, or first
house be in the twelfth house or whether the Lord of the twelfth be in the
Ascendant, or whether one Planet be Lord of the Ascendant, and twelfth, and an
infortune, or if the Lord of the twelfth afflict the Lord of the Ascendant, or
whether the Lord of the twelfth afflict the Moon, in acute griefs which are
under a months standing, or the Sun in Chronick griefs, then you may conclude
that the Quotidian fits of any kind* and likewise the Tertian and Quartan fits
of any Ague are more than natural; and that either Fascination, Witchcraft, or
Sorcery, have been wrought upon the Patient; such is the subtilty of these
wretches, that many times they are not mistrusted, much more discovered, except
by the Rules of Astrology, described as I have showed elsewhere, and who more
bold and forward to visit and frequent Neighbors, and oft-times are employed
both for Nurses, and tenders upon those whom they have bewitched, and yet not
mistrusted, and were there no ways to afflict them, there could be no cure
wrought upon such whom they daily visit or are employed as tenders upon: For by
their wretched ways, they would soon infect them again: Example, Once a Friend
and Neighbor of mine, after she was delivered of her Child fell into strange
fits, whereupon, some thought she had taken great cold, others thought, some
one thing and some another, at length her fits grew so strong, and the Woman so
weak, that her Husband thought at every fit she would have departed, whereupon,
he was advised to come unto me; but to prevent his coming, the Tender or Nurse
being a lusty young Hussie would needs persuade him to send her with the Water,
which he did, at her first coming she seemed to be very merry and jocund
always laughing, I asked her why she was so merry, considering her Dame was so
bad, she told me for no harm, I believe she thought to have fooled me, as she
had done others (but she was greatly mistaken) for having viewed the Urine, I
demanded of her to tell me whether she had any fits, and when her first fit
began, which she readily told me, not thinking that I could thereby discover
her Villainy; I quickly found by the Figure, that Sorcery or Witchcraft had been
wrought upon the sick, and by a Female body, much resembling her person; for
either the Lord of the twelfth house, more especially of that is the afflicting
Planet or the Sign where the Sun is, does usually personate the Witch;
whereupon I told her that I could send no answer by her, in regard, I must
first speak with her Master; at which answer she seemed somewhat danted, but
replied, she would speedily send him, and so went away, but when she came home,
she clean contrary to my message told him, that she had order to gather herbs
and make his Wife Dyet-drink, and none but she must give her any thing to help
her; whereupon, the man marvelling much at this message came to me on purpose
to know the truth, why none but she must be trusted, and brought his Wifes
Brother with him whereupon I told him, what I found by the Figure, his brother
presently replied, that to his knowledge, both her Mother and Grandmother were
both suspected for Witches, and one of them dyed in Reading-Goal, being
Committed by the Justice with intent to bring her unto Trial: having made this
discovery upon her, I advised him speedily to put her away, and to take another
Nurse or Tender who was of better repute, which he did; after which, by such
ways and means as were agreeable to her distemper, according as I have
declared at large elsewhere, she was soon recovered. I shall now proceed to set
forth the Astrological way of Cure, for there is no certainty in any other way
(notwithstanding, sometimes the Patient is cured by other means, (as I shall
declare in the sequel) more especially when the original of the fits, either of
Agues or other Quotidian infirmities before mentioned, be from Sorcery, or
Witchcraft, for then in the first place, you must by the rules before going
endeavor to afflict the Witch, otherwise she will continually renew the grief
so fast as you cure, more especially* where the Witch is not suspected.
Secondly, you must be careful that such herbs which are used for the Cure, be
gathered at the right Planetary hours, with the numbers of herbs according as
they are attributed unto each Planet: what herbs are to be used herein,
together with the time of gathering, administering, and the numbers of herbs are
set down elsewhere. The true way of curing all kinds of Agues, and other
Quotidian fits must be by antipathy, not omitting, as in these, so in all other
Cures, to take a select number of herbs to fortify the heart and vital Spirits.
There are four things considerable to be done in curing all kinds of Agues,
besides the afflicting of the Witch, in case of Sorcery, or Witchcraft, First,
Diet drink; Secondly, Cataplasms laid to the hand wrests. Thirdly, a vomit, to
be given at the coming of the fit: Fourthly, to let blood if the Ague have been
of long continuance Fifthly, to cause the Patient to wear one or more Solary
Plants: The way which I always used, is as follows, having by the Figure
found under what Planet the Patient is most afflicted, as instance Mars, then
take herbs under Venus; if under Saturn, then take herbs under Jupiter; if both
Saturn and Mars afflict, as sometimes 'twill fall out, then let your herbs be
under Jupiter and Venus; but if Saturn and Mars be strong in the Heavens, and
more strong than the fortunes Jupiter and Venus, then their own herbs will do
it; always provided, that one of the smallest numbers of herbs under one or
both the fortunes, together with herbs of the Sun be used together with the
rest; but if the infortunes be weak, then the smallest number attributed unto
them, and the greater number of the fortunes together with a select number of
herbs under the Sun will do it, for the Dyet-drink you may together with the
herbs, aforesaid, add Raisons, Currants, Liquorish, Aniseed, Sweet fennel-seed,
or Coryander-seed, to make the Dyet-drink nutrative, as also more pleasant and
good to expel wind: the Dyet-drink is made by way of decoction and given to the
Patient three times a day viz. morning, afternoon, and night: I have cured many
only by Dyet-drink and herbs, suitable as aforesaid, laid to the hand-wrests,
made up by way of Cataplasm: The herbs which you lay to the hand-wrests must be
shred very small and pounded in a Mortar with Raisons and white Salt, you may
add a little Venus-Turpentine to make it hold together, you must use the
quantity of two walnuts, it must be laid on hot and bound fast to the
hand-wrest: if the Patient does not mend after one or two fits trial, then you
must give the Patient a vomit, just when the fit does begin as follows: Take
one dram of Stibium more or less according unto the strength and age of the
Patient, beat it into a very fine powder with a Pestel and Mortar, then warm a
quarter of a pint of white wine and put the powder into it, keep this in a
glass twenty four hours and shake it often, and when the Ague is ready to come
put forth the wine into so much new milk, but leave the dregs behind and give
it the Patient blood warm and let them take posset drink after every vomit, if
the Patient does not amend after one or two fits trial, then you must let the
patient blood, for after the Patient has been afflicted above a Month 'twill
get into the blood also, if need require you must give the Patient another
vomit, more especially, if the Ague have been of long continuance, and I have
sometimes been enforced to let blood more than once; you must ^^ill give them
diet drink until they are well; If you heed well what I have written you need
not doubt of curing all kind of Agues, although of long continuance, as also
from what cause soever it had its beginning. By the Rules aforesaid I cured a
Woman who had a Tertian Ague nine years, as aforesaid.

Another way whereby to Cure all kinds of Agues Astrologically; together with
other infirmities which are in the Blood or Vital Spirits, as I have oftentimes
proved, is as follows.
When you let the Patient blood, take a small thimble full of Sympathetical
powder, and the like quantity of the powders of such herbs which are suitable to
the cure, as aforesaid, mix them well together and put a small quantity of the
blood into this powder, and be careful that it take no cold, for both the
powder and blood must be put together warm, and let the Patient wear it next
their skin, you must be careful that the herbs used, be gathered at the right
Planetary hours according unto their numbers as formerly mentioned, by this
way, I have cured both Agues and other infirmities.

There is yet another way whereby to cure Agues.
THis way is performed only by a certain writing which the Patient wears. Now
whether there were any such words passed between our Savior and the Jews as
the writing mentions who can tell, for without question there were many
memorable actions, things, and words, said, and done by our blessed Savior
which are not recorded in holy writ, and we find words in Scripture, tending
unto that purpose: The words are as follows.

When Jesus went up to the Cross to be Crucified the Jews asked him, saying,
art thou afraid, or have thou the Ague? Jesus answered and said, I am not
afraid, neither have I the Ague. All those which bears the Name of Jesus
about them shall not be afraid, nor yet have the Ague, Amen, sweet Jesus, Amen,
sweet Jehova, Amen.

I have known many who have been cured of the Ague by this writing only worn
about them; and I had the receipt from one whose Daughter was cured thereby,
who had the Ague upon her two years.

Concerning several kinds of madness, with the true Astrological way of Cure,
as follows.
I shall not enter upon any large discourse hereof nor yet take notice of
Authors, who without question have written Learnedly hereupon My intent being
only to write what I find by my own daily Practice and experience herein:
according unto which I find, that there are several causes of madness, and
several kinds of madness I mean in relation to their actions and behavior,
whilst they are in this condition: First, concerning the Cause, for except it
be known, its impossible, except by accident to work a cure, which for to find,
you must erect a Figure, either for the time of the first fit, or any other
more than ordinary strong fit, and to be sure, so to vary your ascendant, that
it together with its Lord may exactly personate the sick, and then by the Rules
of Art, examine whether the grief be Natural or otherwise, from Witchcraft or
Sorcery: if Natural, then from what original cause, as whether from love, loss
of honor, friends, estate, or any other, more than ordinary vexation, and such
like; for then the distemper will be wholly in the Animal and vital spirits,
for we may be assured, that whatsoever the external or internal senses do
comprehend, which proceed from the brain: the Vital spirits* which proceeds
from the heart does immediately put into action be it mirth or sorrow: in
curing these kinds of madness, you must heed the Complexion and Temper of the
Patient; for as in Drunkenness, so in Madness, you will assuredly discover
their Elementall, Qualities, and Natural Conditions: If Choler abounds, then
they will be violent in their Actions. and very apt to quarrel. If they are by
nature Sanguine, then they will be inclined unto mirth, as singing, dancing,
and the like. And such who are by nature Melancholy, and Mad, usually are given
unto sadness, sighing and much silence, seldom pleased. And those who are by
nature Phlegmatic, mad, are usually sluggish and idle, not careing to do any
thing, except forced thereunto, and much given to sleep, they will lie in bed
two or three days together, if not disturbed The way to cure all these kinds of
distempers before mentioned must be by decoctions, made of such herbs under
such Planets which are antipathetical unto each several Complexion before
mentioned; not omitting ointments to the heart and brain, and fumes to the
head, if the brain be moist and suffumigation if dry If the Patient have been
long distempered, then 'twill get into the blood, and then 'twill be convenient
sometimes to let them blood; and then if you take a small quantity of the
Sympathetical powder and mix it with so much Powder of the herbs proportionable
for the Cure, it will mightily help forward the cure, you must order it and
wear it as directed in the cureing of Agues: There are several other kinds and
causes of madness as follows, sometimes height of blood will ascend up to the
head and so disturb their brain, which will cause madness, the cureing whereof
is by often letting blood, and diet drink made suitable by Antipathy unto their
Complexion, as aforesaid; for if we should apply herbs which are by nature hot,
although good in general for the brain, to a Choleric mad body, it will rather
increase, then mittigate their fury, but in all cures you must ever remember to
fortify the heart and vital Spirits: the Sympathetical powder in this kind of
madness, mixed and ordered as aforesaid, is most proper; the truth is, this kind
of madness is easily cured by any drug-Doctor, for their general way is to cure
by blood letting, and purgation, which kind of Physic is proper for this
distemper. ^here is another kind of madness which comes by being costive and
bound in body, of which I have cured many, and I always found by the Figure,
that the chief significators of the distemper were in earthy Signs: for the
time being, these who are taken in this condition will be as mad, as any
according unto their natural Complexion, be it Choler, Sanguine, Melancholy, or
Fiegmatick; at the first they will be ill only in head and stomach, but after
some time it will make them light headed, and forgetful; and by reason of that
great stop in Natures Course, it will more and more cause inordinate Vapors to
ascend up to the head and brain, and at length bring madness, insomuch, that
they are not able to discover their own condition nor yet their friends; I have
known some who have dyed in this condition, before their grief was perfectly
known, or at least, were so far gone that Doctors could not help them. I had
once a Maid (who was a Farmers Daughter, living in the Parish of Goring in the
County of Oxon) brought tied and bound fast in a Cart with Cords, who was only
mad by reason of this condition, her Friends not knowing what she ayled, some
thought it might be through Love, others thought she was either bewitched or
possessed; some thought one thing, and some another: the truth is, she looked
very ghastly and wild but being by nature of a Sanguine Complexion, she would
hoop, hollow, sing, and dance day and night if she might be suffered: having by
a Figure discovered the cause of her distemper, I bargained with her Father
what to have for the cure, I quickly with suppositer and glister brought her to
stool, and within three days she grew sensible and quiet, and in a week was
perfectly recovered. I have known sometimes that an afright has caused
madness; in this condition applications must be chiefly to the brain, not
omitting Diet drink, made suitable by antipathy to their Complexion: I have
known some Females who have been mad only by the stop of their monthly Course;
the cure is by herbs proper to help such infirmities, as you shall find in this
book. I have known some women, who have fell mad after they have been delivered
of their Child; occasioned sometime from great cold taken, or disorderly diet
and sometimes by Witchcraft as I have already declared, occasioned by the
Tender, or Nurse; for their bodies being open and weak, any infirmities may the
easier be wrought upon them by such wretches, and yet the cause undiscovered
and the Patient many times dies.

The worst kind of madness that I know is occasioned from Sorcery or
Witchcraft; and I believe there are multitudes of this kind in Beathlaem, and
elsewhere, that lie many years in this condition; for except the Witches power
be taken off and staid, its in vain to administer Physic; more especially,
where the Witch sometimes may have admittance to come to the Patient: others
may perhaps be possessed, and then the Devil must be cast forth; for (as I have
said already, except the true cause of each kinds of madness be discovered, its
impossible to cure without a Miracle, except by accident; now to cure this kind
of madness which comes from Witchcraft: In the first place, you must by the
Rules of Art, endeavor to afflict the Witch, and then by herbs antipathetical
unto the afflicting Planet and complexion of the Patient you must make
Dyet-drinks Ointments, and Glisters, not omitting some ingredients suitable, as
Figs, Raisons, Currants, Liquorish, Aniseeds, or any other seeds good to expel
wind, etc. and sometimes when the body is bound, which most mad people are very
subject unto; you must make choice of such herbs amongst your Numbers which are
Purging and losening. Note that I always found in my Practice, that the
afflicting Planet and Complexion of the Patient were usually one, as instance,
Choleric people are commonly afflicted of Mars, and Melancholy under Saturn;
for such is the subtilty of the Devil, and the Witches, that they strike most
upon that humor whereunto they find the nature of men and Women most prone,
and apt to receive impression

If these Rules which I have inserted, be well observed and followed, there is
no one mad body whatsoever, but may (through Gods blessing) be recovered: to my
knowledge I have not failed these many years where I have undertaken;
notwithstanding, some whom I have cured have been mad many years: but I must
needs say, the longer they are mad before a right means is used, the more
difficult the cure is, and somewhat the more time it will require to perfect
their cure: For according unto that saying in Philosophy, Custom produces a
second Nature, etc.

FINIS.
To all such who are Students, and well-Willers unto this most excellent
Science of Astrology,
I Presume, that no sooner are these following Books come forth, but some will
be ready to say, What needs this Treatise, since we have so many books of this
nature extant, written both so Learned and Copious even in our own Language
that one would think, nothing more could be written of this Subject? but yet we
know, that in all Arts and Sciences whatsoever, no man can so curiously and
exactly write of any matter or thing, of what Nature soever, but that something
might be added thereunto; and were it but only a confirmation of what have been
written formerly by other Authors, yet its but reasonable, that such persons
who have been Practitioners and Students in this Art, should likewise have
liberty to write their Knowledge and Experience herein: And although in general
we keep close unto one entire Method and Rule, as in our Introduction appears,
compared with others, even as with young Scholars, so in this Science, there
must be beginning or entrance at the first, after which, each industrious
Student and Practitioner may increase in knowledge, and so make farther
progress and discoveries herein; and having attained thereunto some perfection,
may do well to communicate their knowledge unto others, that so this Art may
continually be enlarged: we find that in all Ages this Art has still
increased, by means of those Worthies who have been Students and Practitioners
therein, whose Books are extant of this nature: I confess, in some material
matters and circumstances I differ from many Authors, yet I keep close unto the
Principles of Art, giving sufficient reasons for what I write; those that read
my Books, being compared with other Authors may follow that way and method
(which by trial) does manifest its self to be most effectual: I do not intend
by this my vvriting, in the least, to disparage other worthy Authors, but do
highly praise and extol those excellent Works written by our Learned and
Ingenious Contrymen, who have taken much pains in Demonstrating the Art;
only as I have already said, where there is a Continuance of Practice each
ingenious person may without doubt add something to the increase of
knowledge; and I question not, but that each Practitioner and young Student
will gain somevvhat by my Labors herein. And as for such who are well
learned in this Art, although my vvriting may not add much unto their
knowledge herein, yet in point of wisdom and love to the Art and Artists I
presume they will take what I have written in good part, and pass by my
failings (if any) with silence: But as to the envious, they shall not much
trouble me, considering their persons will be sufficiently revvarded, as being
to themselves most destructive. But unto such who are loving and true lovers
of the Art, I vvish a blessing upon their Studies and that they may increase in
knowledge, Vale.

Books sold by Obadiah Blagrave, at the Printing Press in Little Britain.
ALstedii Aencyclopedia 2. Vol. Fol. Aretius in N^vum Testamentum Fol. Agu^nii
Commentaria, in Psalmos. Fol. Biblia Junii and Trimelii, Fol. Beza in Novum
Testamentum, Greek and Latin. Fabricius in Psalm^s, Fol. Marloret in Novum
Testamentum, in Psalm^s, and in Is^aiah. Junii Opera, 2. Vol. Fol. Causins Holy
Court in five Tomes, Fol. The C^mpleat Statesman, Fol. Car^i's Commentary on
Job, in Twelve several Vollumes. Q^arta. Allius Chain of Scripture, a
Chronology from the Creation of the World, to the Death of Jesus Christ,
Q^art^. The Pilgrim, by J. Hall, Twelves. Gee, Of Magistracy, Octavo. Sr.
Kenelm Digby, Of Bodies, and of Man's Soul; to discover the Immortality of
Reasonable Souls: with two Discourses of the Powder of Sympathy, and of the
Vegetation of Plants. Culpepers Translation of Riverius, Fol. Culpepers
Translation of Bartholinus Anatomy, Fol. Culpepers Translation of the London
Dispensatory. Culpepers English Physician. Culpepers Directory for Midwives.
Culpepers Last Legacy to his Wife, being his Choice Secrets. Blagraves's
Astrological Practice of Physic, Aristotle's Problems in English. Ramsey of the
Nature of Poisons. Wits Interpreter, The English Parnassus; Or a sure Guide to
those Admirable Accomplishments that Complete our English Gentry in the most
acceptable qualifications of Discourse or Writing, Octavo. Blounts Accademy of
Eloquence. The Accademy of Complements. The History of the Seven Champions of
Christend on. Quintus Curtius in Latin or English. Erasmi Adagia, Fol. Clerks
Phrasalogia Puerilis. Octavo. Sydelii Manuale, Gr. and Latin. Octavo. Turnerii
Orationes, Octavo. Testamentum Latinum, Octavo. Testamentum Graecum, Octavo.
Ho^les Easy Entrance into the Latin Tongue. Translation of Aesop. Corderius
Colloquies. Sententiae Pueriles Confabulatiunculae. Cato. Terence.

