A Description OF THE PROVINCE and BAY OF DARIAN: Giving an full Account of all
it is Situation, Inhabitants, Way and Manner of Living and Religion,
Solemnities, Ceremonies and Product; Being vastly rich with Gold and Silver,
and various other Commodities.

By I. B. a Well-wisher to the COMPANY who lived there Seventeen Years.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heirs and Successors of Andrew Anderson, Printer to
the King's most Excellent Majesty. Anno Dom. 1699.

Reader,
BEing desired by a Friend to set out this following Description of the
Province and Bay of DARIAN (my Friend knowing that I lived there and
thereabouts some years ago) What I have written is both what I have seen and
heard in the Place, and I have not perused one word of Mr. Dampeir or Mr.
Wafer's Books; Neither do I know what Description they have given of this
Province of Darian, they were both my Ship-maits near six years in the
South Sea: I went from Golden Island over the Isthumus that separats the
North-Sea from the South Sea, and there I entered aboard of the Ship which they
were then in, lying in the Bay of Panama, so that I never did see any of them
in the Province of DARIAN; For their Ship came round Cap-Horn in the
South-Seas, therefore if that they and I do not agree in our Description, is
none of my fault; for what I have written is the real Truth of what I have seen
and heard, for the Encouragement of my Contrymen.

By your much obliged Servant. Isaac Blackwell.

A Description OF THE PROVINCE and BAY OF DARIAN.
DARIAN is a Province lying in the Isthmus that separats the North-Sea from the
South Sea in the Latitude of 8 Degrees and 25 Minutes. North-Latitude, The Entry
of the River lies near 30 Miles from Darian-City, which is the Metropolitan of
it is Province. The Word Darian signifies in the Indian Speech, a Shady, City or
Town. And it was never Conquered by any in Man's Memory; It Is called a shadowed
Town, because it is Situated betwixt two great Ranges of high Hills, lying on
the East and West, and running North and South, with a River called by it is own
Name, Darian River. And it lying so near the Line, they are not privileged
with the Sunshine, but at 12 a Clock of the Day, which is near right over
their Heads at that time: And then the Reflects of the Sun from off the River
and Hill-sides, causes such an extreme Heat: But sufferable.

The Bay of Darian begins from Cap de Samblas on the West, and ends at Cap de
Caenu on the East; this is by the Indians own allowance, though other Draughts
makes it three times Broader. To the North lies off these Islands Isle de Pinos
or Isle of Pinos, and some other Islands that lies near to the Shore, called
Isl. de Orr or Golden Island. As also Tortuga or Tortois Isl. because of the
Plenty of these most delicate and wholesome Amphibius Creatures for Man's Use;
for they participate of Fish, Flesh, and Fowl, they Swim in the Sea as a Fish
and feeds upon Grass that grows upon Rocks, like a Bull or Cow, and they lay
Eggs like a Fowll and that incredible Numbers, for I have taken out of an hole
in the Sand 300 and oddsat a time. In short it is an excellent wholesome Food any
manner of way dressed; I would say more of it were it not known to all to be
true, that it would exceed the bounds of their few Sheets. There is another
Island called Furte, which lies off of the Mouth of the Le-goun of Vraba,
which signifies Safe Anchorage, and indeed so it may be called for 1000 Sail
of Ships can Ride in it with much Freedom; There Is from 5 to 10 Fathom deep
Water, with good white chynely ground mixed with white Coryll at the Bottom, in
which there is vast variety of several good wholesome Fishes; But especially that
much admired Creature called Manaty, which signifies Sea-Cow in the Indian
Speech, and many other great and small Fishes. The Mouth of this Le-goun is
about 80 Yairds over, and grows Wider the further you Sale in it; Its in Form
like a Semicircle. The Word Le-goun signifies a Lake or Loch.

All this whole Province of Darian, Soil.
is of a good Strong and fertile Soil and very wholesome, strong bodied People
possess it, which they themselves think, that it is the wholsomness of the Air
and Climate, that makes them such well bodied Men and Women. There is good
store of good Water Springs which flow down from off these high Ranges of
Mountains in the time of their Rainy Months, viz. from the middle of November,
to the middle or end of January: And then all the rest of the year is fair
pleasant and Serene Weather as can be, but Hot with all, which occasions their
ground generally to be so Fertile; but especially all about the Lake or Legoun
of Vraba. For in the time of these Rains all their Savanas or Salinas, id est
Meadows are so over flown with Dirt and Rubbish, which is washed down from the
high Mountains, that when it comes to settle upon the low Grounds, it is like to
Nilus in a manner: For what they have to Sow or Plant, they do it while the Mud
is yet Soft, and in 28 days time, I have seen Mellons, Cucumbers and Gourds and
many such like Roots come to Maturity in the said time, which I ever imputed to
these Rains and the Reflex of the Sun off of the Water and Hill-sides down upon
the Valleys or Meadow Grounds. It Is an continued Summer for all things are
Green there all the year over, Trees of some sort of Fruit will have upon them
all atone time, Blossoms budded or set Fruit, and some half Ripe others
wind-shaken, various are the Numbers of all sorts of Fruit, Trees, and other
stately Trees, for Food and Building; As also all manner of wild Fowl,
especially Turkies and Partriges, Turtle doves, Parats, with various other
sorts of Fowls both small and great: As also that small insect Cuchaniel. Here
grows that famous Tree called the Cocur-nute-tree, which affords all at one
time, Food, Raiment, and all other necessaries fitting for Household Use. Here
grows also the much talked of Cabadge-Tree, which I have measured when blown
down with the Wind, above 100 Foot betwixt the Root above Ground, and the
bottom of the Cabadge that grows upon the top of it. Here grows also that much
esteemed Nut called Coco-Nut of which the Chacolat is made; And here also
grows that Rair and most Fragrant and Odoriferous Apple, called Pinn-Apple,
which I am sure many of your fine Ladies would give their Silk Gown for one of
them to play with a while. In short, I have not now Time nor Bounds, to set
down all the most excellent Species of Fruits, such as Mammi and Mammi
Suportas, and Guovas, etc. and Roots and other Herbs, which are all very
Medicinal as well as wholesome for Food to Man and Beast.

There is likewayes found in these Rivers, Gold.
viz. Darian and Sancta-Maria Rivers great plenty of Gold-dust, which the
Indians drains through small Vessels with holes in the bottom of them, in the
time of these great Rains. The Gold is washed from the Mines of Sagra and the
Mountains of Carabana and Guattimala: Hills in short, it is a Rich Country with
Gold; for I have been told by very Ancient Natives of the Place, that they have
laughed at their Southern Neighbors Peruvians who have boasted of their having
Houses full of Gold; That their King's Ransom called Atabalidas who was taken
Captive by the Spaniard, was no less offered for him than an House full of
Gold, and if that would not do, they would give for his Ransom four times as
much Silver; his House was said to be 22 foot long, 17 foot broad and 36 foot
high; yet notwithstanding of all this great boast of the Peruvians Gold and
Silver. The People of Darian laughed at them, and told them that that quantity
which they bragged of, was but like a Mouse to an Eliphant in comparison of the
Mines of Darian, which to this hour they say contains in them more Gold than
Earth, and I have seen it so in many places my self, when that I lived in
Darian a few years ago. As also, I have seen their Horses shodd with Silver
Shoes and with Beaten Gold, Bridles with Precious Stones, set in all the rest
of the Furniture, and the Household Vessels all of Silver and Gold. I could
Write much more concerning the vast Riches that are there in these places; but
I know that my Contrymen are generally Thomasses, or at least I am sure that
they would be content to be Thomasses by experience in this matter.

I told you before that the People of Darian are a strong well proportioned
People, only I forgot to tell you that they are of a Dark-yellow, or
Copper-colour, having little or no Beards at all, but a straight Rank long
Black-hair as Jeat, some of them have it to their middle, others longer, Women
to their heels; They Generally go all naked, especially before that they be
Married, and but few of the Women kind, unless they are of a higher degree,
that ever covers their nakedness, even after they are Married; and when that
they do it, it is not half covered either, whither it may be imputed to be the
Tailors fault that takes not a true measure, or the Merchants fault that
begroudges enough of Cloth, I know not.

The Men are allowed to take as many Wives as he can keep or maintain, and the
way of their Marriage is this: Marriage.
A Man cannot Mary his Sister, or Mother, or Daughter; other degrees of Kindred
they respect not, for the Uncles Marie with their Cusings, the more Wives a Man
has he is esteemed the more Worthy, Great and Rich; for when any of them
offends him he disposes of her and her Children; if that she have any to be
Slaves to any who will buy them, and so getts other Goods by the bargain, which
likes him better: But Generally all his Wives live very long contentedly
together, without murmuring at others enjoying of their Husbands oftners than
others, and after any of them is with Child, she will not ly with her Husband
till delivered, nor yet come near Men; But when that they are fit for Men's
use, either Maid or Married Woman will not. When that they Marry, the Man
asks the Woman's Friends or Neighbors if that she has any, asking if that it
be their will to let such a Maid or such a Widow Marie or Match with him; if
that she say yea, they away they go all to his house, and Solemnizes the
Wedding in Eating and Drinking for 3 or 4 days: But at the entry to the House,
the Husband gives her an ear of Corn, signifying to her that she must Sow the
Ground, and she gives him a Lance, or else a Bow and Arrow, signifying that he
must go to the Wars and Wodes to fight and hunt for his and his Family, then
to such Victuals and Drink as they have, which is all sorts of Jerkt-hogg that
is Fleshed down without Bones. As also, all sorts of Barbekewd meats both of
Fish, Flesh and Fowl, that is to say, all sorts Roasted. Then for Fruits and
Roots of various sorts, they want not plenty of them, as I told you before, and
for Drinks called Muslawhi it is made of Plantings or Bonano's, which are Roots
not unlike our Carrot, only alike bigg at both ends, and a little crooked,
these they boil all to Mash and Strain off the clear and drink it. They have
also Drink which is made of Maiz, Turkie-wheat and Casader, other-wayes called
Farina de Poo, whereof is made their Meal that they bake for Bread. Farina de
Poo signifyes Flower or Wheat of Timber, such as has been Reported long ago
to be sawings of Trees. I could fill a whole sheet of Paper with the virtues
and uses of this Casader, but however please to accept of what you have here
for the time.

Before they go to ly down upon their Wild-kain-tops, which is all the Bed that
they use, they go and wash in the River, whereon, or near to their Houses are
commonly built, and when they are well washed, then they return home and lie
down: Their Houses I told you are made upon River-sides for Cleanness and for
Air, for they make them generally of an Hutt fashion made of wild Kains set
together into the Ground as close as can be, and covered over with the Tops of
these Wild-kains for Cleanliness, for they will not discharge Nature upon the
Ground, if that they can help it, but run into a River where that it may be
carried away with the Current: But if that they be far from a River, then they
dig a Hole with a Stick in the Ground, and so cover it up afterward; They are
cleaner about the Doors than many of the Doors at the Cross of Edinburgh,
unless that my Countrey-folks have mended their Manners. The Men generally
labor but little in the Fields, but only the Women and old Folks so long as
they are able to go alone, the Men are employed in Hunting and Fishing and
Fowling, and making Instruments for War, such as Bows and Arrows, and Lances
and such like.

When their Wives bring forth their Children, their Husbands take them from the
Womb, and with his Teeth byts their Navel-strings off, and then flatts the Nose
of the Child, either by an Squize upon it, or by tying an flat piece of Board
or Bone upon it, for they covet much to be plain-faced Gentlemen, and then
bores a Hole through the under Lip of it, that through time I have thought that
they have had two Mouths, through which I have heard them make an strange sort
of an Voice, but the proper use is to hang Gold or precious Stones in it; As
also they hang a piece of Gold through the Partition of their Nose down over
the Mouth and Chin, so has the Woman a great thick Ring of Gold through the
same place of their Noses also, so that when they go to War, they attire all
themselves with the richest Things that they have, and when that they Drink
they are forced to hold it up with one Finger while the other Hand is at their
Mouth; They hang also pieces of Gold at their Hair, and the Men cover their
Privies with an hollow piece of Gold which is tied about their Body witha small
Weeth of a Tree, then they Paint their Legs with a certain Juice of an Herb
that they call Pindo, and as I take the word to be, it should signify Paint,
for therewith they do paint their Legs all over; that in a small time they
cannot hardly wash it off; so that I have thought that they had a pair of
cliver strait Black boots on their Legs at a distance, then they oil all their
Bodies, and marches up Man and Woman, Bag and Baggage, to the Place where their
King has appointed an Randezvouze and there pitch their Tents, until that the
King pleases to March; ye must know that the Stoutest and Talest Men are made
likeways King, and not by Heritage, and the next Talest and Stoutest are
Officers under him; again, they come to the Wives and Children, in the time
that they are Encamped, those of the bravest and stoutest Hearts amongst them
fall a cutting and slashing of their Skine with a Fish-tooth which they keep
for the use: The places that they cut are their Brows, Cheeks, Arms,
Shoulder-blades, Breasts and Thighs, and some their Hipps, both men and Women;
I have seen so Carved with all sorts of Birds, Fowls and Fishes, when their
Wounds are bleeding they stop them full of a certain powder, that both dryes
and heals these small wounds, and also causes these parts of their Body to
swell and rise higher than other places does, of which they are very proud,
because they are taken for valiant and brave Men, then when they are all well,
their King Proclames a Speech in this manner, my brave and Stout men, ye'll
know that our Forefathers were most abominably Murdered, and their Goods taken
from them, and their Wives and Children taken captives unto such a Province;
Therefore it becomes you all now to prove your selves Brave and Stout Men, in
going along with me to be Revenged upon them for it; Therefore declare all
your minds, upon which they show their willingness by oyling of their Bodies
again; so that they cannot easily be catched hold of, and so Bagg and Baggadge
follow in order as before is said; and when that they met within any Bow-shot
they all let fly together so long as they have Arrows to shoot, and when all is
gone they fall to Work with their Lances and wooden Halbirts Pellmell, until
some of the sides yield, and then the Wives fall a Plundering of the Enemies
Wives, and in the mean time the Men are secureing the Prisoners, and afterward
they all march Home; and when that they come through any of their Towns, the
King cries out with a loud voice, Erima, Erima, Toupina-Baults Canomi,
Guasione, Tan Tan, That is, behold what valiant actions we have done for the
bringing you these villainous Men that abused our Forefathers; shall we not
Murder them, Murder them, then the People call out aloud, Zanupa, Zanupa, That
is to say furthwith furthwith, which accordingly they do, some in every Town,
until all be killed. The way how that they kill them, is, by tying them fast to
a Post, and so Shoots Arrows at them, by degrees, until that they shoot him or
her through the Heart, then the women quarters them and gives their bowels to
their Children to rubb themselves all over with them, to make them the more
Bloody-minded against their enemies, when that they come to be Men, they
Barbikew their quarters and keeps a Feast in the chief Place of the Town,
playing upon Flutts, that either are made of other Dead Mens-leggs, or
Thigh-bones, or else the Bones of these present whose flesh are eating at the
time. Then when all this Feast is ended, and every Man home to his Family and
Peace begins to be Proclaimed over all that Province, These Men that are jealous
of any of their Wives that have stayed at Home, as many of them do, they get an
order from their old Pagels or Priests, to bring her before the People of the
Town, where she is set upon an high place above the rest, and then the Pagel
asks her if she be guilty of Adultry or not, if that she denis, then he gives
her about half a Gill of a certain Red-water, which is as bitter as any Gall,
or Wormwood, and gives it her to drink: which if that she be guilty, it will in
a quarter of an hours time burst her Belly and rott her Thighs; and if that she
be not guilty, it hurts her no more than plain Water would have done, if that
she had drunk as much. I would desire that none of my Country Women should get
any of this Water sent Home as a Propine of their own Colony in Darian, for
fear it prove their Honesty, as I have it seen done upon them poor Heathens: It
looks something like to the bitter Water that we read of in the Law of
Jealousy in the Levitical Law.

When the Children are born and laid by the Mother of it, the Father brings it
a little wooden Lance and a little Bow and Arrow with a wooden little Knife and
Kisses him if a Son, saying unto him, my Son, when that thou art great, thou
must be strong to revenge thy self upon thy Enemies. They have diverse names for
their Children, such as Orapoecen, that is Bow and Arrow, Sarigoy, that is four
footed Beast, Arignan, that is an Hen, Araboton, that is an American Tree,
Pindo, that is an Herb they paint withal, as ye heard before. The Mother gets
a drink of Muslawhi or two, and Crambs the Pickaninis Mouth, that is to say the
little ones Mouth, with some boiled Root or other, and then gives it Suck for
to wash it down with all and takes a small Weeth or Bark of a Tree, tying the
Child to her back, and casts over her Shoulder, which Pape or Breast she places
that whereat the Infant may Suck at its pleasure; and so she goes about any
Bussiness that she has to do either about their House or in the Fields, They
are truly brave Nurses, for though that there Children are never Swadled, yet
there is none amongst them either young or old that ever I saw Crooked or
Deformed, which I impute to the strength of the Mothers Milk, I have had
Children of my own Nursed by these Indians, and they take it as a great favor
done to them, to let them give Suck to our Children, which they have done many
times when that I lived in America. As their Children grows up they teach them
how to make Bows and Arrows, Lances and such like Tools for to fight their
Enemies with all, as you have heard already the way how that they fight, and
how that the use their Prisoners.

They Hunt with several sorts of Arrows according as they design their Sport,
some small and sharp pointed with a Fish Tooth, others bigger and blunt at the
end like to a Rammer, and that is to Stun or Stupifie certain Creatures that
that they keep about their House, after that they recover Breath again. I have
seen them shoot an Arrow 50 paces even out from them, and make it stick in a
Beasts Head or Man's Head if in time of War. They go a Fishing in small Doors or
Cannous or Barkloggs, or sometimes upon Blown and dressed Selh's skins tied
together, with which they go often to Sea; and shoots with their Arrows some
sorts of Fish, and others they strick with their Harpoon Irons and so when they
are Laden, they come home and delivers their Fishes to the Women, who dresses
them according as they have occasion, and that is various ways for their own
use, and also to keep to complement Strangers with all when that they come
amongst them, as I may self have been, especially near to the City Darian,
where we had several Dishes of the aforementioned Tortoisses and Manaty with
several other rare Fishes and Fowls, which are very plenty near to the Lake or
Loch or Le-goun of Vraba.

I have spoken with old men that have described to me a great Fowl in shape
like the Griffen, but they are all banished of late years; As also are all the
Lions, Tigers, Leopards and Bears that used to haunt the Mountains, and in sted
of them, there is great plenty of all sorts of Munkies, and delicat Fowls as is
aforementioned, which Munkies are very good Meat to them that know them, I have
eaten 40 times of them, and would do it yet, before I would eat Mager or
Lean-flesh.

They are generally kind to all Strangers except Spainiards, whom they hate
with a perfect hatred, as they have good cause to do, considering their horrid
and inhumane Murder that they committed upon these poor silly harmless
Heathens: It Is not many Years ago since I saw upon the Coast of Peru 100
Carcages of murdered Indians turned into Mumy, though a long time since; These
sandy hot Countries keeps their Carcages from consuming; I call them Carcages
because they are lying like as many dead dried Sheep, only they want the Wool
that Sheep bear in these parts of the World: But I will not talk of Peru till I
have finished the History of Darian. I say that they are kind to Strangers, for
if that they know that you are designed to go up the Country, they will carry
you in Ham makers upon their shoulders with two Men one on each side of you,
carrying Water or Wine and Fire and Tobacco, if that you have occasion for
either of them, and when that ye come to the Place where their King or chief
Man lives, ye are made welcome by him and all the rest of his Court, by
hugging of you in their Arms, and scratching of your Back or Shoulders with
their Fingers, the which you must do the like to them, then you are set down
upon a Strawmatt, or some such like thing by the King, or next best Man to him,
and if that you have an Interpreter to acquaint them with your Business, they
will all hear him, or your self if that you can speak the Language, until that
you have made an end, and then the King tells it to all his Court round about
him, which if that it be a thing that pleases him, he claps his right Hand a
cross his Heart, and gives two or three Nods with his Head, which all signify
he likes the News or your Discourse with his Heart, and so if that he do not
like it, shakes his Head and looks of a sower Countenance, and cries out aloud
Zeto patae, id est, I am not well pleased; But if that he is well pleased, then
he cries aloud Yatabala Comorada, that is, ye are welcome to him as a Friend;
and so in confirmation of this he drinks to you, clapping his Heart first, and
afterward takes you by the Hand, and Drinks to you, that is a sign that ye are
as welcome to him as his Heart, and so ye drink all round in this Fashion till
it comes to the King again, and then to Victuals ye go, to such as I have
spoken of already, and the way of dressing of it. And farther to, to complement
you with the Kindness, they give you either their own or their Wifes Sister to
wait upon you while that you stay in Country, which if you except of them, it
is taken by them as an extraordinary piece of Favor conferred upon the Family
in accepting of their Relation; ye may use her if that you please, which if
that you do, I am sure it must either be for rarities Cause, or else extreme
Necessity.

But be sure that you take her not with you when that you return either to your
Storehouse, or yet a Shipboard, by conveying her secretly away as some has
done, to the great Damage of these that may perhaps come into the same Place
for Trade, as I knew it once fall out not many years ago; But that if ye leave
her with them, as also a few Beeds or such like Toys, then besure that they
shall convoy you down in State, with Music before you, and some of the best of
the Place will go at your side, and others holding an Subumbrera (as the
Spainiards call it) over your Head, others carrying Palm-wine and Tobacco; for
fire they can make it out of a green and dry Stick by Frixation presently to
you, if need require.

When that ye are come home either to the Storehouse or the Ship ye cause
compliment those that conveyed you down with Beeds, Coper or Brass-Rings, and
Whistles of all sorts a few of them, and they will return you 1000 times the
worth of it either in Gold or in Silver, besides what Provisions of
Barbekewed-Fish and Flesh they will send down to you.

At your departure from them, ye must shake hands and scart their Back as I
told you before; and then they will cry out Zata faca Balla Comerada, that is,
many bold and hearty success to you my Friend; so away they march home and show
all their Wealth they have gotten from you. If ye have given them any small
Looking-Glasses, that is two or three days Work for them to behold their
beautiful Faces into, and sometimes looking upon the back side of the Glass, to
see if the Party be there that they saw in the foreside of the Glass.

Now for their Religion, you must know that all the Heathens in these Parts,
have some sort of a god or other that they worship; either for fear of Love,
viz. There is a Palm Tree which affords them Wine every day: and there is a
Root that they call Api they worship, because its good for to make Bread of.
There is the Sun and Moon, because they receive Light from them. Next, there is
the Devil they worship in various Shapes, as they have told me; they see their
Valasa, that is, their great Prophet, sometime in a Man's Shape, sometimes in a
Beasts, and other times in a Birds Shape. There is a Fish that they call
Cayman, that is a Crocadoil or Allagator; and there are Snails and Serpents of
all sorts that they worship also. I could insist to 10 Sheets of Paper upon
their way of Worship, and how often in the year, and also what Harm comes to
them that by Chance kill either of these gods: but wanting time, I shall
forbear till the next Occasion.

There is one thing I cannot omit, That I have seen some sorts of them that can
neither comprehend an Oath, nor yet a Lie; though I have demonstrat both to
them, they would tell that it is impossible that any thing that looks like a
Man, can be guilty of either.

Their way of Swearing, is either by their Fathers or Mothers backside; or if
it be a great and deep Oath, then they swear by their Grandfathers; and if no
body will believe the Truth that they are saying, then they swear by their
great Grandfathers and Mothers backside. But as for Lyeing, I never could get
them to comprehend it. This way of Swearing they tell me has been ever with
them: I think it looks something like Abraham's making of his Servant put his
Hand under his Thigh when he was going a Wooing of a Wife for his Son. Yet this
sort of them, are they that worship the Devil.

They have no way of Learning amongst any of them: their way of numbering
anything, is by small Stones, or pickles of great Corn; and they keep those
that they have compted by them, till Occasion calls for them.

Their Ages they keep, or count by so many Moons; they have no Names for the
Months. I have reckoned up so many Moons, as that has come to 105, and 110;
yea, some 120 years old, and brisk old Men, notwithstanding which, I impute to
the wholesomeness of the Country of Darian.

There is others of them that believes the Resurrection of the Body; because I
have seen of their Graves that have been accidentally opened; and these of
their Friends have gone and taken all their Bones and carried them Home, and
put them in a place where that they would ly safe: I have asked them the Reason
of it; they would tell me that he would have occasion for them, when he should
rise to go behind the great High-hill where all the brave and strong Men go;
and these that are not brave and strong men, when they Rise, they go to a dark
Cave, and there neither hear, nor see the brave Singing and Dancing, that they
that go behind the high Hill see, hear and act also: but shall stay in that
place till one Agga shall come and beat his Bones to pieces. Agga, that is, an
evil or bad man.

Their Physicians they call Paggies, plays the Rogue much with them, for they
know certain Herbs and Gumms, that when they please to tell them that they are
sick in such a part of their Body, that they apply a Blistering Plaster to it,
which immediately blister their Flesh, and as soon they will heal it, by
applying of a certain Gumm, of which there is great Store of all sorts, both of
Herbs, Oils and Gumms in this Province of Darian; I have seen the Effects of
severals of them tried to admiration.

Their Diseases are generally Calentures, Fluxes and Yeas, or that we call the
Clap, at which they are very dextrous, in curing in 24 Hours time, by a certain
Root they give inwardly for that Effect.

When they are lying on Deathbed, their Friends Dance Sing and Roar all the
time Night and Day, and the sick Person takes it as a great piece of Kindness
done to him to attend him in this manner. But as soon as he is dead, they howl
and mourn with extreme Howlings, especially if he was a man of Esteem amongst
them, or yet a brave strong man. Also the old Women cries out, O what a lusty
and strong and cunning Hunter and Fisher this Ehu (that is man) was! Thus they
continue for six Hours time until he be buried, for they keep none in these
parts longer than six Hours time, and they bury them in a deep Hole upright
putting in above him Fowls Feathers of various Colors to deck his Lance and
weapons of War with, when he shall go to the back of the Hill and Dance with
the rest of the brave men that are gone before him: Also they power about him
some Palm wine and set a staff before him, and some Tobacco and Pipes, then
they desire him to mind them to such and such as are gone before him to Dance
at the back of this great Hill, and they put the Earth about him, and returns
with a Lamentation, Crying out, O this strong Ehu is gone! who will bring us
now the Bodies of our Enemies to eat as he used to do; Thus they continue to
mourn for a VVeeks time.

Thus far I have given you a true and Real Description of the Province of
Darian, both as to the People and their Customs and Ceremonies; as also the
nature of the Soil, with the Production thereof: If that it be kindly accepted,
I shall give you a Map of the whole Province with all the Rivers and Villages,
with a fuller Description than any extant.

I would have put forth a Map of Darian with it is adjacent Places; but knowing
that there are many who will not understand a Map, that can understand a
Printed Description, especially of the Province where now New-Edinburgh is
stated in Call donia.

But knowing that some People are like Children, who love to play with bony
Pictures; they shall be pleased within a small time with a Map containing all
the varities of the Place, the shapes of Men and Women, Beasts and Birds,
Fruits and Trees.

FINIS.

