A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, August 23. 1691.

BY Jonathan Blagrave Sub-Almoner, and Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's.

Published by Her Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by G. C. for John Southby at the Harrow in Cornhil, and T.
Jones at the White Horse without Temple Bar, 1691.

Luke 12.4, 5. And I say unto you my Friends, Be not afraid of them that kill
the Body, and after that have no more that they can do.

But I will forewarn you whom you shall fear: Fear him, which, after he has
killed, has Power to cast into Hell: Yea, I say unto you, fear him.


MOST of that Fear and Terror, that Men undergo in this World, is occasioned by
false Opinions, which they form to themselves, of the Good or Evil of those
Circumstances, that are incident to the Humane State And that it is Opinion
only, and no real Good or Evil in such Circumstances, that gives Men so much
Disturbance and Disquiet, is evident from this, that in the very same
Circumstance, wherein one Man thinks himself Miserable, another would account
himself happy. And again in the same Condition, wherein one Man thinks himself
Happy, another would account himself Miserable. The Evil then does not lie so
much in the Circumstance or Condition, but chiefly in a Man's Fancy or Opinion.

And this is yet more apparent, in that the greatest Misfortunes, that befall
Men, though they are very grievous at first, yet when they have been familiar to
them, and they are used to them, they are nothing; Though the Misfortune be the
same, and the Men the same, yet it is nothing so Grievous, because then they
know all the Evil that is in it, and at first they formed an Idea of it, which
was much greater than the Truth; For this is the Unhappy Case of Poor Man, that
must inform himself by the Mediation of Fleshly Organs, by his Senses and
Imagination, that he continually Cheats himself with false Images of Things:
For as soon as he sees any thing, that looks a little taking, that seems at
first sight to be Good and Pleasant and Desirable, presently his Fancy falls
to work, and he forms an Image of it, that is altogether lovely, he adorns it
with all that he can find Charming; he never enquires into the Blemishes and
Imperfections of it; And having thus drawn a Representation much beyond Truth,
his Passions are inflamed, and he pursues this Shadow, this work of his own
Brain, and thereby loses some real and substantial Good.

In like manner when a Man sees any thing that at first Blush has a frightful
Aspect, immediately, without having Patience to examine the Truth, he forms a
dreadful Image of it in his Fancy, he draws it so Ghastly, that he himself
becomes immediately mightily afraid of it, and his Fear helps to make it still
more Terrible, and so he becomes like a Man that Fancies he sees Shapes in the
Dark; in flying from which, he falls into some real Danger, tumbling into a
River, or down a Precipice. And the Reason why the Generality of Men do thus
Cheat themselves, is, because all Men would know every thing without being at
the pains of Enquiry; and it is much easier to fancy a thing, to draw a
Representation of it in our Imagination, than it is to search out the Real
Truth.

But in nothing do Men more impose upon themselves in this kind, than in the
Apprehensions of Death, they draw the most ugly and frightful Images of it in
their Fancy, that is possible, and so this becomes to them the King of Terrors,
And all their Lives long (as the Apostle speaks) they are in Bondage through fear
of it. Therefore the Politic Founders of States invented Superstitions to
remove this Fear, when there should be occasion to hazard Men's Lives for the
Security of their Country or the like. And it has been the continual Study of
the Philosophers of all Sects, to persuade Men out of this Fear, to make the
Thoughts of Death more easy, and to keep them from spoiling all the Enjoyments
of Life.

And yet indeed Death it self is no such Terrible thing, if it be thoroughly
examined and truly inquired into; But there is something after Death, that well
deserves our Fear. Therefore our Blessed Lord, to remove from his Disciples
this vulgar Mistake, to deliver them from this common, but vain Fear, and to
show them where they had reason to Fear, and how their Fear might do them good,
and prevent great and real Evils, speaks thus to them in the words of my Text,
And I say unto you, etc.

In pursuance of the Design of which words, I shall show,

First, That Death it self is no such great Evil as it is commonly apprehended
to be, and therefore not mightily to be feared.

Secondly, That the Wrath of God against Sinners, and the Punishment following
upon that Wrath, are very great Evils, and therefore much to be feared. And,

In Conclusion, I shall show the Advantage of the true Fear of God, in respect
of the Happiness it brings to this Life, as well as that to come, How it frees
and delivers us from all other Fears or Terrors whatsoever.

First, Then Death in it self is no such great Evil, that we ought so mightily
to fear it; And this will appear, if we enquire into the Good it deprives us
of; For Death it self can be no way Evil, but in respect of some good it takes
from us, which we might otherwise enjoy. What is then the great Good? The
Happiness and Satisfaction that a Man can have in Life, and from which we are
cut off by Death?

And for the knowing of this we can have no better way, than to ask of those,
who have had the greatest Experience of the Enjoyments of this Life. What their
Opinion is, How they find it. And surely Solomon is a very sufficient Evidence
in this Case. No Man could enjoy more in this Life than he did, and he declares
all that Enjoyment to be Vanity and Vexation of Spirit.

And if you desire to be satisfied by a Living Witness in this Matter, and will
ask any Man, that you think has enjoyed the greatest Portion of Health and
Prosperity, and long Life, Whether he thinks he has always been a very Happy
Man; And whether, if he was put to his Choice, he would choose to live the very
same Life in all its Circumstances, that he has lived, over again. (I say, The
very same in all its Circumstances, because Men would desire to live again,
that they might order their Affairs better, and have more Delight and
Enjoyment, than they have had: And it is the Hope that Men have, that still
their Life will be more Pleasant and Comfortable, than it has been, that makes
them endure their Lives. They still feed themselves with Hope, and that buoys
them up and encourages them.) There is none will say, He desires the same Life
again, that he has passed through. There is none will tell you, that his past
Life has been to his Mind, or in his Opinion Happy. What hurt then, I pray,
does Death do us, in taking us out of a Condition, in which no Man was ever
satisfied, or thought himself Happy?

But if by chance such a Man should be found that affects to be Singular, to
maintain Paradoxes, and will say, That his past Life has been altogether to his
Mind, That he should be very glad to live the same over again, and that
therefore Death must needs be very Evil, because it cuts him off from so
desirable a Good. We must refute such a Man, by showing the Nature of these
Enjoyments, and what kind of Possession a Man can have of them.

And the Enjoyments that are peculiar to this Life (for as for Intellectual
Pleasures, which arise, either from the Contemplation of God's Works, or the
Study of the Arts and Sciences, or the constant Practice of Virtue, which is
the greatest Pleasure a Rational Creature can have, these Pleasures will be had
in much greater Perfection in another Life.) I say, the Enjoyments that are
peculiar to this Life, and from which we are cut off by Death, are either of
Worldly Honors, Riches or Sensual Pleasures; for so St. John reduces them to
these Heads; All that is in the Worlds, says he, is the Lust of the Flesh, the
Lust of the Eye, and the Pride of Life. These things indeed are peculiar to
this Life, and Death will for ever take them from us, after we have taken the
greatest pains to compass them.

Now a Man must have a very mean and narrow Mind, that can think, That the
Happiness of a Rational Creature can consist in the Enjoyment of any of these
things; The vilest Beast, or most inconsiderable Infect were then capable of
almost as much Happiness as the best or wisest Man. But supposing a Man, by
long accustoming himself to Sensuality, has brought himself to such low and
Brutish Thoughts, by drinking deep of such entoxicating Cups of sensual
Pleasure, is become with Vlysses's Companions little other than a Swine: yet if
he has the least Spark of Reasoning left in him, if he can see but the length
of one Consequence, he cannot but see, that these Pleasures, how Satisfactory
soever they are to him, are not durable, that they must be short at the best,
and that a thousand Accidents may snatch them from him every Moment. Now the
more a Man values and is in love with these Enjoyments, the more this Thought
must vex and torment him, That he must part with them, and he knows not how
soon. To a Man that is indifferent this is nothing, But to him that has set his
Affections on these things, this is Gall and Wormwood, it embitters and spoils
all his Enjoyment; For whatever the Epicureans may pretend, A Death's Head is
but ill Company at an Intemperate Feast. And the great pains they take, the
unnatural force they put upon things to reconcile the thoughts of Death with
their sensual Pleasures, plainly shows, that this does still trouble them; it
lies at the bottom like a bitter dreg, and spoils all their sweet Morsels and
pleasant Draughts. For when the witty Atheist says, Let us eat, drink and be
Merry, for to morrow we shall dye. This is but a Copy of his Countenance, this
thought Galls him at the Heart, at the same time, that he pretends therewith to
encourage his Mirth, and he would say with much more Alacrity, Let us fill our
selves, for to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. This comes
heartily from him. The other is but a cold Pretense.

The great Uncertainty then of holding these things, and the certain Knowledge,
that they must in a little while for ever part with them, cannot but lessen, if
not utterly Mar the Enjoyment even with those that are most fond of them. So
that Death takes little even from the sensual Man, but what the Fear of Death
had almost deprived him of before. For even in the midst of Laughter this
Thought always made his Heart Sad, That he must dye and leave all.

But now to a Man of a large and wise Mind, these low Pleasures are of little
or no value. He looks far beyond them, and is even quite weary with being so
long clogged and darkened in this Case of Flesh, with being confined to this
Earth, to creep like a Worm upon it, and to be kept continually to the same
dull Round of things, which he goes through almost in the same manner every day
of his Life. This is so Tiresome to the active searching Nature of our Spirit,
that it cannot endure it; and therefore the Ancients had a Fable of a Man, that
might have been Immortal, if he would; but he was so sated with the same thing
over and over again in Life, that he chose rather to die, that he might have
the Satisfaction of seeing another Scene of things.

And the Noble Heaven-born Mind of him, that has not debased and plunged it in
the Mire of Sensuality, must needs be desirous of making greater Discoveries,
than are to be had here below. He must long to see and know those Glorious
Orbs, of which he now knows nothing, or what is next to nothing, and yet
mightily admires at a distance to range through the mighty Space of the
Universe, and to have his Mind continually entertained and feasted with clear
and certain Knowledge of the wonderful Operations of his Maker, to have his
Mind always more and more informed and enlightened with the most pleasing and
satisfactory Knowledge of God, his Glorious Attributes and wonderful Works, and
yet never to want new Matter of Information.

To a Man whose Mind is raised to these Noble Desires, Death is so far from
being an Evil, that it is the most desirable Good. It is like the opening of
the Eyes to a Man that was Born Blind, like the Unpinioning or Unshackling of a
Prisoner, and letting him out of a strait dark and foul Dungeon, into the free
and unrestrained Enjoyment of all that he can wish or desire. So that neither
to the Fool, who dotes on these things, nor yet to the wise Man, who knows how
to put a right Value upon every thing, are the Enjoyments of this World any
great Matter, though they have them in their Possession, or within their Power;
so that Death does not much hurt them in taking them away.

But what, then, are these Enjoyments to those we term Unhappy in the World,
who certainly make no small Part of it, such as are the Blind, the Lame, the
Maimed, the Diseased, the Poor and Needy, or those that meet with great Crosses
or Disappointments, and are not able to bear them, or such as have always their
Desires running far before their Fortunes, such as are ever displeased and
dissatisfied, and out of Humor with their Condition, whatever it be; These Men
taste but little of the Enjoyment of the World, or at least have but little
Relish of them, and Death can do such Men little Hurt by taking them away from
them; For to such many times may be applied the Words we read in the Third of
Job, Wherefore is Light given to him that is in Misery, and Life to the bitter
in Soul? which long for Death, but it comes not, and dig for it more than for
hid Treasures? To such Persons then Death is rather a Relief than a Prejudice.

And is it not so indeed to all Men? For there is no Man living but has more
pain and Travel, than he has Pleasure in this World. For all Mankind fell under
that Curse, That in the Sweat of their Brows, they should eat their Bread; And
that this Earth should bring forth Briers and Thorns to them instead of
pleasant Fruit. No Man is exempt from this; Not the Rich and Noble, any more
than the Poor and despised; Nay, Great Men have more Solicitude, and must take
more Care and Pains to Maintain themselves with Honor and Safety in the
Station wherein God has placed them, and to answer those Ends, which both God
and Man expect from them, than the Laboring Man does to get his Bread. In a
word, No Man whatsoever can do what is necessary for him, and what is his Duty
to do, and without the doing of which, he can have neither Credit or Comfort in
his Life, but it will cost him the Sweat of his Brows, much Care and Pains, and
every Man's Business will yield him the Thorns and Briers of Perplexity; So
that nothing can be truer, than the words we read in the Fifth of Job, That Man
is born to Labor and Trouble, as naturally as the Sparks fly upward.

Considering therefore the true State and Condition of Man in this World, Death
in it self is so far from being an Evil, that it is an Ease, a Relief, a
Refreshment. It is like a Soft Bed after a Hard Day's Labor, like a safe and
quiet Harbor after a Stormy and turbulent Voyage. It lays us gently down in
our Mother's Soft Lap to Peace and Rest, out of the Reach of all the Malice of
our Enemies, (who have no more that they can do to us) out of the Power of any
more Misfortunes. O Happy Death! How desirable were thou? How far from being
Terrible, if there were nothing to be feared afterward?

But after Death there is an account to be given of our Lives; God will have an
account from his Creatures of the keeping or the breaking of his Laws. And it
is most fit he should, His Wisdom, Justice and Goodness might all be called in
question, if he did not reward every Man according to his Works in another
Life, Since this cannot be conveniently done here without destroying the
present Frame of things, where the Goats cannot be separated from the Sheep,
nor the Tares from the Wheat, This day of Reckoning every Man's Conscience bids
him expect; And this, I am persuaded (though it be not sometimes perceived) is
Death's most bitter Sting, the true Cause of its being so very Terrible to Men.

If we go out of this World without repenting of our Sins, the Wrath of God
remains to be our Portion, and the Effects of that are truly Fearful, which is
the

Second Point, Therefore says our Savior, But I will forewarn you, whom you
shall fear, Fear him, which after he has killed, has power to cast into Hell;
Yea, I say unto you, Fear him. He that was infinitely Wise, that knew all
things, and knew what would come to pass, he forewarns us, and he that was
mightily concerned for our Salvation, he beseeches us, as his Friends, and
likewise enjoins us with all his Authority, as our Master, to fear God. There
must then be some high Reason for this Fear; and so there is; For the Danger is
great and unexpressible, that he would have us be afraid of, and by our Fear
fly from and escape. If you fear a Temporal Death, God's Wrath can and will
kill and take away the Natural Life; but this is little, (as I have shown you)
it is nothing in comparison of the other Effect of God's Wrath, After he has
killed, he will cast into Hell. This is that which should fill us with Terror,
as Job says, Job 31.23. Destruction from God (that is, this Mighty Destruction)
was a Terror to me. And that kept him from Sin.

A Temporal Death cuts us off from the few, empty, uncertain, and at the best
but short Enjoyments of this World; but Eternal Death, that is, Damnation, cuts
us off from those unexpressible Joys, which would fill our Souls, and would
last to all Eternity; and more than that, condemns us to Regions of Darkness
and Torments for ever. This is a most Dreadful Condition! The Scripture sets it
forth by things that are most Terrible to us, such as are Raging Fire, Extreme
Darkness, Perpetual Gnawing, and the like. But what words can express? Nay,
what Heart can conceive, what Dreadful Misery an Infinite God is able to bring
upon his Enemies, such as have contemned both his Justice and his Mercy, that
have frustrated, scorned and derided all that he could do for their Salvation?
Hear how the Wise Man sets this forth in the first of the Proverbs beginning at
the 24. Verse, where he brings in the Wisdom of God thus speaking, Because I
have called, and ye refused, I have stretched out my hand, and no Man regarded;
But ye have set at naught all my Counsel, and would none of my Reproof: I also
will laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear comes; When your fear
comes as Desolation, and your Destruction comes as a Whirlwind; when Distress
and Anguish comes upon you.

Here is a Danger worthy our Thoughts, our highest Concern, our greatest Fear;
for this is the last Degree of Misery, into which Man can fall; and has not
that Relief, which all Temporal Miseries have, when they come to Extremity,
that then they are soon over. No, this will last and increase to all Eternity:
The sad Remembrance of what we have endured, and the Dreadful Prospect of what
we are still to endure, and that without Remedy, shall unspeakably increase the
Torment. What would not a Man do to escape this? What can tempt us to run the
Dreadful Hazard of it? What is there in Sin thus to prevail with us? Alas! We
are presently weary of sinful Enjoyments our selves; Why should we provoke the
fearful Wrath of God for them? Why should we sell our Souls, part with all the
Joys of Heaven, endure an Eternity of such Dreadful Torments, as are in Hell,
for such empty, vain, momentary Pleasures, such mere Dreams and Shadows of
Delight, such mixture of Pain with Pleasure? Do not they deserve Hell, whom
Hell it self cannot wean from such Folly and Madness? Let us be ashamed that we
are so Stupid, so insensible both of our Interest and Danger. Would you not
think him Mad that should follow a Butter-fly upon the Brink of a Precipice?
Let us open our Eyes and see our Danger; Let the Terrors of God be upon us; Let
them make us quick to discern, That it is an evil thing, and bitter, to sin
against the Living God; and that no sinful Enjoyment whatsoever can compensate
our Loss, as our Savior says, Mark 8.36. What shall it profit a Man, if he
shall gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul? None of us can gain the
whole World; but if it were to be gained, all that was in it, and enjoyed by
one Man; the Question were easily decided, whether it were best for a Man to
Sin, to gain it. The World we could have but a little time: But if we dye
Impenitent, we must embrace Torments to all Eternity. And if it be so easy to
be decided, when the Question is about the most profitable Sin, What is it in
the Case of every little Impertinent Folly, that we sell our Souls for? Lord!
What is become of the Understanding of Rational Creatures? We are Melancholy
at the Apprehension of any Pain or Disease that is coming on our Bodies, and we
are not concerned at Everlasting Pains, into which our Sins are drawing us. We
fear every little worldly Loss, and we fear not, we care not, for the loss of
our Souls. We are apprehensive of every Temporal Danger, and we have no Sense,
no Apprehension of the Danger of Eternal Damnation.

Well, if we have no Care of our Immortal Souls, no Relish, no Desires after
the Joys of Heaven, no Dread or Apprehension of the Fearful Torments of Hell;
because they are not just under our view, though a most reasonable Faith makes
us as sure of them: Yet methinks this should move us, that our worldly Affairs
will go better, and we shall be troubled with no Fears about them, if we will
but fear God, and in consequence of that Fear, forbear to provoke and offend
him; for the Fear of God, which works Obedience, will not only remove from us
future and Eternal, but even present and Temporal, Judgments; and will set us
at Liberty, and free us from all other Fear whatsoever. Which was the

Third and last thing observed. The Fear of God will make us Free, it will
deliver us from all Idle, Vain and Tormenting Fear, it will clear us from all
Care and Trouble. To fear little or no Danger, as the Scripture says, To Fear
where no Fear is, no just Cause of it, is Childishness and Folly: To fear when
we are able to grapple with, to withstand and overcome the Danger, is
Cowardice: But to fear where there is an Imminent and Dreadful Danger, which we
have no Power to withstand, is certainly great Wisdom. And what can stand
against the Wrath of God? It is no Courage then (as some pretend) but the
extremest Stupidity or Madness, not to fear and stand in awe of him. It is as
if a Man should see a Tower falling upon him, and scorned to be so dastardly as
to fear it, but resolved to stand under it, and bear it up with his Shoulders.
They that do not fear God, have not the least Reason or Understanding left in
them. To be utterly void of Fear in this Case, is to be Stupid or Distracted,
to be without Sense or Apprehension, not to be able to discern between Good and
Evil, Safety and Danger. But has the Bold Sinner then (according to his
Foolish Boasting) no Fear upon him? Does he go on Cheerfully and Courageously
in his Sins, without any Qualms, with any Misgivings, without being troubled
with the least Fear, is he set at Liberty, is he free from all Fear? No such
Matter, it is quite otherwise with him, he fears every thing but God; He fears,
lest his Confidence and Presumption, that God does not see nor regard, should
fail him, and God should at last take a Dreadful Vengeance upon him. Every
piece of ill News, every Noise of any sudden Danger, is as the Terrors of the
Shadow of Death to him. He is in the Case of Belshazzar, Dan. 5.6. The Joints
of his Loins are loosed, and his Knees smite one against another. Every loss of
his worldly Goods cuts him to the Heart, because this is his All, his Portion,
his whole Dependence; And then for the Fatal News of Death, when that comes (as
come it must) he receives it either as Nabal did the News of David's coming to
take Vengeance on him, His Heart even dies within him, and he becomes as a
Stone, 1 Samuel 25.37. Or else he becomes Mad with Anguish, to think that he must
at once leave this World, and all that he esteemed or valued, for ever, and
enter into unknown Regions, where he can have no Friend, having never thought
of making any there, but must fall into the Hands of Powerful and Crafty
Angels, that will be glad of another Companion in their Misery, and who will
wreak their Malice, and vent the Spite and Anguish that is in their Spirits,
for the Heavy Vengeance that God justly takes on them, by Vexing and Tormenting
one of his Creatures, that is fallen into their Hands.

I might add that no Men have so much Vain and Superstitious Fear, as those
that think it a Disparagement to their Courage to fear God. No Men are so
observant of Omens and Blind Prophecies, and seek so much to Wizards, and those
that have Familiar Spirits, as these very Men do, even like Saul, when he had
rebelled against God, and had no more Hope in him, 1 Samuel 28. Chapter and so they
fear the Devil extremely, though they will not fear God.

But now from all these Vain, Base and Slavish Fears, does the Fear of God at
once deliver us; for he that fears God, and takes care to please him, believes
that all things are disposed of by his overruling Power; and that he is
certainly a Wise and a Good Being, that will suffer nothing to hurt those that
truly serve him, and endeavor to raise themselves to the highest Perfection of
Rational Creatures; But that all things shall work together for good to them,
and that therefore they need be careful in nothing, but cast all their Care on
him who cares for them; They may lie down and rise in safety and security;
because the Lord sustains them; He will suffer no Evil to come nigh their
Dwelling, but will give his Angels charge over them. And if through the Course
of his Providence, they should suffer any Loss in the Company with others in
this World, yet he is able, and will certainly make it up to them in Heavenly
Joys. Nay indeed any Temporal Loss or Calamity will be but a very light and
inconsiderable thing, to a Man that is become Wise by the Fear of God, and that
governs himself in a steady and constant Conformity to his most Holy and
reasonable Laws, he will have such Comforts, such Delight and Satisfaction in
his Mind by so doing, that nothing will be able to Imbitter or Spoil this
Feast; for this is the Summum Bonum, the chief Happiness; and all wise Men
agree, that he that has that, cannot be Miserable. The Joy of walking
Reasonably and Holily is so Great, so Genuine and Natural to Man, that nothing
is capable of disturbing the Man that so walks: But like as one Drop of Blood
is not capable of discoloring a vast clear River, or a little Dirt of Mudding
or Troubling it; so is a little Bodily Pain, or Wordly Loss or Affliction
utterly drowned, lost and swallowed up in the Soul of him that is so filled
with Joy and Satisfaction, as his must needs be, who has true Peace of
Conscience, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Thus does the true Fear of God, which takes away our Sins, deliver us from all
other Fears, and remove all Cares and Troubles from us, and make us Happy both
here and hereafter. Let us then but forsake our Sins, which alone can make the
Fear of God Terrible to us, and show by the Amendment of our Lives, that we
have the true Fear of God before our Eyes, and we need fear nothing else; for
nothing can harm us, we are safe in the Protection of the Almighty.

To whom be all Honor and Glory, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.
Books sold by T. Jones at the White Horse without Temple Bar.
A Discourse of God's Ways of Disposing of Kingdoms etc.

A Sermon preached before the Queen January 30. Both by the Bishop of St.
Asaph, Lord Almoner to Their Majesty's.

A Letter to Dr Sherlock in Vindication of his Discourse, Entitled, The Case
of Allegiance.


