THE APPROBATION from the Chief Physician of the KING.
WE have viewed the History of a Child, who remained Twenty five Years in his
Mothers Belly: Collected by Monsieur De Blegny, and have found nothing therein,
which may hinder the Printing of the same.

At St. Germain en Lay, the 6th. February 1679. Signed, D'ACQUIN.

A TRUE HISTORY OF A CHILD Anatomized: Which remained Twenty five years in his
Mothers Belly. With all those Reflections which the Phenomenon of the same may
Explain. Uery Serviceable and Useful for All: ESPECIALLY Physicians,
Surgeons, and Midwives.

BY NICHOLAS DE BLEGNY Surgeon to the King in France, and one of the most
Reputed in Paris.

Translated according to the Approved and Privileged Copy of Paris. With
Copper Plates. Price 6 d.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. James for Samuel Lee, and are to be sold at the Sign
of the Feathers in Lumbard Stret near the Post Office. 1680.

A Copy of the Privilege From the KING.
IT is by special Favor and Privilege, granted by the King at Paris the
Second of February 1679, Permitted unto Nicholas de Blegny, Surgeon in
Ordinary to His Majesty, and Sworn Master in Paris, to cause to be printed; by
whom, in such Form and Manner, and as often as he himself shall think good, the
discovered Rarities and Novelties, by him already penned; or which he may
acquire from any other place, concerning all the Parts of Physic, according to
the Model thereof by him already made, or from others borrowed: And that for
the time of Six years, to begin at the day that each Volume or Book shall be
printed: Forbidding all Booksellers, Book Printers, or others, to print, cause
to be printed and distributed, the aforementioned Discovered Novelties, uuder
what pretense soever, yea though of a Foreign Print, or otherwise, without
express Leave and Consent of the aforementioned De Blegny; upon Forfeiture and
Confifcation of the Examples and a Thousand Crowns thereabove; with all Costs,
Charges, and Interests; as is more at large specified in the Letters of
Privilege.

Registered in the Book of the Stationers Hall at Paris; the 25th February 1679.
Was Signed E. Cocoterott, Warden.


Fig 1

Fig 2

Fig 3

Fig 2



A TRUE HISTORY OF A Child Anatomized: Which remained Twenty five Years in his
Mothers Belly.
MArgaret Mathews, the Wife of John Pughet, Clothworker at Toulouse, after
having happily brought forth into the World Ten Children in the latter part of
the year 1652, found her self with child of the Eleventh; and at the expiration
of the Accustomary Time, she felt the Pangs of Travel; the vehemence of which
forced her to betake her self to Bed: A Surgeon who was accustomed to
Deliver Women, was fetched; who having visited her, told her and assured her,
that there was no disposition or likelihood of being Delivered at that time:
Nevertheless the Pains continued and increased, and cruelly tormented her for
the space of Two Months: In the mean time two of the most Renowned Doctors
there, were advised with it; who opening and prescribing Medicines, and acting
what might be possibly done, could produce no other Effects, then some Clodders
of Blood, forced out of the Matrix.

After this first time, she went near hand Three Months more with these
troublesome, yet now more tolerable Pains, than the former, though
notwithstanding they were still accompanied with a continual evacuation of a
silthy, mattery Stuff. From that time she increased in her strength, and
nothing more did come forth from the Matrix; but she was, if she would enjoy
any ease, constrained continually to lie upon her Back; for when she turned her
self any otherwise, her Burden caused her great Pains: In so much that she
could, as it were, feel the Child remove it self. She continued in this
condition Eighteen or Nineteen years, during which time, after the intermission
of some Months, she under-went such strong and extraordinary Pains, that
oftentimes she earnestly entreats the Surgeon to open her Belly, and so take
away that which was the Cause of her so great and miserable Pains.

Since the aforesaid first years, unto the year 1675, that same Burden (which
by its weight and greatness had so long tormented her) grew more tolerable and
less troublesome; being then grown fast and without any Motion.

Finally, The Seventeenth of June 1675, she was taken with a Fevor, which ended
the Two and sixtieth year of her Age and her Misery, together. Next day the
Body being opened, there was found on the whole Bottom of the Matrix, a Body or
Substance as hard as Stone; each side of this Substance, toward the Bottom,
being hollow about the length of four Fingers, covering an Ulcer, Boil, or Sore
of the same bigness; as may be seen by Figure 1: Excepting the Sore, the rest
of the Matrix was in its natural Form; as also all the lower parts of the
Belly, the Cawl only excepted; which had acquired about the thickness of two
Fingers breadth a hardness and a little fleshiness: These things considered,
the Cawl was laid upon the dead Corpse, and then was espied a Deformed Lump,
fast under the Cawl, which being separated, represented the Figure N. 2: The
outside of it was nothing but a Crust, a large inch thick, and in some places
more; this Crust was near as hard as a Gristle, of Color a pale Yellow,
excepting on that side of its joining to the Cawl; where it was harder and
something redder. Some Persons out of Curiosity, laid the same against the
Fire, being of opinion that it would melt like Suet or Tallow; and so after the
melting there would remain a kind of a Film or Skin, with some Knobs, which
appeared in diverse places of the said substance: In the mean time, in this
turning it about, there were seen some Signs of a Child, which was loosened and
cut from it as dexterously as possibly; and at length a Child was discovered,
and discerned to be a Man Child; the Yard being found between the Film or Skin
of the Groin: It was laid with its Head to the bottom of the Matrix, his right
Hand in the form of a Closed Fist, placed against the upper part of the Crown
of his Head; his Breast against the Backbone of the Mother; his Back was on the
side of the Cawl; the Feet were bowed upwards, so that they in part encompassed
the Circumference of the Naval, as also some part of the left side of the
nether part of the Belly: Some Harr was found upon the Eyelids, the Eyes sunk
in, the Film of the same wrinkled, the Nose flattish, the Lips grown over with
a a Substance harder than that wherewith he had been encompassed; and after the
Gums were cut, there was there-under found Teeth near as great as of a
fullgrown Child; under its right Arm, and by the right Ear, a small Lock, of
yellow but very short Hair: The Nails of the Hands and Feet long, hard and raw
the Flesh of the Neck, Groin, and the parts thereabouts, colored with Blood;
the Skull Bones separated from one another, and the Brains sunk down and almost
of the Color of Conserve of Roses; the inward parts of the Breast and Belly
were dried up and blackish; the Muscles and Sinews of the lower parts had lost
very little of their greatness, or of their natural force, otherwise then that
the fleshy parts were White, Yellow, and a Dark Pale; the Knees a little parted
from one another; the left Foot a little bended, hiding the right Foot under
it; the left Hand shut and pressed against the Chin and Knee of the same Side:
Finally, All the Limbs, excepting the right Arm, were placed as they are in
other Children in the Mothers Womb; which may easily be discerned by the third
Figure.

After it was stretched out, it was Fourteen Inches long, although the
Backbone remained bent; being inwardly bowed toward the right Side.

All these things were publicly known and viewed in the City of Thoulouse, and
according to the Order of the Court of Parliament of the said City proved and
verified; where also may be seen the Testation of several Credible Persons:
Moreover, This Relation made by me, is consonant and conform. Those Memorials
to me sent from thence, and the Report I had from John Francis Pughet, Eldest
Son and only Male, of the three Children of Margaret Matthews, who is yet
alive, and brought us this Wonder to a Public View: So that now it only
remains to examine the Natural Causes of so many Extraordinary Accidents.

CONSIDERATIONS UPON THE Principal Circumstances OF THIS HISTORY.
NOT to digress too far from the Subject here mentioned, I shall not stand to
inquire, What the Natural Causes and Motives of Childbearing are; Possibly my
Fortune may be, to meet with a Better Way, and more Consonant, to the
Explication; I must then only propose that these Causes had determined, this
our Child to come forth of the Womb; being brought to its due time, and the
Labor being very near, upon the ordinary manner: This then being established,
the first Difficulty which does present it self to be discussed, is, To know
the Cause or Reason, Why the Inward Opening or Mouth of the Matrix; resisted
the powerful Endeavors both of Mother and Child? That is, Why did not the
Matrix sufficiently open it self for the passage; or at least for the drawing
away of this Child? It being certain, That as often as Women come in Travel,
the Matrix always opens and enlarges its self; in whatever manner the Children
appear; and all that Margaret had before this, does sufficiently evidence, that
this part in her was naturally well constituted. In the mean while it is not
very troublesome, to resolve this Question, It is certain that a Part or Member
may suffer and have an Indisposition at one time, which it never had or
suffered before; and also that the Inward Opening of the Matrix, is subject to
Inflammations, Hardness, Convulsions, and in general, Diseases which are common
to all fleshy and membraneous parts; the which either hinders or spoils the
actions of the said parts, and one of these two Accidents might occasion that
Condition in which Margaret found her self, in time of her Labor. The whole
City of Thoulouse being at that time amazed and afraid, by reason of an already
begun Infection, and consider, That in Women the Matrix is made sensible of
every strong and extraordinary Motion of the Mind.

But seeing the Inwardest Mouth of the Matrix could not be opened sufficiently,
could not the Child remain in the Matrix, as others have before done, somewhat
after the due time? And how could it come out of the Matrix, and cast its self
into the Vacuity of the Belly? This is another Subject to be wondered at, and
yet may have Natural Causes: It Is probable this Child pitched first with his
Head downwards, it being found in this posture; the Water could not on this
side form or bring it self to any Head Meeting with uncomparable resistance: In
the mean time the Pangs of Travel were extreme hard; and it is certain the
harder they are, the more that moisture which incompasseth the Child, is moved
and put forth the Adherent Membranes in the form of a Point, to force its self
a Passage; which is called a Formed, or Full-grown Water: We may then already
judge, that the Moisture, with every Pang, pressed toward the Inward Mouth of
the Matrix; and it is not difficult to be believed, That the Water, as it were
by a rebound, turned to the contrary Parts, and so brought forth the same
Effect; Margaret having during that time laid in several Forms and Manners, and
that probably, some manner or other, the height of this Opening might be equal
with that of the Matrix: Forasmuch as the Surgeons who are accustomed to
Deliver Women, and also the Midwives daily observe, To lift up the hinder parts
of those who are in Travel upon the Bed, to facilitate the passage of the Child.

But it may be said notwithstanding all this, That the Water does not receive
such a Form as I have described, before it is forward and in the Innermost
Mouth of the Matrix; and that therefore, to form it self on the other side, it
must of neeessity meet with the Circumference of some Space; that is to say,
the separating or parting ofth whole: For Margaret had no Ulceration in the
Bottom of her Matrix; not having had extraordinary pains before her Labor; and
the diverse Refluctions of the Water, nor the Members of the Child, could make a
sufficient Wound to give him a Passage; the whole Space or Vacancy of that
Bottom is naturally covered with the Afterbirth: And if in case it had been
sufficiently separated or parted, then Margaret must have continually during
her Labor, evacuated Blood; which here was not so: But the situation of the
Trunks or Pipes of the Matrix (although they are in a manner annexed to the
Bottom thereof) teaches us, that their Mouths could not well be covered by the
Afterbirth, which occupies but the Middle; and Experience learneth that they
can retch considerably; for sometimes Children are generated in them; which
have been known to live and grow there until the Fourth or Fifth Month: But if
any will object, That the Quantity of Man's Seed necessary for Generation, can
insinuate it self; without having the Entrances to be naturally very wide, or
capable of retching of it self in the Copulation: I answer, That this, nor all
the Reasons that may be alleged, are capable to with-stand Experience: The
History I am about rehearsing, does undeniably prove that the aforesaid Mouths
can very well endure as large a stretching as the Inwardest Mouth of the Matrix.

This 30th of April 1676, I was sent for by the much Renowned Midwife Mrs.
Langlois, to deliver a certain Woman, the Wife of a maimed Soldier, whose Name
was Bourguignon, living in the Back-street; and when I came, I found the Head
of the Child far advanced in its passage; but the Pains ceasing for Twenty four
hours together, and the Signs of her otherwise approaching Death, showed us the
necessity of Drawing out the Child; which happened with Success, as afterward
the Afterbirth, according to the ordinary Course; but yet she felt some Pains,
when feeling about the Circuit of her Navel, a little to the side of the Liver,
I found a moving Hardness, much like a Child's Head; which I also demonstrated
to the Midwife; whereby we judged the Woman was not wholly delivered: so I put
my Hand again into the Womb, and diligently searching the whole Concavity of
the Matrix, I felt the Entrance of the right a little opened, into which I
presently got my Forefinger, afterward another, and then my whole Hand; with
which I took out of the same more than two pounds of Congealed, and in some
measure hardened Blood; and then the aforesaid round Hardness was no more felt.

This Experience then affirms, That the Entrance of this Trunk or Pipe of the
Matrix, can suffer a great stretch. But here are two difficulties yet remaining
to be resolved; The first is, That if this part had been open in that moment
when our Child passed, then it would not have occasioned the Ulceration which
was found in the Matrix. The Second is, That this Ulceration covered the whole
Circumference of the bottom of this part, and that the Entrance of which we
have already spoke) is in the side of the said Bottom.

The Solution of these two Points is easy, The Chyrurgeons who are used to
Deliver Women, and the Midwives, know, That in all Common and Natural
Deliveries, the Children always come forth, before that the Circumference of
the Inward Opening of the Matrix be as big as their Head, and that the same
passage does enlarge it self at the same time they pass through it. It may then
be, that our Child sticking fast in the Pipe or Trunk (of the which I have
already spoken) before the impressing of the Water, caused a greater Opening;
and that so in its passage made a partition in the whole; which possibly gave
the first occasion of the Ulceration, whereof we have treated; and that this
Separation, most likely, was made upon the side (before the Afterbirth was
joined fast to the Matrix) rather then any where else, by reason that is always
moist; and therefore it follows by reason, to be more easy in this place
then any other.

I will not make any demur in Explaining the Generation of that Stony Body or
Substance found in the bottom of the Matrix, it is evident by Experience, that
in the Ulcers which are not well Cleansed and Purified, the Matter and Filth
which remains upon the Sides, from time to time, produces by succession a
strong hardness; but every one might doubt how the Legs of our Infant (which in
all probability were first born) should have placed themselves in such order,
that they followed the motion of the Water; and so at the same time are come
into the Trunks or Pipes, seeing they are not Naturally Crooked, and mollified
in the Matrix: Moreover, That under the diverse Motions of this Child, it was
so, as by chance, placed in order; the Knees which ordinarily are close joined
together, may be first passed through; so that the Legs lying close about the
Buttocks, could not possibly stop the rest of the Body: However it is, it is
apparent, the Head came last; because it rested against the bottom of the
Matrix, and the Disposition in which the right Arm was found, does declare,
that it served for a form, to hinder the Head from being stopped in its
Passage; which according to many Authors is a very necessary Circumstance in
those Deliveries where the Children come forth with their Feet first. See here
then the Passage of this Child out of the Matrix sufficiently explained, so
that what happened thereafter is now to be examined; Concerning the Time it
stayed in its Mothers Body, and principally how it was Conserved there:

Therefore, First, We must take this for certain, That the Bodies of Creatures
are preserved from Corruption, either by Nourishment which maintains Life, or
by some certain Effect which hinders the Dissolution after Death.

And it may well be that both these Causes did Concur in Conservation of our
Child; for there is nothing to hinder our believing, That for some time it
continued, receiving the Blood through the Vessels of the Navel for its
Nourishment, seeing we experience every day that in some Women's Labors the
Afterbirth sticks fast to the Matrix, so that they are forced to separate it
with Fingers; and sometimes pull it out by Piece-meals: This is an Observation
that cannot truly be alleged against, If this Lump can remain fast annexed to
the Matrix after the Child is brought forth into the World, then it is clear
enough, that it was so in the Case of Margaret, because her Child continued
enjoying its first Nourishment; for the outward Air could not touch the String,
and therefore cause no hindrance in the motion of the Blood, wherewith it was
full; and it is undoubtable, that the Child was preserved some time by this
means; by reason Margaret voided no Blood at that time when the Child passed
through the Matrix into the Concavity of the Belly; but to the contrary, some
Weeks after, when she was given Opening and Forceing Medicines, she voided some
Lumps or Clodders of Blood, which most apparently caused some partition in some
part of the Afterbirth. By that which already has been said, we may suggest
that our Child might be nourished about Two Months, without the Matrix, in the
same manner as when he was in the same: And it is to be comprehended that, that
same wherewith it was covered, was that which preserved it from Corruption
after its Death; sheltring it from the piercing Air, Moistures, and other
Beginnings of Corruption. Here also may arise a Doubt whether it ceased to live
by reason of the want of that motion of the Blood, which it drew to him by the
String, or that it continued receiving Nourishment some other way; but as the
Conclusions upon this Doubt are very dubious, I shall content my self to show
the Reasons, upon these two Circumstances, and leave the Reader to side with
which he pleases. And first, forasmuch as concerns the Generation of the
Crust, it is not certain that it had sufficient thickness to nourish our Child
before the Afterbirth was separated. But we may say that therein was no
impossibility, because the Water flowing forth in her Labor, and the
Afterbirth remaining in the Matrix, that which was found fleshy in the Crust,
could be no other thing then the Trunk or Pipe, in the which our Child had
placed it self. And this place or part was thick enough to with-stand the
Breathings which issued from the Child as it expired. And although many
Witnesses have asserted, That our Child did naturally stir until the Eighteenth
year, they must confess that it was no otherwise then as Margaret turned her
self from one side to the other; which does evidence, that it was nothing but
that motion; the which might be seen in the Molae.

But it may be said, and very truly, that Margaret every Nine Months felt
almost Travel Pangs; but that does not prove, that these Pains were the Effect
of those Endeavors which the Child did to be brought forth. It is found out to
be no otherwise caused than by the moisture cast up by the Mother; and that was
sufficient to moisten these parts at all times: so that the Child might fall to
the bottom of the Matrix, and so cause the Pains.

Finally, It must be consented, That the Child could not live without
sustenance from the Navel Strings: First, Because the same being annexed unto
the Afterbirth, could receive no Nourishment otherwise then in the same manner
as the Molae. Secondly, The Skin and Flesh being tinctured with Blood; it is
credible that their Vessels were anatomized with the Cawl. Thirdly, Being at
that time a part and member of the Mother, needed no other Respiration then
from its self. Fourthly, Being extreme hard and great, it may be judged that it
supplied the place of the Afterbirth.

But all these Circumstances have others, which contradict them: Our Child was
not so perfectly fast to the Cawl as the Molae is to the Matrix; there being a
thick Crust between them, the Anatomy was not perfectly observed by all that
opened the Body of Margaret: The Child which does not respire while it is in
the Matrix, must of necessity transpire through the Heart Veins of the Mother;
and it is evident that the Blood through these Vessels did not circum-ambulate
in our Child, because it did not wax accordingly. And it is well enough known,
That those Humors which have lost their Natural Motion, being gathered or
congealed in any part of the Body, of necessity must generate an extraordinary
motion, which either ripens them, or they stay in the same form; which
generates a hardness.

But howsoever it is, If our Child did live after the Ulceration of the
Afterbirth, then the manner and case in which we found the Child, demonstrates
that the Child had been a long time dead, and that its preservation proceeded
from nothing else but the Crust wherewith it was covered: I speak nothing of
the bigness of the Nails, for it is known they grow after Death; and passing by
all superfluous Circumstances, The first Consideration which may in this Case
be made, is that the Imperial Cut is not to be despised, as some new Authors do
affirm, seeing there may be false Conceptions, and Children themselves
generated in the Trunks or Pipes of the Matrix, as well as those conceived in
the Matrix, can cast them out.

The Second Consideration, That if in due time this Operation had been used,
the Child might have been pulled, out, and Margaret not have suffered and
under-gone so many pains, which she suffered so many years.

The Third is, That if the Matrix had been cut (which in this Case is most
dangerous.) there ought to have been a certainty that the Child was in the
Trunks or Pipes of the Matrix.

Finally, The Fourth is, Then when after a certain being with-child, the Travel
or Labor and Pains accordingly do come; yet then you shall find the Inward
Opening closed and shut, and the Child either upon the right or left side,
higher than before; with a Falling Motion, which then you may be assured, is in
one of the Pipes of the Matrix, and then the Imperial Cut is very necessary.

FINIS.

