BARVCH 's Work finished.

A SERMON PREACHED At the FUNERAL of that painful Labourer in the Lords
Vineyard, Mr. JAMES SHARP.

And now Published at the earnest request of his Friends.

By Nicholas Blake, Preacher of the Gospel.

There the wearied are at rest, Job 3.17. LONDON: Printed for Dorman Newman, at
the Kings Arms in the Poultrey. 1681.

BARVCH 's Work finished, etc.
Nehem. III. 20. After him Baruch the son of Zabbai, earnestly repaired the
other piece, etc.


OUR blessed Repairer, as he permits the making of breaches on the Walls of his
own Jerusalem, and greater and smaller Foxes to enter into his Vineyard; so he
creates repairers, and sends whom and when he pleases, allotting to every one
of them their particular season, work, and talents for repairing of the
breaches, or taking the Foxes that spoil the Vines with tender Grapes; and
particularly observes the frame of every one he imploys, what heart they have
to work, as Neh. 4.6. the people had a mind to work, and how they begin and
finish their piece of the work; for as he has several pieces of work, and
several workmen, so he allots to each their several piece, and indowments
suitable thereunto; and accordingly records and remunerates what they do, and as
they do it.

This Chapter is a short, and yet a long history, giving us an account of the
persons employed in repairing work. Wherein the Lord does greatly commend all
of them, but more especially the repairer in my Text, whom you find described
and elegantly set forth to you by the Spirit of God in these Five Particulars.

1. His name Baruch, which is Benedictus genuflexus, i.e. a blessed and devout
man; and indeed as his name, so is he, for he was a blessed and prosperous
repairer, and finished his work, and was most obsequious and compliant in his
copartner-ship with the rest of the repairers.

2. By his relation, he is the son of Zabbai, fluxus vel fluens, pointing out
how communicative he was; one constantly imparting what he received for the
good of others; and this his son answered in his practice: for as we shall
hear, he was one that put forth what he had for the good of that work he was
called to, or as it is in the Margent, the son of Zaccai, which signifies pure
and clear, such as indeed our Baruch in the Text was, being a man of a pure
heart, and of a shining conversation.

3. He is described to us from his work; he repaired, he vehemently repaired,
left not off repairing till all was finished.

4. From the manner of his work; he not only repaired, but did it earnestly,
with burning Zeal, and an inflamed heart.

5. From the nature of the work, it was Zions Wall, Church-work; and more
particularly, it was such a piece as was allotted him, which he earnestly
repaired, his own part of the Vineyard, his own Watchtower; and that to the
advantage of all the rest of the work that other repairers were taken up with;
he did not advance his own upon the ruins of others, but with joint harmony,
and common advantage finished his work.

The only Doctrine I lay before you from the words, shall be this:

That it is of singular commendation, and that which the Lord takes special
notice of, and greatly values, when a Christian or Minister does their allotted
part of Zions work earnestly.

Baruch not only repaired, but did it earnestly; how earnest was that other
Baruch, who was employed by Jeremiah to carry the black Rolls that were sent
from God by Jeremiah unto the King and Princes of Judah, whereof you may read
Jer. 36. at large; as a most obedient son of the Prophet he run, and faithfully
discharged his part in that Ministry.

In the explication of this I shall take into consideration these Five
Particulars. 1. The Agent, Baruch. 2. The Act, repaired. 3. The manner of this
Act, earnestly. 4. The matter about which this Agent was so earnestly employed.
5. What is in all this that makes it so highly commendable, and why the Lord
does notice the same.

The First thing is the Agent called out and employed in repairing his piece of
the wall of Jerusalem: he run not before he was sent; he consulted not with
flesh and blood, being called out to this work. In every inferior Agent there
be two things we must take into our consideration. 1. Their excellencies, as
qualified by the Master Builder for their work. 2. Their weakness, as they are
men subject to many Passions and infirmities, by reason of the trials and
oppositions they meet with in their work.

For the Excellencies of this Agent, I shall lay before you these Six.

1st. He had an excellent name, a man of a rare fame, Baruch in name and thing.
And that 1. In his being blessed to others; Benedictus, as his name signifies,
a man, a good man, a Minister; an able Minister is much, but a blessed Minister
is above all; so a repairer, an earnest repairer is good, but a blessed
repairer is better, one blessed of God with success, and made a blessing to
others, and called by them Baruch the blessed. 2. In that he was Baruch the
genuflexus, kneeling, devout and reverent in all his addresses to the Master of
the work, of a sweet yielding and complying spirit with the rest of his
fellow-repairers in all things, submitting to the will, and complying with the
directions of his Master, and condescending to them of low degree.

2dly, He was a man of an excellent frame, he had a spirit suitable to his
work, hot and moist; hot with a fire of Zeal to have his work finished; and yet
moist, sweetly bowing and yielding to the various methods of God about him and
his work.

3dly, He was a man of an excellent conversation: For 1. He conversed with the
Master Builder to understand his will and pleasure, that he might conform all
to it. 2. He conversed with fellow-repairers, that he might keep a
correspondence in repairing with the rest of the repairers. 3. He eyed the end
of both, which was to do his work according to the Masterbuilders directions,
and for the good and advantage of all the rest of the repairers.

4thly, He was a man excellent in regard of his communicativeness, in that both
he had enough to impart for the good of others, and in that he most freely and
readily did communicate what he had for upstirring of them in way of duty, that
repairing-work might not be retarded.

5thly, He was a man of a public spirit, not only concerned in what was the
public cause, but was faithful with the Saints, taking part of their cross and
despised work of repairing, and in opposing the public defections of the time;
he was neither a Sanballat nor a Tobyah, discouraging and drawing off others
from the work; but a zealous opposer of all such, and earnest repairer of his
piece of the Wall.

6thly, He was excellent in regard of his activity, he was a very active man,
he repaired, and repaired earnestly; he was not in this inferior to that other
Baruch, Jer. 36.8. who was so active for God, that the Princes said to
Jeremiah, that he was stirred up by Baruch against them, Jer. 43.3. But Baruch
the son of Neriah, sets thee on against us, etc.

And seeing we have hinted a little at this Baruch, the son of Neriah,
Jeremiahs Scribe, I shall guess a little at the common weakness of Eminent
persons, eminently employed, from what I find observed and recorded by the
spirit of God concerning the forementioned Baruch; and that upon occasion of
the many various trials that he did meet with in his part of the work, As

1st, We find he was distempered in his expression, a usual weakness in
repairers in all ages; you know, Moses in his restoring and repairing fell
under this, and spoke unadvisedly. David upon the account of his trials spoke
unbelievingly. Jonah passionately, and Baruch, Jer. 45.3. spoke not like a
valiant man either of God or his dispensations, but frettingly and as one
discouraged, Woe is me now, I am left alone; Jeremiah is imprisoned, and King
and Court is against me.

2dly, We find he was distempered in his heart and affections with immoderate
fear and perplexity, like Jonah, I do well to be angry even unto death, when he
thought too much of his own cross, and cried out, as Lam. 1.12. Is there any
sorrow like unto my sorrow? looking on difficulties that were in his way as
insuperable, this made him faint in his sighing, and remiss in his zeal and
activity for God.

3dly, In that it reached his mind, and did so vexand perplex him, that he
found no rest, nor never would, if God had not observed his distemper, and sent
him a Cure by the hand of Jeremiah: even so Eminent Instruments employed in
repairing work, notwithstanding all their Excellencies, they may be much
distempered in their minds, so that for some time they can find no rest.

4thly, Such may be the distemper, that it may reach their Prayer, and put them
upon seeking great things for themselves; as Baruch was charged with this, so
others may be guilty of the same: And that 1. As Baruch had a great desire to
be excused from the public noise of the Court, and that for his own greater
quiet, and self-ease; so other repairers may be guilty of the same weakness,
especially when they seek more of this for themselves than comes to their lot:
this was a branch of Baruchs seeking of great things to himself, and may be
also found in others not inferior unto him. 2. As he, so may other repairers
seek too great things for themselves, when they peremptorily seek to be
faithful to God in the trust he has put them in; and yet to have the favor
and countenance of great men, who are no great friends to repairing-work; it is
never good when Eminent Instruments seek to please both parties, and cannot
bear up against the frowns of great men. 3. It is a weakness, when persons
employed in repairing-workseek to be exempted from any cross or tentation that
is common to men, especially when they see better than themselves not excused
from it; Jeremiah was Imprisoned, Baruch had no will to come under the like
lot, though he knew that suffering was the Masters lot; and to desire to be
freed from this, was very inconsisent with the general calamities of the day,
wherein God threatened to pluck up that he had planted, and to pull down that he
had built up.

The Second thing to be taken into consideration is the Action, what this Agent
did, wherein he was employed; the Text tells us, in repairing his piece, he had
a particular piece of the work allotted for his share; he had his appointed
time wherein he was sent out to do it, and suitable furniture which he spends
in repairing: which that you may know, I shall consider the original word,
which is very Emphatick, and seems to branch out his work in these Eight
Particulars.

1st, In that he so repaired, as one that was naturally concerned in the work;
it was easy and pleasant to him, his rest and refuge was in his work. Paul
could not commend Timothy more by any thing than by this, Phil. 2.20, For I
have no man like minded, who will naturally care for the things of your soul.

2dly, He not only repaired, but did it affectionately, he stirred up himself
and others to the work; he did what he could to raise his own spirit, and to
provoke others to the highest pitch of activity in, and about so good a work.
The word fignifies to kindle or inflame, he inflamed all he could reach, and
was still more and more rouzing up himself; he stirred up his own gift, and did
what he could to provoke others to zeal and good works.

3dly, He so repaired as to re-edifie, and re-build what had been formerly
built, but thrown down by the Foxes and Wild-Boars that came up upon his part
of the Wall; he built and rebuilt without wearying; he did the same work over
again, and repaired upon occasion of breaches in his Wall.

4thly, He so repaired, that he reformed and did mend what was amiss; he was
not only careful to repair breaches, to prevent ruin, but to remove
deformities that would mar the Beauty of his piece of the Wall, that so there
might not only be a Sanctuary for strength and safety, but an Ornament for
Beauty and Majesty.

5thly, He so repaired as to strengthen; he fortified his piece, he made strong
work; as he himself was strong for labor, so he in repairing his piece of the
Wall, not only made strong and firm work, but did thereby strengthen all the
rest of repairing-work done by others; he did not build upon other men's ruins,
nor did he weaken their piece of the Wall to strengthen his own, but in
repairing his piece was singularly beneficial and strengthening to all the
distinct parts of repairing works, and to persons repairing.

6thly, The word implies that he was no Lingerer or Loiterer about his work; he
hastened his piece of the Wall; Zeal to the house made him quicken his motions;
he knew his work, he considered his wages, and how pleasant quick dispatch was
to the Master, and how commendable, wherever it is; and therefore he made
haste, and delayed not to have his piece of the Wall repaired.

7thly, He was such a repairer as used and put forth a holy violence in
repairing; he bursted forth, and this he did either against himself, in case he
fell heavy and dull at work, by which means this work was not finished; a
grievous thing to him, or else against others, who either had left off the
work, or advanced slowly in it; who were repairers, but not so earnest as the
work called for.

8thly, He repaired, and continued his work till he had finished; as zealously
he began, so zealously he did finish his piece, his last works were as good as
his first, his strength was not abated in the way, his fervency and diligence
laid the last stone in his piece, without being either abated or lessened. Thus
much of this Agent and of his Act, He repaired, etc.

The Third thing to be considered, is the manner of his performance, how he
repaired. This the Text tells us, that he did it earnestly, flagrante animo,
with a mind set on fire by love and zeal to the work. I shall only take notice
of these Four from the manner. And

1st, He repaired earnestly, that is, he was intent upon it, and did it with
much intentness and greediness of mind, longing to have all finished: what
unwearied continuance was there in this man? still looking to the end, and
hastening to come at it.

2dly, He repaired earnestly, that is, though his mind was set upon the end,
yet he carefully used the most proper means to bring things to an Issue to
their expected and desired end; he makes fools haste, that being intent on the
end, either neglects the most promising means, or goes the wrong way to bring
him to his desired and much longed for end.

3dly, He earnestly repaired, that is, did most accurately observe what did
most further, or retard his work; he took notice how the Wall went up, and what
did most advance it, and surely made most use of that which was most helpful to
the design; and did greatly rejoice to see every thing going up and prospering.

4thly, He earnestly repaired, that is, he took great care to have every thing
taken out of the way, that let or hindered the going up of his part of the
Wall, and did manfully oppose who ever offered to come up to hinder the going
up of his piece of the Wall.

The Fourth thing to be considered in my Text, is the subject matter, about
what this Agent put forth his act in such a manner, and that was the Mount Zion
or Jerusalem, the Wall whereof had been broken down, and now a little reviving
being granted in the midst of their bondage, the worthiest among them fall upon
repairing work; which either was in the Mountain, and so was work on Zion
directly; or it was to the Mountain, that is, such work as every way tended to
the good of the Mountain. It was either Church-work in it self, or
consequentially and reductively it was for the welfare of Jerusalem, either
proximately or remotely; he was either digging or sowing, or mediately
repairing the breach in the Wall: he was as Paul describes true Ministers, one
that could do nothing against the Truth, or Church of God, but for it.

But in the Fifth place, it may be required, Why does our Lord so much notice,
and record such of his servants as have done their part of Zions work earnestly?

Reason 1. That his Baruchs may be had in remembrance, Psalm. 112.6. the
righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. And Mat. 26.13. Wheresoever this
Gospel shall be preached in the whole world, there shall also this that this
woman has done, be told for a memorial of her. God not only remembers his
Noah's, and causes the waters of their afflictions here abate, but he will have
them remembered, especially such of them as have been earnest repairers of Zions
breaches, Isa. 58.12. and thou shall be called the repairer of the breach, the
restorer of the paths to dwell in; and as the memory of the wicked is cursed,
so the memory of the just is blessed, Prove. 10.7. The name of the wicked shall
rot, when the name of the just shall be as an Ointment poured forth.

Reason 2. Our Lord records his repairers that do their work earnestly, that
thereby he may give proof and testimony of his love and respect to Zion, when
he noticeth and commends those that take delight in her dust, and employ
themselves earnestly in repairing her breaches; he is said to love Zion more
than all the dwellings of Jacob; here is my rest, says the Lord, here I take
delight to dwell; and if so, what wonder if he record and commend the man who
is the repairer and restorer of paths to dwell in, that he may have a dwelling
to please him?

Reason 3. Satan and his Instruments notice and record such to defame, and
oppose them; what mean these feeble Jews? will they build up all in one day? if
a Fox come up, will he not cast down their stone-Wall? So that such repairers
have need of encouragement, and therefore the eyes of their Master is upon them
for good, his hand with them as with the Apostles; he appears for their glory,
when opposers shall be ashamed and confounded; and when they have done their
work, not only gives them their wages, but commends them, Well done good and
faithful servants; and records them in his book of remembrance.

Reason 4. Our Lord does this, that he may encourage after Ages to be worthy
Baruchs in their day, repairing their piece earnestly, notwithstanding of
difficulties, oppositions and manifold tentations; that ye be not slothful, but
followers of them who through faith and patience have inherited the promises,
Heb. 6.15. we must be followers of such as dear children; our great Repairer,
our blessed Jesus is, and should ever be a pattern to us; inferior builders
should be imitated also. You know the patience of Job, and you have seen the
end of the Lord; David told Solomon, I have done so much, my son; you must rise
and be doing, and the Lord shall be with you; you shall have the Masters eye of
direction and inspection; you shall have his good word; men may have an evil
eye upon you, and will speak reproachfully of you, and your work; may call you
singular, hotheaded, furious and inconsiderate; but God gives thee another,
and far better testtimony, and calls it a doing of thy work earnestly; and thus
commends it in Baruch, that he may recommend the like practice to thee, to be
imitated.

I come now to the Transcript of my Text, which though in every particular it
be not so full and fair as the Copy, yet such it is as deserves our
observation, commendation, and imitation; if it runs not parallel with it, it
may be hoped that it comes not far short; and that Baruch in my Text, is not
much more commendable in all respects, than our Baruch, who is now fallen
asleep, having finished his generation-work; and who being dead, yet speaks
in so many living stones as he helped to build in Zion: thus repairing his
piece of the Wall earnestly.

I shall use neither flattering styles, nor cover his Paul with Hyperbolizing
Elogies; but state the comparison, and set person against person, face against
face, frame against frame, work against work, the Copy and Transcript, and
leave you to judge of the likeness, and how conform our Baruch is to the Baruch
in the Text, who were best acquainted with our dear Brother, and who now have
heard of this repairer in my Text.

That I may methodically emblazon, and show forth the virtues wherewith this
Saint and servant of the most high God (who now has taken the Kingdom, and is
possessed of it for ever and ever) was qualified for repairing his piece of the
Wall, and dressing that part of the Vineyard whereof the Holy Ghost made him an
Overseer; I shall follow the method laid before you in the explication of my
Text.

And theeefore First, Let us consider these personal Excellencies that were
full and fair in the Copy, and were in their due measure in the Transcript.

As First, His Name and Fame, there being so much Air in this, and it being
that which ofttimes meets with contrary blasts, and foul Air; as I cannot say,
that it was never tainted by loose tongues, so I cannot say that he was never
reproached, or that he was a man that all men spoke well of; for then he had
not been honored with that eminent piece of his Masters Cross, which was to be
evil spoken of; had been without this part of conformity to him, and might have
feared that woe, Woe to you when all men speak well of you; and doubted much
whether that blessing belonged to him, Mat. 5.11. Blessed are you when men
shall revile you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my
names sake. But this I may say, that he was a Minister, and a laboring one,
that needed not be ashamed of his work, a repairer like the Baruch in my Text:
Benedictus, a blessed Minister, blessed with much work, great supplies of
strength in the discharge of it, and with no small success, that makes the
laborers work sweet and comfortable to him; and while I call him a servant,
and a blessed servant, I tell you that God gave him a name better than the name
of sons and daughters, and that is, to be a spiritual father unto many of you.
And as he was blessed of God to be useful; so in the Second place, He may be
called genuflexus, kneeling, devout and reverent in his applications to his
Master, in your name, sweetly submitting all to the will of God; so of a
yielding and condescending spirit to you, to all men, becoming all things, that
he might gain some.

2dly, As his name was blessed, and bowing, so his frame was not inferior to
our Baruchs in the Text: hot and moist, hot and zealous for God, and the City
of his God, and in opposing every thing contrary to God; so moist and tender;
tender-heartedness is the best frame for a Christian in a time of abounding
sin, and threatened judgments: He often wished a head as a fountain of Tears,
and Doves eyes always watring; and who knows but that the Lord has removed him
from the evil to come, because his heart was tender, as 2 Kings 22.19. and it
was no strange thing to find it so, for that warming influence that heated his
heart, melted it down, and made a moistness in the eye, by which it came to
pass that as Comforts, Crosses, Words, and Works of God made an easy
impression on his moist and tender heart; so this same made him more easily bow
to the Yoke of Christ, and the many remarkble afflictions he met with in the
course of his Pilgrimage.

3dly, As Baruch in the Text was of a shining conversation, so our Baruch in
the Transcript (humane frailties being excepted) did rise and shine after many
clouds had passed over him. There are three things that commends a man's
conversation. 1st, The persons with whom he converseth. 2dly, The matter about
which. 3dly, The end of his conversation. For the persons with whom the Apostle
John in his first Epistle, 1 John 2.2. tells us with whom we should converse,
Truly our conversation is with the father and with the son. And the Apostle
Paul tells us that our conversation should be in Heaven, from whence we expect
our Savior: And I doubt not but this is the constant care and prayer of all
faithful Ministers, and was of this our brother in particular, if we may judge
of this from the consideration of the persons he conversed with here below,
viz. the excellent ones wherein was the greatest part of his delight; and as
for the matter about which it was, if you look above, it was either to attain
to a conformity to him, by walking with him, or to recieve from him grace for
grace, out of his fullness; or if you look below, then it was either to make
such as are bad good, or such as are good better; either to bring sinners to a
Savior, or to confirm them in him. And Lastly, As for the end of his
conversation, the primary and principal end, was the glory of his God and
Master: the subordinate, the salvation of his own soul, and of those that heard
him.

4thly, As Baruch in my Text was fluent and communicative, for what he got,
that he laid out on repairing his piece; so our Baruch did not only ask rain in
the time of the latter, but came down upon you as the rain, delivering to you
what he received of the Lord, both word and Sacraments, for redressing and
repairing of you; and so pressing and urgent was he, that he seemed as one that
would not admit of a delay, much less a denial at your hand; and if your heart
had been as his, you would have given the hand to the Lord, and come up to his
Chariot, which is all Paved with love for the daughters of Jerusalem.

5. That as Baruch in my Text was a faithful man in the house of God, and in
that particular trust that was committed to him, opposing every course of
defection that made against Zion; so our Baruch was no less faithful; he not
only chused affliction with the people of God, but zealously contended for the
truth, and opposed every course of defection in his day. I need not tell you
what opposition he and others met with not long since, when armed Forces set
themselves to batter down the several pieces of our Wall: I was then his
Neighbor, and cannot forget how the Archers did shoot at him; and how
notwithstanding, his Bow abode in its strength, and made him, and many more
faithful and valiant in that day; the beginning of your reviving, and his
witnessing for you, and of his gracious return to you, which he has increased
to this day, giving you daily liberty out of bonds, and meat out of the eaters,
and made more discernable now to his praise, and our comfort. Lord grant that
our ingratitude cause us not to be sent back again to a darker Dungeon.

6. As Baruch in my Text was a very active man, and repaired earnestly his
part; so our Baruch was no less active in his sphere; there is no time since he
was sent forth to repairing-work, wherein his activity on all occasions did not
appear; not only doing what he could amongst his proper Flock, preaching,
catechizing, visiting the sick; in a word, in labors as much as any. But if ye
will look to his occasional work, his labor therein was not small, which his
abounding compassion to the Souls of notorious Malefactors prompted him to.
Besides what most of you know in the last stage of his race, wherein he run as
one that resolved not to rest till he had all finished. This made him grasp in
so much work as his day was capable of, and made him assiduous daily in
teaching the younger sort.

And lest you should think that we only blazon his Virtues and Excellencies, I
shall therefore compare his weaknesses with that other Baruch the son of
Neriah, a worthy man, endued with all the excellencies of the other; and who
yet through manifold tentations fell under a distemper that would have spoilt
him, if God had not cured it by Jeremiah.

And first, As manifold and long Trials run Baruch the son of Neriah into a
high distemper in his expression, and made him cry out, Woe is me now, Jer.
45.3. So this our Baruch by reason of his, was so far prevasled upon by them,
as to be disordered in his expression, making him speak faintingly and
discouragedly, Woe is me now; especially that his last trial most to be
lamented, considering that it did arise from them not only of his own house,
but of his own bowels, which no question did aggravate his trial, as it did the
Master's, My own familiar friends, Psalm. 38. Judas was the betrayer of him.

2. As this distemper discovered it self in his expression, so likewise in his
heart and affection, and made him faint in his sighing; such waters coming into
the soul are bitter, and oft-times overwhelms the spirit; and then weaknesses
appears, viz. fainting in his sighing, courage failing, and despondency
prevailing over the man.

3. This distemper seized the mind of the one and of the other; so that as the
one could find no rest, so no more could the other; soul and bones vexed, as
Psalm. 6. till he came to this which you see, where the wearied are at rest, and
the wicked cease from troubling. The Lord save you from being such troublers of
faithful Ministers, lest when you cease to trouble them, you be troubled.

4. This distemper affected the grace of prayer in both; and that as the one
did seek great things for himself, which would not have been so great, but with
respect to the time wherein God was threatening to pluck up what he had planted;
so our Baruch and many more might be guilty of that at such a time; and lest I
should be mistaken, as if I intended worse than the Copy, I shall lay before
you the three great things that both might be supposed to seek after.

As first, This was Baruch's infirmity, in that being wearied and tossed with
public business, he did too peremptorily desire-freedom and exemption from
this noise. Moses himself groaned under this, and said, Have I born this
people, that all the trouble of them lies upon me? Which was the occasion of
Gods taking of the Spirit from him, and giving it to others. So it might be the
great thing that our Baruch desired, to be freed from the noise he met with in
his work, that occasioned some remarkable changes in his pilgrimage, that I in
love not only cover, but apologize for by what is said.

2. This was Baruch's infirmity, in that he was too sollicitous about the
countenance and favor of great men that were no great friends to the Truth;
and it was too much for him to seek this, when their faces were set against
God. So it may be some of you will be ready to say, that our Baruch was weak in
this, that he sought very much to do his duty faithfully to God, and yet so as
to please all parties, which put him on some things which a prejudged person
may be ready to remember, looking over all the excellencies that were in him;
but if such as Baruch may be thus far prevailed on by tentations, let us take
heed lest we also be tempted.

3. It was too great a thing in Baruch, and spoke out his weakness, in that he
sought so much to be excused and exempted from some particular crosses that
better than he had met with, and were lying under, as Jeremiah's imprisonment.
So this might be the weakness of our Baruch, too peremptorily to desire to be
excused from that cross which in all appearance did so much crush him, who had
run with the horsemen under other trials.

I come now in the third place, to take a view of both in their Work, and to
set Work against Work; Baruch in the Text repaired his piece of the Wall; and
so did ours.

And first, Our Baruch not only repaired, but stirred up the gift of God that
was in him, that he might do his work the better; and did what he could to
provoke others to zeal and good works: the best confirmation of this, will be
your zealous up-stirring of your selves, and provoking one another to follow
this Copy that he has laid before you.

2. As he in the Text did repair and rebuild; so our Baruch made it his
business to re-edifie what was at any time broken down, both in doing the same
things, and repairing the same piece of the Wall again, that he might repair
the breach. As his work was to quicken such as were dead in sins and
trespasses, so to restore such to life as through security and untender walking
had lost much of what they had; and the little that remained, in a readiness to
dye.

3. As Baruch in the Text did not only repair breaches, but reformed what was
amiss in the work, what marred the beauty of the Building; so our Baruch not
only made it his work to bring you into a fase state, but did what he could to
make you rise and shine, seeing your light was come, and the glory of the Lord
risen upon you.

4. As Baruch in the Text so repaired as to streng-then; he not only did work,
and strong work, as to his own piece; but did strengthen the hands of other
Repairers: so our Baruch not only labored to streng-then the feeble of his own
flock, and to make the fearful heart strong, but did what he could to
streng-then that piece that belonged to other repairers, by his frequent
Lecturing in several places.

5. As he in the Text was no lingerer; so our Baruch: no sooner was he sent,
but he run; he had the Hinds foot; did not linger long; a labourer, no
loiterer; as a man fit for his Masters use, and prepared for every good work;
as one newly come up from the washing, bearing Twins, a noble design for the
glory of God, and for the salvation of the souls of others; as one winged with
faith and hope, with love and longing to have all finished.

6. He was such a Repairer as did his work with a holy violence, knowing that
the strong man was not easily cast out, and that the kingdom could not be taken
but by force; and that either against himself, because he had not finished his
work; or against others, who either had laid by their work, or advanced slowly
in it.

7. As Baruch in the Copy continued at work till all was finished, and did not
give way to discouragements, to cause him cease from the work; so our Baruch in
the Transcript, did not only continue, notwithstanding of all discouragements
to take him off from it, but his last works were his best works, sowing in the
Morning, and at Evening not withholding his hand, not knowing whether this or
that should prosper.

And if to all this, in the 4th place, you will consider, and compare the
manner of their repairing; you will find a sweet semblance between the one and
the other.

And 1. As he in my Text earnestly repaired, that is, naturally, so our Baruch,
naturally did that which he did in repairing his piece; his mind was so bent
upon his work, and delighted in it, that he naturally cared for the things of
your soul. I may say in a great measure, it was his meat and drink to do his
Fathers will.

2. He repaired earnestly, that is, with great fervency and affection, great
intentness of mind, still looking and longing to have all finished, which in
part may excuse his engaging himself in so much work.

3. He repaired earnestly, that is, he conscientiously used all appointed means
conducing to his expected and longed for end; he employed himself both about
foundation and superstructuary-work, plowing and planting, watching and
watering old and young, looking up to Heaven for the increase.

4. He repaired earnestly, that is, he narrowly observed how things prospered,
and grace did grow, and endeavored neither to break the bruised reed, nor
quench the smoking flax; neither to over-drive what was with young, nor
refused the Lambs a place in his bosom.

5. He repaired earnestly, that is, he zealously contended for the truth when
it was invaded on his piece of the Wall, according to his ability, and humbly
called in the help of others, when Foxes greater and smaller were too many for
him; and daily labored to have that taken out of the way that hindered the
progress grouth, and inlargment of his building.

And in fine, if you will consider that the subject matter was Zion, or work
about Zion, either Church-work directly, or that which tended thereunto, as his
educating of the youth; for he was either in his Church as a Pastor, feeding
them; or in his School as a Master, hewing them that they might be fit stones
for the repairing of breaches; leading on his people as a flock, in a storm, to
a place where they may rest at Noon; and leading them into the banquet of Wine
for repast. I say, if you will put all these together, and consider them, you
will sind a Transcript very like the Copy in my Text, and so one worthy to be
commended for our imitation, and remembered with joy.

And now as by this comparison, I have given you a just and charitable account
of him who is gone, so I would also give you the particular improvement of all.

And First, Seeing a Minister, and a blessed Minister, who repaired his part of
the Wall earnestly, is fallen asleep, can we behold this, or hear of it, who
are Ministers, and not hear this speaking aloud to us, at least for my self,
who am the least of all Saints, to whom this Grace is given to Preach the
insearchable riches of Christ: I cannot but hear both the Copy and Transcript
pressing me to follow the Copy in the Text, and to de cautious, lest these
weaknesses be found in me that were found in others. We have been at much pains
to attain the name of able Ministers; but that which is better, is to be a
blessed Minister; blessed our selves, and a blessing to others. It may be
feared, that many in our day are sent to make ears heavy, and hearts fat, till
all be destroyed: we must obey Gods call, it is true; but is it not more
comfortable to be employed in healing of the Nations, and blessed with good
success in our work? Does not this call us to look to our frame, and see
whether we be zealous for the Lord of Hosts; whether we be fire, or dow in our
upperside in our acting for God; and whether we be of a tender heart, mourning
for all our own and the sins of others: we reprove many sins that we never
mourn over: may not some of us say, My moister is turned to the drouth of
summer. Are our conversations like the Copy? do we converse with the Father and
the Son, and that for the obtaining grace for grace, to the end, that our Lord
may be glorified, and souls saved in the day of the Lord? should we not study
to receive more, and to be more liberal in our devisings for God, and in
communicating whatever we recieve to them? he sends it without respect of
persons. Ought not we courageously oppose the defections of the time,
especially when we see whether all this tends: namely, the depriving of us, and
our posterity of the Gospel? will it be comfortable to some called Ministers to
know at last, that they were made the scourge for vexing of the true Martyrs,
that earnestly have, and would repair their piece? or that they have given way
to a Sanballat and a Tobya to inhance the whole work of the repairers, who yet
put not forth their hand to the Work, except it be to build hay and stubble on
the precious foundation, that out of this there may a fire break out to make
desolate Zion's Palaces. O where is the man that rules with God, and is
faithful with the Saints in our day! Let neither their full cup, nor the work
of them that turn aside, cleave unto us.

Can we read the Copy, and not see that it calls upon us to be more active for
God, stirring up that gift that is in us, provoking others to love and good
works? It Is true the enemy sows his tares, casts down what we built up; but
should not we rebuild all again, that breaches may be repaired? Let us not
think it enough to get our people brought in to a safe state, but to a shining
conversation, that beauty and strength may be the two pillars in our little
sanctuary, in our burning bush, yet not consumed. Our Enemy is swift as the
Eagle, such as turn aside as the swift Dromedary. Let us neither be slow in
heart to believe, nor in hand to work. Let us use a holy violence, and choose
rather to endure hardness, to please our Master, than to indulge our flesh. Let
us go on till we finish, with that same fervency and burning zeal against all
opposers, and ardent love toward all the lovers of our Lord Jesus Christ,
keeping close to our piece of the Wall, doing what we can to strengthen the
hands of one another: so shall we be Baruch's recorded and remunerat, when our
Lord comes to make up his Jewels, as these who have repaired our part of the
Wall earnestly, and find that the Spirit of our Elias rests upon us.

And does not this likewise speak words of caution to us? We have fallen in a
tempting place of the wilderness; we are in perils every where; let us beware
that none of these things move us either to speak unadvisedly with Moses,
unbelievingly with David, passionately with Jonah, or discouragedly with
Baruch, Woe is me now. We should beware that we abate not our courage; we shall
reap if we faint not; to sigh for the abominations of the time, is our duty,
and to go between the porch and the altar weeping and praying, Spare thy
people; but to faint in our sighing, neither suits our Cause nor our Leader and
Commander, who is for us, be where he will, and while he hides, and will return
to us again, Ezekiel. 36.10.

We should beware that our minds be not disturbed; it is a part of Zion her
song, after the Lord has opened her gates, Isa. 26.34. That he will keep them
in perfect peace, etc. Who can be still, knowing that he is God? If we cannot
rest in our minds in the day of trouble, let us beware of self-seeking in such
a day, or seeking great exemptions and privileges for our selves. Let us be
content with our allotted Cross, for he has said it, I will never leave you
nor forsake you.

In the next place I address my self unto you who were the flock of his
pasture, and the sheep of his hand. Certainly this matter belongs to you in a
special manner. What the young prophets said to Elisha, that would I say unto
you, 2 King. 2.5. Know ye not that the Lord has taken away your Minister from
your head to day, both in the midst of his work, in midst of his days, and in
the greatness of his strength? I have but three words to speak unto, as the
voice of this rod, and of him who has appointed it.

The first is a word of Lamentation; and that 1. in remembrance of this, that
when he wept over you, considering the misery many of you was under, and the
hazard you were in of losing your immortal souls, you then rejoiced. What was
said of Judah, may be said of many this day, When thou did evil, then thou
rejoycest, Jer. 11.15. As our Lord Jesus wept over Jerusalem when the people
did all rejoice; so it is with his servants, that they are left by their people
to mourn alone, and to pray alone, while they with Israel are dancing about
their golden calves: You laughed, but your Minister wept, considering how little
you knew of these things that belongs to your peace. And therefore be
afflicted, and mourn and weep now; let your laughter be turned unto mourning,
and your joy to heaviness, if you would have the Lord lift you up in due time.
Let it not be said of you, That the Lord has smitten your Pastor, but you have
not grieved.

2. Lament your loss. Do you as yet understand what it is? or have you laid it
to heart, and yet not pour out tears unto God? I have told you what really I
judge him to be, a Repairer, and an earnest Repairer; and if you have found him
such an one, O what a loss do you sustain this day! ye have lost the company of
a Saint, the labors of a painful Minister, a lighter of your Candle, a
Champion for your Master, the blessing of a blessed Minister, who has been
blessed to you, whatever he has been to others.

3. Lament and be humbled for the sins among you, that thus have provoked the
Lord against you; such a breach as this may draw tears from the purest heart,
and the most chaste eye; and ordinarily it is such as are least guilty in this
case, that mourn most. But if thy hand has been against this Repairer while at
work, and if thy hand has been upon him to cut him off from the Land of the
living; if thy hard heart has broken his; if thy refusing to walk in the
light, has provoked God to put out this Candle, and remove this Candlestick:
if thy refusing to be reconciled, has made the King call home this Ambassador
of peace, What great reason have you then to lament?

4. Lament that God has taken him away before the Word took hold on thy heart
and conscience, before thou awaked out of thy sinful security, before Christ
was formed within thee by his Ministry, before thou was altogether persuaded to
be a Christian; and that now thou art left halting between two, and knows not
which to take to; and so much the rather, that this is not the first Minister
that has gone to heaven, and whose Funerals you have attended in a Christless,
graceless, hopeless, and miserable condition, which till now thou have not laid
to heart.

5. Lament and be humbled that he has taken him away at such a time when he is
threatening many, as Zech. 11.9. Then said I, I will not feed you. Do you not
know how many seek to destroy you this day? Have you not heard that all of us
look for a storm, and a scattering? one such as that Joh. 6. end? To smite a
Shepherd at any time, is sad; but to take him off when a storm is coming on, is
dreadful, as if the same Lord had said concerning you, That which dies, let it
dye; and that that is to be cut off, let it be cut off.

6. Lament over this and the like dispensation, as it prognosticates evil to
come, Isa. 57.1. The righteous are taken away from the evil to come. Who knows
but by this he may make way to his anger? for the Repairer is took off his work
before breaches be made up, and while there are but few or none to stand in the
gap to turn away wrath, that he may not destroy the Land.

A second word is of Exhortation, and that in these particulars briefly.

As 1. Trust not in man, nor in the sons of men, for wherein are they to be
trusted? every one walks in a vain show, and promise to stay with you a much
longer time than they can. We appoint bounds to one another that we can never
come to; for it is not one with his who is the Sovereign determiner of times and
seasons; here you see one gone to bed at noontide of his days, and in the
fullness of his strength: cease therefore from man.

2. Let us never give place to security, but watch and pray always, for we know
not in what hour the Son of man will come. Let us so walk, that we may be found
of him in peace. 3. Let this stir all of us up to imitate this Copy in my Text;
work while it is to day, for the night comes; repair, and earnestly repair,
that you may be able to stand in the evil day, and finish your course with joy.
Stir up your selves, provoke one another to zeal and good works; make straight
paths for your feet, lest that which is lame be turned out of the way, but let
it rather be healed. 4. As God has made you one piece about which he employed
the Repairer who is gone, I pray you so continue; and suffer none to divide one
of you from another. Let none of you seek your own things, but the things one
of another; and let all of you pray the Master builder to send you such a
blessed repairer, as may make you find that he has turned your loss into gain,
and given you a meat offering and a drink offering with a blessing

3. From this you may take a word of reproof; such of you as would not be
wrought upon, would not be repaired by this Repairer, such as weakened his hands
in his work, such as built against him, who were ready to ruin what he
repaired, or who at last might be eminently instrumental in taking him off from
his work. As for particular circumstances, I leave to men's own Consciences; but
such would do well to consider, that it is no small thing to bring a Ministers,
and a blessed Ministers Head to the Grave in sorrow; that it is yet more
terrible if thou be one who ought to have been the staff of his old Age; if one
whose soul has been dear to him as his own; if one from whom honor was due by
all the bonds of nature and Religion: it is yet more terrible if such in all
this should justify themselves, and harden their heart against the Almighty.
May not such fear, if they truly repent not, that now when they cease to
trouble, they shall be troubled? and lest God cut them off in the midst of
their days? I say not this for any other end, but to awaken you, and excite you
to repentance. Our Lord is gracious and full of compassion, if you seek him he
will be found of you, he will be gracious at the voice of your cry. If persons
guilty will take hold of Gods strength, that is, his Mercy, we shall, for the
loss of one, have many Repairers.

And now one word more to his afflicted yoke fellow, a copartner with him in
all trials. Now I am left alone. Pray you consider that you are not alone, for
the principal and chief Repairer is yet with you, and who will never leave you
nor forsake you. Ah! the desire of my eyes is gone. Bless God that he died
desired, and that in an acceptable time, in much peace; faint not in your
sighing, but rise to your work, and the Lord will be with you; remember that
there is much of your work to do, let not this astonish you so as to disable
you from duty: put in your claim, lay hold on him for your Husband, Shield and
Judge; leave your fatherless Children on him, let him teach, feed and keep
them. In a word, be still knowing that he is God, and hold your peace, knowing
not only that he has done it, but that he will be sanctified: And make it your
business to know for what he has spared you, and set about the doing of it
earnestly till all be finished.

That I may close all with a word in general to the multitude. I have been
telling you of one repairer in my Text, another in the Providence: I have the
best of all to tell you off, at the Fathers right hand, namely, our Lord Jesus
Christ, who is, and only is the repairer: though he makes use of our hearts,
heads, and hands, and imploys them in doing what is his great repairing and
restoring-work; he it is that makes peace, restores to favor and friendship
with God; he restores to life. Now let me persuade you, if there be any
consolation in Christ Jesus, by the life that you may have in him, by all the
promises made to you in him, by the life and dying of our Lord Jesus, by the
terrors of God, the torments of Hell, the jaws of death, and the comforts of
eternal life, let me persuade you to make choice of Christ as your blessed
Repaires, make use of him in repairing, look to him for strength to perform,
for acceptance of what you do, and for a blessing to make you every way
blessed. O let none of you dare to follow this Corpse, who will not have our
Lord Jesus Christ to reign over you

And to say no more, seeing by what you have heard you cannot but see the
riches of Grace which this glorious Repairer bestows upon his under-workmen,
his Laborers; O! then do as they in Matt. 9.8. But when the multitude saw it,
they marvelled, and glorified God, which had given such power unto men. Now you
have heard what is in my Text, what you have heard, that you have seen many
times; Go hence admiring and adoring the bounty and goodness of such a one: And
by all, be persuaded to do your work earnestly, that of you it may be said, as
in my Text, That he repaired earnestly his piece of the wall.

FINIS.

