





Time drops Pearls from his golden Wings yea the Orient on's: we for
Butterflyes haz:zard God, Christ, Heavens joys, our Im^ortall souls to
Eternity, and all for nothing, for nothing Call Time again Call Time again
Cried a great Lady when it was to late Prize it therefore as ye greatest Jewel
in ye world.



THE LADIES Charity School-house Roll OF HIGHGATE: OR A Subscription of many
Noble, well-disposed Ladies for the easy carrying of it on.
BEing well informed that there is a Pious, Good, Commendable Work for
maintaining near forty Poor, or Fatherless Children, Born all at, or near
Highgate, Hornsey, or Hamsted: We whose Names are subscribed do engage or
promise, That if the said Boys are decently Clothed in Blew, lined with
Yellow; constantly fed all alike with good and wholesome Diet; taught to Read,
Write, and Cast Accounts, and so put out to Trades, in order to Live another
day; Then we will give for one Year, two or three (if we well like the design,
and prudent management of it) once a Year, the sum below mentioned: But if we
be not fully satisfied, that the said Boys are all of them true Objects of
Charity, or are in the least neglected to be taught the holy Scripture, and
Fear of God by good Discipline, frequent Catechizing, and orderly going to the
Public Church every Lord*s Day, Forenoon and After; then we will not mind this
our promise in the least, or contribute any thing at all to it: But hoping that
the work may be good, take Root, find many friends, last long, be commendable
in future Ages, we be inclined to do as above mentioned, not knowing but that a
Kernel may become a Tree, and a thing of small beginning prove popular and
praiseworthy to the Honor of our Protestant Religion, and in time find many
Benefactors: Also it standing so exceeding well and near this City's famous
Hospitals, which were not half so great as now. However, this little Infant
being the first erected thing in our names, and Dedicated to us as a Pious
Work, worthy of Encouragement; we are not willing it should wholly die, but to
try the Expedient, believing all good Works to be good, and not to be repented
of, in Life, Death or Eternity, but the surest sign of true love to God, and
Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.

And now it is ten to one but some of your near Acquaintance, as well as your
great Relations, may say, Pray Madam let us trouble you with a small sum, or a
few Guynies to this good Work, hoping it will be no sin to add a little Charity
to your Ladyship. And in such a case you may for the ease of your memory, set
it down in one of these Lines below, and so you will be sure not to forget or
wrong us. Now a Lord or Gentleman's money will do almost as well for our School
as your Ladyships, only we will still ascribe all to your Honor.

For God's sake do not object any thing, but read and see whether these
Scriptures do not all seem to be for us:

The night comes when none can work (that is, at Death) Joh. 9. 4.

Be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful.

Lay up Treasure in Heaven, Matthew. 6. 20.

He that sows sparingly, shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. 9. 6.

Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye fail (that is, when ye
depart this world) Christ may receive ye into his everlasting habitation. Luke
16. 9.

He that observes the wind shall not sow, or he that regards the clouds shall
not reap, (that is, he that makes excuses and objections) Eccl. 11. 4.

But cast your Bread upon the waters, and after many days you shall find it,
Eccl. 11. 1.

Give, and it shall be given to you, Luke 16: 38.

Charge them that are rich in this world, that they do good, and not trust in
uncertain riches, but be rich in good works, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

Blessed is he that considers the Poor; the Lord shall preserve him alive,
when he lay sick; and not deliver him into his enemies hands, but he shall be
blessed in the Earth, Psalm. 41. 1, 2.

And now he that gives in Life, carries his Lanthorn before him, and makes his
own hands and eyes Executors.

The Great Ladies do allow their Housekeeper one bottle of Wine, three of Ale,
half a dozen Rolls, and two Dishes of Meat a day, who is to see the Wilderness,
Orchard, great Prospect, Walks and Gardens, all well kept and Rolled for their
Honor's Families, and to give them small Treats according to discretion, when
they please to take the Air, which is undoubtedly the best round London.

Three or four short Reasons why you Noble Ladies should not let this little
School-house die:

1. It is but little yet you have done for Christ, or the Honor of Religion,
being cumbred with many things, like Martha, you neglect the best.

2. In this you imitate the best two Princes that ever Reigned in this Realm,
Queen Elizabeth, and Edward the sixth, who founded most of the great Hospitals.

As for Queen Elizabeth, she hated Popery, made Christ's Righteousness her
Rock, loved the Parliament, City and Dutch (a Cord hardly to be broken.)

3. It stands so well, and is really dedicated to you who are the choicest
Flowers in Nature: What is beloved like you English Ladies? no mortals more
happy, if sin do not hurt you. Others have not the hand and purse. Others have
not the Climate. Others have not such Husbands as your Right English Nobles
are, or were many of them heretofore. No such Noble Seats as most of yours be.
You have every one a Canaan, Milk, Honey, and the holy Gospel preached; and may
that ever be, and your lives exemplary, whilst the Sun, Moon and Stars endure.

But pray Madams, why should Old Sutton's brave Hospital, such and such
Hospitals flourish, but yours die; yours who are certainly the best and
greatest Ladies in the whole world?

May God Almighty bend your hearts to us Poor Boys, who will ever pray for you
and all yours.

An Essay, or humble Guess how the Noble Ladies may be inclined to give to, and
Encourage their Charity-School at Highgate, near London.
AND first, my Lady such a one cried, Come, we will make one Purse out of our
Family, and if we get so much we will buy a Close, Mead, or Field, near the
School, and it shall be called by our names to the worlds end: A Noble Motion.

My Lady such a one said, She would give for one Year or two, but settle
nothing.

And my Lady such a one said, She would give only to the Lecture, which is
every Lord's Day, Winter and Summer, about five or six in the Evening.

But my Lady such a one said, She would first inform her self, and then do as
others did.

My Lady such a one said, She would give at present, because she liked the
School-house Orders, and its standing very well, and was very much taken with
the Wilderness and Walks.

And my Lady such a one said, She would give for the fancy of the Roll, and
Charity-stick, and that she never saw the like, and did wonder how any body
would speak against the design of it.

My Lady such a one said, She would give, to bind some out, or send one or two
to be Poor Scholars in Cambridge, or else to a Sea Captain, to learn
Navigation, and get her Lord (if she could) to give the Quit-Rent of one or two
Houses yearly; saying, It was no more than the Hawks-man cost him, or else she
would spare one Point of Venice, but the thing should go forward: Another Lady
Warwick.

And for the six or seven Citizens Ladies we intend to go to, we do verily
believe they will give pretty well, because they are the chiefest in all
London, and eminently good.

My Lady such a one cried, By her Troth she would give nothing at all, for she
had ways enough for her money; But the next said, She would give so much for
five or six stone of Beef every Week; and which of these is most like to Repent
when they come to die and go into another World?

Then my Lady such a one said, She would give for Bread and Beer between this
and January come Twelvemonth, and others promise for their Clothing.

But we have abundance of ways and objects for our Charity: Ay, said a fine
young Lady, it is the better for us, we have abundance of Masses, many Joints,
Toes, Feet, Fingers, (some Excuses) all should do something in order to another
World, where we must be for ever; it is good to send a little beforehand; Faith
lays out for Christ, and up for self; but builds not upon works in the least,
(that is) Hay, Sand, Straw, Stubble; but Christ a Rock for ever; and we should
be glad to do any thing for his Honor, who Loved, Lived, and Died for us, and
still makes Intercession for us to the Father.

And now, good Ladies and Gentlewomen, We humbly pray that all your Charity be
ready about Whitsuntide, or Midsummer next, at the furthest, or sent in to the
Worshipful Mr. Henry Cornish, of Blackwell-Hall, Merchant, next door to the
Gate, whom we have one and all Prayed and Petitioned to be our only Interceder,
Receiver, and Chief Treasurer for Life, to all you much Honorable Ladies and
Gentlewomen, of the famous, mighty, well-beloved City of London, or other
places round about; or else to William Blake, of Covent Garden, Woollen Draper,
at the end of Maiden-Lane, in Bedford-Street, at the Sign of the Golden-Boy,
who will likewise take the same care to see it fairly Registered, for the Honor
of your Families; or wait upon your Honors with the Clerk, to give you further
satisfaction in any particular, when you please to command it.

THE Noble Marquess Galliaces's Sufferings for the Truth was famous through the
World; your Lord's embracing of it, makes his Marquisdom more great; and may
that Truth which our true Protestant Religion teaches, be for ever in and
among your Noble Family; may all the Branches of it flourish as Palms and
Cedars, be all as green Bays in the Courts of God's own House; may the young
Lord and his Noble Lady, and that great Mass of old Gold, be dedicated to the
Lord that made Heaven and Earth; and all their Blessings be sprinkled with a
Blessing from above, which may be as the Dew and Rain to the new-mown Grass, to
make you all fruitful in the ways of God; loving him for himself, and his Son
for ever, and all Good works, because they are so: And this, amongst many, we
humbly beg your most Great and Honorable Family, to abound in: And that as at
the Dedicating of the Tabernacle, Exodus 35. 22. every one brought something; so
at the Rearing of this our Charity Schoolhouse, one half handful of these
Broad-pieces may be slung in as a Freewill Offering to the Lord, who will then
sanctify all that great Lump or Heap besides; and bless you all, as he did the
Seed of his Beloved Israel of Old; and that he may so do, we shall in our
station, as Poor Hospital ones, ever pray.

Most Honorable and Great Lady,
THE Bounty of your Noble Deceased Mother, the Lady Marchioness, and great
Hospitality of the Marquess your Father to the Poor of this Town, as well as
other places, which has been, and still is, and was, before we, or any of us
were born; to our Poor Parents, now Widows and Widowers, many of them, of which
Bounty we having largly tasted, obliges us, and all of us, humbly to
acknowledge your great Goodness, and the Charity of your Family, the only Noble
one near our School; wherefore, Dear Madam, we most humbly beg leave of your
Goodness, to present one of our Charity School-house Sticks, or Letter, to your
Ladyship, and do promise one and all, never to forget, nor cease to pray for
long Life, and Eternal Happiness, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to your most
Noble Ladyship, and the Marquess also.

May it please you most Great and Noble Lady,
YOur Gentleman says, That your Honor fears the Yearly Charge of the Ladies
Little Charity-School, will in time bring Ruin to my Family, if not looked
into; I return a thousand humble thanks for this most kind Caution; but I
cannot in the least believe those good and Noble Ladies, whom I ever intended,
believed, and have Dedicated this unto, will ever suffer such an inferior,
mean and little person to sink under the Burden of so good and great a Work,
tending to their own Honor, and the Honor of Religion; which will be a good
Work, if half the World should oppose it, because it is not only commended, but
commanded in holy Writ, to do all the good we can whilst opportunity lasts; for
at Death no man repents of being or doing good, nor never will whilst the World
stands, but thousands for their not doing have complained how they have lost
their time; and a very great one of this Nation said, Man's only Happiness lies
in being good, and at leizure doing good, imitating the glorious Sun and Air;
yea, the best Saints and Angels, and God himself, who is good to all, and all
his Works. Oh Madam! how sweet and cheering are these Beams to every Creature,
and that Air too, through which they spread and send themselves to us below,
who have yet holy Angels to guard us, as well as the blessed Writ, and those
good examples in it for to guide us in our Charity; which does every where
commend the poor Widow and Fatherless Children to us, as the truest objects of
it; these being really such, and you a very Great, Noble, and Pious Countess,
abounding in all manner of Mercies, Honor and Plenty enough; a large
considerable Offspring, as young and tall Plants and Cedars, to stand on high
ground, flourish as Bays and Bay-Trees in the True Church of God, as well as in
this happy Nation, the most happy yet in all the known World, and a Lord and
Husband of a Thousand, to Crown all these many Mercies; for all which we
heartily and most humbly beg, as on our Knee, that we may have your Noble step
in this Good Work, as a Leading Card to other Pious Ladies, and a little small
Acknowledgment, which you cannot better make to the Great and Good God, of the
deep sense you have of all his many mercies; To whom be Glory, Honor and
Dominion, world without End; Pray all we Poor Boys.

May it please you most Great and Noble Countess,
AS your Title bears the greatest sound, so your Name and Memory will be more
beloved than all that shall succeed; the Protestants loved, and they all
bewailed it in the Nation when it fell; but, while Sion-House shall last, Old
Northumberland's Name will live; and may you live also for ever; Live, when
Sun, Moon and Stars shall be no more: Live in the heavenly Jerusalem, when
earthly Sion, and earthly things shall be no more; And that you may so do, let
the Love of God now dwell in you; the Blood of Christ and his Spirit wash and
sanctify you, Soul and Body, to make both blameless at his coming, and to wait
for his Son from Heaven; which, though it may not be in your days, yet will it
be a pleasure all your life long to think indeed upon it; and that when he
comes the second time, it will be without sin unto salvation; without sin, that
is a good word indeed: At his first coming he was loaded with sins for us, Isa.
53. O read often this Chapter; but he is now without, and shall appear without
sin for us: Christ is got rid of our sins by his sufferings; he gave
satisfaction for us to the Father; no Pens nor Tongues can sufficiently set out
this: Madam, feed your thoughts upon it frequently; the worlds all vanity from
top to bottom, and must pass away, 1 John 2. 17. But the Love of God, and Blood
of Christ, abides for ever: O happy man that makes that his portion! All
things fail but my God and my Duty, said a great one: Oh! keep close to Christ
then, that he may clasp you when you and this world must part: Trust not in
worldly Princes, says the Psalms; Their breath is in their nostrils, and will
soon fall to earth: Happy is the man who has the God of Jacob for his portion,
which made Heaven and Earth; and that Heaven and Earth may both be yours: One
you have already, and the other may you ever have also; That shall be the
prayers of us poor Schoolboys; yea, we shall all pray, that you may for ever
sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, Luke 13. v. 28. be in the Kingdom of
God to sing the everlasting praises of the Lamb, and his Joys to Eternity,
Revel. 7. 16.

May it please your most Great and Noble Ladyship,
WE, the Ladies Hospital-Boys of Highgate, have humbly presumed to pray, and
dedicate one of these little Charity School house-Sticks to your Right
Honorable Family, which is Illustrious, as a Star of great Magnitude, and has
shined (if not out-shin'd) most in this our Horison, for great Wisdom in the
Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, which made the Nation so happy in the Reign
of Queen Elizabeth, when your Lord's Noble Ancestor governed all as only
Minister of State; and may your present Lord be as great and as good a Patriot
to his Country, the Laws and Privileges of it; yea, and Patron to the best of
Preaching-Ministers, as his Noble Family or Grandfather has been heretofore;
and so, whilst he really loves both his Prince and Kingdom, with the
Preaching-Ministers also, he must needs be a good and great friend to both, and
our Protestant Religion, so much struck at, at this time, which is far beyond
all the earthly things in the world, for true value and esteem; may your
Ladyship and Lord therefore both long live together, and may your mutual Love
be blessed by the Great God, with many Children, as it is; and may they all
live, and stand round your great Table, as Olive-branches, flourish in the
Courts of God's own House; be good and pious here, holy and happy to all
Eternity; for that is a long thing, and must be, and our Immortal Souls too,
when the Sun, the Sea and World shall be no more.

Most Honorable Madam,
WE are come again, though the Year be hardly out since our setting up: But for
the future, we will never trouble your Right Noble Ladyship more than once, if
so often; but now necessity puts us upon it for getting something out of Great
Families, to carry on this next Years Charge: And we remember how your Honor
gave a Caution when you sent your Guineys, not to be too troublesome, for that
you had very many objects in the Country, which did need my Lord's help; and
the truth is, the whole World is full of wants, so that Good and Great Persons
can never lack Objects; but this is a thing not common, that bears your Noble
Name, and is Dedicated to the Honor of your Sex; and in feeding it two or
three Years, you will make it live it self, and stand upon its own Legs; and
would your Honor but be pleased to send to see how well it stands; in the mean
time, we well know you to be a good and prudent Lady, and therefore will not
believe in the least you will yet stick out to help us, till the thing be a
little stronger, and have taken better Root, which it will soon and certainly
do; and then you, nor no other Noble Ladies will ever repent in the least of
what has been done for us; who will ever pray, for you, my Lord, his Sons, and
all your Noble Family, that your Souls may be truly happy, when the World shall
fly away like a mighty Eagle, and be seen no more for ever; the Sun, Moon or
Stars be darkened, the Silver Cord loosed, or the Golden Bowl broken, and the
Spirit return to God that gave it, Eccles. 12. v. 2, 6.

Right Honorable Madam,
THough all Good Works may be said to speak for themselves, yet a powerful
Intercessor does do well, and (for your house) or most Noble Family, a greater
than your self cannot be; for as our Lord Jesus Christ his greatness with the
Father, makes every thing to be easy, and readily granted, that he moves the
Father for; so your Power and Influences must needs be very successful, because
you move the nearest of Relations, and them too that are all eminently
Religious, and such as have been so for many years; the Grandmother being yet
living in the Children and Grandchildrens graces. (Madam) assure your self,
it is for a Good Work we are now a begging, and it must be none but good and
great Families, and a few Citizens, that are very eminent indeed, that we
intend thus to go unto; and in so doing, how can we miss, especially when it is
fully resolved, by God's grace, that the Discipline of this little
Charity-School shall be as near as may be, for the Honor of God, and Religion,
to the best of our power; and who can do too much for him, who is all, and will
be all, for ever? He gives us all we have, and though we can give nothing to
him, yet he accepts of what we give to any, so it be for his Honor; and the
highest Honor on Earth is to be good, and extensively doing good, like the
Air. It Is but a little while at best, that we can work, and it may be you, and
the great good Ladies of that Family, will never have such an opportunity to
help erect a thing that may last, perhaps, to the last period of time, and be
so long for the Honor of your Noble Sex and Family also; and therefore pray
despise not the day of small things, nor this good design.

Most Great and Right Honorable Countess,
AS your Noble Name and Title is beloved by all; some for worth, in that brave
Warrier, who yet lost his head in the days of Queen Elizabeth; and others for
that brave Knight your Father, who lost his in the late times, for Loyalty to
his Prince; both which will hardly be forgotten; and especially whilst your
Lord continues (as he does) to do all good, and good Offices for his King and
Country; may such Peers flourish, and be (as they are indeed) Pillars of our
Nation, which do bear up Prince and Peoples Happiness and Honor: And for this
may Children love you; yea, Children yet unborn, will, when they come to know
the worth of our Religion; which if lost, our Bodies would be all slaves, and
our Souls in danger to be damned for ever by Antichristian Errors. O Madam!
who can love enough, whilst he loves his Country so exceeding well, and the
Protestant Interest also! May you, yours and himself, all long live; live for
us, for our Prince and Nation (once a Terror unto others) but especially for
himself, and true Happiness; for to live to God is best of all. We may live to
our selves and Fortunes, our King and Country, forget Heaven, and so be lost
and miserable to Eternity, which will be Heaven when all is done; and no home
is like that, and he that made it; for his favor is better than life it self;
and may that favor which he bears to his Chosen ones, be to you, and yours
also; yea, may you all see the good of his Inheritage, and be blessed in Soul
and Body, with all your Right Noble Issue, here, and hereafter; pray every one
of us.

Most Great and Right Noble Countess,
Says the Lord, I have set watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem! that shall
never hold their peace day nor night: Your brave Lord, most Noble Madam, may be
said to be the same; and if ever faithful warning was given to a Prince and
Nation, of dangers near, and Counsels to prevent, even at the brink, your Lord
has certainly done it, with strength of Wisdom, Zeal and Boldness, that never
man spoke better. And now what shall we say of this our great Nations Seer,
that loves Scotland, England, Ireland, and the Protestant Interest, all the
world over; it being extensive, like the Truth it self, and the holy Gospel;
who can love more than every place where it is professed? or preserve Liberty
and Interest (our only Jewels) better than strongly to oppose all enemies? for
which may his Noble Name and Memory live, and his Lordship sit as long as ever
Statesman served a Prince; and for his Zeal to Prince and People, let both
love him, and the Love of God dwell in him; the blood of Christ be his Laver,
and when ever his great Soul shall leave this little lower sinful World, let
the holy Angels guard him, and our Lord Jesus Christ personally present him to
the Father, to sing the high praises of God and the Lamb to all Eternity: And
when any of his near and Noble Family and Race have served their Generations,
and fallen asleep, may they do the same, and so successively to the World's
end; pray we Poor Hospital Boys.

Right Honorable and Noble Countess,
SOlomon tells us, Wisdom is the principal thing; and if it be, as it is most
deservedly accounted, an excellent piece of Wisdom, to know all the Laws and
Statutes of a Nation; What is it then to know the Laws and Statutes of Heaven,
the Will and Pleasure of the great and mighty Monarch, Lord God of Heaven and
Earth? which your Lord yet does: Surely this must needs make him to be a great
Figure, and a great Statesman, in this our Kingdom: And may many, many such
Statesmen be to Rule and Govern the Great People of this Nation, under our
most excellent and good natured Prince: And may their Wisdom be ever hearkened
to, and their hearts be zealous; for his Greatness, and all the Peoples
Interest; for he that serves both shall never miscarry, to his Honor, and the
wisest Ones Applause: May your Lord steer in this Chanel, miss all Rocks,
especially what may hurt his Soul, live to his God and himself, as well as his
Prince and Country; for Eternity is a long thing, and may he, you, and all your
Noble Issue be ever happy in it; Pray one and all we Hospital-Boys.

Right Honorable Madam,
MAny and great have the Changes been which your Ladyship have known; but this
is certain, there is a great and unchangeable good God, who lives for ever; and
because he is so, therefore the Sons of Jacob are not consumed. Madam, it is
this God, and his Love we must stick to, for nothing else will do us long good;
all things fail and fade, set that aside; the fairest Beauty, and the sweetest
Rose; the richest Garment, with the greatest Wealth and Honor, will be left on
Earth, to die like other things; but the Living God, and the Living Word (Jesus
Christ) who lives with, and by the Father, shall abide for ever, Joh. 6. v. 57.
And whosoever believes in him shall never dye, c. 11. v. 26. Oh Madam! may you
so live, live for ever with the Son and his Saints in the Kingdom of the
Father, to drink of the new Wine, namely, his Love, which he speaks of: Oh!
it is that, that must be our portion, if we have any thing worth the speaking
of: What Is the fluttering up and down the world, or the Enjoyment of the world,
with all Accommodations in, and Applauses of it; if we lose our Souls, as
Christ speaks, what shall it profit us? That Is a Jem, or inestimable Jewel
never to be Rated but in Eternity; it comes next of all to God and Christ; it is
immortal, ever living, and shall never die; if sin does not hurt it, nothing
can: God Almighty make Christ to be our Righteousness, both in Life, Death and
Eternity; and that we may know this his Righteousness which is nigh, and this
Salvation which he so often and affectionately calls upon us for to mind;
saying, Hearken, hearken unto me my People; Give ear unto me, oh my Nation!
This (my) is a sweet word; Scripture myes, and Scripture ours, are all so. Oh!
read, often read this 51 of Isaiah; it is a sweet Chapter, and tells you what
shall become of Enemies to his Church and People, and how the Moth or Worms
shall eat them up like Wool: But that you, nor your Noble Lord may never be,
we shall ever pray, pray, pray.

Right Honorable and Good Madam,
WE shall find in all sorts of Relations Spiritual and Natural; that having
done much for any that they love, it engages them still to do more; instance
Paul, Christ and Moses; now God, Christ, Religion and Good Works, have ever
been the Beloved things of your heart; so we yet presume that they still are,
and ever shall be, to the last moment of your Life; and beyond that, none can
love: Your Right Noble Sister Warwick was in this most of all Noble; for she
loved much, and gave more than any in the Nation of her great Rank, yet now
enjoys all things. Oh Madam! be not yet weary of well doing, for you will
certainly reap to Eternity, what you sow from faith, in Christ, love to, and
union with him; and may your union with him be more inseparable, as it is than
your Arm to your Shoulder, of your Soul to your Body; yea, these are not so
inseparable, as both are to Christ; for though Time, Sin or Death may separate
them for a while; yet Sin, Death, Grave nor Eternity, shall ever separate
either from Christ; but because he lives, both shall live, and be where he is;
and what a little while is it that you have more to work for God, Christ,
Heaven, and Eternal Happiness? Oh! when those Everlasting Mansions are really
thought on, it makes our Souls mount as the Lark, our Thoughts and Desires,
like the wing and tongue of that nimble morning Bird, to praise its Maker.
Madam, we write not these things in the least to stir up kindness toward us;
you have enough, and have done enough, more than any; for you really gave first
of all, and we doubt not in the least, now our Year is up, but many Noble
well-disposed persons will follow your good Example, and some of your great
Relate us, if you but give a little hint this way, it being for so good a work,
as certainly it is; and your Labor of Love to us poor Fatherless Sinners, and
others God's Saints and Servants, he will never forget.

Most Honorable Madam,
It Is the Goodness of the Great God that he beholds things below, and is good
to the Children of Men, yea, all his Works; may you from that kindness have
your heart, your lips and your life, yea, your soul filled with that Marrow
which is from above, no where to be tasted but in Religion or Communion with
himself, and when that is strongly moving in you, how easy will it then be to
prevail with you for a little kindness, to an English Charity-School? which is
young, and in its Infancy (as yet) but will soon become strong, root, grow, and
be a great thing, if the Ladies be not wanting to promote their own praise; for
what is more praiseworthy, than to be good, and do good? to raise the Needy
from the Dust; Poor and Fatherless Children, from Ignorance, Idleness and
Beggary, to know themselves, and God in Christ, live another day in a hard
world? to this Good Work, you, and none but you, and this great Duchess in all
your Kingdom, are invited; surely your Figures must needs be great among the
English Ladies: God Almighty bless both your Princely Families, and make them
and theirs to be blameless at the coming of the great God, and our Savior
Jesus Christ, pray one and all we Poor Hospital-Boys.

Most Great Lady,
IT is your Happiness that you have not a great Lord in his own Country only,
but a good one that lives well, does well, and is much beloved where he comes;
may you both long live, have your Land and Country slow with Honey Gospel, as
it does, with Milk and Kine, which is yet a great mercy; fat Ground, a good
Climate, holy Lives, with heavenly Preaching, is the best place to live in in
the world; and oh that this Nation were but stockt with more Prophets than it
is! and oh that those that be, were but more countenanced than they are! oh
that the Pulpits were but more open than they are, or like yet to be, and
Drones quite asleep, dead we mean, or out of the way, that those that can
Preach, and would, might yet be restored to the great Congregations! A
Preaching Minister is a Star or Finger pointing unto Christ, a Golden Stick or
Candle in the Socket; a Silver Bell, that gives a good molodious sound; drops
heavenly Dew, and feeds with Manna; Bread that comes from Heaven: Christ
Preached, and Christ broken in the Preaching of the Gospel, is the Bread of
Life, and the Water too, which he that drinks shall never thirst. Give us this,
said the Jews? Ay, Christ's Flesh is meat, and Christ's Blood is drink indeed:
We may all by faith think upon it, and that is really eating in a Gospel sense.
May Ladies, eat like Angels; yea, your Ladyship, and live upon the holy Joys
and Comforts of the Spirit; have Fellowship, true Communion with the Father and
the Son; be no strangers to the Love and Life of God, who is seen in all his
works. What Is the Rose? a painted blossom of his Beauty; the little Pink and
Violet, but a thing of his, which all the world cannot make? the Honeycomb and
Hony-drops from Heaven; the early Dew, sweet Showers, and fruitful Seasons; all
Preach a good God to a heavenly mind; the morning Star, and glorious Sun and
Beams Preach Christ; and there is but one Sun, and one Christ for all the
world: Many Eyes cannot see, but all might, were they heavenly, never hurt or
hinder one another; and Christ is similed in these glorious Beams of his
Beauty; for the Sun is no more to Christ than one Beam or Ray: May these Rays,
Joys and Comforts be upon you and yours, heads, and hearts, and souls: May you
all know, and dwell in the Love of God, which passes knowledge: May your
Children be all taught of God, according to his promise, to avoid sin, the sins
of the times; live as Pilgrims and Strangers to noisome lusts, the sins and
pleasures of this Age: And may your Love and Piety abound to us, and our Poor
Hospital-School, or little Charity-house; and in so doing, you will imitate the
Divinity, who is good to all his Works; yea, the Spring that refreshes every
thing; the blew veins, or bosom flowers, come from, or are refresht by that;
yea, the Sun, and Beams of it; for though this glorious creature be millions of
miles distant from us, yet his Influences come down to us every day. O send,
send something to us then, although you be in Cheshire; though you be where you
will! and then we will all pray that you and the whole Family that love God,
may be blessed with long Life here, and Eternal Joys hereafter.

Right Honorable Madam,
THis is certain, That the Sun, Moon and Stars, in some sense, do not more
adorn the Heavens, than good Lives, good Doctrine, and good Works do Religion;
and if any Religion in the world be more inward, spiritual and heavenly than
others, surely it is the Doctrine of our true reformed Protestant Religion,
which lies not in Shows and Ceremonies, but in Love to God, and all that bears
his Image; which we Poor Children cannot yet be said to do, whilst Poor, and
altogether ignorant of our selves and Maker; and such are We; And all We which
do humbly present our selves as Objects to your Honor's Charity: And yet if
We, or some of Us, by God's Blessing, good Discipline, Catechizing and
Preaching, shall be brought to know our selves, and the Lord Jesus Christ, as
well as to get our Bread, and be put forth into a hard World, to live another
day; then our Advantage will be great, and your Satisfaction also, because your
Bounty has contributed to this good Work; and because it is a good Work, 'twas
very unfit your Honor should be left out in the least: For your Good and Noble
Lord has ever still been in (as we hope he will) when Religion, Liberty, or the
Civil Interest of the Nation has been at stake in the least, as a bold and
brave Champion for his King and Country; yea, the three Kingdoms; for which God
Almighty bless all, and every Branch of Ye: And may your Names be in the Memory
of our Nation, your own Country as it is; Yea, the Lamb's Book of Life
especially; for all out of that will be everlastingly cast into the Lake that
burns for ever: Rev. 20. 15. God Almighty bless us all with the Power of
Religion, that we may yet have an abundant Entrance into his everlasting
Kingdom. To whom be Power, Glory and Dominion, world without end. Amen, Amen.

Right Honorable and Good Madam,
THE Great God and his Goodness having made you and your Lord not only Noble
and Great in Quality, but Good and Gracious in Disposition, loving Humility and
Religion, which teaches the right way to Life and Happiness, as it is most
full, and plainly revealed in the holy blessed Writ and Word of God, the which
may ever dwell in your hearts, to shine in your Lives as it does.

Oh! when Lords and Ladies fear the Lord God Almighty, that made Heaven, Earth,
Sun and Seas, they do abundantly add to their own Honor, and praise their
Creator too: May you both so do, love him, and live to him, who is all, and
will be all for ever: And may he dwell in your hearts by faith, establish, root
and fix you both in himself, Giving you to know, taste, and comprehend with all
Saints, what is the height, breadth, length and depth of his grace, and to
know the Love which is unsearchable, and passes knowledge; and be filled with
all the fullness of God, Ephesians. 3. 17, 18, 19. Yea, may the young Lord your Son,
grow as a Lilly; be as a Vine that runs over the wall, and in time root as a
Cedar, to be tall in the Nation, and may many Branches be his Portion; yea, all
the Blessings of Joseph, or everlasting Hills, come upon his head to be as a
fruitful Bough and Blessing to your Family, Gen 49. 25, 26, 27. Yea, may you
both live to see all this and our poor divided Nation flourish; yea, our little
School live and thrive, which is a thing near where your Honors have been
sometime past, taking a little Air; and will be for God's Honor, if it
flourish and be well disciplined, which is sweet, and good, and Charity wholesome
also; and therefore pray, Madam, let us taste a little of your Bounteous
Goodness, for we have nothing else to live upon, nor no such Noble Good
Protestant person as your self to help us, that is near; and therefore pray,
good Madam, do something for us and our School, which stands so full or near in
your Eye; And we will never cease to beg the best of blessings in Heaven or
Earth to be on you and yours.

Most Noble,
WE the great English Ladies Charity School-house of High-gate, which are yet
but in our Infancy as it were, do with all humility adore you the virtuous
Maiden-Ladies of that high or mighty State or Commonwealths Ambassador; being
desirous that your, and only your most Noble Names and Charity be Rolled and
Registered with the Ladies of our Nation: For as Queen Elizabeth of happy memory
did love you more than any; so We, and the People of this Nation in general, do
wish to You above all the Commonwealths in the world, great Prosperity and
Peace, and may never more unhappy breach be, or drop of blood spilt by any
enemy whatever; but may your Ships and ours be, as the mighty Ships of
Tarshish, to carry in and out the Treasures of the world, to the Church of God;
or the people of the world which do favor them; and all your Guns and ours be
as Brazen walls to defend both, and Truth from Falsehood, or at least our
Habitations and Enjoyments; and from this Union may the Children of men, and
the Christian world suck the Consolation of Peace and Quiet, if they will be
quiet; and then we Poor Hospital-Boys will never bow nor beg of any Foreign
Prince or States Ambassador in the world, set your most Honorable Ladiship's
Father aside; but yours we naturally love, and your great Figures and Names we
would all fain beg to be visible in our Charity School for all Ages to come.

May it please your Honor, most Good and Great Lady,
AS we have presumed to petition the She Princess of this world, or the great
Ladies of this Nation to be charitable unto us; so we most humbly do your
Honor also, presuming a Figure of your making in the Ladies Roll, must needs
be, like your self, Great; and therefore the good God and his Son from Heaven
bless you and your Sir Henry, make you still to love your King and Country, as
you really do, and live for the Kingdom of Heaven: To love your King, is to
love him in his Person, Power, and Just Prerogative; to love him in all the
good he does his People; your Country, yea, the whole Nation, Prince and
People's Happiness is much bound up in God, both in living unto him, and
therefore Heaven must still be at the end of our living, and the end of our
dying; for then Eternity comes to be a serious thing: Sharp, quick and great
Wits, have ever sooner or later found the Power of Religion: Everlastingness
makes time and action short here, and in that we shall have time enough to look
back, read over past things; Great Actions will be there greatly influenced by
it; and for little ones of this nature, they cannot trouble either mind or
thoughts in another world, being so warrantable as they are, and commendable
too: Lord what am I? whence came I? whither go I, so fast away, and yet the
Nation lies at stake? may your most worthy Husband say.

Thousands, thousands Soul-happiness lies at stake, if Popery should come in,
and Property quite be lost, then we are miserable, and like to be unhappy for
both worlds; to live in fear in this, dye in doubts and dangers as to the other
is a great slavery, as all out of the way must needs do: God Almighty grant the
Truth may never be lost, nor any thing prevail against it, or those either that
contend and care for it day and night: But the Church is founded on a Rock,
God's Love, and Christ's Merit, which the Gates of Hell cannot prevail over;
and much of the Nation's Happiness is in the two Houses, and the good Acts
there to be made: May your dear Relation sit, who bears the whole name of that
not forgotten proper, brave beloved man his Father; may he Vote, may you both
Live; may you dye to God, and Love your Country, as you really do; so shall
your Names and Souls both live, one on Earth for a while, and the other in
Heaven for ever with the Lamb and his Redeemed ones.

So prays all of us.
Right Honorable Madam,
WEre not your sharp, quick and great parts, naturally mixed with good and pious
Principles, we should not in the least presume, or endeavor to engage your
cheerful, good and prudent Inclinations, to accept of this your Family's Roll
or Charity School-house Stick; but presuming the work it self to be very good,
and the Noble Lady your Mother, who is so eminently blessed with good and many
Children abounding in the world, and they very Charitable also, makes us
complain of a peck of troubles; for having raised near forty Poor and
Fatherless Boys, they prove very chargeable to be kept, with Meat, Drink and
Clothes, as you know they have: Now pray, dear Madam, speak or write to my Lady
out of hand, and tell her how it is with us; and if she will subscribe a good
gob, and get the young Ladies to do something too; and then put it all
together, with your Ladiship's, and Sir James's also; for it is necessary he,
or you in his stead, should do something, now the great Ship is come safe in.
At the Rearing of the Tabernacle every one brought something, Exodus 25. 22. And
if in this you will, to the Rearing of our School, give something as the first
fruits of your great Bay, or new Plantation, as it were, to be sure the rest
will be blessed the better; and therefore pray give freely, that we may say,
Received from you and your Family so much: For we would not have them, nor you,
out of the Noble List of Ladies, nor want those prayers in the least, which all
our good Benefactors have.

May it please your Honorable Ladyship,
SIR Francis being a pious, good, charitable, and most worthy person, our only
great Neighbor, able to relieve, support and help us, we humbly pray this our
Charity Schoolhouse Stick may be accepted by your Ladyship; for we have nothing
in the world to keep up us Poor Boys, or put us out, but the Benevolence of
pious, good and charitable Ladies; therefore pray, Madam, be entreated to do a
little for us, who will never cease to pray the great God and his Son to bless
you both in Soul and Body, and your Olive-branches also, ye may also be blessed
with the blessing of Abraham, sit down with Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of
Heaven, Luke 13. 29. and never know troubles on the Earth, but such as God's
nearest and dearest Children meet with, for the good of their Souls; and a
Soul-mercy it is for to have his Love and Providence turning all things to our
good; yea, the worst things that do befall us here, he can make the Best,
Sickness, Death and Sin: And may all this be, and Sin forever pardoned to both
your Souls, and blotted out, as if they had never been: Oh the blessedness of
that man, whose sins are pardoned, in Life, Death and Eternity! May this
blessing, with all others your Souls can wish or desire, be your portion for
ever and ever, prays one and all us now at Highgate.

May it please your Ladyship,
SIR Walter Rawleigh in the Tower, said, That true and eternal Happiness lies
in God, and no where to be tasted but in Religion; which is a certain thing
going up and down the world, too little minded by the greatest, but of more
concern than all things in it, said the Lord of Marlborough, that was lately
slain: And that man that does not first or last live to God, will certainly
wish he had never been when he comes to die; says another great one; and yet
we must bleed and bleed, says the Doctor, to keep Life, or prevent
Consumptions, Cough, Dropsy, Ptysick and Diseases, which it tells and foretells
certain Death to be at hand; as gray hairs does a youthful Life past: And if we
have got over one bout of Sickness or Disease, yet still another hangs over or
upon us, and is nigh, or ready for to shake, force or tear poor frail man all
to pieces; yea, and something or another still at hand to turn us where we
cannot turn; namely, Coffin, Grave, Prison, and the Winding Sheet, or last
shift, which may be eaten, but never shaken off by mortals; No, Skin, Flesh,
Bones, and the faggs of pale Beauty, must all be Earth, and turn to that from
whence we first of all came; and it is but just and reasonable, that as that did
feed, cloth and nourish us, as it were our Mother for a while, we should sink,
dye, fall, and lay down our heads again, into that most natural Lap or Bosom,
as being its most proper place to take our last or longest sleep in: But, O
Madam! may you, yours, or Sir Richard, never come, go into one world and
another without a great Errand: And may the Great God direct us what it is he
sent us hither for: For this end was I born, every one says, namely, to know
God, and live to him. Christ was born to die for us, as he told Pilate, and we
are bound to live to him, and must, or else we shall wish we had never been.
The world is nothing but the world, a dream and shadow that must pass away:
Were the Sands; Sea and Mountains beaten Gold; Death stretches out the
fingers, and we let go again all that head, hand, will, heart or thoughts,
could ever hold, wish, or eye see: May you then know, may you then love Christ,
and live to him, whilst you may; he is yet near and dear, but you would both be
lost for ever, if you should neglect him till it be too late. Christ once wept,
often bled and wept too; but will dye no more, nor do no more for us, if we do
not live to him: O let us live to him, and die to sin, before we die: Sin dies,
and dips the Soul in black and bloody Scarlets of defiance. Old, long and great
ones eat it quite up. O let not Canker, Death, Hell's Worm spoil so great a Gem
and Jewel, or Immortal thing! Christ will save us now; Christ will save us
ever, if we be but willing; yet he will never bleed more; but he prays and
mediates for us still; for, he makes continual Intercession, Romans 10. 4. and
his blood speaks better things than the blood of Abel, that cried down
vengeance upon Cain; but Christ's blood cries up forgiveness unto us. Oh Father!
let them come to me if they will be mine, Joh. 17. 24. And may you both dwell
with him for ever; but oh! live a little if you have not; live to him a little,
if you cannot much, time being now short; lay up, as much as can be, Treasure
in Heaven, where no Rust nor Thieves can come. Lands, Debts, Rents and Houses
may be all lost; but Treasure in Heaven can never miscarry; and if ever we
indeed mean to come there, it must be by faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. Money
will not buy Pardon, Blood nor Tears cannot; nor the Fruit of our Bodies go for
the sin of our Souls, Micah 6. 7. But Christ's Blood is Current Coin: Oh stick
to that Rock which will not fail! when the Silken Stockin, and the Silver Shoe
must off, and never on more; nor the Soul return to the same Body: Vanity of
Vanities, how is all but froth and vanity besides Christ! and therefore if he
be not ours, we are lost, for nothing, for nothing, but a Dream, a Bubble and a
Fancy; yea, and our Souls to Eternity.

Madam,
WE have presumed to offer one of these to the Lady Player, Mrs. Love, and
Madam Pilkinton, with a few humble Lines, as now we do to your most great and
Right Honorable Ladyship, from all which we most humbly pray, that this Good
Work, which in charity must be so accounted, may be a little countenanced by
you, the four Beloved Ladies of this mighty City; for if any names be
deservedly great and famous, more than others, sure it is yours; and those
other three above mentioned: And may your Names live from generation to
generation, whilst your Walls and Gates last, and your Souls to Eternity (after
all.) May Hell never be known, nor Heaven lost by you, nor none of yours;
especially your dear Husbands: But may they be all four for ever Citizens in
the New Jerusalem; walk hand in hand with the Lamb, and his Redeemed ones, to
the Fountains of Living Water, where God shall be all in all, and they always
drinking from the River of his Pleasures, Rev. 7. 17. Psalm. 36. 8. So prays one
and all our Charity School-house.

Madam,
THE great God and his Providence has made Sir Thomas the Father as it were of
all the famous Apprentices of London; and only sole Judge between the great
Merchant and his Man; and not so, but an Eye for the Nation also, piercing
through and through the greatest Intrigues, Policies, Stratagems, that Malice,
Hell or Rome can lay against our King, Kingdom or Religion, Liberty and
Interest; Gems and Jewels, of greater value than the Gold of Ophir in a true
sense: But in your sphere Madam, this little little Work is not to be despised
in the least, but a Scriptural Honor it is, to be owned the Lady of Charity,
and a Mistress or great Benefactor to one of their little Schools. Light is
light, truth truth, a spark is fire, and true Charity praise worthy to the
world's end; and so long may your Name, Praise and Honor live, (and our House
also.)

Madam,
LOve is from the Fountain and Divine Being of all good: May that ever flow in
your Name and Nature, and be as natural to you as the Rose and Buds are to the
Summer; and then when this Spring and your Charity shall flow up in and from
you, to the barren Hill of Highgate, where your School-house stands, it will
then become a feeding, filling Spring too; for Charity will feed us, and praise
flow from us to the famous City-Ladies names, which shall never be forgotten,
but be fairly Registered, and read from one Age, and one Generation to another:
And now may the Love of God Almighty, the pure Joys and Comforts of his holy
Spirit, ever abide with you and yours whilst you abide in this Tabernacle of
Clay; and he constantly guide you through the Wilderness of this bewitching,
barren, wicked World, till you come to the last period of Life, and wrap you up
then in the Righteousness of God's dear and anointed only Christ, to shine as
the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father for ever more, prays thirty six of us and
our Minister also.

Most Worthy Madam,
THere are four Gates in the City; four Seasons in the Year; four Ladies nigh
together, that will hardly be forgotten, but shall be beloved for their
Husbands sakes, and their own too; for their praise is truly praiseworthy,
their virtues all eminently specious. But now, dear Madam, would it not be a
high and great Honor to see you our four Citizens Ladies, with your four
well-beloved Husbands, our constant Parliament men for London, chosen more by
hearts than hands; and a many brave, judicious, sober Citizens waiting on them,
all standing one by one, as it were, on the brow of our Hill, saying one to the
other, There is the Tower and the Monument, the Old Change, Guild Hall, and
Blackwell-Hall, which some would fain burn again; there is Bow-Steeple, the
Holy Bible, the Silver Bells of Aaron the godly outed Ministers, the melodious
Music of the Gospel, Smithfield* Martyrs yet alive, and the Best Society, the
very Best in all the world, for Civility, Loyalty, Men and Manners, with the
greatest cash, bulk, mass, and stock of all sorts of Silks, Cinnamon, Spices,
Wine, Gold, Pearl, Spanish-Wooll and Clothes, with the River Nilus, and the
stately Ships of Turshish, to carry in and out the great Merchandises of the
world? And may all this, with the dew of Hermon her Silver Drops, with your
godly Ministers yet unrestored, ever be to the World's end, and to your Live's
end: May you and yours be beloved, as you are: And now the God and Father of
our Lord Jesus Christ, and all Consolations, bless you both in Spirit, Soul and
Body, Sickness, Health, Life and Death, here, and for evermore, prays all we
your poor youngest Hospital-Boys of Highgate; and to help them is most Charity
ever. The old fares well, thanks be to a good City, and their Benefactors in
it; for which God Almighty bless them and their Government to the world's end
with Peace, Health, Wealth, Honor, and the Power of Religion.

Most Honorable Madam,
THE Best have not always Love boiling in them, yet at sometimes nothing works
so strongly as Divine Goodness in their Souls; and now we think we see in your
heart, hand and eye, all lifting up unto the Hills, from whence alone has your
Salvation and Deliverance been; we think we hear you still say, God has been my
Helper, my Rock, and my Salvation, and I will bless him; he has inclined his
Ear unto me, therefore will I love him as long as I live: The sorrows of death
caught hold upon me; I found trouble, then called I on the Name of the Lord,
and he heard me. The Lord has dealt bountifully with me, what shall I render
unto the Lord for all his benefits? I will take the Cup of Salvation, and pay
my vows in the midst of his people, in the Courts of the Lord's own House, in
the midst of thee, O Jerusalem, praise ye the Lord. And if ever there be a time
for us to speak, and you to give, it is now: Whilst your heart is full of his
Goodness, yet yours can never extend to him; to us and our School it may, and
others need it not; we mean, your great City-Hospitals, but our poor little In
fant, newborn thing, needs, really needs, and that makes us speak, others are
Rich, we are poor; others are full, we are empty; others have all things, we
have nothing, but what the good Lord Jesus shall incline some great Ladies, and
a few of you the choicest Citizens of London for to give; and choice men it
must be that we thus go to; for we intend never to beg, nor mingle, but with
the best of Protestants; and some of them too have scarce faith enough to
believe the success of this great or good design. Nay, your Brother Cornish
himself, who in other things is one of a hundred, through the greatness of his
diffidence would have once persuaded us to lay it down; whose Charity yet we
doubt not of in the least, it being a well approved thing by good men and
Ministers, one of which constantly Preaches every Lord's day an Evening
Lecture, for all sorts of comers, where Bread, and other encouragement is given
for any Poor or Needy people that please to be there and hear at that same
hour. In short, the praise and good report of this House, and your Charity,
will live, grow, and be a great thing, and still redound to your Honor, and
the City's Praise: And now the prayers of all our School, with the Blessings of
the great God of Heaven and Earth, rest on the Heads, Hearts and Souls of all
your near Relations and Family.

May it please you most Worthy Madam,
THE Good and Noble Ladies have given liberty to Petition (as now we do) some
few Honorable Citizens and great Merchants Wives of eminent Quality or Degree,
your Husband being one, we well know, to be both free, bountiful and a Right
English Gentlemen in all things, We humbly beg and entreat your Ladyship, that
this our Charity School-house Stick, or Roll, may be accepted, it being for a
good work, much of praiseworthy: And we humbly promise this, We will all beg
many Blessings, or wish Health, Peace, Wealth, and Eternal Happiness to you for
ever and ever: Yea, we will beg for the two young Ladies also, that they may be
Saints in Heaven, good and virtuous Wives on Earth and may have, as they really
do, and will ever well deserve the best of Husbands to enjoy them, such as may
never grieve nor offend day nor night; such as may love them and their Souls,
both above their great Fortunes, and next our Lord Jesus Christ: Study what to
do for both; for to be ensnared with a bad man, and unkind or churlish Husband,
will be a thousand, thousand pities, and grieve us to the heart. When sweet
Nature's Blossoms, Buds and Roses meet with churlish Nabals, the yielding
gentle Reed is bruised by the ugly Oak, and the Honey suckle tangled in a knot,
which can never be untied till Death. But a good man, though he be not a Lord,
though he be not a very great Merchant; yet if he be but good natured, wise,
cheerful, and careful for the world, and minds the world to come, prays daily
for a Blessing, let the Ladies (we all say) accept of such a one; or let one
venture first, and the other for Honor after; or let either choose as they
will, but still let both be happy, we all pray from the bottom of our hearts:
Yet happy they can never be, unless after all, they go to Heaven; for Heaven is
Heaven when all is done, and ever will be. We should Buy, Sell, Trade, Marry,
Live and Dye so, as that we may not endanger our Souls in the least: Other
losses may be gaind, Health, Wealth, and the World; but Heaven lost will never
be found in another. O love God and Jesus Christ now above all! love his
Praise, love his Promise, love his Spirit, which knocks now and then; yea,
often at your hearts, with sweet, soft, and still Motions in the night, saying,
Open, open unto me: Hear, hear, and your Souls shall live. I will make a
Covenant with you, if you will be mine; love and live to me now. I will own you
here and hereafter; save you when you come to dye, and bless you at the present
with Children, more or less; or that which is better, good things: Yea, no good
thing will he withold from them that fear him, says the Psalmist. And
therefore fear him day and night both you; yea, both you Young and Lovely
Ladies, that he may indeed bless you in Life, Death and Eternity; prays all we
at Highgate.

SILVER DROPS, OR SERIOUS THINGS.
HEre follows the Substance of the fine Young Lady's Answer to that Objection
in the Essay; Are these Times for Charity, and a new Design, when we have so
many Ways and Objects for it? Ay, said she, And it is the better for us too;
we have many Joints and Mercies, Fingers, Feet and Toes; all should do
something for him and another world, who is always doing of us good; and all
his Works: So says the Psalmist; And all his Works do praise him, Psalm. 145.
10. Now if this little Design of theirs at Highgate be for, or look like any
thing of serving him, why should it dye? Let the vanity and things of the
world, sin, folly and emptiness dye; but let Virtue, Religion, and the Love of
Charity live in all our bosoms, breasts and lives. If Angels were to be
visible, and present with us, how much would they be to be embraced and desired
for their holiness? When Great and Noble Persons, Lords, Ladies, and others,
embrace true Piety, they seem to imitate the holy Angels, though clothed with
frailty and mortality; immortality is for another world, and in that world
nothing but Divine Love shall live: Joy and Glory cease here, but that which is
heavenly shall never cease; yet Charity shall cease, though it be greater than
Faith and Love too. So says Paul, 1 Cor. 13. 13. Now abides Faith, Hope and
Charity, but the greatest of all is Charity.

Will you abound a little in this Work? you have enough of this world; yea,
enough to swallow and drown you to Eternity, if a good God do not love and save
you from the snares, cares and flatteries of it: For all its pleasures are
bewitching things; and the sweetest Music fails and tires often times. But
thou O Son, Saint and Servant of God, 1 Timothy 6. 11. fly these things, and
Covetousness. Fight the good fight of Faith: Lay hold of Eternal Life: And
witness a good Confession, as Christ did, v. 12, 13. I have done it, I have
done it, says Paul, and there is laid up for me a Crown of Life; and that is
Life indeed, 2 Timothy 4. 8.

Temporal Life flies away, but Eternal Life never ends; and Charity leads to
that under Christ: Oh! let us not want that which leads to him, who is all, and
will be all for ever, Gal 3. 11. Other things will fail, but Christ will never
fail, if we be his, and he ours. Oh! get a never-failing Christ to be your God
and Guide, Lord and Master now. If all the Princes, Kings and Queens in the
world had but one Lord and Master, as they have not in a strict sense, to whom
Account at last must be given; would they, or should they not love him? I am
sure all the Ladies in the world have but one Lord at last to trust to; Oh!
love him now, that he may love you in a dying hour, and save you then when you
and the world must part; and part you must for ever; but then to be for ever
with the Lord of Lords, the Lord of Life and Glory, 1 These. 4. 17.

And where he is, to be also there, according to his last prayer, Joh. 17. 24.
Oh! how happy will that be? and may this happiness be the portion of your
Honor, and all your Honor's sweet and lovely Children too; but that can never
be, unless you love and live to him, embrace and choose him as the Chiefest
Good. Be wise then, O ye Honorable of the Earth, Lords, Ladies, and others!
Psalm. 2. 10.

If ye were a thousand times more Noble, Rich and Bountiful than ye are, yet,
yet, you will all certainly perish if you do not stoop, if you do not bend to
him, to whom every knee must bend, Psalm. 2. 12. what will become of you, Lords,
Ladies and others? you have but one true friend in Heaven and Earth, and that
is the good God, and our good Lord Jesus; and if ye do whatsoever he has bid
you, he will love you to the end of Time and Eternity too, if that could be
supposed to have any; but that is without end, says a great Father, and clasps
in all times and things that ever were, or shall be; but this you may easily
suppose none but he can. Creatures dye, and the love of Creatures; but the Love
of God abides for ever, 1 John 2. 17. 1 Cor. 7. 31. And the Blood of Christ
sticks by us in a dying hour; yea, it is the only thing that sticks by us, as
great Lord Strafford said; and if you, great Ladies, would wash in that, it
would make you whiter than the Snow. Wash me, says David, Psalm. 5. 1. v. 52.
Oh! ye had all need wash, and pray David's prayer, Lords, Ladies and others;
but especially to you great Ladies, do we commend and beg these few lines may
be accepted: It Is not for your Charity alone, but good as well as Charity, that
we thus plead: Gold and Silver is but little worth to us, or our School, in
comparison of God and Christ: Oh! look to him that ye be not undone at last,
when ye should be happy; yea, utterly undone; once in Hell, and never out; once
in Hell, and utterly undone; other losses may be gained, but Heaven can never
be gained, if once lost: Ye weep for Love, and weep for Honors, weep for
Frowns, and weep for Friends, many times; but how will ye weep, says Christ,
if such a thing should happen! which, God forbid; namely, that some, or many of
you, great Ladies, should ever see great sinners and little, we mean, mean
sinners in respect of you Noble Ones, that shall come from the East, and from
the West, from the North, and from the South, Luke 17. v. 22. and from places
where Preaching has never been; and yet these sinners shall sit down with
Abraham, with Isaac and Jacob, Luke 13. 28. and you, great Ladies, should be
shut out, as Christ speaks, into utter darkness, where shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth for evermore: Weep to think that weeping avails not. We
suppose it a vain story, that the Queen of Carthage wept for Aeneas, but it is
true Divinity, that the Lord of Glory wept for the Jews, saying, Oh Jerusalem,
Jerusalem! how often would I have gathered thee, as a Hen would have gathered her
Chickens? Matthew. 23. 37. But oh! who can, or will weep for you, if you should
once miscarry in the days of Eternity? Nay, there will be no day, if that
night once overtake you, John 9. 4. But you will long, and long, and lose your
longing; for a Gospel day can never come, when it is once finally lost: Now, as
we would beg from you, so we would beg for you, that you would mind, whilst you
may, and work whilst you may, for the night comes, wherein no man can work,
John 9. 3. And if indeed you would work for your Souls, God, and another world,
first make Christ and his Love the ground of all your Joys and Sorrows for the
future. Christ is a true Foundation, and others can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
Honors, Riches, Smiles, Favors, with all the Mirth, Music and Embraces in
the world, are but Toys to a soaring Soul: Yea, I have experienced it, said a
great Lady: If you would soar aloft, as the lofty Eagle flies, then fly away in
your Soul's Loves, Joys and Pleasures to a heavenly Object, and a heavenly
Christ yea Christ in Heaven, who sits there and ever lives to make continual
Intercession for such sinners as come unto him, Romans 8. 34.

Madam, as we would beg heartily, so we would deal plainly with your Honors;
and your Noble Sex, do rather need more plain dealing, than any others in the
world; for all things seem to smile and flatter you, and will till you be in
Hell, if you have not a care; the greatness of your Birth, Beauty, Train,
Fortune and Relations; yea, some of your own Chaplains deal not so faithfully
with you as they should many times, but wink at sin, say little.

When Dives was in Hell, he would fain have sent to his kindred then on Earth,
to forewarn them, Luke 16. 24. but who almost of a thousand gives you half that
timely warning that you should have, to look after Heaven, and the God of
Heaven, which will be a lasting Good for ever and ever?

Oh Madam! home is home, as we use to say; but there is no home like to Heaven,
and he that made that; will ye mind whilst ye may, and live whilst ye may for
Heaven, and the Heaven of Heavens? I mean the God and Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the God of all Glory, as the Apostle calls him. I repent of all the
hours I ever spent in my life, said Sir Thomas Mason, save what I spent in
communion with God: And that man will certainly wish he had never been in a
dying hour, who lives not unto him. All things fail me now, but my God, my duty
and my prayers, Mason.
So then, faith never fails, said he, who had been five times Ambassador for
King James. But from all chiefly learn this, the world to be vanity, that God
in Christ, Faith and holy Duties well performed, were never failing things;
that is to say, holy Duties done, by Divine assistance, and the sense of his
Love in Christ: But all things else fail us, and Cordials cease when breath and
life slies away. But God is my portion for ever, says the Psalmist, 16. 5.
Money will not; nor money cannot buy one moment from the grave; for what would
not some give, could the Physician help? but Faith and Holiness will help;
practice then the Art of well living, for the comfort of well dying. Great
peace have they that love thy Law, says David, Psalm. 119. 165. Many shall be
the sorrows of those that sin much here or hereafter. And I suffer these pains
for my sins past, says a great Lord. And I shall never sleep more, says a
Carding Gentlewoman, the word Eternity does so run in mine Ear. And indeed it
is hard when people spend their time in Carding, as she had done, and come to
dying, to find comfort. Oh! but a good conscience sings sweet; Remember, O
Lord, I walk before thee, says good King Hezekiah, 2 King. 20 3. I have
finished my work, says Christ, Joh. 17. 4. I have fought a good fight, says
Paul, 2 Timothy 4. 7. And, I have loved, Preached, and lived to thee, says
Luther, Oh Christ, from my Soul! And so have I, says Beza; and I am weary of
sin, and willing to dye. But what have you, great Ladies, done, that you should
expect to live with Angels, and sing with that Celestial Quire the praises of
the Lamb to all Eternity? Rev. 7. 9. Come and begin Heaven here on Earth, that
ye be never made the tail at last; you are now uppermost in all places, rooms
and companies, would you be lowermost in the next world? Lords lead you by the
hand up and down stairs, where your steps go pit pat, with your silver
Clappers: But oh! if ye do not live to Christ, what will become of you when the
Silken Stockin, and the Silver Shoe, the Holland Shift, and all must off; and
as ye come into the world, so must ye go; only your Mother's blood will be
washed away. Princes, Kings and Queens must all lie down to Death, and
Parliament Lords must pull off their Robes; but Death can never strip a Saint,
nor any true believing penitent of Christ and his Righteousness; no, no, Worms
may eat his skin through and through, and the Grave consume his flesh and bones
to dust, as Job speaks, Job 19. 26. Yet shall I see my Redeemer.

But will he own you then, if you do not own him now? My Sheep hear my voice,
and I give to them Eternal Life, says Christ. But you would none of me, Joh.
10. 27. I have piped, says Christ, but you would not dance; I have mourned,
but ye would not lament, Mat. 11. 17. Christ Preached Repentance by John to the
Jews, but they would not mourn: Christ Preached Forgiveness by himself, but
they would not believe, nor have any of his Salvation. Oh! take heed, and again
take heed, that ye, Great and Noble, Gentile Ladies, do not the same. The
Gadarens once preferred their Swine before the Lord of Life and Glory, and
entreated him to be gone out of their Coasts or Country, Luke 8. 37. And take
ye heed that ye refuse not the waters of Shiloah, that run softly, Isa. 8. 6.
and slight him that speaks from Heaven, Heb. 12. 25. prefer your Lusts, Toys,
Honors, and every little thing before your Lord and Master. Why should the
braying of an Ass be more acceptable to you, than the most melodious Music of
the Gospel? I mean, base and mean things, before the high and heavenly ones of
God: Oh! taste and see that the Lord is gracious, and Religion sweet, Psalm. 34.
8. I will assure you it is, said a great Countess to the Lord Bartlet. And,
Cursed be the man, said the Noble Marquess Galliaces, that thinks all the
pleasure in the world worth one hours communion with God. And if you would have
communion with God, sit down, and sink down in your spirits, and converse with
your selves a little before ye go hence and be no more; but the Devil visits,
and twenty needless things will not let you sit down, walk alone, or be in the
dark one hour, to mind Death, Heaven, Hell and Eternity. Indeed, it is hard for
a man of much business, or a Lady of much Honor and Courtship, to mind the
main, or to live to him at all, who lives much for others. Wise men, and Great
men, and Statesmen too, are great strangers to themselves many times. Oh!
let us live to our selves: We have lived to our Fortune, our King, and our
Country; let us live to our selves before we go hence: All the world will not
make amends, if we neglect it (said Sir Francis Walsingham to Lord Burlington)
who were great Statesmen in Queen Elizabeth's time; and if you neglect it too,
to breed up two or three young Lords, or Ladies to stand in your room and
stead, merely to maintain your Honor, and the Honor of your Families, and not
mind the Honor of Christ, and his Exemplary Life, or Laws, which should be
copyed out in your Lives, and Children's Conversations; What do ye more than
others? as Christ speaks; nay, do ye not worse than others many times? Matthew.
5. 47. As if Greatness were necessitated to abandon Piety and Goodness: This is
a bad conclusion. Great men should imitate the great Planets, and the great
Deity, by being good, and doing good; but you do hurt many times by bad
Examples, sinning, leading others into sin; send away your Children for a
little breeding, to the hazard of their Souls; match them to the worst of men
for a little Honor many times; weep for them when they are sick, and laugh
when they sin. But Cato advises, He that will buy a Farm, should look well what
Neighbors he has; but the qualifications of the person had need more be minded
of the Young Lady's Servant, because it is for Life; For Honor is but a shadow
without Piety, and will prove a bubble, a bubble, as one cried out of all the
world, upon the thoughts of Eternity; indeed that swallows all things, as
mighty Whales does the little Fishes: how quick and soon this comes, God knows.
Man walks, sings, laughs and talks, and Ladies do the same; play upon the Lute
and Citern one day, and to Death's Pipe the next: And now if Death and Night
puts an end to Life and Day, what should remain but to work whilst day and time
last? because, though another day comes, and that past, yet the same Day and
Life; nor may that opportunity be, which in your hands, if once slipped and gone.
Oh! how much lost time have I to repent of, and how little time to do it in!
said Sir Henry Wotton in King James's Reign. Man's greatest happiness is to be
good, and at leisure to do good; Delays and procrastinations of being good, and
doing good, are dangerous. And, To morrow, to morrow, couzens many a one, says
a Father. Therefore the Wise man says, What thou find in thy heart to do,
do it with all thy might; for there is no device nor work in the Grave whither
thou art going, Eccles. 9. 10. But he that dies to sin daily, makes the best
step to this Eternal step of Death, as a great Philosopher calls it, which puts
us not into another room, but another place and condition quite, away from all
we now converse withal. Relations never meet together more, in the way and
manner that they now do, but the Father puts away the Son, and the Son the
Father; and this Relation is never more, nor the Marriage one neither, Matthew.
22. 30. Death is a Divorce for ever; and though these Relations meet in the
Resurrection-state, yet is there neither Marriage, nor giving in Marriage, as
Christ speaks to the seventh Brother.

Let Husbands love their Wives, whilst they may; and Wives their Husbands;
this step and journey will part them both for ever; as one said to his wife a
dying, who had been married fifty years or upwards. Oh me! said a young Lady,
This is very sad, that I must leave thee, my dear, so soon; we have not been
married one year; what, is there no Remedy? and must I needs dye? Truly yes; he
that lives must dye whether he be sick or no. We dye, because we lived; said
one, Death is decreed, and we dye naturally; our Bed and Sleep resembles Death
and the Grave, What is sleep but the shadow of it? And he that will dye well,
must live well; and if there be any thing after this Life, Why do not young men
take care to live well? I did both, says Socrates, though a heathen: Live and
Dye well go together: What God has joined, let no man put asunder: for as the
tree leans, so it falls; Eccles. 11. 3. Men do not live sin-ward, and dye God
ward; no, no; you must live to God, and lean to God; live and dye to God, if
ever you mean to go to him. The Tree falls as it leans, and lies as it falls:
If you fall God ward you are happy; But if sin-ward you are miserable; and ever
like to be. For after death comes judgment; that is, the stating of the Soul,
says Burrace, in an unchangeable state. Here a man's condition may be mended,
but after death its never to be altered. Faith and Repentance may be wrought
here, though it be at the last cast. This night shall thou be with me in
Paradise, Luke 23. 43. Yet late Repentance seldom true; though true Repentance
never too late: But after death there is no amendment nor Repentance neither.
Solomon hewed and squared his Building for the Temple beforehand; so that at
the rearing of it up, there was no noise of the Ax or Hammer heard; Whoever God
intends as a stone in the heavenly Jerusalem he fits before hand: May you all
be fitted, all you young and lovely Ladies, And you more elderly too; May you
all stand before the Lamb, see him, have his name and praise in your forehead,
Palms in your hands, Robes upon your backs; to cry with that numberless number
of all kindreds, tongues and people; Salvation, Glory, Honor to the Lamb, and
to him that sits on the Throne for ever, Rev. 7. 10. Yea, may you all fall down
and cry, not with the cry of Lamentation, but Acclamation, Joy, and triumph;
which Triumph to the Godly will certainly be; after all actions of Mortality
are come to an end. In the mean time all affections have two sharp ends, the
first and the last; the first meeting, and the last parting of Friends and
Lovers is always so. And as Christ wept for Jerusalem, and the hardness of the
Jews, whom Paul wished almost to be accursed for, that they might be saved; so
the Jews shall one day be converted and look upon him whom they have peirced,
and mourn, as for their first born, Rev. 1. 7. And Paul's Friends wept sore
when he told them they should see his face no more; Act. 21. 13. But the Mary's
wept, Mary Magdalen, and the Mother of Jesus wept, when he said in his
sufferings, Woman behold thy Son, John 19. 26. And the other Loved much,
because much was forgiven, Mark 8. 36. You who have all your sins forgiven, let
the memorial of his sufferings dwell in your hearts, and 'twill make you weep
to sin against him; Oh! the kindness and favors of a good God, are obligations
to a good Soul. May you all remember what he has showed unto you at any time.
Were you never sick in dangers, nor partakers of some special mercies? Oh! keep
the Remembrance of his goodness to your Souls. But, oh how little do rich and
poor, think upon this God and his goodness to their Souls! which must stand
before the Lamb, as I said but now, or be banished from him for ever and ever;
or how little do they think of the worth, Nature, or Immortality of them?
What Is a fine Silk, a fine Skin, a fine Shape, a sweet Face to such a Spark or
Beam of God as the Soul is, that came out from him, and was breathed into man
by him? Genesis 2. 7. Shall this immortal thing ever starve, dye and be forgotten?
which one calls the Breath of Life, or the Living Breath which gives us Life.
Some never look their Bibles, others never mind their Souls; the whole world
will not make amends for such a loss, much less a vain wretched life of sinful
pleasures, and a few honors. What! Careful for shape, and fashion, and neglect
that which is the Breath of life, or the life which gives us Breath? as I said
before. Good Books are good Companions, and the Bible makes glorious
Christians, when they so read, mind it, as to live up to it. Queen Elizabeth
loved it well, and hugged it in the Prison. But vain Books eat up time, and
spoil many young Ladies and Gentlewomen, but it is not lack of time, but love
and relish to it, that you do not read, hear and pray more* But what kind of
foolish Creatures are many of you young Ladies, to think God, Christ, Heaven,
Souls may be put off for any slight occasions, or a Looking-glass. You were not
made for Birds or Butterflies, to sing in woods, Play, Court, or Dance in Sun:
But you are made for Saints, to sing with Angels, and go to God; or else to
weep in Hell. Nay it is so, we will assure you and no otherwise, there is but
two places; Look to the heavens, and think well what he deserves that made them
and you. Psalm. 8. 3. and you to live in them for ever. If you be his servants
you shall sing and others shall weep, grieve, and mourn; Isa. 65. 14. You shall
drink, and others shall be thirsty.

The Heavens declare his wondrous work, says the Psalmist, and the Earth is
full of his Goodness, Psalm. 8. 1. And will you be full of Sin, Enmity and
Folly? Oh! God forbid, that such lovely Creatures as many of you young Lords
and Ladies be, should be full of sin: Sin is an evil, an evil Disease in the
Soul, and to the Soul, it kills it worse than Leprosy to Eternity, if Christ
do not save it: Oh! value him; fly to him; clasp about him, that ye never
miscarry in Time nor Eternity. Compare both, how short is one, and long the
other. The pleasures of sin are but for a season, Heb. 11. 25. Moses left
Pharaoh's Court, preferring afflictions before these pleasures, which betrays
into Gulphs, Snares and Rocks. Do not you make your selves unhappy in another
world, when you may do well in both: A thousand years should be more valuable
than fourscore: However, let not fourscore be more to you than three or
fourscore thousand, thousand, thousand. This is certain, Riches, Honors,
Estates and Courtships, with all that is Terrene and Sublunary, shall fly away.
Heaven and Earth shall pass away, before one Jot or Tittle of God's Word, Joh.
2 17. Luke 21. 33. It Is a very dangerous thing, though you do not mind it, to
be irreligious: Pleasure one day in God's Court is worth a thousand elsewhere,
Psalm. 114. 10. Oh! taste and see the sweet and honey of it: Less pains will
serve for Eternal Life than some take for Temporal; yea, to dress themselves:
What! three hours about that, and not a quarter at prayers? Some get great
Fortune by Marriages, others a little by Plough, Cart and pains; others by
Play, and that is almost cheating; but get the Lord Jesus Christ, and you get
all, 1 Timothy 4 8. This world you see, but do not you believe the other, and the
Resurrection-state? if you do not, you are Sadduces, and irrational. Do not you
see all things spring again every year? Dead Seeds and Corn bring the same
Grain; and shall not man spring again, as well as Worms, Flies and Spiders,
which seem to be dead all the Winter, yet live again in the Summer? Oh! believe
the Resurrection-state, and the Promises; for Godliness has one for both
worlds. But this lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. Ephesians. 2. 2. Shall honors,
pleasures, profits be your portion ever? it cannot be; Oh look ye after another
world then! Why choose you not then that that you would have when you come to
dye; let me dye the death of the Righteous, and my latter end be like unto his;
Number. 23. 10. And every one will say and wish so; Let go sin and sorrow, take
faith and you shall do it; how much better is that than fancy, heaven and
earth, than earth and not heaven? God can give a thousand pleasures; a river of
pleasures, Psalm. 36. 8. But vain sinful pleasures are certainly the way to
hell; 2 Timothy 3. 4 And I could never reconcile them and Religion together: said
a great one. Lovers of pleasures that are sinful, are really Lovers of Death,
yea, the whores house goes down to death; her feet take hold on hell, Prove. 2.
16. 5. 5. He that cannot cease from sin, and repent of it must needs be damned
for it, it is an ill bedfellow, and a worse grave fellow; And a cutting saying
it was to the Jews that they should dye in it, Joh. 8. 21. If ye believe not
that I am he, you shall die in your sins, says Christ. Sinful lusts make men
beasts, and sinful wrath makes men Devils: What! kill a man in anger? Go into
the field to seek honor, but find Death and Hell? live a Murderer, or dye by
one? If furious sparks did mind the sparkles of an eternal fire; and how much
the Devil is glad when he finds such fools; they would never do as they do,
sight and damn one another for a thing of naught many times. My Life is of more
worth, said the Philosopher to the rude Mariners, who were swearing, and
careless in a storm, than to be cast away. And indeed Life is a thing to be
valued at a high rate. And upon a Life well spent depends Eternal happiness;
therefore it is the wise, and not fools, that redeem time for Eternity. The
Egyptians pictured time with three heads; a Dog, a Lion, and a Wolf; a Dog,
signifying Time to come, flattering; and a Lion, to denote Time present,
strongly working; and a Wolf, denoting Time lost or past, to be biting: And
Death on a dark Throne, with a Rod in one hand, and a Key in the other; as if
by one he drove us together, and the other he locked us up. Oh Ladies! every
moment of time commands Regions of Blessedness, when it is improved; but lost,
it becomes a Worm in conscience, and eats to Eternity. If men in health, and
Duellers did but mind this, they would not send one another to Hell as they do.
Certainly such Duellers will be sad repenters (as I said before) in another
world: Do they believe a God? or do they not? If there be a God, he is a
Rewarder of Virtue, and will certainly punish all unpardoned sins which lead us
into Gulphs, Snares and Rocks. Say, when temptations are upon you to any great
sin, Now are the Philistines come, and the Cords of Death and Hell are upon me;
shall I be foolish, base, vile and unclean? do this and wrong my own soul?
Prove. 8. 36. And, all that hate me love death, says Solomon. Some vices have
short pleasures, long throws, and after-pains; if vice, sin, sinful sin and
folly, have spoiled youth: Have a care of old Age; one foot is in the grave:
What! sin all your life, and have Heaven at last? no, it will be Hell. And, I
had rather be in it, says a Father, without sin, than in Heaven filled with
it. Oh! take a fair farewell of it betimes; it never did, will, nor can do any
one good; no, it cannot; it brings all the losses, crosses in the world on us,
here, or hereafter: And how can we think of going to Heaven, if we do not live
to it, but leave a Hell of sin, seeds and spawn, by bad example behind us? or
if we should live for Heaven a little, and lose it for want of living a little
more, would it not be sad?

A good bargain lost for want of a second or third bidding, proves a great
vexation many times; one step more and all had been well and safe; but to lose
a Heaven for nothing, for nothing, for want of a little Religion, and being
serious in it, bites to Eternity. Oh! if you fall but a step or two short, this
will be your case, and you will never come in. Take heed, and again take heed,
O ye great Ones of the times! Lords, Ladies, and others, that ye do not
miscarry in the days of Eternity, but give at length some diligence to make
your Calling and Election sure. Honors and Evidences are never sure enough;
can Heaven be too sure for you? Come, look after God and Christ more; pray
oftener; throw your selves into the Arms of Jesus; depend upon Free Grace, and
he will certainly save you, and your Souls: Like and love holiness: Be in love
and league with no sin, and you shall have Joy, Happiness and Holiness to
Eternity: And therefore, as ever you would be Lodgers out of Hell, live in the
Church as a holy member of the Church; love the best of Protestants,
persecution is a devilish sin; And good preaching a great mercy; And if ye love
one another then are ye my disciples indeed, says Christ, Joh. 14. 21. And
it is reported of St. Chrysostom, that they had rather want the shining of the
Sun than his preaching; and says he, if I had a Mountain for my Pulpit, and
the whole world to hear me it should be upon that Text. O ye sons of men how
long will ye love vanity! Psalm. 4. 2. The delight of the soul is to know its
maker, and heavenly preaching is a soul-ravishing thing; there being infinite
sweetness in the love of God: But he that does not lift his head and his heart
above this world; will perish with the world. And he and she that is for much
ease, new fashions, and fine clothes, and haiting up and down in Coaches is
oftentimes for little religion. If you cannot live without excess of pleasures,
I say excessive ones, you will be carried down the stream of Nilus to the
deadly Sea, called, Mare Mortuum; like the skipping fishes till they fall into
it. Come, let brave Sparks and gallant Ladies mind better things, the great God
and his Son that came down from heaven, and never knew pleasure here on earth
but in doing his Fathers Will; and if you will, now do it; when the Door is
once shut it is too late: Some would be troubled if they should never go to the
Park again, or see another May Day. But if you should never go to heaven you
are utterly undone; for there are but two places, all go to one place says
Solomon; but he means that of the grave, Eccles. 12. 7. But all besides believe
two places, if the principles of Religion were never so dubious, yet, it
concerns us to be serious, because they are of such mighty concernment to us
Said the great Earl of Leicester, Fools play with their souls, and drawlers at
Religion cut the thread of life, and throat of them. But sink not into this
deadness and deadly wickedness, as to make sin a sport of at any time;
especially such kind of sinning as throws a contempt upon God and his word, and
hardens others to despise and condemn that, namely Religion, which all ages and
nations beside this have never done before: But it were better to be drowned
with a millstone about our necks, than left to dye and be buried with a hard
heart in the grave, or live to draw others to hell. Take heed which way you go,
the broad way is most easy, but the narrow is most safe, Luke 13. 24. Safe
bind, and safe find; but sin loosened, and the Reins let go, carries us whither
we should not, and whither we would not. If we did but consider; but the want
of due consideration; if you will indeed do it too, then you shall know it more
than you do, and taste it to be far better than all the sports and pleasures of
the Court and Country too. Oh! that I had never been King of Spain, said that
great Prince Charles the fifth, and that I had lived a Hermite's life. But a
heavenly life will never be repented of: Should not Ladies strive to be
Angelical, and holy in the eyes of God, as well as lovely in the eyes of men?
why should you be all for Honor, and not for Religion, as some of you are? It
becomes great Sparks to seek great things, and not to spend their time in
Ladies Chambers, tossing of a Play-Book, or reading this or that little Jest,
crying, Faith Madam here is a good one. Lord Bacon said, Nothing concerns us so
much in all the world as Religion, and the Principles of it.

Come then, and let us seek the world to come; this passes away like May Day
and May-flowers; all but smoke or dew quickly gone, but everlastingness is a
mighty thing. The world and times are bad; let us make Christ all in all, Col.
3. 11. He is so, and will be so: Let him be to us in point of Justification,
Sanctification and Redemption: Imitate him, and lean upon him in Life, Death
and Eternity. Wisdom waits at his Gate to keep you from sin, which a Playhouse
leads unto: But I will go to the house of God, says David, and pay my Vows in
thee, O Jerusalem! Psalm. 116. 19. And I mine in thee, O Smithfield, said that
brave Hampshire Martyr, John Philpot; but if you care not for God's Honor, he
will not care for yours, nor what becomes of you when you dye: But he that
honors me, will my Father love, said Christ, Joh. 14. 21. But no man can love,
serve, or honor him enough, who has loved us so much, as to wash us in his own
blood, Rev. 1. 5. And Philpot shed his free and boldly, and disputed as bravely
as ever man did for Christ and his Truth in the Convocation-house. And the
world is not worthy of those men which have been burnt upon this account, in
all, or diverse Countries, by the Man of Sin: But take heed you be not foolish
Virgins, and foolish Ladies; and such as have not Oil in your Lamps, nor saving
Grace in your hearts, at midnight, when the Cry of the Bridegroom shall come:
For if the door be then shut, and Repentance too late, Christ will never hear,
though you knock, beg, and cry upon your knees; and were more beautiful than
Angels, saying, Lord, open, open, with ten thousand tears in your eyes. The day
is past, and the night will never have an end: But it is non-consideration is
the cause of men and women's damnation, said a good Divine: Therefore said God,
O that my people did but consider! But the Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his
Masters Crib; but my people does not consider, Isa. 1. 3.

The length of Time; the certainty of Eternity; the impossibility of more than
a long Life; and how vain it is to labor not to dye once! Methusalem dyed,
Genesis 5. 7. Piety, strength or policy keeps none from the grave. Consider, says
Solomon, do not all go one way to the dust? Eccles. 12. 5. But Christ shall
say, Come ye Blessed; Go ye Cursed: I was an hungry, and you fed me; naked, and
you clothed me; or, you did it not. Nay, what you did to one of these little
ones, you did to me, Matthew. 25. 41, 42. O Do something for the School, if you
have not yet! though works do not merit. It Is impossible, says St. Austin; for
we cannot will good, much less do it of our selves. Yet you must live for
Heaven, and by Christ get Faith, or you can never be saved.

Short Hints, but Sound Truths, In great Humility.
THe Heathen Oracle of mortal man used to say, We are born crying, live
laughing, and dye sighing; But Job and Solomon seem to hint, there is little
laughter; for man is born to sorrow as the sparks fly up, Job 5. 7. and All is
vanity says Solomon, Eccles. 12. 8. That is, all besides Christ and the
knowledge of him in a strict sense; And says Hintius, Upon this account I
could even obscure my self to think how much short all knowledge is, and how
much envy the most curious parts sustain and undergo, especially when they are
in great and high places, where they have too too little time to converse with
themselves, mind their maker, or rectify their crooked nature. Infancy is full
of ignorance, Youth of sins, and Old Age of sorrows, and the whole life of
dangers: so that it is a great misery for poor man who is but a Pile or Bag
full of dust to come into the world, were it not for the hope of heaven or a
better world. But this is never lost without great grief when possessed with much
love. A certain rich man that loved riches well and too too well too; being
sick to death, caused all his Plate and Gold to be brought before him, and thus
said to his soul, like the fool in the Gospel, Luke 1^. 18. My soul, if thou will now tarry with me and not leave my body, all this will I promise thee and
thou shall enjoy it with Riches, fine Buildings, Gardens, and sumptuous Houses:
But finding his infirmity increasing, and no hopes of life, in a great rage and
fury he broke out into this most desperate speech: Since thou will not abide,
nor be entreated, nor tarry longer with me, I recommend thee to the Devil: and
so soon departed. Oh! let such men fear to laugh who are in danger to go where
it will never avail or profit any thing to weep: And he that looks on a picture
and sees on it a rich man and a beggar, never envies one nor pities the other:
all men are but pictures and shadows, quickly pass away: and the poor have an
advantage of the rich many times in dying, having but little to leave behind:
but many are dull in want, and wanton in fruition; and most men's lives are
miserable seeing those that seek for good hardly find it: When evil comes of it
self, and enters our gates unsought. Yet the brain will be working whilst the
pulse is beating; let a man live few years, or let a man live many; one does
not make him happy, nor another unhappy; but his living well or ill does it.
Anselmus says; In heaven joys shall be within and without, above and beneath,
in all parts and round about, and everlasting too, says the Prophet Isaiah 65.

The lovers of this world eat, drink, and are merry, but for want of the love
of God, go down to hell, Psalm. 9. 17. in a little while and nothing remains of
them but a short name, dust and worms. Seneca says evil actions are whipped by
the conscience of themselves, and torments them sore; and that wickedness
drinks up the greatest part of its own poison, and is a punishment to it
self. But Christians say there is a hell besides, and most of all nations
believe future rewards, and punishments: Oh! let us prevent weeping by weeping,
says One, and all of hells sorrows by heavenly repentance; Aristotle says It
were better to dye than to do any thing against the good of virtue. And I,
says Seneca, was better born than to be a slave to lust: what they count
virtue, Christians do not so well know; but this is certain, it is better not
to be, than not to know a good God in Jesus Christ, and live to him in some
measure, who is all, and will be all for ever. Though Zenon said, through his
Atheism, he feared nothing but Old Age; yet Socrates tells ye, When Death
approaches bad men will be willing to turn Divines. And, if I have lived well,
says Lucicrema, why do not you clap your hands? But Divine Love is a never
ending Treasure; and the Orient Pearl is gathered from the Early Dew. And in
the 110th. Psalm, it is said of Christ, That from the womb of the morning he
had the dew of his youth; that is, as I humbly conceive, from the first peeping
out of God's Love to mankind, as it was through a promise in Jesus Christ; so
all these promises and blessings, obtained in Time or Eternity, are gathered
from the head, heart, Love and Merit of Christ, as the morning dew is from
Grass, Corn, or Herbs. But to be careless of him, or our selves, and to live
without fear, is to Dye Living, and is in great danger to fall into the Sea of
God's everlasting wrath. Awake, awake, O miserable Soul! and lift up thine
Eyes, lest the night of nights overtake thee, Romans 13. 12. Joh. 9. 4. And
assure your selves, Death will almost daunt good Livers; what will thou do? But
he whom happiness affects cares not how long he lives. But Job was safer on the
Dunghill, than Adam in Paradise. And Christ the true Son of the Living God,
when begging water at the Well of Jacob, Joh. 4. 7. from the woman with the
Pitcher: Yet many think a middle condition is best for this world, and for our
Souls too; but we need every day the blood of Christ to wash us all, as well as
Water for our faces: And the Soul is washed by secret thinking and applying of
the Love, Life, Death and Merit of Christ to it self: He gave himself for me,
says Paul, Gal. 2. 20. And our Souls are like Camaeleons, live upon the
Gospel-Air, Promises in Christ, and God's Love through Christ; but the world
trusted on, is apt to thrust all out of our minds. And says Tully, No man
could ever make me believe the Soul should live in this mortal Body, and be
dead when absent. Oh! live then to live for ever. Bear well, and prepare well
for that which can never be avoided, namely, Death. To labor not to dye once,
is to labor in vain; But to live to Christ, is a certain way to prevent a
second Death. And a man whose Soul is truly conversing with God, shall find
more pleasure in secret walks, closets, groves and hedges, than in the Palace
of a Prince. And Sir Walter Rawleigh says, He that is resolved to be a great
Favorite and Servant there, must abandon strict Piety. The love of Fame, Name
and Pleasure, is inconsistent with the Love of God. True, a weak man may give
strict Rules; and the holiest Minister in the world hardly lives up to his own
Preaching. And you cannot look to Heaven with one Eye, and look down to the
Earth with the other at the same time. But however, the best counsel is best
and most wholesome for our Souls: And though our care be great for the Body, yet
a man may be as happy in Russet as in Cloth of Tissue. A golden Cap, and a
rending Head; a Silken Stockin, and a sore Foot; or a great Estate, and the
torment of the Stone, or Gout in the great Toe, is a grievous misery.

And I see, says the Emperor, that sovereignty commands no diseases nor the
seas, having set himself and chair on the shore at the Tides coming in, crying
back, back, and I command you, proud waves, back: but the Emperor was fain to
move. And Bardue Coesar cried I begot him mortal, when word was brought him his
only Son was dead; which was the reward of Trophimus, after he had finished the
famous Oracle of Apollo; and begged that which was the best for him, and 'twas
promised in three days he should have it; in which time he died. But it is our
duty said Seneca, to dye often: yet one complained against the long life of a
Raven and his own short; but the old Romans counted it Ominous to see one, and
not two in the morning, as if it had betokened Wife or Husband's death; yet
though that be the most known, it is the most unknown thing in the world: The
Sexton, Clerk, and Coffin-maker are most apt to forget their own, though they
nail up and bury others; and the best Men, Citizens and their Neighbors too,
when they have got their rings and gloves; but it is ill preparing for death
when it is a burden to live. Sick repentance is seldom true, and it is certain
it is labor and trouble enough to be head and heart sick; and then a man can
hardly do any thing but mind his ease, or pillow. Oh! put not off your Will but
especially your souls weal and happiness to a dying hour; My care was, when
young, to live well, and it is now to dye well, said a Heathen. Physicians,
Lawyers, and Ministers cannot be heard at once; and it may be friends are
troublesome too: Come, to live well is best, and that will prevent the worst:
Oh! then play not the Courtiers part who, some say, do all things late, Rise
late, Dine late, Sup late, and Repent late, many times never, but it is never
too late if true, but it should be of the whole man; but when death has folded
up men's days, opportunities are all gone; Moles see, and Swans sing a little
before they dye; but a true Saint and a Simeon says let me depart in peace,
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation, Luke 2. 29. But the fashion of this
world is to put men in mind of dying when they see they cannot live above a day
or two longer; but as I have lived uncertain, so I now dye doubting, said a
wise man and a great Scholar; yet after a thousand thousand millions of years,
eternity will be as long as ever; sadly and suddenly will all worldly pleasures
be turned into walking dreams: and great Alexander is less now than a little
whiteish to thistle down, which the least wind or air rouls about; the world
passes away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. time is short, says Buroughs; and says he, the
word signifies, folded up to the last end or fag of it like a piece of cloth;
but eternity is still as long as ever. Oh! set your house in order, 2 King. 20.
4. as the Prophet said to the good King; if every one has not an house, yet
every one has a soul, as well as a body, and there be great affairs that
concern both, and the greatest wits in the world have been concerned for them,
said the Right Honorable the Earl of Northampton, and have ever found sooner
or later the power of God or Religion in their consciences; yea, the Great and
Godly ones. Oh, my soul, my soul! said the French Cardinal. And Oh mine! said
the wretched Pope; And thou must never be merry more. To dye safe is a good
thing, and the best of men are best at last, and have heaven in their Bosoms
and Breasts; and say Let me go, let me go; Oh Christ! thou are mine, said
another. The Jews said, God kissed Moses's soul out of him: And the Minister
said, so he did a great Ladies in Essex. But though some men dye not so
comfortably, yet they all dye safely, who have the habits of true Grace in
their souls; and many very bad men seem to dye quietly and go to hell like a
Lamb in dull diseases, consumptions, senslesness, and hardness of their hearts
in sins; for Satan can let men alone well enough when he knows he has them sure
enough; but it is a sad thing to have a man's eyes never opened till they are
singed and burnt open in hell; break from him and sin now, by true and timely
repentance, and you make sure work for ever. Go forth, go forth, said one to
his soul; thou have served God, and trusted Christ many years, and now Heaven
is just at hand, and this dying Body of mine shall live again, as Job speaks,
Job 26. 27. and my Soul return with the Joys of Heaven to fetch it to it self.
Some say, There are veins or strings in a man's Tongue which reach to the
Heart; and when they break he dies: But when heart and tongue shall speak this,
oh what a comfort is it in a dying hour!

Plato, though a Heathen said, All men almost were out of the way, because they
did not seek after the mind of God; and that those did dye most comfortably
that lived by reason, and adored the first Being. Therefore, says Lucicrema to
his friends, when he had called for the Glass, and combed his head; Now clap
your hands if I have acted my part well. And Seneca says, Since Nature has
stamped a God in the mind of every man; and the belief of him arose not from
custom, nor was enacted by a Law; it necessarily follows there must be a Deity;
the belief is so natural. And Cato says, Epicurus did dread Death more than
any thing in the world upon this account. Lord Chancellor Edgerton says, The
Atheist and Profane lays a wager with the Pious, but upon mighty odds; for
one ventures his Life and Soul, or the Life of his Soul for ever; and the other
but his Lust and Sin, which is yet his Interest to be without; and yet if it
were on equal ground, the disproportion is vast and infinite; and what a sad
surprise will he be in, when by death he shall be instantly seized by horrid
Spirits! And this truth of reward and punishments will be tried in a little
time: And it is but a little while, and every man shall be no man. And though
every one should strive to mend one, that the world may be better; yet may we
not think, that the world is angry with some, because they are no worse: When
good men are sorry in themselves they are no better; but he that is angry with
sin, and repents of it, shall not easily sin in his anger; when he that is
angry for every thing, will be angry for nothing, as we say: But it rests in
the bosom of Fools, says Solomon, Proverbs.

Though Moses was sometimes angry with Israel, yet he wished his name might be
blotted out of the Book of Life, rather than God should destroy them, Exodus 32.
32. He granted part of the request, and loved Moses the better for it. And Paul
had a brave strain of this nature for his Countrymen the Jews, Romans 9. 3.
Surely these were as great Saints as ever lived, and loved God as much. It Is a
sin not to think there is a Providence; but what a sin is it to think there is
no God nor Providence? yet such Atheists there be on Earth, if not in
Coffee-houses: Yet in Hell there is none but will feel there is a God to punish
with everlasting destruction evil doers, as well as to reward with everlasting
salvation the well doers: And if he did not both, why should not men do what
they please? And says Joshua, when he had pressed them to the Love of God; Do
what you will, I and my house will serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. And it is
better to beg our bread here, if it be his will, than to beg Water in Hell, as
Dives did, Luke 16. 23. A thankful heart will bless God for a little, when
abundance abuse him for his many, many mercies; but happy are they to whom God
is nearer than the nearest, and dearer than all relations in the world: For he
that loves Wife and Children best shall never be saved: See this Text, Luke 14.
26. But before Christ came into the world, God was in Christ reconciling the
world to him: But when he died, the work was finished, said Christ, bowed the
head: But God took Christ's word before that, and saved millions of his
Servants before Christ came into the world; we find a hundred and forty
thousand in the Text, Rev. 7. 4. But now that Christ has shed his blood, and
paid, by suffering on the Cross, for the debt and sin of his people, he does
as it were take the Father's word now, for all that shall be saved to the
world's end.

Time was when this Gospel was thinn sown, but thick come up, and many
thousands converted by hearing one sermon, but now many sermons to one
conversion: Oh! Conversion, Conversion of souls, how have I aimed at thee? when
Melancthon was a young man, he had so much Zeal, Rhetoric, and Elegancy that
he thought no hearer should be able to withstand him; but at last he sadly
complains that old Adam was too hard for young Melancthon: but all Apostates
are the Devils prisoners, brook loose and caught again, says one; and when
strangers ride apace through a village little dogs bark. And if good men be
more ordinary zealous in the way to heaven, wicked men do the like many times
says Buroughs: but God will not ask men why they were no more rich, nor fair,
nor learned, but why they were no more zealous: the word of God is a rich
Jewel, it should lie in our hearts, as well as hang in our ears: but as one
broke her looking glass for showing her wrinkles in her face, so many are angry
with the Minister, and the word, when the fault is in themselves. One said, a
proud Rome, but all other Cities were but villages to that: but honest London
is a Sion to that sink or Sodom in comparison of sin: and David loved that, and
hated Mesech, Psalm. 120. 5. We may love relations well, and too much, but we
can never love God and his Church enough. Oh! that men were as wise as those
wise men who came from far to see Christ, Matt. 2. 1. but men forsake him and
damn themselves, a little time and pains for this world is enough, but much for
heaven is too little, because God, Christ, Holiness, and Happiness is there,
and ever will be. Some men trade along time for nothing, but others get heaven;
Jacob served for one wife, and then for another: Genesis 29. 27. longer than some
getting God and Christ for ever. The first Adam found a place for his Children,
and lost it, but the second Adam is gone to Heaven to prepare a place in
heaven, which shall never be taken from them; Joh. 14. 2. Some like Rachel weep
for their Sons, Matt. 2. 18. when sick or dye, but never for their sins; a
Printer prints, and has money for composing; what he does, he does not like
sometimes; and so have some men for preaching, though they do not practice;
such watermen which look one way and row another, may chance to bring others
to heaven, but they will never get in themselves; though a Christian do not
good works that he may be seen of men, Matt. 15. 16. (yet he) may and ought
that they be seen with men (namely good works) the Proud Italian Beggars many
times use this phrase Do good for your own sakes, they get most, that do most
good: Pray good Ladies consider this, and do not forget the Lady Vare and
Warwicks good example, they gain most that do most for God and Religion sake,
and the giver gets most.

Contentment turns all to gold; but grace is better than that: Oh beg of Christ
this Eye Salve! Rev. 3. 18. And that it may be like the house of David, and sin
like Saul*s, weaker and weaker. God says sometimes to his Servants, as a King
said to a Courtier, that desired to be gone to provide for himself; No, says
the King, do my work first, and I will do thine. So says God, Seek ye first my
Kingdom, and the righteousness thereof, and all things shall be added unto you.
Matt. 6. 33. Judas sold his master and salvation both cheap, yet they that paid
the money bought dear, for they bought their own damnation as is much to be
feared: but some have an easy kind of way for sin. A French King wore a
Crucifix in his hat, and when he swore he kissed that, as if all was well; some
swear, drink, and do worse, and yet cry God forgive me, it was but once or
twice and a trick of youth; but such tricks will trip you into hell without
mercy and repentance: the world was once destroyed with water, for the heat of
lust and other wickedness; but shall at length be burnt with fire for
bewitching men to sin. 2 Pet. 3. 11. a foolish witty Gentlewoman being told the
world and the glories of it was but vanity, it is true, said she, Solomon said
it, but he first tried it, and so will I; but Solomon was a double great Type,
first, of wretched, sinful, miserable man, who can do nothing but sin of
himself; secondly, of holy, happy, Blessed Christ who is all righteous we
should imitate him in his wisdom, and holiness, not in his sin and wickedness,
for that brings death here and hereafter, Romans 6. 23. but good men should not
dote upon the world, because the world loves its own, Joh. 17. 14. it never
loved Christ, nor they that are his, much; the most things of the world, and
the best things of the world, leave us at the worlds end, send us gawl'd and
weary out; a pack-horse has but beans and oats, many care and carry for they
know not who. A rich man lately going with his son by water toward London
Bridge, Father, said the young man, there is a brave play to day at the Dukes
Playhouse, let us go see it; O villain! said the Father, would thou go and
have me too, when there is a great vessel to look after? Damn me, choose you,
said the Son, I will go, calling another boat and so stepped away: but they are
both dead now, and a vast estate gone, and no body knows where almost. Oh! how
many do the like, care, and care as the old man did, and have nothing many
times but sin and the gawled conscience to carry them to the grave: a sad
reward, and curse upon over covetous men; but the world at best is but as a
spoke in a wheel, one is uppermost to day and another to morrow, and though
corn, wine, and oil be the worlds happiness, Psalm. 4. 7. yet this is at an end,
when he or the world is; they ravish in expectation, not in fruition, but
heavenly things are sweet in both, and the worlds all is nothing at all at
last; many desie it, and the Devil in their mouths, and yet serve both in their
hearts, it is not the having the world in our hands, or our hands in the
business of the world, but our making an Idol of it, serving it more than the
Creator, God blessed for ever: It Is a great piece of wisdom to hide faults and
ignorance sometimes, yet learned Rome and Greece the two great schools of the
world by all their learning did not define whether there were many Gods or one;
and were for many years the greatest Idolaters in the world, notwithstanding
all their wisemen; but wisdom is good with an inheritance, and true wisdom
chooses God and Christ for a portion: The Lord is my portion says my soul, and
whom have I in heaven but thee, says David, Psalm. 73. 25. Sir Edward Petto
says that if we do ill, the pleasures are but short, and the pains remain for
ever; but if we do well the good does so too; and it is good to wait on God who
waits to be gracious to such as call upon him. Some men find want of comfort,
and others find comfort in want because God is with them; when thou go
through the fire, and through the water; I will be with thee says the Lord,
Isa. 43. 2. And Tertullian says of young Ladies, if they were clothed with
Silks and Piety, Sattins and Sanctity, Purple and Modesty, God would be with
them, and love and like them better too. A man may love morality, civility, and
not Grace; Rome would prove the truth by miracles, when she should prove
miracles by truth; but her whole Golden Legion is a fiction of forged lies; and
that he that wrote it had a brazen face and a leaden heart: they willingly
believe lies, and God in judgment suffers them so to do; because they receive
not the love of the truth, 2 These. 2. 10, 11, 12. And Vespasian was tired with
a triumph, and Ladies have been so with music and a playhouse; all is but
vanity of vanities at the long run besides Christ and the Knowledge of him:
Yea, all else is but Golden Dreams; and it is better to fear and dream of Hell,
than to drop into it; to think of Jollity, and find misery, is said; or to
dream of Heaven upon Earth, and to wake by Death in Hell is sad indeed. Time
passes a pace, and all post some where. It Is dangerous putting off that to day,
which thou must do, or else it may be utterly undone to morrow. Contemplation
and Meditation, are good things: It Is as the smell of the Rose and Jessemin,
says one. Some men are ashamed to sin before a child; but what we are afraid
to do before men, we should be to think before God. And it is better to spend
our time in doing good, than bare talking or getting Riches either. If we
should be thankful for little Mercies, Riches and Honor; what should we be for
God himself, and the pardon of sin? The Tongue blessing God without the heart,
is but a tinkling Cymbal; and the heart blessing God without the tongue, is
sweet, but still music; but the heart and tongue together makes the sweetest
harmony in the world. And if the Larks and Birds sing so merrily to the morning
Sun, we should much more to our Creator and Redeemer. Let all the world praise
thee, O God; Let all the world praise thee, says the Psalmist, Psalm 67. 3. And
you, Noble Ladies, who have best voices, and least to do, should be most
engaged in that good work. But Honor is a snare, and visits many, and needless
too sometimes: Better stay at home, and think, Lord, what am I? What do I?
Whither go I so fast? a little time will put me in a Basin. Every man is but a
bag full of Dust, at the best, and Death turns us into Ashes; and that Dust may
be squeezed into a small place: And it is probable the Grave-man takes up some
of that sometimes to sling upon another, when he cries, Dust to Dust, and Ashes
to Ashes. But this is certain, after a little while every man will be no man. A
good Gentlewoman being sick, was asked whether she were willing to Live or Dye;
What God pleased. Ay but, says one, If God should put it to you; but then said
she, I would refer it to him again. And a brave Grace it is to be resigned so
patiently to God's will in every thing: And there are four Reasons for it: The
Holiness; The Sovereignty; Eternity and Goodness of his Will. But he that sins,
and quarrels against this good and holy Sovereign and Eternal Will of God, does
but do what in him lies to make him send him Soul and Body into Hell.

But cut me, hack me, kill me, says Austin, so thou savest my Soul. And oh
what an Emphasis does the Scripture frequently put upon the word Soul! Hear,
and your Soul shall live, Isa. 55. 3. He that sins against me wrongs his own
Soul, Prove. 8. 36. Fear not them that can kill the Body, but him that can throw
the Body and Soul into Hell. What shall it profit a man to gain the whole
world, and lose his Soul? Matthew. 16. 26. Thou Fool! this night shall thy Soul
be taken from thee, Luke 12. 18. Matthew. 12. 28.

Soul mercies, Soul-promises, and Soul-salvation, must needs be great. And the
Great God by his absolute Sovereignty claims, and says, All Souls are mine;
Ezekiel. 18. 4. But most are like the poor Woman Mr. Buroughs mentions; who when
her house was burning, ran about to save some little trisles, but forgot her
Child in the Cradle: But then supposing it to be burnt, though indeed it was
saved, she presently ran mad, to think she should mind little trisles, and
forget that.

Many scramble for a little Dirt, Dust, Gold and Honor, but when Death comes,
they will cry out, Oh my Soul! I would give for Heaven so much, said a Knight
at Brumpton. But it was once said of a Lady, That she and her two Children did
thrive in the Truth, John 2. 4. We wish you and yours the like. For the soul is
more worth than the body, yea, than all the green and glory in the world
besides; And I would says Sterry, if God should put it to my choice, that all
the vines, greens, and flowers in the world should everlastingly wither, rather
than one soul finally perish, for whom Christ dyed: but yet, yet for all this,
Christ is more worth being God-man, than all the fouls in the world put
together, how much better are soul-comforts than bodily ones, and so for
mercies. Oh! let me have the Cream, says one, and let others take the scum'd
milk, sorrow for sin and contrition is good, but it must not keep us from
believing and hopeing in him: carnal joys breed sorrow, but spiritual sorrow
breeds joy, and is a repentance never to be repented of, 2 Cor. 7. 10. In
wicked laughter the heart is sad or should be, for says Christ, woe be to you
that laugh, Luke 6. 25. but in holy mourning the heart is secretly glad:
therefore blessed are all ye that mourn for ye shall be comforted. Matthew. 5. 4.
but some mourn for the shame, and not for sin; sorrow lies heavier on the
wicked than sin, but sin is heavier than sorrow on the godly, my sin is ever
before me, says David, Psalm. 51. 3. And against thee have I sinned and done
this evil in thy sight. 51. 4. Oh! that bad men would confess and go to God by
Christ and repentance! if they don't he will never come over to them whilst the
world stands but send them into hell: it is the height of wickedness to do ill
and think it well done, and go on; swearers swear again, and swear for grace,
and think it a brave thing to be damn ye; and so do poor Rascals, Dray-men,
Footmen, Coach men, and Porters, and all for grace the of imitating huffing
Sparks; but little do such Wretches, Worms, Atheistical, Heathen, Mortals think
what sins they brought with them into the world, and what hellish damning, and
despairing fears will tend them when they are going out, unless they dye
brutish, or like one that has no sense of another world. Dr. Manto, Dr. Manto,
Fetch him quickly or some other good man, said one. A Horse, a Horse, a Kingdom
for a Horse, said crook-backt Richard; and more would these give if they were
able; if they did but know how the Devil waited for their souls: 'Twas Readiness
Case, and a sad cry he made, God has forsaken me, and the Philistines are upon
me: and the Devils, the Devils will be about such men if they do not repent.

Christ paid dear for their souls, but those that buy sins with damnation set
but little on them.

Let none of us fool our selves; sin will prove a deadly downfall if we do not
rise by faith and repentance: in the mean time it never did any man good, nor
never will says the Practice of Piety.

It Is one thing to sin, and another to be overcome or taken by sin; but it is
sad if that which comes from God should daily cause us to sin against and
forget him; yet high fortunes lead some men to sad lives and fashions; yea,
they think it strange to say their prayers, or do as others do, when they are
newly come out of France, and exceeding modish; Oh! my Son, my Son said old
Fox, when he was just come from beyond Sea; sure this is not my Son Samuel in
this habit. But it is a less sin, or less danger to offend Christ or one of his
servants, than to be offended with Christ or his Church; yet the least wrongs
his own soul; Prove. 8. 36. and private ones have public shame many times; yet
it is a lesser danger to commit a sin we are inclined to delight in, than really
to delight in the sin we commit: Yet Fools will be Fools, though they go to
Hell for their folly: But a wise man, and a good, will weep and sigh to see a
foolish laugh and sin.

Come, Gentlemen, forsake it before it forsake you, or you be forsaken of God.

It Is a hard thing to lose him and all for nothing; or to look up to Heaven
with one Eye, and down to the World and Vanity with another. And it is hard to
commit one sin alone. Sin hangs to sin, as spawn to spawn, and links to links
in a Chain. It Is easy and hard to tell but a Lie; something or other will tend
or go along with it.

Come, throw up the purpose, and throw up the habit of all sin, and you may do
well enough: The pleasures of it are but short. If they say to you, as Jael
said to Sisera, Turn in, my Lord, Turn in to me; fear not; I will give thee
Milk or Honey: But it proved a Nail in his head. And I will leave one in your
Conscience, said that brave Bohemian Martyr John Husse; and your sins will
prove as a Nail there, if they be not washed away. And no man living can give a
reason why he should commit the least against a good God: Yet some that are
very wise, will give a reason for all other Actions: But, In good Troth* and,
By Faith and Troth, are great sins in Gown-men and Divines; and Drinking,
Joking and Drolling, will make them lose ground, and not be reverenced. 'Twas
pious, holy Preaching, strict and blameless living, got their first Estimation
in the world: And nothing else will ever keep it up. God's Servants are called
his Sons and Daughters, 2 Cor. 6. 18. And Ministers that Preach to them, or the
World either, should be very holy: Be holy, for I am holy, says the Lord, 1
Pet. 1. 16. Lev. 11. 44. They are called Suns, Stars and Angels, Rev. 1. 20.
and Shepherds, that must watch or give account for the blood of our Souls, if
they miscarry: But I am free from the blood of all men, says St. Paul, Act.
20. 26. And I will seal with my blood what I have preached, said that brave
Martyr, John Philpot, Latimer: And he did so to the astonishment of all
beholders; for it abundantly gushed out at his heart after he had been a long
time in the Fire. Well, good men and good Ministers have the Law, Love and
Grace of God in their hearts, and do for love of Souls more than money: Neither
do they love chopping and changing: But a great Benefice is a great temptation,
even to a good man; but to many is certainly a great sin in Giver and Receiver.
But I will live and dye with my Flock, as I should, Joh. 10. v. 4. said a good
man. And it is more honor to be a heavenly, holy, zealous Preacher, than a rich
Drone, a thousand times. Some Shepherds have for little so much, that the great
Shepherd will owe them nothing at all: Others have so little for their
faithfulness, that he will give them a Crown. It Is better for Ministers it
should be said, Why are not you and you provided for? than, Why have such and
such so much? As he nobly said, I had rather it should be said, Why does not
Cato 's Image stand here? than it should be said, Why does it stand here? But
Preachers of Faith, must live by Faith, as well as other men; and the world to
come will make amends for all. Come, Thee and I shall be happy when King Jesus
comes, said one to his friend. And they that fear the Lord speak often one to
another, Mal. 3. 16. And then shall the Righteous shine as the Sun, in the
Kingdom of their Father, Matthew. 13. 43. But many men make work for Repentance;
and many Ministers never put them seriously upon it as they should, for want of
Skill, Love, Faithfulness or Zeal. The Lion sent for the Wolf, and asked him if
he had not a stinking breath: Yea, Sir, said he; and for that he tore him in
pieces; and sent for the Dog, and asked him; no, said he; it is very sweet; for
that he tore him in pieces; and sent for the Fox, and asked him, who cunningly
told him, He had a great Cold in his head, and could not smell; and so saved
his Skin. It Is a brave thing when neither fear nor flattery moves men nor
ministers from saying what they should, few love Reproof, fewer who reprove for
love of souls, and fewest of all who sincerely love the reprover: Am I your
enemy because I tell you the truth? says Paul, Gal. 4. 16. and we may say the
greatest sin timely repented of is pardonable, but the least never repented of
is damnable in its own nature, it being against a holy law and a holy God; and
Oh! how would Mr. Fowler that brave Redding and Thames Street preacher set out
this! It Is for us to bring our will over to God in every thing, and not his to
us in any thing contrary to his Law and holy Writ whilst the world stands;
Religion is an inward thing, takes off from self and creature; but gives to God
reverence in the heart; and the heart and sum of religion is to love God and
our Neighbors sincerely; but Religion can do more for Learning than Learning
can for Religion, can bless and sanctify that, but that can do nothing but
adorn, dress, and set it out with words, which yet is a most excellent thing;
And oh! that all the preachers in the world were practisers and learned too;
but more especially the former; yet says God, I will set thy Sons, O Sion!
against thy Sons, O Greece! Zechariah 9. 13. And the quarrel shall never be
ended.

There is naturally so much Scorn, Malice, Enmity, and Disclain, in Learning
against the Simplicity, Purity, and Holiness* of the Gospel, that the corrupt,
unsanctified mind of man cannot but disdain it, as the Pharisees and Sadduces
did the preaching of Christ; the Greeks and other learned men Paul, counting
him a babbler, and the cross of Christ foolishness 1 Cor. 1. 23. and he a mad
man, and Christ a publican and sinner, for being a Physician to them, and a
preacher frequently among them; and therefore a sociable life is better than a
solitary Monkish one in a cell; Christ did eat and drink at great tables with
publicans and sinners, but he was still as a physician to heal and reprove sin;
and Dod the old Puritan minister of Northampton was so holy and good at this
and had that reverence and presence with him, that a young gentleman at Sir
Anthony Cope's could not eat half his Dinner for fear of swearing before Dod;
but he is dead, and gone to Heaven, and so may the Gentleman too, for ought
that we know. God calls at several hours; but it is better to go to Heaven
alone, than not at all; or to Hell with half the world. Let me be happy, it
matters not how many then be miserable, yet Balak's Balaam wished that he might
dye the death of the Righteous; and thought of death, another world, and
eternal Joys, Numb. 23. 10. And so some will send for good men at their death,
which they care not for in their life, to come and pray, and secretly desire
that their last end might be like unto them. Yet the world is apt to think of
Religion clean contrary to what it is, says Lord Bacon, and to make it
madness; a thing that dulls spirits, and is apt to make Ladies look wrinkled
before their time; depresses them of Joy; and to be looked upon by Wits and
Sparks as some of God Almighty's Shee-fools, and must never see good or merry
days more. Alas! alas! said he, What a miserable mistake is this! Can there be
better and greater Joy, than Joy in the Holy Ghost, 1 These. 1. 6. unspeakable,
and full of Glory? And can there be better Sorrow, than such Sorrow which is
accompanied with Joy, and Works, or Repentance unto Salvation, never to be
repented of? 2 Cor. 2. 10. Can there be better cheer than a good Conscience?
Ask Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, if the Ways of God be not good: Ask all the
Prophets, Patriarchs, and Apostles, if the Ways of God be not Good: Yea, the
Martyrs, and the Prisoners: I am in a Bed of Roses, says one. And I am in my
Paradise and Palace with God and his Angels, said the Noble Marquess Galliaces,
in the Dungeon. And I have Christ, who is, was, and ever will be all in all,
says another; All in Health, Life, Death, and Sickness, and Eternity too, to
Men and Angels: Yea, ask your own Conscience when the Curtain's drawn, and the
Candle out; Which is best, a house of Prayer, a house of God, or a Playhouse?
or a days sinning, or a days communion, and waiting on God and his Worship?
Come, fie, pish, you are mad, if you prefer the pleasures of sin before Heaven,
or sinful pastime before Heaven's Joy. Oh ye vain and foolish young Ladies! do
not think of being Religious when you have nothing else to do; but lay aside
the Lute and Citern now, and dance a little in your thoughts to Death's Pipe;
and think you hear his Night-watch, and where you shall be a hundred years
hence; and what when you have lain a month or two in the Grave; and this will
help you to be good betimes. Young Ladies might be merry enough, if they would
be good and godly, and begin betimes, and have better Husbands too; for good
men will love good Ladies; especially when they are young and good too: And we
hope some are left, though but a few, that look for Heaven and Religious Wives.
True Recreations are in another world: All the pleasures of this are either
sins or snares, if we use them too much: But moderation may be; and there is a
time for every thing under the Sun, Eccles. 3. 1. excepting sin; and for that
you shall hardly sin in moderate mirth and pleasure: But to make Recreation a
toil, and the Business of your Life, is folly and madness: What! nothing but
hait, hait up and down, as some do, and never to a Lecture; or scarce on the
Lord's Day in the forenoon? I said of Laughter, Thou were mad, says Solomon,
Eccles. 2. 2. It may be they sing too, which had need to weep and pray. But let
not your high Fortunes make you too high-minded: For they that think themselves
better for Gold, Pearl and Lace; and are proud, and disdain others, which yet
is very natural; and we are all apt to fall this way; which makes us worse than
Gold Slaves, and Servants to it; says Anselmus. But remember what you shall be
in the Grave, especially in Hell, if you should go there: And wanton thoughts
and plumes will all fall; but humble great ones, are good ones indeed; and God
will exalt such, and make them higher than they are; and men will love them
more. Humble Great ones are double Great ones, and twice as honorable as
others of the same rank: And therefore let not great Fortunes make you proud
and unfortunate; yet a grain must be allowed for Old Adam's sake, whose
Children we all are.

And it is easier in a minister to preach down Adam in others, than to beat it
down in himself, wife, or children; but sound men should love sound preaching;
the best wine is best, and so is the best preaching, and that that comes from
the heart goes to it; so say and so do is good in a good minister, some speak
more briefly than they live, as Cato told his friends; but do not say I will
and don't: we read of two Brothers; one said he would do his Fathers will but
did it not; the other said he would not but did it; and that was better than
the other. When prayers and praise go together, and the heart with both, God is
well pleased, and the music sweet; when the tongue does not go from the inward
motions; the Pharisee said, I thank God, and I do this, and I do this; but the
poor Publican said, The Lord be merciful to me a sinner, Luke 18. 13. and he
was justified, hand and tongue went together; some forget to pray, because they
have too much of the world, and some neglect because they want it, and must
work early and late, but it is a misery and a sin not to be excused in any; pray
if you be rich, and pray if you be poor, or else thou say in effect, God, I
have nothing to do with thee: don't say you forgot it; for that is a
soul-careless trick, few forget their dinner, but it is better to fast all day
than not to pray in a day, and a little meditation does well; what ask of God
and not think what to ask, or why? they who have most grace have something to
ask, and they that have least have something to ask, but they that have none,
have all to ask; for they want Christ, pardon and every thing; yet God will
give them his holy Spirit if they do but indeed ask it: Luke 11. 13. Ask then,
and down upon your silken knees, O ye great Lords, Ladies and others, that you
might have his holy spirit and his heavenly will revealed in and to you so as
to do it, live it, and love it; it will be your glory, heaven and happiness for
ever if you do so indeed; but if you slight him now, you will need him, miss
him, and want him hereafter, and never find him. It Is a mercy to have many good
things in this world; but what a misery is it if you should have all, and be
said, Son, Remember thou in thy life time had thy good things, and likewise
Lazarus evil things, Luke 16. v. 25. therefore he is comforted, and thou art
tormented: A Scripture that made Gregory the great weep, or tremble, as himself
said, for fear to think lest he had received his good things. Come, Heaven's a
sweet Cake; but who would eat it beforehand, or take Earth for it? Sweetmeats
are the last dish, but it will be sour sauce if you lose all in conclusion.
Read to the end of the Chapter. Come, come, a godly Life is best, and best for
you, great Countesses, and you Ladies more elderly, and young ones too; though
you be not twelve or thirteen: Let head and heart remember that, and what
Angelical things you would be, if you would begin betimes, as the best did.
Josiah, Samuel, Timothy, John, were all young Saints, and the most eminent in
the Book of God; the last leaned in Christ's bosom; dipped his Pen and his Quill
in the Love of God, and strows all his Epistles with it.

But how frail a thing is man (and you are the same, or more: The Venice-glass
is soonest broke;) that sings, walks, talks, and yet is gone as a Tale, Dream,
or Watch in the night! And he is no man that does not need mending more than a
Watch, and oftener winding up to mind Heaven and heavenly things: For this world
is bad, and too bad too; mend one, and make it better; mend one, and draw
twenty; great persons do always so; for many follow them and their Examples,
which way soever they go. When Magistrates hearts are toward God, the People's
are so too: And when Magistrates hearts are toward the People, the Peoples
hearts are toward them. Love begets Love; and they that do not love, will not
be beloved. Love comes down; good Parents, Magistrates, Masters and Landlords
too, if they be kind, and love them beneath: But the Love of God is the best
Love of all; therefore Magistrates, Ministers and People, should all love him;
and you Ladies, which are uppermost in this world, will be lowermost in Hell if
ye forget him. True Love seeks how to please him: If you love your Lords much,
that is well, and it is but your duty; but if ye love Christ less, that is ill;
but if God not at all, he will never care for you, nor what becomes of you,
when Honors have done with you, and you with them. It Is better to love God
now, though you do not see him, than not to love him and never see him. Love
God, and he will love you with that Love which has no end, nor never shall
have. Your Lord and your Husband will love you no longer after a little time;
but Christ will love you with an everlasting Love, and draw you to himself; if
all things in the world are not good enough for you and your Souls. If you love
God, he will give you himself, the World to come, and his Son for ever; and
your Soul shall live, because he lives; and that is most where it loves; and
shall be quite with him after a little while, if it love him most. But oh!
Love, Love, whither go thou to love, when thou go from God, Christ, and
Self-happiness. Self-love and happiness is to love God, and God above all: Whom
have I in Heaven but thee? or whom do I desire in comparison of thee? says
David, Psalm. 73. 25. There was a time when you desired your Lord much; but did
you ever desire your Lord Christ a little? if you did, do it more and more; his
Name, his Nature, his Person, and his Promise is altogether desirable, and
shall be remembered in all Generations, and praised for ever and ever, Psalm. 45.
17. Therefore his Love is better than Wine, Cant. 1. 2. Yea, the wine of
Angels; for this is that that they drink in the perpetual beholding of him; and
you shall see my face too, says God, if you be his Servants, Rev. 22. 4. But
do not think of Reigning with God in Heaven, if you be not his Servants here;
and your present Heaven is nothing to that. Lift up your Eyes and look upon
them, and he that made them; all your Heavens are but Dreams and Smoke. What
art thou that forgetst the Lord thy Maker, Isa. 51. 13. that has stretched
forth the Heavens, and laid the foundations of the Earth? and art afraid of a
man that shall dye, and be as grass? Look unto Abraham, says God, ver. 2. And
if Abraham's bosom be desirable, his Faith and Obedience is so too.

Some have the art to make much of little, but few to make God all as Abraham
did when he told him I am thy shield and exceeding great reward, Genesis 15. 1.
and it is not in the power of any but he who is all and fills all in all, to
give to all abundantly what their Souls do want; Herod would give half his
Kingdom for nothing, but St. John Baptist's head pleased the young Gib well
enough; Matt. 14. 8. He preached repentance, and Christ forgiveness; a Prophet
may instruct us, but Christ only makes us to profit by the ministry of the
word; Oh! pray, pray that hearing you may hear, Rev. 2. 11. Matt. 13. 14. and
know him whom to know is life eternal, John 17. 3. though knowledge may be
without Grace, yet true Grace is never without knowledge; and I know my
redeemer lives says Job, 19. 25. and that you have not the love of God in you,
says Christ to the Jews, Joh. 5. 42. and his satisfaction for us is more the
ground of our justification before God, than his sanctification in us; and yet
Christ in us too, is the hope of glory: Oh! let him live in your hearts by
faith, 'twill breed joy, and feed joy, a true Christian tastes that here, which
will be unspeakable hereafter; here his joys enter into us, hereafter we shall
enter into it; and the sweetness of divine love passes all knowledge, men
taste a little here, but ravishment is for fruition: be industrious till you
come there, for the industrious man is not at leisure to sin; heavenly
meditations keep the mind busy when the hand is at plough or play: but play
days, said Bishop Latimer, are the Devils working days; and he has more sin
in one of them than in a whole week besides: Religion allows not much idleness,
for he that will not work must not eat by Paul's rule. Admire God in your
calling and out of thy calling, and the fields will give you room and objects
enough for meditations and contemplations if you be not vain and airy, but you
must take care, and watch thoughts, or else you will loose God in your mind, which
is the honey in the way: Oh! what is the bough, the bush, and the green, but a
little thing he sends every spring; a little Daisy has a fine head, but all the
world cannot make it, nor one hair white or black. Oh! admire God in his works
which are past finding out, says David, Psalm. 19. 1. if they were happy which
stood before Solomon as the Queen of Sheba said, Luke 11. 31. what are they
that shall stand before the Lamb, to admire him to Eternity, Rev. 7. 15. Come,
begin heaven on earth, admire him here and you shall hereafter in a sinless
state; here we sin and serve him too, not in sin, that is the Devil's work, as
Christ said, John 8. 44. there we shall be without sin, and never fear, nor
offend; but love him to all eternity, and be beloved of him, Saints, and Angels
too; Oh! may you dwell among them for ever, and that is best of all; but the
best of and whole of this world is not worth one half quarter of the world to
come; That, that makes heaven full of Joy is; that it is above all fears; and
that that makes hell so full of terror is, that it is below all hopes; the
certainty, perpetuity, and eternity of it never ends, nor the worm dies says
Christ, Mark 9. 44. Isa. 66. 24. sin breeds death, and the worm feeds upon the
Conscience in remembrance of it, so that a man or woman's own hell comes much
from and lies most in themselves, by the alwise providence of a just and wise
God ordering of it so; see and buy Mr. Strongs little book upon the Worm of
conscience; we grieve, and take care that little ones be not sick and dye of
the worms, but seldom take good and sound repentance our selves through the
blood of Christ to kill the worm to come. Oh! that sin may dye, and Christ live
in all your hearts, grace increase, and that decrease; grace is glory begun; a
bud, beam, and slower of it, and a grain of it is more worth than all the
hypocritical knowledge in the world; and through justifying grace, scarlet sins
and sinners are made whiter than snow by the blood of Christ, Psalm. 51. 2. and
the true preaching of the holy Gospel is the breaking of one heart, and the
binding up of another; the hard is to be broken, and the bruised is to be bound
up; much of the Minister or good Physicians skill lies in this: Oh, how good is
it to have such a good Physician; or to look out if we have not! and if it be
good for us to draw near unto God by prayer; is it not so for him to draw near
unto us by Preaching Peace, Pardon and Forgiveness to us in the Ministry. Yea,
it is this way that he speaks Peace to his People. And every faithful Minister
has as much the Power and Key this way as another. For it is but in Preaching
and Believing: They tell us of the Love of God, and we apply and believe
through the Blood of Christ; and this applying and believing, becomes our
Remission and Forgiveness. Oh! believe God is a giving, and a sin-forgiving
God, and has two places, one above, and another below in a broken heart; and if
he dwell with a penitent, what may not that heart get by him? And for old and
past sins, it is our Heaven to be rid of them; for they would have run us to
Hell, if we had continued in them. When God is in the heart, and sin out, we
might well say, The worst is gone, and the best is come: praise be to him that
makes the change, and is unchangeable in himself, Mal. 3. 6. and in all his
Attributes. And he is a Fool that says, There is no God; or, That the Love of
God has not wonderfully appeared to Mankind by Jesus Christ, Titus 3. 4. Oh!
be rich in Faith, and you shall never be poor in the world to come: And they
that are most full of that, have most comfort and experience too, of his
Faithfulness. Faith is the Life of the Soul, and Christ is the Life of our
Faith. Oh! live upon him, and you shall live with him, and never dye, Joh. 17.
24. Do not be offended with him, nor they that are his. Great and many waves
have beat upon the Rock, but the Church remains still, and the Gates of Hell,
Sin, Death and Despair, nor Enemies neither, shall ever prevail against it,
Matthew. 16. 18. Some set their hearts upon God, others against the Church; but
those that maliciously persecute good men, will find ill Rewards. Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou me? Act. 9. 4. It Is a mad thing to be furiously mad
against good people. If ever we expect to be happy, we must be holy, and hate
no man for it; for without it no man shall see God, Heb. 12. 14.

But the Devil tempts men to sin, and then to despair, and good men are full of
doubts after sinning: Oh! begin to live to God before you dye; and a man may
live, sin, dye, and be utterly lost in a little time; some thieves rob a long
time, others are quickly taken and executed, but Gods patience is great toward
most men; yet some have but little sport for their souls; airy Sparks ride post
and quickly sin away their time, but fair and soft is too fast to hell and the
Devils; and death would not be half so troublesome were it not for sin; but he
that leads a good life, takes a great deal of comfort with him to his end, and
that death of his frees his soul for ever; nothing can trouble in heaven,
unless it be want of living, or more living unto God on earth; and nothing can
be more terrible in hell than to think there was a time they might, but it is
past, it is past; Simeon and Paul desired to dye, Luke 2. 29. David and Hezekiah
desired to live, 2 Kin. 20. 3. and it was well enough for them and his servants
any way, For whether we live or whether we dye we are the Lords, Romans 14. 8.
for if indeed we be so we can never dye amiss. A wise man never looses his
wisdom though he be a sleep, nor a good man his grace, though he be caught away
before he is aware; yet it is best to do as Job says, Wait for our Change, Job
14. 14. Death is never the nearer, nor farther off for minding, or not minding;
and young men have it at their backs, as well as old men in their faces; yet
the familiar rising of it in our thoughts, will make it less strange, and more
welcome when it comes; if it be from trouble to comfort, and not from light to
darkness, and the dungeon of darkness, where light shall never be. Oh that
sinners would prevent weeping, by weeping; and their own misery, by becoming
God's Servants! as a good Lady said. If he be not a better Master than any, do
not serve him; but if he be a better Master than all, as certainly he is, oh
serve him, serve him day and night, O ye Lords, Ladies, Gentlewomen and others!
and ye would quickly be content so to do, if ye did but taste how gracious he
is; and how much better to you than you deserve: Sin and Sinners desert is
Hell: Oh! It Is mercy to us all to have any thing on this side that, and all
misery to be there.

Though we came into the world alike, and must go out, yet let us not live
alike, but say you as Joshua did, I and my house will serve the Lord, Joshuah
24. 15. Oh! hazard your credit if it be counted discredit to fear him, for it is
not unlovely or not commendable to love, what is most lovely, Christ and his
ways; Great peace have they that keep his laws, Psalm. 119. but ill company
will commit evil for company; and two or three men were lately stabbed by their
companions who haunted ill houses; but good company never hurts, and the house
of mourning is better than the house of feasting many times; And Bishop Cranmer
was troubled for but drinking at Queen Mary's court, because she would not
hearken to the Gospel nor his Counsel in King Edward*s days; and good men
should every where savor of the fear of God, be much in self-tryal, and in
self-denial too, and to take up his cross when Christ lays it before him, as
that good man did at the stake for his counsel or sticking to the word of God,
but the worst of Christ or suffering for him is better than the best of all the
world. Paul and Silas sung in the Stocks, Act. 16. 25. so did Hampshire Philpot
in Bonner's Cole-house. He learns Christ well that learns to follow him through
thick and thin. He left his life to save us, we find ours in following him.
Christ dyed to give Life and Repentance, Act. 3. 26. And no man ever repented
for serving him in a just Call. A wise man provides for his Family, and saves
his Soul by his Skin, or Sufferings many times. Some have bewailed the day of
their Birth, as Job did through the greatness of his grief, chap. 6. 2. None
the day of Conversion, or Marrying unto Christ, or Trials for him, when he
stood by them. And this is a sweet Promise, I will never leave thee, nor
forsake thee, Isa. 49. 14, 16. Isa. 43. 1, 2, 3. But the Forsakers of God shall
be forsaken.

Short Sayings of the Wise, or Q. Mary 's Martyrs.
WIll you now, most Noble Ladies, take a few short and serious Sayings from the
Wise; pore and ponder on them but a little, which are as Goads and Nails,
fastened by the Master of the Assemblies, that is Christ, says Solomon,
Eccles. 12. 11. for it is meant of him.

And this was a good one of Sir Francis Compton, Oh! keep close to Religion,
for that brings Peace at the last. Hold out Faith and Patience, says Boulton.
It Is but one Style more, and we shall be at our Father's House, said a brave
Martyr. When shall I be dissolved, and be with Christ, says another, Lo, here
I am, let them do with me what they please; but don't you meet me at the last
Day, in an unconverted state. Said a good Man to his Children in a dying Hour,
and they weeping for him, he cried, What a deal of do is here to let a Man die,
and go Home? And so with Heavenly Counsel, fell a sleep. Perkins converted
Northampton Boulton: And Brave, Learned, Famous, Bishop Usher, desired to Die,
as honest Mr. Perkins, that old Puritan Minister did, calling upon God for the
pardon of all his Sins, both as to Commission and Omission. Policarpus being
pierced with a Sword, issued so much Blood, that it almost quenched the Fire,
and amazed the Beholders as it were: At his Apprehending, they hurried him so
fast along, that they broke his Leg, crying, This is the Father of the
Christians; and the despiser of our God, said the Heathens. And says Ignatius
the first Martyr, as we read of: When the Beasts have ground me and my Bones
with their Teeth, I shall be as God's White Bread; and I will worship none,
none but the God of Heaven, Said another. And none but Christ, none but Christ,
said that brave English meek, and humble Martyr, John Lambert, when half burnt
by Henry the 8th, for denying the real Presence in the Sacrament. The Soul is
in the Body, but not the Body: So Believers are in the World, but not the
World, said another. Doctor Hall said, The English Clergy were the Worlds
wonder: He means the Painful, Pious, Preaching ones; and would some were in
again, that were long ago put out. Tertullian, wrote Day and Night, and made an
Apology for the Christians, and complained, That too many Lawyers did almost as
much hurt as Soldiers: But Pliny told the Heathen Emperor, The Christians did
none, but prayed in the Night, and sung Hymns to one Jesus; but they would not
Lie, Steal, nor commit Adultery, but did visibly eat together: But the
Soldiers wearing all Crowns of Laurel upon their Heads, for a great Victory
which the Emperor had obtained; A private Christian wore his upon his Arm,
saying, It did not become him, nor his Fellows, to be Crowned with it. Head,
Heart, Feet, Milt, and Liver, are all failing, said a great Divine. Arise, make
ready, mount my Soul, and go away; I saw not you, my Children, when you were in
the Womb: God that fed you then, will be a Father to you when I am gone, and
you shall not want. I am weary of Sin, and willing to Die, God's Mercy is
unspeakable. One Saturday Morning, especially, I found the power of Religion,
and the certainty of the other World, and Divine Eternal Love; Glory, glory to
the Deliverer of my Soul, out of all doubts about it. Origin was fastened by
the Neck with an Iron Chain, his Feet in a pair of Stocks, till he died; Paul
and Barnabas differed a little, Act. 15. 39. But in Heaven Luther and Zyngulus
will agree together (said a Father) though here in some things they could not.
Come, Oh sweet Jesus Christ! thou bright Morning Star; come, I desire to be
with thee, said Holland. Zepheron was said to be the Blind Man's Eyes, and the
Lame Man's Feet. And the Lady Warwick, gave both Books, Clothes, and Money for
the Schooling, both in England and Wales: And a great Countess that lives in,
or near the Strand, being lately in the Country, was informed of a very poor
Family, which she went in Person for to see; and finding the poor Woman Sick
and Weak, having two or three Children in the Bed, and no other Boulster but an
old Straw Cushion, she presently caused a good Caudle, and saw it made for the
Woman; gave her a very considerable sum of Money, and ordered Boulster, Bed, or
Blanckets for the Children; and all this is good Charity and Humility too: And
to breed up poor ignorant Country Boys to know God and themselves, is the
same, which shall be endeavored in your School-House; yea, it is as much as to
feed the Blind and Lame, and in some sense rather more; for the Soul is better
than the Body. To teach a young Bird to sing, or young Boys to fear God, is the
best thing in the World.

The Light of Europe is the Gospel, and the life of Preaching is for holy
Living; but Persecution brings Death and Life too; Says a Father; Death in one
hand, and Life in the other, it kills the Body and crowns the Soul. I have
Lived long, and Sinned long, says Beza, but now I am willing and would fain
Die to be rid of it, giving God thanks for six things: And some signal Mercies
every good Man may find, besides his daily ones. Basil, being profer'd Honors
to Apostarize, cried, They were changeable, being threatened with Confiscation
and Banishment, he cried, he need not fear, he had little to loose; and for
Banishment, Heaven was his Home or Country, as for his Death they might do it
with one blow. You are mad, said they; Ay, and ever will be, for Divine Love is
to me a never failing Treasure. Francis Junus was converted, with that Text, In
the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, John 1. 1. And by this,
through the tender Mercies of God, was I brought Home; and when a Prodigal, and
a great Sinner comes Home, there is great joy in Heaven. Perkins converted a
poor Thief, that was going to be Hanged thus; he wringing of his Hands upon the
Ladder, Perkins asked him, why he was afraid to die? Oh, said he, it is the other,
the other Death I am afraid of. Ah man! come down a little, and see what God's
good Grace can do for thee, and by Prayer so opened the nature of Sin, and then
of God's free Grace and Mercy by Jesus Christ, for the Pardoning of it, that he
made the man both cheerful and willing to Die. He wrote many Books, and
frightened Sinners, with that word Damn, and yet would open the Blood, Death,
and Merits of Jesus Christ, in the Preaching of the holy Gospel. Most wise Men
desire the Lawyer and Phisician, to deal plainly with them, and Lords and
Ladies should not love a Flatterer in the Pulpit; nor a Chaplain that is not
Holy, Harmless, or Exemplary in the Family. Ambrose boldly reproved Theodotius
the Emperor, and used to say, Men embrace Gold, but refuse Salvation; put off
that on any account, and catch at good Bargains. The World is a Bird in Hand:
Heaven is one in the Bush; like the Frenchman, that would not leave his part in
Paris, for Paradise. Theodoret said, The delight of the Soul is to know its
Maker. And the great learned Earl of Leicester said, Man differed in nothing
more from a Beast, than in his Reason, especially Heavenly Reason, Wisdom, and
Understanding. Hierom would not live in Rome, because it savoured so much of
Paganism, and sinful Pleasures; hardly of any true Christianity, which is an
inward Mystical, and outward mortifying Thing, and indeed, it has not been long
free from one Wickedness or another; Ignorance, Uncleanness, Persecution,
Idolatry, Sodomy, and therefore well may she be called the Mother of Harlots;
who takes Money and Rent for so many Stew-Houses yearly, and it is as good
Money to him, as the best which comes into his Cosser: But if my Father, or
Mother, Brothers, Sisters, and Children were all before me weeping, and hanging
on me, to keep me in a sinful Life, I would despise them all, and fling them to
the Ground, says Chrisostom; And when the Empress threatened to Banish him for
preaching against her Covetousness, he told her, I fear nothing but Sin; As for
Banishment, the Earth is the Lord's, and the fullness thereof: If she cast me
into the Sea, or saw me asunder, I will remember Jonas and Isaiah; if she Stone
me, or cut off my Head, I have Stephen and John the Baptist, for my Companions.
Plato praised God for three things:

First, That he was a Man. 2. That he was born in Greece. 3. That he had seen
Socrates.
You may thank God that you are Lords and Ladies, as well as Men and Women; but
you may thank God that you are Christians, and such as have the holy Gospel,
and may hear it preached every day if you will: But especially that you have
the holy Bible in your own Tongue, which does reveal the Will and Mind of God,
concerning Man and his Salvation. A Mercy, which the poor Italians and
Spaniards, and other whole Countries are debarred of; or if they have the Bible,
it is so very very scarce and corrupted, that the poor People are more Blind
and Ignorant than Bats and Beetles, all running after lies, whilst we enjoy a
Goshen of light, through the blessed Bibles, in our own English Tongue, which
cost so many men's lives: May be you never minded scarce what the Bible cost,
for having it Bound, Translated, and brought into the English Tongue; it is
probable the Papist brought Lord Cromwell to the Block upon this account, and
the Monks fat houses, more than any thing, who cried, going to the Scaffold,
Though our Breakfast be sharp, yet our Dinner will be very sweet. And how many
have been burnt for Translating of it into English!

Sure we are bound in conscience to love the names of these men, especially
such as love the Word of God, and live to it; yea, and almost the very ground
of Smithfield where they were burnt. If Papists give KETCH money for a Bit of
Rope, why should not we love the Name of Smithfield, where those brave ones
suffered, but especially above all the Cross of Christ; that is to say, the
Sufferings that Christ endured on the Cross for us, or any Sufferings that he
brings upon us for his own Glory, and our Good.

Now his Suffering is called the Blood of the New Testament, Matthew. 26. 28.
Mark 14. 24. And he himself is called the Testator, Hebr. 9. 16. And the Holy
Bible is the Will and Testament of this Testator, wherein he gives us the love
of God, pardon of Sin, Eternal Life and Glory.

O it were better, better, a thousand times, the Pope should take all your
Lands again, than the Holy Bible, or last Will and Testament of Christ in the
Four Evangelists more especially contained; but it may be his Conscience would
be content to swallow both.

Yet Bellarmine loved Whitaker's Picture, Because he was a brave Scholar, and a
learned Heretic, as he said. But the charity of their Church is for burning
them alive; yea, sometimes after they are dead, John Whitcliffe 41 Years after,
because he denied the Popes-Pence.

And Mrs. Marter was dug up at Oxford, and buried in a Dunghill, because her
Husband had been a great Preacher in Queen Mary's time. But I am neither
ashamed to live, nor afraid to dye, said Austin: And Holy Marriage is better
than proud Virginity a thousand times; and how can we merit, when we can
neither will good, nor do good? (says he) My heart is in Heaven, and I would
fain be there also: For thy Sabbath, O Lord, shall be my Eternal One, into thy
Hands I commend my Spirit: And so he died.

O Christ, said another, I depend upon thee, and resign up to thee.

Farewell Riches, farewell Honor, said the great Earl of Somerset, unhappy in
his good nature; I would rather suffer and lose all, than speak a wicked word
against God. I suffer now for sins past, said he in his penitent frame in the
Tower. I have a great many, and but a little time to repent of them, said a
Knight; and he that succors the Poor, lays up safely for himself.

As Clouds darken the Heaven, so Intemperance does the Mind; as Winds and Waves
sink a Ship, so Uncleanness, Gluttony, Drunkenness, do our Souls: Yet we should
never hate the Man for his Vice, nor love the Vice for the Man, but with pity
do what we can to save a Sinner* A good Mariner would be loath to have any of
his Passengers miscarry, or a good Shepherd, who takes care of all his flock,
John 10. 2.

The Papist don't love the Name of John Fox, because he wrote the Book of
Martyrs: And their Priests do so scoff and jeer at Martin Luther, because he
wanted a Wife forsooth, as they say, as if it had been a great sin to follow
God's Word, and holy Ordinance, instituted in Paradise, and honored by the
first Miracle that Christ ever wrought.

O filthy Fools to despise that when God has ordained a Mate for every
Creature, Fish, Fowls, Birds and Beasts, Worms and creeping things, put an
instinct in Nature, to love, choose and mate with one another; (1 Timothy 4. 6.
Doctrine of Devils. If an Angel from Heaven preach any other Gospel, let him be
accursed, Gal. 1. 8. If any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the plagues that are written in this book, Rev. 22. 18. And yet you thrust
out one of his Commandments:) so that if the Priests be Men, they must needs
desire Natures enjoyment and privilege as well as all creatures; but they
themselves need never want one, who have so many Wanton Women, and Confessions
to be whispered in their ear every day, with money to boot. But Bugentius says
of Martin Luther, I did once think him the most pestilent Fellow that ever
lived upon the earth, but now what shall I say of him, all the World is in a
seminarian darkness, and he has found the light; and I am more instructed in
one little Page of his, than in all Thomas Aquinas 's great Library. And he and
Luther Translated the Bible into the German Tongue, and when they had finished
it, kept a day of Thanksgiving every Year to their lives end.

But John Jewel was a brave Man too, almost as ever writ, but the Queen said, I
doubt I shall spoil him, when I have made him a Bishop, for a Preacher: Yet he
continued, saying. It well becomed a Bishop to die in his Pulpit. But when John
Fox was poor, he had a Purse of Gold and Money sent him, he knew not from
whence; would some Body would do the like for Highgate, to help up our new
School-House which is just a Building, and will have a brave Green by it; but
the Duke of Richmond was Fox's great Friend and Patron, yet he would say, he
forgot some Lords and Ladies, to remember poor People that truly fear God; and
yet great Saints are little and poor in their own Eyes. I am less than the
least of all Saints, and the greatest of all Sinners, said St. Paul. And if I
were equal, says Deering, in holiness to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and had the
purity of Angels, yet I would confess my self a Sinner, and expect no
Salvation, but in Christ, and from his Righteousness: And if I had the
excellency of all Creatures in Heaven and Earth, I would still rely upon that;
for as there is but one Sun for all the World, so there is but one Communion
and Savior for all Saints. Oh! that I might live more to him, or die to go to
Heaven, says a Father. He is my Life, he is my All, said another. And whenever
thou art tempted to Uncleanness, Lust, or Pride, consider what thou art already
by Sin, in respect of its desert and punishment, and what thou shall be in the
Grave, when thou have lain a Month or two there, and thy thoughtful Lusts and
Plumes will quickly fall; as the Soul is the Life of the Body, so God is the
Light and Life of the Soul: When the Soul departs, the Body dies; and so the
Soul dies too when God leaves it: for when he forsakes us, he utterly
overthrows us, and gives us a deadly Wound. But Anselmus says, That Christ died
for Elect Men and Angels; For Men, that they might rise out of Sin; and for
Angels, that they might not fall into it. And if they should go to Hell, that
do not feed the Hungry, and cloth the Naked, Mat. 25. 42. what will become of
them that oppress the Poor, and take from them? Prove. 14. 31. Ezekiel. 12. If want
of Charity shall be Tormented, what will become of Covetous Oppressors? One
said of Gregory the Great, That he was the worst and the best Bishop, worse
than all that went before him, and better than all those that have succeeded;
who used to be troubled when he read these words, Son, remember in thy
Lifetime, thou receivedst thy good Things, Luke 16. 25. A great Preacher said
in his Lifetime, he was often tempted to despair, but God gave him strength to
overcome it: But the same subtle Serpent in my Sickness, would have persuaded
me, That my Labors and Fidelity in the Ministry had even merited Heaven; but
blessed be God that gave me strength to overcome him, by bringing these two
Scriptures especially, What have thou that thou have not received? 1 Cor. 4. 7.
yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor. 15. 10. These Texts
made the Enemy get away ashamed; Fools go laughing to Destruction, as well as
to the Correction. But do any thing with me, says another, so thou save my
Soul; I had rather be in Hell without Sin, than in Heaven with it. Says
Anselmus, Ambition is a gilded Misery, a secret Poison, and an hidden Plague;
the Parent of Envy, the Original of Vice, and Moth of Holiness.

Oh the unhappiness of great Men, said a great Earl in the Tower, that know no
other end of their Greatness, than to abuse Inferiors! Young men, middle-aged,
and old, are often surprised by Death, and Ladies too, while the Gown is making:
But this is life eternal, to know thee the eternal true God, and Jesus Christ
whom thou have sent, John 17. 3. And, said a great Scholar and English
Gentleman, (now in being) I have studied almost all the Learning in the World,
and find more mystery in that short saying of Paul to Timothy, This is a
faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the
World to save Sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 15.

But when we consider what was done to John Huss of Bohemia, and Thomas Cranmer
Bishop of Canterbury in Queen Mary's days, we have just reason in this Land to
fear the worst. Dr. Cranmer was discourst about the lawfulness of King Henry's
Divorce from Queen Catharine his Brothers Wife, and his judgment was, The King
would do well to consult the Word of God, and take able Divines counsel.

This advice was hearkened to, and he sent for by the King, and so dispatched
away to Rome, to dispute it with the Pope, and the Earl of Wiltshire Ambassador
along with him: And it is said when they both came before the Pope, the Pope
put his Foot out for them to kiss; the Earl's Spaniel (being young, fond and
foolish, and it may be trained up) caught him by the Toe; but however Cranmer
and the Earl both scorned to kiss after him; and presently after his return, he
was made Archbishop of Canterbury, and soon after the Proverb grew, Do him but
a shrewd turn, and he will be your Friend as long as you live. And some say by
Nature he Was a very Charitable Man; I wish you Ladies, for your own sakes,
were so too: But we have no reason to complain, nor I hope never shall against
your most Noble Sex.

He was the freest from Passion of any man in the World: But when they had set
him upon a high Scaffold in Queen Mary's days, to make his Recantation for
owning the Protestant Principles. Dr. Cole having made a sad Popish Sermon to
him to take his Death patiently, and to rejoice in his Conversion, as he called
it.

After Sermon, Cranmer said, Pray you good People pray for me, who have
contrary to Truth, and my Conscience, for fear of Death, Signed a Writing of
Recantation, for which this Hand of mine shall be first burnt; holding it up
with many tears running down his cheeks; and at the fire he held it out, that
all might see it first burnt, never stirring of it but once to wipe his Face,
to the grief of many Beholders, in the Year 1556.

But for John Huss, he was burnt in the Year 1415. There being a Council about
three Popes, the Cardinals being divided after Alexander the fifths Death; to
which Council the Emperor commanded John Huss to go, giving him his safe
conduct to pass and return; in which journey he preached, and set up letters of
his judgment in every City.

At Constantine he was sent for by the Cardinals, imprisoned, and tied up to a
Rack, against a Wall; many Nobles and Lords of Bohemia petitioned for him, but
that would do no good.

But a good thing it is for great Lords to appear on the behalf of poor
Ministers, when imprisoned and persecuted for the Truth; yea, there were fifty
of them in Bohemia that stood up and petitioned for him and Jerome of Prague. A
brave pattern for all Ages, when the Truth is suffering; but yet all signified
nothing: For when the Council had degraded and condemned him, he kneeled down,
saying, Lord Jesus forgive them, they know not what they do. In degrading of
him, they pared off the hair so close, that they even cut the skin off his
Crown, the Council having made an Order, That Faith was not to be kept with
Heretics.

Going to be burnt, they put upon him a Triple Crown of Paper, all painted over
with ugly Devils; which when he saw, he said, My Lord Jesus did wear a Crown of
Thorns for me, and I will this for his sake.

And now, said they, We do commit thy Soul to the Devil: (We believe it was in
the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, for usually such
wickednesses are so pronounced) But I, said John Huss, do commit it to my dear
Redeemer, Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

As he lifted up his head, the Crown of Paper fell off, but they put it on
again, saying, Let him be burnt with his Masters the Devils.

And as they tied his Neck with the Chain, he smiling, said, This I suffer for
Preaching of the Holy Gospel, singing three times with a loud voice, Lord Jesus
Christ, thou Son of the Living God, have mercy on me.

He told them at his Death, God would raise up out of the Ashes of the Goose
(for so Huss's Name signified in the Bohemian Language) in 100 Years, a Swan in
Germany, whose Singing would affright all the Vultures: which was exactly
fulfilled in Luther.

But for Jerome of Prague, he was so bold and zealous, that he wrote certain
Letters, which he sent to Constantine to be set up upon the Gates of Noblemen
and Cardinals; showing the purity and clearness of his Faith and Doctrine for
which he was accused, and that he was ready to come and make good all he had
Preached.

His great Crime was, he had thundered against the ill Lives of the Monks and
Friars; but being taken into custody, he was sadly used, fed with Bread and
Water, and tied almost Neck and Heels together, so that he sell sick. After a
long time they required him to subscribe, That John Huss was justly put to
Death; which he did partly for fear of Death, and hoping to escape their hands:
But he soon repented, saying before the Council, All the Sins he ever committed
in his Life, did not half so much gnaw and trouble his Conscience, as that
pestiferous Sin.

When they had condemned him, he said, I Cite you all to answer it within 100
Years before the most High Judge of Heaven and Earth; in the mean time I leave
a remorse and nail in your Consciences.

He was bound to the Image of John Huss, and had a Paper-Crown of red Devils
painted on his head.

When the Executioner went to kindle the Fire behind him, he bade him do it
before his Face, saying, If I had been afraid of Death, I had not come to this
place, for I had opportunities to escape; but this Soul of mine, in burning
flames, Oh Christ I will offer thee.

And for his Oration that he made before the Council, it is said, That no
Tongue is able to express that learned Elegancy and Braveness of his Speech,
showing what the Best of Men had still suffered in all Ages.

Latimer was a zealous Papist, till Mr. Blinny converted him, and then he was
made Bishop of Worcester; he preached twice a day, and in Queen Mary's days he
was laid up in the Tower.

As he rode through Smithfield, he said that had groaned for him many Years. He
used to pray for three things.

First, That as God had made him a Preacher of his holy Word, that he might
seal it with his Blood, if called thereunto.

Secondly, That God of his Mercy would restore his Gospel to England once
again, once again. Shall we not prize it?

Thirdly, That the Lord would preserve Queen Elizabeth, and make her a Comfort
to the Comfortless Realm: At his Burning, the Blood run out of his Heart so
abundantly, as if all the Blood in his Body had gathered there, according to
his Prayer; which struck the beholders with Astonishment. In the Fire, he
stroakt his Face with his Hand, crying out, Oh! Father of Heaven, receive my
Soul; and so died, 1555. Ridley, in the same Year, writing to Latimer, he said,
Good Father, assist me with your Prayers; for unless God stand by me, I shall
play but the part of a white liver'd Knight: At his hearing he stood bare, till
the Cardinal named the Pope, and then he put on his Cap. A Woman weeping for
him, a day before his Suffering, he cried, Ah! Mistress, I see you love me not;
it appears you will not be at my Marriage to Morrow (meaning his Burning) nor
will be therewith contented, A Friend offering to watch with him, he cried, I
intend to go to Bed, and sleep as quietly as ever I did in my Life: At the
Stake, he cried, Into thy Hands I commend my Spirit; Lord Jesus receive my
Soul. But the Fire being pressed down by much Wood, he desired for Christ's sake,
to let the Fire come up to him; his lower part and Legs were quite burnt before
his upper part, so that he fell into the Fire. He going one day by Water, the
Thames, being very rough, and the Watermen being a little fearful, he cried,
Fear not, you carry one that must be Burnt, and not Drowned. John Bradford, was
persuaded by Booker, to enter upon the Ministry; and he modestly complained of
his want of Parts and Learning: Oh! says Booker, be not discouraged, if you
have not fine Manchet, give them Barley Bread. But being in Prison Condemned,
one comes running to him, Oh! Mr. Bradford, I bring you heavy News, you must be
burnt to Morrow, I saw your Chain a buying: At which, he plucked off his Cap,
saying, I thank God for it, the Lord make me worthy; lifting up his Eyes to
Heaven, saying, Life with God's displeasure, is worse than Death; and Death
with his true Favor, is better than Life. Oh, England! repent of thy Sins,
repent; beware of Idolatry and false Preachers, and take heed they don't
deceive you: A good Prayer. And to another, he said, Be of good comfort, my
Brother, for we shall have a merry Supper with the Lord. He was so Charitable,
that in a hard Time, he sold his Jewels and Rings, to relieve them that were in
Want: He was so humble, that he often subscribed some of his Letters, The most
miserable hard Hearted unthankful Sinner, John Bradford, a painted Hypocrite.

Rowland Tailor was a great Preacher, and would often visit the Poor and Sick,
and relieve them too, when Bedridden; but being threatened by the Bishop's
Pursurvant, he said, I know my Cause to be so good and just, that I will appear
before them, and to their Beards, resist their false Doings; I fear not their
Lordly looks, nor the Proudest of them all. Going to the Fire, he told the
Sheriff. I shall deceive a great many, being a fat Man; for, said he, I thought
the Worms in Hadley Churchyard must have had me, but now I see I must be
Burnt: Giving one or two Leaps, and said, God be praised, I am almost at Home:
But the People cried, Oh, dear Father, and good Shepherd, God help and succor
thee, as thou have done us many times, and our poor Children; and so they went
weeping all along the Streets for him: To whom he said, I have preached to you
God's Truth and Word, and now am going to seal it with my Blood. In the Flames,
he cried, Merciful Father of Heaven, for Jesus Christ my Savior's sake,
receive my Soul: And so departed.

A Popish Doctor told Tindal, (disputing about Religion) That it were better to
be without God's Law than the Popes. Tindal replied, I defy the Pope and all
his Laws. He translated the Testament into English, but the Popish party
exceedingly raged, saying, There were a thousand Errors in it: And for his good
Works he was Imprisoned, Condemned, and Burnt; but at his Death he cried, Lord,
open the King of England 's Eyes.

John Hooper, who Died 1555, being writ to by one out of England, to send him
some News; he said, He had no News to send him, but that the last News that you
will hear of me, will be, That where I have taken most pains to preach the holy
Gospel, there I shall be burnt to Ashes. But one persuading him to Fly; No,
says he, I will live and die with my Sheep. But being sent for to London, he
was Committed to the Fleet, where he was miserably used, and even poisoned with
the common Ditch; but being Sick, he cried and called for help, but the Warden
said, Let him alone, if he die, it will be a good riddance: But a Knight coming
to him, told him, Life was sweet, and Death bitter: To which he replied, Death
to come is more bitter, and Life to come more sweet. But being proffered his
Pardon going to the Execution, he cried, If you love my Soul, if you love my
Soul, away with it: He prayed at the Stake, Jesus, thou Son of David, have
mercy upon me, and receive my Soul: And wiping his Face with his Hand, cried,
For God's sake, let me have more Fire. And a third Fire being kindled, he was
yet alive; but the last words he spoke were, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit.

Lawrence Saunders, meeting with one Pembleton, another Minister, said, I have
many fears if I should come to Suffer, or Die for Religions sake. What need you
fear, said Pembleton, you have but a lean Body, but I have a fat one? yet you
shall see the last gobbet and Grease of mine melt or fry away, rather than deny
Christ, or the least of his Truth, which I have professed. Mr. Saunders being
called, a while after Imprisoned, Tried, and Condemned, cried, Welcome Christ,
welcome Christ, welcome Eternal Life; and the Fire being kindled, sweetly slept
in God, sealing the Truth with his Blood: But faint-hearted Pembleton, for all
his Self-boasting, played Apostate in a small time.

John Rogers might have escaped, and had many Motives, a Wife and ten Children,
and had Friends in Germany, if he would have gone; he helped to Translate the
Bible into English, but Bonner sent him to Newgate amongst Thieves, and
Murderers: And being Condemned, he desired to have his Wife admitted to see
him, but that would not be granted him by any means; but being told in the
Morning he must Die that Day, O, said he, if it be so, I need not tie my
Points: (being Dressing of himself) But a Pardon being proffered him if he
would Recant; he utterly refused it. His Wife then, with nine Children, and the
tenth sucking at her Breast, were brought to him, but this sorrowful sight
nothing moved him; but in the Flames he took his Death with wonderful Patience:
The Sabbath before his Death, he drank to Mr. Hooper, who lay in a Chamber
beneath him, bidding the Messenger tell him, That by God's Grace, never little
Fellow stuck closer to a man than he would to him, supposing they should be
both Burnt together.

Thomas Blinney, in the Year 1531, had been in Prison, and was drawn to Abjure
and Submit himself, after which he fell into terrors of Conscience for almost a
Year; being through God's Mercy restored to Comfort, he resolved to lay down
his Life for that Truth which he before had Renounced, he Preached openly, and
complained of himself for his Fact, bidding them beware they did not trust in
Flesh nor Friends in matters of Religion, but was seized by the Bishop, and
Imprisoned: Being told of the Fires heat, O, said he, God's Spirit will cool
those Flames; and I am sailing through a boisterous Sea, but shall shortly be
in Heaven, help me with your Prayers; and was Burnt, calling upon Jesus, with
his Eyes and Hands lifted up.

John Frith, was Prisoner in the Tower, and had many Conflicts with the
Bishops, and at last condemned to be Burnt, and delivered over to the Mayor and
Sheriffs, and in Smithfield patiently endured the same; the Wind blowing away
the Fire, made his Death very long; but by God's Grace, he bore it as though he
felt no Pain; he much helped Tindal in Translating the New Testament.

And thus have I given you, most Great and Noble Ladies, a little short brief
hint, of a few brave and famous worthy English Martyrs; there are Hundreds more
in Fox's Book which you may find, yea, Thousands more English and others;
surely we should love the Truth, and our English true Protestant Religion for
the Truths sake, yea, and a little for these holy Martyrs sake. And the God of
Heaven grant our merciful King may long Live, and such a Spirit never come
again.

For this is the sum, and substance of that Stuff we shall have, if we lose the
Bible, of which the Gold Legion has a Cart-load, which I here give you in a
score or two of Lines, as I found it written in a great Book, Translated out of
Spanish, and Dedicated to a mighty Princess, by an English Knight.

A great Person quitting all his fair Possession, and giving them to the Church
(as 'twas likely) turned Colliers Man, which labor brought Sickness and Death;
at which very instant, all the Bells in Rome rang out on their own accord, to
the astonishment of the Pope himself. A certain holy Monk, retiring into a
Wilderness house, 70 miles distant from any, 14 Years together, had a certain
Leopard, which came to him every day for his Meat, a long time together.

Gregory the Great, in a great Sickness-year, relates, that he saw many visible
Arrows come down from Heaven, and struck Men dead; yea, another saw it Rain
perfect Arrows and pieces of Stars. A holy Priest that went into a very Rich
Man's Kitchen, where was a great Dinner of Chickens, Capons and Feasants in
Dishes, which when the Priest saw, he bade the Cook uncover the Dishes, and
they presently became Toads and Serpents.

A certain Monk saw a little Bird in a Cloister singing very pleasantly; and
hopping out, he followed it to a certain Wood, where the Bird continued singing
for the space of two or three hours, as he thought; but returning to the
Cloister again, thinking he had been only a few hours, or half a day at most;
but being unknown, and searching of the Records, he had been absent from the
Covent 300 Years, when he thought he had not been half a day.

St. Antonius tells you of an ill Liver that he knew, was afflicted with
tedious Sickness, earnestly begged of God to deliver him, who sent an Angel to
tell him, he must lie so two Years, and then die, and go to Heaven; or else lie
three days in Purgatory, and from thence go to Heaven, willing him to take his
choice. He presently pitched on Purgatory, and his Soul went strait thither;
where he had not been one hour, but the Angel appeared to him there, and asked
him how he did; and that he was the same Angel that brought him the Message
from God, about his two years, or three days in Purgatory:

Ay, but said he, You are not a good Angel, for I have been here three years,
and you told me but two days. No, said the Angel, it is not one hour yet.

O pray for me, said he, that I may come out, and go to my sick Bed again;
which the Angel did, and the man was very glad he got into the world again.

St. Francis writes just such another Story, and God sent an Angel to him, to
know whether he would lie one day in Purgatory, or one year longer in his Bed;
but prayed hard here, and the Angel came and let him out before he had lay'n
one hour, and yet he thought his two days had been out, so great were those
Torments; and therefore what a cruel hard hearted thing is it, for People that
have money, to let their Friends lie there in Torment, when the Priest can so
easily get them out, if they will but pay for it! Ay, and what a devilish thing
is that of the Pope, to keep them there for money, especially if they be poor!

Gregory the Great, writes of Tarsellus's Sister being dead, cast forth a most
fragrant smell, beyond Ointment, Jessamy, or Roses; and that St. Hillarion did
the like for 10 months together.

A French Doctor in Paris wondering in his mind how God should make the Bodies
of his Saints to shine in the Kingdom of Heaven, had immediately his Feet so
transparently shining and bright, that he was not able to behold them with his
eyes, but to cover his head and them with the Bed clothes.

St. Anthony in one day past from Padua to Portugal.

St. Ignatius transported himself from Rome to Cologne, and to Rome again, in
less than two hours.

St. Francis, and St. Martinus, were seen lifted up in Prayer, to a very great
height, namely above Trees or Towers, or any Steeples, and continued praying a
great while, very visible to be seen.

A Gentleman of Noble Parentage became a Monk, and went on with that courage
and zeal, that at last he challenged the Devil, and bade him do his worst. The
Devil appeared, and fought in his own Cell, and made his nose and mouth bleed;
but with the noise the rest of the Monks came in, where he lay as in a trance,
but they carried him to his Bed, where he continued almost three days without
any sign of life, in which time, by the company of an Angel, who descended to a
dark obscure place, and saw a man sitting in a Chair, and certain beautiful
Women thrusting Torches in his mouth, drawing them thorough his body again, and
many strange things, which frighted the Monk, and he prayed the Angel to tell
him what it meant:

This miserable Wretch, said the Angel, was a Gentleman much given to Women,
and therefore the Devil torments him in the shapes of Women.

And he, said the Angel, that lay on the Gridiron rubbed with Salt, was a cruel
Lord to his Tenants.

Others had their Brains and Eyes beat out, because that in their lifetime they
would not see.

These, and such like Stories be in that Book, which is big and large, but has
not a Primer-full of Divinity in it, only a few moral rational things, mixed
with these kind of Lies, which they would teach men instead of the Scriptures,
and the Holy Word of God. And if such kind of Divinity shall be Translated and
Dedicated to agreat Princess, what stuff is there in France, Spain, Italy, and
other Countries, for which we may justly charge these two or three Scriptures
against them, and a hundred more, were we minded, who are Enemies to the Bible,
and the Souls of Men.

The first Scripture is this, They have forsaken me the Fountain of living
Water, and dug to themselves broken Cisterns, which can hold no Water, Jer.
2. 13. That is, they have forsaken the Holy Scriptures, which contain the
waters of consolation and comfort for all thirsty and desiring Souls after God
and Christ, and the saving knowledge of God and Christ in their Souls; and for
the broken Cisterns, that is, the deceitful, lying, cracked, unsound History
Books, of little Truth or Divinity in them.

And this is the very same which St. Paul speaks of in the 2d Chapter of the 2d
of the Thessalonians, ver. 11, 12. where he says, For this cause God shall send
them strong delusions, that they should believe a Lie. It Is but one Lie, all
their whole Religion; that is, one great, entire Lie, congealed, linked,
mass'd, and coupled together, by Time, Policy, Covetousness, Deceit and
Ignorance. And a strange delusion is sent them by God, ver. 12. who can and
does most righteously and often punish sin with sin; the Jews and Pharisees for
malicious accusing and persecuting Christ and his Apostles with blindness to
this day, and the Papist too, for abusing of the Word of God, and concealing of
it from the People, to believe Lies and Delusions; God suffering it to be,
because of the Peoples ignorance and willingness to have it so, not at all
caring for his Word, or receiving the love of, and Truths contained in it about
Jesus Christ and his pure Worship, full and infinite satisfaction to the Father
for our sins by his sufferings, all which they are willingly ignorant of; and
for this cause or sin of theirs, God has sent, that is, suffered Satan by
false, foolish Teachers, Books and Lies, to deceive them, that they might be
justly damned, for not loving, regarding, or forsaking the pure Fountain, that
is, the plain wholesome Word and Truths of God, but suffer their Priests to
forbid Meats and Marriages, which is the very Doctrine of Devils, says S.
Paul, 1 Timothy 4. 1, 3. and S. Peter, whom they advance above all, almost equal
with Christ, making him a Rock; or that the Church of God stands upon him, when
as he is no more than another, but says this against them, that Christ is the
Rock or precious Cornerstone on which all the Church of God and Believers are
spiritually built, 1 Pet. 2, 4. and how his Word is a more sure Rule to us, and
that we ought to take more heed to it, than if an Angel from heaven speak to
us, 2 Pet. 1. 18, 19. Gal. 1. 8. And says St. John, If any man add to that, God
shall add to him all the Plagues that are written in this Book, Rev. 22. 18. Or
if they shall take away any thing of this Prophecy, God shall take his part
out of the Book of Life, ver. 19. And yet you presume to alter, or take quite
away one of his Commandments. Read this, you poor well-meaning Papists.

The last and general Closing Letter, that is thus presumed to be offered.
ANd now most Noble, Great, and Right Honorable Ladies, Gentlewomen, and
others: It Is not many Weeks, nay, Days, since your poor Orator, Supplicant, or
Petitioner, was in his own and others apprehension, at the brink of Death, and
the Grave; and so, many Days together: But God was pleased by Doctor Cox, my
alone Physician, to raise me up again. And though in my Sickness, my Life
seemed to be flying away like an Eagle in the Air, and the World, and the
Things thereof, to be passing away as if they had never been, yet, yet, I did
secretly resolve (if God should raise me up) to perform, or finish, this poor
little scribled (and yet serious) short, brief, and harmless Pocketbook, with
the Ladies Letters; which yet I humbly entreat your Noble Ladyships to peruse,
and view over and over, in some serious leisure Hour; persuading my self, that
though your Breasts are full of Piety, Virtue, Wisdom, and Virtuous Thoughts,
yet you may find some, if not many brief hints of Truth, Religion, and Virtue,
well worth your pious Thoughts, or Memory; for as Eternity is a very serious
thing, so every Sickness that brings one near the Borders of it, or from the
Borders of it, should make us very serious, and to Speak and Act as those that
have been near another World, though not in it. And truly, if I were no more,
nor longer to be in this, than just to finish these few Lines, and humbly, on
the bended Knee, to present them to your Lilly Hands, and so to lie down and
die at your Feet; yet would I seriously do it in the way of Prayer to your
Honors. First, That the short Hints might be weighed, and weighed, again and
again, in your most strict, serious, and retired Thoughts* whether they be
really so as they seem to be hinted to you; and if you find them indeed so to
be, by the standard, Golden Rule, Reed, or Touchstone of God's holy Word; then
not to slight and say, Pish Fool; or cry, This simple Man will never a done;
for it is of more concern than so. Truth is Truth, and serious Things must and
will be serious, whether we mind or count them so or no. And this I assure you,
if ever you come, as come you must, to a Fit and Bed of Sickness; I mean, a
through Sickness that your life seems in your own and others thoughts to be
flying away; you will be then thinking of your immortal ever-living and
never-dying Souls: And it may be in a dowsed manner not knowing well, where you
are, or what Day it is; whether Day or Night: The Watch Candle being in the
Room, the Curtains drawn, little or no Company to speak to you, because of the
high Fever, or other Distemper, but yet in that hour (it may be) Fears,
Doubts, Conscience will be working, and secret Questions will be working in
you, whether you must and shall Die, now or no; go to the Grave, leave your
golden Hangings, Rooms, Honors, and Relations, going to the silent and be seen
no more, whilst it may be, are just in the middle of some great Design or
other, as your Supplicant was in these Papers, or setting up of your little
Charity-School at High-Gate: But be it what it will, every Design must break
off, if Death really come with, and at the end of, your Sickness; and then no
remembrance of you or yours, will be after a very little while. Oh, Madams, for
our Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and your own Souls, I beseech you mind a little
the house of mourning, Eccles. 7. 2. which he says it is so good to go to; and
the Bed of sickness before it comes, and especially what to do before it comes;
that its coming may not be as a damp and death to your spirits when it comes.
It Is said the Cockatrice never kills, but when it sees us before we see it. Oh
be beforehand with your Sickness, and prepare in Life for Death, and Health for
Sickness! and assure your selves, you may as well persuade your selves, that
Michaelmas will never come, because April is, and May is at hand, as that
Sickness and Death will not come, because Health, Wealth, Honor, and all about
you, is now as you would have it; and more comforts seem to promise to you
also, from a Son or Daughter's great Match or Purchase, which you are just a
making: But yet Michaelmas comes in course, and Winter too, when one Flower
will not be left. But now against the height and heart of that, and all that is
cold and killing unto Creature Comforts, set a never-failing good God aside;
make him your portion, and with the Prophet Habakkuk say, Though the labor of
the Olive should fail, Flocks, Herds, and the Fruits of the Field yield no
increase, yet I will rejoice greatly, I will joy in the God of my salvation,
Habbak. 3. 17, 18. But this must nor can ever otherwise be, but by true Faith
in the Love, Life, Blood, Death and Merit of our Lord Jesus Christ, with holy
walking in the sanctifying graces of his Spirit, six or seven of which you may
eminently find I shall hint at in the first Sermon our Lord Jesus Christ ever
preached, Mat. 5. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. First, blessed are the poor in Spirit, for
theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven; by purchase, purpose, promise, and eternal
preparation, Mat. 25, 34. Come ye blessed of my Father, and receive a Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the World. Oh blessed Poverty, that
enriches men with the Kingdom of Heaven! This poverty of Spirit is nothing else
but a sensible want of Grace and Christ, and every good thing in our selves;
through the discovery of original sin to us by the Fall of Adam, whereby we go
out of our selves as knowing our selves to be lost, by the purity and
spirituality of God's most holy, inward, piercing Law, the ten Commandments, by
which we go out of our selves, as knowing our selves to be most miserable,
wretched creatures, and lost in our selves, seeing no hope, nor help any ways,
but in Gods mercy thorough Christ; and this brings us to be like the poor
Prodigal or Publican, Luke 18. 11. to cry, Lord be merciful to me poor lost
sinner, and grant that I may find Christ, and pardon for my Soul; and by
Prayer, Reading, Hearing, Preaching, Meditating, make out after him in an
humble, persevering way. And this is the Poverty to which the Kingdom of Heaven
belongs, that is the Gospel with all its Promises, and everlasting Kingdom of
Glory too; which God grant you and yours may all find.

But secondly, ver. 4. Blessed are all they that mourn; for they shall be
comforted: that is for sin, in-dwelling of original and actual sin, and upon
that account cry out, like great St. Paul, O wretched man that I am, who shall
deliver me from this body of sin? Romans 7. 24. Mark, Ladies, Sin has a Body, yea
in Paul it had, though he was as great and experienced a Saint and Servant of
Christ as ever lived; that is an in-dwelling in every part of our Body, yea and
Soul too, says Perkins and Bishop Usher. Indeed both, and every part of both,
is miserably defiled through Adam's Fall; and this in-dwelling of sin in us,
makes good men mourn, and hinders them also that they cannot do what they
would, and makes them too too often do what they should not, Romans 7. 19. I hope
you Ladies and Gentlewomen find it so. And this is the true cause of their
mourning and complaining; But blessed are they that mourn, upon this so good
and gracious an account, for they shall be comforted; first here, 2dly
hereafter; and a thousand promises are made to them in the Holy Writ, Comfort
ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord. Speak ye comfortably unto Zion, her
Warfare is accomplished, her Victory is ended, her Sins are pardoned, Isa. 40.
1, 2. And blessed is the man whose sin is pardoned, Psalm. 32. 1. This real
blessedness is beyond the tongue of men or Angels to set out, and oh that it
might be yours, and that you could mourn and secretly weep, and now and then on
the knee drop a tear in the Closet upon this account, that you have lived to
your selves, your Lords, Pleasure, Sin and the World so much, and Christ so
little! God would certainly comfort you with a thousand secret Soul-comforts in
the pardon of Sin, the sense of his love and assurance of Christ to your Souls;
and this assure your selves shall be your last and lasting comforts, if you be
Sin-mourners and Forsakers of it.

But, Thirdly, Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the Earth, Mat. 5.
4. Yea, and God too in the Earth: For thus says he that is High and Holy, I
will dwell with him that is of a meek and lowly Spirit, Mat. 11. 29. May this
high and holy One dwell and abide in all your Ladyships Hearts, Souls, and
Families; may he secretly be your Comfort Day and Night, but you must be meek;
and I am meek and lowly, says Christ. Humility is a great Grace in a great
Person, and well becomes your most Noble Sex, yea, and Lords too; but this
Meekness is a quiet submissiveness of Grace in your wills to the Will of God,
in all his Providence to you and yours; whereby you say as it were with holy
David, If he has pleasure in me, he will bring me back again. And with good old
Ely, It is the Lord, 2 Samuel 3. 18. And with Paul, and his Friends after weeping
for him, The Will of the Lord be done, Acts 21. 14. And like our Lord Jesus
Christ in his Agony, about passing of the bitter Cup in his Bloody Agony, Not
my Will, but thy Will be done. This is a brave frame indeed for Ladies on the
Knees, to hold up the little Hands, kiss the Rod quietly, and patiently submit
to all the Providence, Losses, and Afflictions, because God as a Father, sends
them for good and holy ends to his Servants, best known to himself; and if you
patiently take them as his Children without Murmuring, then are you Meek,
Patient ones indeed. It Is the sturdy Oaks that resist the Winds and are split,
but the gentle Reed yields: And stubborn Sinners quarrel at the Providence and
Will of God, but good Men and Women submit and serve some divine design or
other; and this is the way to inherit the Earth. That is to say, All your
outward Earthly Comforts, namely, Honor, Riches, and Prosperity, yea, Heavenly
and Inward too. Does God take one Child? Be quiet, lest he take another. Does
he take one part of your Estate, or Comfort? He can take another; yea, He can
take all, as he did Job's, and restore it again, Blessed be his holy Name, Job
1. 21. Oh! labor to be Meek and lowly, and he will lead and guide you through
the Wilderness of this miserable, wretched, sinful, and bewitching World, in
all your plentiful Enjoyments, till you come to himself in Glory.

But, Fourthly, Blessed (says our Savior) are they which do hunger and thirst
after Righteousness. What Righteousness? God's, Christ's, Abraham's, Isaac's,
Jacob's, Jews and Gentiles, Faith's Righteousness; and the fruit of this
Righteousness is Sanctification. By Righteousness here is meant, that which God
imputes to Men or Women, and makes Sinners complete and happy in, which is
indeed his Son's Righteousness, or that which is often called his Son's Active
and Passive Obedience, as God and Man in our Nature, to the whole Will and Law
of God. Christ, you know, did all the Will of God in a way of Obedience,
Submission, and Observance to his holy Law, and so fulfill every Branch of it to
a tittle; for had he failed in one, he could never have Justified us, who do
still come short in all, as we are in our selves. But he suffered all the Will
of God too, in a way of satisfaction for our Breach and Breaches of this his
holy Righteous, Perfect, Good, and Heavenly Law, given by God himself unto
Moses in the Mount, Exodus 19. 20. Yea, as he fulfilled this, and satisfied for
the Breach of it; so he did the Levitical, or Ceremonial Law also; for he was
Circumcised and Baptized for us in both, and all which he stood as a Man, or
God-Man, and Surety for us, or as one in our Room, Stead, Place, or Company.
And as he fulfilled the Law for us in the Active Obedience of his Life, so he
did all the Law required, or God ever desired of him in his Will to do, and in
his Death, he satisfied the Justice of God for all that we, or Adam ever did
against him, or his most pure and holy Law. Yea, he did it to the full,
uttermost, and over too, whereby he has, as it were, an infinite Overflowing,
endless Merit in his Hand, to show the Justice of God in our behalf, why he
should deliver us from Hell, and all the Curse and Curses of the Law; which
dreadful ones, you may read in Deuteronomy. 27. 15, 16, 17, 18. which implies Eternal
Death to all out of Christ; for it says, Cursed is every one that continues
not in all that is written; and not only so, but to give us everlasting Life
and Glory. Pray Ladies, mind this seriously, for it is this Obedience of Christ
and his Righteousness, and that, and that alone, which being imputed, reckoned,
and conveyed, or given unto us, becomes before God in a way of strict Justice
and equal Righteousness, our Justification, and so eternal Salvation; and you,
nor none of you, nor any living, can be saved otherwise, and therefore well
may, and well ought you, for to mind it. And how Isaiah, and Paul says, He was
made Sin, and died for us, as well as Born for us, that we might be made the
Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21. Now this Righteousness is called
God's Righteousness, Christ's Righteousness, Abraham's, Jews and Gentiles,
Faith's and the Saints Righteousness, Rev. 19. 8. And first, It is called
God's, because God contrived and designed this Way of justifying Sinners from
Eternity; therefore says Paul, God was in Christ reconciling the World to
himself, not imputing their Sins, 2 Cor, 5. 19. Secondly, It is called God's
Righteousness, because Christ who was God as well as Man, wrought and brought
it about; yea, he alone brought it about: And therefore it is said of the
People, There was none to help, and mine own arm brought salvation, Isa. 63. 5.
Then what an injury and dishonor do the Papists unto Christ, in bringing so
many He and She-Saints in to share with him; now the work's done?

Thirdly, it is called God's Righteousness, Romans 10. 3. because it is imputed,
reckoned, implied, and discovered to us by the holy Spirit of God, working
Faith in our hearts.

But then secondly, it is frequently called Christ's Righteousness, because
Christ, as man, in our nature, stead, room, and place, wrought it for us, not
Christ and Peter, not Christ and Paul; the Disciples all slept, and Christ
prayed, and sweat alone, bore all the wrath, and hung upon the Tree for us;
bore our sins in his own body; dead, buried, and rose again for us; well may he
be called, as he is, the Lord our Righteousness, and the Justifier of the
Ungodly.

Thirdly, it is called Abraham's Righteousness, he being the Father, first and
most ancient Saint of God, and he to whom the promise, next Adam, or rather
Eve, was most eminently made; and therefore says God, In thy Seed, that is in
Christ, shall all the Nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22. 17. Not that it
is indeed his any more than Isaac's, Jacob's, or any other Servant of God's
that shall believe the promise, as he or they eminently did, Isa. 51. 1. We are
bid look unto Abraham; do, and go unto the same Pit as he did, namely, Christ
for Righteousness: (for as God justified him, so, just so and no otherwise will
he do by you, and all us that do believe in him.)

Fourthly, it is called the Gentiles Righteousness; that is, the Heathens and
Ungodly Sinners, such as were without God in the World, and did worship instead
of the true God, Moloch, Bell and the Dragon; Mars, Venus, Jupiter and Apollo;
and the Devil in an hundred Idols, consecrated Trees, and Four-footed
Creatures. Now to these miserable Gentiles was Christ promised and sent, and he
shall bring forth judgment unto the Gentiles, Isa. 51. namely Christ; that is a
right understanding to worship the true God that made Heaven and Earth, which
Papists yet so much continue in, by worshipping Pictures, Shrines, Images, and
the consecrated Host, a little Half-farthing Wafer; and for which not doing,
they have burnt and murdered thousands. A thing most cruel on one hand, and
irrational on the other; yea more than the Persians worshipping of the Sun a
thousand times, for that is a glorious creature, though it be but a creature.
Now from these Gentiles we came, and are of their Race; yet by Christ and his
Righteousness, which is called the Gentiles, we are made near, though otherwise
Strangers and Aliens.

But fifthly, as it is called God's, Christ's, Abraham's, and the Gentiles
Righteousness, so it is called Faith's Righteousness also, Romans 10. 6. That the
Righteousness of Faith might come unto the Gentiles, Romans 9. 30. And it is
called Faith's Righteousness, first because by Faith we see it, lay hold on,
and believe in it, to the saving of our souls. Faith is an eye, that sees
Christ and his Righteousness. Faith is an hand, and receives Christ and his
Righteousness. Faith is an ear, that hears Christ and his Righteousness when
it is preached on; And all my Sheep follow me, says he, and I give unto them
eternal life, and they shall never perish, Joh. 10. 28. For with the heart man
believes, says St. Paul, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.
What Confession? namely this, That God has raised Christ from the dead, and
made his life and death a Righteousness for poor sinners, which alone is the
ground of their justification, and eternal salvation in the highest Heavens
also. And for this, and this alone, and denying Mass, Purgatory, and Works of
Supererogation, and for denying the Popes Infallibility and Supremacy, have
thousands and thousands been massacred and murdered in the Christian world; but
when did any Protestants put any Roman Catholics to death, merely upon the
account of their Religion? or how very few have they been? Thomas of Becket,
Bishop of Canterbury, was knocked on the head by 3 or 4 Blades at Court, for
quarrelling with the King, or interrupting of the Laws; and somebody else by a
just Law hanged, for a Gun intended against a better and much greater King; and
for this one is Sainted, and the other may be too in a little time: But Faith
and its Righteousness teaches us none of these, but to submit to Kings, and all
lawful authority, that we may live peaceably and quietly under them in all
righteousness and honesty, Romans 13. 1.

But sixthly, this Righteousness is called the Saints Righteousness; that is,
all sanctified men, women and children, and Righteousness in the world; for a
Saint is nothing else in a strict sense, but a man or woman truly fearing God;
and a little of the true fear and grace of God in the heart, makes any man or
woman in the world so in the account of God and the holy Scriptures; for it is
not Notion, Gifts, Parts, great and humane Learning, but saving truth that make
a Saint. And all the humane learning in the world, says Hintius, will not
rectify the crooked nature of man; as instance Socrates and Aristotle, the one
being a covetous wretch as ever lived, and the other keeping a common Strumpet
for his Lust. But a little saving grace will bridle men from all sin, when bare
humane knowledge cannot; nor all the Brass, Tin and Copper in the world, make a
dram of Gold; nor all the common gifts, parts and wit of men, which I speak not
in the least against, no not in the least, but reverence it, and them that have
it; yet, I say, it is grace, and the sanctifying grace and Spirit of God in the
heart that makes a Saint, and whoever has any thing of that more or less; for
some have much more and some much less than others, yet whoever has the least
sanctifying measure of the Truth in his Heart, is a Saint and Servant of God,
be he Noble or Ignoble, High or Low, Rich or Poor, Learned or Unlearned; and
for this, see these Texts, or Scriptures at your leisure, Phil. 1. 1. Col. 1.
2, 12. Ephesians. 4. 12. Chap. 3. 8. Heb. 6. 10.

And therefore if any fine young Lady, Gentlewoman, or others, have but a
little love to Christ, the Word, Ways, Things, or Servants of Christ, she may
be a Saint as well as the greatest; they were called at the first Disciples,
Brethren, 2 John 1. 2. Jam. 1. 2. Christians, Acts 11. 26. Saints and
Believers, Acts 5. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 12. And we are now lately called Protestants,
from the seven Princes of Germany, protesting against the Pope's Supremacy, but
are indeed the true real Catholics, because we hold the Universal truths which
were from the Beginning, are, and shall be so to the Worlds end; the main of
which, is the Worshipping of God in and through Christ, and loving Him and his
Son for ever. But many beyond Sea are called Lutherans, Calvinists and
Hussites, for following those great Lights and their Doctrine. But now this
Righteousness of God, Christ, Abraham, Jews, Gentiles, and Believers is called
the Saints, for two or three Reasons. First, Because it is this that makes them
so. Christ's Righteousness is our Justification, and Sanctification too before
God, and it is that and his holy Spirit sanctifying of us, which makes us
Saints in the Eyes of God, and before Men in this World too; take three
distinctions, and they will end 20 disputes about this Point,
for Christ justifies us before God by his Blood, Life, and Death. Faith, that
is the object of Faith; Christ justifies us in our own Consciences, so that it
is not so much Faith in a strict sense, as Christ by Faith Justifies us and
that too. And indeed, Faith being imperfect at the best, needs a Christ for
Justification, as well as other Graces, though it still shows us Christ as in a
glass, for our justification, and good Works which are really so, and the
fruits of God's Spirit, namely good Works, these do justify us before Men: And
therefore (says Christ) let your light so shine before Men, that they may see
your good Works, and glorify your Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 5. 16. And
says St. James, Show me thy Faith by thy Works, and do not tell me so much thou
have it, but let me see it by thy Works. So that to God we must plead the Blood
of Christ, and nothing else, and to our Consciences, show the Blood of Christ,
and witness all to others by good Works and a Godly Conversation; and this is
the Saints visible and invisible Justification.

And now, had I the Tongue of Men, or Angels, 1 Cor. 13. 1. I could never
enough set out the Blessedness, or Blessednesses of Men or Women, that do
Hunger and Thirst, that is, Long, Love, and secretly wish and pray for day by
day this Righteousness; and to be found in it, namely, this of God and Christ,
and the sanctifying graces of his Spirit, for they shall be satisfied, yea,
they shall certainly be satisfied in the discovery of it, and present comfort
also; yea, in the everlasting wearing and enjoyment of it in the highest
Heavens. For as Kings Cloth all their Yeomen in their Gold Embroidered Coats.
So Christ the King of Kings, does spiritually Cloth the Souls of all his; and
by virtue of this, They shall shine as the Sun, in the Kingdom of his Father,
for evermore, Mat. 13 43. Yea, all his Rich, and all his Poor, and all his
Gifted, and all his Ungifted, that hunger after it. Here one has his Silken
Suit, and another his Thredbare Habit; here one has their Holland Shifts, and
fine Laces, others want course Linen; but Time shall pass, and Time shall
come, when all wants shall be done away, and small Gifts, and no Gifts scarce,
shall be equally happy with the greatest, for all shall everlastingly shine as
the Sun in the Righteousness of Christ; which is the Blessedness here hunger'd
after, which is the White Linen, and the Wedding Garment, so often spoken of
in the Revelations, Rev. 19. 8. And that which Paul would so feign be found in;
Counting his own Righteousness but dung and dross, in comparison of it, Phil.
3. 8, 9.

But, Fifthly, Our Lord and Savior goes still on with his Blessings, saying,
Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy, Mat. 5. 7. And the
merciful Man, will be merciful to his Beast, says Solomon. And now, Noble
Ladies, give me leave to plead with you a little, from this good Text, The
Mercies of God are dear and tender Things, the choicest chiefest things in
Heaven and Earth. We have nothing to hang upon Living, or Dying, but the tender
Mercies of God in Christ, which he proclaims, and shows to us, Exodus* 26. And he
was with Joseph, and showed mercy in the Pit, Isa. 39. 21. Prove. 11. 17. And, A
merciful Man (says Solomon) does good to his own Soul.

And if you will show a little to some 30 or near 40 poor and fatherless Boys
now in your School at Highgate, you will shine as lights before men, and your
candle shall be on a hill, and not under a bushel, which Christ bids you do;
and in doing of it, do good to your own, so says Solomon, Prove. 11. 17. and in
this, and doing something for it, you will to yours.

But you will say, You have ways enough, and need not a new design for Charity:
Oh! but you can never have too many ways, nor do too much good in the world;
and if it be new, it is the more pity that so many brave Noble English Ladies as
there be that profess the true Religion, and are Religious also; that they have
not done some public thing for the honor of it, as well as old Sutton, when
you see so many burnt to ashes for the Gospel, and that Religion which you
profess. Oh then do a little, eminent, and something that may have a little
notice taken of it, for the honor of their Lord and Master, Religion, and your
own also! all which this would do; surely the great and famous Hospitals of
London are famours praiseworthy things, and honorable to Religion; and should
nor you most Great and Noble English Ladies, which all the world must needs
give place unto, do something for the honor of it? If they did well that did
build, and set up them, as you will not say but they did, you cannot do amiss
in a little countenancing this. Those were done by some one particular person
at first, which would swallow up a great and whole Estate; this would hurt no
more than a little Tradesmans Bill, because there are so many of you to join in
this good and pious Work; surely God will incline some of your hearts, yea
many, we yet hope, to it. The Wiseman says, You will do good to your own
Souls. And we are certain it can be no hurt to your children; come and take
Christ's counsel, and lay up treasure in Heaven, where no Rust nor Moth, nor
Thief can ever come; and to the merciful, God will show himself merciful. But
if you do not love your Souls, care for treasure in Heaven, nor the tender
mercies, which is the Rise, Springhead and Fountain of all we hope for, or can
hope for from God in this world, or the other, you need not mind these sayings in
this blessed Book of his. Oh! but you dare not say or think so in the least;
for God and his mercies are your last and lasting Refuges. Oh! then dear good
Ladies, Gentlewomen, and others, as the Italian Beggars proudly beg, saying
frequently, Do it for your own good. Let us humbly beg as on our knee, in the
bowels of our Lord Jesus Christ, do, yea, and do without your lame Objections,
That you have so many ways, when it is nothing else but a will and heart that
you want; for you have Purse enough, and 20 ways to save a little, and
therefore do something worthy of this good Design. And you may be sure it is a
good one, because it is to feed, cloth and teach poor ignorant Children to
know themselves, fear God, and live in a hard world, what can be better? ask
your Lords; I am sure the Lord Christ, all the Prophets and Apostles commend
it; I have clothed the hungry, says Job. And Dorcas or Lydia made clothes,
says Paul, Acts 9. 39. And Cornelius was a man full of good Works, Alms-deeds,
and Charity, Acts 10. 4. And Primitive Christians sold their Lands to give to
necessitated Brethren, Acts 4. 32, 3, 4. so that 'twas all along, and is still
a good work, because it suits so well with our Religion, and the Church of
England, which says with St. James, Faith without Works is dead, Jam. 2. 26.
But this, and such as the nature of this is, amongst many others will declare
it living.

Thirdly, it is a good work, because it will in some measure stop the mouths of
Papists, who are prone to say, Where are your Works, and how few are your
Hospitals, and how small is your Charity, notwithstanding great Preaching? Yet
we have more than they know, but do not boast as they do. Our Catholic
Doctrine teaches us to do good, private and public too: And this is a
Catholic grace, because it is more or less in every Member of Christ; and
ought so to be, for he bids us be merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful,
who makes the Sun to shine, and the Rain to rain upon the just, and the
unjust, Mat. 5. 45. I shall give you one blessed Scripture more, and I hope I
may, without any boasting, truly say, I have even this present February or
March experienced something of it; and God Almighty grant that you, many, or
all of you, might do so too; for it will be your case or cases, as sure as God
lives, to lie upon the Bed of Sickness, as I have done many days together: Now
says the Holy Writ, Blessed is the man that considers the poor and needy,
Psalm. 41. 1.

All these Children of Hampstead, Hornsey, or Highgate, are really so; the Lord
preserves and keeps him, delivers him not into the hands of his Enemy, and
keeps him alive, the Lord shall comfort him when he is sick upon his Bed, and
shall make his Bed in his sickness; that is, comforts for his Soul, yea and
Body too; if this great, full, plain, eminent, well-known Scripture be not
considered, none will.

Now 'twill be of the latest, may be, another day; and you will certainly come
to be sick, and it may be in your Sickness be dozed, scarce know where it be
day or night, as I said before, and it may be in your Sickness have many fears
and doubts concerning your eternal weal. The Enemy will tempt you, by reason of
sin and guilt, secretly to despair, or throw away your Soul and Souls; nay he
will do it, because you have lived no more to God and his Honor, but have
minded your own Honor, Ease, Pleasure, and Interest, in the World, done no
Good, been a Christian in Name, only having a form of Godliness, but no Power,
2 Timothy 3. 5. And a thousand things of this Nature he will bring, it may be, he
will bring some particular Sins committed so and so to your Minds, whilst the
Room is close, or two or three in it, with a watch Light, the Curtains drawn,
but the Evil One is very busy in the Bed or Conscience with you. Now, now, if
you wish (as God Almighty grant you may) never be delivered over into your
Enemies, or the Enemy of Mankinds salvations Hands. Mind this Promise: I do not
bid you build upon it; that is dangerous: But build upon Christ, and mind this,
for the Promises must be minded, and the Conditions performed too in some
measure: And therefore be Merciful, that the Lord may be Pitiful, and not by
Death deliver you to your Enemies Hands. It Is a dreadful terrible thing, for a
poor Partridge to lie trembling in the Talons of the Faulcon, says the Practice
of Piety; but a thousand thousand times more dreadful to be delivered into the
hands of Satan, in a dying Hour; but the Promise is, God will not deliver the
merciful Man into the Enemies hands, Psalm. 41. 2. but keep him alive: Nay, he
will certainly do it, that is, He will keep him alive in Christ, unto Eternal
Life, or else alive in this World for more Work and Comfort; which latter
Promise is rather meant here. So that a long Life seems to be promised to a
merciful Man or Woman. And now, Ladies, would you also live long on the Earth,
as I believe you would? and enjoy all your Comforts, Riches, Honors, and
Relations, be merciful to the Poor, not idle vagabons, sturdy Rogues and
Beggars, that make a Trade; but poor industrious Housekeepers, old people and
children, that are past their Labor, or too young, poor Outed Ministers
Widows, and others: All these you must consider. And as the Apostle says, Do
good unto all men, as ye have opportunity, especially the household of Faith;
and in so doing you might expect the promise or promises. But some may object,
it may be you would have us give all away; no, nor above the tenth part
neither, scarce that: Yet many, many good men and Ministers think we are bound
to that; especially Dr. Gouge. And in his Book called The Best Way of Thriving,
gives you forty Arguments of Scripture for it: And tells you an excellent story
of a Bishop, that lost a hundred pound for not giving five, etc.

But Divine discretion must be used, for this and the other world too. We all
commend good Husbandry, and good Houswifery. But what think you of the Lady
Warwick? she would say, Save the money of one Rich Laced Gown a year, and that
would serve to cloth a great many poor Children, especially if it should be a
May-Gown: Here was good Houswifery, and great Charity. I had rather starve a
Lust, said she, than not feed a good Christian. And she found the comfort of it
in her sickness, for she had scarce any: God tolled her Soul away, as it were,
without groans. But you, it may be, let a thousand pound Necklace, it may be
more, lie dead in a little penny Bran Box; and many thousands more in Jewels,
Plate, Gold, or Silver by you; and yet, yet, think it a great matter to do a
little, any thing that is for a Noble, Good and Brave Charitable Design, which
may flourish to the world's end, for ought you know. If you would do some
little thing at present, take no care for hereafter; as our Savior says of to
morrow, Mat. 6. 25. Luke 12. 22. There are Ladies enough in England; yea, and
good Citizens too, for to carry it on, when you have once set it up.

But I have heard that a poor Coach-maker's Wife gave almost as much as a great
Countess, at a Collection: Will this pass? Nay, do you your selves think this
will in the day of Account? And our Lord Jesus Christ will take an Account of
every Lady of the Land, Wife or Widow, as well as others. And though he
approved of the poor Widow's Mite cast into the Treasure; yet he will never
accept of your Charity, except it be in some measure proportionable to the
Talent he has put in your hands: For, do you think that God or Christ will
accept of the improvement of one Talent from a Lady, Lord or others, that he
has given ten to? no, he will ask you, Where are the other nine? and you will
then be speechless: For he does not allow you, nor no man living, to lay up,
up, out and out for Self, Covetousness, Honor, Pride, Vainglory, Children,
Grandchildren, Nephews, Nieces, and all manner of Relations; this and that
great purchase every year; but still little or nothing for Religion, and
another World, God, or your Souls; but for Silk, Satin, Coaches, Lace,
Tire-women, and other French Toys; and yet may be you good Ladies too; all
which we grudge you not in the least; but in the mean time, to see you all
almost slight Charity, the love and eminent practice of it; this is
uncomfortable, and not Lady Vere like: Or will she and you stand alike together
in the day of Accounts? Nay, will not the Lady Drummond, though a Papist,
condemn some of you? She was not of the true Church, and yet gave almost a
thousand pound to the Poor; but nothing for a Funeral. Come, come, be
convinced, and do more good while you live; for you have not done a quarter of
that good you might have done, and not have hurt your Lords Estates, or run
backwards in the least; nor do we in the least desire that you should: For
Charity brings a great blessing; as a good Divine said. But you want a heart or
a hand for Christ, or a Death-watch at your Bed's head, to put you in mind of
another world: But a sound sickness will do it, and nothing else to purpose:
But then it may be you will talk, talk, talk, in a high Fever, of a hundred
things, when the plasters are on your feet, blisters on the arms, legs and
neck, instead of Christ and his Righteousness. As a Merchant did about Wool;
and would hear nothing but what price Wool bore: Bring my Manteau, and my
green Petticoat; I will rise; but the Watchers cry, Pray good Madam be still,
and keep your Arms in the Bed: Don't tell me; I will rise and go see my Lady
such a one; call the Coach quickly: And a hundred things run in the head, when
we are running to another world, and its Eternity may be altogether unprepared:
Now if you would find mercy in that day, which was the last Text that worthy
Dr. Manton ever Preached on; will it not be very sweet, welcome and seasonable,
when all things, creature comforts and relations are just a going from you, or
you from them for ever, to find a God embracing of you? Oh! be good then; do
good; and remember the Poor; and this good Work too, because it may live when
you are gone; flourish and be a mighty Tree, as I said before: but the promise
is, You shall rather live too, and not dye; For the Lord will keep him alive
when he lies sick: Mark that word; and it may be when you are dangerously sick,
and in your senses, you would not for half; nay, all your Estates but that you
should recover; because you have doubts and fears about your Soul's Eternal
state, as the poor Apothecary had, that cried despairingly, He should go to
Hell, and lie millions of years there. But now to be kept alive and recover,
will be the sweetest and greatest mercy to you in the world. Oh try! trust, and
take God*s promise before all the world's: They often fail, though the blood of
Christ never, as one said when his head was going off. Yea this promise; it is
but, venture a little money; it may be it is no more, not so much as a French
Page, or one or two Liveries cost you, or some lesser thing, if you look well
about. May not this or that be saved, and go to this good design which stands
high upon a high Hill, and has a great name. The Ladies, not what Ladies; but
the Ladies, taking in all by that general, universal, endless name, as it were,
though it be intended to pious, good and great Religious Protestant Ladies, and
other virtuous Gentlewomen; yet it has an universal name, because no body knows
what God may incline some, or how many of that Noble Sex to do for it. Some are
apt to think it may be in time as big as most things (why not?) and as worthy;
it bears so many Noble names, as there be Ladies in the Land, or shall be
successively; and who knows but some body may dye, want an Heir; and remember
this, when you have set it once a little up: For it is still The Ladies Charity
Schoolhouse, and must be whilst one stone or stick remains upon another; for no
body can new christen it: And therefore pray don't let this young God-Son of
yours (it is your first, and will be your last) Starve, dye, look poor, or be
spoiled, for want of a little good keeping, one two or three years. The Boys
are fine, handsome, and well clothed now; not too fine, because they are the
Ladies: You cannot but like them and their place exceeding well, and be taken
with it, if you would but send or see them these Holy Days, or after: But now,
if a year or two hence they should be grown, which God sordid, poor, ragged,
half-starv'd and no clothes, Country folks would say, who rule or go that way,
(...) Were there not good Ladies enough in and about London, to maintain a
little School? a Duce on their Pride, Charity, Close hand and Covetousness, if
it is be all: And a hundred things of this nature will be said; and some
scoffing at Religion too, which will be as bad as death. And therefore pray
good Ladies and Gentlewomen, out of tenderness and conscience, do not let the
thing dye for want of a little countenance; but set the wheel a going by giving
something this Easter, one Whitsuntide or two, till you see the thing it self,
and the likely wheel of its prosperity, which there is no doubt of if you come
a little off. However, above all a hundred times that we can say, do something
for this great and serious promise and promises; in case of Death or Sickness,
it may be in a week or months time, and you shall never see May out; and for
those mercies which you would wish and hope to find then: And if you do, as the
Lord Jesus Christ grant you and your Children may, 'twill be more a comfort to
you, than if all your choicest creature comforts in the world should surround
you. Alas, alas! what are Pearls, Plate, Cordials, Jewels, Wife, Children,
Husbands, Lands, Livings, Rich Bed and Hangings, or the Honors of the world,
when the Soul is stepping upon the dark Mountains of Eternity, or sitting on
the Lip, just taking wing; with the last gasp to fly away for ever, as an Eagle
in the Air? O mercy, mercy then! and in that day may mercy be your portion. And
as the poor people of Hadly wept and prayed for Dr. Tailor in the street, as he
was going to be burnt, saying, Oh! Lord Jesus Christ; relieve thee our good
Shepherd Mr. Tailor, as you have relieved and comforted us many times with your
Charity. But there are two promises more, which I shall hint at and I have
done. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God, Matt. 5. 8. To see
God is the very heaven of heavens, and to see him in heaven is the last and
lasting highest happiness of all men, angels, and glorified creatures, or
whatsoever our soul or souls can, or shall ever to all eternity desire: and may
you and all you so see him and personally enjoy him for ever and ever: but
there must be purity, and heart purity, for it is the pure in heart that shall
see him in glory, without holiness no man can see him, Heb. 12. 14. And with
the pure he will show himself pure, Psalm. 18. 26. but in a strict sense this
word pure must not be taken, as if in a strict sense we should not see him
without perfect holiness in our selves which is to be without all sin, and to
be perfectly holy in his sight, which otherwise than in Christ no man living
can be; says Job, The Stars are not pure in his sight, Job 25. 5. and he has
beheld folly in his Angels, Job 4. 17. much less men, the best of men, or the
best of their actions, yea, so none can say I am pure, Prove. 20. 9. but men may
be said to be pure as they are washed, justified, sanctified persons, and made
pure by the blood of Christ, and so every believer, or justified, sanctified
person is pure, Rev. 1. 5. Timothy speaks of a pure conscience that is washed,
1 Timothy 3. 9. 2. Tim. 1. 3. serving God with a pure conscience. And so again
Paul bids us draw near to God with a true heart and full assurance (of what?)
faith in Christ for justification, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil
conscience with the blood of Christ, and our bodies washed with pure water, that
is, the water of sanctification by his spirit, typified by that which came out
of his blessed side when by the spear pierced for us upon the Cross. And thus,
noble Ladies, it is that you must be pure if ever you will be pure, and see God
in Glory, you must be washed by the blood of Christ, and sanctified by the
spirit of Christ, fine Words, fine Clothes, Complements, and Faces do nothing
in point of justification; no nor many sermons hearing if rested upon, nor
other good deeds; no, it is the blood of Christ witnessed by an honest, humble,
godly conversation from the integrity of your hearts, that must get you the
denomination of being pure in heart, and seeing God in glory: and therefore
dear Ladies, Gentlewomen and others, as ever you would see glory, or see the
face of God in glory, be holy, heavenly, and mind things above, Col. 3. 1. 2.
where Christ sits at the right hand of God, Heb. 1. 13. and think not that a
little little slight religion, no religion, any religion will bring you there
when nothing will do it without Purity, Strictness, and Honess; yea, there must
be a little of all this; do you think to go in fine Sedans, Down Beds, and
Coaches? no, no, it must be in a way of mortification to sin, and love to
holiness if you will ever have happiness; yea, this unspeakable happiness of
seeing God in glory, which one says He would for one glimps of it endure a
great while in hell. Oh! but you need not go to hell for heaven; for if you go
there you will never come out, though the Papists fancy they may from Purgatory
for a little money to the Priest: And therefore one said, Oh Money Money! what
wilt not thou do in the Court of Rome! Ay, said the Pope, and you are fools to
bring it here, to an English man that was there upon trial for a Church Living.
Oh! but go to Christ and the promise, go to God by Christ through the promise,
beg and plead that you may see him, and you shall see him, and his grace, and
hereafter you shall see his face also, Rev. 22. 4. And his name shall be in
your foreheads; that is the blessed rays of his glory shall be visible on you
when you come to stand before God and the Lamb in glory with your Palms in
your hands, Rev. 7. 9.

But, seventhly and lastly Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be
called the Children of God, Matt. 7. 9. Peace makers are Christ's imitators,
who is called the Peacemaker and the Lord of life and glory, the mighty God
the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace, Isa. 9. 6. by whose commission
alone it is, that all his Messengers and Ministers do preach Peace and Pardon
to poor sinners, such as are far off and such as are near in their own
apprehensions: Yea, to all that believe, be they far or near, Jews or Gentiles,
the blood of Christ speaks peace and better things to them than the blood of
Abel that cried for vengeance; and all innocent blood will do so. And therefore
it is not good to pardon any that kill men in quarrels, duels; but this cries
for peace, pardon, and forgiveness, Oh! Father forgive them they know not what
they do, Luke 23. 34. now to be a peacemaker, is to be a sin-reconciler, I do
not mean to God, for that none can do but Christ who is our propitation, 1 John
2. 2. 4. 10. and he has done it for all that do believe, but to reconcile men
to men is to do all the offices of love and good will, yea, all the offices of
good we can for the Church and people of God, especially in our own place, way,
and calling; wishing prosperity, peace, and weal, and to say with the Psalmist,
Peace be with thee, and let them prosper that love thee, Psalm 22. 6, 7. Peace
be within thy walls and prosperity within thy Palaces, Psalm. 26. Pray for the
Peace of Jerusalem says the Prophet Isaiah, and in the Churches peace, shall
you have peace says the same Prophet, and the people of God are said to
delight themselves in abundance of peace, Psalm. 37. 11. Where the meek are said
again to inherit the earth: And as Paul in his salutation, said, Grace be unto
you, and Peace, through our Lord Jesus Christ, Col. 1. 2. And In as much as in
you lies, live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. 18. Now first there is a
personal or particular peace, that is, a peace with a man's own self, Mind,
Actions, Ways and Conscience. Secondly, There is a domestic peace, that is,
with Masters, Servants, Husbands, Wife and Children. And thirdly, There is a
Relative Neighbor, or Parochial Peace, that is, one Neighbor, Friend or
Relation with another. And Moses reproved the two Israelites for quarrelling,
saying, They were Brethren, Exodus 12, 13. Oh! how good is it, says the
Psalmist, for natural or spiritual) Brethren to live together in Amity! Psalm.
133. 1. Fourthly, There is a National and Ecclesiastical Peace, which we are to
pray for, and desire also: But this is rather to be desired, than expected.
While some men know more, and others less, there will be disputes and some
differences; for all men have not the same fancies, nor Physiognomies, but do
differ there, and in mind too. However, for peace and quiet sake, let the
strong comply with the weak, and the weak not to despise and judge the strong,
because they know more than themselves: And this is to become all to all men,
as Paul did, to gain some: And for God, Christ, Peace and Angels sake, do you
do so; which was the Song that millions of them sung at the Nativity of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to the Shepherds; yea, the universal world, saying, Glory be
to God in the highest, Luke 2. 14. Peace and good will toward men on earth.

But for your worldly outward Peace, take Paul and Christ's counsel in a word,
and so shall you preserve and keep it.

First, Wrong no man, says he, Act. 25. 10.

Secondly, Forgive your Enemies, says Christ, Matthew. 5. 44. which two
Scriptures well observed, would make a great deal of peace in the world;
especially amongst the best of good Christians. But I shall not mind nor
trouble you further in any thing of this nature about Peace above mentioned;
only this; A personal inward Peace, which is a thing of great concern for
Eternity; namely, your Soul-Peace; and for that take this great Scripture,
Simile or Parable of our Lord Jesus Christ, Matthew. 5. 56. Agree with thine
Adversary quickly, whilst thou art in the way with him, lest at any time thy
Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer,
and thou be cast into prison.

Verily I say unto thee, Thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have
paid the uttermost farthing; which is as much as to say, never, never.

And now pray will you mind this, young Ladies and Gentlewomen; for you, for
the most part, are most ignorant of the holy Scriptures, and their meaning.

This is a true and great Parable of Soul concern; and therefore Christ's
counsel is serously to be minded by us.

Our Adversary is God; and God, though he be the God of all Good, Grace, Glory,
Eternal Love, and Infinite Endless Mercy; yet he is an Adversary to every Man,
and every Man and Woman by nature too, is an Adversary, an enemy at distance to
him, till he be reconciled by Christ, for the breach of his most righteous,
just and equal holy Law, Psalm. 119. 19.

Every branch of which, as it contains a beam of his eternal will and image, is
more pure than the Sun, or gold tried in the Fire, as the Psalmist has it,
Psalm. 119. 72.

Now, whilst sweet life, and the holy blessed Gospel is continued and preached
to us, we are in the way, in the right way, that we may be reconciled to this
good God, who is yet an Enemy, and will continue so, if we do not agree and
make peace in the blood of Christ: But he, namely God, delivers us by death,
any kind of death that kills us; Consumption, Surfeit, Cold, Ague, Fever,
Smallpox, Age, Gout or Dropsy, etc. so that we be put into the Judges hands,
namely, the good Lord Jesus Christ's, who is and shall be Judge of quick and
dead; he finds us guilty of debt, sin, unbelief, and breach of God's holy Law;
sends us, and delivers us over into the Jaylors hands, the Devil; and he
presently casts and carries us to Hell, where we never come out, nor can, till
we pay the uttermost farthing; that is, till we satisfy to the uttermost for
God's wrong, and infinite strict Justice, for the breach of his holy,
righteous, just and good Law; which can never, never be, though we lie
millions, millions, and ten thousand millions of years; as Francis Spira once
said. Oh Lords, Ladies, Gentlewomen and other poor People! make Peace while you
may; make Peace, yea, whilst Christ and the holy Spirit of Christ sweetly
knocks, with an Olive branch of Peace, pleading with you at the door of your
hearts. Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the door and knock, that is, by good
motions; and if any one hear, and open the door, that is, hearken to my
counsel, I will come in and sup with him, that is, give him pardon and comfort,
Rev. 3. 20. And so again, Cant. 5. 2. Open, Open unto me, my Love, my Dove, and
come away.

And now, if you have taken his advice, and have made your Peace, by hearkening
unto Christ, and taken his counsel, who is an Advocate, Friend and Counselor,
to plead for you to the Father, by showing of his Blood, Death and Merit in a
way of Intercession to the Father for poor Sinners, then will he be a Savior
to you, and not a condemning Judge, to turn you over by Death to Hell and the
Jailer; but will convey you safely by the holy Angels, who are now your
Guardians to the Bosom of the Father. And now, if you have made your Peace, as
easily yet you may, if you have not, and do but look about you with a grain of
Faith, through the Blood, Life, Death and Merit of Jesus Christ, as I said
before; then you have little else to do, but to study all kind of Peace in your
Families, Parish Church, and every where, where you can come or go; That ye may
be called the Children of the Living God, Romans 9. 26. The Sons and Daughters of
the most High God, 1 John 3. 1. And so Peacemakers indeed. And this frame of
spirit, with the Spirit of God in you, Romans 8. 10. will be a great Witness and
Comfort to you, that you are now the Children of God; and if Children, then
Heirs, as the Apostle says, verse 17. and so Joynt-heirs with Christ.

O unspeakable Love and Grace! What! an Heir with Christ? Ay says the Text, a
Joynt-heir with him; of what? nay, that is for Eternity to tell; but this we may
say they are Heirs of: First, of Eternal Life and Resurrection from the Dead,
Luke 20: 36. But they which shall be accounted worthy of that world, namely,
Heaven, and the Resurrection from the Dead, neither marry, nor are given in
Marriage; neither can they dye any more, Luke 23. v. 36. for they are equal to
Angels, and are the Children of God, being Children of the Resurrection.

Mark, the Children of the Resurrection, are the Children of God, that is,
those, and all those Christ rose as a Head for; they, and all they have a part
in the first Resurrection, Rev. 20. 6. Blessed and happy are they that have
part in the first Resurrection; for on such the second Death shall have no
power; that is, Hell, the Devil or Jaylors, Prison, above mentioned.

O Ladies! Look to Christ, who is the first Resurrection, and the first
begotten from the Dead; and the Prince of the Kings of the Earth; for he has
loved you, and washed you from your sins in his own Blood, Heb. 1. 6.

Yea, look to him that he be your Resurrection; and that you have a part by
Faith in him, who is the true Book of Life, Revel. 21. 27. And if by Faith in
him, you rise from the Grave and Death of sin here, then may you assure your
selves of a share and part in his Resurrection unto Eternal Life, which was
typified by the First Fruits, and the Sheaf of Corn which the Priest held up
and waved under the Ceremonial or Levitical Law.

And that you are indeed the Children of it, And of God too, and so shall never
dye: Oh! believe thou this? as Christ said in another place about Lazarus, I
am the life and resurrection of the dead, and he that believes in me shall
never dye; Joh. 11. 25. Yea, though he were dead yet shall he live again;
Believe thou this says Christ; so say I to you noble Ladies, Gentlewomen and
others if you be the Children of God and the resurrection, you shall dye no
more, dye once you must to this world and the things, sleep a little in the
grave, and imitate Christ your Head and your Husband, your Lord and your
Savior who was there before you three days and three nights; and then
destroyed and tore the grave open to assure you of the resurrection also; but
in that you shall never dye more: Oh! happy resurrection when Christ shall say,
awake, and sing O ye that sleep in the dust, and with my dead body shall ye
awake; Isaiah Come with me my love from Bebon the Leopard, and the Lions den,
Canticles. All which promises, and a thousand more are made to you if you be
the children of God, and peacemakers in the Church, or World, or where you are.

The Children of Israel were happy that they were the Children of Israel, and
the seed of Abraham, though all were not the true seed: but Oh! how happy are
you that you are the Children of God, and shall be like his Angels in the
resurrection! yet Israel died in the wilderness and never entered into the land
of Canaan; but you shall never dye, be as Angels, enter in and possess the true
Canaan; Heaven's Kingdom, and the Kingdom of God; be among the Angels to sing
with that Celestial Quire the high praises of God and the Lamb to all
eternity, Rev. 7. Oh happy day! Oh happy hour! that ever you were born or made
to be the Children of God, and peacemakers in the world, and places where you
come; Hell is full of brawling, the world is full of brawling, but your Breasts
and Lives are full with peace and the love of God, and the ways and things of
God: Oh! keep that Nightingale and sweet ever singing Bird of Paradise close to
you, and let it never fail you day nor night, yea, all you Children of God;
it is a heaven to begin a heaven here, and a double hell to lose it for a straw
as one said, or a bubble which Children blow from a walnut shell; whilst it is a
little heaven, or young heaven as a great Lady called it, but old heaven, and
the heaven of heaven of heavens shall be your portion; yea, he that compasses
heaven and earth and is within the Starry Element, where Sun, Moon and Stars
are. Oh! how glorious is that, this is but the Tileing we see, Gods house is
all invisible, and the inside no mortal man nor eye can see, nor him neither
and live, Exodus 33. v. 20.

But time shall pass, and time shall come when these things shall be no more,
and we for ever with the Lord, 1 These. 4. 17. and see him as he is, face to
face, and eye to eye, and all tears shall be quite wiped away, sorrow, and
mourning fly away for ever, former things be forgotten, and all your Lords
unkindness, and your own unworthiness of the Lamb, and your Redeemer's love;
yea, the want of Grace, and comforts here, the young Lord, and little Ladies
death will be forgotten in another world, yea, in resurrection, glory, all will
be swallowed up in everlasting joy, some Fountains have their mouths or pipes
through which they send their Crystal streams with pleasant noises, Revel. and
in heaven shall the Children of the resurrection, Saints, and Angels,
continually send their Praises to God and the Lamb, and that unweariedly; for
worthy is the Lamb to receive Power, Glory, and Dominion, for ever and ever,
Revel. 7. 10, 11, 12. And every creature in heaven, and earth heard I say Amen,
Amen, Amen.

Oh! ye Lords, Ladies, Princes, Kings, Queens, Potentates, and highest Mortal
of the earth, join ye, for it becomes you well, and all ye with that kingly
Prophet David in his three last Psalms 148, 149, 150. and with this I shall
close this little little book of yours which was made a little before, and just
after a great sickness, but the work is Praise the Lord from the heaven, Praise
him in the highest, for the highest is too low for him. Praise him all ye
Angels; an Angelical praise becomes him and them very well, praise him all ye
host, be ye what he will, praise him Sun and Moon for ye are man and wife to
rule both day and night, and he made you both; praise him all ye Stars of
light, which are as Sun and Moons children, and are of great influence to the
children of men; praise him O heavens, air, ye terrestrial, celestial heavens,
heaven of heavens, praise him and him alone, he only made you with the word of
his power; and ye waters that be above the heavens, the airy heavens and clouds
that we see, and in the deep; let the fountains of the deep praise him, he has
commanded and you were created, he establish a Decree and you cannot pass.

Praise him Dragons, and deep fiery Mountains, Hail, Snow, and Storms, and
fulfill his word; Mountains, Hills, Trees, and Cedars, high Men, and low Men,
little Beasts, and Cattle, Creeping things, and Flying, little Ants, and mighty
Eagles, Kings, Judges, Princes, and all People, young Lords, and maiden Ladies
of nine, ten, eleven, twelve and thirteen; let them praise his name, for his
name alone is excellent, and before him let all flesh be for ever silent. His
glory is above the Heavens, ever was, is, and ever shall be; he also exalts
the horn of his people, Christ the horn of David, and the horn and salvation of
the Church, as well as the praise of all his Saints, Male, and Female, for ye
are all one in Christ Jesus, and so are Jews and Gentiles, Greeks and
Scythians, all Nations having drunk of his Blood, and Saints too, even the
Children of Israel, a People near unto himself, yea, as the apple of his eye.
Praise ye the Lord, sing a Song of Praise, Psalm 149. and rejoice in your King;
the Lord reigns, the Lord is King for ever and ever; let the Earth be glad; let
them praise his Name in Dances, spiritual ones, with Timbrel and Harp, joy and
comfort in their Souls; for the Lord takes pleasure in his People; shall a
Worm do it in his hole? a Bird in the Sun? a Saint in God? and not God in his
people? Oh yes! he takes pleasure in his people, and will beautify the meek
with salvation.

We told you the meek should inherit the earth a little before, but here is
heaven and salvation too; Oh! Blessed are the meek, and blessed are all these
blessed ones whom he takes pleasure in.

Let the Saints be joyful in glory let them sing upon their beds, go in all the
divine and heavenly discoveries, of Gods love to their souls; and let a sword
be in their hands, the holy word of God which is as a two edged one to cut down
all ungodly lusts and reigning sins in their souls, yea, let the law of God as
a golden chain bind their unruly Kingly lusts and Lordly ones too, from acting
against God and their souls, for ever; and to execute on them the doom, that
is, death and mortification as St. Paul says, Col. 3. 5. This honor all his
Saints shall have, that is, his sanctified justified ones as I told you a
little before; yea, in these no sin shall ever reign as Kings and Noble men,
for these are not under the Law, but under Grace, so says the great Apostle,
and experienced Saint St. Paul, Romans 6. 14.

Wherefore praise him in the sanctuary, yea, that that is of all most proper,
yea, in the congregation of his people, yea, in the great congregation will I
praise thee, says David; ay, and in the little one too; I will praise thee
with my whole heart, and my tongue shall be as the pen of a ready writer, Psalm.
45. 1. I will extol thee, O King, I will bless thee for ever and ever, Psalm.
145. 1, 2. Every day will I bless thee; great is the Lord most worthy to be
praised, his greatness none can reach; Ladies, Men, and Angels may try their
skill, and strain their voices, but can never reach it, no, the uttermost
thoughts of men and Angels cannot do it, for he is still as far beyond them as
the heavens are beyond the earth; yea, he is more excellent than all creatures
can conceive to eternity: and Christ also fairer than the children of men, the
chiefest of ten thousands altogether lovely, Psa. 45. 2. 6. Cant. 5. 10. And
says God concerning Christ I will make thy name to be remembered in all
generations, And therefore shall the people love and praise thee for ever and
ever. Psalm. 45. 17. And to thee shall every knee bow, Phil. 2. 10. that is,
submit and be disposed of by Christ as he pleases and how he pleases; Oh!
praise him for his acts, he has led Captivity Captive, and is judge of quick
and dead, according to his excellency give him praise, with Timbrel and Harp,
yea, with ten stringed instruments, all the veins in tongue and heart praise
him, praise him, for musical instruments has Christ put down in his Gospel
worship, and therefore it is the lip, it is the life, it is the heart, it is the
soul, that must now praise him; O Lords, Lords, Ladies and other English
Mortals! will not you join to Praise him? Then you are undone, utterly undone For
EVER,

Written by WILLIAM BLAKE, Housekeeper to the Ladies Charity-School.

FINIS.

