A Short HISTORY OF THE Last Parliament.
THE Honorable Conclusion of the late War with France, to the great
Mortification of his Majesty's Enemies, the Satisfaction of his Friends, and the
Admiration of all Men, must thankfully be acknowled'd as chiefly owing to His
Majesty's great Wisdom, invincible Courage, and inflexible Resolution. By his
Courage he rekindled the decaying Fire of this Warlike People, taught them by
his Conduct, and provoked them by his Example to equal the Achievements of
their Valiant Forefathers, and thereby restored to England the ancient
Reputation of her Arms. But by his Wisdom he procured us an Honor we never
could before pretend to; he made England a Match for France, as well in the
Cabinet, as in the Camp; and gained by a Wise Treaty more, than by Arms had
been won in the Field.

For any Potentate to unite many States and Princes disagreeing in Interests,
Inclinations or Religion, in a strict Confederacy against a Common Enemy, and
to preserve that Alliance unbroken for many years together, notwithstanding the
great Losses those Allies sustained, and in despite of all the Attempts of
Foreign and Domestic Enemies to dissolve their Union, must be acknowledged by
all the World, as the effect of a refined and masterly Judgment: Yet this
Honor, which perhaps has no Example, is by the Confession of all, due to His
Majesty, who was the only Center in which so many various Lines could meet, the
only Head which such differing Interests could confide in, as capable to direct
them in a Juncture of Time, when the Libertys of all Europe lay at Stake.

We are likewise greatly indebted to the Bravery and Fidelity of His Majesty's
Fleet and Army for our present Peace, and the Blessings that attend it. It must
be owned to their great Honor, that our Officers and Common Men, as well by
Land as by Sea, notwithstanding any Disappointments they at any time met with,
did on all occasions show a Courage and Resolution equal to that of their
Warlike Ancestors; a Courage that became the Subjects of such a Prince, and
such a General; a Courage worthy of the Noble Cause in which they were engaged;
the Preservation of their Religion, Laws and Libertys. And therefore no Praises
can be too high, nor can any Rewards consistent with the Public Good for which
they fought, be looked on as too great for Men who have merited so much of
their Country.

And yet it must be confessed that so great a Prince and so great a General at
the Head of such Brave and Loyal Men, could never have been able to have
brought a War with such a Potent Adversary to a happy Issue, had not the
Parliament of England concurred with him, and stood by him with so much
Constancy and unanimous Affection. It Is therefore to these worthy Patriots that
we owe, in a great measure, our present Security, and the Establishment of our
Laws and Religion. The People of England ought to have a due Reverence and
Affection for their Representatives in Parliament, and to maintain their
Honor, even when in distempered Times it might happen, they should act some
things against the Public Good, not only because they are a Part of our
Constitution, but likewise that particular Part which the People have entrusted
to look after and manage their Interests; for should the People desert their
Representatives, they would be Felo de se, and one day run a hazard of losing
that part of their Constitution.

And if it be the Duty and Interest of the People, not to despise, or run down
indifferent, or bad Parliaments for the reasons mentioned, what Applauses, what
Expressions of Affection and Gratitude are due to Good Ones? And indeed if any
of our Parliaments ever rightly understood, and zealously pursued the true
Interest of their Country, those that have been Called, and Sat since the
happy Revolution, must be allowed with the greatest Justice to have merited
that Character. If to have steadfastly adhered to the Interest of Europe against
a Common Enemy: If to have cheerfully supplied His Majesty with the Sinews of
War, to enable him to carry it on with Vigor; and by such Ways and Means as
were least Burdensome and uneasy to the People; If to have discerned and
prevented the greatest Dangers that could threaten a Nation; To have conquered
Difficulties of State of the highest Nature, and to have persever'd so many
years, through an obstinate Zeal for the good of their Country; to Support His
Majesty till his Arms had procured an Honorable Peace, and thereby Established
our Government, our Religion and our Property: If This be to have deserved well
of the English Nation, the Parliaments have been speaking of, have at least
equaled the Glory of their greatest Ancestors.

Their Love to their Country, and Capacity for Public Business, have appeared
in a very eminent manner: It Is easy and pleasant to Sail in good Weather before
the Wind; But to Steer true and steady in a Storm, to beat it against the Wind
'midst Rocks and Shelves on either hand, and to make the Port at last in
Safety, this must be allowed to be a Master's work. These Parliaments
therefore, and particularly those among them who had the chief Direction of
Affairs, having like Wise and Careful Patriots, done so much in their hard
Station toward bringing Matters to this successful Issue, must deserve all the
grateful Returns that can be from their Country.

Their Honor is the more particular, inasmuch as Men of great Capacity for
Business of State, are so very rare: For it may be truly said, that a Thousand
Men are Born in this Kingdom fit for Arms, to one, that has solidity of
Judgment, quickness of Apprehension, compass of Thought, and clearness of
Sight, proper for the management of Public Affairs.

What has been said of the several Parliaments assembled since his Majesty's
Accession to the Throne is more eminently true of the last; which pursued the
Designs of the former with the greatest Skill, as well as the warmest Zeal.
This August Assembly had the hardest Tasks imaginable upon their hands, and to
give an impartial and succinct Relation of their principal Proceedings, of the
Wise Measures they took to remove the Evils we felt, and to prevent greater
which we feared; and to find sufficient Supplys for the carrying on the War,
till at last they had the satisfaction to see it issue in an Honorable Peace,
is the design of the following Papers.

WHen this Parliament first came together, they found themselves engaged in
variety of Business of great Nicety, and most important Consequence.

To maintain our new Settlement after the late happy Revolution, we had a War
upon our hands with a mighty Prince; who by his Naval Strength, as well as by
the Number and Discipline of his Land Forces, by the Wisdom of his Counsels,
and his constant Successes, was grown the Terror of all Europe. This Potent
Monarch protected the Person, and espoused the Quarrel of the late Abdicated
King; and looking on his Honor and Interest alike concerned, used his utmost
Efforts by Arms to reenthrone him. And notwithstanding England had hitherto
with great Resolution and Alacrity born the weight of this heavy War to
preserve all those Advantages; that is, whatever is dear to an English Freeman
and a Protestant, which were procured by their late Deliverance, yet some of
the wisest and clearest-sighted among those who were hearty Friends of the
Government, grew diffident of the Event. They questioned our Ability to support
our selves under so Burdensome and Expensive a War, while the Enemies of our
Settlement were insolently sure of over-turning it. It Is true indeed, we had at
the head of the Government One, from whom we might expect all Things that with
Reason could be hoped for, from the Courage and Conduct of a Wise Prince, and
an Accomplished General; One, who to Protect a Nation which with so much Glory
he had before delivered, freely and frequently exposed his Life, as if it had
been the Life of a Common Man, to all the Dangers of the Sea, and all the
Hazards of Battle by Land; and who the year before by his Reduction of the
important Fortress of Namur, in the sight of almost all the Power of France,
had struck a Damp upon our Enemies abroad, and rebuked the Confidence of the
Malcontents at home. But notwithstanding the Nation might with the fullest
Assurance rely upon His Majesty for every Thing that could be asked, or
expected from the greatest Prince, and most watchful Father of his Country; yet
the People could not be without their Fears, lest he should one day Fall by the
hands of Saul, and the Kingdom be crushed by the disproportioned Power of our
Enemies. They doubted whether the Nation, though ever so willing, would be able to
grant to His Majesty the necessary Supplys, for carrying on so necessary a War.

But besides what we had to apprehend from so formidable a Foe abroad, we had a
great deal to fear from our treacherous Enemies at home. For though the Body of
the Nation was infinitely pleased with the late Revolution, and thankfully
acknowledged the unvaluable Benefits that attended it, yet a considerable
number were impatient of their Deliverance, and raved at the restitution of our
Libertys and Religion. Our Warlike David found his most dangerous Enemies were
at home, if not of his own Household. The whole Body of the Papists were his
Enemies, and the Reasons of their Enmity are too obvious to mention. Besides
these, a great number of moderate Protestants, and such as were the Creatures
and Dependants of the late Government, and had embarked in, or wished well to
the glorious design of enslaving and ruining their Native Country, Men of
Arbitrary and Tyrannical Principles, fixed and settled in their hatred to the
Constitution of our Government, and the Libertys of the English Nation, these,
and many others that did not find their Account and particular Interest in the
present Settlement, became its Enemies; and by open or clandestine ways,
endeavored to streighten or subvert it. These Men were very Zealous to deliver
us from our Laws and Libertys, and to restore us to the Privileges of our
Egyptian Burdens. The ungrateful Murmurers spoke of Stoning the Moses that
rescued them; and unable to bear their happy Deliverance, with Threats and
Violence demanded their heavy Tasks, and their old Oppressors. These Men,
according to their different Posts and Tempers, in different ways, assisted the
Foreign Enemy.

All Arts and Methods though ever so base and unworthy, which Wit quickened with
malice could invent, were employed to weaken the Reputation of the Government.
Sometimes they flew openly upon it with bitter Invectives, sometimes they
secretly stabbed it with malicious Suggestions and sly Insinuations. They
traduced all that were in Public Employ, and exposed them to Contempt; they
worried their Names with base and groundless Calumnys, attributing many of our
Misfortunes not to be foreseen, and therefore not to be prevented, to the
Treachery or Negligence of our most faithful and vigilant Ministers. And it is
no wonder these fierce Creatures fastened so greedily on the Characters of our
greatest Ministers, when His Majesty himself, who had merited as much as any
Prince ever did of his People, could not escape their disloyal Reflections.

They were very fond of propagating any ill Tidings, or false Reports, that
might any way lessen the Credit of our Administration, increase the Fears of
the People, and cool their Affection to the Government; what unnatural and
salvage Joy did they express when they heard of any Losses that befell the
Nation, which they cruelly aggravated, and with no less Zeal they diminished
and slighted the Advantages we at any time obtained: They could by no means
dissemble the secret Pleasures they felt, when they had any fresh hopes of
seeing their Country speedily undone.

England, as before mentioned, being engaged in a War with France for the
Preservation of the late happy Settlement, great Supplys were absolutely
necessary to enable His Majesty to sustain the Force of a Kingdom, which by
their own Wise Administration, and the Supineness of England in the late
inglorious Reigns, was grown so Potent, that now it required a longer Sword to
Resist, than heretofore to Conquer it. And for this reason, without the least
Flattery, His Majesty has acquired more Honor by Controuling the Power of
France, than any of his great Predecessors did by subduing it. The Parliaments
therefore resolving to carry on the War with Vigor, were obliged to lay great
Taxes on the People, though not greater than the necessity of Affairs required;
and the War continuing so long, they could not be insensible of the Burden. Of
this the Malcontents took the Advantage, and represented in all Companys, that
the Government must of necessity sink under its own Weight, and that our heavy
Taxes, by reducing us to extreme Poverty, would inevitably prove our
Destruction. They never ceased declaiming on this popular Subject, and galling
the People in this tender Part; hoping to make them weary of a Government which
was represented so Burdensome; and at last, persuade them rather to let in the
Deluge, than to be at the Expense of maintaining their Banks.

Besides these Adherents to the late King's Interest, there were others, who
though great Asserters of the late Revolution, and averse enough to a second;
yet, from I know not what private disgusts, personal Quarrels and
Disappointments, grew sour and uneasy; and to express their Resentments in all
Conversation, endeavored to bring our Administration into Contempt; they were
for breaking the Confederacy, and against raising such large Sums of Money for
carrying on the War; they were for distressing and streight'ning the
Government, but not for overturning it. They were willing it should continue;
but they were for Clogging its Wheels, that it might move heavily; in short,
they were against all things that the known Enemies of the Government were
against; and for all things which they were for, unless the overthrowing of the
present Settlement, and the Restoration of the late King; That is, they were
for all the means that would certainly bring about the End, but not for the End
it self. However, under this plausible pretense of declaring against great
Taxes, and by other popular Oppositions, they thought to recommend themselves
to their Country, as great Patriots; though at the same time, the greatest Enemies
of the Government had in this respect, as good a Title to the favor of the
People; whom they would gladly have delivered from their Taxes, and thereby
have eased them of the means of their Preservation.

The Proceedings of these Men were of all others the most absurd and
unaccountable; and the opposition they made; seemed to be the effect of some
strange Infatuation. The best Apology that can be made for 'em is, that they
were guided by a false Notion of Popularity; and supposed that the Character of
a Patriot was without distinction of Times or Persons, to be ever against the
Court, and in all Cases whatsoever. Notwithstanding these Men could not but be
sensible, that the Preservation of their Religion, Laws and Libertys, was
inseparably interwoven with that of the Government; that the Face of Affairs
was so far altered by the late happy Revolution, that the Interest of their
Country was plainly the same with that of the Court; which appeared, as well by
the opposition that was made to it by all those whom these Men themselves ever
looked upon as the greatest Promoters of Popery and Arbitrary Power; as by the
Principles of Liberty by which the Government was brought about, and on which
it must always stand; and notwithstanding this was a Government of their own
seeking. and than which they could never expect any other more favorable to
them, either in their Civil or Religious Interests; notwithstanding all this,
such a satisfaction it was to thwart a Court, such a pleasure to express a
private Resentment, and by the same act to be thought Popular, that these Men
to the admiration of all, and with the secret Derision of their new Friends
endeavored what they could to make the Government uneasy.

Moreover, at this time another Difficulty lay heavy upon the Nation: Our
Current Coin had many years before began to be Clipped, a mischief which of late
had been secretly carried on, and promoted by the Enemies of the Government, and
the dangerous Consequences of it not being heeded or wilfully neglected, and
therefore no remedy being applied, our Money wgs now become so far diminished
and debased, that the Nation suffered unspeakably by it, both in carrying on
the War, as well as our Commerce. The cure of this Evil could no longer be
delayed, without apparent and inevitable Ruin. The Adherents to the late King,
and the disaffected to This, observed it with unconceivable Joy. They were very
confident the Government must unavoidably split on this Rock, and that this
single mischief was enough to sink it. And tho the Friends of the Government
and their Country (I call them so, because the Interest of both are now so
inseparably united, that it is impossible to be one without being the other)
were fully convinced that this Grievance ought to be redressed; yet how to
effect it in such a Conjuncture, without bringing the Nation into the utmost
Confusion, was enough to puzzle Men of the deepest Reach, and greatest Capacity.

Our Enemies abroad, after the glorious Success of His Majesty's Arms the last
Campaign in Flanders, grew very diffidenr of the Issue of the War. After this
Blow which wounded them in so sensible and tender a part, they expressed by
their Behavior and Language, how much their hopes of subduing us by Force were
abated; they could not but foresee, that if His Majesty could appear in the
Field the next Summer in the same Circumstances as he did the last, it would be
very hard, if not impossible, for them to oppose his Arms. To prevent this,
they had two things to wish and promote; one was to Embroil our Affairs by
creating Mutinys at home, the other to ruin our Credit, and thereby disable us
from carrying on the War abroad. The first they hoped would be effected by the
ill State of our Coin; for to neglect that Disease, or to attempt its Cure,
they judged would alike produce such intestine Disorders as would prove our
Destruction: And as to our Credit they judged, that if by any means That of the
Bank of England could be destroyed, which was then the great Support of the
Nation, and was by Experience found to be so the following Summer, when it
contributed so much to the Support of our Army, at a time when the Bank it self
labored under the greatest Streights, it would be impossible for us to
maintain our Army abroad; and for this reason they engaged their Friends in
England to employ themselves with the utmost Diligence, to aggravate the
Inconveniencys of not recoining our Money if that should be neglected, or to
Embarrass and Entangle as much as they were able, the methods of recoining it,
in case that should be agreed on, and thereby make it grievous and
insupportable; and in case any Miracle should happen, that this great Business
should be accomplished without the Confusion that was expected to follow, they
were instructed to leave no Stone unturned, whereby they might hope to destroy
the Public Credit, and particularly that Branch of it that remained most
entire, the Bank of England. If either of these Designs, and much more if both
succeeded, they were well satisfied it would be impossible for the King to
appear in Flanders the next Spring in that Formidable manner he did the year
before. In this posture our Affairs stood, and indeed this Business of the Coin
was such a complicated, and almost inextricable a mischief, that
notwithstanding this Parliament, as will appear in the sequel of this History,
appeared a most Wise Assembly, and did Wonders for the Preservation of the
Government, and their Country; yet it may be perhaps allowed, that some
unfitting and unwary Steps were made, when they first entered upon so delicate
and intricate an Affair; and indeed the Novelty as well as the Nicety of it was
such, that it was their Honor they made no more, if indeed they made any. It
is not certain, that if according to some Resolutions, the Silver Money had been
all called in at once, and then paid out as fast as recoin'd, according to the
respective Appropriation, we should not have run into the greatest Confusions;
for it is not easy to tell how the smaller Necessities of Life and Commerce
among the People could have been maintained, had the Money been called in all at
once, or how the New Money should have freely Circulated, had it been all paid
out as appropriated; for it seems that the monied Usurers, and the Goldsmiths,
must of necessity have received the far greatest part, who were not likely to
part with it without great Advantage: And if these had been the Consequences,
it is plain the Nation could by no means have subsisted; and as some Men
apprehended, that had the Parliament proceeded in these Steps, this Confusion
would have followed; so they were afraid, that if the Second Bank that was
intended to be set up, had been Established, it would have proved so great a
diminution of the Credit of the former, that it had been impossible to have
supported our Army in Flanders; and if that had been the Consequence, we must
have been contented with what Terms of Peace our Enemies would have been pleased
to give us.

Whether these Resolutions would have produced these Effects which many
apprehended, is not certain, they being never put into Execution; but this is
certain, that if these Measures were wrong, the Parliament soon after recovered
themselves, to their great Honor; for even then when they found themselves
perplexed, and almost oppressed with their hard Affairs, yet such was their Zeal
for the Service of their Country, such their Courage and Resolution, that they
broke through all their amazing Difficultys, and made the way to a prosperous
Conclusion.

Besides, at this time though it is plain by the Event, that the Nation had
Treasure enough to support the War, yet the ways of coming at it were grown
very difficult. The former Parliaments chose rather to Establish Funds for
Public Supplys, than to use any Methods of raising them within the year;
diverse Branches of the King's Revenue were by His Majestys own consent,
subjected to great Anticipations, and the most easy and obvious Funds were
already settled, and sufficiently loaded; so that by the continuance of the War,
it became much harder for this, than for the preceding Parliaments, to find out
ways to defray the Charge of it.

This was the posture of Affairs when this memorable Parliament first sat
down. These were the complicated Diseases under which the Nation labored, when
these Physicians of State met together to Consult about proper Remedys. Now to
judge right in such nice and perplexed Cases, and to extricate a Kingdom from
such various and pressing Difficultys, is a Task worthy of Wise and Great Men;
and when it is duly considered what Condition this Parliament found the Nation
in, what hard work lay before them, and how they surmounted the frightful
difficultys they had to contend with, whereby they defeated the hopes and
expectations of their Enemies, and settled the Nation in Peace and Tranquillity,
it cannot but raise in us a mighty esteem of their Love to their Country, as
well as their Courage and great Capacity.

His Majesty having finished the Campaign in Flanders Ninety Five, no less to
his own Honor than the general Satisfaction of his People, arrived in England
the Fourteenth of November, where he was received with as loud Applauses, and
as great demonstration of public Joy and Affection, as have been expressed on
any occasion. He met the Parliament on the two and twentieth day of November
following; and at the opening of the Sessions, both Houses with great Zeal and
Unanimity, in a very Loyal Address to His Majesty, Congratulated the Success of
his Arms in Flanders, and his safe Return to his People: in which they likewise
assured him of their steadfast Resolution to support His Majesty and his
Government, against all his Enemies at home and abroad; and effectually to
Assist Him in the Prosecution of the present War.

The great Thing this Parliament had to do, and which they undertook with great
Alacrity, was to find out Ways to discharge the Expense of the War, and to
carry it on with Vigor, till they could bring it to a safe and honorable
Conclusion; this they were resolved to do with the utmost Care and Application.
But at the same time, to show their Zeal for the Ease of the People who chose
them, and the Security of their Lives and Estates, before they so much as
entered upon any Public Business, a Bill was brought into the House, and read
the first time, for regulating Trials in Cases of Treason and Misprision of
Treason; where many Things which the People complained of as grievous, were
removed or mitigated. This Bill in a short time past both Houses, and was one
of the first that received the Royal Assent this Session: By which gracious
Condescension His Majesty was pleased to let his People see, that he was as
ready to contribute every thing in his Power, for the Ease and Safety of his
Subjects, as they were every thing in theirs, for the Support of His Majesty
and his Government. About the Second of December, the House of Commons Voted a
Supply for carrying on the War, and proceeded to proportion it according to the
Estimates relating to the Navy, Army, and our Allies. They endeavored all that
was possible to raise the Supplys they had Voted, by such Ways and Means as
might keep the People from being querulous and uneasy. And notwithstanding the
Lands of England had all along born so great a share of the Public Charge, and
that now there might be a greater Pretense than in former Parliaments, to ease
the Landlord; yet the House resolved not to spare Themselves, but Taxed Land
Four Shillings in the Pound. They were contented to share the Expense of the
War, and chose rather to burden themselves than their Tenants, acting in this
like Wise Generals, who to encourage their Troops, and engage their Affection,
put them upon no other Hardships than what themselves are most forward to
undergo.

About this time the Parliament entered upon the great Affair of the Coin; and
whether it was necessary or expedient to recoin the Silver Money, was the first
Question. The Arguments were indeed weighty on either side. The Reasons against
calling in and recoining our Money were, That this was no fit Conjuncture for
it. That the Nation was engaged in a burdensome and doubtful War, by which the
Kingdom had already greatly suffered, and of which it grew every day more
sensible. That therefore the People on whose good Affection the Government so
much depended, should not be provoked by fresh superadded Grievances, greater
than any they had yet felt, as those would certainly be, that must arise from
calling in our Coin. That if this was done, however things might be managed and
accommodated at home, it was impossible to maintain either our Foreign
Commerce, or our Foreign War; for neither the Merchant could be paid his Bills
of Exchange, nor the Soldier receive his Subsistence. That this therefore was
to lay the Axe to the Root, and to dig up the Foundations of the Government.
That if this design was prosecuted, Trade must stand still for want of mutual
Payments, whence such great Disorders and Confusion would certainly follow, as
would discourage and dishearten the People in the highest measure, if not drive
them to a perfect Despair. That therefore the recoining our Money at this time,
was by no means to be attempted without hazarding all.

'Twas alleged by those of the contrary Opinion, that the Mischief would be
fatal, if a present Remedy was not found out and applied. That by reason of the
ill State of our Coin, the Change abroad was infinitely to our prejudice. That
the Supplys that were raised to maintain our Army would never attain their End,
being so much diminished and devoured by the unequal Change and exorbitant
Premiums before they reached the Camp. That this was the unhappy Cause that our
Guineas were mounted to Thirty Shillings, that therefore to our great loss, all
Europe sent that Commodity to this profitable Market; and would continue to do
so, till we should be impoverished and undone by our Plenty of Gold. That we
must Exchange for their Gold, our Goods or our Silver, till at last we should
have only Guineas to Trade withal; which no Body could think our Neighbors
would be so kind to receive back at the Value they were at here. That therefore
this Disease would every day take deeper Root, infect the very Vitals of the
Nation; and if not remedied, would soon become deplorable. That our Enemies
would sooner be induced to agree to honorable Terms of Peace, in case they saw
us able to surmount this difficulty by the retrieving the ill State of our
Coin, on which their hopes of our speedy Ruin so much depended. That it would
justly create a mighty Esteem abroad of the Greatness and Wisdom of the
Parliament of England, which was able to Conquer such an obstinate and almost
insuperable Evil in such a Juncture of Affairs. That our Enemies must be
mightily intimidated by so great an Action; and that it would be Natural for
them to conclude, that nothing would be impossible for a People, who were able
to disengage themselves from such an intricate Mischief, and get above
Difficultys that were looked on as invincible.

This Matter being fully debated, after all their Deliberations, the Parliament
resolved to call in and recoin our Money, looking on it as an Essential and
Capital Point that required, as certainly it did, their immediate Application,
and utmost Care. They resolved to do it at any Rate; and to use all imaginable
Endeavors to make it as easy to the People as it was possible for such a
Remedy to be. They chose rather to run the hazard of some great Inconveniencys,
by attempting the Cure, than by their longer neglect of it, to expose the
Kingdom to apparent Ruin.

This Step being made, the next was to consider whether the several
Denominations of our New Money should have the same Weight and Fineness as the
Old, or whether the Established Standard should be raised; and this Question
produced many Debates.

Those who were for raising the Standard argued thus: That the Standard of our
Coined Silver ought to bear Proportion to Silver in Bullion. That the Price of
an Ounce of Silver Bullion was advanced to Six Shillings and Three Pence; and
therefore the Standard ought to be raised to an Equality. That the raising our
Standard would prevent the Exportation of our Coin, which had been much
practiced to the great Prejudice of this Kingdom; that it would prevent its
being melted down; and Men would be much encouraged to bring in their Plate and
Bullion to the Mint.

Those who were for preserving the Old Standard in our Coin, urged that the
Worth of Money was Relative, and to be rated by the measure of such Goods,
Labor, and Advice, Skill or other Assistances, as could be purchased from
another by our parting with it. That the Value of Money among People that lived
under different Municipal Laws was intrinsic, and consisted in its Weight and
Fineness. That common Consent had given it this Value for the common
Convenience of supplying one another Wants. That the Weight and Fineness was
the only Worth that other Nations regarded in our Coin, or we in theirs. All
Money being between Subjects of different Governments, of no greater Value,
excepting the Workmanship, than so many pieces of uncoin'd Bullion. That
therefore should our Standard be altered, we should still be upon the same Foot
with our Neighbors; for if we were to pay them for their Goods, or exchange
our Money with theirs, whatever Denomination we gave our Money, they would in
their Change ever reduce it to an Equality with theirs, and proportion the
Quantity and Goodness of their Commoditys to the Weight and Fineness of the
Money they were to receive for them. That therefore in respect of our Foreign
Commerce, there was no reason to alter our Standard. And at home they said,
that if the Standard was raised, great Confusions would attend it, the Landlord
would be defrauded of a great part of his Rents, and the Creditor of his Debts.
That the Seaman and the Soldier would be wronged in their Pay, etc. and many
the like Injurys and Inconveniencys would happen: That it was no Answer to say,
they might buy as much Goods and Conveniencys of Life with this Coin raised
above its Standard, as they could before; because by degrees, the Seller would
infallibly raise the Price of his Goods in proportion to the new raised
Standard; and that of this there was an instance before them, all Commoditys
being greatly raised in their Price, while Guineas were paid for Thirty
Shillings. That whereas it was alleged that the Price of Bullion was risen to
Six Shillings and Three Pence, and therefore the Standard of our Silver Coin
ought to be raised likewise: It was replied, that it was a thing impossible
that the Price of Silver could ever rise and fall in respect of it self; That
it was an unchangeable Truth, than which no Mathematical Demonstration could be
clearer, that one Ounce of Silver would be ever worth another Ounce of the same
Fineness, and no more, allowing some inconsiderable disparity upon the account
of the Coin, if one Ounce be in Money, and the other Ounce in Bullion. That
'twas true indeed, that the People commonly gave Six Shillings and Three Pence
for an Ounce of Bullion; but they gave only Clipped Pieces, that had no more than
the Name or Sound of Shillings and Pence, but were by no means the Things
themselves. That is, they were not the Standard Shillings of due Weight and
Fineness, and so were no more Shillings in the just sense of the word, than an
Ell is an Ell when the third part of it is cut off, or two halfs of a broken
Yard are each of them a whole one. That the Case was so plain, that when they
demanded of those that affirmed an Ounce of Bullion was worth six shillings and
three pence, whether they meant six Milled Shillings and three pence, they knew
not what to reply; for this alteration of the Value of Bullion was merely in
relation to the diminished Money. And to make it yet more evident, they urged
that it was then matter of Fact, that with Five Shillings and two pence of new
Milled Money, they could buy as much Bullion as they pleased, while those who
bought it with Clipped Pieces paid six shillings and three pence. That whereas it
was urged that the raising the Standard would prevent the Exportation of our
Money, it was replied, that there was no other way possible to keep our Money at
home than by out-trading our Neighbors; that is, by sending them more
Commoditys, or of greater Value, than those we received from them; for if so be
upon the Balance of Trade we were found in their Debt, there was no way left
but to pay it in Coin or Bullion; and that therefore whatever Denomination we
gave our Coin, we must be necessitated to send it abroad, if the Commoditys we
Exported could not pay our Debts. That all the other Arguments for raising the
Standard would sink to the ground, in case these Two on which the rest were
built, had no reasonable Foundation. After the Debates on this Subject, the
House came to a Resolution, to recoin the Money according to the Old Standard,
both as to Weight and Fineness. And to make it more easy to the People, they
Voted a Recompense for the Deficiency of the Clipped Money.

When the Parliament undertook this sour and knotty piece of work, they were
not insensible of the inconveniencys that would arise from it; the Principal of
which, and the Spring of most of the rest, would be a Cessation of Payments,
and thereupon an interruption of Commerce for want of the Circulation of our
Money during its recoining. This Trading Nation could not live, unless this
Vital Current was constantly maintained; and our Gold alone was not sufficient
for that purpose. To obviate this Evil, which must have been fatal had it not
been prevented, was enough to try the Skill, and stretch the Imagination of the
ablest Statesmen. 'Twas plain, England could not subsist unless some Expedient
was found out to support its Trade, till the New Money returned from the Mint;
and to hit of such an Expedient, was indeed a very difficult Task. They
therefore agreed to call in the Money by degrees; that while some Denominations
of Coin were suppressed, others might be Current, hoping that before the last
Old Money should come in to be recoin'd, so much of the New might Circulate from
the Mint, as might sufficiently answer the Necessitys of the Nation. But this
expectation was partly defeated by the backwardness of the People to receive
any Old Money, though allowed at present to pass, apprehended at last it should be
left upon their hands at a great Loss, partly from the slowness of recoining in
respect of the Peoples Wants, though otherwise dispatched with all the Expedition
imaginable in so great an Affair, and partly by reason of the unequal
intrinsic Value between the New Milled Money and those Pieces or Denominations
of the Old which were allowed to be Current, and in which Payments were usually
made; for while the Hammered Money, and Pieces not Clipped within the Ring, were
permitted to pass for the present necessity of Trade, no body was willing to
make Payments in New Money, which so much exceeded the Old in its intrinsic
Worth. And therefore the New Silver Money as fast as it issued from the Mints
and the Exchequer, was in a great measure stopped in the hands of the first
Receivers; for none were disposed to make Payments in the New Silver Coin at
the Old Standard, when they could do it in Clipped Pieces so much below it. And
those who had no Payments to make, kept their New Money as Medals and Raritys in
their Chests; and there is too much reason to believe, that at first a great
deal of the New Money by help of the Melting Pot, went abroad in Ingots to
purchase Gold, which at that Juncture was a very profitable Commodity in
England.

And though the Parliament lowered the Value of Guineas, as shall be afterward
mentioned, hoping by that means to bring out the New Money into Circulation, yet
by the Artifice and Managery of some Men, the People were made to believe that
the Value of Guineas would be raised at the next Session, upon which abundance
of Men that had great Sums of Guineas in their Chests, kept them close there,
in expectation of their being raised in Value when the Parliament should come
next together. By this means though the Circulation of the New Money was a little
promoted, yet that of Guineas, by which we then chiefly subsisted, was quite
obstructed this Golden Coin, which was before incredibly frequent vanished on a
sudden; and the New Silver Money too, the Value of which the People were
likewise persuaded to believe, would be advanced the next Session, was for that
reason in a great measure hoarded up, to the great damage of our Commerce; for
by this means the Nation was reduced to very great Straits, especially in their
Payments of Foreign Bills.

The Parliament about this time took into Consideration the lowering the Value
of Guineas, to which the People had raised them. The Reasons against sinking
their Value were, That the People were easy and pleased with it, and it would
raise great Disturbance and Clamor in the Nation, to fix them at a lower
Price. That abundance of People would be Losers in whose hands the Guineas
should be at last found. That the Farmer and Common Tradesman, who now all
abounded with Guineas which they received at Thirty Shillings, would not bear
such a loss. That therefore it ought to be considered, how far it was fit to
incense the Common People in this Juncture of Affairs, who had already suffered
so much by the War.

Those who were for reducing the Price of Guineas, argued, That there was as
great reason to bring down Guineas, as there was to recoin the Silver Money at
the Old Standard; and here they reckoned up the Mischiefs mentioned before on
that Head: That however, the Parliament were obliged to manage by the necessity
of Affairs, and to suffer for a time the Guineas to pass at that excessive
rate, that in some measure there might be a currency of Money, while the Mints
were employed in new Coining the Silver; yet now they were obliged to sink the
Price nearer the Old Standard, that the Silver Money might not be stopped and
hoarded up as fast as issued out from the Mints. And whatever Losses and
Inconveniencys the People might suffer by the reducing of Guineas, yet the
Mischiefs that arose, and would daily increase from not doing it, did
infinitely over-balance those on the other side. Upon this the House resolved
to lower the Price of Guineas; and that they might do it with less Grievance
and Disquiet to the People, they chose to sink them by degrees, till at last
they reduced them to the State they are now in, that is, that they should not
pass in Payments for above Twenty two shillings; that by this means Guineas
being brought near to an Equality with our new Silver Money, the Circulation of
the last might not be obstructed; and the Event answered the Expectation.

But notwithstanding all the Care which the Parliament used to provide against
the Mischiefs they foresaw were likely to follow, yet many great Inconveniencys
were unavoidable: And, one Evil arose during recoining the Money; that is, a
general loss of Credit, which indeed shook the State; but this likewise was
Cured by a most seasonable and wise Remedy, which the Parliament applied in
their second Session. So that at last this great undertaking of the highest
Difficulty, yet of absolute Necessity, was happily acomplish'd. In this Affair
the Parliament showed such Wisdom, such Care of the Public, such unbroken
Courage and Resolution in undertaking and carrying on a Business of this
Importance, and encomber'd with so many and such great Obstructions, that no
Patriots ever merited more of their Country, none having ever rescued it form
greater, and more apparent Danger. By restoring our Coin, they restored Health
and Strength to a Nation under the worst Symptoms in the World. They restored
the Honor of the English, confirmed the Shaking Government, and laid the
Foundation of that Honorable Peace, which after ensued, and which we now enjoy.

And those worthy Gentlemen who made the greatest Figure in this Parliament,
and had the chief Direction of this particular Affair, must be allowed to have
shown a great Capacity and a Mastery Judgment, as well as a just regard to the
Good of the People, and therefore no Votes in their Favor, no Praises and
Thanks from their Country, can be thought too much for those who have so well
deserved them.

No part of the Roman History gives a Man a greater Image of that noble People,
than that which relates the Presence of Mind, the unshaken Constancy, and the
wise Conduct which the Senate showed after the loss of the Battle of Cannae, to
be incapable of desponding even in Extremity of Affairs, to wind themselves out
of such intricate and pinching Straits, and at last to weather Difficulties
which seemed insuperable, this cannot but create a great Opinion of their Wisdom
and Resolution.

Some of his Majesty's implacable Enemies finding themselves disappointed the
last Year in Flanders, and being impatient to wait the event of another
Campaign, betook themselves to the most wicked and most dishonorable means of
accomplishing their Designs.

Upon the twenty fourth of February, the King came to the House of Lords, sent
for the Commons, and having passed what Acts lay ready for the Royal Assent, in
a gracious Speech he acquainted both Houses, that he had received several
concurring Informations of a Design to Assassinate him; and that at the same
time the Enemy was very forward in his Preparations for an Invasion of this
Kingdom. That he had given Orders about the Fleet, and sent for such a Number
of Troops as might secure the Kingdom from any Attempt; that some of the
Conspirators against his Person were in Custody, and that care was taken for
apprehending the rest. It Is not necessary to give a long Relation of this
Conspiracy, a short account is thus.

Several of the late Kings Adherents not without the Consent, Encouragement and
Direction of the late King and his Ministers, had formed a hellish Conspiracy
against the Life of his Majesty. The Conduct and Execution of this horrid
Villainy was committed to Sir George Barclay, who had formerly been a General
Officer, and was then in France an Officer in the late King's Guards. This
Gentleman Ruffian undertakes the barbarous Business; and for the accomplishing
of it, departs from St. Germains about the tenth day of December for England,
where he arrived about the beginning of January. Before him, with him, or after
him, about twenty more of the late King's Guards, who were Embarked in the same
Bloody Design, and who had all Instructions to obey the Orders of Sir George*
came into England, where in a short time they Engaged about as many more in the
Conspiracy. Several Consultations were held, and several ways were proposed,
where, and how to Assassinate the King's Person, and at last it was agreed that
they should Execute their Design on a Saturday as his Majesty returned from
Richmond, whither he used to go on that day, to take the diversion of Hunting.

The Place agreed on was the Lane between Turnham-Green, and Brentford, through
which the King was to pass after his Landing at Que-ferry, and to avoid
Suspicion they were to go out of Town in small Numbers to the Inns in
Turnham-Green, there to stay, till they had notice that his Majesty's Guards
appeared, and then they were to Mount, and in a Body to march to the Lane,
where some were to Attack the King's Person, and the rest in the mean time were
to Engage the Guards. The day for Executing this horrid Deed was at hand, when
Mr. Pendergrass who had been newly made acquainted with the Design, and seemed
to consent to it, though indeed he only complied with it, till he could gain the
fittest Opportunity to discover it, went to my Lord Portland, and disclosed to
him this important Secret. By whose means his Majesty's Life was preserved from
the violence of the Conspirators, and that fatal Stroke most happily prevented;
which must have been attended with all the terrible Calamitys, that Fear it
self is able to represent.

Both Houses of Parliament were greatly alarmed at the news of this Barbarous
Conspiracy, and being satisfied that the welfare of the Kingdom entirely
depended on the Safety of the King's Person, they joined in an Address to his
Majesty full of Loyalty and the warmest Affection; wherein they Congratulated
the happy Deliverance of his Royal Person, gave him thanks for imparting to
them the horrid Design of Assassinating his Majesty by Papists, and other
disaffected Persons, and of the intended Invasion from France. Humbly desired
his Majesty to take more then ordinary Care of his Person at this time, assured
him that they would stand by, assist and defend his Majesty with their Lives
and Fortunes against all his Enemies, and that in case he should come to any
violent Death (which they begged God to prevent) they would revenge the same
upon all his Majesty's Enemies and their Adherents; told his Majesty they would
give all possible dispatch to public Business, and desired him to seize and
secure all Persons, Horses and Arms, that he might think fit to apprehend.

On this Occasion the House of Commons for the Security of his Majesty's
Person, entered into an Association in these Words. Whereas there has been a
horrid and detestable Conspiracy formed and carried on by the Papists, and
other Wicked and Traitorous Persons, for Assassinating his Majesty's Royal
Person, in order to encourage an Invasion from France, to subvert our Religion,
Laws and Libertys, We whose Names are hereunto Subscribed, do heartily,
sincerely, and solemnly profess, testify and declare, that his present Majesty
King William, is Rightful and Lawful King of these Realms, and we do mutually
promise and engage to stand by and Assist each other to the utmost of our
Power, in the Support and Defense of his Majestys most scacred Person and
Government, against the late King James and all his Adherents; and in case his
Majesty come to a violent or untimely Death (which God forbid) we do hereby
farther, freely and unanimously oblige our selves to Unite, Associate and stand
by each other, in revenging the same upon his Enemies and their Adherents, and
in supporting and defending the Succession of the Crown, according to an Act
made in the first Year of King William and Queen Mary: Entitled, an Act
declaring the Rights and Libertys of the Subject, and settling the Succession of
the Crown.

They ordered at the same time a Bill to be brought in, that when it should
please God to afflict these Realms by the Death of his present Majesty, the
Parliament then in being should not be dissolved thereby, till the next Heir of
the Crown, according to the late Act of Setlement should dissolve it. And if
there is no Parliament then in being, the last preceding Parliament shall
immediately convene and sit; and it was done accordingly. By this wise Act, as
the Parliament provided against that Confusion and Disorder that might happen
by the Cessation of Parliaments, and all Commissions on his Majesty's Decease,
so nothing could have been imagined more effectual for the Security of the
King's unvaluable Life, against the implacable Malice and Violence of his
Enemies; seeing by this means all hopes of Escape and Impunity were cut off, in
case they should succeed in* their hellish Attempt. They likewise Addressed his
Majesty to issue out his Royal Proclamation, to Banish all Papists from the
Citys of London and Westminster, and ten Miles from the same, according to the
Laws made for that purpose; and likewise, that he would please to give
Instructions to the Judges going the Circuits, to put the Laws in Execution
against Papists and Non-Jurors.

By these Proceedings and prudent Provisions for the King's Safety, the
Parliament equally expressed their unshaken Loyalty to his Majesty, and their
tender Care and Vigilance for the Happiness of the People; it being as clear as
Noonday, that had not his Majesty by the gracious Providence of Heaven, been
delivered from this Hellish Design, the greatest Calamitys and Desolation must
have overwhelmed the Kingdom, that ever befell a miserable People: And it is very
observable, and must be taken notice of, for the Honor of this Parliament,
that amidst all their Zeal for securing his Majesty's Life, on which all our
Happiness depended, they expressed that Lenity and Memorable Regard to the
Libertys of the People, that they passed no new and extraordinary Law for the
Conviction of the Conspirators, as Men in such amazing Dangers might have been
provoked to do for the Preservation of the Government; but they mercifully left
them to stand or fall by the known Laws which were then in being. And it is very
remarkable, that Charnock who was the first Person tried for this Conspiracy*
was the first too that had the Benefit of the Law that was beformention'd, to
be made this very Session to regulate Trials in Cases of Treason.

There is but one single Instance that seems to contradict the universal Extent
of this Observation; and that is the Case of Sir John Fenwick, which happened
in the Second Session of this Parliament; yet neither in that Case was any new
Law made for the Trial of the Criminal by the Judges in Inferior Courts: But
the Parliament thought fit to make use of the Legislative Authority, and to
proceed aginst him by Bill of Attainder, which no Body questioned their Power
to do. That Government would be defective in its Constitution, and incapable of
defending it self, that had not a Power lodged in it to reach a Criminal in an
Extraordinary Case, by an extraordinary Manner. Neither could the Legislative
Power be looked on as under the same Restraints, Limitations and Forms of
Proceeding, which the Judges who are entrusted only with the executive part of
the Law, are obliged to observe in the ordinary Courts of Justice. The
Questions therefore in this Case, seemed to be only these two, Whether the
Parliament had sufficient convincing Grounds to believe the Prisoner Guilty of
the Treason he stood accused; and in the second Place, whether this was a Case
of that extraordinary Nature, and that Importance, as required this uncommon
way of proceeding by Bill of Attainder. As to the first Question, All the World
as well as the Parliament, thought there was sufficient Reason to believe the
Prisoner Guilty. But whether the Evidence was in all Forms and Limitations such
as the Law required for convicting the Prisoner before the Judges in Inferior
Courts, was out of the Question, the Parliament as was said before, being not
tied up in their Legislative Capacity to the Rules and Restraints by which the
Inferior Courts were obliged to Act. And as to the second Question, Seeing the
Prisoner had so notoriously prevaricated with the Government, seeing there was
such a vehement Presumption that one of the Evidences was drawn off, and
absented himself by the management of the Prisoner's Friends, to elude the Law
in the common course of it; and seeing the Crime wherewith he was Charged, was
of no lower Nature than the dethroning of his Majesty and the Subversion of the
Government, the Parliament believed it a Case so Extraordinary and of such
Consequence, as sufficiently warranted this uncommon, though not unexampled way
of Proceeding.

These were the chief Transactions of this Parliament in their First Session,
those of the Second come now to be related.

The great Deficiencys of the Funds settled by Parliament for the Service of
the Year Ninety Six, and particularly the unhappy Project of the Land-Bank
proving wholly Abortive, and not producing one Penny, of above two Millions and
a half, with which it was charged, were likely to have proved fatal to our
Affairs the following Summer. This Disappointment involved the King in so many
great Difficulties abroad, as well as at Home, that no clearer Demonstration
could be given of his Majesty's Wise Conduct, or of the Fidelity and Affection
of his Army, than his finishing this Campaign with so little disadvantage. His
Majestys more discerning Friends could not but tremble, to think on the hard
Circumstances our Army was in; and how dangerous the Issue was like to prove;
while the Enemies of the Government were all overjoyed at the hopeful Prospect
of our sudden Ruin. But to their great Mortification his Majesty, whose Spirit
was never broken by the greatest Difficulty; who never wanted Presence of Mind
in the most surprising and pinching Exigencys, by the assistance of Divine
Providence weathered this Storm; and having put his Army into Quarters,
returned in Safety to meet his Parliament.

The Parliament came together the twentieth day of October, and after they had
in a Loyal and most affectionate Address assured His Majesty, that tho they had
born so many years the great Burden of the present War, yet they were most
steadfastly resolved never to desert his Interests, or be wanting to their
Country, till by His Majesty's Arms they should obtain a safe and honorable
Peace. They entered with great Alacrity upon the Business that lay before them,
which indeed was very great.

The principal Evil which this Parliament had to remove, was the loss of
Public Credit. For the Tallys struck on Funds settled by Parliament, especially
such as were remote, were Exchanged for ready Money at a mighty loss; and the
Government was obliged to make excessive Discounts and Allowances, to bring
Treasure into the Exchequer. This great and almost fatal loss of Credit, arose
chiefly from two Springs, the Deficiencvs of Parliamentary Funds, and the
Recoining our Silver. The First made Trust and Confidence, as the Last made
Money to be very scarce.

This loss of Credit was so great, that unless it were restored, it was not
possible for the Government to continue much longer; The Notes of the Bank of
England which had been a mighty help to the Public, were discounted at Twenty,
Tallys at Forty, Fifty, or Sixty per Cent. The Government had contracted a
mighty Debt; and some Funds were wholly taken away, and the rest proved
Deficient; great Numbers of Tallys had no Fund at all, and the rest were on
Funds very remote. Hereby the Trust and good Opinion of the People was so far
lost, that those few who had any Money to Lend, showed the greatest backwardness
imaginable to advance it for the Public Service; and therefore all Loans to
the Government, as was said before, were procured on most immoderate Premiums,
and exorbitant Discounts.

This decay of Public Credit created the greatest Confusion and Disorder in
the World; our Affairs seemed reduced to Extremity, and the Government was
looked on to be at a stand. All Men were at a Gaze, and stood wondering what
the Parliament would do; what Measures they would take in such perplexing
Difficultys, scarce believing that the Wit of Man was able to find out any
Remedy, or propose any Expedient that could be effectual in removing so great a
Mischief. Those who were for galling and streightning the Government; had now
the Wicked Satisfaction of seeing it sufficiently distressed; it not being
possible that our Affairs could be more embarass'd than they were in this
Conjuncture.

To revive Public Credit was therefore a thing of the last necessity for the
Preservation of the Government; but as the Wisest Men without Door were at
their Wits end how to accomplish it, so the Malcontents were certain that this
Evil was never to be cured; and therefore looked upon the Government as near
its End; gave it up as desperate; and triumphed in the Expectation of a sudden
Revolution.

But this great Parliament being fully sensible that the Restoration of our
Credit was a point of Capital Importance, instead of being discouraged by the
Difficulty of effecting it, they were rather animated to undertake the Work
with greater Zeal and Application; as if they looked on nothing which was
necessary to be impossible; and resolved at any Rate to find out Means to
preserve their Country, and to break through all Opposition how great soever it
should appear, to confirm and secure our Happy Establishment.

The Parliament was very sensible, that one great Spring of this Mischief was
that mentioned before, the Deficiencys of several Aids and Dutys which neither
had been, nor ever would be sufficient to answer the Principal and Interest
charged upon 'em. That these Deficiencys, and the remoteness of the course of
Payment of the Tallys, were the true Reasons why the Owners of such Tallys were
frequently necessitated for the procuring of ready Money, to dispose of and
exchange them at a great Loss. By which means the Public Credit was extremely
weakened, our Commerce interrupted, and other Public and Private Affairs
exceedingly perplexed. The Parliament therefore took this great Affair into
their serious Consideration, and in order to the Cure of this grievous Wound,
which began to Ulcerate and Eat into the very Heart of the Government, they
resolved to search it and lay it open to the Bottom.

This they did by ordering an Estimate or Computation to be laid before them of
what Sums were, or would be wanting to satisfy and discharge all Principal and
Interest due, or to become due on the several Aids, Dutys or Funds, over and
above all Arrears standing out upon them which were determined, and over and
above all Monys to be raised by such as were then unexpir'd; and the
Computation of all the particular Sums that were wanting to make good all the
deficient Funds being made, the whole amounted to five Millions one Hundred and
sixty Thousand four Hundred Pounds, etc. The Parliament now having got to the
bottom of the Disease, resolved on a through Cure, by making Provision for the
Payment of the whole Debt. They were perfectly convinced that to cure a part,
was no way to cure the Disease, and restore Strength to the Whole. Had some
Deficiencys been taken Care of and others neglected, Public Credit must have
continued Lame; and the Government must still have Halted, if it had not fallen
to the Ground. That therefore the Remedy might be Adequate and Commensurate to
the Evil, the Parliament found out a general Fund which might secure the
Payment of the whole five Millions, etc. That so there should remain no Tally
without a Fund, nor any Tally on a deficient Fund, but what in its course of
Payment should be satisfied and discharged. For this End they continued diverse
Taxes and Dutys after the Day on which they would otherwise have Expired to the
first Day of August seventeen Hundred and six, and appointed all the Monys
which should arise and be brought into his Majesty's Exchequer from any of
these Taxes or Dutys from the Day on which they were otherwise to Expire, to
the said first Day of August one Thousand seven Hundred and six, to be the
general Fund for making good all the deficient ones, by the Satisfaction and
Payment of the Principal and Interest due, or to become due thereupon. And that
all occasion of Complaint might be removed, and equal Provision might be made
for all, the Parliament directed that all Monys arising from the Dutys so as
before continued and appropriated for a general Fund, should be distributed and
applied to pay Principal and Interests upon every one of the deficient Funds,
in just Proportion to the Sum of which they were deficient. And that all the
Money which should be in such a due proportion distributed or placed to the
Account of each deficient Tax and Fund for the discharge of Principal and
Interest, should be Issued or Paid out to all who were entitled to receive the
same, in such Course and Order as if the same were Monys really arising by the
respective and deficient Funds, and that without being diverted, misapplied or
postpon'd; and the Officers of his Majesty's Treasury were to incur great
Penaltys in case this Method or Order were not observed. And to remove all
Doubts about the Security intended to be given, in case on the first of August
seventeen Hundred and six, or within three Months then next ensuing, the whole
Produce of the several Funds and Revenues appropriated for a general Fund,
together with other Grants then in being, should not be sufficient to discharge
the Sum of five Millions, etc. intended to be discharged, that then what was
deficient should be made good out of such Aids or Revenues as should be granted
in the next Session of Parliament.

Thus the Parliament found out a Security sufficient to discharge this great
Debt that lay so heavy on the Nation, which was not only a stroke of admirable
Wisdom, but likewise such a noble Act of Public Justice, as perhaps cannot be
equaled in the Story of any Nation. Money at that time not in being, and
therefore not to be had; and a sufficient Security was all that could be
Demanded or Expected; and this was very happily provided for, wherein a due
Regard was had to the particular Interest of every Man concerned.

And for as much as all the Branches of Public Credit did plainly depend on,
and mutually support one another, the Parliament took into consideration, by
what means they might restore the Credit of the Bank of England which was then
at a low Ebb.

In order to this the Parliament agreed, to augment and enlarge the Common
Capital Stock of the Bank of England by admitting new Subscriptions, which new
Subscriptions should be made good in Tallys and Bank Notes. The Proportion was
four fifths of the First and one fifth of the Last, and an Interest of eight
per Cent. was allowed, as well for all such Tallys as should be brought in to
enlarge their Stock by new Subscriptions, as for those Tallys which the Company
was then possessed of, provided they did not exceed the Value of those Bank
Notes which should be paid in upon this Enlargement of their Stock; and for
securing the Payment of this Interest of eight per Cent, the additional Duty on
Salt was granted and appropriated. The Time likewise of the continuance of the
Bank of England they thought fit to extend to the Year seventeen Hundred and
ten; and upon this Encouragement a Million was Subscribed and Paid in Tallys
and Bank Notes, as the Parliament had directed. This Expedient was projected
with all the Prudence imaginable; and though many Persons who were Interested in
it, could not presently apprehend the Reasonableness of it, yet the Advantages
they have since received, have fully convinced them that no other Way could
have been found out to have retrieved their sinking Credit. For the Value of
two Hundred Thousand Pounds in Bank Notes being sunk by the new Subscriptions,
the rest as it was reasonable to believe they would, began presently to rise in
Worth; and so likewise did the Tallys, after so many as amounted to eight
Hundred Thousand Pounds were Paid in to augment the Bank. And the Owners of the
rest have a great deal of Reason to wish that they had sunk the remainder also
the same way; for had that been done, this great Work had been accomplished at
one happy Stroke. The whole five Millions had in a Moment been taken off from
the Government, and thereby a Disease that was judged Incurable had been
entirely removed by a single Application. For upon this, the Credit of the Bank
began to recover apace, till in a short time their Notes were all equal with,
and their Bills that bore Interest, better than Money. By this means the Face of
Affairs was in a short time much changed for the better, Credit began to
revive, Money to Circulate on more moderate Terms. Foreign Exchange was less to
our Disadvantage, and soon after at an equality. The People began to think
better of our Condition, and were more convinced of the Wisdom of our
Administration, and of the Care that was taken of 'em; and whatever Hardships
they had undergone by reason of a long War and the recoining our Money, which
could not but occasion many Complaints, yet the greatest part attributed this
to the necessity of our Affairs, and began to Hope, that by the Care and Wisdom
of the Government they should enjoy more favorable Times.

Besides this of the great loss of Credit, another Evil of no less Difficulty
or Importance remained still to be removed, and that was the great scarcity of
Money. The Porliament to prevent Disappointments by settling Funds which might be
deficient came to a Resolution, that the Supplys for the service of the Year
following, should be raised within the Year; and they Voted those Supplys in
proportion to the Estimates laid before them. But this Resolution of Parliament
seemed a Thing quite Impracticable. How could five Millions be raised within
the Year, while the Silver Money was called in and recoining, and there was not
Current Coin enough in the Nation to answer the Occasions of Trade, and
scarcely the Conveniencys and Necessitys of Life? The Enemies of the Government
made themselves Merry with this Vote of Parliament, and instead of being the
occasion of their Anger 'twas the common Subject of their Raillery, and the
Entertainment of their pleasant Humor. And many even of the best Friends of
the Government, imagined that the Parliament by this, rather expressed their
Zeal and Willingness, than their Ability to support the State. They had no way
to satisfy themselves in this Point, but by relying upon the Wisdom and great
Capacity of the Parliament, for whom they believed nothing was too hard, and
who they hoped would Conquer this Difficulty because they had mastered so many
others before; which were looked on as no less Invincible. Neither were their
Hopes in this Matter disappointed, for the Parliament had recourse to an
admirable Expedient in this pressing Exigency, and found out a way of raising
Money, in a Juncture when no Money was to be had. Other Parliaments have been
able to raise great Sums of Money when the defense of their Country required it,
but it was the particular Honor of this, to have been able to make it. They
created Money without Bullion, and distributed great quantity of Coin without
help of the Mint. This they did by authorizing the Lords of his Majesty's
Treasury to issue out Bills from the Exchequer to the value first and last, of
above two Millions; which Bills were first appointed to be brought in and sunk
upon the Duty commonly called the Capitation Tax; but before the Session ended
the Parliament was convinced by the first Collection of that Duty, that it
would prove very deficient; and therefore they appointed the Exchequer Bills to
be brought in on any other of the King's Dutys or Revenues, excepting the Land
Tax; and allowed an Interest of seven pound twelve shillings per annum upon the
said Bills, which at first was not given. The Parliament by this laid a good
foundation for Paper Money to supply the place of our Silver Coin, which was
called in to be new made; for so many Payments were at this time to be made
into the Exchequer, that when the People had Assurance given them that the
Exchequer Notes should be received back again in Payment for the King's Dutys,
they were very well satisfied to take them, at first indeed at a small
discount, but not long after at an Equality. A great number of these Notes were
only for five or ten Pounds, which answered the necessitys of Commerce among
the meaner People, for the common Conveniencys of Life. And that those who had
advanced Money in Loans on any Part of his Majesty's Revenue, might not be
obliged to receive it back in Notes that were under the Value of Money, to
strengthen the Reputation of these Bills, the Parliament authorized the Lords
of the Treasury to Contract with any Corporations or Numbers of Private Men,
and to allow them a competent Premium, provided they obliged themselves to
exchange these Notes for ready Money when tendered to them for that purpose;
which the Lords of the Treasury did accordingly.

By this means the Credit of the aforesaid Notes was mightily secured, and
daily arose nearer to Par; till as at this time, they exceeded the Value of
Money; and whereas the Trustees contracted with to exchange them for Money, were
before as a Premium allowed Ten per Cent. they have been since contented to do
it for Four. By this means Trade and Commerce were maintained; and without
Silver we had an Artificial Treasure Circulating through the Kingdom, which so
well answered the design of the Wise Projectors, that by the Confession of
those very Men who at first inveighed sharply against it, it proved an
effectual, though a Paper, Prop to support the State, when its Silver Pillars
were for a time removed. We were Sailing in bad Weather, and our main Mast was
brought by the Board; and it is very plain, that unless this Jury-Masts of
Exchequer Notes had been presently made and set up in this stress of Affairs,
we must unavoidably have sunk and perished.

These Bills past in Payments as so many Counters, which the People were
satisfied to receive, because they knew the Exchequer would receive them again
as so much ready Money. These State-Counters so well supplied the place of Money
till new Coin was issued from the Mint, that Trade was preserved, and mutual
Payments well enough made to answer the Necessitys of the Government, and the
People; and by this means the Parliament had the Honor to Accomplish another
Work that was judged impossible.

The Parliament likewise this Session, to the great satisfaction of the People,
took care to Remedy a Public Grievance of long standing. Several Places in and
about the City of London, which in Times of the Romish Superstition were
allowed as Sanctuarys to Criminals and Debtors, had ever since the Reformation
pretended a Privilege to protect the last; and one of these was a notorious
Nest of broken and desperate Men, in the very heart of his Majesty's Capitol
City, whither they resorted in great Numbers, and to the dishonor of the
Government and grievance of the People; defended themselves with Force and
Violence against the Law and Public Authority. The Parliament took care to
redress this inveterate Mischief; and what was long expected from others, was
effected by this, in an Act entitled, For the more Effectual Relief of
Creditors in cases of Escapes, and for preventing Abuses in Prisons, and
pretended Privileged Places. Wherein such effectual Provision was made to
reduce these Garrisons of Outlaws, that immediately after the Act was
published, they abandoned their Posts, and deserted in such Numbers, that their
old Haunts became a Desolation, and lay open to receive better Inhabitants.

The Summer after this Session of Parliament, His Majesty being at the Head of
his Army in Flanders, his Enemies even after they had opened the Campaign with
the taking of Aeth, thought fit to enter upon a Negotiation of Peace, which was
begun and carried on at Ryswick by the Plenipotentiarys of all the Princes and
States concerned, and through the good Disposition of the principal Partys to so
great a Work, the Treaty was concluded, and a Peace ratified the Autumn
following; to the accomplishing of which, his Majesty's Presence in Flanders
mightily contributed. The management of this famous Negotiation, and the
favorable Terms on which it were concluded, were no less to the Peoples
Satisfaction, than to His Majesty's Glory. For the Malcontents never believed
that it was possible for the King to make Peace upon any, much less upon Terms
so very Honorable; and therefore they looked on this Transaction at Ryswick,
as a pure Amusement either to break the Confederacy, or to cover some notable
Design which was not yet ripe for Execution. And when at last they saw the
Treaty far advanced, they began indeed to believe that a Peace might be
concluded with the rest of the Allys, but they were certain England would never
be included: For they judged this so incredible a Story, that they scarcely
believed it when the Peace was publicly and solemnly Proclaimed.

This important Work being thus happily effected, His Majesty returned to
England; where the People every where received him, as they had the greatest
Reason in the World to do, with all the Applause and Demonstration of Joy that
can be imagined. He met his Parliament the third day of December.

The War being ended, the House of Commons for the Ease of the People, Voted
the Army to be Disbanded, and resolved to raise a Supply sufficient to pay off
the Troops. But at the same time when they took off so great a part of the
Burden from the Country, out of a due regard to our future Safety, they passed
a Vote to enable His Majesty to keep such a number of Troops on Foot, and to
maintain such Naval Force, as in their Opinion the Security of the Government
and the public Tranquillity required.

When the House had Voted a Supply for the Disbanding the greatest part of the
Army, they took into Consideration the Services of the Officers and Common Men,
who had amidst so many Hardships, Dangers and Disappointments in Nine
successive Campaigns, shown so much Bravery and Fidelity in the Defense of
their Country, as recovered the declining Reputation of the English Valor, and
preserved the Kingdom from the terrible Assaults of the most Potent Empire that
perhaps was ever Erected in the World. It was thought hard that such gallant
Men, to whom the Kingdom owed so much, should be discharged without any
Provision made for them, the House of Commons therefore passed a Vote in their
Favor, That the Officers should be continued in half Pay till they should
otherwise be provided for; and that the Common Sentinels should have a Donative
at their Disbanding; and for their further encouragement, should be free to set
up and exercise their Trades in any Town or Corporation throughout the Country.

This being done, the Parliament took into Consideration two great Branches of
our Foreign Trade, which had long wanted a due Regulation; and they entered
first upon that of the Company Trading to Africa; and in consideration of the
necessity of keeping up Forts and Castles for the Defense of our Factorys on
the Coast of Guinea, there being no Regular Government among those Barbarous
People on whose Protection they might safely rely, the Parliament thought it
necessary to Establish the African Company for the better carrying our Commerce
to those Parts. Yet the Free Traders or Interlopers, were likewise permitted to
Trade to the same Coasts, provided they paid to the Established Company Ten per
Cent. of the Value of Goods exported, toward the maintenance of the Forts and
Settlements.

Next they entered on the Business of the East India Trade, which had been
depending many years, and was looked on as so nice and difficult that it had
been referred to the King and his Council, and back again by them to the
Parliament.

This Affair being brought into the House of Commons, and the Old Company
having offered to advance seven hundred thousand pounds at four per Cent. for
the Service of the Government in case the Trade to India might be settled on
them Exclusive of all others, the House seemed inclined to embrace their
Proposal, when a Number of eminent Merchants proposed to the House to raise Two
Millions at eight per Cent. on Condition the Trade to India might be settled on
the Subscribers exclusive of all others. They proposed that these Subscribers
should not be obliged to Trade in a Joint Stock, but if any Members of them
should afterward desire to be incorporated, a Charter should be granted to
them for that purpose.

The House judged this Overture not only to be more advantageous to the
Government, but likewise more likely to settle this controverted Trade on a
better Foundation than it was on before; a Bill therefore was brought into the
House, for settling the Trade to the East Indies on those who should subscribe
the Two Millions, according to the Limitations beforementioned. But so great a
regard was had to the Members of the Old Company, that till they had refused
and rejected the Offer made them of settling this Trade upon them, if they would
accept it on the same Terms and Limitations on which the others were contented
to take it, and which the Parliament judged most advantageous for the Kingdom,
the Bill did pass in favor of the New Adventures.

The Bill being passed, and the Books laid open to take Subscriptions, the
whole Two Millions were subscribed in less time than four Days, the People
showed so much Zeal to assist the Government, and promote the Trade of the
Nation, that it is very probable a Million more had been subscribed, had not the
Books been shut up before the distant Corporations, and private Men in remote
Countys, could remit their Commissions for the great Sums they intended to
Subscribe. The dispatch of so great a Work in so short a Time, after the Nation
had born so chargeable a War for so many years, surpised and amazed all the
World. And as it greatly mortified all those who were joyfully assured that His
Majesty would be disappointed of this Supply, so it gave our Neighboring
Nations an astonishing Image both of the Opulence of the People, and the
Strength of the Government. This Transaction viewed in all its Circumstances,
is in deed so very strange and wonderful, that 'twill be a hard matter for
Posterity to believe it. How will they be able to persuade themselves, that a
Nation whose Wealth might with great Reason be supposed to be exhausted after
they had contended so many years with such a mighty Enemy, should be capable of
furnishing such a vast Supply in Four Days? Yet this Wise Parliament had so
much Skill in touching the Springs of the Peoples Affection, that
notwithstanding all the Losses they had suffered, and all the Expense they had
been at, they were prevailed with to advance this great Supply with such
incredible Expedition. And by this means, the Parliament, only by doubling the
Duty on Proceedings at Law and that on Salt, raised a Supply of two Millions;
which to have done by any other Ways, was at that time a matter of the highest
Difficulty.

The Parliament likewise this Session, applied themselves with great Diligence
to discover such Offenders, who by fraudulent and surreptitious Ways had
carried on a secret Commerce with France; and to the great Damage of this
Kingdom, had brought in for diverse Years past, great quantitys of Alamodes and
Lutestrings. Many of these Criminals they detected and punished: And to prevent
the continuance of this clandestine and most prejudicial Trade, and to
encourage our own Manufacture, they brought in a Bill which after past into an
Act, Entitled, An Act for the better encouragement of the Royal Lustring
Company, and the more effectual preventing the fraudulent Importation of
Lustrings and Alamodes.

And for as much as many ill Men continued to export English Wool etc. to
foreign Parts, to the unspeakable detriment of the Nation, notwithstanding the
severe Laws that were in Force against such Offenders, the Parliament the more
effectually to obviate that stubborn Mischief for the future, made many prudent
Provisions, in an Act Entitled, An Act for the Explanation and better
Execution of former Acts made against Transportation of Wool, Fullers-Earth,
and Scouring-Clay.

This Session likewise upon complaints made, that the Woollen Manufacture was
carried on in Ireland, to the great Prejudice of that Staple Trade in England,
the Parliament took care to stop the Progress of that growing Evil. They
entered upon a Bill for that purpose, but it terminated at last in an Address
to the King, That his Majesty would be pleased to use the most effectual means
to discourage his Subjects of Ireland from prosecuting the Woolen, and
encourage them to apply themselves to the Linen Manufacture in that Kingdom,
whereby they might carry on a gainful Trade to themselves, without interfering
with an Interest of which his Subjects in England were so very tender.

These were the principal Transactions of these worthy Patriots in their three
Sessions; and those who seriously reflect on the mighty Difficultys which with
unexampled Resolution they encountered, and at last Mastered, on the Wise and
Effectual Remedys which they applied to the sharpest and most obstinate
Distempers under which any Nation ever languish'd, on their Constancy and
unwearied Diligence, either in obviating new Dangers, or removing fresh
Mischiefs that embroiled their Affairs, with what Vigor they plied the Helm,
and how steddily they Steered on very treacherous and boistrous Waters, how often
they Rowed against Wind and Tide, and though often carried back by the Violence
of the Current, or diverted by rapid Turns or Eddys of State, yet still
returned with invincible Courage, stem'd the Tide and forced their Way, till at
last in spite of all Opposition they gained their intended Port, those I say,
who impartially and seriously make these Reflections, cannot but entertain a
great Veneration of their Ability and Zeal for the Public Good. If there be
any Man that does not yet admire as he ought to do, the greatness of this
Parliament, let him but consider what an amazing Undertaking it was to recoin
all the Silver Money of the Nation when it was ready to sink under the weight of
a long expensive War; which attempt was so hazardous, that the Enemy was made
to believe it would certainly be fatal to us, and under that Confidence was
persuaded to continue the War; as they made Peace when that Presumption was
disappointed. Let him consider what a Task it was to recover the lost Credit of
the Nation both Public and Private, in those low Circumstances, to which we
were then reduced. Let him consider how great a Work it was to raise, or rather
to make Money for the Public Service which required extraordinary Supplys, when
there was very little Money in Being; Let him consider this well, and he will
take righter Measures of the Wisdom of this great Assembly. These were the
Work's of refined Understanding, of the most extensive Capacity and inflexible
Perseverance; And these were the Works of this Parliament. A Parliament that
had the Honor to be Hated and Reviled as much as any ever was by the Enemies of
our Government; which is a convincing Proof that they took the best Measures in
the World for the Preservation of it. For had they betrayed it, these Gentlemen
would have thanked them for it; had they out of Supineness or Ignorance run it
a ground, our Enemies perhaps might have derided their Weakness and
Unskilfulness, but they could never have expressed so much Choler and
Resentment. The Slanders therefore and Invectives of these Men who heartily
wished the Ruin of our Establishment, is an honorable and lasting Encomium on
the Proceedings of this Assembly. And as the Adherents of the late King openly
declair'd their Anger and Enmity against the last Parliament, so it is not to be
doubted but that all the Friends of the Government, that is every true
Englishman, has, on the other Hand, an great Affection and Reverence for their
Memory.

FINIS.

