A Natural History: Containing Many not Common OBSERVATIONS: Extracted out of
the best Modern Writers.

BY Sir Thomas Pope Blount, Baronet.

Foelix qui potuit Rerum dignoscere Causas. Virgil. LONDON: Printed for R.
Bentley in Russel Street, in Covent Garden. 1693.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Henry Lord Capel, Baron of Tewkesbury, and one of
their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
DEDICATIONS are in this Age grown so much in fashion, that an Author who
appears without one, seems but an uncouth sort of Animal; and therefore since
Necessity forces me to a Compliance with this Custom, I hope Your Lordship will
vouchsafe to Honor this small Piece with Your Protection. My Lord, should I
follow the common course of Dedications, I might here have a fair opportunity
of Celebrating your many Virtues; here (indeed) is Field-Room enough to range
in, and it is easy to be Eloquent upon such a Topic; but since Nature has by
no means fitted me for Panegyricks, nor is there any need of Proclaiming that
which every one already knows; I shall now wholly forbear anything of this kind.

My Lord, what I now (with all deference) present to Your Lordship, is not any
superficial, slight Notion of my own, but that which is here tendered, is a
NATURAL HISTORY, drawn from the Writings of the Beaux Esprits, or the greatest
Wits of the Present Age upon these several Subjects, so that I question not but
Your Lordship will meet with some Remarques, that may be Entertaining, Useful,
and not Common. And if upon any Account it be acceptable to Your Lordship, I
have then fully attained my End; since the utmost I can pretend to, is but a
Pepper-Corn Acknowledgment from,

Your Lordship's Most Devoted, And Obliged Humble Servant, Tho. Pope Blount.

THE PREFACE.
WHoever Surveys the Curious Fabric of the UNIVERSE, ^an never imagine, that
so Noble a Structure should be Framed for no other Use, than barely for MANKIND
to live and breath in. It was certainly the Design of the great Architect, that
his Creatures should afford not only Necessaries and Accommodations to our
Animal part, but also Instructions to our Intellectual. Every Flower of the
Field, every Fiber of a Plant, every Particle of an Insect, carries with it the
Impress of its Maker, and can (if duly considered) read us Lectures of Ethics
or Divinity. The deeper insight any Man has into the Affairs of NATVRE, the
more he discovers of the Accurateness, and Art, that is in the Contexture of
Things: For the Works of God, are not like the Compositions of Fancy, or the
Tricks of Juglers, that will not bear a clear Light, or strict Scrutiny; but
their Exactness receives advantage from the severest Inspection; and he admires
most, that knows most. How unreasonable (then) are those Men, who will not
herein allow us the use of ^our RATIONAL FACVLTIES, but with great Fury and
Zeal declaim against the Study of NATVRE, as a thing most dangerous and
pernicious; telling us, that too strict an Enquiry into the Works of NATVRE,
does often terminate in a Spirit of Atheism. But whoever He was that first
broached this Doctrine, I am sure the true RELIGION is little beholden to him
for it; for instead of Obeying the Jewish Law, which forbids us to offer up to
God a Sacrifice that has a Blemish; He has only assigned to Religion those Men,
who have the greatest Blemish of Humane Nature, even a defect in their
Knowledge and Understanding. Indeed, it cannot but justly provoke any Man of an
Ingenious temper, to hear after what manner some Men inveigh against REASON,
calling it the Stepmother of FAITH, and a proclaimed Rebel against God
Almighty; and such declared Traitors, ^s dare harbor it, or so much as appear
in its defense. Methinks these Sort of Men Act every whit as foolishly, as He
who in great wrath should break his Perspective, only because it could not
bring home to his view the most remote Objects; and are as unjust as Jacob had
been, if he had divorced from Leah, because she was Tender-Ey'd. Ever since
FAITH and REASON have been by Divines set together by the Ears, the brutish
Multitude conclude those who are most REASONABLE to be least RELIGIOUS; and the
greatest SPIRITS to be the least SPIRITVAL: A conceit most inconsistent with
that Divine Parable, wherein Those who received the Many Talents, improved them
to the best advantage, whilst He who had but One, laid it up in a Napkin. Nor
is it probable, that God would choose low Shrubs, and not tall Cedars, for the
Building of his Glorious Temple. And besides, it is remarkable, that God in the
Old Law refused to accept the Firstborn of an Ass in Sacrifice, but not of
any other Creature. We have Reason (then) to think, that no Perfection is to be
valued at so high a Rate, as a true Freedom and Ingenuity of Mind; It Is this
that distinguishes Churches from Herds, as a Modern Author expresses it. And
those Men who have laid aside the free and impartial use of their REASON, are
just as fit for RELIGION, as Sheep and Oxen; for they differ only in this, that
the One are Brutes without REASON, and the other Brutes with it. How could the
Scythian have Sacrificed RATIONAL Beings, had he not first Sacrificed his own
REASON? Or the Egyptian adored IRRATIONAL Creatures, had not He himself been
one? Onions could never have been Deities, if Egyptians had been Men; but when
REASON was once banished the Temples, no wonder if Folly and Superstition
commenced RELIGION; a Stock might be a Deity, when the Priest was no more. Thus
then we see, that unless we make use of our RATIONAL Faculties, we presently
cease from Acting like Men, nay, We do not so much in our Kind, as Beasts do in
theirs, who justly obey the Prescrpit of their Natures, and live up to the
height of that Instinct that Providence has given them. But, alas! though
every Man would be thought to be ANIMAL RATIONALE, yet how few are there who
Act as if they really were so! insomuch that it may be truly said, Humanum
paucis vivit genus; MANKIND is but preserved in a few Individuals; The greatest
part of Men, like the Serpent, ly hissing and grovelling upon the Earth, and
their Souls are so fixed in that grosser Moity of Themselves, their Bodies,
that nothing can Sublimate or Refine them. The numerous Rabble that seem to
have the Signatures of Man in their Faces, are but Brutes in their
Understanding, and have nothing of the Nobler part that should denominate their
Essences; it is by the favor of a Metaphor, we call them Men, for at the best
they are but DesCartes's AVTOMATA, moving Frames and Figures of Men, and have
nothing but their Outsides to justify their Titles to Rationality.

Now, having said thus much, it remains only, that I apply my self to another
sort of Men, and they are such, who pretend to be wiser and more knowing than
the rest of Mankind: These, I know, will be apt to smile at, and despise many
of the Subjects here treated of, as mean and trifling. What! Entertain such
brave Heroes, such mighty Dons, with an insipid Discourse of PLANTS, INSECTS and
REPTILES! away with them, this is an Impertinence not to be bore with. But let
these highflown Topping Sparks swell and strut as much as they please, I am
sure one, who may be allowed to have a great deal more Wit than Themselves, I
mean the Wise Solomon, was of another Opinion; for he thought it not beneath
him to take notice as well of Abject REPTILES, as of Lions, Eagles, Elephants,
and other noble Animals; nor did he only write of the tall Cedars of Lebanon,
but also of that Dspicable Plant, which grows out of the Wall. Pliny in his
Treatise of INSECTS seems to be transported with an unusual admiration of the
Workmanship of NATVRE in them; Nusquam alibi spectatiore Naturae rerum
Artificio; In nothing, says he, is the Workmanship of NATVRE more remarkable,
than in the Contexture of these little Creatures. And after a Wonder, not
unworthy a Philosopher, He concludes, Rerum Natura nusquam magis quam in
Minimis tota est, NATVRE in her whole Power is never more wholly seen than in
her smallest Works. And from this very Opinion, in all probability, did
Epicurus frame his Doctrine of ATOMS. The Gods, says Aristotle, are as well in
the least INSECTS, as in the most bulky ANIMALS; and therefore we ought not to
despise these little Creatures. For on the contrary, as in Art, the less room a
Picture takes up, the more it is esteemed; so in Nature, the less Volume Things
are in, the more worthy they are of Admiration. Much to the same Effect says
that Noble Philosopher, Mr. Boil, viz. That Gods Wisdom appears not less in
lesser Creatures, than in the larger; and that there is none of them so little,
but would deserve a great deal of our Wonder, did we attentively enough
consider it. History tells us, that Apelles was discovered by the skillful
Protagoras, by drawing so fine and slender a Line, that Protagoras, by being
scarce able to discern it, discovered it to have been drawn by Appelles; even
so Almighty God, in these little Creatures, does often draw such exquisite and
delicate Lines and Traces, that nothing less than the Divine Pencil could ever
have framed the like: How can any thing be more stupendous and wonderful, than
to see in these little Creatures all the Perfections of the largest Animals?
They have the same Organs of Body, multiplicity of Parts, variety of Motions,
diversity of Figures, and severality of Functions with those of the largest
Size; And that which is still more wonderful, is, that all these in so narrow a
room do neither interfere, nor impede one another in their several Op^rations.

And now, that I may not be too tedious, I will close this PREFACE with a word
or two, in Answer to one Objection, that this following Piece may seem liable
to. I know many will think it very ahsurd and preposterous, that I should
undertake to write a NATURAL HISTORY in so small a Volume, and Contract a
Subject of the largest Field into so narrow a Compass. But in Answer hereunto I
have this to say; that (indeed) had I taken in all things that properly relate
to Natural History, instead of an Octavo, I could easily have swelled it into a
Folio; but I considered, that by reason of the present Taxes men now are forced
into good Husbandry, and that the laying out much Money in Books is by most men
thought an unnecessary Charge fit to ^e retrenched: wherefore I resolved to
make my self as easy to the Reader as I could, by not being too chargeable to
him; and this I thought was best to be done, by singling out such Subjects
only, as I knew contained in them matters of the greatest curiosity. So that
(in a word) my chief Design is, that by the help of such a Vade Mecum,
Gentlemen may entertain themselves upon these following Subjects, without too
great an Expense either of Time, or Money.

The several Subjects here treated of, are, as follow.
MVsk. Page 1 Civit and Civet-Cats. Page 9 Amber. Page 13 Ambergreece. Page 17
Coral. Page 23 Bezoar. Page 30 Cinnamon. Page 37 Nutmegs. Page 44 Pepper. Page
49 Cloves. Page 54 Ginger. Page 57 Manna. Page 61 Mastick. Page 65 Lignum
Aloes. Page 70 Cochincel. Page 75 Indigo. Page 80 Coco-Nut. Page 85 Cacao-Nut.
Page 91 Tea, or The. Page 99 Coffe. Page 107 Opium. Page 116 Tobacco. Page 123
Planting and Ordering Tobacco. Page 132 Sugar. Page 136 Ordering the Canes, and
how the Sugar is made. Page 141 Diamonds. Page 150 Pearl. Page 158 Of the way
and Manner of Diving for Pearl. Page 167 Several Precious Stones. Page 170
Loadstone. Page 182 Sea Ccompass. Page 190 Petrification. Page 195 Salt. Page
209 Gold. Page 225 Silver. Page 237 Generation of Metals. Page 245 Damps in
Mines. Page 251 Generation of Insects. Page 262 Ants, Emmits, or Pismires. Page
276 Bees. Page 293 Gloworm. Page 303 Spiders. Page 313 Silkworm. Page 325
Snakes, Serpents, or Vipers Page 337 Tortoises. Page 349 Remarkable Trees. Page
356 Mountains. Page 368 Vulcano's, or Subterranean Fires. Page 388 Earthquakes.
Page 403 Hurricanes. Page 416 Tornados. Page 434 Islands. Page 443 Origin of
Fountains. Page 451
A Natural History.
Observations concerning MUSK.
THe MUSK-Cat is a Creature almost like a Goat, bred in the Kingdom of Pegu, in
the Indies; as also in Egypt, and other places. It has been brought into our
Northern Countries, but through the disagreeableness of the Climat, it will not
with us yield any MUSK, nor will it live long.

Schroder says, that MUSK is an Excrement, or matter included in a Cistis or
Bladder about the Navel, while the Creature is full of Venery. When this
Imp^sthume swells much, and puts him to Pain, he rubs it against Stones or
Shrubs. and breaks it, upon which the Matter falling it sticks, and, by Virtue
of the Sunbeams, it becomes sweet-scented MUSK.

Monsieur Thevenot tells us, That in the Province of Azmer, belonging to the
Great Mogul, there is a Beast, like a Fox in the Snout, which is no bigger than
a Hare: The Hair of it, is of the Color of a Stags, and the Teeth like to a
Dogs. He says, it yields most excellent MUSK; for at the Belly it has a
Bladder full of corrupt Blood, and that Blood makes the MUSK, or is rather the
MUSK it self; which they take from it, and immediately cover the place where the
Bladder is cut with Leather, to hinder the Scent from evaporating: But after
this Operation is made, the Beast is not long-lived.

Monsieur Tavernier, in his Travels in India, says, That the best sort, and the
greatest quantity of MUSK, comes from the Kingdom of Boutan, from whence they
bring it to Patna, the chief City of Bengala, to truck it away for other
Commodities: And that all the MUSK which is Sold in Persia, comes from thence:
And that the MUSK-Merchants had rather deal with you for Coral and
Tellow-Amber, than for Gold or Silver; in regard the other is more in esteem
among the Natives where they live.

Tavernier also tells us, That after they have killed the Creature, they cut
off the Bladder that grows under the Belly, as big as an Egg, nearer to the
Genital parts, than to the Navel: And that then they take out the MUSK that is
in the Bladder, which at that time looks like Clotted-Blood.

He observes to us, That this Creature is not to be found in 65 degrees, but in
60 there are vast Numbers, the Country being all over covered with Forests.
But he says, that in the Months of February and March, after they have endured
a sharp Hunger, by reason of the great Snows that fall where they breed, Ten or
Twelve Foot deep, they will come to 44 or 45 degrees to fill themselves with
Corn and new Rice. And then it is that the Natives lay Gins and Snares for
them, to catch them as they go back: Shooting some with Bows, and knocking
others of the head. Nay, he says, some have assured him, That they are so lean
and faint with Hunger at that time, that one may almost take them running

He also informs us, That none of these Creatures have above one Bladder, no
bigger th^n a Hen'sEgg, which will not yield above half an Ounce of MUSK; and
that sometimes three or four will not aff^rd an Ounce; and yet what a world of
MUSK is bought up!

There are three sorts of MUSK, Black, Brown, and Yellow; of which the First is
naught, the Second is good, the last best; which ought to be of Color like the
best Spikenard, that is, of a deep Amber Color, enclosed with one only Skin,
and not one over another, as it is oftentimes to (...) -moist, which make^^
(...) but in a mean; having some (...) like Bristles, but not over many clear
of Stones, Lead, or ^ther Trash intermixed; and of so strong and fragrant a
smell, that to many it is offensive, and being tasted in the Mouth, it pierces
the very Brain with the Scent, and ought not oversoon to dissolve in the Mouth,
nor yet to remain very long undissolv'd in any hand; it must not be kept near
to any sweet Spices, lest it lose the scent PVRCH. P^lgr. Vol. 1. Page 389.

That the Testicles of the Animal called MUSK-QUASS do smell strong of MUSK, as
Mr. Iosselin in his Treatise of the Rarities of New England affirms, is most
certain; for a certain Person, (as you may see in the Philosoph. Transact)
t^lls us,

There is a Plant, pretty common in England, viz. One kind of Cranes-Bill,
called Geranium Moschatum, that smells just like MUSK, especially Morning and
Evening.

There are several ways of adulterating MUSK. Sometimes with Roots of Angelica,
a Kids Liver, or Goats Blood, p. iiii., of it to i. p. of MUSK. As also with
Nutmeg, Cinnamon, Cloves, Spikenard, ana, mixed with MUSKED Rose Water. And
sometimes with Benjamin, Storax, and Laudanum.

The King of Boutan fearing that (...) Cheats and Adulterations of (...) ^^SK
would spoil the MUSK-(...) ordered that none of the (...) should be sowed up,
but (...) they should be all brought to (...), and there, after due in^ction,
be sealed up with his Seal. (...) notwithstanding all the wari^^^s and care of
the King, they will (...), cunningly open them, (...) put in little pieces of
Lead to (...) the Weight.

Observations concerning CIVET, and CIVET-CATS.
THe CIVET-CAT is a Beast almost as big as a good Dog; it has a sharp Snout,
small Eyes, little Ears, and Mustachios like a Cat; the Skin of it is all
spotted Black and White, with some yellowish specks, and has a long bushy
Tail, almost like a Fox. It is a very Wild Creature; and I believe the bite of
it would put a Man to no small pain. There is great plenty of this sort of
Animals in Aethiopia, but especially in the Kingdom of Naria, Tributary to the
King of Aethopia; where the Jews keep them in great square Wooden Cages,
feeding them with raw Mutton and Beef, cut into small pieces. When they would
get from them that which is called CIVET, (and is the Sweat of this Beast, that
smells so sweet,) they make him go back with a Stick, which they thrust in
betwixt the Bars of the Cage, and catch hold of his Tail; when they have that
fast, they take hold also of his two hind Legs, pulling him half out of the
Cage by the Door, which falls down upon his back, and keeps him fast there,
then another opens a certain ^od of Flesh, that these Beasts have, which is
shaped like a split Gysern, and with an Iron-Spatula scrapes all the Sweat off
it within. The Males have that piece of Flesh betwixt their Stones and Yard,
which is like a Cats. The Females have it betwixt their Fundament and
Privities; and it is emptied of the Sweat but twice a Week; each Beast yielding
about a Dram at a time. When that Sweat or Excrement is taken out, it is of a
whitish Gray, but by little and little in some short space it turns to a very
brown Color. It smells very sweet at a distance, but near hand it stinks, and
causes the Headache. There are as many Kinds of CIVET-Sweat, as there are of
CIVET-CATS, for it is more whitish, grayish, or yellowish, and drier, in some
than in others, and yet they mingle all together. After all, it is in vain to
think to have pure CIVET, for the Jews falsify it; and if a Man imagine it to
be pure, because he has seen it taken from the Beast, he is mistaken; for the
Jews (before People come to their Houses) rub the inside of that piece of
Flesh, with a little Oil, or some such stuff, that so the Sweat and it together
may make more Weight; but when no body is present, they take it out pure, and
mingle it afterward. The Jews hold this Beast very dear, the common rate for a
CIVET-CAT being an hundred Chequins. THEVENOT's Travels, Page 239.

The Island of Socotora in the East Indies does so abound with CIVET-CATS, that
as Purchase, Vol. 1. Page 419. tells us, They often take them with Traps on the
^ountains, and sell them for Twelve Pence a piece, to such as will buy them.

Dr. Stubbes, in his Iamaica Observations, says, That CIVET-CATS will live
above a Month without drinking, as he himself once tried on one that he kept:
But that if they drink once a M^nth, they will then yield more CIVET; and so,
if they be fed with Fish. He also says, they Piss much, as do Rabbets. PHILOS.
TRANSACT. Numb. 36 Page 704.

The Lord Bacon, in his Natural History, Cent. X. Page 204. says, That the
smells of MUSK, Amber, and CIVET, are thought to further Venereous Appetite:
Which, in his Opinion, they may do, by the Refreshing and calling forth of the
Spirits.

It is a certain Received Opinion, That CIVET put into Wine adds much to the
strength of it, and gives it a more Inebriating Quality.

CIVET is adulterated with the Gall of a Bull, liquid Storax, and Honey.

Observations concerning AMBER.
GReat variety of Opinions has there been concerning AMBER. Some think it to
be a Gum that distills from Trees: Others tell us, it is made of Whales Dung; or
else of their Sperm or Seed, (as others will have it,) which being consolidate
and hardened by the Sea is cast upon the Shore.

But Peter Heylin affirms, That AMBER is the Juice of a Stone, which grows like
a Coral in Poland, in a Mountain of the North Sea, clean covered with Water;
and that in the Months especially of September and December, this Liquor is by
violence of the Sea, rent from the Rock, and cast into the Havens of Poland,
and the Neighboring Countries: He likewise affirms, that being taken out of
the Water, it hardens like to Coral: And that besides its Beauty, and the
Quality it has of burning like Pitch, and attracting Straws and Iron, like the
Adamant, it is good for stopping the Blood, all kind of Agues, Falling
Sickness, Dropsies, Stone, Colic, Weakness of Stomach, Headache, and the Yellow
Jaundise. PET. HEYL. Cosmog.

Tavernier says, that AMBER is nothing but a certain Congelation made in the
Sea, like a certain Gum: And that Yellow AMBER is only found upon the Coast of
Prussia in the Baltic Sea, where the Sea throws it upon the Sand, when such
and such Winds blow. He affirms, that the Elector of Brandenburgh, who is
Sovereign of that Coast, Farms it out for Twenty Thousand Crowns a Year, and
sometimes Two and Twenty Thousand. And that the Farmers keep Guards on both
sides of the Shore, in regard the Sea casts it up sometimes upon one side, and
sometimes upon the other, to prevent the stealing of it. TAVERN. Travels in
India, Page 152.

In China, when any great Lord makes a Feast, it is for his Grandeur and
Magnificence to cause three or four several sorts of Perfuming-Pots to be set
upon the Table, and to throw into every one of them a vast quantity of AMBER;
for the more it burns, and the bigger the pieces are, the more magnificent is
the Entertainment accounted. The reason of this Custom is, because they adore
the Fire; and besides that the AMBER casts sorth a scent pleasing to the
Chinese, there is a kind of Oil in it, that flames after a more unusual manner
than other materials of Fire. This waste of AMBER makes it the best Commodity
that could be imported into China, if the Trade were free for Strangers. At
present the Hollanders have engrossed all this Trade to themselves, and the
Chinese (...) Authors) affirm it to be a kind of Bitumen, issuing from
Fountains, or Springs in the bottom of the Sea, and that by floating upon the
Water it becomes hard, etc.

Iustus Klobius, in his H^storia Ambra^, reckons up no less than Eighteen
several Opinions concerning this Noble Drug: But that which he embraces, is,
That it is the Dung of a Bird, of the bigness of a Goose, found in Madagascar,
the Maldives, and other parts of the East Indies; and that these Birds,
flocking together in great Numbers, as Cranes; and frequenting high Cliffs near
the Seaside, do there void their Excrement, from whence the Sea washes it, if
it fall not of it self into it.

There is another Opinion also among the Eighteen, to which Klobius seems well
inclined, but yet dares not wholly stick to it; viz. That it is the Excrement
of a particular sort of Whale. But that which makes him not rely upon this this
Opinion, is, because he observes, there is none of this Drug to be had in those
other places, where there is good store of such Whales.

The Honorable Robert Boil, Esquire, in a Letter to Mr. Oldenburgh, Dated
September 13. 1673. after he had declared how little satisfied he was with the
common received Opinions of AMBER-GRISE, at last affixes to the said Letter an
Extract out of a Dutch Iournal, belonging to the Dutch East India Company;
which is in these words. AMBER-GRISE is not the Scum or Excrement of the Whale,
etc. but issues out of the Root of a Tree, which Tree how far soever it stands
on the Land, always shoots forth its Roots toward the Sea, seeking the warmth
of it, thereby to deliver the fattest Gum that comes out of it: Which Tree
otherwise by its copious fatness might be burnt and destroyed. Wherever that
fat Gum is shot into the Sea, it is so tough, that it is not easily broken from
the Root, unless its own weight and the working of the warm Sea does it, and so
it floats on the Sea. PHILOSOPH. TRANSACT. Numb. 97.

Tavernier in his Travels in India, says, There is no Person in the World that
knows either what AMBER-GRISE is, or where, or how it is produced. But the
fairest probability is, that it must be only in the Eastern-Sea: Though some
Parcels have been found upon the Coast of England, and in some other parts of
Europe. He says, that the greatest quantity is found upon the Coast of Melinda,
but more especially in the Mouth of a River called Rio de Sena: That the
Governor of Mozambique gets in the three Years of his Government above Three
Hundred Thousand Pardo's of AMBER-GRISE, every Pardo containing 27 Sous of
French Money: That sometimes they meet with very large and very considerable
pieces, viz. Of Thirty or Forty, Pounds Weight. TAVERN. Trav. in India, page
152.

Sir Philiberto Vernatti, late Resident in Iava Major, says, That the best
AMBER-GRISE in the World comes from the Island Mauritius in the East Indies;
and is commonly found after a Storm: That the Hogs can smell it at a great
distance; who run like mad to it, and devour it commonly before the People come
to it: That it is held to be a Zeequal Viscosity, which, being dried by the
Sun, turns to such a Consistence as is daily seen. He mentions one Isaac Vigny,
a Frenchman, who had been a great Traveller in his time, who told him, that he
had sailed once in his Youth through so many of these Zeequalen, as would have
loaded Ten Thousand Ships; the like having been never seen; and that his
Curiosity drove him to take up some of those, which being dried in the Sun,
were perceived to be the best AMBER-GRISE in the World. Sir Philiberto, says,
He has seen one piece which the Frenchman kept for a Memento, and another piece
he sold for Thirteen Hundred Pounds Sterling: This being discovered, They set
Sail to the same place where these Zeequalen appeared, and Cruised there to and
fro, for the space of six Weeks, but could not perceive any more. Where this
place is seituated, Sir Philiberto says, He knows not; but Monsieur Gentillot,
a French Captain in Holland, does. SPRAT's Hist. of the R. S. page 168.

There is AMBER-GRISE of four several Colors; White, Gray, Red, and Black;
which comes according to the variety of Places or Regions where it is found;
the Gray is preferred before all the other, and is known to be good, if when
pricking it with a Pin, it sends out a moisture like Oil.

The Black or White AMBER-GRISE is adulterated with a little mixture of Musk
and Civet with Storax, Laudanum, and Lignum-Aloes, but may easily be known by
the scent.

Observations concerning CORAL.
THere are several sorts of CORAL, but the two Principal are the White and the
Red; but the Red is the best. It grows like a Tree in the bottom of the Sea,
green when under the Water, and bearing a White Berry; and when out, it turns
Red. There is also a Black and Yellow kind of CORAL. Nay, Linschot in his
Description of the East Indies, says, That at the Cape of Bon-Esperance there
are Rocks on which CORAL grows of all Colors.

CORAL, but little valued in Europe, is highly esteemed in all the three other
parts of the World. There are three places where they Fish for it upon the
Coast of Sardigna. That of Arguerrel is the fairest of all. The second place is
called Boza; and the third is near the Island of St. Peter. There are two other
places upon the Coast of France, the one near the Bastion of France; the other
at Tabarque. There is also another Fishery upon the Coast of Sicily, near
Trepano, but the CORAL is small, and ill-colour'd. There is another upon the
Coast of Catalogna, near Cape de Quiers, where the CORAL is large, and of an
excellent Color, but the Branches are short. There is a Ninth Fishery in the
Island of Majorque, much like that near the Island of Corsica. And these are
all the places in the Mediterranean Sea, where they Fish for CORAL; for there
is none at all in the Ocean. TAVERN. Trav. in India.

They Fish for CORAL, from the beginning of April to the End of July; to which
purpose there are employed above two Hundred Vessels; some Years more, and some
Years less. They are built all along the River of Genoa, being very swift.
Their Sails are very large for more swiftness, so that there are no Galleys can
reach them. There are seven Men and a Boy to every Barque. They never Fish
above forty Miles from the Land, where they think there are Rocks, for fear of
the Pirates, whom they easily escape through the nimbleness of their Vessels.
Ibidem.

Monsieur Chapuzeau, in his History of the Riches of the East and West Indies,
says, That the manner of Fishing for CORAL, is with two big Beams of Wood, laid
crosswise, with a good piece of Lead on the middle, to make it sink, casting
about it course Hemp, carelessly twisted, and tying this Wood to two Ropes,
whereof one hangs at the Stern, and the other at the forepart of the Boat; and
so letting this contrivance fall into the Current, along the Rocks, where the
Hemp being turned about, and engaged in the CORAL, there is occasion sometimes
for a great many Boats to draw away the Instrument.

The common Opinion, That CORAL is soft under Water, but waxes hard in the
Air, has been sufficiently re^uted by several. Johannes Begvinus, in his
Chapt. of the Tincture of CORAL, undertakes to clear the World of this Error,
from the very Experiment of John Baptista de Nicole, who was Over-seer of the
Gathering of CORAL in the Kingdom of Thunis. This Gentleman, says he, desirous
to find out the Nature of CORAL, and to be resolved how it grows at the bottom
of the Sea; caused a Man to go down no less than a Hundred Fathom, on purpose
to take notice, whether it were hard or soft in the place where it grows. Who
returning, brought in each Hand a Branch of CORAL, affirming it was as hard at
the bottom, as in the Air where he delivered it. The same was also confirmed by
a Trial of his own, handling it a Fathom under Water before it felt the Air.

Boethius, in his accurate Tract de Gemmis, is of the same Opinion; not
ascribing its Concretion unto the Air, but to the coagulating Spirits of Salt,
and the petrifying Juice of the Sea, which entering the Parts of that Plant,
overcomes its Vegetability, and converts it into a Stony substance. And this,
says he, does happen when the Plant is ready to decay; for all CORAL is not
hard, and in many Concreted parts some parts remain unpetrified, that is, the
livelier parts remain as Wood, and were never yet converted. BROWN's Vulg.
Errors.

The Lord Bacon, in his Natural History, tells us, there are very few Creatures
that participate of the Nature of Plants and Metals both; but that CORAL is one
of the nearest of both Kinds. But the Ingenious Monsieur Guisony seems to be of
another Opinion, for he utterly denies CORAL to be a Plant, affirming that it
is a mere Mineral, composed of much Salt, and a little Earth; and that it is
formed into that substance by a precipitation of diverse Salts, tha^ ensues upon
the Encounter of the Earth with those Salts. PHILOSOPH. TRANSACT. Numb. 99.
page 6159.

Of the Nature and Generation of CORAL, it is affirmed by the Honorable Mr.
Boil, That whilst it grows, it is often found Soft and Succulent, and
propagates its Species. And by Georg. de Sepibus, That of those who had been
used for many Years to dive for CORAL in the Red Sea, Kircher learned thus
much; That it would sometimes let fall a Spermatick Juice, which lighting upon
any [ Steady] body, would thereupon produce another CORAL. And further, by
Wormius and Tavernier, from the Relations of others, That this Juice is White
or Milky. Which may seem the more Credible, when we consider that the like
Milky substance is found in diverse Mines. Sometimes enclosed, (as is observed
in the Philos. Transact. Numb. 100. by Mr. George Planton,) in great Hollows of
the Metallic Rock. And that Mr. Beamont (Philos. Transact. Numb. 129. Page
730.) has found in the Hollows of some Stones called Entrochi, and
Rock-Plants, or akin to them, an evident Concretion of such Milky Juice.
GREW's Mus. Regal. Societ.

Paracelsus makes an Amulet of CORAL against Fears, Fright, Melancholy,
Epilepsie, Enchantment, and Witchcraft.

The Learned Dr. Brown, in his Vulgar Errors, seems to suspect, That the
Custom of Childrens wearing CORAL, was at first superstitiously founded; and
that (possibly) in former times, it might be looked upon as an Amulet or
Defensative against Witchcraft.

Observations concerning BEZOAR.
THe Deer-Goat, is a Creature bred both in the East and West Indies: That from
Persia and the East Indies yields the Oriental BEZOAR, being partly like a
Deer, partly like a Goat. That of Peru is like the former, but without Horns,
yielding the Occidental BEZOAR. The BEZOAR Stone is of an Oval Form, or round,
hollow within, (the Oriental having Chaff, Hair, Sticks, Grains, Filth, or the
like, in its Capacity, the Occidental Not) shining and smooth without, having a
Coat ^olded like an Onion, of a various Color, but generally of a Blackish^
Green, Pale, Ash^Colour, or Hony-Colour, without scent, and much about the
bigness of a Walnut. The Occidental is rough without, Whitish, Ash-colored,
Black, or Blackish Green, and generally bigger than the former.

BEZOAR, (says Tavernier) comes from a Province of the Kingdom of Golconda,
toward the North-East. It is found among the Ordure in the Paunch of a
Wild-Goat, that browzes upon a certain Tree, the Name whereof Tavernier had
forgot. This Shrub bears little Buds, round about which, and the Tops of the
Boughs, the BEZOAR Engenders in the Maw of the Goat. It is shaped according to
the form of the Buds, or Tops of the Branches or which the Goats eat: Which is
the reason there are so many shapes of BEZOAR Stones.

The Natives (as Tavernier informs us) know by feeling the Belly of the Goat,
how many Stones she has within, and sell the Goat according to the quantity.
This they will find out by slideing their hands under their Bellies, and then
shaking both sides of the Paunch; for the Stones will fall into the middle,
where they may easily count them all by their feeling.

The rarity of BEZOAR is in the bigness; though the small BEZOAR has the same
Virtue as that which is larger. But there is more deceit in the large BEZOAR;
for the Natives have got a trick to add to the bigness of the Stone, with a
certain Paste composed of Gum, and something else of the Color of BEZOAR. And
they are so cunning too, to shape it just like Natural BEZOAR. The cheat is
found out two ways; the first is by weighing the BEZOAR, and then sleeping it
in warm Water: If neither the Water change Color, nor the BEZOAR lose any
thing of its Weight, the Stone is right. The other way is to thrust a red hot
Bodkin of Iron into the Stone; If the Bodkin enters, and causes it to fry,
there is a mixture. TAVERN. Trav. in India, Page 153, 154.

As well in the East, as West, there are a great quantity of BEZOARS that breed
in the same m^nner in Cows; of which there have been some that have weighed
Seventeen or Eighteen Ounces; for there was such a one that was given to the
Great Duke of Tuscany. But those BEZOARS are little esteemed, Six Grains of the
other BEZOAR working more powerfully than Thirty of this.

As for the BEZOAR which breeds in Apes, as some believe it, it is so strong,
that two Grains work as effectually, as Six of Goat's-BEZOAR: B^t it is very
scarce, as being only found in those Apes, that breed in the Isl^nd of
Macassar. This sort of BEZOAR is round, whereas the other is of several
Fashions. And as the Apes-BEZOAR is stronger, and scarcer than the Goat's, so
it is dearer, and m^re (...); a p^^ce as big as (...) worth a (...) The
Portugals (...) ^f this BEZOA^ (...) upon their (...) Pe^son'd. TAVER^^ (...)
154.

There has always (...) Dispu^e am^ngst the (...), concerning the part wh^re
the Stone grows. Tav^^nier d^clares, he could not find it out, though he
labored all he could.

The Arabians write, That the Goat-^eer, and all other sorts of Deer, fi^ding
^^emselves Old and Sick, ^y their breath draw Serp^nts out of their Holes and
devour them, that ^o thereby they ^ecome youn^ and well again; after which,
^inding themselves heated by this ^ood, th^^ (...) into the Water, and (...)
there thout drinking till their (...); during which stay (...), this St^ne is
bred in the Corne^^ of their Eyes, whence (...).

But Monardes, more probably, learnt from the Inha^itants of the Mountains of
China, that in the Indies near the River ^anges, these Goat-Deer, after their
^^^ing of Serpen^s, go about the Tops of the Mountains, seeding on such Herbs,
as Nature has taught them resist Poisons; of the Quintessence whereof, mixed
with that of the Poisons, the BEZOAR is by some particular Virtue, produced in
some cavity of their Bodies; Garsias ^b Horto, and Acosta say, in their
Stomach; Others, as Fragosus, in the Kidneys, because some Stones have the
Figure of that p^rt, which also is the most Lapidi^ick of the whole Body; and
others too, as R^bbi Moses the Aegyp^ian, in the Gall; which Opinion Monardes
himself is o^, though he admits too that it is found in the Ventricle,
Intestines, and other (...) of the Body: As, indeed, there is no place in the
Bodies of Animals, but Stones may be generated in them. PHILOS. CONFER. of the
Virtuosi of France. Vol. 2. Page 365.

This word [BEZOAR] some think is derived from the Hebrew Bell, which signifies
King, and Zaars, Poisons, as if it were the King or Master of Poisons, which
are subdued more powerfully by this than any other Remedy. According to
Scaliger, BEZOHARD is taken by the Arabians for that which preserves Life, and
so the Stone will have borrowed its Name from its Effect. Cardan says, There is
a Poisonous Root of this Name, which bears a Fruit called Nirabri, which is an
Antidote to it. Plants and every thing good against Poisons, is commonly termed
BEZOARDICAL. Ibidem.

Tavernier says, That he once sold a BEZOAR of four Ounces and a half, for two
Thousand French Livers.

He affirms, That it is Death without Mercy, to transport any of these Goats
out of the Country.

The BEZOAR Stones are adulterated with Pitch, dried Blood, Stones powdered
fine, Ashes of Shells, Antimony, Cinnabar, Mercury, mixed with small
BEZOAR-Stones exquisitely pulverized, and made up with a proper Mucilage.

The Persian BEZOAR is best; then that of Peru; then that from New-Spain. The
Oriental BEZOAR is the most Sudorifick; the Occidental most purging.

Observations concerning CINNAMON.
CINNAMON comes at present from the Island of Ceylan. The Tree that bears it is
very much like the Willow, and has three Barks. They never take off but the
first and second, which is accounted the best. They never meddle with the
third, for should the (...) enter that, the Tree would dye. So that it is an
Art to take o(...) the CINNAMON, which they l^arn from their Youth. The
CINNAMON Spice is much dearer to the H^llanders than People think; for the King
of Ceylan, being a sworn Enemy to the Ho^landers, sends his Forces with an
Intention to surprise them, when they gather their CINNAMON; so that they are
forced to bring Seven or Eight Hundred Men t^^^ther to ^^^end as many more that
are at Work Which great Expense of thei^s, very much enhances the Price of the
CINNAMON. There grows upon the CINNAMON Tree a ^ruit like an Olive, though not
to be eaten. This the Portugals were wont to put into a Caldron of Water,
together with the Tops of the Branches, and boiled it till the Water was all
consumed. When it was cold, the upper part became a Paste like white Wax; o^
which they made Tapers to (...) up in their Churches, (...) no sooner were the
(...) but all the Church (...) ^um'd. Formerly the Po^^^gals brought CINNAMON
out of ^ther Countries, belonging to the Raja's about C^^hin. (...) Hollanders
have destroyed all those places, so that the CINN^MON is now in their hands.
TAVERN. of the Commodities belonging to the G. Mog^l.

CINNAMON formerly grew in such great plenty in Aethiop^^, that we find the
Southern part of it was called by Ptolomy the Geographer, REGIO CINNAMO MI
FERA, from the great qu^^tity of CINNAMON which then grew there, though now
there is not a Tree of it to be found in all this Country, as the ^ort^g^ls,
who have looked narrowly ^o^ it, have affirmed. PET. (...).

The Ancient CINNAMON was, of all other P^am^, while it grew, the driest; and
those Things which are known to comfo^t (...) Plants, did make that more
barren: For in Showers it prosper'd worst: It grew also amongst Bushes of other
Kinds, where commonly Plants do not thrive: Neither did it love the Sun: There
might be one Cause of all those Effects; namely, the Sparing Nourishment, which
that Plant required. BAC. NOT. Hist.

There is a great Dispute concerning the difference between Cassia Lignea and
CINNAMON; Some say, they are both one, differing only in Names; Others, that
they are the same, but differ only in place; Others, that they come both off of
the same Tree, and so call the outward thickest Bark Cassia Lignea, the inward
thin Bark the CINNAMON: Others say, that they come off o^ different Trees that
are very like, so that the Cassia may be made a CINNAMON-Tree by
Transplantation: But d^ubtless, the Shop-CINNAMON or Canella, is the true
Cassia of the Ancients; and if we must distinguish, you may call the thicker
Bark Cassia, and the thinner CINNAMON.

CINNAMON was so scarce in Galen's time, that he says, Lib. 1. De Antid. No Man
had any but the Emperor. But Scaliger is of the Opinion, that the CINNAMON
which we now use, is very different from what was in Galen's Days. CAESAR.
SCALIG. Exercit. 144

It is a great mistake to think (as many do) that CINNAMON will hold good for
Twenty or Thirty Years, and that it impairs not with Age: For that great Father
of Physicians, Galen, in the place just now mentioned, tells us, that by his
own Experience he found the contrary.

Monsieur Thevenot says, that the Isle of Ceilan produces the best CINNAMON;
that the Tree (from which they have that Bark) is straight, and pretty like to
the Olive Tree; that it bears a white Flower of an excellent Scent, and that
the Fruit of it is round; that they take off the Bark in the Summer time, and
that when they cut it, the smell is so strong, that the Soldiers (who are to
Guard the same) fall almost Sick upon it. He says, that toward Cochin there is
wild CINNAMON; but because it is weak, it is not much esteemed. THEVENOT's
Trav. into the Indies, Page 109.

There are some who affirm, that CINNAMON when first gathered has no taste at
all, but acquires its taste and strength by fifteen Days Sunning. But in answer
hereunto, Sir Philiberto Vernatti, late Resident in Iava Major, says, That the
CINNAMON-Tree, as it grows, is so fragrant, that it may be smelt a great way
off before it be seen: And that it has even then, a most Excellent taste; so
that by Sunning, it loses rather, than acquires any taste or force. He also
affirms, that the Tree being pill'd, is cut down to the Root; but that the
young Sprigs, after a Year or two* give the best and finest CINNAMON. SPRAT's
Hist. of the R.S. Page 169.

In the Philosophical T^ansactions, Numb. 172. Page 1031. we have an account of
a sort of White CINNAMON, which comes from Guardaloupe.

The Ephemerides Medico-physicae Germanicae, for the Years ^673. and 1674. make
mention of ^INNAMON-Trees, sent o^t of Ceylan in Chests, filled (...) Native
Earth of that Island, (...) into the Low Countrie^, and there thriving very
well, (...) any considerable change of their Quality.

Linschoten says, that t^^ ^^^NAMON-Trees grow (...) Island of Ceylan in great
(...), and that they sp^ing up (...) without Planting, in ^he open Fields like
^ushes; (...) the Tree from whence (...) B^rk is ^^ken, they let it stand, and
within three Years* after it has another Bark as it had before.

The CINNAMON that is not well dried, is of an Ash Color; and that which is
overmuch dried, is Blackish; but the best dried, is Reddish.

Observations concerning NVTMEGS.
THe NUTMEGS grow in the Molucca Islands, Zeilan, and the Isle of Banda in the
EastIndies.

The Tree is somewhat like a Peach: The Fruit consists of four parts; the
First, is a thick covering, like that of a Walnut. The Second, a dry and
Hosculous Coat, commonly called MACE. The Third, a harder Tegument or Shell,
which lies under the Mace. The Fourth, a Kernel included in the Shell, which
is the same we call NUTMEG: All which both in their parts, and order of
disposure, are easily discerned in those Fruits, which are brought in Preserves
to us. BROWN's Vulg. Errors.

There are two sorts of NUTMEGS, the Male which is long, and the Female round.
Sir Philiberto Vernatti, late Resident in Iava Major, takes particular notice
of the NUTMEG called Thieving: So called, because that being put among a whole
Room full of good NUTMEGS, though it be but one, it will corrupt them all.
PHILOSOPH. TRANSACT. Numb. 43. Page 863.

It Is observable of the NUTMEG, that the Tree which tears it, is never Planted,
which, as Tavernier says, has been confirmed to him by several Persons that
have lived many Years in the Country. He says, the Relation they gave him,
was, that the NUTMEG being ripe, several Birds come from the Islands toward the
South, and devour it wh^le, but are forced to thr^w it up again before it be
digested: That ^he NUTMEG, then (...) a Viscous marter, ^ailing to ^he Ground
takes Root, and produces a Tree, which would never (...) were it Planted.

This, says Tav^rni^^, puts me in mind of mak^ng on Observation upon the Birds
of Paradise. These Birds being very greedy after NUTMEGS, come in flights to
gorge themselves with the pleasing Spice, a^ the Season, like Felfares in
Vintage time, but the strength of the NUTMEG so intoxicates them, that they
fall dead drunk ^n the Ground, where the Emmets in a short time eat off their
Legs. Hence it comes, that the Birds of Paradise are said to have no Feet;
which, ^ays T^vernier, is utterly false, (...) that he had seen three or (...);
and a French Merchant s^^t one from Aleppo, as a Present to Lewis the
Thirteenth, that had Feet; of which the King made great account as being a very
lovely Fowl. TAVERN* Of the Commodities of the Dominions of the G. Mogul.

Monsieur Thevenot says, that the best NUTMEGS are got in the Isle of Banda,
which is to the South of the Molucca's: The Tree, says He, that produces them,
is no higher than our common Apricock-Trees that grow by themselves; when its
outward Husk falls off, its Mace appears of a lovely Vermilion Color; but
being in the l^^st exposed to the Air, it changes its Color into a light Brown
as we have it. The Tree is produced after this manner, There is a kind of Birds
in the Island, that having picked off the Green Husk* swallow the Nuts, which
having been some time in their Stomach, they void by the Ordinary way; and they
(...) not to take Rooting in the place where they fall, and in time to grow up
to a Tree. This Bird is shaped like a Cuckoo, and the Dutch prohibit their
Subjects under pain of Death to kill any of them. THEVENOT's Trav. into the
Indies, Page 109.

It Is to be Noted, that the Oil of Mace or NUTMEGS by Expression, is the
Ground, Foundation, and Body of all Great, N^ble, and Generous Artificial
Balsoms: As for Example, if to Oil of Mace or NUTMEGS by Expression, you add a
small proportion of Oil of CINNAMON, you then have Balsam of CINNAMON, etc.

The best NUTMEGS are those which are fresh, heavy, fat, and which, when
pricked, force out Oil.

Observations concerning PEPPER.
THere are diverse sorts of PEPPER; viz. Black, White, and Long PEPPER. The
Black is the commonest.

The Plant that bears the Black PEPPER, grows up like a Vine among Bushes
and Brambles, where it naturally grows; but where it is manured, it is Sown at
the bottom of some Tree, where it climbs up to the top. The Leaves are few in
Number, growing at each joint one, first on one side of the Stalk, then on the
other, like in shape to the long undivided Leaves of Ivy, but thinner, and
broader.

The Plant that bears White PEPPER is not to be distinguished from the other,
but only by the Color of the Fruit; no more than a Vine that bears Black
Grapes, from that which brings White: And by some it is thought, that the
self same Plant does sometimes change it self from Black to White.

The Tree that bears long PEPPER, is quite different from the Two former, and
grows in another Country. It is much hotter than the common' Black PEPPER, yet
sweeter, and of better taste. GERRARD's Herbal.

Tavernier says, there are two sorts of PEPPER; one is very small, another sort
much bigger; both which sorts are distinguished into Small and Great PEPPER.
The larger sort comes from the Coast of Malavare; and Tuticorin and Calicut are
the Cities where it is brought up. Some of this PEPPER comes from the
Territories of the King of Visapour, being vended at Rejapour, a little City in
that Kingdom. The Hollanders that purchase it of the Malavares, do not give
Money for it, but several sorts of Commodities in Exchange; as Corten, Opium,
Vermilion, and Quicksilver; and this is the PEPPER which is brought into
Europe.

As for the little PEPPER that comes from Bantam, Afchen, and some other parts
toward the East, there is none of it carried out of Asia, where it is spent in
vast quantities, especially among the Mahumetans. For there are double the
Grains of Small PEPPER in one pound, to what there are of the Great PEPPER;
besides that the Great PEPPER is hotter in the Mouth. TAVERN. of the
Commodities of the Dominions of the Great Mogul.

Philippus Baldaeus, in his Description of some of the Chief Parts of the
East Indies, says, that PEPPER grows best in shady places; that it has a weak
Stem, to be supported like Vines; having on each Branch commonly six Clusters,
each a Foot long, in Color like unripe Grapes; that they gather it, being
Green, in October and November, exposing it to the Sun to dry, whereby it grows
Black in a few Days.

Ligon says, that in the Island of Barbados there is a kind of Red PEPPER,
which is of two sorts; the one so like a Child's Coral, as not to be discerned
at the distance of two paces; a Crimson and Scarlet mixed; the Fruit about two
Inches long, and shines more than the best Polisht Coral. The Other of the same
Color, and glistering as much, but shaped like a large Button of a Cloak; both
of one and the same Quality; both so violently strong, that when they break but
the Skin, it sends out such a vapor into their Lungs, as makes them fall a
Coughing, which lasts a quarter of an hour after the Fruit is removed; but, as
long as they are garbling it, they never give over. The Spaniards are so much
in love with this Spice, that they will have it in all their Meat, that they
intend to have piquant, for a greater Haut-goust is not in the World. Garlic
is faint and cool to it. It grows on a little Shrub, no bigger than a
Gooseberry Bush. LIGON's Hist. of Barbados, Page 79.

Piso Describes and Figures nine or ten sorts of Guiny-PEPPER, all growing in
Brasile, and there called Quiya. The Guiny-PEPPER is used as a great Stomachick
Medicine, and in Sauces, both in substance and infusion, in America, Spain, and
other Countries, and by many preferred before the best PEPPER. GREW's Mus.
Regal. Societ. Page 231.

Mr. Hughes, in his Treatise, called The American Physician, mentions a sort of
PEPPER called the Sweet-Scented PEPPER, which he says he never saw but in
Iamaica, it grows much after the same manner as the East India PEPPER does.
He also says, that the Red PEPPER-Tree grows in many Plantations in Iamaica.

Observations concerning CLOVES.
THe CLOVE-Tree grows in Form much like to our Bay Tree, the Bark of an Olive
Color. The CLOVES grow Ten and Twenty together among the Leaves. The Blossoms
at the first are White, then Green, and at last Red and hard, which are the
CLOVES. The Leaf, Bark, and Wood being Green, is as strong as the CLOVE. When
the Blossoms are Green, they have the pleasantest smell in the World. The right
Color of CLOVES, when they are dry, is a dark Yellow, and to give them a black
Color they are commonly smoakt. The CLOVES are gathering from September unto
the End of February, not with hands, as we gather Apples, Cherries, and such
like Fruit, but by beating the Tree, as we do Walnuts. The CLOVES that stay on
the Tree ungather'd are thick, and continue till the next Year, and these are
called The Mother of CLOVES.

This Tree grows in great plenty in the Molucca Islands, as also in Amboyna,
where they grow of themselves without Planting, by the falling of the Fruit;
and when they are of Eight Years growth they bear Fruit, and so continue
bearing for an Hundred Years together.

In the place where these Trees stand, there is neither Grass, Weed, nor any
sort of Herbs, for that the Tree draws unto it self all the moisture round
about. The CLOVES are so hot by Nature, that whenever they are made clean,
and separated from their Garbish, if there chance to stand either Tub, or Pail
of Water, in the Chamber where they cl^an^e them, or any other Vessel with
Wine, or any kind of moisture, it will within two Days at the furthest be
wholly dried up, although it stand not near them, by reason of the great heat
of the CLOVES that draw all moisture to them. Of the same Nature is the unspun
Silk of China; so that whenever the Silk lies any where in a House upon the
Floor, that is to say, upon Boards, a Foot or two above the Ground, and that
the Floor is covered with Water, although it touches not the Silk, in the
Morning all that Water will be in the Silk, for that it draws all unto it.
And this trick the Indians oftentimes use to make their Silk weigh heavy, when
they sell it, for it can neither be seen nor found in the Silk. PVRCH. Pilgr.
Vol. 2. Page 1783.

The same Author, Vol. 1. Page 699. says, That in Machan, one of the Molucca
Islands, there is a CLOVE-Tree differing from all others in its Fruit, which is
called The Kings CLOVE, much esteemed by the Country People, both for the
variety, as also for the goodness; nor is there any other but this in all the
Molucca's; they are not to be bought for any Money, but are given away to
Friends by handfuls and half handfuls.

There is extracted from the CLOVES a certain Oil, or rather thick Butter of a
Yellow Color, which being Chased in the hands, smells like the CLOVES
themselves, wherewith the Indians Cure their Wounds, as we do with Balsam.
GERARD's Herbal.

Avicenna affirms, that the Gum of this Tree is like Turpentine; but he is
mistaken, it being certain, that it does not produce any at all. MANDELSLO's
Trav. into the Indies, Page 132.

Observations concerning GINGER.
GINGER is the Root of neither Tree nor Shrub, but of an Herbaceous Plant,
resembling the Water Flower-De-Luce, as Garsias first described; or rather the
common Reed, as Lobelius since affirmed. Very common in many parts of India,
growing either from Root or Seed; which in December and January they take up,
and, gently dried, role it up in Earth; whereby stopping the Pores, they
preserve the Natural Moisture, and so prevent Corruption. BROWN's Vulg. Errors.

GINGER grows in many places of India, yet the best and most carried abroad,
is, that which grows on the Coast of Malabar: It grows like thin and young
Netherland Reeds, of two or three Spans high, the Root whereof is GINGER; being
Green, it is much eaten in India for Sallets, as also sod in Vinegar. The time
when they are most gathered, and begun to be dried, is in December and January:
They dry it in this manner; They cover it with Pot-Earth, which they do to stop
and fill up the Holes, thereby to make it continue the fresher; for the
Pot-Earth preserves it from Worms, without the which it is presently consumed
by them. GINGER is little esteemed in India, notwithstanding there is much
Shipped off, as well to the Red Sea, as to Ormus, Arabia, and Asia. PVRCH.
Pilgr. Vol. 2. Page 1782.

Mr. Ligon says, that in Barbados the GINGER (being a Root) brings forth
Blades, not unlike in shape to the Blades of Wheat, but broader and thicker,
for they cover the Ground so, that one cnanot see any part of it. They are of a
Popinjay Color, the Blossom a pure Scarlet. When it is ripe, they dig up the
Roots, (cutting off the Blades,) and put them into the Hands of an Overseer,
who sets many of the Young Negroes to scrape them with little Knives, or small
Iron Spuds, ground to an edge. They are to scrape all the outward Skin off, to
kill the Spirit; for, without that, it will perpetually grow. Those that have
GINGER, and not hands to dress it thus, are compelled to scald it, to kill the
Spirit; and that GINGER is nothing so good as the other, for it will be as hard
as Wood, and Black, whereas the scrapt GINGER is White and soft, and has a
cleaner and quicker taste. LIGON's Hist. of Barbados Page 79.

Dr. Grew in the Musaeum Regalis Societatis, Page 228. says, There are some
GINGER Roots so large, that sometimes one single Root will weigh fourteen
Ounces. He also observes what great variety of Opinions there is concerning
this Plant. Acosta compares it to that called Lachryma Iobi; Lobelius to a
Reed; Garsias to a Flag; and Bauhinus Pictures it accordingly with a trivalvous
Cod. Piso, out of Bontius's Papers, gives two Figures, one of the Male, the
other of the Female: And supposes, that the reason why this Plant is so
variously described, may proceed partly from the not distinguishing betwixt
them.

Mr. Glanius in his Voyage to the E^^t-Indies, says, that in the King of
Bantam's Dominions there is a Plant called Ganti, a Root so like GINGER, that
the Bantamites have given it the same Name, but it is dearer; and with it they
rub their Bodies. Page 107.

GINGER is brought in great quantities from Amadabat, where (says Tavernier)
there grows more, than in any other part of Asia; and that it is hardly to be
imagined, how much there is Transported Candited into Foreign Parts.

Observations concerning MANNA.
MANNA, or the Dew of Heaven; a delicate Food, wherewith God fed the Children
of Israel, it falling from Heaven in manner of a Dew, White and somewhat like
Coriander Seed; with which the Israelites lived Forty Years in the Wilderness,
till they came to the Borders of the Land of Canaan. At first sending hereof,
the People were in such admiration, that they said each to other, Manhu? id
est, Quid est hoc? What is this? Which seems to be the Cause why it was
afterward called MANNA. In Physic it is taken for a kind of Dew, or grained
MANNA, which falling in hot Countries upon Trees and Herbs before break of Day,
does there congeal, almost like Crumbs of White-Bread, and is gathered and
choicely kept, as a gentle purger of Choler. BLOVNT's Glossogr.

The MANNA of Calabria, is the best, and in most Plenty. They gather it from
the Leaf of the Mulberry Tree; but not of such Mulberry Trees, as grow in the
Valleys. And MANNA falls upon the Leaves by Night, as other Dews do. It is
very likely, that before those Dews come upon the Trees in the Valleys, they
dissipate, and cannot hold out. And, in all probability, the Mulberry Leaf has
some Coagulating Virtue, which thickens the Dew, for that it is not found upon
other Trees: And we see by the Silkworm, which feeds upon that Leaf, what a
dainty smooth Juice it has; and the Leaves also, (especially of the Black
Mulberry,) are somewhat Bristly, which (possibly) may help to preserve the Dew.
Certainly, it were not amiss, to observe a little better the Dews that fall
upon Trees, or Herbs, growing on Mountains: For it may be, many Dews fall, that
spend before they come to the Valleys. And I suppose, that he that would gather
the best May-Dew for Medicine, should gather it from the Hills. BACON's. Not.
Hist.

The Learned and Ingenious Mr. Evelyn, says, that the MANNA of Calabria is
found to exsude out of the Leaves and Boughs of the Ash. This is also confirmed
by Mr. John Ray, in his Historia Plantarum, Vol. 2. Page 1703.

Christophorus Vega Writes, that MANNA is made by a sort of little Bees like
thick Gnats, from whom, sitting by Swarms upon Trees, Sweat as it were drops
from them. But Sennertus Lib. 4. Cap. 8. thinks, that they are rather drawn
thither by the Sweetness of the MANNA, and that they make it not.

It has been controverted among the Learned, whether the Jews MANNA was the
same with Ours? They do indeed in many Things agree, but in this they differ,
that Theirs, ground in a Mill, or bruised in a Mortar, was fit to make Wafers.
If it be not prevented, MANNA will melt with any Sun; for even an Easterly Sun
will dissolve it.

We read in Scaliger, Exercit. 164. that those Shepherds that frequent the
Deserts of Targa, use MANNA instead of Sugar, with the Water which they drink.
IOH. IOHNSTON. Thaumatogr. Naturalis.

MANNA falls from Heaven like Dew in several of the Oriental Countries, as
Iudaea, Mesopotamia, Persia, Syria, Calabria, and is also sound in England: In
those hot Countries it Coagulates, with us it is liquid. The Syrian MANNA is
best; then that of Calabria; then that which has Grains like Mastick: The
White and Fresh is good, not old, the Red and Dark is old, and not so Effectual.

Observations concerning MASTICK.
MASTICK is a Gummy Rosin, of a Whitish Yellow, well scented, and in Grains,
proceeding from the Le^tisk Tree. The Best comes from Chio.

Three Leagues from the Island of Chio, upon a Mountain to the South, there
grows a peculiar sort of Trees; the Leaves are somewhat like a Myrt^^, their
Branches so long, that they cr^^p upon the Ground; but which is more wonderful,
that when they are down, they rise again of themselves. From the beginning of
May to the end of June, the Inhabitants take great care to keep the Earth under
the Tree very clean; for during those two Months there issues out a certain Gum
from the Joints of the Branches, which drops upon the Ground; this is that
which we call MASTICK, and the Turks, Sakes, according to the Name which they
give the Island. The Island produces great store of this MASTICK, which is
spent in the Seraglio of Constantinople, where the Women continually chew it,
to cleanse and keep their Teeth white. When the MASTICK Season draws near, the
Grand Signior every Year, sends a certain number of Bestangi's to take care
that it be not exported, but be preserved for the use of the Seraglio. If it be
a plentiful Year for MASTICK, the Bestangi's that cull out the lesser sort to
sell, put it into little Bags and seal ^t up; which ^ags being so sealed, are
never questioned by the Custom-House Officers. TAVERN. of Chio.

Dioscorides affirms, that several other Places afford MASTICK, but still
acknowledges, that the MASTICK that grows elsewhere, is rarer, and not so good
as that of Chio. They prick these Trees in the Months of August and September,
and the MASTICK, which is their Gum, sweating out by the Holes they have made
in the Bark, runs down the Tree, and falls upon the Ground, where it congeals
into flat pieces, which some time after they gather, then dry them in the Sun,
and afterward range and shake them in a Ranging-Sive, to separate the Dust
from them, which so sticks to the Faces of those that handle the Sive, that
they cannot get it off, but by rubbing their Faces with Oil. There are two and
twenty Villages in the Island of Chio that have MASTICK-Trees, and among them
all, they have about an hundred thousand of them, for which they yearly pay to
the Grand Signior, three hundred Chests of MASTICK, which make seven and twenty
thousand Oques, at fourscore and ten Oques the Chest, and every Oque contains
four hundred Drachms. In raising all this MASTICK, every one of the Villages
where it grows, is assess'd, at so many Oques, according as they have more or
fewer Trees, for they know within a little, how much every Tree can yield; and
seeing all Years are not alike good or bad for all the Quarters where they
grow, they who gather more than they are to pay, sell to those who have not
gathered so much as their Tax comes to, at the rate of threescore Aspres the
Oque, for they assist one another as much as they can, else they would be
obliged to buy of the Master of the Custom-House, at the rate of two Piastres
the Oque. Afterward, they sell what they have over to the Cust^mer a^ the
price of threescore Aspre^ the Oque, which turns to good account to him; for
they are not suffered to sell to any but the Master of the Customs, who sells
it afterward for an hundred and fourscore Aspres, or two Piastres the Oque,
there being none but he in Chio that can sell any, because it is a Commodity
that belongs to the Grand Signior, as the Terra Sigillata, or Terra Lemnia is;
and for that reason they have Waiters upon all the Avenues of the Places where
the Trees grow, who live in little Houses purposely built for them; and search
all that come or go that way, to see if they have any MASTICK about them, and
that so strictly, that once they found a good piece about a Woman, which she
had hid in her most privy parts. Whosoever are taken stealing of MASTICK, are
without remission sent to the Galleys. THEVENOT's Travels into the Levant, Part
1. Chap. 62.

The Felling of this Tree, at the time of its D^stilling, is prohibited, on the
Penalty of losing the Right Hand of him that does it. PET. HETLIN.

In China, Men, Women, and Children go almost constantly with MASTICK in their
Mouths, which they take to be the best thing in the World for fastening of their
Teeth, and also for a good Breath. They also put it into their Bread, and
Biscuit, to give it a more delicate Taste. IOH. RAII Hist. Plant. Tom. 2. Page
1581.

Observations concerning LIGNVM ALOES.
THe LIGNUM ALOES, which in India is called Calamba and Palo D'aguilla, is most
in Malacca, in the Island of Sumatra, Camboia, Sion, and the adjoining
Countries. The Trees are like Olive Trees, and somewhat larger; when the Wood
is first cut down, it smells not so well, because it is green, for the drier
it is, the better it smells: the best and that which smells most, is the
innermost part of the Word: Some of it is better than the rest, which the
Indians do presently know how to find out. The best and finest is called
Calamba, and the other Palo D'aguilla. Now to know which is the best, you must
understand, that the Wood that is very heavy, with black and brown Veins, and
which yields much Oys or Moistness (which is found by the Fire) is the best,
and the greater and thicker it is, the better it is, and has the more Virtue.
Of this Wood they make many costly Things, and it has so curious a smell, that
it is greatly esteemed; especially the Calamba. which if it be good, is sold by
weight against Silver and Gold. The Palo D'aguilla next after the Calamba is
much accouted of. There is another kind of Palo D'aguilla, which is called
Aquilla Braua, or wild Aquilla, and i^ also much esteemed: for the Indians use
therewith to burn the Bodies of their Bramens, and other Men of account; and
because it is costly, therefore it is a great Honor to those that are burnt
therewith, as it is to those that with us are buried in Tombs of Marble: But it
is not comparable to the other Palo D'aguilla, nor the Calamba. The Wild
Aguilla grows most in the Island of and Ceylon, on the Coast of Choramandel.
LINSCHOTEN.

Dr. GREW says, that the Honorable Mr. BOIL presented the ROYAL SOCIETY with
a Piece of LIGNUM ALOES, with its own Gum growing upon it. He says, that the
taste of the Gum is perfectly like to that of the Wood: the Color, like that
of the purest and most lucid Aloe, called Succotrina: for with the Light
reflected, it looks almost l^ke Pitch; with the Light transmitted, it glisters
like a Carbuncle; powdered, it is of a reddish Yellow. This, says the Doctor,
or some other like Aromatic Gum, was the Aloe of the Hebrews; whence the
other, from the Likeness, has its Name.

The Tree is described by Linschoten; about the bigness of the Olive. This Wood
is the Heart of the Tree, the outward part, commonly called the Sap of a Tree,
being whitish and soft. It Is said by Sir Philiberto Vernatti, formerly Resident
in Iava Major, to yield a Milk so hurtful, that if any of it lights in the
Eyes, it causes Blindness; if on any other part the of Body Scabbiness. But,
says Dr. Grew, this (doubtless) is to be understood, neither of the Heart, nor
the Sap; but only of the Bark: there being no Milk-Vessels in either of the
former, as the Doctor remembers. in any Tree, by him observed. GREW^^ Mus^um
REGALIS SOCIETATIS page 179.

Palo D'aguilla, by Druggists called LIGNU^^ ALO^, ^y the Portugals, Palo (...)
the Indians, Calamb^ (...) Iava, but not in such Quantity, (...) Malacca,
Sumatra, Cambaya, and other places. The Tree is like the Olive Tree, only a
little bigger. The Wood while green has no Scent, but as it dries its Odor
increases. The weightiest and the brownest is the best; the Perfection is known
by the Oil that issues out of it when it is held to the Fire. They make Bands
of it, and the Indians use it to embellish their Cabinets; but the chiefest use
is for Physic; for this Wood beaten to Powder, and taken in Broth or Wine,
fortifies the Stomach, stays Vomiting, and cures the Plurisy, and Bloody Flux.
GLANIVS's New Voyage to the East Indies, page 105, 106.

This Wood is much used in India for the making of Beads and Crucisixes.
Monfart says, the Portugals did commonly pay a hundred Crowns a pound for it to
make their Beads.

This Wood is brought to us in small Pieces, which are heavy, bitter, and of a
blackish Purple-colour, with Ash colored Veins, of a sweet Scent, and if they
be good, they will swim when put into Water.

Observations concerning COCHINEEL.
COCHINEEL, a kind of Dust or Grain, wherewith to Dye the Crimson or Scarlet
Color. It is a little Worm breeding in a certain Shrub, which they call
Holy-Oak, or Dwarf-Oak, and is found in Cephalonia and other Places; on the
Leaves whereof there arises a Tumor, like a Blister; which they gather, and
rub out of it a certain red Dust, that converts (after a while) into Worms,
which they kill with Wine (as is reported) when they begin to quicken. BAC^NS's
Not. Hist. Experim. 887.

New Spain in America does so wonderfully abound with this Comodity, that 5670
Arro^a's of ^^ (each Arroba containg 25 Buthels o^ our English Measure) have
been shipped for Europe in one Year. Now, this COCHINEEL grows on a small
Tree, or Shrub, having very thick Leaves, which they call a Tuna; planted and
ordered by them as the French do their Vines; out of the Seed whereof, arises a
small Worm at first no bigger than a Flea, at the greatest not much bigger than
our common Lady-Cows, which they much resemble; which feeding on the Leaves,
and over-spreading all the Ground in which they are, are gathered by the
Natives twice a Year, stifled with Ashes, or with Wate^. (but this last the
best) dried to a Powder in the Shade, and so transported into Europe. PET.
HE^LIN.

It is generally believed, that the COCHINEEL comes out of a Fruit called the
Prickle-Pear, bearing a Leaf of a slimy Nature, and a Fruit Blood-red, and full
of Seeds, which give a Dye almost like to Brasiletto Wood, that will perish in
a few days by the Fire: But the Insect engendered of this Fruit or Leaves,
gives a permanent Tincture, as is generally known.

There grows a Berry (by report) both in the Bermudas and New England, called
the Summer-Island-Redweed, which Berry is as red as the Prickle-Pear, giving
much the like Tincture; out of which Berry come out first Worms* which
afterward turn into Flies somewhat bigger than the COCHINEEL-Fly, feeding on
the same Berry: In which we read, there has been found a Color no whit
in^erior to that of the COCHINEEL-Fly, and as to Med^cinal Virtue much
exceeding it.

Whereupon it has been offered to the consideration and trial of the ROYAL
SOCIETY. 1. Whether this Bermuda Berry might not grow in England? 2. Whether
out of the Berry of Brasil^^^^ Wood the like Insect might not ^e obtained in
respect of Color or Tincture? 3. Whether a fading Color, yielded by certain
Vegitables, ^ight not be fixed by causing such a Fermentation in the Concrete,
as may engender Insects giving the Tincture of its Original, which will hold in
Grain? PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 40. page 496.

That Learned, and Ingenious Naturalist, Dr. Lister, is of Opinion, that
COCHINEIL is a sort of Kermes. As you may see in a Letter of his to Mr.
Oldenburgh in the Philos. Transact Numb. 87.

COCHINELE, Coccus Radicum The former Name, seems to be but the Diminitive of
Coccus. The ^atter, grounded upon the Opinion, That as the Kermes Berry grows
on the Body and Leaves, so This, on the Roots, of Plants, especially on those
of Pimpinel; yet in some places only. Farther, I find no certain account. To
me, thus much seems evident, That it is neither a Vegetable Excrescence, as some
surmise; not an Insect, as others; yet an Animal Body, as the Kermes Berry, by
some Insect affixed to a Plant; and thence nourished for a time, but gathered
before it be filled with Mites or Maggots. For being held, as the Kermes Berry,
in the Flame of a Candle, it usually huffs and swells, but always stinks, like
Hair or Horn when they are burnt.

A Scruple of COCHINELE added to an Ounce of Saccharum Saturni, makes a most
curious Purple; but I believe fading. GREW's Mus. Regal. Societ. page 241.

In the Philosophical Transactions Numb. 176. We have three several Figures
representing the COCHINEEL-Fly, as seen on its Belly by the help of the
Microscope, and by the naked Eye, and as seen on its back through a Microscope;
the Draughts of which were communicated by Dr. Tyson, Fellow of the Royal
Society.

Observations concerning INDIGO.
INDIGO comes from several Parts of the Great Mogul's Empire; and according to
the Diversity of the Place it differs in Quality, and consequently in price.

In the first place, it comes from the Territories of Biana, Indoua, and Corsa,
a Day or two's Journey from Agra: Which is esteemed the best of all. It is made
also in a Village called Sarquess, Eight Days Journey from Surat, and two
Leagues distance from Amadabat: Here the flat INDIGO is made. There is also
INDIGO little inferior in goodness and price, which comes from the King of
Golconda's Territories. There comes INDIGO also from Bengala, which the Dutch
Company transports for M^s^ipa^an: But (as Tavernier informs us) the Merchants
buy this INDI^O, and that of Brampour and Amadabat, cheaper by 24 in the
Hundred, than that of Agra.

INDIGO is made of an Herb, which they sow every Year after the Rains are over:
Which when it is grown up, is very like our Hemp. They cut it three several
times; the first cutting far exceeds the two latter. The Second cutting is
worse than the First by Ten or Twelve in the Hundred. And the Third worse than
the Second by Twelve in the Hundred. The difference is found by breaking a
piece of the Paste, and observing the Color. The Color of that INDIGO which
is made of the First cutting, is a Violet-Blue, but more brisk and lively than
the two others: And that which is made of the Second, is more lively than the
Third.

When they have cut the Herb, they throw it into Pits which they make with
Lime, which becomes so hard, that you would judge it to be one entire piece of
Marble. They are generally 80 or 100 Paces in Circuit; and being half full of
Water, they fill them quite up with the Herb. Then they bruise and jumble it in
the Water, till the Leaf (for the Stalk is worth nothing) becomes like a kind
of thick Mud. This being done, they let it settle for some days; and when the
settling is all at the bottom, and the Water clear above, they let out all the
Water. When the Water is all drained out, they fill several Baskets with this
Slime, and in a plain Field you shall see several Men at work, every one at his
own Basket, making up little pieces of INDIGO flat at the bottom, at the top
sharp like an Egg. Though at Amadabat they make their pieces quite flat like a
small Cake. Here you are to take particular notice, that the Merchants, because
they would not pay Custom for an Unnecessary Weight, before they transport
their INDIGO out of Asia into Europe, are very careful to cause it to be
sifted, to separate the Dust from it; which they sell afterward to the Natives
of the Country to Dye their Calicuts. TAVERN. of the Commodities belonging to
the Dominions of the Great Mogul.

Philippus Baldaeus, in his Description of some of the Chief Parts of the
East Indies, says, That the Plant, which yields the INDIGO, bears a Flower
like that of Thistles, and a Seed like that of Faenum Graecum: He says, That
the principal Marks of good INDIGO are, dryness, lightness, and swimming on
Water; yielding a high Violet-Colour; and when put upon live Coals, giving a
Violet Smoke, and leaving but few Ashes: That the INDIGO Merchant is to beware
of buying moist INDIGO, because he will then find, that in Eight Days time he
loses three Pounds in Ten; That the best way is to try it in a clear Sunshine,
by breaking some Lumps in pieces, and viewing them well, whether there can be
observed in them any thing that glistens; which if there be, one may be sure
there is Sand in it, with which it has been sophisticated, to increase the
Weight. But for the greater assurance of the goodness of INDIGO, his Advice is,
to pass the Nail of ones Thumb over the broken pieces, and if it be good, it
will be of a Violet-Colour, and the higher that Color, the better the INDIGO.

Monsieur Tavernier says, That the penetrancy of the Powder of INDIGO is such,
that all the while they are sisting it, they are fain to keep a Linen Cloth
before their Faces, and to stop their Nostrils, leaving only two little holes
for their Eyes: And that besides, they are forced every half Hour to drink
Milk, which they find to be a great Preservative against the piercing Quality
of the Dust: And that notwithstanding all this caution, they yet often find,
that having been for Nine or Ten Days together employed about this Work,
whatever they spit for a good while is Blueish. And He also tells us, That one
Morning he laid an Egg among the Sisters, and when he came to break it in the
Evening, it was all Blue within.

Observations concerning the COCONVT-Tree.
THis Tree, when Young, is very Tender; but as it becomes more lofty, so it
grows more solid and strong: The Body is straight and smooth, and in
Circumference equals the Wast of a Man at the full growth: In height, Twelve or
Fourteen Foot: Round about the top (and so a Yard or two down) Spring forth
many Boughs or Branches, but without any Fork in them, b^s^^ very thick which
long and slender Leaves, almost of a Seagreen Color. At the Roots of these
B^ughs, as low as they grow round, about the Head of the Tree, grow the COCO
NUTS. This Nut is at first, whilst it is Young, of a Green Color; but when
they are Ripe, they appear outwardly of a Brown or Whitish Brown Color: They
are of several sizes, some bigger, and some less: The largest of them are (Husk
and Rind) two Foot in Circumference: They are almost Oval, and their outer Rind
is very tough and thready; so fast fixed to the Shell, that it is hard to be
gotten off: This Rind is nigh an Inch thick, under which is a rough strong hard
Shell, some of them Black, and some Brown or Yellowish. In the top of each of
these Shells there are three Holes, by which the inner Cavity receives a
continual supply of N^urishment: Just within this Shell, sticking close
thereto, is a Milk-White Kernel, about half an Inch thick; and the hollow
Cavity within the Kernel is full of a thin, clear, sweet Water or Juice, which
is as a Viand to them. HVGHES's American Physician.

They grow in Iamaica, and in most of the Caribbee-Islands; as also in the
Islands of Maldiva, and other places in the East Indies. But those that grow in
the East Indies seem to be of another kind, growing to Forty, sometimes Fifty
Foot high.

Amongst other rare Fruits, the Island Madagascar has plenty of those, which
they call COCOS, or COCO-NUTS; a kind of Date as big as a Cabbage; the Liquor
in it, about the quantity of a Pint, tastes like Wine and Sugar; the Kernel big
enough to content two Men; and like good Ale, it affords not only Meat and
Drink, but Clothing; as also Furniture for their Houses, Tackle for their
Ships, Fuel for the Fire, and Timber for Building; the Body of the Tree being
straight and high, and toward the top diversified into many Branches. PET.
HETLIN.

Linschoten says, that this Tree grows in greater abundance in the Islands of
Maldiva, than either Olive Trees in Spain, or Willow-Trees in the
Low Countries. He says, They grow no where but on the Seaside, or Banks of
Rivers, and in Sandy Grounds, and that they grow not within the Land: That they
have no great Root, so that a Man would think it impossible for them to have
any fast hold within the Earth, and yet they stand so fast, and grow so high,
that it makes one afraid to see a Man climb up to the top of them.

The Question ^eing put to Sir Philiberto Vernatti, late Resident in Iava
Major, whether there be a Tree in Mexico, that yields Water, Wine, Vinegar,
Oil, Milk, Honey, Wax, Thread, and Needles? His Answer was, The COCO-Tree
yields all this and more; The Nut, while it is Green, has very good Water in
it; the Flower being cut, drops out great Quantity of Liquor, called Sury, or
Taywack, which drank fresh, has the force, and almost the taste of Wine; grown
four, is very good Vinegar; and distilled, makes very good Brandy, or Areck:
The Nut grated, and mingled with Water, tastes like Milk; pressed, yields very
good Oil; Bees swarm in these Trees, as well as in others; Thread and Needles
are made of the Leaves and tough Twigs. SPRAT's Hist. of the ROYAL SOCIETY,
Page 170.

The COCO is one of the most useful Trees in the World. Of the Husk, or outmost
fibrous cover of the Nut, all manner of Ropes and Cables are made throughout
India. Of the Shells, the Indians make Ladles, Wine-Bottles, and many forts of
Vessels. The inmost Cover next the Kernel, while it contains only Liquor, they
eat with Salt, as a very pleasant Food. The said Liquor, is commonly used as a
clear, sweet, and cool Drink. Sometimes they cut away the Blossom of the young
Nut, and binding a convenient Vessel to the place, thereby obtain a sweet and
pleasant Liquor, which they call Sura. This standing an hour in the Sun,
becomes good Vinegar, used throughout India. The same Distilled (I suppose
after Fermentation) yields a pretty strong Brandy, called Fulo, and is the
first running. The second is called Vraca, the only Wine of India. Of the same
Sura, being boiled, and set in the Sun, they also make a fort of Brown Sugar,
which they call Iagra. From the Kernel it self, when fresh, and well stamped,
they press out a Milk, which they always mix and eat with their RiceMeats. Of
the Kernel dried (called Copra) and stamped, they make Oil, both to eat and to
burn. Of the Leaves of the Tree (called Olas) they make the Sails of their
Ships: As also Covers for their Houses and Tents; and Summer-Hats. Of the Wood,
they make Ships without Nails; sewing the several parts together with the Cords
made of the Huk of the Nut. GREW's Musaeum REG. SOCIET. Page 199, 200.

Observations concerning the CACAO-Tree, and its NVT, of which CHOCOLATE is
made.
OF these Trees there are several sorts, which grow to a reasonable height: The
Bodies of the largest do usually arrive in bulk (although not in tallness) to
the largeness of our English Plum-Trees: They are in every part smooth; and the
Boughs and Branches thereof extend themselves on every side, to the proportion
of a well-spread Tree, much resembling our HeartCherry-Tree, but at its full
growth it is dilated to a greater breadth in compass, and is something loftier;
there is little difference in the Leaves, these being pointed, but smoother on
the E^^^s, and of a (...) white kind of Pulp, that is agreeable to the Palate.
By the turning and Sweating, their little Strings are broken, and the Pulp is
imbibed and mingled with the substance of the Nut. After this, they are put to
dry 3 or 4 Weeks in the Sun, and then they become of a Reddish dark Color, as
you see; and so are Cured.

What is remarkable in this Fruit, is, that the Codds grow only out of the Body
or great Limbs, and Boughs; and that, at the same time, and in the same place,
there are Blossoms, Young and Ripe Fruit.

This Tree requires to be sheltered from the Sun while it is Young, and always
from the North-East Winds; and to have a fat, moist, low Soil, which makes them
to be Planted commonly by Rivers and between Mountains: So that it is ill living
where there are good CACAO-Walks. In a Years time the Plant comes to be 4 Foot
high, and has a Leaf six times as big as an Old Tree, which, as the Plant
grows bigger, falls off, and lesser come in their place, which is another
extraordinary Quality of this Tree.

The Trees are commonly Planted at 12 Foot distance; and at 3 years old, where
the Ground is good, and the Plant prosperous, it begins to bear a little, and
then they cut down all or some of the Shade, and so the Fruit increases till
the 10 th or 12 th Year; and then the Tree is supposed to be in its prime. How
long it may continue so, none with us (in Iamaica) can guess; but it is certain,
the Root generally shoots out Suckers, that supply the place of the old Stock
when dead or cut down, unless when any ill Quality of the Ground or Air kill
both. [ See this Accurate Account of the CACAO- Tree, given by a very
Intelligent Person residing in Jamaica,] which you may find in the PHILOS.
TRANS ACT. Numb. 93.

These Kernels being well pounded, as Almonds, in a Mortar, and mixed with a
certain proportion of Sugar and Spices (according as the Trader thinks or finds
it best for Sale,) are commonly made up in Cakes or Rowles; which are brought
over hither from Spain, and other parts. But those that would have a good
Quantity for their own private use, had much better procure the NUTS
themselves, (as fresh and new as may be,) and so prepare and Compound them to
their own Constitution and Taste. And for those that drink it, without any
Medicinal respect, at CoffeeHouses; there is no doubt but that of Almonds
finely beaten, and mixed with a due proportion of Sugar and Spices, may be made
as pleasant a Drink, as the best CHAWCALATE, GREW's Mus. REG. SOC. Page 205.

Dr. Stubbes, in the last part of his Observations relating to Iamaica (see the
Philos. Transact. Numb. 37.) takes notice of the Censure of Simon Paula in his
Herbal, Page 383. against CHOCOLATA, and says, He cannot forgive him for it;
being of Opinion, that that Liquor, if it were well made, and taken in a right
way, is the best Diet for Hypochondriacs, and Chronical Distempers, for the
Scurvy, Gout and Stone, and Women Lying-in, and Children Newborn (to prevent
Convulsions; and purge the Meconium out,) and many other Distempers, that
infest Europe; but that it is now rather used for Luxury than Physic; and so
compounded, as to destroy the Stomach, and to increase Hypochondriacal
Diseases; and that we now so Cook it, as if it were to be transformed into a
Caudle or Custard.

The Native Indians seldom or never use any Compounds; desiring rather to
preserve their Healths, than to gratify and please their Palars, until the
Spaniards, coming amongst them, made several Mixtures and Compounds; which
instead of making CHOCOLATE better (as they supposed) have made it much worse:
And many of the English (especially those that know not the Nature of the
CACAO) do now imitate them: For in Iamaica, as well as other places, when they
make it into Lumps, Balls, Cakes, etc. they add to the CACAO Paste, Chille, or
Red Pepper; Achiote, sweet Pepper, commonly known by the Name of IamaicaPepper,
or some or one of them; as also such other Ingredients as the place affords,
or as most pleases them that make it; or else as the more skillful Persons may
think it to agree with this or that Individual Person; adding thereto as much
Sugar only as will sweeten it: First of all drying and beating every Ingredient
apart; and then at the last mixing them together, as it is wrought up into a
Mass. HUGHES's American Phisician*

Josephus Acosta says, that in several places in the West Indies, The CACAW-NUT
is so much esteemed, that the Kernels are used instead of Money; and commonly
given to the Poor, as Alms: And that the Indians are wont to Treat Noble Men
with CHACAWLATE, as they pass through their Country. IOS. ACOST. Hist. Lib. 4.
Cap. 22.

Observations concerning THEE, or TEA.
THEE is a Shrub growing in most parts of China and Iapan; it arises generally
to the height and bigness of our GardenRose and Currant-Trees; the Roots are
Fibrous, and spread into many little Filaments, near the surface of the Earth;
the Flowers are like those of Rosa Sylvestris; the Seeds round, and black;
which being sowed come to perfection in three Years time, and then yield yearly
a Crop; but these are little valued; the great and only Virtue of this Plant
being supposed to consist only in the Leaves; of which there are five sorts,
both as to bigness, and valued; for the largest at bottom are sold for about
one Penny half Penny the Pound; but the smallest at the top for Fifty, nay
sometimes one H^ndred and Fifty Crow^s the Pound. IOH. NIC. PEC^LIN. De potu
THE^E.

This Plant (says the Learned Pechlin) abounds with a brisk volatile Salt,
which he adjudges very agreeable to our Northern Constitutions, whose Blood is
naturally very heavy, and sluggish; it carries also with it a sine thinner sort
of Oil; but so admirably well tempar'd, that as this hinders the Spirit from
Evaporating, so that corrects the Inflammability of this; from whence results
the very agreeable latter A^tringent: All which together, as they rectify the
Ferment of the Blood, and at the same time strengthen, and confirm the tone of
the Parts, contribute so much to the assisting of Nature in her Operations, as
to prevent, if not to Cure, most Chronical Distempers.

Because the discreet Choice of a proper Vehicle for this great Panacea, may be
very material, the Learned Author therefore thinks good to show his dislike of
Milk; in that it very much obstructs its more lively and quicker parts; as
always leaving behind it much acidity, which how prejudicial to Hypochondriacal
Persons, is sufficiently obvious He dislikes the Custom they use in Iapan, of
drinking the Leaves powdered, supposing that it may dry the Body too much. In
short, He concludes warm-Water to be the most Natural and Effectu^l Vehicle, as
being pure, and vo^d of all Saline or other ways pernicious Particles, and
being more ready to be impregnated with the Virtue hereof; which when Armed
with this powerful Vegetable, Nature easily admits into its obscure Channels,
and dark Recesses.

He approves well enough of the use of Sugar; as it serves not only to qualify
the bitter taste, by its sweetness, which at the same time is corrected by the
Heat; but as being good also for the Kindnies, and Lungs. He thinks the
difference of Constitutions too great to be insisted on, and therefore only
says this, viz. That those of a dryer Habit may take it more diluted, because
their Salts may more easily be carried off: And for the Moister and Hydropical
Temper, He supposes this Water, if more strongly impregnated, may make way for
the Evacuation of the other.

As to the Times of taking it, He says, the more empty the Stomach, the passage
will be the more easy, and therefore in such the more effectual: He condemns
the use of it after Meals; because the Volati^e part flies off, before the Meat
is any ways digested; after which the Concoction is difficulty performed;
because the Ferment, as well as the Volatility of the Chyle, is suppressed by
the Astringent Quality; which in those Circumstances often proves a thing of very
pernicious Consequence.

To conclude, our Author, notwithstanding all his Encomium's of this Exotic,
can be content to think, we might receive as much benefit from some Plants of
our own Growth; were People industrious to search after them; such as Veronica,
Lingua Cervina, Marrhubium, Hepatica, Cichoreum, and some others which he
names. PEC^LIN. Ibidem.

The Physicians of Tunquin in India do mightily admire the Herb TEA, which
comes from China and Iapan; which latter Country produces the best. It is
brought to them in Tin Pots close stopped, to keep out the Air.

When they would use it they boil a Quantity of Water, according to the
proportion they intend to use, and when the Water seeths, they throw a small
Quantity into it, allowing as much as they can nip between their Thumb and
Forefinger to a Glass. This they prescribe to be drank as hot as they can
endure it, as being an excellent Remedy against the Headache, for the Gravel,
and for those that are subject to the Griping of the Guts; but then they order
a little Ginger to be put into the Water when it boyls. At Goa, Batavia, and in
all the Indian Factories, there are none of the Eui^^^^^ns who do not spend
above four or five Leaves a day; and they are careful to preserve the boiled
Leaf for an Evening Sallad, with Sugar, Vinegar, and Oil. That is accounted the
best TEA, which colors the Water greenest; but that which makes the Water look
red, is little valued. In Iapan, the King and great Lords, who drink TEA, drink
only the Flower, which is much more wholesome, and of a taste much more
pleasing. But the Price is much different, for one of our ordinary ^e^^-Giasses
is there worth a French Crown. TAVERN. of the Kingdom of Tunqin. Chap. X.

In Iapan there is a Plant called TSIA, it is a kind of THE or TEA; but the
Plant is much more delicate, and more highly esteemed than that of THE'.
Persons of Quality keep it very carefully in Earthen Pots well stopped, that it
may not take Wind^: but the Iapponneses prepare it quite otherwise than is done
in Europe. For, instead of infusing it into warm Water, they beat it as small
as Powder, and take of it as much as will lie on the point of a Knife, and put
it into a Dish of Porcelane or Earth, full of seething Water, in which they
slir it, till the Water be all green, and then drink it as hot as they can
endure it. It is excellent good after a Debauch, it being certain there is not
any thing that allays the Vapors, and settles the Stomach better than this
Herb does. The Pots they make use of about this kind of Drink are the most
precious of any of their HousholdStuff, in as much as it is known, that there
have been TSIA-Pots, which had cost between Six and Seven Thousand Pounds
Sterling* MANDELSLO's Trav. into the Indies, page 156.

The Persians, Indians, Chinese, and Iaponneses, assign to TEA such
extraordinary Qualities, that, imagining it alone able to keep a Man in
constant Health, they are sure to treat such as come to visit them, with this
Drink, at all Hours. The Quality it is (by experience) found to have, is, that
it is astringent, and that it consumes superfluous Humors, which incommodate
the Brain, and provoke Drowsiness. OLEARIVS's Ambassadors Trav. into Musc.
Pers. and Tartar. page 241.

The Dutch are said to transport the dried Leaves of Sage into China, and,
under the Name of European TEA, to barter it with the Chinese for their TEA.

Observations concerning COFFEE, or CAVPHE.
THis Tree is said to grow only in that part of Arabia Foelix, which lies
within the Tropicks; and that it very much resembles our Cherry-Trees, but
scarce so big. It bears a Berry about the bigness of a small Bean; of which is
made a thick and bitter Drink, as black as Soot, and of a strong Scent, but not
Aromatical; which is commonly called COFFEE. This Drink is in such mighty
request among the Turks, that, as the Learned Veslingius affirms, there are no
less than some Thousands of COFFEE-Houses in that one City of Cairo. It is also
much used in Barbary, and great part of Africa. And of late Years it has crept
into Europe, nay even into our Northern Climate. So that we now see great
plenty of COFFEE-Houses, not only in the City of London, but also in other
p^rts of the Kingdom. And wh^^ a mighty Consumption there is of this Drink,
plainly appears from that considerable Revenue, which yearly arises to the
Crown* from the Impost laid upon that one Commodity of COFFEE.

In the COFFEE-Houses where the Turks use to resort to tipple, there is usually
one hired by the Owne^s to read either an Idle Book of Tales, which they admire
as Wit, or filthy obscene Stories, with which they seem wonderfully affected
and pleased, few of them being able to read. These are the Schools, which they
frequent for their Information, though in Times of War, when Things went ill
with them, their Discourses would be of the Ill Government; and the Grand
Signior himself and his chief Ministers could not escape their Censures; which
mani^estly tending to Sediti^n, and to the heightning of their Discontents by
their mutual Complaints, and by this free venting of their Grievances, during
the War at Candia, the wise Vizier, seeing the evil Consequences that would
follow, if such Meetings, and Discourses were any longer tolerated, commanded,
that all the public COFFEE-Houses should be shut up in Constantinople, and
several other great Cities of the Empire, where the Malcontents used to
rendezvous themselves, and find fault, upon every ill Success and Miscarriage,
with the Administration of Affairs. Dr. THO. SMITH's Account of Constantinople,
etc. in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 155.

The Turks look upon CAUPHE ^o be good all Hours of the Day, ^ut especially
Morning and Even^ng, when to that purpose, they en^ertain themselves two or
three Hours in CAUPHE-Houses, which ^hroughout Turkey abound more than ^^s, and
Alehouses, with us. This Drink is thought to be the old Black Broth used so
much by the Lacedaemonians; it dries ill Humors in the Stomach, comfort the
Brain, never causes Drunkenness, or any other Surfeit, and is a harmless
Entertainment of Good-Fellowship. Sir HENR. BLOVNT's Voyage into the Levant.
Page 137.

The Lord Bacon in his Natural History, says, That this Drink comfort the
Brain, and Heart, and helps Digestion.

Monsieur Thevenot speaking of the Qualities of this Drink, says, that if it be
drank very hot, it clears the Head of Vapors, moderately hot it binds up the
Body, and cold it is Laxative. THEV. Trav. into the Levant. Part 2. Chap. v.

Those who write of COFFEE, do almost all reckon it amongst the Antihypnoticks,
agreeing that it is a Driver away of Sleep.

The Learned Dr. Willis, in his Discourse of COFFEE, is of the Opininion, that
this Drink, though most commonly used, and very profitable in some Cases, and
very Medicinal; is to others perhaps very hurtful, or less healthful. Indeed,
that it is so, not only Reason (says the Doctor) but also common Observation
every where dictates, for we see that great COFFEE Drinkers become lean, and
are very often subject to be Paralytick, and grow impotent for Generation. Yet
as to Affects of the Brain, and the Genus Nervosum, I very often (says the
Doctor) prescribe this Drink for them. For indeed in very many Cephalic
Diseases and Infirmities, viz. in Headaches, Giddiness, the Lethargy,
Catarrhs, and the like, where with a full habit of Body, and a cold
Temperament, or one that is not hot, and a Watery Blood, there is a moist Brain
with a Sluggishness and Dullness of the Animal Spirits, COFFEE has often a very
good effect, for being daily drank, it wonderfully clears and enlightens each
part of the Soul, and disperses all the Clouds of every Function. But on the
contrary, those who being thin, and of a Bilious, or Melancholic Temperament,
have a sharp, or burnt Blood, a hot Brain, and the Animal Spirits too much
stirred and restless, ought to forbear this Drink altogether, as being apt to
pervert both the Spirits and Humors in a greater measure, and to render them
wholly unfit, and unable to perform any Functions: For I have observed many
(says the Learned Doctor,) not having a sufficient plenty of Spirits, and being
also subject to the Headache, Vertigo, Palpitation of the Heart, and a
trembling or numbness of the Limbs, who presently after drinking COFFEE became
worse as to those Affects, and suddenly found an unusual Languor in their whole
Body. WILLIS Pharmaceut. Ration. Sect. 7. Cap. 3.

COFFEE has a cooling Quality, and the Persians think it allays the Natural
Heat. And therefore they often drink of it, on purpose to avoid the charge of
having many Children. To this purpose they tell a Story of one of their Kings,
named Sultan Mahomet Caswin, who Reigned in Persia before Tamerlane's time,
that he was so accustomed to the drinking of COFFEE, that* he had a strange
aversion to all Women; and that the Queen standing one day at her Chamber
Window, and perceiving they had got down a Horse upon the Ground, in order to
the Gelding of him, asked some that stood by, why they treated so handsome a
Creature in that manner; whereupon answ^r being made her, that he was too Fiery
and Me^tlesome, and that the business of those that were about him, wa^, with
the taking away of the Exce^s of Mettle, which Stone-Horses are guilty of, to
deprive him of all G^n^rative Virtue; the Queen replied, that that trouble
might have been spared, since COFFEE would have wrought the same effect; and
that ^f they would keep the Stone-Horse with that Drink, he would, in a short
time, be as tame and quiet as the King her Husband. OLEARIVS in the Ambassadors
Travels, page 240.

There goes a Story, (how true I know not) that the Virtue of COFFEE, was at
first discovered by a Prior of a Convent; who observing that the Goats, which
fed in that part of Arabi^ where these Trees grow* used to live with little or
no Sleep, and that (...) the day time they ^e^e mighty b^isk and frisking; ^he
said ^rior did from thence concl^^e that this must necessarily proceed from the
Goats licking up the Berries that fell from these Trees: Whereupon to satisfy
his Curiosity. He tried the Experiment upon another sort of Beast, viz. a
Sleepy Heavy-Headed Monk, whom the Prior did often ply with this sort of Drink;
on whom, as the Story goes, it had, in a short time, such a wonderful effect,
that it quite altered his Constitution, and that he afterward became more
quick, brisk, and airy, than generally that sort of Cattle are.

The Goodness of COFFEE chiefly consists in an exact way of Parching and
managing the Berries; for if these are parched to a higher or lower degree than
they ought, the COFFEE is stark naught, and good for nothing. Dr. Bernier
affirms, that there were but two Men in the whole City of Cairo that rightly
understood the Art and Mystery of Parching and ordering these Berries. IOH.
RAII Hist. Plant. Vol. 2. page 1692.

That Learned Bo^anist, Mr. Ray, in the place last quoted, tells us, that the
Arabians are very industrious in destroying the Vegetative Force of the Seed,
that so thereby they might prevent its growing in any other Country. Nor
indeed are they to be blamed for so doing; since from this one Commodity of
COFFEE there accrues to their Country such an immense Treasure from almost all
the other parts of the World; in which respect, as the Learned Ray wittily
observes, Arabia may b^ said to be, not only Felix, but ^^licissim^.

Observations concerning OPIVM.
OPIUM is a Tear which flows from the wounded Heads of the Poppy being ripe:
Some do promisc^^usly use it with MECONIUM, but very improperly; for OPIUM is a
Drop or Tear, MECONIUM the gross expressed Juice from the whole Plant; however
they are both of one Quality: OPIUM is the finer Gum, and the stronger;
MECONIUM is the courser and weaker, yet the more malign.

OPIUM is of three sorts. 1. Black and hard from Syria and Aden. 2. Yellower
and softer from Cambaia. 3. Whiter from Cairo or Thebes; which last commonly
called Thebian-OPIUM, is the best, being heavy, thick, strong scented like
Poppy, bitter and sharp, inflamable, almost of the Color of Aloes, and easy to
dissolve in Water. The Counter^eit, when washed, colors the Water like Saffron.

The OPIUM, which is spent in Europe, comes from Aden or Cairo; but that which
is sold in the Indies comes out of the Province of Gualor, in Indostan, and is
nothing but the Juice which is got out of POPPY, by an Incision made therein,
when it begins to grow ripe. All the Eastern Nations are great Lovers of it,
insomuch that the young People, who are not permitted the use of it, and the
meauer sort, who are not able to buy it, will boil the POPPY it self, and eat
of the Broth which is made thereof. And whereas the POPPY among them is called
Pust, they thence call those Pusty, who make use of that Broth, instead of
OPIUM. The Persians affirm, that they were the first who made use of it, and
that all other Nations did it in Imitation of their Grandees, who took it, at
first, to provoke Sleep. They take every Day a small Pill of it, about the
bigness of a Pea; not so much in order to Sleeping, as that it should work the
same effect as Wine does, which infuses Courage and great Hopes into those, who
otherwise would not discover much of either. The Caffees, or Messengers, who
travel into the Country, take of it to hearten themselves; but the Indians make
use of it for the most part, that they may be the better fitted for the
Enjoyments of W^men. No doubt but it is a Poison, which kills, if a Man do not
accustom himself thereto by little and little; and when he has so acc^^^om^d
himself, he must continue the frequent use of it, or he dies, on the other
side. It so weakens their B^ains who take it continually, that they run ^he
hazard of losing the use of their Reason, an^ ^he principal Functions of their
Understanding, and become in a manner stupid, if they recover not themselves by
the same Remedy. MANDELSLO's Trav. into the Indies, page 67.

OPIUM is commonly used among the Persians; they make Pills of it of the
bigness of a Pea, and take two or three of them at a time. Those who are
accustomed thereto, will take about an Ounce at a time. There are some who take
of it only once in two or three Days, which makes them Sleepy, and a little
disturbs their Brains, so as that they are as if they were a little entered in
Drink. There is abundance of it made in Persia, especially at Ispahan, and it
is thus ordered. The POPPY being yet green, they cleave the Head of it, out of
which there comes a white Liquor, which being exposed to the Air grows bl^ck,
and their Apothecaries and D^uggi^^s trade very much in it. All (...) East they
use this D^ug, the (...) and Indians, as w^ll as the (...) insomuch, that
Bellen s^y^* (...) Observations, that if a Turk (...) but a P^nny, he will
spend a Farthing o^ it in OPIUM; that he saw above ^itty Camels laden with it,
going from Natolia into Turkey, Persia, and the Indies; and that a Ianizary, who
had taken a whole Ounce of OPIUM one Day, took the next Day two, and was never
the worse for it, save that it wrought the same effect in him, as Wine does in
such as take too much of it, and that he staggered a little. It has also this
Quality common with Wine, that it does infuse Courage into those who have not
much. And therefore the Turks never fail to take of it before they enter upon
any great Design. The Women do not ordinarily take any; but those who are not
able to b^ar with their untoward and imperious Husbands, and prefer Death
before the Slavery they live in, do sometimes make use of OPIUM, whereof they
take a good Q^antity, and drinking cold Water upon it, they, by a gentle and
insensi^l^ Death, depart this World. OLEA^^^S's Trav. of the Ambass^dors, etc.
p^^. 2^9.

Dr. Bernier, in his History of the late Revolution of the Empire of Mogol,
says, that the Ragipous, or the Soldiers of that Kingdom, are great takers of
OPIUM; that he has oftentimes wondered to see them take such great Quantity;
that they accustom themsel^es to it from their Youth; that on the Day of B^ttel
they double the Dose, this Drug animating, or rather inebriating them, and
making them insensible of Danger; insomuch, that they cast themselves into the
Combat like so many furious Beasts, not knowing what it is to run away, but
dying at the Feet of their Commanders, when they stand to it. It Is a pleasure,
says the Dr. thus to see them, with the Fume of OPIUM in their Head, to embrace
one another; when the Battle is to begin, and to give their Mutual Farewells.
as Men resolved to dye. Page 60.

Tavernier says, that such of the Persians, who from their Youth have been
great Takers of OPIUM, are short lived: And that if they do live till Forty,
they complain heavily of the Pains that proceed from the cold Venom of the
Herb.

He says, that those who have a Mind to kill themselves, swallow a large piece,
and drink Vinegar after it, to prevent the relief of any other Counter-Poyson,
and so they dye Smiling. TAVERN. Trav. into Persia Page 242.

Sachsius in the Ephemerides Germanicae An. 2. Observe. 69. is of Opinion, that
OPIUM is an Inciter of Venery in those who live in the Eastern parts of the
World; but that it has a quite contrary Effect on those who inhabit the
Western. But herein he seems to be singular; since all other Authors do agree,
tha^ OPIUM in both, is a very great pro^ocative to Lust.

Johannes I^cobus Saar, in his Iti^erar. L^d. Orie^t Page 11. says, that the
Indians make an Electuary of OPIUM, which the Chinese take on purpose to
Excite them to Lust and that by Virtue thereof, they can ly a whole Night in a
constant Enjoyment.

Wagnerus in his Historia Naturalis Helvetiae, Page 262. says, that in Argovia,
where POPPY is sowed in great quantity, they express on Oil out of the Seed,
which they use in their Lamps instead of Olive-Oyl: That some make use of it
with their Meat instead of Butter, and that they also Knead it with their
Flower, and make Cakes of it, which they eat without any manner of harm.

Observations concerning TOBACCO.
THe Herb called by the Sp^niards TOBACCO, ^^om on Island of the same Name
(...) ^he West Indies, wherein it grow^ (...) great abundance, is Named by
(...) Indians PETUN; by others, (...) its great Virtues, Herba Sancta; and John
Nicot, Ambassador of Francis II. having first brought out of Portugal into
France some of the Seed of it to Queen Catherine de Medicis, with the
Description of its Virtues, it became denominated from him in French NICOTIANE,
or HERB A' LA REINE, (the QUEENS HERB;) as in Italy it was termed HERB DE
SANTA CROCE, (or HOLY CROSS) because a Cardinal of that Name was the first that
brought it to Rome. Some others call it ANTARCTICAL BUGLOSSE, HENBANE of PERU
and INDIAN WOUNDWO^^ It grows, many times, to the height of three Cubits, with
a straight and thick Stalk, so fat that it seems anointed with Honey; it sends
forth sundry large Branches, with many Leaves long and broad, rounder than
those of great Comfrey, somewhat like those of great Personata, or Bur-dock;
Fleshy, Fat, and a little rough, of a pale Green, unpleasing Smell, and biting
Taste; on the top of the Stalk it has many Flowers, Oblong, Hollow, and Large,
in form of a Trumpet, of a White inclining to Purple; to which succeed little
slender Cods or Husks, full of a brownish Seed, smaller than that of Poppy. Its
Root is thick, has several Lobes, is Woody, yellow within, bitter, easily,
separating from its Bark and, like all Herbs hot and dry. (for this is so in
the Second Degree.) it requires moist places and Shadow, and delights to be
cultivated. Moreover, it is kept in Gardens, as well for its Beauty, as for its
Faculties of curing abundance of Diseases; to which it is the more proper, in
that it has an Vnctuosity or Oilyness familiar to our Bodies, whose
Excrementious Humors (the Seed of most Diseases) it potently resolves. For as
Plants are of a middle Nature between Minerals and Animals; so they are more
proper and safe for the Preservation and restoring of Man's Health, than
Animals themselves, which by reason of their Similitude Act less on us; or than
Minerals and inanimate Bodies, which through the too great Diversity of their
Nature Act with too much violence. PHILOSOPII. CONFER. of the VIRTVOS^ of
FRANCE, Page 19.20. Vol. 2.

The first thing the Persians set upon the Table is the Pipe, the TOBACCO, and
the Dish of Coffee; and indeed thus it is, that they begin all their Debauches.
They Suck and Smoke of their TOBACCO through Water in a long Glass Bottel, by
which means it comes cool into their Mouths; else they would never be able to
take it all Day long as they do. They Sing very little in their Cups: But they
recite a vast Number of Wicked Verses, which they rehearse with a great deal of
Gravity. They are so accustomed to take TOBACCO, both Men and Women, that a
Poor Tradesman tha^ has not above five Sous to spend, will lay out three of
them in TOBACCO. If they had none, they say that they should not have dam^que,
that is, Gladness in their Hearts. Many will confess, that their Excessive
taking TOBACCO is hurtful; but if you tell 'em of it, they answer in a word,
Adedehoud, It Is the Custom. TAVERN. Trav. into Persia, Lib. 5. Cap. 17.

Diemerbrockius, in his Book De Peste, very much commends the use of TOBACCO in
the time of Plague; he says, it absolutely Cured him when he had it; He also
observes, that almost all those Houses, where TOBACCO was sold, both in Spires
(a City in the Palatinate,) and likewise in London, were never infected,
whereas the Houses round about them were.

The Learned Dr. Willis, very much commends the use of TOBACCO for Soldiers
and Mariners; in as much as it renders them both fearless of any Dangers, and
patient of Hunger, Cold, and Labor.

He says, that as soon as the Custom of taking TOBACCO becomes familiar, it is
gra^eful, and takes the Animal Spirits with so great a Witchcraft or pleasing
allurements, that some had rather be debarred Meat or Drink, than the use of
it. The Reason of which is, that this Smoking gently awaking or stirring up
the Animal Spirits at any time, sluggish or slothful, and as it were tickling
them, provokes them into gentle and expansive Motions, with which they are
wonderfully recreated, as with the Drin^king of Wine. WILLIS. Pharmaceut
Rational. Sect. 7. Cap. 3.

TOBACCO grows more abundantly in the Kingdom of Peru, than in any other
Country of America: For which cause, and the resemblance it has to Henbane,
in Form and Quality, it is called the HENBANE of PERU, by Gerrard, and some
others of our Modern Herbalists. A Plant, which though in some respect being
moderately taken, it may be serviceable for Physic; yet, besides the
Consumption of the Purse, and impairing of our inward Parts, the immoderate,
vain, and fantastical abuse of this Stinking Weed, Corrupts the Natural
sweetness of the Breath, stupifieth the Brain, and indeed is so prejudicial to
the general esteem of our Countrymen, that one says of them, Anglorum Corpora
qui huic Plantae tantopere indulgent, in Barbarorum naturam degenerasse
videntur. The two chief Virtues ascribed unto it are, that it voideth Rheum,
and is found to be a Sovereign Antidote against lues Venerea, that loathsome
Disease of the French Pox. As for this last, like enough it is, that so unclean
a Disease may be helped with such an Unsavory Medicine: But as for the other,
it may perhaps consist more in Opinion, than Truth or Reality; the Rheum,
which it is said to void, being no more than what it breeds at the present.
We may as well conclude that Bottled-Ale is good for the breaking of Wind,
(which Effect we find commonly to follow on the Drinking of it,) though indeed
it be only the same Wind which it self conveyed into the Stomach. But TOBACCO
is by few now taken as Medicinal; it is of late times grown a Good Fellow, and
fallen from a Physician to a Complement. An Humor, which had never spread so far
amongst us, if the same means of Prevention had been used by the Christian
Magistrates, as was by Morat Bassa among the Turks: Who commanded a Pipe to be
thrust through the Nose of a Turk, whom he ^ound taking TOBACCO, and so to be
carried in Derision all about Constantinople.

It is observed, that the taking of TOBACCO was first brought into England, by
the Mariners of Sir Francis Drake, Anno Dom. 1585. PET. HETLIN's Cosmogr.

King James the First (for the Second was no Writer,) had such an aversion to
this Plant, that he Printed a small Discourse against it, which he Entitled, A
COUNTERBLAST to TOBACCO. Wherein He very wittily observes, among other things,
that this Custom of taking TOBACCO, was at first derived from the Indians, from
whom he wished that we might not in time learn the other Custom too. Of
Worshipping the Devil.

He also tells us, that this Custom of taking TOBACCO is looked upon, even by
the Indians themselves, as such an Effeminate thing, that in the Market they
will not offer to buy a Slave, whom they find to be a great TOBACCO taker.

The Manner of Planting and Ordering TOBACCO.
IN the Twelve-Days they begin to Sow their Seed in Beds of fine Mould, and
when the Plants be grown to the breadth of a Shilling, they are fit to Replant
into the Hills; for in their Plantations they make small Hills about four Foot
distant from each other, somewhat after the manner of our Hop-Yards; these
Hills being prepared against the Plants be grown to the forementioned bigness
(which is about the beginning of May,) they then in moist Weather draw the
Plants out of their Beds, and Replant them in the Hills, which afterward they
keep with diligent Weedings. When the Plant has put out so many Leaves as the
Ground will nourish to a substance and largeness that will render them
Merchantable, then they take off the top of the Plant; if the Ground be very
rich, they let a Plant put out a dozen or sixteen Leaves before they top it; if
mean, then not above nine or ten, and so according to the strength of their
Soil, the top being taken if the Plant grows no higher; but afterward it will
put out Suckers between their Leaves, which they pluck away once a Week, till
the Plant comes to perfection, which it does in August. Then, in dry Weather,
when there is a little Breeze of Wind, they cut down what is Ripe, letting it
lie about four hours on the Ground, till such time as the Leaves, that stood
strutting out, fall down to the Stalk, then they carry it on their Shoulders
into their TOBACCO-Houses, where other Servants receiving it, drive into the
Stalk of each Plant a Peg, and as fast as they are pegg'd, they hang them up by
the Peggs on TOBACCO-Sticks, so nigh each other that they just touch, much
after the manner they hang Herrings in Yarmouth; thus they let them hang five
or six Weeks, till such time as the Stem in the middle of the Leaf will snap in
the bending of it; then, when the Air has so moistened the Leaf, as that it may
be handled without breaking, they strike it down, strip it off the Stalk, bind
it up in Bundles, and pack it into Hogsheads for use.

Sometimes they are forced to Plant their Hills twice or thrice over, by reason
of an Earth-Worm, which eats the Root; and when the Plant is well grown, they
suffer damage by a Worm that devours the Leaf, called a Horn Worm, (an Eruca or
Caterpill^r), which is bred upon the Leaf; if these Worms be not carefully
taken off, they will spoil the whole Crop. THOMAS GLOVER's Account of VIRGINIA,
in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 126.

It Is certain, that the TOBACCO, which grows on Saltpeter Ground, flashes as
it is Smoked; but it is a mistake, that any TOBACCO grows Wild, in Iamaica at
least. The same Nitrous TOBACCO will not come to so good a Color, nor keep so
long, as ^ther TOBACCO; insomuch that the Merchants do oftentimes lose all
their TOBACCO in the Voyage for England, or Ireland, it rotting all by the way.
Dr. STVBBES's Observe. on the Caribe- Islands: In the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 36.

If one would try a pretty Conclusion how much Smoke there is in a Pound of
TOBACCO the Ashes will tell him; for let a Pound be exactly weighed, and the
Ash^s kept charily and weighed afterward, what wants of a Pound weight in the
Ashes cannot be denied to have been Smoke, which Evaporated into Air: I have
been told that Sir Walter Raleigh won a Wager of Queen Elizabeth upon this
nicety. IAM. HOWEL's Famil. Let. Page 404. Edit. 5.

Observations concerning SVGAR, and the SVGAR-Cane.
THe SUGAR-Cane is a kind of Reed, both pleasant and profitable, having long
Stalks, about some six or seven Foot high, (if you reckon the Top-Leaves, or
Branches and all,) joynted or knotted much like unto the Great-Caue: The Leaves
come forth of every joint on each side of the Stalk, long, narrow, and
sharp-pointed, much like unto some Flags, or Flower-de-Luces, but not so broad;
and seem, at a distance, like those Sag-Beds, which grow many together in some
extraordinary Moorish or Boggy places in England; but of a more Bluish Green
Color, much like a Willow-Green. These Canes are not hollow; but the Stalk, or
Body it self, is stuffed with a porous substance, moist and sweet in taste:
From the Root Spring young Suckers (as they are called) which are cut away, and
serve to Plant elsewhere for increase. HVGHES's American Physician.

The Sugarcanes grow in both the Indies, in the Canary Islands, Portugal,
Spain, Sicily, Creet, and Ciprus.

The SUGAR which comes from the Maderaes is the best: That from the Canaries
next: That from Malta next: Then that which comes from Barbados, Virginia, St.
Thomas, etc.

The Island of St. Thomas is quite destitute of Wheat, which if sown, turns
all to Blade, and brings forth no Ear: Nor will any Fruits here prosper, that
have any Stone in them: But so abundant in Sugarcanes, and well stored with
SUGARS, that forty Ships are thence loaded Yearly, with that one Commodity: For
the making of which, they have there Seventy Ingenios, or SUGAR-Houses, and in
each of them Two Hundred Slave^, in some Three Hundred, which belong to the
Works. Six (...) ( says He) that Concrete consists of a very sharp and
Corrosive Salt, though mitigated with a Sulphur, as it plainly appears from its
Chemical Analysis: For SUGAR distilled by it self, yields a Liquor scarce
inferior to Aqua Stygia: And if you distill it in a Vesica, with a great deal of
Fountain Water poured to it, though the fixt-Salt will not so ascend,
nevertheless a Liquor will come from it, like the hottest Aqua Vitae, burning
and very pungent; when therefore (says the Dr.) SUGAR mixed almost with any
sorts of Food, is taken by us in so great a plenty, how probable is it that the
Blood and Humors are rendered Salt and sharp, and consequently Scorbutical, by
its daily use? A certain Famous Author ( viz. Simon Pauli) has laid the cause
of the English Consumption on the immoderate use of SUGAR amongst our
Countrymen: I know not (says the Dr.) whether the cause of the increase of the
Scurvy, may not also be rather hence derived. WILLIS's London-Practice, Page
372.

It Is observed of Those who work much in the SUGAR-Houses, that they are very
subject to the Scurvy; and that in Portugal, where there is a mighty Quantity
of SUGAR Yearly spent, their chief Distemper is a Consumption.

The manner of Ordering the CANES, and How the SUGAR is made.
WHen the CANES come to Maturity, (which the Planters know by several Signs, as
well as we know when our Harvest is ready,) they cut them down at or above the
first Joint from the Ground; (for there is little moisture in them close to the
Ground) with a strong Instrument for the same purpose, laying them even in
^eaps, as we usually lay our Corn here in Harvest-time: Then they shread off
all the Branches, and ^ind the Stalks in Bundles, ready ^or their Servants to
carry away; or else they lay them together here and there, till they can carry
them away with their Horses to the Mill, Machine, or Ingenio, where they
squeeze them: Which must be as fast as they can after they are cut; for if they
lie long after they are cut before they use them, then they come by much
damage; so that whilst they are cutting in the Plantations, the Mill is usually
going, and the Coppers are boiling. They carry them on their Horses, being
loose, or bound up in bundles, after this wise: They have a kind of Pad made as
some of our Horses have that carry Burdens; and on each side of that are two
Crooks standing up even, or higher than the Horse's back; into which Crooks the
CANES, are laid on each side of the Horse; and then they carry them up to the
SUGAR-Mill, which is made after this manner following.

They have an open House built on some pretty high Ground o^ Hill, whereby they
may have as much Air as they can, square, or at least pretty wide; in the
middle of which they set up two great Posts, of very hard and solid Timber,
made exactly round and straight, with Irons at each end ^itted for them to
turn, the lower end of which turns in Brasses fast fixed in a great and solid
piece of Wood: Now in one of these Cylinders, or Rowlers, which are to turn
upright, is a set of Coggs set round about, which takes always hold of the
other Rowler, and causes it to turn; so that both of them turn together: There
being fastened to one of the Cylinders a piece of Wood, or rather a Frame of
Wood, whereunto is fastened a Horse or two, to go round and draw it about, in
such a manner as most Brewers in England Grind their Malt.

Now the Mill being prepared, and the CANES laid by it, and all things ready to
set them to work; there is one that does always put the CANES between these
Rowlers, as they turn, which draw them through, by turning very nigh one
against another; so that it squeezes all the Juice or Moisture out of them: And
then there is another always to take the Crushed CANES away; unless one
sometimes make shift to do both, which commonly is too hard a Task.

Now under these Rowlers is set a Receiver, as a Trough, Cistern, or the like
convenient thing, to receive the Juice or Liquor that is squeezed out of the
CANES: And from this Trough or Cistern, is a Spout to convey this Juice into
the Furnaces or Coppers, where it is to be boiled to SUGAR; whereas, in some
SUGAR-Houses, there are five or six Coppers for that purpose, which are
commonly set in a House built only for the same use, at a distance from the
Mill; and also somewhat lower than the Mill, because the Liquor is always
running down into the Coppers: All which Passages and Vessels must be kept very
clean; for otherwise, they are by reason of the great heat apt to Sower, and so
spoil the Juice: Neither must the Juice be long kept after it is pressed out;
for if it once grow Sower, it is not then sit to make SUGAR.

These Coppers are set all one by another a-thwart the end of the SUGAR-House,
or Caring-House, (as they term it,) so that the upper edges of each Copper do
almost touch one another, being fast fixed in Brick-work, and cemented round
the Edges, that no Fire can get up, or be seen in the SUGAR-House: But the
mouth of the Furnaces where the Fire is put, is so contrived, that they are
made and appear on ^he outside the House; where before them is always ready cut
great store ^f Wood to cast in, to maintain ^he Fire so long as they boil.

Now, if there be six C^ppers, the ^^st two are thinnest an^ biggest, (...)
which the Juice is first (...); but not by a very strong Fire, for that will
make the Scum to rise, by casting in Temper, as they call it: the first of
which that arises is little worth; but afterward, what is scumm'd off, they
make a very good drink of, called Locus-Ale, much used by the Servants in
Iamaica; or else they convey it into a Copper-Still (as they do all their other
Setlings and Dregs of SUGAR) to be distilled, and make a sort of str^ng-Water,
which they call Rum, or Rumbullion, stronger than Spirit of Wine, and not very
pleasant, until a Man be used to it. This strong Liquor is ordinarily drank
amongst the Planters, as well alone, as made into Punch.

Furthermore, when this Juice has so boiled into the two first Coppers, then
is it strained into the third and fourth Furnaces, which are less and thicker,
and there it is boiled by somewhat greater Fire; and as it begins to grow
pretty thick, the^ is it put into the fifth and sixth Coppers, and there boiled
by a greater and very strong Fir^, to a just consistence: These Coppers are
lesser and thicker than the other, which the Master-Workman does always tend,
with a great deal of care, till it be boiled enough; and then they put it into
Wooden-Boxes, made broad at the top, and narrow at the bottom, with a hole
almost like a Mill-Hopper: then they set it in the Curing-House, in which there
is a place made to set them all in Rows; under the bottom of which Gutters or
Troughs are placed to receive the Mallassus, and convey it into a Vessel. They
cover the tops of these Boxes, or Earthen Vessels, with a tempered white Earth:
and indeed there is great Art in whitening and making of good SUGAR. See
HVGHES's American Physician, page 30, 31, 32, 33, and 34.

The principal Knack, without which all their Labor were in vain, is in making
the Juice, when sufficiently boiled, to Kerne or Granulate. Which is done, by
adding to it, a small proportion of Lie made with ( Vegetable) Ashes: without
which, it would never come to any thing by boiling, but a Syrup, or an Extract.
But a little of that Fixed Salt, serves, it seems, to Shackle or Chrystallize
(which is a degree of Fixation) a very great quantity of the Essential Salt of
this Plant.

In re^ining the SUGAR, the first degree of pureness is effected, only by
permitting the Molosses to drain a way through a Hole at the bottom of the
SUGAR- Pots; the Pots being, all the time, open at the top. The Second Degree
is procured, by covering the Pots at the top with Clay. The reason whereof is,
for that the Air is hereby kept out from the SUGAR, which, in the open Pots, it
hardens, before it has full time to refine by Separation. And therefore,
whereas the first way requires but one Month, this requires four. The finest
SUGAR of all, is made with Lime-Wa^er (and sometimes Urine) and Whites of Eggs.

That which Dioscorides calls (...); Galen, Sacchar; and Archigenes, Sal
Indium; is the same thing for substance, faith Matthiolus, with that we call
SUGAR: saving that, whereas this is made of the Juice expressed and boiled;
that of the Ancients, as is likely, was only the Tears; which bursting out of
the CANE, as the Gums or Milks of Plants are used to do, were thereupon
hardened into a pure White SUGAR. That the SUGAR of the Ancients was the simple
concreted Juice of a CANE, he well conjectures: But that it was the Juice or
Tears of the SUGAR-CANE, he proves not. Nor, I think, could be, if, as is
supposed, it was, like Salt, friable and hard. And in affirming our SUGAR to be
the same for Substance with that of the An^ients, he much mistakes; that being
the simple Juice of the CANE, ^his a compounded Thing, always mixed either with
the Salt of Lime, or of Ashes; sometimes of Animals too. GREW's M^s. Reg.
Societ. page 224, 225.

In Iamaica the SUGAR cures faster in ten days, than in six Months in
Barbados: and this happens in such places, as it rains for many Months at the
same time; but you must know, that Rains there are sudden, and make no previous
Alteration in the Air before they fall, nor do they leave it moist afterward.
Dr. STVBBES in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 36. page 705.

Observations concerning DIAMONDS.
THE principal DIAMOND Mines now known, are four. That of Raolconda, in the
Kingdom of Visapour; discovered two hundred Years since. In this Mine, the
DIAMONDS lie in sandy V^ins in the Rocks. Of all, the clearest, and of the
whitest Water. They pound and wash the Vein for the DIAMONDS, just as we do
some of our Ores for the Metal. A second called the Gany, about seven Days
Journey from Golconda; found out a hundred Years since. They dig here not above
fourteen foot deep. Sometimes above sixty thousand Men, Women, and Children are
at work. It affords the largest DIAMONDS, but not clear. A Third, that of
Govel, a River in the Kingdom of Bengala. The DIAMONDS are found in the Sand of
the River, for the space of fifty Leagues. From hence come those fair pointed
Stones, called Natural Points: but not great. The Fourth, that of Succadan, a
River in Borneo. But there are none come from thence but by stealth. GREW's
Mus. Reg. Societ. page 281, 282.

There are in the DIAMOND-Rocks of Raolconda several Veins, some half a finger,
some a whole finger-wide: And the Miners make make use of Irons with Hooks at
the end, with which they pick out the Earth or Sand, which they put into Tubs,
and among that Earth, they find the DIAMONDS. But because these Veins do not
run always str^ight, but sometimes down, sometimes upward, the Min^rs
(follow^ng always the trace of the Veins) are often constrained to break the
Rock with great Iron-Leavers, and s^^iking with a violent force; which often
(...) the DIAMOND, and make^ it look like Crystal. Which is the reason there
are found so many sof^ Stones in this DIAMOND-Mine, though they make a great
show. When they have opened all the Veins, and taken out all the Sand, then
they wash it two or three times over to look, for the DIAMONDS. TAVERN. Trav.
in In^ia, Part II. Book II. Chap. xi.

The Water of those DIAMONDS which are drawn, not from the Rock, but the
Ground, commonly partakes of the Color of the Soil wherein they are found. So
that if the Earth be clean and somewhat sandy, the DIAMONDS will be of a good
Water; but if it be fat or black, or of any other Color, they will have some
tincture of it. BOIL of Gems, page 51.

Whereas it is commonly said, that as Gold is the heaviest of Metals, so
Diamonds are the hardest and heaviest of Stones. The Honorable Mr. Boil can
by no means agree to this Assertion, since as he tells us, in his Discourse of
GEMS, page 52. He by his own Experience knows it to be false.

Boethius, in his Treatise De Gemmis and Lapidibus, affirms, that DIAMONDS
receive no hurt, but are rather mended, by the Fir^.

Garci^s lib. 1. cap. 43. tells us, that some DIAMONDS, being rub^'d, will take
up Straws, just like Amber, and other Electrical Bodies. And Mr. Boil, in his
forementioned Tract of GEMS, page 109. mentions a DIAMOND of his, which with a
little friction attracts vigorously. And that he had another DIAMOND in his
keeping, which by Water, made a little more than lukewarm, He could bring to
shine in the Dark. Ibidem, page 112.

It Is the property of all true DIAMONDS, to unite the Foil closely and equally
to it self, and thereby better augment its Luster, than any other Gem. That
which is called the Foil, is a mixture of Mastick and burnt Ivory: The latter,
being one of the blackest of Colors; used by Painters for Velvet, the Pupil of
the Eye, etc. GREWS's Mus. Reg. Societ. page 282.

Between the Grain and the Vein of a DIAMOND, there is this difference, that
the former furthers; the latter, being so insuperably hard, hinders the
splitting of it. Although it seems, that a Vein, sometimes is nothing else, but a
Cross-Grain. Our European Jewellers, when they split one, they take a very
small Iron Wyre, and having daubed it with Oil and Powder of DIAMONDS; draw it
upon the DIAMOND, by a Tool, to and fro like a Saw, so long as is needful for
that purpose. GREW ibidem.

As for the Water of DIAMONDS, it is remarkable, that whereas in Europe we make
use of Daylight to examine the rough Stones, and to judge of their Water, and
the Specks that are found therein; the Indians do all that in the Nightime,
setting up a Lamp with a large Wiek, in a hole which they make in the Wall,
about a Foot square; by the Light whereof they judge of the Water and clearness
of the Stone, which they hold between their Fingers. The Water which they call
Celestial is the worst of all, and it is impossible to discern it so long as
the Stone is rough. The most infallible way to find out that Water, is to carry
the Stone under a Tree thick of ^oughs, for by the verdure of that shade you
may easily discern whether the Water be bluish or no. TAVERN. TRAV. in India,
Part II. Book II. Chap. xii.

To know the value of DIAMONDS, if they be every way perfect, Tavernier gives
this Rule: That if a good DIAMOND weigh one Carat, viz. four Grains, it is worth
150 French Livres; and then to know, how much a good Stone, weighing 12 Carats,
is worth, you are to multiply 12 by 12, which makes 144; which Product is to be
multiplied by 150 (the price of a Stone of one Carat,) which will make 21600
Livres, the price of a DIAMOND of 12 Carats. But if the DIAMOND be not perfect,
then you are to allow but 80 Livers for a Carat; and if such a kind of DIAMOND
should weight 15 C^rats, then multiply 15 by 15, which is 225, and this into
80, makes 18000 Livres, the value of that DIAMOND.

According to which Rule, the DIAMOND of the Great Mogol (w^ighi^g 279 and 9 16
th Carats, being o^ a per^ect g^^d Water, and of a good shape, w^t^ only a
little flaw in the ^dg of the cutting below, which g^es ^ound a^^ut the Stone)
will an ^unt to 11723278 Livres. Were it not for that little flaw which is
mentioned, the first Carat of this DIAMOND were worth 160 Livres, but Tav^rnier
allowing for that flaw, he values the first Carat but at 150 Livres, and so he
has made his Computation.

He says, that the Great Duke of Tuscany's DIAMOND weighs 139 Carats, clean and
well-shap'd, cut in Facets every way: but that in regard the Water inclines
somewhat toward the Color of Citron, He does not value the first Carat above
135 Livres; so that by the Rule the DIAMOND ought to be worth 2608335 Livres.
TAVERN. ibid. Chap. 15.

Observations concerning PEARL.
IN the first place, there is a Fishery for PEARLS in the Persian Gulf, round
about the Island of Bakren. Every one that fishes pays to the King of Persia
five Abassi's, (every Abassi is worth about 18 Sols French Money) whether he
get any thing or no. The Merchant also pays the King some small matter for
every thousand Oysters.

The second Fishery for PEARLS is right against Bakren upon the Coast of Arabia
Felix, near the City of Catifa, which together with all the Country about it,
is under the Jurisdiction of an Arabian Prince. The PEARLS that are fished in
these Places are sold to the Indians, who (as Tavernier informs us) are not so
nice as we; for they give a good price for all, as well the uneven as the round
ones.

There is another Fishery for PEARLS in the Sea that beats against the Walls of
a great Town called Manar, in the Island of Ceylan. For their roundness and
their Water, they are the fairest that are found in any other Fishery; but they
rarely weigh above three or four Carats.

There are excellent PEARLS, and of a very good Water, and large, which are
found upon the Coast of Iapan; but there are few fished for, in regard Jewels
are of no esteem among the Natives.

There are other Fisheries, in the West Indies; in the first place all along
the Island of Cubagna, three Leagues in compass, lying ten Degrees and a half
of Northern Latitude, a hundred and sixty Leagues from Santo Domingo. The
PEARLS are small, seldom weighing above five Carats.

The second Fishery is in the Island of Margarita, or the Island of PEARLS, a
League from Cubagna, but much bigger. This Fishery is not the most plentiful,
but it is the most esteemed of all those in the West Indies, by reason the
PEARLS are of a most excellent Water, and very large. Tavernier says, He sold
one Pear-fashion'd to Sha-est-Kan, the Great Mogul's Uncle, that weighed fifty
five Carats.

The third Fishery is at Camogete, near the Continent.

The fourth at Rio de la H^cha, all along the same Coast.

The fifth and last, at St. Martha's, sixty Leagues from Rio de la Hacha. All
these three Fisheries produce very weighty PEARLS; but they are generally ill
shaped, and of a Water enclining to the Color of Lead.

As for Scotch PEARL, and those that are found in the Rivers of Bavaria, though
a Neck-lace of them may be worth a thousand Crowns, yet they are not to be
c^mpar'd with the E^stern and West-Indian PEARLS.

Some Years since, there was a F^sh^ry discovered in a certain place upon the
Coast of Iapan; Tavernier says, He has seen some which the Hollanders have
brought thence; They are of a very good Water, and large, but very uneven.
TAVERN. Trav. in India, Part II. Book II. Chap. xvii.

Over all Asia they choose the yellow Water inclining to white; for they say,
those PEARLS that incline somewhat to a Gold Color, are more brisk, and never
change Color; but that the white ones will change in Thirty Years time,
through the very heat of the Weather, and the Sweat of the Person that wears
them, turning them scandalously yellow.

Take this Observation along with you, touching the difference of their Waters;
some being very White, others inclining to Yellow, others to Black, others to a
Leaden Color. As for the last, there are no such, but only in America, which
proceeds from the Nature of the Earth, at the bottom of the Water; which is
generally more Ouzy than in the East. I once met with Six PEARLS, in the return
of a Cargo from the West Indies, that were perfectly round, but black like Iet,
which weighed one with another Twelve Carats. I carried them into the
East Indies to put them off, but could meet with no Chapman to buy them. As for
those that incline to Yellow, it proceeds from hence, that the Fishermen
selling the Oysters to the Merchants in heaps, while they stay Fourteen or
Fifteen Days, till the Oysters lose their Water, the Oysters wast and begin to
smell, for which reason the PEARL grows Yellow by Infection; which appears to
be a Truth, in regard that where the Oysters preserve their Liquor, the PEARLS
are White. Now the Reason why they stay till the Oysters open of themselves,
is, because that if they should force them open, they might perhaps injure and
cut the PEARL. In short, the Eastern People are much of our Humor, in matter
of Whiteness, for they love the whitest PEARLS and the blackest Diamonds; the
whitest Bread, and the fairest Women. TAVERN. Ibid.

Some Ancient Writers have commonly Reported, that PEARLS are produced by the
Dew of Heaven, and that there is but one in an Oyster; but Experience teaches
the contrary. For the Oyster never stirs from the bottom of the Sea, where the
Dew can never come, which is many times Twelve Fathoms deep; besides, that it
is as often observed, that there are Six or Seven PEARLS in one Oyster; and I
have had in my hands an Oyster, wherein there were above Ten beginning to
breed. It Is very true, that they are not always of the same bigness; for they
grow in an Oyster after the same manner as Eggs in the Belly of a P^llet. But I
cannot say there are PEARLS in all, for you may open many Oysters and find
none. TAVERN Ibid. Chapt. XVIII.

They Fish in the Eastern Seas twice a Year; the First time in March and April,
the Second time in August and September; and they keep their Fairs in June and
November. However they do not Fish every Year; For they that Fish will know
beforehand whether it will turn to account or no. Now to the end they may no^
be deceived, they send to the places where they are wont to Fish, seven or
eight Barks, who bring back each of them about a Thousand Oysters, which they
open, and if they find not in every Thousand Oysters to the value of Five
Fano's of PEARLS, which amounts to half a Crown French Money, it is a sign that
the Fishing will not turn to account, in regard the poor People would not be
able to de^ray their Charge. For partly for a Stock to set out, and partly for
Victuals while they are abroad, they are forced to borrow Money at three or
four in the Hundred a Month. So that unless a Thousand Oysters yield them five
Fano's of PEARLS, they do not Fish that Year. As for the Merchants, they must
buy their Oysters at hap-hazard, and be content with what they find in them. If
they meet with great PEARLS, they account themselves happy; which they seldom
do at the Fishery of Manar, those Pearls being sit for little else but to be
sold by the Ounce, to Powder. Sometimes a Thousand Oysters amounts to seven
Fano's, and the whole Fishery to a Hundred Thousand Piasters, (every Piaster
being worth four Shillings Sterling.) The Hollanders take of every Diver 8
Piasters, in regard they always attend the Fishery with two or three small Men
of War, to defend them from the Malavares Pirates.

The more Rain falls in the Year, the more profitable the Fishery happens to
be. They Fish in Twelve Fathom Water, Five or Six Leagues off at Sea, sometimes
Two Hundred and Fifty Barks together, among which there is not above one or two
Diverse at most. Ibidem.

Monsieur Thevenot says, that the Two Fisheries, at Manar and Tutucorim, (which
is over against the Isle of Manar,) have sometimes been spoilt, by throwing
into the bottom of the Sea a certain Drug that chased away the Fish that breed
them, and hindered them for many Years from coming back again; and that they
who did it (knowing whither they went) fished them there, and grew rich, before
it was known that there was good Fishing in that Place. THEV. Trav. into the
Indies, Page 109.

There goes a Common Tradition, that PEARL, which has lost its Color, may be
recovered by being buried in the Earth; which if true, would (as the Lord Bacon
Observes) be a thing of great advantage: But that Noble Lord tells us, that,
upon a Six Weeks Trial, he could find no such Effect. But for a further
Satisfaction, he says, it were good to try it in a Deep Well; or in a
Conservatory of Snow, where the Cold may be more Constringent; and so make the
Body more United, and thereby more Resplendent. BAC. Not. Hist. Experim. 380.

Of the Way and Manner of DIVING for PEARL.
THere is a Cord tied under the Arms of them that DIVE, one end whereof is held
by them that are in the Bark. There is also a great Stone of 18 or 20 Pound
tied to the great Toe of him that DIVES; the end of the Rope that fastens it,
being also held by them in the Vessel. The DIVER has beside a Sack made like a
Net, the Mouth whereof is kept open with a Hoop. Thus provided, he plunges into
the Sea, the Weight of the Stone presently sinking him: When he is at the
bottom, he slips off the Stone, and the Bark puts off.

Then the DIVER goes to filling his Sack, as long as he can keep his breath;
which when he can do no longer, he gives the Rope a twitch, and is presently
haled up again. After the DIVER is drawn up, he stays half a quarter of an hour
to take breath, and then dives again (at this rate) for ten or twelve hours
together.

Those ^^ Manar, are better Fishers, and s^ay longer in the Water than those of
Bakren and Catifa; for they neither put Pincers upon their Noses, nor Cotton in
their Ears, as they do in the Persian Gulf.

The PEARL-DIVERS are fed with dry and roasted Meat, on purpose to enable them
to hold their Breath the longer.

Sir Philiberto Vernatti, late President in Iava Major; says, that the longest
the PEARL-DIVERS in those Parts can continue under Water, is about a quarter of
an hour; and this they can do by no other means but Custom: For PEARL-DIVING
(as he observes) lasts not above six Weeks, and the DIVERSE stay a great while
longer under Water at the end of the Season, than at the beginning. PHILOSOPH.
TRANSACT. Numb. 43. Page 863.

The same Person also affirms, that the PEARL Fishing is accounted so very
dangerous, that the DIVERSE do commonly make their Will, and take leave of their
Friends, before they tread the Stone to go down. SPRAT's Hist. of the
ROYAL-SOCIETY, Page 169.

The PEARL-Oysters are so very hard and tough, and of such an Unpleasant Taste,
that they always throw them away.

To Conclude the Discourse of PEARLS, you are to take notice, that in Europe
they sell them by the Carat Weight, which is four Grains* In Persia they sell
them by the Abas, and one Abas is an Eighteenth less than our Carat. In the
Domions of the Mogul, the Kings of Visapour and Golconda Weigh them by the
Ratis, and one Ratis is also an Eighteenth less than our Carat.

Observations concerning several PRECIOUS STONES.
THE AGATE, is so called from the River ACHATES in Sicily, near which it was
first found. Almost of the Color of Clear-Horn. The hardest of
Semi-perspicuous Gems. They grow in India, Germany, and Bohemia.

Naturally Adorned with much Variety of waved and other figured Veins, Spots,
the representation of Vegetable, and sometimes of Animal Bodies. None more
memorable, than that mentioned by Pliny of Pyrrhus King of Epyrus, in which,
without much strain of Fancy, one might imagine a Representation of the Nine
Muses, and Apollo, with his Harp, in the middle of them.

It Is used for Sword-Hilts, Knife-Hasts, Beads, Cups, and the like. There are
pieces of it, sometimes as thick as a Man's Arm. GREW's Mus. Reg. Societ. Page
287.288.

The AMETHYST, has its Name from the Opinion of its being an Amulet against
Drunkenness, and so much the Word (in Greek) imports. The Best are those of a
Purple Color, Shining and Sparkling. It is brought from India, Arabia,
Armenia, and Egypt.

The AMETHYST, is often called GEMMA VENERIS, from its Beauty and Splendour.
Pliny observes, that the Indian AMETHYSTS have the exact Color of the
Phoenician Purple; which ( says be) the Diers would be glad if they could but
imitate.

CRYSTAL, derived from (...) and (...): Because supposed to be only Water
contracted or condensed with Cold.

It is a Stone found in India, Scythia, Spain, Germany, and Asia; more
transparent than clear Glass. It is the softest of all Gems; that which is most
pure and transparent is best.

CRYSTAL, at least some sorts of it, is the softest, says Boethius, of all
Gems. He should have said, of all perspicuous Gems: For the Turcois is much
softer. The most usual Figure of CRYSTAL, is Sexangular: Yet Terzagi mentions a
Rock of square pointed ones. But it is observable, says Dr. Grew, that he says
the Bed on which they grew, seemed to be Gold-Ore. If so, it might proceed from
some Governing Principle in the Ore. For I have heard it Noted, says the Dr.
as I Remember, by Sir Christopher Wren, That Grain-Gold is often found
naturally Figured into Cubes. CRYSTAL grows in most Countries, both cold and
hot: The Globous, especially in B^hemia and Silesia. GREWS's Mus. Regal.
Societ. Page 284.

Dr. Grew, in the same place, takes notice of a Massy Piece of CRYSTAL, now in
possession of the ROYAL SOCIETY: He says, it is not pointed, nor angular; but
of a roundish Figure; much bigger than any Man's Head. One way, near a Yard in
compass; the other, above three Quarters. In Weight, Thirty Nine Pounds and a
quarter Haver dupoise. Yet it is very clear, beyond the clearest Ice of the
same thickness. The biggest Piece of CRYSTAL the Dr. says he finds mentioned
elsewhere, is a Ball of thirty six Ounces in Septalius's Musaeum.

It has been much Controverted amongst the Learned, concerning the Original of
CRYSTAL. Pliny will have it, that it is made by the most Violent Frost from
Snow or Ice. But Georgius Agricola, in his De Natura Fossilium, faith, it is
some Sap Congealed by Cold in the Bowels of the Earth. Both these Opinions have
had their several Champions; and though the first be most Generally received;
yet the Learned Dr. Brown will by no means admit of it.

The EMERALD is a Clear Transparent Gem, of a very beautiful and Glorious Green
Color, and is either Oriental or Occidental. The Oriental are the harder, more
Beautiful and Precious; found in Scythia, Egypt and Cyprus. The Occidental are
worse, being had in Peru, and several Parts of Europe.

Monsieur Chapuzeau, in his History of the Riches of the East and West,
affirms, that EMRALDS are never to be foundi n the East Indies, but in Peru,
whence they were carried by that Trading People to the Moluccas, even before
America was Discovered by the Europeans; and so they came from the Orient; of
much less value now, than they were formerly, by reason of their Commonness.
The Author notes, that EMRALDS grow in Stones, just as Crystals, forming a
Vein, in which they are by little and little refined and thickened: And that
some of them are seen, half White and half green; others, all White; and others
all Green and perfect. PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 23. Page 430.

The Learned and Ingenious Dr. Grew says, that there is in Gresham College, a
Clear and Green Stone, (a kind of Smaragdus) which being heated red hot,
shines in the Dark for a considerable time, sc. about (...) of an Hour. Given
by Dr. William Crown. Dr. Grew says, He tried the Experiment himself; and at
the same time observed, that as it grew hot in the Fire, its Green Co^our was
changed into a Sky-Blue; which it likewise retained so long as it continued to
shine: But after that, recovered its Native Green again. GREW's Mus. REG.
SOCIET. Page 287.

The RUBY or CARBUNCLE, is either White or Red; The White are unripe; for that
is their Primary Color; then as they grow to perfection, they grow to a Rose
Red, and at last they b^^ome as Red as Blood.

The best come from Ceilan and Pegu; the worse and lesser are found in Calicut,
Bisnagar, Coria, and Camboia, being found in the same Mines with the Sapphire.
It is a most Transparent Red Gem, and so hard as not to be touched with a File.
The best are the Hardest and Coldest, (which you may perceive by your Mouth and
Tongue) and such (as Isidore says) shine in the Dark.

Pliny says, that among the Red Gems, the RUBIES or CARBUNCLES, challenge the
first Place. It is called in Greek (...), from its likeness unto Fire, and yet
the Fire has no Power over it, which is the reason that some call them (...).
There are, says he, several sorts of RUBIES, among which there is the Male and
the Female; those are taken for the Male, whose red is briskest, and most
Fire-like. He tells us, that the Aethiopians were wont to steep their dusky
dark RUBIES in Vinegar; and that in fourteen days they would be pure and
resplendent, and that for fourteen Months they would hold it. In conclusion, he
says, that it is a very difficult thing to distinguish the several sorts of
RUBIES one from another; in that they are so easy to be counterfeited and
falsified by the Art and Skill of Lapidaries and Goldsmiths, who commonly lay
some foil under, to make them shine and glister like Fire. PLIN. Lib. 37. Cap.
7.

The Natives of Pegu call all colored Stones RUBIES, distinguishing them only
by the color. Saphirs they call Blue-Rubies; Amethysts they call
Violet-Rubies; Topazes, Yellow-Rubies; and so of other Stones.

Tavernier says, that among all the RUBIES found in the Mountain Capelan,
within the Kingdom of Pegu, you shall hardly see one of three or four Carats
that is absolutely clean, by reason that the King strictly enjoins his Subjects
not to export them out of his Dominions; besides that, he keeps to himself all
the clean Stones that are found. So that Tavernier, as himself informs us, got
very considerably in his Travels, by carrying RUBIES out of Europe into Asia.
And this may very well render the Relation of Vincent le Blanc suspicious, who
reports, that he saw in the King's Palace, RUBIES as big as Eggs.

The other place where RUBIES are found, is a River in the Island of Ceyl^n,
which descends from certain high Mountains in the middle of the Island; which
swells very high when the Rains fall; but, when the Waters are low, the People
make it their business to search among the Sands for RUBIES, Saphirs, and
Topazes. All the Stones that are found in this River, are generally fairer and
clearer than those of Pegu.

There are also some RUBIES, but more Balleis-Rubies, and an abundance of
Bastard Rubies, Saphirs and Topazes, found in the Mountains that run along from
Pegu to the Kingdom of Camboya.

In Hungary there is a Mine where they find certain Flints of different
bigness, some as big as Eggs, some as big as a Man's Fist, which being broken,
contain a RUBY within, as hard and as clean as those of Pegu. TAVERN. Trav. in
India, Part. II. Book. II. Chap. XVI.

The SAPPHIRE, is either Oriental or Occidental; and of each there are Male and
Female. The Oriental are found in Zeilan, Calecut, Bisnagar, and Pegu, in which
last place are the best. The Occidental are found in Silesia and Bohemia. It is
a glorious, clear transparent Blue, or Skye-colour'd Stone; these are the
Males. The Females are white, and unripe; so they want color. The most
transparent and deep colored, are easily divested of that Beauty, by a little
heat of the Fire.

The SAPPHIRE is cut or fashioned with Emery and Tripoly; and engraven with
Diamond-Dust, as other harder Gems.

Ulysses Aldrovandus in his Musaeum Metallicum, affirms, that AEs ustum and
Glass melted together, imitate a SAPPHIRE.

The TURCOIS or TURKEY STONE, is of a dark Sky-colour, and sometimes greenish
withal, or greenish Blue. This Stone is no where to be found but in Persia:
Where there are two Mines. The one is called the Old Rock, three days Journey
from Meched, toward the North-west, near a gre^^ Town which goes by the Name of
Michabourg. The other, which is called the New-Rock, is five days Journey off.

Those of the New-Rock are of a Paler Blue inclining to White, and less
esteemed, so that you may have a great many for a little Money. Some Years
since the King of Persia Commanded, that no Turquoises should be dug out of
the Old Rock, but only for himself; making use of those Turquoises instead of
Enamelling, to adorn Hilts of Swords, Knives and Daggers: of which the Persians
are altogether ignorant. See TAVERN. TRAV. in India, Part II. Book II. Chap XVI.

The best TURQUOIS, according to Pliny, is that which comes nearest to the
Grass Green of an Emrald; though after all, he says, whatsoever Beauty is in
this Stone, seems to come from outward helps: For being set in Gold, it looks
most Be^utiful, nor is there any Precicious Stone that becomes Gold better.

The fairer a TURQUOIS is, the sooner it loses the Color, by Oil, Ointment, or
Wine; whereas one of a baser sort, will much better hold its own, and maintain
the Luster. In Conclusion, He tells us, that of all Gems the Turquois is the
eas^est to be falsified, and counterseited with Glass. PLIN. Lib. 37. Chap. 8.

Observations concerning the LOADSTONE, and the Sea COMPASS.
THe LOADSTONE, Magnes; from Magnesia, a Country between Thessaly and
Macedonia, where, it is said, it was first found. For the most part of an
Iron-Colour, tending to Blue, by some called The Male; if Black, The Female. It
is of a Metallic or Iron Matter, usually found in Germany, Norway, Italy, etc.
about (...) of Mines.

The admirable and known Properties of this Stone, are, in general, these; That
it attracteth Iron; or any Body, if small, which has Iron in it. That it has
no perception of any other Body, though never so light. That it makes the
Attraction according to its Poles. And that it communicates to Iron both the
same Attractive Power, and a Verticity to the North Pole. In which last lies
its great Use, as applied to Navigation. Although by Observations made from the
Variation of the Needle, Time may produce further Discoveries in Astronomy.
Those that Travel through the vast Deserts of A^^bia, have also a Needle and
Compass, whereby they direct themselves in their way, as Marine's at Sea.

The Power of the MAGNET depends not on its Bulk; the smaller being usually
the stronger. Tergazi mentions one that would ^^^pend Sixty times, and Mr.
Boil another, Eighty times, its own Weight. But the Best in time lose very
much of their strength; as those now kept in GRESHAM COLLEGE have done.

Some Means have been proposed for preserving the strength of a LOADSTONE. But
there is none mentioned by any Author, that I know of, comparable to That,
Experimented by Mr. Theodore Haac, Fellow of the ROYAL SOCIETY; not only for
Preserving, but also Recovering and Increasing the strength of the LOADSTONE.
For he having one that weighed about four Ounces and a half armed, which would
take up Sixteen times its own Weight: And having laid it by for the space of
some Years unused, found it to have lost one Fourth part of its strength, so
that it would now take up but about three Pound; and, upon search, meeting with
no Means Effectual to recover it; considered with himself, That as in Morals,
the Exercise of Virtue, makes it more generous; and that Animal Motions, by
use, become more Vigorous: So it might possibly prove also as to some
Properties of Inanimate Bodies. Whereupon, he hung as much at his Stone, as it
would bear; and so left it for the space of some Weeks. Then, returning to it,
and applying more Weight to the former, it very easily held the same. And
repeating the Addition of more Weight, at several Periods, in the space of
about Two Years; He at last found, That his Stone had not only recovered its
former strength, but increased it; for whereas before he had never known it to
take up more than Sixteen, it would now take up Twenty times its own Weight.
And he is now continuing the Experiment, to see how far it will go further.
GREW's Mus. Reg. Societ. page 317, 318.

Dr. Highmore tells us, That the Magnetical Exspirations of the LOADSTONE may
be discovered by the help of Glasses, and be seen in the form of a Mist, to
flow from the LOADSTONE: This, indeed, would be a most incomparable Eviction of
the Corporeity of Magnetical Efflurviums, and sensibly decide the Controversy.
But I am sure he had either better Eyes, or else better Glasses than ever I saw
(though I have looked through as good as England affords,) and the best of them
all was so far from presenting these subtle Emanations, that they would never
exhibit to me those grosser, and far more Material, Effluviums, from Electrical
and Aromatical Bodies: Nay, not the Evaporations of Camphire, which spends it
self by continually effluviating its own Particles: Nay, I could never see the
grosser Steams, that continually transpire out of our own Bodies, and are the
fuliginous Eruct^tions of that Internal Fire, which constantly burns within us.
Indeed, if our Dioptricks could attain to that Curiosity, as to grind us such
Glasses as would present the Effluviums of the Magnet; we might hope to
discover all* Epicurus's Atoms, Des Carts his Globuli Aetherii, and all those
insensible Corpuseles which daily produce such considerable Effects in the
Generation and Corruption of Bodies about us: Nay, might not such Microscopes
hazard the discovery of the Aerial Genti, and present even Spiritualities
themselves to our view? HENR. POWER's Experim. Philosophy. page 154, 155.

Andreas Libavius, lib. 2. Singul. affirms, that the LOADSTONE, if it be put
into Fire, loses its attractive force; and that whilst it burns, the
Sulphurous Particles fly forth.

Baptista Porta, in his 7th. Book, Chap. 2. says, that he has often seen with
great delight, a LOADSTONE wrapped up in burning Coals that sent ^^rth a blue
Flame, which smelt of Brimstone and Iron; and that being dissipated, it lost
its attractive Virtue.

Mr. Samuel Colepress, in a Letter to the ingenious Mr. Oldenburg, giving an
account of some Magnetical Experiments, acquaints him, That he had taken a
LOADSTONE unpolished, which attracted but meanly; and that he had heated a
Lath-nail glowing hot, nimbly applying the North Pole of the said Magnet to it,
which quickly took it up, and held it suspended a great while, till he put down
both the Magnet and Nail.

He further faith, that he took the same Stone, and cast it into the Fire,
letting it remain there, till it was thorough hot, altering its color from
black to red, and that being red-hot, he applied the North Pole to another
Lath-nail cold, and untoucht before, which it took up but faintly, yet held it
suspended for some time.

In conclusion, he says, that two or three days after, he took the very same
LOADSTONE, and found that it attracted then as strongly, as before it was cast
into the Fire. Whence he inferred, that the Fire somewhat lessened its
attractive Faculty, but did not deprive the Stone of it. PHILOS. TRANSACT.
Numb. 27. page 500* 501.

Dr. Edward Cotton made a Present to the ROYAL SOCIETY of a LOADSTONE, that
weighed sixty Pounds. Dug out of the Ground in Devonshire. Which though it
takes up no great Weight, yet moves a Needle nine foot distant. Some part
hereof, which was broken off, being put into its proper place, adds much
Strength to it. PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 23. page 423.

Of the Sea COMPASS.
IN the Year Thirteen Hundred, One Flavio of Malphi, in the Realm of Naples,
found out the COMPASS, or Pixis Nautica, consisting of Eight Winds only, the
Four Principal, and Four Collateral: and not long after, the People of Bruges,
and Antwerp, perfected that Excellent Invention; adding Twenty-four other
Subordinate Winds or Points. By means of this most Excellent Instrument, and
withal by the good Success of Columbus, the Portugals Eastwards; the
Spaniards, Westwards; and the English, Northwards; have made many Glorious and
Fortunate Expeditions: Which had been utterly impossible to have been
performed, and had been foolishly undertaken, when that help Was wanting. I
know there has been much Pains taken by some Learned men, to prove the use of
the Mariners Compass to be far more Ancient, than is now commonly pretended.
Nicolas Fuller, a very Learned and Industrious Man, but better skilled in the
Hebrew Tongue, than the Philology of the Greeks and Latins, will have it known
to Solomon, and by him taught unto the Tyrians and Phoenicians (the most famous
Seamen of Old Times): but he brings no Argument of Weight to make good the
Cause. Nor is it possible that such an Excellent Invention, so beneficial to
the common good of all Mankind, should have been forgotten and discontinued,
for the space of more than Two Thousand Years; if ever the Tyrians, and
Phoenicians had been Masters of it; who could not possibly conceal it (had they
been so minded) from the Common-Mariners, or they not have Communicated it for
gain, or desire of Glory, to the Greeks, and Romans; under whom successively
they lived. And as little moment do I find in some other Arguments, as that the
Lapis Heraclius of the Ancient Writers, or the Versoria of Plautus, should be
by them intended for the Mariners Compass. For plainly the Versoria of Plauturs
is no other than the Piece of Tackle which our Mariners now call the Bolin; by
which they use to turn their Sails, and fit them to the change of every Wind.
And so much does appear by the Poet himself, in the Comedy which he calls
Mercator; saying, Hinc ventus nunc Secundus est, cape modo Versoriam. So called
from Verso, to turn often; or from Versum, the first Supine of Verto; Whence
Velum Vertere is a common Phrase amongst the Latins, used for the shifting of
the Sail, as the Wind does vary. PET. HEYLIN's Cosmog.

But as peremptory as Heylin is, in the assigning this Noble Invention to
Flavius the Neapolitane, yet I find other Authors (it may be of as good Credit
and Authority) wholly differ from him. Dr. Gilbert* our Countryman (who has
written an Excellent Latin Treatise of the Properties of the LOADSTONE) seems
to be of Opinion, that Paulus Venetus brought the Invention of the Use of the
COMPASS from the Chinese. Paulus Osorius, in his Discourse of the Acts of King
Emanuel, ascribes it to Gama and his Countrymen the Portugals, who, as he
pretends, took it from certain Barbarous Pirates, Roaving upon the Sea about the
Cape of Good Hope. Goropius Becanus likewise thinks, he has great Reason to
entitle it upon his Contrymen the German's, in as much as the 32 Points of
the Wind upon the COMPASS borrow the Name from the Dutch in all Languages* But
Blondus, who is therein followed by Pancirollus, both Italians, will not have
Italy lose the Praise thereof, telling us, that about 300 Years ago it was
found out at Malphis or Melphis, a City in the Kingdom of Naples: But for the
Author of it, the One Names him not, and the Other assures us, he is not known:
Yet Salmuth, out of Ciezus and Gomara, confidently Christens him with the Name
of Flavius. To conclude then, who it was, that first discovered this Noble,
useful Invention, is not certainly known. And, is it not pity, that one of the
Greatest Benefactors to Mankind that ever was, should lie hid in so neglected
an obscurity? When the great Disturbers of the World, have so dear, and so
precious a Memory. For my part, I think there is much more acknowledgment due
to this obscure Fellow, (if it be Flavius) than to a Thousand Alexanders and
Caesar's, or to Ten times the Number of Aristotle's. And He really did more for
the increase of Knowledge, and the Advantage of the World, by this one
Invention; than the whole Tribe of Schoolmen have done by their many niceties,
and subtle Disputations.

In the Philosophical Transactions, Number 157, Page 520. we meet with a very
Remarkable Account concerning the COMPASS of a Ship, viz. of its changing its
Poles in a Thunder-Storm.

There are Three Kinds of Sea-COMPASSES; the First, the plain Meridional
COMPASS. The Second, a COMPASS of Variation. The Third, a Dark COMPASS.

Observations concerning PETRIFICATION.
OF PETRIFYING Waters, though I doubt not but their Kinds are as various, as the
Effects they produce; and the Effects again, as the Subjects they Work on; yet
I am inclined to believe, that they all agree thus far, that they proceed in
the Main from the same Stock and Lineage, and are all more or less of the
Kindred of SALTS, which sublimed and rarefied in the Bowels of the Earth into
an invisible Steam, are received by the Waters as their most agreeable Vehicle,
and brought hither to us at the Rising of Springs, as invisibly as the
Particles of Silver or Gold, when each is dissolved in its proper Menstruum:
Where meeting perchance with an ambient Air, much colder and chilling than any
under Ground, in all likelihood are precipitated, and thrown down on such
Subjects, as they casually find at the place of their Exit, which they
presently Cloth with a Crust of Stone; or else (where Precipitation or
Cohesion will not suffice) they pass with the Waters through the Pores of the
Subjects, and are left behind in them just as in a Filter.

The Reason of which difference may probably be, that some of these PETRIFYING
Steams or Atoms, may be gross and more bulky, than some others are, and cannot
be held up in the watery Vehicle, without such a Heat as they have under Ground,
but fall, and by Reason of their bigness, do not penetrate, but adhere to their
Subjects; whereas others that are fine, more minute, and subtle, are easily
supported in a Volatile Condition, and pass with the Waters into the closest
Textures.

If any body doubt whether Stones, and so PETRIFICATIONS, arise from SALTS, let
him but consult the Chemists, and ask whether they find not all indurated
Bodies, such as Stones, Bones, Shells, and the like, most highly sa^ed with the
Saline Principle? Some Mixture of Earth and Sulphur, it is true, there is in
them, which give the Opacity that most Stones have; from which, according as
they ar^ more or less free, they have proportionable Transparency, and some
hardness too; as the best of Gems, the Diamant, evinces. And if he shall ask
what SALTS are the aptest to perform this Feat of PETRIFICATION, though the
diffic^lty of the Question might well excuse me, yet I Will venture thus far to
give him an Answer, That I have frequently seen at Whitstable in Kent, how
their Coperas or Vitriol is made out of Stones, that it is more than probable
were first made out of That: To the Spirit of which Vitriol, if you add Oil of
Tartar, they presently turn into a fixed and somewhat hard Substance, not much
inferior or unlike to some Incrustations; which seems to conclude, that from
these Two, all such like Concretions are probably made; and that could we but
admit that Ocean of Tartar, which Plato placed in the Center of the Earth, and
thought the Origin of all our Springs, the business of PETRIFICATIONS were
sufficiently clear. To which I also add in the behalf of Vitriol, what is matter
of Fact, and prevails with me much, That wherever I find strong
Vitriol-Waters, the PETRIFYING ones are seldom far off. PLOT's Not. Hist. of
OXFORDSHIRE.

The Ingenious, and Learned Mr. Hook says, that all the PETRIFIED Pieces of
Wood that he ever saw, seemed to have been rotten Wood before the PETRIFICATION
began. And since I have Named this Industrious and knowing Gentleman, I shall
not think my time ill spent, if (for the Entertainment of the Reader) I
Transcribe the Observations he has made of a Piece of PETRIFIED Wood, taken
from a Microscopical Examen.

This PETRIFIED Substance resembled Wood, in that

First, all the parts of it seemed not at all dislocated, or altered from their
Natural Position whiles they were Wood; but the whole Piece retained the exact
shape of Wood, having many of the Conspicuous Pores of Wood still remaining
Pores, and showing a manifest difference, visible enough, between the Grain of
the Wood and that of the Bark; especially, when any side of it was cut smooth
and polite; for then it appeared to have a very lovely Grain, like that of some
curious close Wood.

Next (it resembled Wood) in that all the smaller, and (if I may so call those
which are only to be seen by a good Glass) Microscopical Pores of it appear,
(both when the Substance is cut and polished Transversly, and Parallel to the
Pores) perfectly like the Microscopical Pores of several kinds of Wood,
retaining both the shape, and Position of such Pores.

It was differing from Wood, First, in Weight, being to Common Water, as 3 to
1. Whereas there are few of our English Woods, that, when dry, are found to be
full as heavy as Water.

Secondly, in Hardness, being very near as hard as a Flint, and in some places
of it also resembling the Grain of a Flint: It would very readily Cut Glass,
and would not without difficulty (especially in some parts of it) be scratched
by a Black hard Flint: It would also as readily strike Fire against a Steel, as
also against a Flint.

Thirdly, in the Closeness of it; for, though all the Microscopical Pores of
the Wood were very Conspicuous in one position, yet by altering that position
of the Polished Surface to the Light, it was also manifest that those Pores
appeared darker than the rest of the Body, only because they were filled up
with a more Dusky Substance, and not because they were hollow.

Fourthly, in its Incumbustibleness, in that it would not burn in the Fire;
nay, though I kept it a good While red-hot in the Flame of a Lamp, made very
Intense by the Blast of a small Pipe; yet it seemed not at all to have
diminished its extention; but only I found it to have changed its Colou^, and
to have put on a more Dark and Dusky Brown Hue. Nor could I perceive that those
parts which seemed to have been Wood at first, were any thing wasted, but the
Parts appeared as Solid, and Close as before. It was farther observable also,
that as it did not Consume like Wood; so neither did it Crack and Fly like a
Flint, or such like hard Stone; nor was it long before it appeared red-hot.

Fifthly, in its Dissolubleness; for putting some drops of Distilled Vinegar
upon the Stone, I found it presently to yield very many Bubbles, just like
those which may be observed in Spirit of Vinegar when it Corrodes Coral; though I
guess many of those Bubbles proceeded from the small parcels of Air, which were
driven out of the Pores of this PETRIFIED substance, by the insinuating Liquid
Menstruum.

Sixthly, in its Rididness, and F^iability; being not at all Flexible, but
Brittle like a Flint; insomuch that with one knock of a Hammer I broke off a
small piece of it, and with the same Hammer quickly beat it to pretty fine
Powder upon an Anvil.

Seventhly, it seemed also very differing from Wood to the Touch, feeling more
Cold than Wood usually does, and much like other close Stones and Minerals.

The Reasons of all which Phoenomena seem to be: That this PETRIFIED Wood
having lain in some place where it was well soaked with PETRIFYING Water (that
is, such a Water as is well impregnated with Stony and Earthy Particles) did by
degrees separate, either by Straining and Filtration, or perhaps by
Praecipitation, Cohoesion or Coagulation, abundance of Stony Particles from
that permeating Water: Which Stony Particles having, by means of the fluid
Vehicle, conveyed themselves not only into the Microscopical Pores, and so
perfectly stopped them up; but also into the Pores, which may perhaps be even in
that part of the Wood, which, through the Microscope, appears most solid; do
thereby so augment the Weight of the Wood, as to make it above three times
heavier than Water, and perhaps six times as heavy as it was when Wood: Next,
they hereby so lock up and fetter the parts of the Wood, that the Fire cannot
easily make them fly away, but the Action of the Fire upon them is only able to
Char those parts as it were, like as a piece of Wood, if it be closed very fast
up in Clay, and kept a good while Red-hot in the Fire, will by the heat of the
Fire be Charr'd, and not Consumed; which may perhaps be the Reason why the
PETRIFIED Substance appeared of a blackish Brown Color after it had been burnt.

By this intrusion of the Petrified Particles, it also becomes hard and
friable; for the smaller Pores of the Wood being perfectly stuffed up with
these Stony Particles; the Particles of the Wood have few or no Pores in which
they can reside, and consequently, no Flexion or yielding can be caused in such
a Substance.

The remaining Particles likewise of the Wood; among the Stony Particles, may
keep them from cracking and flying, as they are very apt to do in a Flint.
HOOK's Microg. Observe. XVII.

Among the several Kinds of the PETRESCENT Liquors, I have observed a sort that
is of so fine a Substance, and yet of so PETRIFYING a Virtue, that it will
Penetrate and PETRIFY Bodies of very different Kinds, and yet scarce, if at
all, visibly increase their bulk, or change their Shape or Color. To which
purpose, I Remember, that I have seen diverse Animal and Vegetable Substances so
PETRIFIED, as scarce at all to be taken notice of, by their appearance, to have
been altered by the Operation of the PETRESCENT Liquor. I have with Pleasure
seen a thin Cream-Cheese turned into Stone, where the Size, Shape, and Color
even of the Wrinckles, and the blueish Mold (which it seems it began to have
when the Liquor Invaded it) were so well preserved, that an Hungry Man would
not have scrupled to have fallen upon it as a good Bit. And as for the
Hardness, that this PETRESCENT Juice can give to the Body that it Penetrates, I
shall only tell you, that I have had (and I think yet have) a pretty quantity
of Wood, PETRIFIED in England, which retaining its former Figure, and Grain,
and scarce at all visibly increased in Bulk, was so very hard, that I could
make Impressions with it upon Iron, and Glass it self, and make it strike Fire
like an Excellent Flint. To which I shall here add, that the Stone parts did
not suffer the Wood, which they had Penetrated, to be reduced in the Fire,
either to Ashes or Charcole. And I have by me a Lump of Mineral Substances,
wherein a PETRESCENT Liquor, that fills the large Intervals between them, is
Transparent enough, and harder than most Stones, as far as we could guess by
some trial of it made by a skilful Ingraver of Gems. And to these Instances
might be added many others, if it did not by these few sufficiently appear,
that PETRIFICK Agents may insinuate themselves into the Pores of Various
Bodies, and turn them into Stone, without otherwise destroying their Pristine
Nature, or so much as their Former Figure. BOIL of Gems, Page 124, 125.

Where there are PETRESCENT Liquors mingled with common Water, there may, by
diverse accidents, and particularly an hot Summer, a sufficient Discharge be
made of the superflous Moisture, to make the more disposed parts of the
PETRESCENT Liquor to Coagulate; and afterward the Coagulation may be
suspended, either by the supervening of a Colder Season, as Winter; or even in
Summer it self, by a plentiful Rain, or the effect of it, a Land-Flood, which
might check the progress of Coalitions by over much diluting the Liquor, that
might else have turned into Stone. BOIL ibidem, page 143.

For ought we know, in those very Places, where now there is nothing to be seen
but loose Stones, and perhaps Beds of Stone themselves, in those very Places (I
say) there may in times past have been PETRESCENT Liquors, whether Stagnant or
Running. For, I have in another place showed, that Earthquakes, Inundations of
Seas and Rivers, Sinkings of Ground, Encroachments of the Land on the Water,
Fiery Eruptions, and other such Accidents, (some related by Authentic Authors,
and others happening in our own times, in places, some of which I had the
curiosity to see,) have among other odd Effects, been able to dry or choke up
Pools and Lakes, and to stop and quite divert the course not only of Springs,
but of Rivers, so as to leave no Footsteps of them, where they plentifully
flowed before. IDEM Ibid. page 157.

Observations concerning SALT: S^veral sorts thereof.
COmmon SALT is the Coagulum of Seawater, or of Salt; Fountain Water; but that
of the Sea is the chief. It is purified by Solution, Filtration, and
Coagulation, or Crystallization. It is to be noted, that the artificial SALT of
Vegetables and Animals are subject to the same Preparations which common SALT
is subject to. If the Solution and Crystallization be often repeated, this
common SALT will at last be sweet.

The SAL AMMONIAC of the Ancients was a Native SALT, which grew in the Lybic
Sea, unknown to us: Ours is a Compound Artificial Volatile SALT, boiled from
the Ashes of Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals, Salt of Soot, common SALT, and
Sal Gemme. The best comes from Venice and Antwerp, being very white and pure.

Among all the SALTS that Nature alone produces, the scarcest, but of greatest
Virtue, is the SALT-AMMONIAC; they call it vulgarly AMMONIAC, and from that
Name conclude, that it comes from Armenia; but that is not the true name of it
but AMMONIAC, which in Greek signifies, SALT of the Sand: and underneath the
Sand (of the Seashore, I suppose) it is found congealed in little pieces by
its internal Heat, and the continual burning of the Sun, baked so much that it
is made the bitterest to taste of all kind of SALT. Goldsmiths use it more than
the Physicians. It is one of those they call The four Spirits, because the Fire
will convert them into Smoke, and so they fly away: The other three are Quick
Silver, Sulphur, and Salt Peter. It has a particular Property to cleanse and
color Gold, and is put into the Composition of that Aqua fortis that dissolves
it. ALBARO ALONSO BARBA of Metals. Transl. by the Earl of SANDWICH. Chap. 8.

Johannes Alphonsus Borellus in his Historia and Meteorologia Incendii Aetnoei,
Ann. 1669. takes particular notice of the great abundance of SAL AMMONIAC, that
was found in all the holes and vents of the Ground, and in the Clefts of
Stones. And of this SALT He affirms, that there had been sublimed (for he makes
it factitious) so great Store, that many thousands of Pounds might be gathered;
adding, that even a whole Year after the Extinction of the Fire in the Mouths
of AETNA, there were found remaining d^vers vents about Catania, exhaling store
of Smoke, which had the like SAL AMMONIAC flicking to the sides and edges of
the Stones.

At this day, we have little knowledge of the true NITRE, which was anciently
made of the Water of the River Nilus; although Albertus Magnus says, that in
Goselaria there was a Mountain that contained a very rich Mine of Copper, and
that the Water which issued out at the bottom of it, being dried, became NITRE.
We know little also of Aphronitrum, which is but as it were the froth of NITRE.

NITRE is bitterer than Salt, but less Salt. SALT PETER is the Mean between
them two, and consists of very dry and subtle parts; it grows on the Walls of
old Houses, and in Stables, Cow-Houses, Hog-Sties, and Dove-Coats; it will grow
again in the same Earth it was taken out of, if that Earth be thrown in heaps,
and not stirred, and taken care of; or if ordinary Earth be cast up into heaps,
and watered with Brackish Water, after some Years it will give a great
increase, as profitable as Crops of Corn.

The use of it in making GunPowder, and Aqua Fortis is very well known. It is
used also in the melting of Metals. Ibidem.

Whether the NITRE of the Ancients be of the same Species with the SALT, which
is commonly known by the name of SALT PETER, is variously disputed by very
learned Authors amongst the Modern Physicians: On the Negative side are
Mathiolus and Bellonius; the latter of which had the advantage by the
opportunity of his Travels in Egypt, to have often seen and handled them both,
and is so positive as to pronounce, that in all Christendom there is not one
Grain of NITRE to be found, unless it be brought from other parts; although at
the time of his being in Grand Caire (which was about the Year 1550) it was so
common there (as he says) that ten Pounds of it would not cost a Moidin Among
those that hold the Affirmative, the most eminent are Cardan and Longius; and
it seems the general Vote of Learned Men has been most favorable to that
Opinion, by reason that in all Latin Relations and Prescriptions, the word
NITRUM or HALINITRUM is most commonly used for SALT PETER.

I have often enquired amongst our London Drugsters for Egyptian NITRE, and if
I had been so fortunate as to have ^ound any, I doubt not, but I should have
been able to have put an end to that Question by a Demonstration: that is, by
turning the greatest part of it into SALT PETER. However, the Observations I
have made in my own private Experiments, and in the Practice of SALT PETER-Men,
and Refiners of SALT PETER, seem to give me sufficient ground to suspect, that
the confidence of those who hold them to be several SALTS, proceeds chiefly
from their being unacquainted with the various (...) of SALT PETER in the
making and refining of it: And also their comparing double refined SALT PETER
(o^ which Gunpowder is made) with the NITRUM and APHRONITRUM described by
Pliny, in the one and thirtieth Book of his Natural History; which indeed is
the only tolerable account of that SALT, that has been handed to us from
Antiquit^: where he tells us, that APHRONITRUM was Color pene purpureo, and
Egyptian NITRE Fuscum and Lapidosum. HENSHAW of the making of SALT PETER. See
SPRAT's Hist. of the R. S. page 260, 261.

NITRE is often adulterated by being mixed with common SALT, but you may try it
by burning; for being fired upon a red hot Tile, or Stone, if all fly away, it
is pure; but if any thing remain, it is common SALT.

The Lord Bacon says, that NITRE is a kind of cool Spice; in that it bites the
Tongue and Palate with Cold, just as Spices do with Heat; and that NITRE is the
only Vegetable, which abounds with Spirit, and yet is Cold.

He further tells us, that Cattle which drink of NITROUS Water, do manifestly
grow fat; which, says he, is a sign of its cold Quality. BAC. Hist. of LIFE
and DEATH.

It is affirmed by several, that Gunpowder, which consists principally of
NITRE, being taken in Drink, does conduce to Valor; and therefore it is often
used by Mariners and Soldiers just before they are to fight, even as the Turks
do Opium.

The greater Part of Africa has no other SALT but such as is dug out of
Quarries and Mines, after the manner of Marble or Free Stone, being of a White,
Red, and Gray Color. Barbary abounds with SALT, and N^midia is indifferently
furnished therewith: But the Land of Negros, and especially the inner part of
Ethiopia, is so destitute thereof, that a Pound of SALT is there sold for half
a Ducat. And the People of that Country use not to set SALT upon their Tables;
but holding a crumb of SALT in their hands, they ^ick the same at every morsel
of Meat which they put in their Mouths. In certain Lakes of Barbary, all the
Summer time, there is fair and white SALT congealed or kern'd, as namely, in
diverse places near the City of Fez, PVRCH. Pilgr. Vol. II. page 849.

The Learned and Ingenious Dr. Brown in his Travels, page 112. says, That near
the City of Eperies, in upper Hungary, there is a SALT-Mine of great note,
being an hundred and fourscore Fathoms deep, in which are pieces of Salt found
of ten thousand Pounds weight.

The Principal SALT-Mines are in Poland and Calabria. In the lesser Poland,
says Comer, in his Description of that Country, are some pieces of SALT as big
as huge Stones; so hard, that Houses and even whole Towns are built with them.

In the Philosophical Transactions we have a Relation concerning the SAL-GEMME
Mines in Poland, lying within a Mile of Cracovia: which Relation was
communic^ted to Mr. Oldenburg by a curious Gentleman in Germany, who some Years
since descended himself into those Mines, to the depth of 200 Fathoms, and was
led about in them for the space of three Hours. He says, that out of these
Mines they dig and cut out three sorts of SALT; One is common, course, and
black; the Second somewhat siner and whiter; the Third, very white, and clear,
like Crystal. He says, the course and black SALT is cut out in great pieces,
roundish, and three Polonian Else long, and one Ell thick, which c^sts from
fifty to seventy Polonian Florins: In the mean time the Inhabitants of Cracow
have a Privilege, whereby a certain number of Pieces is to be delivered to
them, at the rate of eight such Florins the Piece. The great Pieces lie at
Cracow about the Streets before the doors of the Citizens; as also in the
Country, in the small Towns and Villages, and before the ^orts and Houses of
the Nobility; where the Cattle, passing to and fro, lick of those SALT Stones;
which afterward by Mills and other Engines are ground and beaten small for use.

These SALT-Works belong to the King of Poland, who appoints and maintains the
Officers of them; and it is one of his best ROYAL REVENUES, amounting to a very
considerable Sum. There are no less than a thousand Men that are constantly
employed in these Mines; and he says, There was then a Provision of SALT
valued at two Millions.

He farther says, There are in these Works three Horses that stay always below,
having their Stable and other Necessaries there; the Horses, after they have
been a while under Ground, grow blind from the sharpness of the SALT; and that
all the Three, which then Labored there, were quite blind. PHILOS. TRANSACT.
Numb. 61. page 1099, etc.

In Iamaica they have a very pretty and easy way for the producing of good
SALT, which is thus: Near the Seaside they dig a low place, as it were a Lough
or Pond, and pave it very even, and with a Sluice let in some of the Seawater,
an Inch, two Inches, or three Inches deep, or more; and there letting it
remain, the Sun in a short time turns it into SALT: And if they have occasion
to use it quickly, they let in the less; but if they have a good Stock, that
they can stay longer, then they let in the more; for the more is let in, the
longer will it be e're it become SALT: which being done, they sweep it up, and
keep it for use, and so let in more. And thus are they well provided with SALT,
to Powder their Beef, Pork, etc. which will not keep sweet otherwi^e many hours
after it is killed. HVGHES's American Physician, page 35.

According to the Quality of the Earth, or Ground of the Marish, the SALT is
made more or less white. The Reddish Earth makes the SALT more Gray; the
Blueish more white. Besides, if you let run in a little more Water than you
ought, the SALT becomes thence more White; but then it yields not so much.
Generally all the Marshes require a fat Earth, neither Spungy, nor Sandy.

Unless it rain much, the Rainwater does little hurt to the Marish; and
although it rain a day or a night, they do not let the Water which is in the
Marish run out, the heat of the Sun sufficiently exhaling such Rainwater.
Only, if it have rained very plentifully that day, no SALT is drawn for the
three or four next following days. But if it rain five or six days, the People
are then necessitated to empty all the Water of the Beds by a peculiar Channel,
conveighing it into the Sea; which Channel cannot be opened, but when it is low
Water. But it is very seldom that it rains so long, as to constrain them to
empty those Beds.

It Is Obvious that the hottest Years make the most SALT; where yet it is to be
noted, that besides the heat of the Sun, the Winds contribute much to it, in
regard that less SALT is made in calm, than in Windy Weather. The West and
North-West Winds are the best for this Purpose.

In the Beds of the Marish, where the SALT is made, the Water must not be above
an Inch and an half deep. Each of these Beds is fifteen Foot long, and fourteen
Foot broad. Chiefly care is to be taken, that the Earth at the bottom of the
Beds mingle not with the SALT. This Account was communicated to Mr. Oldenburg
by a French Dr. of Physic, residing in the Isle of The, where Salt is made in
a great Quantity. As you may fin^ in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 51. page 1025.

SALT is that which gives Ligature, Weight, and Constitution to things, and is
the most manifest Substance in all Artificial Composts. It Is SALT which
Fertilizes, and Renders Egypt so Luxuriously Fruitful after the Inundations of
Nile; and the Nitrous Grounds of Iamaica, and other places, which cause so
stupendous a growth of Plants and Trees. In a Word, SALT may be said to have a
Dominion almost Monarchical, in the great Work of Vegetation, being so absolute
an Ingredient in all our Dungs and Composts.

To Conclude, you know, who have Dignified SALT with the Prerogative of being
Named Element-Earth, the Vigor and Close of all Things, yea, the first and
last of Elementated Bodies: What shall I say, Quid Divinum, the Original of all
Fecundity; nor can I say less, since there was nor Sacrifice, nor Discourse
acceptable without it. EVEL^N's Discourse of Earth, in several places, Page
312, 313, 314. Fol.

See an Account of the SALT Springs at Nantwich in Ch^shire, by Dr. William
Iackson, in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 53.

And of the SALT Waters of Droytwich in Worcestershire, by Dr. Tho. Rastell,
in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 142.

And of the SALT Springs in Staffordshire, by Dr. Rob. Plot, in his Description
of that County.

Observations concerning GOLD.
THE most perfect of all Inanimate Bodies, and the most esteemed of all Metals
is GOLD, universally known, and covered by all People. It is made of the same
Matter, and in the some Manner, as other Metals are, but of parts so pure and
perfect, and so well compacted together by Decoction, that its substance is, as
it were, incorruptible, being out of the Power of any of the Elements to be
Corrupted or Destroyed. The Fire that consumes all other Metals, only makes
GOLD more pure: The Air and Water, diminish not its Luster, nor can Earth make
it Rust or, Waste. By the Nobleness of its Substance, it has most deservedly
obtained that Estimation, which the World gives it, and the Natural Virtue
which flows from the admirable Equality of its Composition, is the best
Medicine against Melancholy, and the greatest Cordial to the Hearts of Men,
which perpetually run after this Avaritious Metal, as the Needle does after
the Loadstone. The Virtue ascribed to Aurum Potabile, to preserve a Body
perpetually in Youthfulness without Infirmity; together with the Receipt of
making thereof, depends upon the Credit of those Authors, who have written
concerning the same. ALBARO ALONSO BARBA, of Metals, Translat. by the Earl of
Sandwich, Chap. 26.

GOLD has the least Variety of Regular Figure, in the Ore, of any Metal.
Because more solid, and therefore, less wanton, than the rest. It Is a rare
Specimen, mentioned by Georgius de Sepibus, which he calls, Aurum Ramescens.

The Ductility of GOLD is admirable; One Grain, in Leaves, is extended to above
Fifty Inches Square: And one Ounce employed in Guilding small Hair-Wyre, will
be extended to almost an Hundred Miles in lenght; as Mr. Boil has observed.

The Uses of GOLD for Vessels, Coins, Armor, Garments, etc. are infinite. The
Luxury of Galienus the Emperor, taught him to Powder his Hair with the Dust of
GOLD. Some Painters, says Ambrosinus, hang Plated GOLD over Vinegar, whereby
is produced a pure Blue (as Ceruss out of Lead) which they prefer before the
Vltramarine.

One principal Use of GOLD in Medicin^ is, for the Correction o^ Mercurial
Medicines. The Original Use of Leaf-GOLD in Electuaries, and diverse other
Preparations, was not only for better Grace, but from the Opinion of its adding
Virtue to them. And Plates of GOLD, anciently, have been used especially for
Children, as an Amulet. Which I take to be the true Reason, why the Kings of
England hang a piece of GOLD upon those they Touch* GREW's Mus^eum REG. SOC.
Page 323.

There goes a Tradition among Learned Men, that the Leaves of Vines that grow
in some places of Hungary, whose Mines afford GOLD, are as it were Guilt on the
lower side, by ascending Exhalations of a GOLDEN Nature: Whether this be true
or no, I shall not take upon me to determine: But I remember, that having made
Enquiry about the Truth of it, of a very l^genious Traveller, whose Curiosity
led him to visit heedfully those famous Mines: He told me, that he did not
remember He had observed what is Reported about the Leaves of the Vine: But He
knew very well, that at Tockay, (a place that affords the famousest Wine of
Hungary, and indeed the best I have drunk) very many of the Kernels of the
Grapes would appear Guilt over, as it were, with Leaf-GOLD. ROB. BOTLE of the
Insalubrity, vnd Salubrity of the Air. page 44, 45.

At Chremnitz, a small Town in Hungary, there is a GOLD-MINE, in which they
have Worked these Nine Hundred and Fifty^Years; the Mine is about Nine or Ten
English Miles in length, and the^^ (...) one Cuniculus or Horiz^ntal pass^ge,
which is Eight Hundred (...) long, called the Erbstall. The d^pth of it is
above One Hundred and Seventy Fathoms; They do not use Ladders to descend into
this Mine, but are let down at the end of a Cable, unto which is fastened a
Sling, or Seat of Leather; the Leather being broad, and divided ordinarily into
Two or Three parts, so that it is to be shifted or changed as you find
Convenience, and affords no uneasy Seat even to such as are not used to it.
And in this manner, whosoever enters the Mine is let down. Through one of the
Schachts or perpendicular Pits, of which there are Six. 1. That of Rodolphus.
2. Queen Anne. 3. Ferdinand. 4. Matthias. 5. Windschacht. and 6. Leopold. I
went down by the Pit of the Emperor Rodlophus, gently descending by the
turning about of a large Wheel, to which the Cable is fastened, One Hundred and
Eight Fathoms deep into the Earth; and after many Hours being in the Mine, was
drawn out again by Leopold's Pit, strait up above One Hundred and Fifty
Fathoms; a height surpassing that of the Pyramids, by a Third part. At the
bottom of which Pit, I was not Discouraged to find my self so deep in the
Earth, for considering I was yet above Three Thousand Miles from the Center, I
thought my self but in a Well. It is built on all sides with Firr-Trees one
laying upon another on Four sides from the bottom to the top.

The Work toward One, Two, or Three of the Clock, as they speak; for the
Miners direct themselves underground by a Compass, not of Thirty Two Points,
(such as is used at Sea,) but by one of Twenty Four, which they divide, as we
do the Hours of the Day, into Twice Twelve.

Of the GOLD-Ore some is White, some Black, some of it Red, and some Yellow.
That with Black Spots in White is esteemed the best; as also the Ore which
lies next to the Black Veins.

There have been Pieces of Virgin GOLD found in this Mine.

Where they Pound the GOLD-Ore, they lay a Foundation Three Yards deep of Wood,
upon which they place the Ore, over which there are Four and Twenty Beams,
armed at the bottom with Iron, which break and grind the Ore, it being covered
all the while with Water. These Beams are moved by Four Wheels, one Wheel to
Six Beams, the Water which comes out from the pounded Ore, is let into little
Pits or Chests commonly Seven or Eight one after another; and afterward into a
large Pit of almost half an Acre of Ground, and then after settling let out.

The GOLD-Ore in Powder or Pounded is called Slich, of which that is the
Richest which is nearest to the Beams where it is first Pounded. They Work thus
Day and Night continually. The Candles which they make use of are of Fur or
some Resinous Wood.

They wash the Slich so long, as perhaps in an Hundred Pound Weight, there may
be half an Ounce, or an Ounce of GOLD and Silver, the greatest part ordinarily
GOLD, Two Thirds generally. To this Slich they add Limestone and Slacken, and
Melt them together in the Melting Furnace.

The first Melting produces a Substance called Lech; this Lech they burn with
Charcole to make it lighter, to open its Body and render it porous, and then it
is called Roast.

To the Roast they add Sand as they see occasion, and Melt it again in the
Melting Furnace; then let it out into the Pan, and proceed as in the Melting of
Silver. BROWN's Trav. in Hungaria etc. Page 98, etc.

The Lord Bacon commends the Wit of the Chinese, who despair of Making of
GOLD, but at the same time are mad upon the Making of SILVER: For certain it
is, says that Noble Philosopher, that it is more difficult to make GOLD,
(which is the most Ponderous and Materiate amongst Metals) of other Metals,
less Ponderous, and less Materiate; than ( Via Versa) to make SILVER: of Lead,
or Quicksilver: Both which are more Ponderous than SILVER: So that They need
rather a further Degree of Fixation, than any Condensation. BAC. Not. Hist.

The Polite and Ingenious Dr. Sprat, now Bishop of Rochester, speaking of the
Modern Chemists, who search after Riches, by Transmutations, and the great
Elixir, says, That their Success has been as small, as their Design was
extravagant; and that their Writers involve them in such Darkness, that He
scarcely knows, which was the greatest Task, to understand their meaning, or to
Effect it. These Men, says He, are so earnest in the Chase of the
Philosopher's Stone, that they are scarce capable of any other Thoughts: So
that if an Experiment lie never so little out of their Road, it is free from
their Discovery: As I have heard of some Creatures in Africa, which still going
a violent pace straight on, and not being able to turn themselves, can never
get any Prey, but what they meet just in their way. This Secret they prosecute
so impetuously, that they believe they see some Footsteps of it, in every Line
of Moses, Solomon, or Virgil. The Truth is, they are downright Enthusiasts
about it. And seeing we cast Enthusiasm out of Divinity it self, we shall
hardly sure be persuaded, to admit it into Philosophy. It were perhaps a vain
attempt, to try to cure such Men of their groundless Hopes. It may be they are
happier now, as they are: And they would only cry out with the Man in Horace,
that their Friends, who had restored them to a perfect Sense, had Murdered
them. But certainly if these Men could be brought to content themselves with
moderate Things, to grow Rich by degrees, and not to imagine, they shall gain
the Indies, cut of every Crucible: There might be wonderful things expected
from them. SPRAT's Hist. of the ROYAL SOCIETY, Page 37, 38.

Dr. Hackwell, in his Apology of the Power and Providence of God, speaking of
the Philosopher's Stone, says, He much doubts whether any such Experiment be
yet really found or no; and if it be, whether the Operation of it be not more
dangerous and difficult, then the effect arising from it, is or can be
advantageous. But of this, says he, I am well assured, that as he who dug
in his Vineyard for GOLD missed it, but by opening the Roots of his Vines,
thereby found their Fruit, the next Year more worth unto him than GOLD: So
whilst Men have labored by Transmutation of Metals from one Species to
another to make GOLD, they have fallen upon the Distillations of Wa^ers,
Extractions of Oils, and such like r^re Experiments unknown to the Ancients,
which are undoubtedly more precious for the use of Man, than all the GOLD of
both the Indies. HAKEWILL, Lib. 3. Chap. 9. Sect. 2.

Observations conserning SILVLR.
SILVER is the most Perfect of all Metals Except Gold, whereunto it comes so
near, as to want nothing but the Color; and therefore those that most of all
oppose the Opinion of the Transmutation of Metals one into another, do yet
hold it possible to turn SILVER into Gold, because the Color only being
wanting, the Fire and Artificial Concoctions can supply that, whereof there be
many Experiments: From the good Mixture and Fineness of its Parts, proceeds its
enduring the Fire with very little waste, as also its being Tough and
Malleable, and endures the drawing out into very Thin Leaves, and small Wyre;
if it were not a Common Trade to do it, it would not be believed to be
possible, that an Ounce of SILVER should be Drawn out into Fourteen Hundred
Yards of Wyre; and it is yet more admirable, that all that shall be made Guilt
Wyre, with only six Grains of Gold; So that although SILVER can be Extended to
admiration, yet Gold is a Hundred times more Ductile than it. BARBA of Metals,
Chap. 27.

The Chief Places of the Indies from whence they draw SILVER, are New Spain,
and Peru; but the Mines of Peru, says Acosta, far surpass the rest; and
amongst all others of the World, those of Potozi.

The greatest Riches of the Kingdom of Peru is most out of sight hid in the
Bowels of the Earth, but found in those never decaying Mines of GOLD and
SILVER; more eminently abounding in this one Province, than in all America. For
instance whereof we may take the SILVER Mines of Potozi, Discovered in the Year
1545, the fifth of which Payable into the King's Exchequer, amounted in Forty
Years to one Hundred and Eleven Millions of Pezoes, every Pezo being Valued at
Six Shillings and Six Pence; and yet a third part of the Whole was discharged
of that Payment. By this one we may guess somewhat of the rest, as by the
proportion of one Member, the Dimentions of the Whole Body may be probably
geuss'd at; unless the Riches of these Mines be beyond conjecture of which it
is affirmed by some knowing Men, that they yield in many Places more Gold than
Earth. PET. HETLIN.

How these Rich Mines of Potozi came first to be discovered since it was a
thing somewhat Remarkable, I shall here give an account: The manner (therefore)
of this Discovery was as follows.

A Peruvian called Gualpa, who Worked at the Mines of Porco, going a Hunting,
it chanced that the Game ran up the steep Mountain of Potosii, which prevented
his Pursuing of it any ^urther; but the Mountain being over grown with Trees,
he got hold from one Bough to another to help himself up, and at last taking
hold of the Bramble called Quinua, he pulled the same out of the Ground, and
finding it heavy, looked upon it, and espied a great Lump of SILVER hanging at
the Root of it; whereupon viewing the Hole, he discovered a Rich SILVER Vein;
of which taking some Pieces home, and Melting them, he found that it was the
best SILVER that ever he had known; wherefore he privately got a greater
quantity, and by degrees grew Extraordinary Rich: But tho he carried his design
never so close, yet he was at last suspected, and especially by his Neighbor
Guanca, Born in the Valey Xauxa, who was the more jealous of him, because he
sold greater Bars of SILVER than any were Cast at Porco. Whereupon he resolved
to speak to him, and getting out the Secret, it came to this Agreement between
them, that they should both be Partners, and share the Booty; Gualpa was to
keep the Vein, since called the Rich Vein. and Guanca was to have another, at
Present Named Diego Centeno: But they agreed not long; for Guanca finding much
Labor upon his Vein, by reason of the hardness, and that he could get no share
in what Gualpa got, acquainted his Spanish Master Vilaroel with it, who rested
not till he had sound out the truth thereof; for which Valaroel obtained
(according to the Custom of Porco) several Rods to work for him, only Paying
the King one fifth Part of what he got, and so remained owner of the Mine
Centeno.

This Discovery of the Rich, Mine Potozi, is said to have happened on the 24
th. of April, 1545. Soon after which they found the SILVER Vein Del Estanno,
which tho it was very Rich, was difficult to be dug, because of its
hardness. The first Vein which Gualpa, searched after stood upright from the
bottom of the Mine, and contained above Three Hundred Foot in Length, and
Thirteen in Breadth, and continuing good for Two Hundred Foot in D^pth, af^^r
which the SILVER begins ^o lessen.

These Mines produce Yearly for the Kings fi^th Part, Forty Thousand Pieces of
SILVER, each valued at Thirteen Ryals, each Ryal being Four Shillings, besides
what he is desrau^e^ of, which is perhaps half as much more. OGILB^'s America,
page, 463.

For the more easy Working in the Mines, the Spaniards have dug Trenches,
which they call Socabon^^, at the Foot of the Mountain of Potozi, toward the
West, cross thr^ugh the Mountain to the Mine, each of them being Eight Foot
Br^^d and a Fathom Deep, and lock'^ up with Gates, through which the SILVER is
carried out, whereof the Owner of the Socabon rec^ives a fifth Part. The
Socabon which leads to the Rich Vein, was begun Anno 1556. and finished in
Twenty-nine Years, Extending it self Two Hundred and Fifty Rods in Length. The
Miners work by Candlelight, both Day and Night by turns; those that Work in
the Day, Sleep in the Night, and those that Work in the Night, Sleep in the
Day. The Ore, which is as hard as a Stone, is cut out with Pick-Axes, beaten in
pieces with an Iron-Crow, and carried upon their Backs on Ladders made of
Leather; Each Ladder has three fastnings about the thickness of a Cable,
stretched out by Sticks, so that one goes up on one side, whilst another comes
down on the other. Each Ladder being Ten Fathom long, is pitched upon its
several Floor on which the Laborers rest before they go up higher, for they
make diverse Floors according to the Depth of the Mine. The Laborers carry the
Ore in Bags fastened before on their Breasts, and falling back over their
Shoulders, three and three together, the foremost whereof ties a lighted Candle
to his Thumb, and thus they help themselves with both hands. It is a wonderful
thing to Consider, how the Peruvians are able to scramble up and down
continually a Hundred and Fifty Fatham: But besides many other Inconveniences,
the Mines often fall in, or at least great Pieces, which Bury all the Diggers.
The Mines also being excessive Cold, occasion to those that are not used to
them a Vertigo in the Head, and Vomiting. The SILVER runs for the most part
between two Rocks, as it were in a long Channel, of which one side is as hard
as Flint, and the other much softer, The SILVER is of different Value; the
best, called Cacilla, or Tacana, resembles Amber in Color; the worser sort is
Blackish, and sometimes of an Ash Color. The Pieces of Ore are carried on the
Backs of the Sheep Pacos to the Mill, where being ground to Powder, they are
put into Furnaces to melt; of which there were once above Six Thousand on the
Top of Potozi; but since the Quick-Siviler was found to cleanse the same, not a
third part remains. Ibidem, Page 464, 465.

SILVER is in its highest perpection in JAPAN, but not used in Trade; in which
is seen nothing but Gold, and some small Coin of Brass; which latter they spoil
by Refining it too much. PHILOSOPH. TRANSACT. Numb. 49. Page 984.

Observations concerning METALS; how they are generated.
IT is no wonder, that Learned Men differ so much in their Opinions, about the
Matter whereof METTALLS are engendered, because the Author of Nature seems to
have Created them in that obscurity, and depth, and to have immured them with
hard Rocks, on purpose, to hide their Causes, and to give check to the Ambiton
of Man.

The Philosophers, who pret^nd to know the Causes of Things, ^esides the first
Matter, (which is the first Principle, not only of Mettalls, but of all other
Bodies in the World) assign another Matter remote also, which is a certain
moist and unctuous Exhalation, together with a portion of thick and rough
Earth, from which, being mingled together, there results a M^^^er, whereof not
only Mettalls, but also Stones are made: For if dryness prevail, Stones are
beg^tten, but if the unctuous humidity be predominant, then Mettalls are
begotten; Plato, Aristotle, and their Followers are of this Opinion.

From the abundance of this pure, and Shining Moisture, made Solid, proceeds
the Luster of Mettalls, in whom, of all the Elements, Water is experimentally
known, to (...) most predominant, and t^^ (...) they run, and are dissolv^d ^y
Fire.

From the v^ri^us ^^^p^rament, and purity of ^he as^^ (...) Mate^, come the
Dive^s kinds of Mettalls, the most pure and ^ine of all which, and (as it would
seem) N^tur^^ Principal intention, is Gold.

Many, to avoid difficult dispures of this Nature, do hold with the Vulgar;
That at the Creation of the World, God Almighty made the Veins of Mettalls in
the same Condition, as we now find them at this Day; herein doing Nature a
great injury, by denying her* without Reason) a productive Virtue ^n this
Matter, which is alow'd unto her in all other Sub^un^ry L^ing^* Moreover, that
Exp^i^ce in diverse places has (...)trary: A clear Example whereof we have in
Ilva, an (...)ing to Tuscany, full of Iron Mines, which when they have dug as
holl^w, and as deep as they can, the Circumjacent Earth falls in, and f^lls
them up again; and in the space of Ten or Fifteen Years at most, they work
those Mines again, and thence draw out abundance of Metal, which that new
Earth has been converted into: Many do think that the same happens in the rich
Hill of Potosi. BARBA of Metalls. Chap. 18.

It is Reported by some of the Ancients, that in Cyprus, there is a kind of
Iron, that being cut into little Pieces, and put into the Ground, if it be well
Watered, will increase into greater Pieces. But this is certain, and known of
Old, That Lead will multiply, and increase; as has been seen in Old Statua's
of Stone, which have been put in Cellars; the Feet of them being bound with
Lead; where (after some time) it appeared, that the Lead did swell; insomuch as
it hanged upon the Stone like Warts. BACON's Not. Hist. Experim. 797.

Our Saltpeter Men find, that when they have extracted Saltpeter out of a
Floor of Earth one Year, within Three or Four Years after, they find more
Saltpeter generated there, and do work it over again. The like is observed in
Alum and Copperas.

And for Mettalls, our Tinners in Cornwall have experience of Pits which have
been filled up with Earth, after they have wrought out all the Tin they could
find in them, and within Thirty Years they have opened them again, and found
more Tin generated. The like has been observed in Iron, as Gaudencius Merula
reports of Ilva, an Island in the Adriatick-Sea, under the Venetians, where
Iron breeds continually, as fast as they can Work it; which is confirmed also
by Agricola and Baccius. The like we read of at Saga in Ly^iis, where they dig
over their Iron Mines every Tenth Year. John Mathesius gives us examples of
almost all sorts of Minerals and Metalls which he ^ad observed to grow and
regenerate. The like examples you may find in Leonardus Thurnesserus E^^stus
affirms, that he did see in St. Ioachims Dale. Silver grown upon a Beam of
Wood, which was placed in the Pit to support the Works; and when it was rotten,
the Workmen coming to set new Timber in the place, found the Silver sticking
to the Old Beam. Also He reports, that in Germany there has been Unripe and
Unconcocted Silver found in Mines; which the best Workmen affirmed would become
Perfect Silver in Thirty Years. The like Modestin^s Factuus, and Mathesius,
affirm of U^ripe and Liquid Silver; which when the Workmen find, they use to
say, We are come too soon. IORDEN's Discourse of Natural Baths, and Mineral
Waters, Cap. 11.

T^^^ Mettalls may be (and often have been) ^ound in a Solt and Liquid Form or
Substance, the Honorable Mr Boil instan^^^ ^^rom Ger^ardus, in these Wor^^^
(...) aqua caerulea inventa^st An^^b^^gae ^i argentum adhue crat in primo
(...), qu^e coagulata, red^cta in ca^cem sixi and boni Argenti. Also that at
Anneberg a B^ue Water was found, where Silver was yet in its first Being, which
coagulated, was reduc^d into the Powder or Calx of fix^d and good Silver.
BOTLE's S^ept. Chym. page 360.

Observations concerning DAMPS in Mines
THE Learned and Ingenious Dr. Plot, speaking of DAMPS in Coal-Mines, reduces
them to either Superterraneal, or Subterraneal; both which sorts, He says, He
takes to proceed from Stagnations in the Subterraneal Vaults of the Earth, for
want of due Ventilations, and Commerce between the In^^^ior and Superior Air.
The Material Causes, says the Dr. may be various, either Simple, or Compound:
As the mere Corruption of the simple Air alone upon a long Stagnation in the
Coal-Rooms, and the Rifts and Clists of the Rock of Coal it self, may be its
Material Cause indeed; but the Causa sine qu^ non of such a Damp, he takes to
be the want of motion in those Cavities, without which, the Air would never
have Corrupted; no more than Water which never Corrupts till it Stagnates, when
indeed like the Air it becomes poisonous, though possibly not to that Degree, the
Air being a Body much finer, and conveyed to the more tender parts of the Body.
Whence it is, that in the Old Works, wherein there has been no digging for a
long time, no laveing, drawing, or pumping of Water, all which keep the Air in
motion, and the Water from Cankering, these DAMPS are most frequent and most
dangerous. Whence it is too, that the Works where the Bed of Coal is thin, and
admits of but few or no such Rifts or Clefts for the Air to Stagnat or Corrupt
in, are seldom or never troubled with them. Upon which account it is likewise,
that though a Bed of Coal have many of these Rifts, and large Ones too; yet as
long as there is a profluence of Water through them, there is no Danger of
their Entertaining such DAMPS; which as soon as made dry by a Sough or
Free-Level, the same Mine shall become much more liable to them; the wholesome
Air that was in them whilst kept in motion by the Flux of the Water (having
little or no Communication with that above Ground) now Stagnating and
Corrupting to that Degree, that it not only extinguishes the glowing heat of
Coals, and the Flame of Candles, Torches, etc. but the Flammula Vitae too in
most living Creatures, so that the Animal which respires it, sometimes (...)
Subterraneous Waters are at the lowest. They fancy, it proceeds from the
multitude of Red Trifoil Flowers, by them called Honey-Suckles, with which the
Limestone Meadows of the Peak (where they have this sort of DAMP) do much
abound.

Dr. Plot says, that he enqui^'d concerning this Sort in the East part of
Staffordshire, where the Moore-Lands bound upon the Peak-Country of Darbyshire,
and found it not only there, but as far as he could learn, to be the most
common DAMP in the Country, it making their Candles first to diminish, to burn
round, and at length to go out, persuming the Stauls at the same time with a
faint Sweet smell, as those in Darbyshire do, only with this Difference, that
these in Staffordshire are said to be sometimes visible, showing like a thin
Smoke which may be seen not only in the Groves, but fuming out at the top of
the Pit. But in Staffordshire (says Dr. Plot) they are wiser (where they go for
their Coal Forty or Fifty Yards deep, and have no such thing us Trefoil, for
many Miles, and yet have this DAMP,) than to think it proceeds either from
Pease or Trefoil; it being rather apprehended to arise from the Workmens Breath
and Sweat, mixed with the Steams of the Golden Marchasite or Brass Lumps, than
any thing else.

The Third sort of DAMP is the strangest, and most Pestilential of any, if all
be true which is said concerning it. Those who pretend to have seen it (for it
is visible) describe it thus: In the highest part of the Roof of those
Passages, which Branch out from the main Grove, they often see a round thing
hanging, about the bigness of a Football, covered with a Skin of the thickness
and Color of a Cob-Web: This, they say, if by any Accident, as the Splinter of
a Stone, or the like, if it be broken, immediately disperseth it self, and
Suffocates all the Company. Therefore to prevent Casualties, as soon as ever
they epsy it, they say, they have a way, by the help of a Stick and a long
Rope, of breaking it at a distance; which done, they purify the place well by
Fire, before they dare enter it again. Mr. Iessop says, He dares not avouch the
Truth of this Story in all its Circumstances; because the Proof of it seems
impossible, since they say, it kills all that are likely to bear Witness to all
the Particulars: Neither dares He deny, but such a thing may have been seen
hanging on the Roof, since He has heard many affirm it. Perhaps the General
Tradition they have amongst them, has made them ascribe all Strange and
Surprising Effects unto this Cause. They are not without a Reason for it, which
is not altogether irrational, if the Matter of Fact be true; for they say, the
Steam which arises from their Bodies and the Candles, ascends unto the highest
part of the Vault, and there condenseth, and in time has a Filme grows round
about it, and at length Corrupting becomes Pestilential: Thus (says Mr.
Iessop) have I heard many of our Underground Philosophers Discourse.

The Fourth which they also call a DAMP (although how properly, I will now not
argue) is that Vapor, which being touched by their Candle, presently takes
Fire, and giving a Crack like a Gun, produces the like Effects, or rather
those of Lightning. Hence it is commonly called the Fulminating DAMP. PHILOS.
TRANSACT. Numb. 117. page 391, 392.

Mr. Iessop, in a Letter to the Ingenious Mr. Oldenburg, concerning a further
Account of DAMPS, says, That DAMPS are most generally observed to come about
the latter End of May, and to continue during the Heat of Summer, and in those
places, which have DAMPS all the Year long, yet they observe them to be most
violent at that Season: And that He could meet with no other certain Rule for
any Periodical returns, except this Annual; although it be certain they do
often return in the same Summer.

He also says, There are some DAMPS that will quite extinguish all those Fires
that are let down into them, be they never so many Successively, or never so
great; and Fire is observed to be so far from Curing, that it often creates
DAMPS in places not otherwise Subject to them. Indeed they are a present
Remedy, if you can so order them, as by their help to make a Circula^ion of the
Air through the Infected place, otherwise they do hurt; and those Groves
wherein they are forced to break their Rocks by the help of great Fires, are
seldom free from DAMPS. PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 119. page 453, 454.

Mr. George Sinclar says, That the Fire of Fulminating DAMP is in Scotland, in
a Land called Werdy, West of Leith; which they there from its Effects (that are
very much like ours) are pleased to call Wildfire.

He says, that they do there prevent this DAMP by a Person that enters before
the Workmen, who being covered with wet Sackcloth, when He comes near the
Coal-Wall, where the Fire is feared, He creeps on his Belly with a long Pole
before him, having a lighted Candle on the top on it, with whose Flame the
Wildfire meeting, it breaks with violence, and running along the Roof, goes
out with a Noise at the Mouth of the Sink; the Person that gave Fire escaping
by creeping on the Ground, and keeping his Face close to it, till it be over
past. GEORGE SINCLAR's Miscellan. Observe. page 292, 293, 294.

Dr. Plot advises all such as are to go down into any deep Well, that may be
suspected to have any malignant, noxious Steams, or Vapors, first to throw
down into them a Peck of good Lime, which slaking in the Water, and fuming out
at the top, will so effectually dispel all such poisonous Vapors, that they
may safely go down, and stay some time unhurt. PLOT's Not. Hist. of
Oxfordshire, P^g. 63.

Observations concerning the Generation of INSECTS.
THat Learned and Ingenious Italian Author, Francisco Redi, in his Book
Entitled, Esperienze intorno alla Generatione Degl' Insetti, with much
Industry undertakes to evince, That there is no such thing as Aequivocal
Generation, but that every Animal is generated by the Seed of another Animal,
(its Parent,) or, at least, from some Living and un-corrupted Plant, as out of
Oak-Apples, and several Protuberances and Excrescencies of Vegetables.

First then, in the asserting of the Universal and true Generation of INSEC^S
by a peculiar and paternal Seed, this Author positively affirms, that He could
never find, by all the Experiments and Observations he ever made, (of which he
relates a great Number, by himself made upon many sorts of Animals) that ever
any INSECTS were bred from Flesh, or Fish, or putrified Plants, or any other
Bodies, but such, as Flies had access unto, and scattered their Seed upon; He
having taken extraordinary care and pains to observe, that always on the Flesh,
before it did Verminate, there sat Flies of the self same kind with those that
were afterward produced thence; and again, that no Worms would ever come from
any Flesh in Vessels well covered, and defended from the Access of Flies; so
that to him there seems no Generation of INSECTS from any dead Animals, but
such as have been Fly-blown.

And lest^it should be objected, that the Reason, why in Vessels exactly
closed, no INSECT breeds, is the Want of Air, necessary to all Generation, He
has carefully covered several Vessels with very fine Naples-Vaile, for the Air
to enter, though Flies could not; but that no Worms at all were bred there,
notwithstanding that many Flies swarmed about them, invited by the smell of the
Flesh enclosed therein.

Secondly, to make out the other part of his Position, viz. That those Animals
that are not bred by the Seed of other Animals, are produced from some Live
Plant, or its Excrescence; This Author thinks it not absurd to affirm, That
that Anima or Power, which is able to produce Flowers and Fruits in Living
Plants, may be alike capable to breed Worms in them; since that Soul is so
powerful, as to cause Plants to feed, to grow and to produce Seed, as it does
in Animals. For Confirmation of which, He observes, that both the Generation
of Worms in Vegetables is always and constantly the same, (not at all casual*)
and that all Galls grow constantly in one determinate part of the Branches, and
always in the new Branches; as also, that those little Galls, which grow on the
Leaves of the Oak-Holm, and c. do all grow constantly on the Fibers or Strings
of those Leaves, not one of them being seen to grow on the smooth part betwixt
two Strings: Farther, that there are ^ound many Leaves of other Trees, on which
grow Vesicles, or small Bags, or some wrinckled or swelled places, full of
Worms, springing ^orth with those Leaves. Besides, that there is not one Gall
but it has its proper Worm; and that each sort of Galls has its peculiar and
determinate Race of Worms and Flies, which never vary: Where He takes notice of
the Singular Art of Nature, both in forming the Egg, which is found in the
Center of Galls, and in preparing its place therein, furnishing it with many
filaments, that pass from the Gall-Apple to the Egg, as to many Veins and
Arteries, serving for the formation of the Egg and Worm, and for the
Nourishment requisite thereto. To which He adds this Observation, that, there
being certain sorts of Galls, which breed more Worms at a time than One, Nature
has carefully provided and distinguished places for them, as she does in those
Animals that are multiparous.

H^^ing Established this ground against Equivocal Generation, he proceeds to
Particulars, and refutes the Opinion of those, that will have Bees to be Bred
of the Putrified Flesh of Bullocks; Wasps, of Asses or Mules Flesh; Drones, of
Horses; Scorpions, of buried Crayfishes, or the Herb Basilica, or dead
Scorpions; Toads, of Ducks Buried in Dung; Mites of Cheese; affirming that none
of these INSECTS have any such Origin mentioned, but that all those Substances
have been first blown upon by some Fly or other.

See this Abstract of Francisco Redi's Book of the Generation of INSECTS, in
the PHLOSOPH. TRANSACT. Numb. 57. Page 1175.

To that Opinion of the Italian Francisco Redi, viz. That some live Plants or
their Excrescencies do truly generate some INSECTS, I told my Friend, as I
Remember, that I indeed had observed, that the By-Fruits of some Vegetables, as
of the Oak and Wild-Rose, for Example, did grow up together with their
respective Worms in them, from small Beginnings to fair and large Fruit, some
of them Emulating even the Genuin Offspring of the Plant, -- Et miratur non
sua poma.

And further, that I did believe, the Worms were furnished with food in and
from them; but not by any Naval-Connexion, as that Author fancies, and which I
said, to me was unintelligible, and that I should be glad of a Notion, which
might make out to me such a monstrous Relation, as half Animal, half Vegetable,
or, which is all one, Vegetable Vessels inserted into an Animal, or, the
Contrary. Strange Economy!

That it had never been my good Fortune (what ever diligence I had used) to
discern Eggs in the Center of Galls, but a Worm constantly, even at the very
first appearance, as near at least as my Fortune led me. Yet I would not deny,
but that diligence might one Day discover the Egg it self, which I was of
Opinion was affixed to or near the Place by the Parent-INSECT, where the Gall
rose.

That I ever found the Worms in all the Excrescencies, that I had yet met with,
perfectly at liberty; and for the Filaments, our Author mentions, it was very
possible he might be mistaken, it being very hard, and a matter not yet Treated
of in any Public Paper, which and what are the Vessels that enter into the
Texture of a Vegetable, as of a large Tree, for Example, much more hard would
it be to say, this is a Vessel in a small Gall.

That there were many By-Fruits of different Figure and shape (though perhaps of
a like Texture) upon one and the same Plant, every one of which did Nourish and
Produce a different Race of INSECTS; This, I told him, I thought might rather
argue the diverse Work-manship of different INSECTS, than one and the same
Principle of Vegetation to be Author of several sorts of Animals. MARTIN LISTER
in a Letter to Mr. Oldenburg; which you may find in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb.
75.

I have for my own Particular, besides several of those mentioned by the
diligent Goedartius, observed diverse other Circumstances, perhaps, not much
taken notice of, though very Common, which do indeed afford us a very Coercive
Argument to admire the Goodness and Providence of the Infinitely Wise Creator,
in his most Excellent Contrivances and Dispensations. I have observed at
several times of the Summer, that many of the Leaves of diverse Plants, have
been spotted, or, as it were scabbed, and looking on the under-sides of those
of them that have been but a little irregular, I have perceived them to be
sprinkled with diverse sorts of little Eggs, which letting alone, I have found
by degrees to grow bigger, and become little Worms with Legs, but still to keep
their former Places, and those Places of the Leaves, of there own accords, to be
grown very Protuberant upwards, and very hollow, and arched underneath, whereby
those Young Creatures, are, as it were, sheltered and housed from External
Injury; diverse Leaves I have observed to grow and swell so far, as at length
perfectly to enclose the Animal, which by other Observations I have made, I
guess to contain it, and become, as it were a womb to it, so long till it be
fit and prepared to be Translated into another State, at which time, like (what
they say of) Vipers, they gnaw their way through the Womb that bred them;
diverse of these kinds I have met with upon Goosberry Leaves, Rose-Tree Leaves,
Willow Leaves, and many other kinds.

There are often to be found upon Rose-Trees and Brier Bushes, little red
tufts, which are certain Knobs or Excrescencies, growing out from the Rind, or
Barks of those kinds of Plants, they are covered with strange kinds of threads
or red hairs, which feel very soft, and look not unpleasantly. In most of
these, if it has no hole in it, you shall find certain little Worms, which I
suppose to be the causes of their Production; for when that Worm has eat its
way through, they having performed what they were designed by Nature to do, by
degrees die and wither away.

Now, the manner of their Production, I suppose to be thus; that the All-Wise
Creator has as well Implanted in every Creature a Faculty of knowing what Place
is convenient for the Hatching, Nutrition, and preservation of their Eggs and
Offsprings, whereby they are stimulated and directed to convenient Places,
which become, as 'twere, the wombs that perform those Offices; as He has also
suited and adapted a Property to those Places, whereby they grow and enclose
those Seeds, and having enclosed them, provide a convenient Nourishment for
them; but as soon as they have done the Office of a Womb, they die and wither.

The Progress of Enclosure I have often observed in Leaves, which, in those
Places where those Seeds have been cast, have by degrees swelled and enclosed
them, so perfectly round, as not to leave any perceptible passage out.

From this same cause, I suppose that Galls, Oak-Apples, and several other
Productions of that kind, upon the Branches and Leaves of Trees, have their
Original; for if you open any of them, when almost Ripe, you shall find a
little Worm in them.

Thus, if you open never so many dry Galls, you shall find either a hole
whereby the Worm has eat its passage out, or if you find no passage, you may,
by breaking or cutting the Gall, find in the middle of it a small Cavity, and
in it a small body, which does plainly enough yet retain a shape, to manifest
it once to have ^een a Worm, though it died by a too early separation from the
Oak on which it grew, its Navel-String, as 'twere, being broken off from the
Leaf or Branch by which the Globular body that invelop'd it, received its
Nourishment from the Oak. R. HOOKE's Microg. Page 189, 190.

Perchance some kind of INSECT, in such places where there are Putrefying or
Fermenting Bodies, may, by a certain Instinct of Nature, eject some sort of
Seminal principle, which Cooperating with various kinds of Putrefying
Substances, may produce various kinds of INSECTS, or Animate Bodies: For we
find in most sorts of those lower degrees of Animate Bodies: that the
Putrefying Substances on which these Eggs, Seeds, or Seminal Principles are
cast by the INSECT, become as 'twere, the Matrices or Wombs that conduce very
much to their generation, and may perchance also to their variation and
alteration, much after the same manner, as by strange and unnatural
Copulations, several new kinds of Animals are produced, as Mules, and the ^ike,
which are usually called Mon^trous, because a little unusual, though many of
them have all their principal parts as perfectly shaped and a^aapted for their
peculiar uses, as any of the most perfect Animals. (...) therefore the
Putrefying Body, ^n which any kind of Seminal or ^ital principle chances to be
cast, ^ecome somewhat more than meer^y a Nursing and Fostering Helper, ^n the
Generation and Producti^n of any kind of Animate Bo^y, the more near it
approaches ^he true Nature of a Womb, the ^ore Power will it have on the
^y-Blow it incloses. HOOK ibid. ^ag. 123.

Observations concerning the ANT, EMMET or PISMIRE.
THIS little Animal is that great Pattern of Industry and Frug^lity: To this
School-mast^^ did Soloman send his Sluggard, who in those Virtues not only
excels al^ Insects, but most Men. Other Excellent Observables there are in
(...) small a Fabric: As the Hercule^ strength of its Body, that it is able to
carry its Triple Weight and Bulk: The Agility of its Limbs that it runs so
swiftly: The equality of its Motion, that it trips (...) nimbly away without
any salienc^ or leaping, without any fits or start in its Progression. Her Head
i^ large and globular, with a Prominent Snou^: Her Eye is of a very fair black
Color, round, globula^ and Prominent, of the bigness of P^a, Foraminulous, and
Letticed like that of other Insects: He mouth (in which you may se^ something
to move) is armed with a pair of Pincers, which move laterally, and are
indented on the inside like a Saw, by which she bites, and better holds her
Prey; and you may often see them carry their White Oblong Eggs in them for
better Security. HENR. POWER's Microscop. Observe. Page 25.

There have occurred to my Observation but three sorts of ANTS, commonly without
Wings; viz. very Black; Dark Brown; and the Third sort of near the Color
usually called Philemort.

Each kind Inhabit by themselves in their several Banks; Two sorts seldom or
never being ^ound together; and if either of the other Two sorts be put into
the Black ANTS Bank, it is worth observing what enmity there is betwixt these
^ittle Creatures, and with what vio^ence the Black on^s will seize on ^he Red,
never leaving to pinch them on the Head with their For^eps or Claws, till they
have killed them upon the Place: Which done, they will carry them dead out of
the Field, from their Bank. But if you put Black ANTS into a Bank of the Red,
the Black seem to be so sensible of the strangeness of the Place they are in,
that there they will not meddle with the Red, but as if they were Frighted, and
concerned for nothing but self-preservation, run away.

Upon opening of these Banks, (...) observe first a White Substance, which to
the bare Eye looks like the scatterings of fine White Sugar, o^ Salt, but very
soft and tender; and if you take a bit of it, as big perhaps as a Mustard Seed,
and lay i^ on the Object Plate of a good Microscope, you may by opening i^ with
the Point of a Needle, discern many pure, White and Clear Appearances in
distinct Membrans, al^ figured like the lesser sort o^ Birds Eggs, and as clear
as a Fishes Bladder. This same Substance, as it has been j^st now described, I
find in the ANTS themselves, which I take to be the true ANTS Eggs; it being
obvious to Observation that where ever this is uncovered, they make it their
business to carry it away in their Mouths to secure it, and will, after you
have scattered it, lay it on a heap again, with what speed they can.

I Observe they lie in multitudes upon this (if I may so call it) Spawn of
theirs; and after a little time, every one of these small adherances is turned
into a little Vermicle, as small as a Mite, hardly discerned to stir; but after
a few days more, you may perceive a feeble Motion of Flexion, and Extention,
and they begin to look Yellowish and Hairy, shaped very like a small Maggot;
and so keeping that Shape, grow almost as big as an ANT, and have every one a
black spot on them.

Then they get a Film over them, whitish, and of an Oval shape, for which
reason I suppose they are commonly called ANTS Eggs, which yet (to speak
properly they) are not.

I have, to prevent mistakes, opened many of these vulgarly called ANTS Eggs, I
mean, the lesser sort, (for there are some as big as a Wheat-Corn, others less
than a Rye-Corn) and in Some I find only a Maggot, to appearance, just such as
was described before: In O^^ers, I find a Maggot beginning to put on the Shape
of an ANT about the Head, with Two little Yellow Specks where the Eyes are
designed: In Others, a further progress, and furnished with every thing to
complete the Shape of an ANT, but wholly transparent, the Eyes only excepted,
which are then as black as black Bugles.

But when they have newly put on this Shape, I could never discern the least
Motion in any one part of the little Creature, whereof the Reason may perhaps
be, the weakness of their Fibers; for after a little more time, when they begin
to be Brownish, they have strength to stir all their parts.

At last I met with some of these reputed Eggs, which being carefully op^n'd by
me, I took out several of them, every way perfect and complete ANTS, which did
immediately creep about among the rest, no way differing from many other ANTS,
but by a more feeble motion of their Limbs. And this I took for a clear
Demonstration of what I designed, which was to know, That the Film does only
cover the Maggot, while she is transforming into an ANT, and fit to shift for
her self.

The Black Speck that is at one end of every such reputed ANTS Egg, I suppose
to be cast out of the Maggot, in her transformation; since, after it puts on
the Shape of an ANT, the Speck is quite gone, and the whole Body of the ANT
pure clear; since also this Speck at the end of the said Egg, lies always close
to the Anus of the included ANT.

As to their care for their Young, (by which I mean, all the Sorts and Degrees
aforesaid, from the Spawn to the vulgarly called Eggs, in every one of which
you will find a Young ANT,) it is observable, how upon the breaking up of their
Banks, they make it their business immediately to carry their Young out of
sight again, laying the several sorts of them in several places and heaps: The
which if you mingle again or scatter, you shall, laying but some bits of Slate,
or the like, in any place they may come to and get under, after a few Hours see
all the Vermicles, and vulgarly called Eggs, laid in their several and distinct
parcels, under such pieces of Slate, and c. provided the place be not so cold
as to chill their Limbs; which if it be, by being brought to the Fire they will
soon recover their strength, and fall to their business again, of securing
their little Ones.

I have observed in Summer, That in the Morning they bring (...) those of their
Young (that are vulgarly called ANTS Eggs) toward the top of their Bank; so
that you may from Ten in the Morning, until Five or Six in the Afternoon, find
them near the top; especially about One, Two, or Three of the Clock, and later,
if the Weather be hot, when for the most part they are found on the South Side
of the Bank: That toward Seven or Eight at Night, if it be Cool, or likely to
Rain, you may dig a Foot deep before you can find them. EDMUND KING, M. D. his
Observe. concerning Emmits or ANTS. Which you may find in the PHILOS. TRANSACT.
Numb. 23. Page 425, 426, 427.

The next of these moving little Animals, are ANTS or PISMIRES, and those are
but of a small Size, but great in Industry; and that which gives them means to
attain to their Ends, is, they have all One Soul. If I should say, they are
here or there, I should do them wrong; for they are every where, under Ground,
where any hollow or loose Earth is, amongst the Roots of Trees, upon the
Bodies, Branches, Leaves, and Fruit of all Trees, in all places, without the
Houses and within, upon the Sides, Walls, Windows, and Roofs without; and on
the Floors, Side-Walls, Cielings, and Windows within, Tables, Cup-Boards, Beds,
Stools, all are covered with them, so that they are a kind of Vbiquitaries. The
Cockroaches are their Mortal Enemies, and though they are not able to do them any
Mischief, being Living, (by Reason they are far stronger, and mightier than a
Hundred of them, and if they should force any One of them with Multitudes, he
has the liberty of his Wings to make his escape) yet, when they find him dead,
they will divide him amongst them into Atoms; and to that purpose, they carry
him home to their Houses or Nests. We sometimes kill a Cockroach, and throw him
on the Ground, and Mark what they will do with him; his Body is bigger than a
Hundred of them, and yet they will find the Means to take hold of him, and lift
him up; and having him above Ground, away they carry him, and some go by as
ready Assistants, if any be weary; and some are the Officers that lead and show
the way to the Hole into which he must pass; and if the Van Couriers perceive,
that the Body of the Cockroach lies cross, and will not pass through the Hole,
or Arch, through which they mean to carry him, Order is given, and the Body
turned Endwise, and this done a Foot before they come to the Hole, and that
without any stop or stay, and this is Observable, that they never pull contrary
ways.

Those that are Curious, and will prevent their coming on their Tables,
Cupboards, or Beds, have little Hollows of Timber, filled with Water, for the
Feet of these to stand in; but all this will not serve their turn; for they
will some of them go up to the Cieling, and let themselves fall upon the
Teasters of the Beds, Cupboards, and Tables.

To prevent them from coming on our Shelves where our Meat is kept, we hang
them to the Roof by Ropes, and Tarr those Ropes, and the Roofs over them, as
also the Strings of our Hamocks, for which Reason we avoid them better in
Hamocks than in Beds.

Sometimes when we try Conclusions upon them, we take the Carpet off the Table,
and shake it, so that all the ANTS drop off, and rub down the Legs and Feet of
those Tables, (which stood not in Water,) and having done so, we lay on the
Carpet again, and set upon it a Sallet-Dish, or Trencher, with Sugar in it,
which some of them in the Room will presently smell, and make toward it as
fast as they can, which is a long journey, for he must begin at the Foot of the
Table, and come as high as the inside of the Carpet, and so go down to the
bottom and up of the outside of the Carpet, before he gets on the Table, and
then to the Sugar, which he smells to; and having found it, returns again the
same way, without taking any for his pains, and informs all his Friends of this
Booty; who come in Thousands, and Ten Thousands, and in an instant, fetch it
all away; and when they are thickest upon the Table, clap a large Book (or any
thing fit for that purpose) upon them, so hard as to kill all that are under
i^, and when you have done so, take away the Book, and leave them to
themselves, but a Quarter of an Hour, and when you come again, you shall find
all those Bodies carried away. Other Trials we make of their Ingenuity, as this
Take a Pewter Dish, and fill it half full of Water, into which put a little
Gally-Pot filled with Sugar, and the ANTS will presently find it, and come upon
the Table; but when they perceive it Environed with Water, they try about the
brims of the Dish, where the Gally-Pot is nearest, and there the most venturous
amongst them, commits himself to the Water, though he be conscious how ill a
Swimmer he is, and is drowned in the Adventure: The next is not warned by his
Example, but ventures too; and is a like dr^wn'd, and many more, so that there
is a small Foundation of their Bodies to venture on; and then they come faster
than ever, and so make a Bridge of their own Bodies, for their Friends to pass
on; neglecting their Lives for the good of the Public; for before they make an
End, they will make way for the rest, and become Masters of the Prize. I had a
little White Sugar which I desired to keep from them, and was devising which
way to do it, and I knocked a Nail in the Beam of the Room, and fastened to it a
brown Thread, at the lower end of which Thread, I tied a large Shell of a Fish,
which being hollow, I put the Sugar in, and locked the Door, thinking it safe;
but when I returned, I found three Quarters of my Sugar gone, and the ANTS in
abundance, ascending and descending, like the Angels on Jacob's Ladder, as I
have seen it Painted, so that I found no place safe, from these more than busy
Creatures.

Another sort of ANTS there are, but nothing so numerous or harmful as the
other, but larger by far; These build great Nests, as big as Bee-Hives, against
a Wall, or a Tree, of Clay and Lome, sometimes within Doors, and in it several
little Mansions, such as Bees make for themselves, but nothing so curious;
These the Cockroaches and Lizzards meet withal, way-laying them near their
Nests, and feed upon them: which to prevent, they make from thence many and
several Galleries, that reach some of them Six or Seven Yards several ways, of
the same Earth they do their Nests: So that for such a distance as that, they
are not to be perceived, by any of their Enemies, and commonly their Avenues go
out amongst Leaves, or Moss, or some other Covert, that they may not be
perceived: But the most of These are in the Woods; for we have destroyed their
Nests, and their Galleries within Doors so often, as they are weary of
Building, and so quit the House: I can say nothing of These, but that they are
the quickest at their Work of Building, of any little Creatures that ever I
saw. LIGON's Hist. of Barbados, Page 63, 64.

Mr. John Ray observes, that the Liquor which ANTS sometimes let fall from
their Mouths, dropping upon the Blue Flowers of Cichory, immediately gives them
a large Red Stain; and supposes, it would produce the like in other Blue
Flowers.

Mr. Samuel Fisher says, that not only the Juice, but also the Distilled Water
or Spirit of this Insect will produce the same Effect.

Mr. Ray says, That the said Mr. Fisher had some Years since acquainted him
with this Experiment, viz. That if with a Staff, or other Instrument, you stir
an heap of ANTS, (especially Horse-ANTS) so as to anger them, they will let
fall thereon a Liquor, which if you presently smell to, will twinge the Nose
like newly Distilled Spirit of Vitriol. PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 68.

It Is a Thing well known, that ANTS, if they get into Peoples Clothes, and so
to their Skin, will cause a smart and tingling, as if they were Nettled: which,
says Mr. Ray, I conceive is done by letting fall the forementioned Corrosive
Liquor, rather than by Stinging. PHILOS. TRANSACT. Ibid.

The Liquor of ANTS is commended by Schroder for a most Excellent Ophthalmick.

Mr. Evelyn in that most Incomparable and Useful Discourse of Forest-Trees,
says, That PISMI^ES may be destroyed with Scalding Water, and disturbing their
Hills, or rubbing the Stem with Cow Dung, or a decoction of Tithy-Male, washing
the infested parts; this, says He, will insinuate, and chase them quite out of
the Chinks and Crevises, without prejudice to the Tree, and is a good
prevention of other Infirmities: They are also to be destroyed by laying Soot,
Saw-Dust, or refuse Tobacco, where they haunt, Chap. XXVII. Sect. 19.

Observations concerning BEES.
THE Eye of a BE is of a protuberant Oval Figure, black and all foraminulous,
drilled full of innumerable Holes like a Grater or Thimble; and, which is more
wonderful, we could plainly see, that the Holes were all of a square Figure
like an Honeycomb, and stuck full of small Hairs (like the Pores in our Skin)
and which (by blowing upon) you might see want to and fro; All which neat
particularities were more palpably discovered in the Eye of a great HUMBLE-BEE.
Now these Holes were not absolute perforations, but only dimples in their
Crustaceous ^unica Cornea; which it seems is full of little Pit-Holes, like the
Cap of a Thimble: For we cut out the Eye in a large HUMBLE-BEE and Crecket, and
bared the Shell or Horney-Coat of the Eye; and laying either the Unequal or
Concave sid^ upwards (upon the Object Plate) I could easily perceive the little
Holes or Dimples formerly mentioned. So that, by the favor of our Microscope.
I have seen more in One Hour, than that Famous BEE-Master Aristomachus did in
his Fifty Years Contemplation of those Laborious Insects.

If you divide the BE (or HUMBLE-BEE especially) near the Neck, you shall,
without help of the Glass, see the Heart beat most lively, which is a White
Pulsing Vesicle.

The Stings in all BEES are hollow and tubulous (like a Shoomaker's- Punch) so
that when they prick the Flesh, they do also, through that Channel, transfuse
the Poison into it: For if you take a BE, Wasp, or HUMBLE-BEE especially, and
gently squeeze her Tail, so that you may see the Sting, you shall perceive a
drop of Diaphanous Liquor at the very end of it, which if you wipe off, you
shall distinctly see it renewed again, that Humor passing down the Cavity into
the end thereof. POWER's Microscop. Observe. page 3, 4.

The Sting of a BE seems to be a Weapon of Offense, and is as great an
instance, that Nature did really intend Revenge as any, and that First, because
there seems to be no other use of it. Secondly, by Reason of its admirable
shape, seeming to be purposely shaped for that very end. Thirdly, from the
Virulency of the Liquor it ejects, and the sad Effects and Symptoms that follow
it.

But whatever be the Use of it, certain it is, that the Structure of it is very
admirable; what it appears to the Naked Eye, I need not describe, the Thing
being known almost to every One; but it appears through the Microscope, to
consist of Two parts, the One a Sheath, without a Chape or top, shaped almost
like the Holster of a Pistol; this Sheath I could most plainly perceive to be
hollow, and to contain in it, both a Sword or Dart, and the Poisonous Liquor
that causes the Pain. The Sheath or Case seemed to have several Joints or
Settings together, it was armed moreover near the top, with several Crooks or
Forks on one side, and on the other, each of which seemed like so many Thorns
growing on a Briar, or rather like so many Cat's Claws; for the Crooks
themselves seemed to be little sharp transparent Points or Claws, growing out
of little Protuberancies on the side of the Sheath; and from several
particulars, I suppose the Animal has a power of displaying them, and shutting
them in again, as it pleases, as a Cat does its (...), or as an Adder or Viper
can its Teeth or Fangs.

The other part of the Sting was the Sword, as I may so call it, which is
Sheathed, as it were, in it; the top of which appears quite through at the
smaller end, just as if the Chape of the Sheath of a Sword were l^st, and the
end of it appeared beyond the Scabbard; the end of this Dart was very sharp,
and it was armed likewise with the like Tenterbooks or Claws with those of the
Sheath: These Crooks, I am very apt to think, can be closed up also, or laid
flat to the sides of the Sword when it is drawn into the Scabbard, as I have
several times observed it to be, and can be spread again, or extended,
whenever the Animal pleases.

The Consideration of which very pretty Structure, has hinted to me, that
certainly the Use of these Claws seems to be very Considerable, as to the Main
end of this Instrument, for the drawing in, and holding the Sting in the Flesh;
for the point being very sharp, the top of the Sting or Dagger is very easily
thrust into an Animal's Body, which being once ^ntred, the BE, by endeavoring
to pull it into the Sheath, draws (by Reason of the Cro^ks which lay hold of
the Skin on either side) the top of the Sheath into the Skin after it, and the
Crooks being entered, when the BE endeavors to thrust out the top of the Sting
out of the Sheath again, they lay hold of the Skin on either side, and so not
only keep the Sheath from sliding back, but helps the top inwards, and thus, by
an alternate and successive retracting and emitting of the Sting in and out of
the Sheath, the little enraged Creature by degrees makes his revengful Weapon
pierce the toughest and thickest Hides of his Enemies, in so much that some few
of these stout and resolute Soldiers with these little Engines, do often put to
flight a huge Masty Bear, one of their deadly Enemies, and thereby show the
World, how much more considerable in War a few skilful Engineers, and resolute
Soldiers politickly ordered, that know how to manage such Engines, are, than a
vast unweildy rude force, that confides in, and Acts only by, its strength. But
(to proceed) that he thus gets in his Sting into the Skin, I conjecture,
because, when I have observed this Creature living, I have found it to move the
Sting thus, to and fro, and thereby also, perhaps, does as 'twere, pump or
force out the Poisonous Liquor, and make it hang at the end of the Sheath in a
drop. The Crooks, I suppose also, to be the cause why these angry Creatures,
hastily removing themselves from their Revenge, do often leave these Weapons
behind them, Sheathed, as 'twere in the Flesh, and, by that Means, cause the
painful Symptoms to be greater, and more lasting, which are very probably
caused, partly by the piercing and tearing of the Skin, by the Sting, but
chiefly by the Corrosive and Poisonous Liquor that is by this Syringe-Pipe
conveyed among the Sensitive Parts, and thereby more easily gnaws and corrodes
those tender Fibers. HOOK's Microg. Page 163, 164.

Those Two Learned and Ingenious Persons, Dr. Edmund King, and Mr. Francis
Willoughby, give an account of a sort of Wild BE, which breeds in the Stocks
of old Willows. Curious to Observe. They first bore a Canale in the Stock,
which, for more Warmth, they Furnish afterward with Hangings, made of
Rose-leaves, so rolled up, as to be Contiguous round about to the sides of the
Canale. And to finish their Work, they divide the whole into several Rooms or
Nests, with round Pieces of the same leaves. See this more at large, in the
PHILOSOPH. TRANSACT. Numb. 65.

The under or hinder Wings of a BE, are the least; that they may not incommode
his fl^ght. In Windy Weather, BEES often hold a little Stone in their hinder
Feet; which serves as a balast to make them Sail through the Air more Steadily.
M^V F. De INSECT. Cap 1.

The Humming of BEES, is an unequal Buzzing; and is conceived by some of the
Ancients, not to come forth at their Mouth, but to be an Inward Sound: But it
may be, it is neither; but from the motion of their Wings; for, it is not heard
but when they Stir. BACON's Not. Hist.

Sugar has put down the use of Honey; insomuch as we have lost those
Observations, and Preparations of Honey, which the Ancients had, when it was
more valued. First, it seems that there was in Old Time, Tree-Honey, as well
as BE- Honey, which was the Tear or Blood issuing from the Tree: Insomuch as
one of the Ancients relates, that in Tribesond there was Honey issuing from
the Box-Trees, which made Men mad. Again, in Ancient Time, there was a kind of
Honey, which either of its own Nature, or by art, would grow as Hard as Sugar;
And was not so Lushious as ours. IDEM Ibid.

The Honey-Bag, is the Stomach, which they always fill to Satisfy, and to
spare; Vomiting up the greater part of the Honey, to be kept against Winter.

The History of BEES, is the best that Aristotle has given us, of any one
Animal. Of their Polity, Generation, Conservation, Diseases, and Use: See also
Moufet, Butler, and a late Treatise of Mr. Rusden. All that Authors speak of
the Spontaneous Generation of BEES, is Fabulous. The Ashes of BEES are put into
most Compositions for Breeding of Hair, GREW's Mus. REG. SOC. Page 155.

Observations concerning the GLOWORM.
HER Eyes (which are Two small black Points or Specks of Iett) are Pent-hous'd
under the broad Flat Cap or Plate which covers her head; which obscure
Situation, together with their exceeding exiguity, make them undiscernable to
common Spectators. Yet in the Microscope they appear very fair, like black
Polished Iett or Marble, Semi-globular, and all foraminulous, or full of small
but very curious Persorations, (as in common Flies.) Her two Horns are all
joynted and degreed like the stops in the Germination of some Plants, as
Horse-tail and Canes: Under which she has two other small Horns or Pointers,
of the same Stuff and fashion. If you take hold of her Horns, you may draw out
her Eyes, and cut them out, and so lay them on your Object Plate and see them
distinctly.

This is that Night-Animal with its Lanthorn in its Tail; that creeping Star
that seems to out shine those of the Firmament, and to ou^vye them too in this
property especially; that whereas the Celestial-Lights are quite obscured by
the Int^rposition of a small Cloud, this Terrestrial-Star is more Enlivened and
Enkindl'd thereby, whose pleasant sulgour no Darkness is able to Eclipse.
POWER's Microscop. Observe. Page 23, 24.

The Nature of the GLOWORM is hitherto not well Observed. Thus much we see,
that they breed chiefly in the hotest Months of Summer; And that they breed not
in the open Air, but in Bushes and Hedges. Whereby it may be conceived, that
the Spirit of them is very fine, and not to be refined, but by Summers Heats:
And again, that by reason of the Fineness it does easily exhale. In Italy, and
the Hotter Countries, there is a Fly they call Lucciole, that Shines as the
GLO-WORM does; and it may be is the Flying GLO-WORM. But that Fly is chiefly
upon Fens and Marshes. But yet the Two former Observations hold; for they are
not seen, but in the Heat of Summer; and Sedge or other Green of the Fens, give
as good Shade, as Bushes. It may be the GLO-WORMS of the Cold Countries Ripen
not so far as to be Winged. BACON's Not. Hist.

The FLYING GLO-WORMS are in Italy every where to be seen in Summer Time. These
Flying or Winged GLO-WORMS are nothing else but the Males of the Common
Creeping or Unwing'd GLO-WORMS. Fabius Columna, relates, that Carolus
Vintimiglia of Palermo in Sicily, having out of Curiosity kept many Unwinged
GLO-WORMS in a Glass, did put in among them a Flying one, which presently in
his Sight did Couple with them one by one, after the manner of Silkworms; and
that the next day the Vnwinged ones, or Females, began to lay their Eggs. That
the Males are also Flying Insects in England, though they do but rarely or not
at all shine with us, we are assured by an Eye Witness; who saw them in
Conjunction with the Common shining Vnwinged GLO-WORMS. Here by the way it may
not be amiss to impart to the Reader a discovery made by a certain Gentleman,
and Communicated to me by Francis Iessop Esquire which is, that those reputed
Meteors called in Latin Ignes Fatui, and known in England by the Conceited
Names of Jack with a Lanthorn, and Will with a Wisp, are nothing else but
swarms of these Flying GLO-WORMS. Which if true, we may give an easy account
of those strange Phoenomena of these supposed Fires, viz. their sudden Motion
from Place to Place, and leading Travelers that follow them into Bogs and
Precipices. IOH. RAY's Observat. Topograph. Page 409.410.

The Cicindela Volans, or Flying GLO-WORM, tho it has been pretty well
described by several Writers that treat of Insects, yet I think has been by
none mentioned to be found in England, and indeed it is very rare, but I have
happened to catch twice of them at Northaw in Hertford-shire; First about
Midsummer 1680, and for a Fortnight in June 1684. they slew about the Candle as
soon as it grew Dark; at both which times the Weather was very Hot, and it may
be it Shines only at such Seasons, tho the Animal be easy enough to be met
withal Winged when it Shines not, and without Wings shining, which is the
Common GLO-WORM.

Aldrovandus affirms, Ovis quae parit Cicindela, Erucam quandam fieri, and ex
hac tandem alatam gigni, etc. It is much to the same purpose described by
Moufet and Thomas Bartholin in his Treatise De luce Animalium: Save that they
both, I think, mistake in allowing the Male only to have Wings, whereas they
both fly alike, as we may conclude was known to Julius Scaliger, Exercit. 191,
from a Place it seems not regarded, tho Cited by Moufet, where he says,
Cicindelam Volantem cum suo M^r^ in Coitu deprehendi, and c. The same which
happened to (...), for I once caught the Male and F^^^l^ Coupl'd, and could
Observe no difference between them, except in Size, the Female being a little
the larger, for they both shined alike. Its Light was very Vivid, so as to be
seen plainly when a Candle was in the Room, but the Vibrations thereof were
unequal, and the Color Greenish, like that of the Creeping GLO-WORM. The
Luminous Part was two small Specks on the under si^e of the Tail at its end.
The shinin^ continued for a little while after the Tail was cut off, tho it
sensibly decayed, till at last it went quite out. Whether it shined longer than
the life remained in that Part (which will live for a Considerable time in all
Insects, after it has been severed from the Body,) I much doubt; and Moufet
says, Clarissimum istum Splendorem una cum Spiritu Vitali prorsus evanescere.
Possibly the use of this Light is to be a Lantern to the Insect in catching its
Prey, and to direct its Course by in the Night, which is made probable, by the
Position of it on the under Part of the Tail, so that by bending the same
downward (as I always observed it to do,) it gives a light forward upon the
Prey or Object: The Luminous Rays in the mean time not being at all
incommodious to its sight, as they would have been, if this Torch had been
carried before it. This Conjecture is also favored by the placing of the Eyes,
which are on the under Part of the Head, not on the Top. I observed also that
it could, and did by some contrivance Cover its Light, and make a kind of Dark
Lanthorn.

This Insect appears to be of the Beetle kind; it is of a dark brown Color
unpolisht, when the Case Wings are opened, it extends Two very large Membranous
Wings, fastened to the upper part of the Thorax; its head is Covered as it we^e
were with a Shield, or broad-brim'd Hat.

The Two Eyes under the broad Covering are black, and very large, making almost
the whole Head; there being little else to be seen: these are Movable, so that
the Animal can thrust them forward to the edge of its Hat. From between these
are discovered the Two hairy feelers, or perhaps Brushes to cleanse the Eyes.
Between these Eyes and the Thorax lies the Mouth: On the Thorax are Six Legs
almost all of a Length. The Tail is made of Seven Shelly Rings, at the last of
which are visible the Two Shining Points. RICHARD WALLER Esquire his Observe.
PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 167.

The Ingenious Mr. John Templer, in his accurate Observations upon this Insect,
one whereof he kept for some days in a Box, to enable him the better to make
his Remarks, says, That he never saw her Shine without some Sensible Motion
either in her Body or Legs; and that in her Clearest Shining she extends her
Body a Third Part beyond its usual Length.

He further Observes, That, if his Senses fail him not, she emits a Sensible
Heat in her Clear Shining. PHILOSOPH. TRANSACT. Numb. 72.

Wondrous things are promised from the GLOWORM; thereof Perpetual Lights are
pretended, and Waters said to be distilled, which afford a Luster in the Night;
and this is asserted by Carden, Albertus, Gaudentinus, Mizaldus, and many more.
But hereto we cannot with reason assent; for the Light made by this Animal,
depends upon a Living Spirit, and seems by some Vital Irradiation to be
actuated into this Luster. For, when they are dead, they Shine not, nor always
while they are alive, but are obscure, or give Light, according to the
Disfusion of this Spirit, and the Protrusion of their Lumino^s Parts, as
Observation will instruct us. For this Flammeous Light is not over all the
Body, but only visible on the inward side; in a small White part near the Tail.
When this is full, and seems protruded, there arises a Flame of a Circular
Figure, and Emrald-Green Color; which is more Discernable in any Dark place,
than day; but when it falls and seems contracted, the Light disappears, and
the Color of that part only remains. Now this Light, as it appears and
disappeareth in their Life, so does it go quite out at their Death. As we have
Observed in some, which, preserved in fresh Grass, have Lived and Shined
Eighteen Days; but as they declined, their Light grew Languid, and at last went
out with their Lives. BROWN's Vulg. Errors.

Observations concerning SPIDERS.
NOW let us see what we can discover in Ovid's Lydian Spinstress, that proud
Madam, which Pallas, for her Rivalship, transformed into the SPIDER; which has
not only the Character of Aristotle, but of Solomon himself, for a Wise and
Prudent Animal, and therefore a fit Residentiary in the Court of Kings.

Of Domestic SPIDERS there are Two Sorts; One with longer Legs, and a little
Body, and the other contrariwise.

The First eminent thing we found in these House-SPIDERS, were their Eyes,
which in some were Four, in some Six, and in some Eight, according to the
proportion of their bulk, and length of their Legs. These Eyes are placed all
in the forefront of their Head (which is round, and without any Neck) all
diaphanou^ and transparent, like a Locket of Diamonds, or ^ Set of round
Crystal Beads: So that well might Muffet say of those Philosophers that held
them blind, Sane coecutiunt illi summo Meridie, qui videre ipsas non vident
n^que intelligunt: Far better might he have said it, if his Eyes had had the
assistance of our Microscope.

Neither wonder, why Providence should be so Anomalous in this Animal, more
than in any other we know of ( Argus's Head being fixed to Arachne's
Shoulders.) For, First: Since they wanting a Neck cannot move their Head, it is
requisite that defect should be supplied by the multiplicity of Eyes. Secondly:
Since they were to live by catching so nimble a Prey as a Fly is, they ought
to see her every way, and to take her per Saltum (as they do) without any
motion of their Head to discover her; which motion would have scared away so
timorous an Insect.

They have a very puffy light Body, of an Oval Figure, covered with a sleek
thin Skin; which they change once a Month, says Muffet; though I hardly believe
they cast their Spoils so often.

Their Skin is not pellucid, for I could never discover any pulsing Particle
within them: She has Eight Legs, four on each side, split into small oblong
Fingers at the Ends, by which she makes her curious Web-Work. Both Body and
Limbs is all stuck over with small Silver-Hairs, which the very Air will waft
to and fro, as you may see in the Microscope. POWER's Microscop. Observe. page
11, 12.

There are Multitudes of several sorts of SPIDERS, whose Eyes, and most other
Parts and Properties, are so exceedingly different from one another, that it
would be almost endless to describe them, as Some with Six Eyes, placed in
quite another Order; Others with Eight Eyes, others with fewer, and Some with
more. They all seem to be Creatures of Prey, and to feed on other small
Insects, but their ways of catching them seem very differing: The Shepherd
SPIDER by running on his Prey; The Hunting SPIDER by leaping on it; Other Sorts
weave Nets, or Cobwebs, whereby they ensnare them, Nature having both sitted
them with Materials and Tools, and taught them how to Work and Weave their
Nets, and to lie perdue, and to watch diligently to run on any Fly, as soon as
ever entangl'd.

Their Thread or Web seems to be Spun out of some Viscous kind of Excrement,
lying in their Belly, which, though soft when drawn out, is presently, by Reason
of its smallness, hardened and dried by the Ambiet Air; examining several of
which with my Microscope, I found them to appear much like White Horse-Hair, or
some such transparent horny substance, and to be of very differing Magnitudes;
Some appearing as big as a Pig's Bristle; Others equal to a HorseHair; Others
no bigger than a Man's Hair; Others yet smaller and finer. I observed further,
that the radiating Chords of the Web were much bigger, and smoother than those
that were Woven round, which seemed smaller, and all over knotted or pearl'd,
with small transparent Globules, not unlike small Crystal-Beads or Seed-Pearls,
thin strung on a Clew of Silk; which, whether they were to Spun by the SPIDER,
or by the adventitous Moisture of a Fogg (which I have observed to cover all
these Filaments with such Crystalline Beads) I will not now dispute. HOOK's
Microg. Observe. 48.

The long Threads in the Air in Summer, and especially toward September, have
been a strange puzzle to the Wiser World. It would divert you, though you know
them as well as I, if I should here reckon up the ridiculous Opinions
concerning them: but I shall omit them, and proceed to tell you the certain and
immediate Authors of them, and how they make them.

I say then, that all SPIDERS, that Spin in a Thread, (those, which we call
Shepherds, or longLegg'd SPIDERS, never do;) are the Makers of these Threads,
so much wondered at, and in such infinite quantities every where.

I sent you the last Summer a Catalogue of Thirty sorts of SPIDERS, that I had
distinguished here with us in England; and I must confess, I had well near
completed that Number, with many other Experiments concerning them, before I
discovered this Secret.

I had exactly Marked all the ways of Weaving, used by any sorts of them, and
in those admirable Works I had ever noted that they still let down the Thread,
they made use of; and drew it after them. Happily at length, in nearly
attending on One, that wrought a Net, I saw him suddenly in the Mid-Work to
desist, and turning his Tail into the Wind to dart out a Thread with the same
violence and stream, as we see Water spout out of a Spring: This Thread taken
up by the Wind, was in a moment emitted some Fathoms long, still issuing out of
the Belly of the Animal; by and by the SPIDER leapt into the Air, and the
Thread mounted her up swiftly.

After this Discovery, I made the like Observation in almost all the sorts of
SPIDERS, I had before distinguished; and I found the Air filled with Young and
Old, sailing on their Threads, and undoubtedly seizing Gnats and other Insects
in their passage; there being often as manifest Signs of Slaughter, as Legs,
Wings of Flies, etc. on these Threads, as in their Webs below.

One thing yet was a Wonder to me, viz. That many of these Threads, that came
down out of the Air, were not single, but snarl'd and with complicable Wooly
Locks, sometimes more, sometimes less; and that on these I did not always find
SPIDERS, though many times I had found Two or Three upon One of them: Whereas
when they first flew up, the Thread was still single, or but little tangl'd,
or, it may be, thicker in one place than another. In the End, by good attention
I plainly found, what satisfied me abundantly, and that was this; That I
observed them to get to the top of a Stalk or Bough, or some such like thing,
where they Exercise this Darting of Threads into the Air, and if they had not
a mind to sail, they either swiftly drew it up again, winding it up with their
Fore-Feet over their Head into a Lock; Or break it off short, and let the Air
carry it away. This they will do many times together, and you may see some of
them, that have Chains of these Locks, or Snarl'd Thread before them, and yet
not taken flight.

Again, I found, that after the first flight, all the time of their Sailing
they make Locks, still Darting forth fresh supplies of Thread to sport and sail
by.

It is further to be Noted, that these Complicated Threads are much more
tender, than our House-Webbs.

In Winter and at Christmas, I have observed them busy a Darting, but few of
them sail then, and therefore but single Threads only are to be seen; And
besides, they are but the Young Ones of last Autumns hatch, that are then
employed; and it is more than probable, that the great Ropes of Autumn are made
only by the great Ones, and upon long Passages and Summer Weather, when great
Numbers of Prey may invite them to stay longer up. MARTIN LISTER's Observe. See
the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 50.

The Learned and Ingenious Mr. King, Chaplain to Mr. Chetwynd of Staffordshire,
tells us, that SPIDERS in projecting a Thread cross a Room in plano Horizontis
(which they do for their easier and more direct passage) raise themselves on
their Legs, as high as they can, setting them very straight and stiff, and
turning their hinder Parts up higher than usual, they will shoot out a Thread
to a great distance; which when fastened where they would have it, with their
Forelegs they will wind up the Thread shorter till it is very straight, as the
Funambuli strain their Ropes, and then like them too, will get upon it, and run
from one end to the other.

And as to their Sailing at the Ends of these Threads, He further observed, not
only that they Sailed much swifter than any Wind then stirring could carry
them, but that at the same time they constantly Sailed all the same way, which
was not directly with, but as he once noted at Eight Points distance, as it
were with a Side-Wind; which plainly shows, that they do not only Row, but
Steer too, with the motion of their Feet, according as directed by some Secret
Instinct they have in them. PLOT of Staffordshire, Page 239.

Mr. Richard Stafford in a Letter to the Ingenious Mr. Oldenburg, (an Extract
whereof you have in the Philos. Transact. Numb. 40.) says, That the Web of a
Bermuda-SPIDER is so strong, as to snare a Bird is big as a Thrush.

At Gresham College, they have some of this Web, where it is wound upon a
Paper like Raw Silk.

I know there are some that question the truth of the things related of the
TARANTATI (as the Italians call them that are bit by the TARANTULA SPIDER) and
I easily grant, that some Fictions may have been suffered to pass under the
Countenance of so strange a Truth. But besides the Affirmations of some Learned
Men, as well Physicians as others, my Doubts have been much removed by the
Accounts I have received from an Ingenious Acquaintance of mine own, who at
TARENTUM it self, whence the Insect takes its Name, and elsewhere, saw many
bitten Persons in their Dances, some in public and some in private places, and
amongst the rest a Phisician, on whom the Tune that fitted his Distemper had
the same Operation as on the other Patients. And the Learned Epiphanius
Ferdinandus, who Practiced Physic in Apulia and Calabria for many Years, not
only delivers, upon his own Personal Observation, several Narratives of the
Effects of Music upon the TARANTATI, but invites any that may doubt of the
Truth of such Narratives to repair to him at a fit Season, undertaking to
convince them by Ocular Demonstration. ROB. BOTLE of lanquid motion, page 75,
76.

Observations concerning the SILKWORM.
THE use of SILK was brought over from the East Indies into Europe above a
Thousand Years since, and was particularly introduced into Italy by Two
Religious Men, who brought thither the Grain of it somewhat above Three Hundred
Years since; in which Country of Italy, that Commodity has been much
Cultivated, and that upon several Accounts; as, the preciousness of it, the
easy Transportation from one place to another, by Reason of its lightness: And
lastly, for that it is one of the principal Instruments of Luxury, which never
wanted Partisans and Abettors in any Age, not to mention the great Advantages
and Wealth attending the Manufacture of it. The Latin Word SERICUM is received
from that of SERES, an Oriental People, who were more Sedulous in the
Cultivation of it than any other: And the same thing that has happened to
this, as to many other Excellent Productions derived from mean an despicable
Principles. For the Animal, from whose Labor we have the SILK, is an Insect,
as are all those which Spin, to wit, the Spider and the Caterpillar, and it
differs in nothing from this latter, save that the Caterpillar has a little
Hairiness, and the Silk of the Silkworm is stronger than the Web of the
Caterpillar, and of another Color, but as to figure and bulk there is little
difference between them. Whereto may be added, that their production is much at
one, as being as it were hatched of certain Eggs, living on Leaves, enclosing
themselves in certain Webs, out of which they make their way, after they are
become a kind of Butterflies, by a strange Metamorphosis, which forces them
from one Extremity to another, That is, from the Nature of Reptiles to that of
Volatiles: Which Transformation is such, as, were it not for the frequency of
it, might be placed among the greatest Miracles of Nature, considering the
great difference there is between those Two Forms. And that indeed is such, as
has given some occasion to doubt, whether the SILKWORM becoming a BUTTERFLY
did not change its Species, as certainly it would, were it not that every thing
produces its like; and the SILKWORM deriving its Birth from the Seed of the
BUTTERFLY, it is an Argument that both are of the same Species. Thus much as to
their Progress. The Kingdom of Spain commonly furnishes us with the best Grain
or Seed of these Worms, which are like Heads of Pins, but black, or resembling
Rape-Seed, somewhat flatted on both sides: This Grain, sometime in the Month of
April, being put between two warm Pillows, or exposed to the Sun, enclosed in
the Linings of ones Clothes, or otherwise chased by a moderate Heat, but
without any Moisture, there are produced o^ it little certain Worms of the same
Color, that is, black at their first coming forth, which by Reason of their
smallness, as resembling the Points of Needles, pass through certain little
Holes made in a Paper, wherewith they are covered, and fasten themselves on the
Mulberry-Leaves, which are also placed on the said Paper full of little Holes,
upon which Leaves all the best Grain being hatched, within Five or Six Days,
goes creeping after the first Worm that gets out of her Shell; all that is
hatched afterward never coming to any good. These Worms are thence
transported, with the Leaves laid upon little Boards or Hurdles, into a
temperate place, and disposed in a lightsome and spacious Room, where they are
Entertained with fresh Leaves twice a Day, among which those of the White
Mulberry make finer SILK, than those of the Black; for want whereof, the Leaves
of the Rose-Bush, Lettice, and some others may be used: But though the Worm
makes a shift to Subsist by that Nourishment, yet either it will not Spin at
all, or the SILK will be like the Web or Clue wrought by the Caterpillars. Thus
it feeds for the space of Forty Days, during which it becomes Gray, and changes
its Color four times, not eating for some Days before each Change, by reason
of the fullness it is then sensible of. The Worm is subject to certain
Disseases; and those oblige such as have the care of them to remove them out of
one Room into another, and that even when they are dying in great quantities;
Perfume, Incense, Benjamin, Vinegar, and Wine recovering and comforting them;
as also the smell of broiled Bacon. To prevent which Diseases, and the Assaults
of Flies and Pismires, who will make havoc among them, they are very carefully
to be kept clean, the Boards on which the Leaves lie to be rubbed with
Wormwood, or sprinkled with Wine, which must be well dried up before they come
near them, all moisture being hurtful to them, as also Salt, or the hands that
have handled it. All harsh sounds, as those of the discharging of Muskets,
Bells, and Trumpets, destroy them; nay, the strong Breaths of those who come
near them, especially such as have eaten or handled Garlic or Onions, are very
prejudicial to them. When their time of Spinning draws nigh, which is about Six
Weeks after their being first alive at which time they are about the bigness of
a Man's little Finger, more transparent than they use to be, and the little
Snowt so lengthned, as that it represents the form of a Nose, the Animal by an
extraordinary motion, expresses the inconvenience it endures by Reason of its
burden: Then is it cleans'd oftener, and there is so much the less given it to
eat, and afterward they set on the Boards some dried Branches of Heath, Broom,
or Vines, and above all of Birch, as being the most delicate and least prickly,
lest it should prick the Worm, or entangle the SILK. Then you shall see them
fasten their first Threads, and casting out of their Mouths a kind of coarse
Sleeve SILK, and afterward that which is finer and more perfect, in one
continued Thread, accompanied with a Gum, which makes it stick one to another,
so that the Worm does encompass it self with that SILK, which is commonly
Yellow, very seldom Greenish or White, and being come to the end of the Clue,
has only so much room as it takes up. Then, for the space of Fifteen Days, it
remains immovable, and is covered with a Skin of Film like that which covers
the Fruit of the Pine Tree, under its Shell, and which appears not till after
that is broken. But these Fifteen Days being ove^ (of which those will abate
some, who are desirous to make advantage of the SILK, and trouble not
themselves what becomes of the Grain) the SILKWORM, though it seemed to have
been dead, breaks through its Web, and comes out in the form of a White and
Horned BUTTERFLY, bearing a certain Image of the Resurrection; then coming
together, the Male, which is smaller, coupling with the Female that is bigger,
the latter sheds her Seed upon a clean Paper, spread under her for the
Reception of it. The Seed being carefully put into a Box. is either kept for
the next Year, or sold by the Ounce; they commonly keep as much as comes from a
Hundred Males, and so many Females; the Grain or Seed whereof, before their
Copulation, is barren. Now, if they be desirous to get SILK out of it, which is
the principle Advantage, in order to which the Worms are kept, about Fifteen
Days after they are completed, these Webs are cast into Water, somewhat better
than lukewarm, and the Women and Children employed about that Work, stir the
Water with an handful of Birch, till they have fastened on Seven or Eight Ends
of SILK, which having done, they wind it up into Skains, and that is the Raw
SILK. PHILOS. CONFER. of the VIRTUOSI of France, Vol. 2. Page 402, 403, 404.

It Is to be imagined that the use of SILK was absolutely unknown to the Jews,
especially when we consider, that in the Works of that (...) of the Worm the
Head of the Fly. But Sig. Malpighius makes no mention hereof; neither is it any
way likely to be so. GREW's Mus. Reg. Soc. Page 176.

An Ingenious Gentlewoman of my Acquaintance, Wise to a Learned Phisician,
taking much Pleasure to keep SILKWORMS, had once the Curiosity to draw out one
of the Oval Cases, (which the SILKWORM Spins, not, as it is commonly thought,
out of its Belly, but out of the Mouth, whence I have taken Pleasure to draw it
out with my Fingers,) into all the SILKENWire it was made up of, which, to the
great Wonder as well of her Husband, as her self, who both informed me of it,
appeared to be by Measure a great deal above Three Hundred Yards, and yet
weighed but two Grains and a half: So that each Cylindrically shaped Grain of
SILK may well be reckoned to be at least One Hundred and Twenty Yards long. ROB
BOTLE of E^fluviums, Page XI.

Observations concerning SNAKES, SERPENTS, or VIPRRS.
IN Barbados there are SNAKES about a Yard and a half long, that will slide up
the Perpendicular Wall of a House out of one Room into another. A greater
agility without Feet, than we see in most Creatures that have Four. Much
helped, as it should seem, by their great length; whereby they can, in an
instant, reduce themselves into so many more undulations for their better
ascent. GREW's Mus. REG. SOC.

In Brasile, says Job. de Laet, there are SNAKES found sometimes 25 or 30 Foot
long. They have also a sort of SERPENT called the RATTLE-SNAKE, from the Rattle
at the end of his Tail. By this Rattle, those that Travel through the Fields,
or along the Highways, are warned to avoid coming near so noxious a Creature.
For those

He also observes, that where^ commonly it has hitherto bee^ believed, that
the Poison of VIPERS being swallowed, was prese^ Death; He, after many
reiterate Experiments, tells us, that in V^PERS there is neither Humou^ nor
Excrement, nor any part, nay not the Gall it self, that, being taken into the
Body, kills. And H^ assures us, that he has seen Me^ eat, and has often made
Brute Animals swallow all that is esteemed most poisonous in a VIPER, ye^
without the least Mischief to them And therefore what some Author have
affirmed, viz. That it is Mortal to eat of the Flesh of Creature killed by
VIPERS, Or to drink o^ the Wine wherein VIPERS have been drowned; Or to such
the Wounds that have been made by them, is by this Author observed to be
utterly salse. For He affirms That many Persons have eaten Pullets and Pigeons,
bitten by VIPERS, without finding any alteration from it in their Health. On
the contrary, He declares, That it is a Sovereign Remedy against the biting of
VIPERS, to suck the Wound; alleging an Experiment made upon a Dog, which he
caused to be bitten by a VIPER at the Nose, who, by licking his own Wound,
saved his Life. Which He affirms by the Example of those People, Celebrated in
History by the Name of Marsi and Psilli, whose Employment it was to heal those
that had been bitten by SERPENTS, by sucking their Wounds.

Again, He adds, That although Galen, and many Modern Physicians, do affirm, that
there is nothing, which causes so much Thirst, as VIPERS-Flesh, yet he has
Experimented the contrary, and known diverse Persons, who were wont to eat the
Flesh of VIPERS every Meal, and yet did assure him, They never were less dry,
than when they observed that kind of Diet. (...) the Experiment and found no
such matter: Whereupon I got leave (in the absence of the Family) to enclose my
SNAKE in the Court, before the Right Honorable the Lord Anglesey's House, to
see what time would produce, leaving the Gardener in trust to observe it
strictly, who found it, indeed, after three Weeks time dead, without any
sensible external hurt.

How this should come to pass, is a Question indeed not easy to determine; but
certainly it must not be ascribed to the Talismanical Figure of the Stone
Ophiomorphites to be found about Adderbury, and in most Blue Clays, whereof
there are plenty in this Country. Since these are to be met with about Oxford
too, and many other places, where there are SNAKES enough. Beside, we are
informed by Cardan, that Albertus Magnus had a Stone, that being naturally
marked with the Figure of a SERPENT, had this no less admirable than contrary
Virtue, that if it were put into a place that was haunted with SERPENTS, it
would draw them all to it. Much rather may we subscribe to the Cause assigned
by Pliny, who seems confidently to assert, that the Earth that is Blackish, and
stands much upon SaltPeter, is freer from Vermin than any other. To which we
may add, if need be, Sulphur and Vitriol, whereof there is plenty in these
parts of the Country; but whether by One, Two, or All these, though we dare not
pronounce, yet that it is caused by some such Mineral Steam disagreeable to the
Animal, I think we may be Confident. PLOT of Oxfordshire, page 187.

My Father in his Voyage to the Levant, giving an Account of what he observed
in Egypt, has, among other remarkable Things, this passage: Many Rarities of
living Creatures I saw in Gran Cairo, but the most Ingenious was a Nest of
Four-Legged SERPENTS, of Two Foot long, Black, and ugly, kept by a Frenchman,
who when he came to handle them, they would not endure him, but ran and hid in
their Hole; then would he take his Cittern, and play upon it; They, hearing his
Music, came all crawling to his Feet, and began to climb up him, till he gave
over playing, then away they ran. Sir HENR. BLOUNT's Voyage into the Levant,
Page 58, 59.

That which is mentioned by Sir Henry Blount about the Effect of Music upon
SERPENTS at Grand Cairo, may be not only confirmed but exceeded, by a strange
Relation that I had from a Person of unsuspected Credit. Which Narrative having
appeared to me so considerable, as well to deserve a place among my Adversaria,
I shall subjoyn that part of it which concerns our present Subject, in the
Words wherein I find it set down.

Sir I.C. A very candid and judicious Traveller, favoring me yesterday with a
Visit, told me among other remarkable Things relating to the East Indies,
(which Countries He had curiously visited,) that He, with diverse European
Merchants had seen, (and that if I mistake not, several times) an Indian, who
by many was thought to be a Magician, that kept tame SERPENTS of a great Bulk.
And that when the Owner of them played upon a Musical Instrument, these SERPENTS
would raise themselves upright into the Air, leaving upon the Ground but 3 or 4
Inches of their Tail, upon which they leaned for their Support. He added, that
at the same time that they erected their Bodies, they also stretched and
lengthened them in a strange and frightful manner; and whilst they were thus
slender, they were taller than He, or any Man of ordinary Stature. But that
which appeared to Him the most Wonderful and Surprising, was, that they
manifestly seemed to be very much affected with the Music they heard; insomuch
that some parts of the Tune would make them move to and fro with a surprising
agility, and some other Parts of it would cast them into a Posture, wherein
they seemed to be half asleep, and as it were to melt away with Pleasure. ROB.
BOTTLE of the Insalubrity and Salubrity of the Air, page 135, 136, 137.

The VIPER, says Sir Thomas Brown, from the Experience of Credible Persons, in
Case of fear, receives her Young Ones into her Mouth; which being over, they
return thence again. BROWN's Pseudod. Epidem.

The chief Use of VIPERS is for the making of Treacle, and for that purpose,
the young Feamales are the best, being taken in the Spring, after they have
been a while ou^ of their Dens.

The Indians, in some places, eat SNAKES very greedily.

Observations concerning TORTOISES.
DR. Grew says, That the SeaTortoise differs from the LandTortoise, chiefly,
in having a more rude, and softer Shell, and Feet rather like the Finns of a
Fish, as proper to Swim with.

Rondeletius affirms, That he Squirts the Water out at his Nostrils, in the
same manner as the Dolphin does at his Spout.

Trapham in his Discourse of Iamaica, Cap. 4. says, That in Generation, the
Embraces of the Male and Female do continue for a whole Lunary Month.

They abound in the Caribee and Lucayick Islands, and in Iamaica, as also in
the Red Sea.

I remember that in a place called the Camanas, which lies to the Lew-Ward of
Jamaica, the Sea TORTOISE (of which there are Five Sorts) or TURTLES, as some
call them, those Triple-Hearted Amphibious Creatures (for they have each of
them three distinct Hearts) being entangled in a Sain or Net, which was usually
set for the taking of them, or else being turned on their Backs on Land (for
then they cannot turn themselves on their Feet again) did always Sigh, Sob,
shed Tears, and mightily seem to Lament, as being most sensible of their
Destruction, and that they were in their Enemies hands. WILL. HUGHES's Pref. to
The American Physician.

Sir Philiberto Vernatti, late Resident in Iava Major, says, That he had seen
in those parts some SeaTORTOISES of Four Foot broad, in Oval Form, very low
Legged, but of that strength, that a Man might stand on one: That the manner of
catching them, was to turn them with a Fork upon their Backs. SPRAT's Hist. of
the ROYAL SOCIETY, page 170.

All the TORTOISES, from the Caribes to the Bay of Mexico and Honduras, repair
in Summer to the Cayman Islands, to lay their Eggs and to hatch there. They
Coot for Fourteen Days together, then lay in one Night some Three Hundred Eggs,
with White and Yolk, but no Shells: Then they Coot again, and lay in the Sand,
and so thrice. Then the Male is reduced to a kind of Gelly within, and blind,
and is so carried home by the Female. Their Fat is Green, but not offensive to
the Stomach, though you eat it as Broth, Stewed. Your Urine looks of a
YellowishGreen, and Oily, after eating it. Dr. STVBBES's Observe. Sailing from
England to the Caribe-Islands, in PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 27.

^^^ing an Hour or Two's stay, at ^e Caymans, I examined that Assertion of Mr.
Lygans, that a TORTOISE has Three Hearts, and I found it false. For, although
the resemblance of the Two Auricles be such, as also their Bodies or Flesh, as
to deceive the unwary Observer; yet is there but One Heart, triangular and
fleshy; the other Two are only the Auricles, yet of the same Shape and Body.
The Two Auricles move at a several time from the Heart, and they are distanc'd
from the Heart about an Inch; and the passage fleshy (as I remember) and
narrow, by which the Blood is insus'd into the Heart. This Heart has but One
Ventricle; yet are Three several Columns of Flesh, and receptacles in it, such
as are not in the Auricles -- The TORTOISES Bite much more than they Swallow,
so that the Sea is covered with the Grass, where they feed at the bottom. Once
in about half an Hour they come up, and fetch one Breath like a Sig^, and then
sink down again. And if out of the Water, they Breath somewhat oftener. If you
hurt them on Shore, as they lie on their Backs, the Tears will trickle from
their Eyes. You may keep them out of the Water Twenty Days and more, and yet
they will be so Fat as to be very good Meat, provided you give them twice a Day
about half a Pint of Salt Water. The Fat that is about their Guts, is Yellow,
though that of the Body be Green. The Head being cut off, dies instantly; and
if you take out the Heart, the motion continues not long. But any quantity of
the Flesh will move, if pricked, and also of it self, for many Hours after it
is cut into Quarters; and the very Joints of the Bones of the Shoulders and
Legs (answering our Omo-Plate and Thigh, yet within the Shell) have their
motion; and even though you prick only the Fat of it. Bu^ if you place these
parts of the TORTOISE in the Sun; they presently die. The Legs die as soon, in
a manner as cut off. STVBBES's Enlargement of the former Observe.
PHILOS.TRANSACT. Numb. 36.

Trapham in his Discourse of Iamaica, says, That the Flesh of a TORTOISE
makes a most pleasant Jelly: And that the Callapee, viz. the Belly-part so
called, baked, is an excellent Dish.

The Legs, says Schroder out of Solenander, applied to the part affected, are
a most Experienced Remedy in the Gout.

In Turkey, the Shells are used for Bucklers: In Tabrobana, (according to
Aelian) to cover their Houses: And in China, to make Girdles for Noble Men.

In the Kingdom of Tunquin in India, there ar^ infinite Number of TORTOISES,
which are esteemed such excellent Food, that the Tumquineses and Cochinchineses
do not believe they have entertained their Friends at a Banquet as they ought
to do, till the TORTOISES are brought in. Those two Nations pickle up great
Quantities of them, and send them abroad, which is a vast Trade among them; and
indeed the chiefest occasion of the Wars between them is, because the
Cochinchineses do all they can to hinder the Tunquineses to Fish for them,
alleging that those Seas and Islands, where they breed, belong to them.
Neither is the Meat but the Shell also of great esteem, and one of the most
considerable Commodities for Trade in Asia. TAVERNIER's Relat. of the Kingdom
of Tunquin, Cap. 3.

Observations concerning several Remarkable TREES.
IN the Islands of Solon and Timor in the East Indies, there grows a Tree
called the STINKING-TREE; and indeed, well may it be so called: For it
naturally smells like the strongest Humane Excrements, especially, as upon the
Emptying of a House of Office. Sir Philiberto Vernatti procured an Arm of this
TREE, and sent it to the ROYAL SOCIETY at Gresham College. Where, though it
has now been preserved many Years, yet seems to give as full and quick a Scent
as ever. Yet in burning, it yields no smell; as do Lignum Aloe, and some other
Woods. It Is ponderous, hard, and of the Color of English-Oak; and as that has
large Aer-Vessels; yet but few I should have conjectured, says Dr. Grew, that
this Wood belonged to the TREE called Ahovaj, which has a Stinking smell, but
that this is said to be the more odious when it burns. GREW's Mus. REG. SOC.
Page 180.

There is in Iamaica a sort of Tree called the SOAPE-TREE; the Berries whereof
(being as big as Bullets of Muskets) without any proportion of Salt-Lixiviate,
or Sulphur, or Oil, wash better than any Castile-SOAPE; but they rot the
Linen in time. The Negro's use them. Dr. STVBBES.

In the Caribe-Islands grows the Famous TREE called the Cabbage-Tree; which,
tho one would not imagine, I assure you, says Dr. Stubbes, is a sort of
Palm Tree: All that part which is eaten as the Cabbage, is, what sprouted out
that Year, and so is tender. If eaten raw, it is as good as New-Almonds; and if
boiled, it excels the best Cabbage. When that Top is ^ut off, the TREE dies.
The Dr. says, There was one of those TREES at Barbados, above Three Hundred
Foot high, as He was credibly informed. This TREE will never Rot, and when it is
dried, grows so hard, that you cannot drive a Nail into it. STVBBES Account of
the Carbie-Is^ands.

In Barbados there is a particular sort of TREE called the POYSON-TREE. Its
Leaves are full out as large and beautiful, as the Laurels, and so like, as not
to be known asunder. The People that have lived long there, say, it is not whole
some to be under the Shade of this TREE. The Workmen, as they cut them down,
are very careful of their Eyes; and those that have Cipers, put it over their
Faces; for if any of the Sap fly into their Eyes, they become Blind for a
Month. A Negro had two Horses to walk, which were left with him by two
Gentlemen; and the Horses beginning to fight, the Negro was afraid, and let
them go; and they running into the Wood together, stuck at one another, and
their Heels hitting some young TREES of this kind, struck the poisonous Juice
into one another Eyes, and so their Blindness parted the Fray, and they were
both led home Stone Blind, and continued so a Month, all the Hair and Skin
peeling off their Faces. Yet, of this Timber they make all, or the most part,
of the Pots they Cure their Sugar in; for being Sawed, and the Boards dried in
the Sun, the POISON vapors out. LIGON's Hist. of Barbados. page 68.

He also tells us of a certain Sort of POISONOUS CANE, so like the SUGAR-CANE,
as hardly to be discerned the one from the other: This Plant has this Quality,
that whosoever chews it, and sucks in any of the juice, will have his tongue,
mouth, and throat, so swelled, as to take away the faculty of Speech for two
days, and no remedy but patience. Ibidem Page 69.

Among the Rarities of the Malacca, or rather of the World, is the Arbor
Tristis, which bears Flowers only after Sunset, and sheds them so soon as the
Sun-rises, and this every Night in the Year. ROB. MORDEN's Geogr. Page 413.

In the Molucca Islands, in the East Indies, there is a certain Wood, which,
laid in the Fire, burns, sparkles, and flames, yet consumes not; and yet a Man
may rub it to Powder betwixt his Fingers, MANDELSLO's Travels into the Indies,
Page 133.

In the Philosophical Transactions we have an Account of a sort of
INCOMBUSTIBLE CLOTH, called Linum Asbestinum: which was esteemed by the
Ancients (though then more common, and perhaps better known than it is yet
amongst us) equally precious with the best of Pearls. But as great a Rarity as
it now is, it seems one Mr. Nicb. Wait, Merchant of London, has lately
procured a piece of it; an Account whereof he gives in a Letter to Dr. Plot, He
says, he received it from one Conco, a Natural Chinese, Resident in the City of
Batavia in the North East parts of India. Who* by means of Keayarear Sukradana
(likewise a Chinese, and formerly chief Customer to the old Sultan of Bantam)
did after several Years diligence, procure, from a great Mandarin in Lanquin (a
Province of China) near of a Yard of the said Cloth; and declared, that he was
credibly informed, that the Princes of Tartary, and others adjoining to them,
did use it in burning their Dead; and that it was said and believed by them, to
be made of the under part of the Root of a Tree growing in the Province of
Sutan; and was supposed, in like manner, to be made of the Todda Trees in
India: And that, of the upper part of the said Root, near the Surface of the
Ground, was made a finer Sort, which in three or four times burning, the said
Mr. Wait says, He has seen diminish almost half: They Report also, that out
of the said Tree there distills a Liquor, which not consuming, is used with a
Wiek made of the same Material with the Cloth, to burn in their Temples to
posterity.

Mr. Wait showed a Handkerchief or Pattern of this INCOMBUSTIBLE LINEN to the
ROYAL SOCIETY; which being measured, was found in length Nine Inches, between
the Fringe or Tassells; the Fringe at each end being three Inches more; so that
the whole was just a Foot in length; and the breadth was just half a Foot.

There were two Proofs of its resisting Fire, given at London: One, before some
of the Members of the R. Society, privately, Aug. 20.1684. when Oil was
permitted to be poured upon it whilst red hot, to enforce the Violence of the
Fire: Before it was put into the Fire this First Trial, it weighed one Ounce,
Six Drams, Sixteen Grains, and lost in the burning Two Drams, Five Grains.

The Second Experiment of it was public before the SOCIETY, Nov. 12.
following, when it weighed (as appears by the Iournal of the SOCIETY) before it
was put into the Fire, One Ounce, Three Drams, 18 Grains. Being put into a
clear Charcoal Fire, it was permitted to continue Red hot in it, for several
Minutes: When taken out (though red hot) it did not consume a piece of White
Paper, on which it was laid: It was presently Cool, and upon weighing it again,
was found to have lost one Dram, Six Grains. PHILOS. TRANSACT Numb. 172.

That this LINEN was very well known to the Ancients, beside that of Pliny, we
have the further Testimony of Caelius Rhodiginus, who agrees with the aforesaid
Account in Mr. Waits Letter to Dr. Plot, placing both the Materials and
Manufacture of it in India; and Paulus Venetus more particularly in Tartary,
the Emperor whereof, He says, sent a piece of it to Pope Alexander. It is also
mentioned by Varro; and Turnebus in his Commentary upon him, De lingua Latina.
And by all of them as a thing inconsumable by Fire. In these latter Ages;
Georg. Agricola tells us, that there was a Mantle of this LINEN at Vereburg in
Saxony; and Simon Majolus says, He saw another of it at Lovain exposed to the
Fire. Salmuth also acquaints us, that one ^odocattarus, a Cyprian Knight,
showed it publicly at Venice, throwing it into the Fire without scruple or
hurt; and Mr. Lassells saw a piece of it in the Curious Cabinet of Manfred
Septalla, Canon of Milan. Mr. Ray was showed a Purse of it by the Prince
Palatin at Heidleberg, which he saw put into a Pan of burning Charcoal till it
was red hot, which when taken out and cool, he could not perceive had received
any harm; and we are told in the Burgundian Philosophy, of a long Rope of it,
sent from Signior Bocconi to the French King, and kept by Monsieur Marchand in
the King's Gardens at Paris, which though steeped in Oil, and put in the Fire,
is not consumed. To which add, that we have now seen a piece of this LINEN
pass the fiery Trial both at London and Oxford. So that it seems to have been
known in all Ages, all describing it after the same manner, as a thing so
insuperable by Fire, that it only Cleanses and makes it better. Dr. ROB. PLOT,
in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 172.

The said Dr. says, that this INCOMBUSTIBLE CLOTH is now of no Mean value even
in the Country where made, a China Covet, that is, a piece 23 Inches and three
Quarters long, being worth 80 Tale, that is, Thirty Six Pounds Thirteen
Shillings, and four pence.

PVRCHAS says, that in Fanfur, a Kingdom of Iava, in the East Indies, there is
a Tree of a great bigness, and length, the Pit^ whereof is Meal, which they put
in water, and stir well, the lightest dross swimming, and the purest settling
to the bottom; and then the water being cast away, they makethere of Paste,
which tastes just like Barley Bread.

The Wood of this Tree thrown into water, sinks like Tron; hereof they make
Lances, but short, for if they were long, they would be too heavy for use:
These they sharpen, and burn at the tops, which, so prepared, will pierce
Armor sooner than if they were made of Iron. PVRCH. Pilg. Vol. 3. Page ^04.

In great Iava they say, there is a Tree, (...) Pith is Iron: It is very small,
^et runs from the top to the bottom of the Plant. The Fruit that grows on it,
is not to be pierced with Iron. IVL. SCALIG. Exercit. 181. Sect. 27.

In the Island C^mbubon there grows a Tree, whose Leaves fallen upon the
ground, do move, and creep. It has Leaves like the Mulberry Tree. They have on
both sides that which looks like two little feet; pressed, they yield no
Liquor. If you touch them, they fly from you. One of them kept eight days in a
Dish, lived, and moved, as often as one touched it. IVL. SCALIG. Exercit. 112.

The SENSITIVE PLANT is somewhat of this Nature, which contracts it self, if
any one puts his hand to it; and if you pull back your hand, it recovers it
self again.

Observations concerning MOVNTAINS.
SOme have thought that MOUNTAINS and all other Irregularities in the Earth
have rise from Earthquakes, and such like Causes; Others have thought that they
came from the Universal Deluge; ye^ not from any Dissolution of the Earth that
was then, but only from the great agitation of the Waters, which broke the
ground into this rude and unequal Form. Both these Causes seem to me very
incompetent and insufficient. Earthquakes seldom make MOUNTAINS, they often
take them away, and sink them down into the Caverns that lie under them;
Besides, Earthquakes are not in all Countries and Climats as MOUNTAINS are;
for, as we have observed more than once, there is neither Island that is
Original, nor Continent any where in the Earth, in what Latitude soever, but
has MOUNTAINS and Rocks in it. And lastly, what probability is there, or how
is it credible that those vast Tracts of Land which we see filled with
MOUNTAINS both in Europe, Asia, and Africa, were raised by Earthquakes, or any
Eruptions from below? In what Age of the World was this done; and why not
continued? As for the Deluge, I dou^t not but MOUNTAINS were made in the time
of the General Deluge, that great Change and Transformation of the Earth
happened then, but not from such Causes as are pretended, that is, the bare
rolling and agitation of the Waters: For if the Earth was smooth and plain
before the Flood, as they seem to suppose as well as we do, the Waters could
have little or no power over a smooth Surface to tear it any way in pieces, no
more than they do a Meadow or low Ground when they lie upon it; for that which
makes Torrents and Land Floods violent, is their fall from the MOUNTAINS and
high Lands, which our Earth is now full of, but if the Rain fell upon even and
Level Ground, it would only sadden and compress it; there is no possibility how
it should raise MOUNTAINS in it. And if we could imagine an Universal Deluge as
the Earth is now constituted, it would rather throw down the Hills and
MOUNTAINS, than raise new ones; or by beating down their Tops and loose parts,
help to fill the Valleys, and bring the Earth nearer to evenness and plainness.

Seeing then there are no hopes of Explaining the Origin of MOUNTAINS, either
from particular Earthquakes, or from the General Deluge, according to the
common notion and Explication of it; these not being Causes answerable to such
vast Effects; let us try our Hypothesis again, which has made us a Channel
large enough for the Sea, and room for all Subterraneous Cavities, and I think
will find us Materials enough to raise all the MOUNTAINS of the Earth. We
suppose the great Arch or Circumference of the first Earth to have fallen into
the Abyss at the Deluge, and seeing that was larger than the Surface it fell
upon, it is absolutely certain, that it could not all fall flat, or lie under
the Water: Now, as all those parts that stood above the Water made dry Land, or
the present Habitable Earth, so such parts of the dry Land as stood higher than
the rest made Hills and MOUNTAINS; and this is the first and General Account of
them, and of all the Inequalities of the Earth. THO. BVRNET's Theory of the
Earth. Lib. 1. Cap. XI.

The Height of MOUNTAINS compared with the Diameter of the Earth is not
considerable, but the Extent of them and the Ground they stand upon, bears a
considerable proportion to the Surface of the Earth. And if from Europe we may
take our Measures for the rest, I easily believe, that the MOUNTAINS do at
least take up the Tenth part of the Dry Land. Ibidem.

The Height of the highest MOUNTAINS does bear no greater a proportion to the
Diameter of the Earth, than of the Sixteen Hundred and Seventieth part to the
whole, supposing the Diameter of the Earth to be Eight Thousand Three Hundred
Fifty Five Miles, as Pet. Gassendus computes both. And it is more than
probable, that Men have been exceedingly mistaken, as to the height of
MOUNTAINS, which comes so far short of Sir Walter Raleigh's Computation of
Thirty Miles, that the Highest MOUNTAIN in the World will not be found to be
Five direct Miles in height, taking the Altitude of them from the plain they
stand upon. Olympus, whose Height is so extolled by the Poets and Ancient
Greeks, that it is said to exceed the Clouds, yet Plutarch tells us, that
Xenagoras measured it, and found it not to exceed a Mile and a half
perpendicular, and about 70 paces. Much about the same height Pliny says that
Dicaearchus found the Mountain P^lion to be. The Mount Athos is supposed of
extraordinary height, because it casts its shadow into the Isle of Lemnos,
which according to Pliny was 87 Miles; yet Gass^ndus allows it but Two Miles in
height; but Isaac Vossius in a Learned Discourse concerning the height of
MOUNTAINS, in his Notes on Pomponius Mela, does not allow above 10 or 11
Furlongs at most to the Height of Mount Athos. Cancasus, by Ricciolus, is said
to be 51. Miles in height: Gassendus allowing it to be higher than Athos or
Olympus, yet conceives it not above three or four Miles at most; but Vossius
will not yield it above Two Miles perpendicular, for which he gives this very
good Reason; Polibius affirms, there is no MOUNTAIN in Greece which may not be
ascended in a Days time, and makes the highest MOUNTAIN there not to exceed Ten
Furlongs; Which, says Vossius, it is scarce possible for any one to reach,
unless he be a Mountainer born; any other will scarce be able to ascend above
Six Furlongs perpendicular; for in the Ascent of a MOUNTAIN every pace does
reach but to an hands breadth, perpendicular; but if we do allow Eight Furlongs
to a Days Ascent, yet thereby it will appear that the Highest MOUNTAINS in the
World are not above Twenty four Furlongs in height, since they may be ascended
in Three Days time: And it is affirmed of the top of Mount Caucasus, that it
may be ascended in less than the compass of three Days, and therefore cannot be
much above two Miles in height. Which may be the easier believed of any other
Mountain, when that which is reputed the highest of the World, viz. the Pike of
Teneriffe, which the Inhabitants call Pica de Terraria, may be ascended in that
compass of time, viz. Three Days; For in the Months of July and August (which
are the only Months in which Men can ascend it, because all other times of the
Year Snow lies upon it, although neither in the Isle of Teneriffe, nor any
other of the Canary Islands, there be Snow ever seen) the Inhabitants then
ascend to the top of it in Three Days time, which top of it is not Pyramidal
but plain, from whence they gather some Sulphurous Stones, which are carried
in great quantities into Spain. So that according to the proportion of Eight
Furlongs to a Days journey, this Pike of Teneriffe will not exceed the Height
of a German Mile perpendicular, as Varenius confesses, than which he thinks
likewise, that no Mountain in the World is higher. For what Pliny speaks of the
Alps, being Fifty Miles in height, must be understood not perpendicular, but
in regard of the Obliquity of the Ascent of it; so that he might account so
much from the Foot of the Alps to the top of them, and yet the Alps in a
perpendicular Line not come near the Height of a German Mile. STILLING FLEET's
Orig. Sacr. Lib. 3. Cap. 4. page 544, etc.

Mr. Muraltus of Zurich in a Letter to Mr. Haak, a Fellow of the R. S.
concerning the Icy MOUNTAINS of Helvetia, called the GLETSCHER, gives him this
Account.

The Highest ICY MOUNTAINS of Helvetia about Valesia and Augusta, in the Canton
of Bern; about Paminium and Tavetsch of the Rhaetians, are always seen covered
with Snow. The Snow melted by the heat of the Summer, other Snow being fallen
within in a little while after, is hardened into ICE, which by little and
little, in a long tract of time, depurating it self, turns into a Stone, not
yielding in hardness and clearness to Crystal. Such Stones closely joined and
compacted together, compose a whole MOUNTAIN, and that a very firm one; though
in Summer time the Country People have observed it to burst asunder with great
cracking, Thunder-like: Which is also well known to Hunters, to their great
cost; for as much as such Cracks and Openings, being by the Winds covered with
Snow, are the Death of those that pass over them. PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 49.

Monsieur Iustel in an Enlargement upon this very Subject, says, that the
ICY-MOUNTAIN called the GLETSCHER, is very high, and extends it self every year
more and more over the Neighboring Meadows, by increments that make a great
noise, and cracking. There are great Holes and Caverns, which are made when the
ICE bursts; which happens at all times, but especially in the Dog Days. Hunters
do there hang up their Game they take during the great heat, to make it keep
sweet by that means. Very little of the Surface melts in Summer, and all
freezes again in the Night. When the Sun shines, there is seen such a variety
of Colors as in a Prism.

There is such another MOUNTAIN near Geneva, and upon the Alps. A certain
Capucin told Monsieur Iustel, that he had been upon the highest of these
MOUNTAINS with a Trader in Crystal, who having driven his hammer into one of
these Rocks, and sound it hollow and resonant; made a hole into it, and thence
drew forth a Substance like Talk; which to him was a sign there was Crystal.
After which, he made a great hole with Gunpowder, and found Rock-Crystal in it.
PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 100.

I have had the Curiosity to enquire of more than one Traveller, that had
Visited the Famous Pico of Tenari^, (at whose upper part there are found
scattered parcels of Sulphur, and diverse manifest Tokens of a Vulcan) whether
the Sulphurous Steams (that I supposed to be copious near the top of the
Mountain) did not work upon the Silver they had in their Pockets, and discolor
it: To which he answered, that 'twas no uncommon Observation, to find at Men's
return from visiting the top of the Hill, that the Money they carried about
them was blackn'd, and that he himself had particularly observed it to be so:
Which might easily gain Credit with me, who have diverse times made a
Preparation of Sulphur, which even in the Cold, sends out exhalations so
penetrant, that having for Trials sake, put some pieces of Coin (which ought
not to be Golden) into a Leather Purse, they were able, and that not in very
many Minutes, to discolor manifestly the Money, in spite of the interposition
of the Purse, that contained it. But I had a more considerable instance of the
Efficacy of the Sulphurous Expirations of the Pico of Tenari^, by a Sober
Person, that is one of the Chi^f Directors of the Famous East India. Company of
London; who, being questioned by me about some Circumstances of his Journey to
visit the top of that stupendous MOUNTAIN, answered me, that among other
Effects the Sulphurous Air had upon ^im, (who is of a very fine Complexion) he
found at his return to the bottom, that his light-colour'd hair had manifestly
changed color, and was in many places grown sorked at the ends. ROB. BOYLE's
Experim. Disc. of the Insalubr. and Salubrity of the Air, page 31, 32.

Though there are some, who think MOUNTAINS to be a desormity to the Earth, as
if they were either beat up by the Flood, or else cast up like so many heaps of
Rubbish left at the Creation; yet, if well considered, they will be found as
much to conduce to the Beauty and Convenience of the Universe, as any of the
other parts. Nature (says Pliny) purposely framed them for many excellent
uses; partly to tame the violence of greater Rivers, to strengthen certain
joints within the Veins and Bowels of the Earth, to break the force of the Seas
inundation, and for the safety of the Earths Inhabitants, whether Beasts, or
Men. That they make much for the protection of Beasts, the Psalmist testifies,
The Highest Hills ar^ a refuge for the Wild Goats, and the Rocks for Conies.
The Kingly Prophet had likewise learnt the safety of those by his own
experience* when He also was fain to make a MOUNTAIN his Resuge from the sury
of his Master Saul, who Persecuted him in the Wilderness.

True indeed, such Places as these keep their Neighbors poor, as being most
barren, but yet they preserve them safe, as being most strong; witness our
Unconquered Wales, and Scotland, whose greatest protection has been the
natural strength of their Country, so fortified with MOUNTAINS, that these have
always been unto them sure re^reats from the Violence, and Oppression of
others. Wherefore a good Author does rightly call them Natures Bulwarks, cast
up at God Almighty's own Charges, the scorns and curbs of Victorious Armies;
which made the Barbarians in Curtius so con^ident of their own safety, when
they were once retired to an inaccessible MOUNTAIN, that when Alexander's
Legate had brought them to a Parley, and persuading them to yield, told them of
his Masters Victories, what S^as and Wildernesses he had passed: They replied,
that all that might be, but could Alexander fly too? Over the Seas he might
have Ships, and over the Land Horses, but he must have Wings before he could
get up thither. Such safety did those Barbarous Nations conceive in the
MOUNTAINS whereunto they were retired. Certainly then such useful parts were
not the effect of Man's Sin, or produced by the Worlds Curse, the Flood, but
rather at the first Created by the Goodness and Providence of the Almighty.
WILKIN's World in the Moon, page 114, 115, 116.

It may be objected, that the present Earth looks like a heap of Rubbish, and
Ruins; and that there are no greater Examples of Confusion in Nature than
Mountai^ singly or jointly considered, and that there appear not the least
footsteps of any Art or Counsel either in the Figure and Shape, or Order and
Disposition of MOUNTAINS and ROCKS. Wherefore is is not likely they came so out
of God's hands; who by the Ancient Philosophers is said (...), and to make all
things in Number, Weight, and Measure.

To which I answer, that the present ^ace of the Earth, with all its MOUNTAINS,
and Hills, its Promontories, and Rocks, as rude and deformed as they appear,
seems to me a very beautiful and pleasant Object, and with all that variety of
Hills, and Valleys, and Inequalities sat more grateful to behold, than a
perfectly level Country without any rising or protuberancy to terminate the
Sight: As any one that has but seen the Isle of Ely, or any the like Country,
must needs ac^nowledge. Neither is it only more pleasant to behold, but more
commodious for habitation, which is so plain, that I need not spend time to
prove it.

Secondly, A Land so distinguished into MOUNTAINS, Valleys, and Plains, is also
most convenient for the Entertainment of the various sorts of Animals, which
God has Created, some whereof delight in Cold, some in Hot, some Moist and
Watery, some in dry and upland Places, and some of them could neither find nor
gather their proper food in different Regions. Some Beasts and Birds we find
live upon the highest tops of the Alps, and that all the Winter too, while they
are constantly covered with Snow, as the Ibex, and Rupicapra, or Chamois among
Quadrupeds, and Lagopus among Birds.

Thirdly, The MOUNTAINS are most proper for the putting forth of Plants;
yielding the greatest variety, and the most Luxuriant sort of Vegetables, for
the maintenance of the Animals proper to those places, and for Medicinal Uses;
partly also for the Exercise and Delight of such ingenious Persons as are
addicted to search out and collect those Rarities, to Contemplate and Consider
their Forms and Natures, and to admire and Celebrate the Wisdom of their
Creator.

Fourthly, All manner of Metals, Minerals, and Fossils if they could be
generated in a level Earth, of which there is some question, yet should they be
Dug or Mined for, the Delss must necessarily be so slown with water, (which to
drive and rid away no Adits or Soughs could be made, and I much doubt whether
Gins would suffice) that it would be extremely difficult and chargeable, if
possible to work them at all. IOH. RAY's Miscell. Disc. of the Dissolut. of the
World, page 165, and c.

It is likely, if not certain, that all Valleys rise by atteration, that is, by
Earth continually brought down from the tops of MOUNTAINS by Rains, and Snows,
whence all MOUNTAINS are become lower than they were formerly, and the Valleys
risen higher; so that in time all the MOUNTAINS (except the Rocky) will by
great shoots of Rain be quite washed away, and the whole Earth levelled:
Whereof the ingenious Mr. John Ray in his Observat. Topograph. p. 8. gives us a
very pertinent Consirmation from the Steeple of Craich* in the Peak of
Derb^shire, which in the Memory of some Old Men yet living, could not have been
seen from a certain Hill lying between Hopton, and Werksworth, whereas now, not
only the Steeple, but a great part of the Body of the Church may be seen
thence; which without doubt comes to pass by the deterration or sinking of a
Hill between the Church, and place of View. And I am told of just such another
Example of a Hill between Sib^ertost and Hasleby in Northamptonshire, whence
yet we may only inser, that the Parts of the Earth do ^hange their Sci^^ation,
giving as much Increase (in proportion) at one place, as it takes away at
another, without any Augmentation, or Diminution in the whole. PLOT of Stafford
Chap. 3. Sect. 11, 12.

Observations concerning VVLCANO's, or SVBTERRANEAN FIRES.
THere are Subterraneous Cavities, which they call VOLCANO's, or Fiery
Mountains; that belch out Flames, Smoke and Ashes, and sometimes great Stones
and broken Rocks, and Lumps of Earth, or some Metallic mixture; and throw them
to an incredible distance by the force of the Eruption. These argue great
vacuities in the Bowels of the Earth, and Magazines of Combustible Matter
treasured up in them. And as the Exhalations within these places must be
copious, so they must lie in long Mines or Trains to do so great Execution, and
to last so long. It Is scarce credible what is Reported concerning some
Eruptions of VESUVIUS and AETNA. The Eruptions of VESUVIUS seem to be more
frequent and less violent of late; the Flame and Smoke break out at the top of
the Mountain, where they have eaten away the Ground, and made a great hollow,
so as it looks at the top, when you stand upon the brims of it* like an
Amphitheater, or like a great Caldron, about a Mile in Circumference, and the
burning Furnace lies under it. The outside of the Mountain is all spread with
Ashes, but the inside much more; for you wade up to the mid-leg in Ashes to go
down to the bottom of the Cavity, and it is extremely heavy and troublesome to
get up again. The inside lies sloping, and one may safely go down i^ it be not
in a raging fit; but the middle part of it or Center, which is a little raised
like the bottom of a Platter, is not to be ventured upon, the Ground their lies
false and hollow, there it always Smoaks, and here the Funnel is supposed to
be; yet there is no visible Hole or gaping any where when it does not rage.
Naples stands below in fear of this Fiery Mountain, which has often covered
its Streets and Palaces with its Ashes; and in sight of the Sea (which lies by
the side of them both) and as it were in desiance to it, threatens it at one
time or another, to burn that fair City. History tells us, that some Eruptions
of VESUVIUS have carn'd Cinders and Ashes as far as Constantinople; This is
a^^e^ted both by Greek and Latin Authors; particularly Ammianus Marcellinus
says, that they were so affrighted with them, that the Emperor le^t the City,
and that there was a Day observed Yearly in Memorial of (...)*

AETNA is of greater Fame than VESUVIUS, and of greater Fury, all Antiquity
speaks of it; not only the Greeks and Romans, but as far as History reaches,
either real or fabulous, there is something recorded of the Fires of AETNA The
Figure of the Mountain is inconstant, by Reason of the great Consumptions and
Ruins it is Subject to; The Fires and Aestuations of it are excellently
described by Virgil, upon occasion of Aeneas his passing by those Coasts. --
Horrificis juxta tonat AETNA ruinis;
Interdumque at ram prorumpit ad aethera nubem,
Turbine fumantem peiceo and candente favilla;
Attollitque globas flammarum, and Sydera lambit;
Interdum scopulos, avulsaque viscera Montis
Erigit eructans, liquefactaque Saxa sub auras.
Cum gemitu glomerat, fundoque exaestuat imo.
Fama est Enceladi Semustum fulmine Corpus
Vrgeri mole hac, ingentemque insuper AETNAM
Impositam, ruptis flammam expirare Caminis.
Et fessum quoties mutet latus, intremere omnem
Murmr TRINACRIAM and caelum subtexere fumo.
-- AETNA whose ruins make a thunder;
Sometimes a Cloud of Smoke in pitchy Curles,
Mingled with burning Ashes, forth it hurles.
Or balls of flame, that scorch the Stars on high;
Or its own Bowels torn, throws in the Sky.
In its deep Cells under the Earth, a Store
Of Fire Materials, molten Stones, and Ore,
It gathers, then Spews out, and gathers more.
ENCELADUS when Thunderstruck by JOVE,
Was buried here, and AETNA thrown above;
And when to change his wearied Side, he turns,
The ISLAND trembles, and the MOUNTAIN burns.
Not far from AETNA lies STROMBOLO, and other adjacent Islands, where there are
also such Magazines of Fire; and throughout all Regions and Countries, in the
West Indies and in the East, in the Northern and Southern parts of the Earth,
there are some of these VOLCANO's, which are sensible Evidences that the Earth
is incompact and full of Caverns; besides, the roarings and bellowings that use
to be heard before an Eruption of these VOLCANO's, argue some dreadful
hollown^ss in the belly or under the Roots of the Mountain, where the
Exhalations struggle before they can break their Prison. THO. BVRNET's Theory
of the Earth, Page 117, etc.

I will not enter upon a long Description of that which is so well known as
Mount VESUVIO; it had roared so loud about a Month before I came to Naples,
that at Naples they could hardly sleep in the Nights, and some old Houses were
so sh^ken, by the Earthquake that was occasioned by this Convulsion of the
Hill, that they ^^ll to the Ground: And the last Eruption, above Fifty Years
ago, was so terrible, that there was no small fear in Naples, though it lies at
the distance of Seven Miles from the Hill, yet the Storm was choked under
Ground.

When one sees the Mouth o^ this Fire, and so great a part of the Hill which is
covered some Foot deep with Ashes and Stones of a Metallic Composition, that
the Fire throws out, he cannot but stand amazed, and wonder what can be the
Fuel of so lasting a Burning, that has calcined so much matter, and spewed out
such prodigious quantities. It is plain there are vast V^^ns of SULPHUR all
along in t^^s Soil, and it seems in this Mountain they run along through some
Mines and Rocks, and as their slow Consumption, produces a perpetual Smoke, so
when the Air within is so much ratified that it must open it self, it throws up
those Masses of Mettle and Rock that shut it in; but how this Fire draws in Air
to nourish its Flame, is not so easily apprehended; unless there is either a
Conveyance of Air under Ground, by some undiscovered Vacuity; or a more
insensible transmission of Air, through the Pores of the Earth. The heat of
this Hill operates so much upon the Soil that lies upon it toward the Foot of
it, that it produces the richest Wine about Naples; and it also purifieth the
Air so much, that the Village at the bottom is thought the best Air of the
Country, so that many come from Naples thither for their Health. Ischia that is
an Island not far from Naples, does also sometimes spew out Fire. Dr. BVRNET's
Let. Page 174, 175.

The Hill AETNA now called MONT-GIBEL, is Ten Miles from the top to the bottom,
and may be easily discerned by Sailers at an Hundred Miles distance: The lower
parts thereof are very Fruitful, the middle being shaded with Woods, and the
Top covered with Snow, a great part of the Year, notwithstanding the frequent
Vomiting of Flames and Cinders. It was formerly observed, and to this Day the
same Observation holds, That whenever any extraordinary Eruption happens, it
certainly portends some Revolution. But these Eruptions of Fire are not now so
ordinary as formerly; the matter which gave Fuel to it, being wasted by
continual Burnings: So that the Flames which issue from it are hardly visible
but by Night, though the Smoke show it self the most part of the Day. And when it
does break out, which is commonly once in three or Four Years, it falls in
great fl^kes on the Vales adjoining, to the destruction of the Vintage, and
great loss of the Country. But that, they say, is recompensed by the plenty of
the following Years, the Ashes thereof so enriching the Soil, that both the
Vines and Cornfieldsd are much bettered by it.

The Reason of these Fires is the Abundance of SULPHUR and BRIMSTONE, contained
in the bosom of the Hill; which is blown by the Wind, driving in at the Chaps
of the Earth, as by a pair of Bellows. Through these Chinks also there is
continually more Fuel added to the Fire, the very Water adding to the force of
it: As we see that Water cast on Coals in the Smiths Forge, does make them burn
more ardently. PET. HE^LIN's Cosmogr.

Johannes Alphonsus Borellus in his Historia and Meteorologia INCENDII AETNAEI,
Ann^ 1669, rejects the Opinion of those, that ^aintain the AETNEAN Fires to
have been perpetual and never ext^^guish'd, asserting the frequent Cessation of
them, and withal assigning the Cause of that Cess^tion, as well as that of
their Renovation. Concerning which, and many other considerable Remarks and
Reflections, too many to be here recited, we refer the Reader to the Book it
self.

Now, whether these Eruptions are caused by actual Subterraneous Fires,
lighting upon Combustible Matter; Or by Fire struck out of falling and breaking
Stones, whose Sparks meet with Nitro-Sulphureous or other inflamable Substance
heaped together in the Bowels of the Earth, and by the Expansive violence of
the Fire forced to take more room, and so bursting out with the impetuosity we
see; may not be unworthy of a Philosopher's Speculation. PHILOS. TRANSACT.
Numb. 48. Page 969.

Naturalists a^^irm, that these VULCANO's or Fiery Mountains nourish
SULPHUROUS Matter in their Bowels which is easily in^lam'd, and issues out
with more or less Vehemence, and more or less frequency, according as the
Matter is more or less disposed; and the Subterranean Winds kindle and eject
these Fires, and open the Mass of Earth, under which they are shut up. But the
Opinion of certain Philosophers, who maintain, That mere Chance produces these
extraordinary Events, appears to me very Ridiculous; affirming, that one Stone
striking another, produces a Spark whence happ^^ (...) great Inflammations:
Nay, they proceed farther, and would persuade us, That a Lighted Lamp, left, by
chance, by those who scarched into the Bowels of these Mountains, to discover
the Secrets of Nature, might make these Flames; which lighting on a Combustible
Matter, and meeting with nothing that is contrary to 'em to extinguish them, to
cause these Surprising Effects. They also say, That Lightning striking fiercely
on some one of the Coasts on these Mountains, may do the same thing; as the
Stones striking one against another, or the Lamp left Lighted. See LETTERS writ
by a TVRKISH SPY at Paris, Vol. 1. Page 126, 127.

That Learned Physician, and most Sagacious Inquirer into Nature, Dr. Martin
Lyster, says, That amongst Minerals, the Pyrities, both in Gross and in
Vapor, is actually of its one accord fired. He instances the VULCANO's all the
World over for a proof of it; for, says he, we with great probability believe
them to be Mountains made up in great part of Pyrites (the Breath whereof is
SULPHUR Ex tota Substantia,) by the qualities of SULPHUR thence Sublimed, and
the Application of the Lodestone to the Ejected Cinder. And he proceeds,
telling us, That these VULCANO's were naturally kindled of themselves, at or
near the Creation, in all probability, because there is but a certain known
Number of them, which have all continued burning beyond the Memoirs of any
History, few or none of them that he knows of, have ever totally decayed or
been extinct, unless possibly by the Submersion of the whole, being absorpt in
the Sea. Though they indeed, do burn more fiercely sometimes than at others,
for other Reasons. So that it seems to me, says the Doctor, as natural to have
actual Fire in the Terrestrial World from the Creation, as to have Sea and
Water.

Again, says the Doctor, if these VULCANO's did not kindle of themselves, what
cause can we imagine to (...) done it? I^ the Sun; we (...), Hecla placed in so
extreme Cold^ Climate was kindled, for ought I (...) see by the Natural History
of bo^^, as soon as AETNA, or FUEGOS, or the most Souther^y. Not the Ac^^dents
happening from Man; for, i Man was (as we must believe) created Solitary and
Topical, they were none of his kindling, because they seem to be fired before
the World could be all over Peopled; besides, they were mostly the very Tops of
vast high Mountains, and therefore the most unfit for the Habitation of Man.
MART. LYSTER in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. 157. page 516.

Observations concerning EARTHQVAKES.
EARTHQUAKES are too evident Demonstrations of the Hollowness of the Earth,
being the dreadful Effects or Consequences of it; for if the Body of the Earth
was sound and compact, there would be no such thing in Nature as an EARTHQUAKE.
They are commonly accompanied with an heavy dead Sound, like a dull Thunder,
which arises from the Vapors, that are striving in the Womb of Nature when
her Throes are coming upon her. And that these Caverns where the Vapors lie
are very large and capocious, we are taught sometimes by sad Experience; for
whole Cities and Countries have been swallowed up into them, as Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the Region of Pentapolis, and several Cities in Greece. and in
Asia, and other parts. Whole Islands also have been thus absorpt in an
EARTHQUAKE; the pillars and props they stood upon being broken, they have sunk
and saln, in as an House blown up. I am also of Opinion, that those Islands
that are made by divulsion from a Continent, as Sicily was broken off from
Italy, and great Britain, as some think, from France, have been made the same
way; that is, the Isthmus or Necks of Land that joined these Islands with their
Continents before, have been hollow, and being either worn by the Water, or
shak'd by an EARTHQUAKE, have sunk down, and so made way for the Sea to
overflow them, and of a Promontory to make an Island.

For it is not at all likely, that the Neck of Land continued standing, and the
Sea overflowed it, and so made an Island; for then all those Passages between
such Islands, and their respective Continents, would be extremely shallow and
unnavigable, which we do not find them to be. Nor is it any more wonder, if
such a Neck of Land should fall, than that a Mountain should sink, or any other
Tract of Land, and a Lake rise in its place, which has often happened. Plato
supposes his Atlantis to have been greater than Asia and Africa together, and
yet to have sunk all into the Sea: whether that be true or no, I do not think
it impossible that some Arms of the Sea or Sinus's might have had such an
Original as that: and I am very apt to think, that for some Years after the
Deluge, till the Fragments were well settled and adjusted, great alterations
would happen as to the Face of the Sea and the Land; many of the Fragments
would change their posture, and many would sink into the Water that stood out
before, the props failing that bore them up, or the Joints and Corners whereby
they leaned upon one another; and thereupon a new Face of Things would arise,
and a new Deluge for that part of the Earth. Such removes and interchanges, I
believe, would often happen in the first Ages after the Flood; as we see in all
other Ruins there happen lesser and Secondary Ruins after the first, till the
parts be so well poised and settled, that without some violence they scarce
change their posture any more.

But to return to our EARTHQUAKES, and to give an instance or two of their
Extent and Violence: Pliny mentions one in the Reign of Tiberius Caesar that
struck down Twelve Cities of Asia in one Night. And Fournier gives us an
Account of one in Peru, that reached Three Hundred Leagues along the Seashore,
and Seventy Leagues Inland; and levelled the Mountains all along as it went,
threw down the Cities, turned the Rivers out of their Channels, and made an
Universal havoc and Confusion; And all this, ^e says, was done within the
space of Seven or Eight Minutes. There must be dreadful Vaults and Mines under
that Continent, that gave passage to the Vapors, and liberty to play for Nine
Hundred Miles in length, and above Two Hundred in breadth. Asia also has been
very subject to these Desolations by EARTHQUAKES; and many parts in Europe, as
Greece, Italy, and others. The Truth is, our Cities are built upon Ruins, and
our Fields and Countries stand upon broken Arches and Vaults, and so does the
greatest part of the outward Frame of the Earth, and therefore it is no wonder
if it be often shaken; there being quantities of Exhalations within these
Mines, or Cavernous passages, that are capable of rarifaction and infl^mation;
and upon such Occasions, requiring more room, they shake or break the Ground
that covers them. THO. BVRNET's Theory of the Earth. Page 119, 120, 121.

Many have written of the Causes of these dreadful Effects of Nature, of these
Tremblings and Shiverings of the Earth, or rather Aguish shaking Fits,
whereunto we find her Body is as subject as the Body of Men, or Lions, who are
observed to have their Mont^ Paroxisines.

The Babilonian Philosophers think the Cause of these impetuous Motions
happens by the force of some Planet meeting with the Sun in the Region of the
Earth; Others hold it to be a Vapor a long time engendring in some Concavities
of the Earth, and restrained from Sallying forth into the Air; Others affirm,
that it is a Wind penned up in the Entrails of the Earth; Pliny says, that the
Earth never quaketh, but when the Sea is very Calm, and the Air so still and
clear, as the Birds can hardly bear themselves up, and that the Winds are then
shut up in the Bowels of the Earth, their improper S^ation. He adds further,
that an EARTHQUAKE is nothing else but as Thunder in the Air, or an overture
and Crevice in the Earth, or as Lightning breaking forth violently and making
irruptions from the midst of the Clouds, the Wind enclosed therein, and
struggling to come forth by force. The Stoics speak of diverse Sorts of
EARTHQUAKES that cause the gapings of the Earth, the swellings of the Water,
and bolling of the same; a horrid confused Sound commonly proceeds and
accompanies this Quaking, sometimes like to the roaring of a Bull, sometimes
to the lamentable Cry of some Humane Creature, or like the Clattering of
Armor, according to the quality of the Matter which is enclosed, or according
to the Form of the Cave, and Hole, or SPELUNCA, through which it passes, which
resounds in Vaulty and hollow places: It waxes hot, in sharp and dry places
and causes defluxions in those that are moist and humid. Now amongst all
EARTHQUAKES, the Agitation of the Waters is most dangerous, for Lightning is
not so hurtful, nor the shaking of Buildings, or when the Earth is pus^'d up,
or falls down by an interchangeable Motion, because the one keeps back the
other. The safest Buildings are those upon Vaults, the Corners of Walls, and on
Bridges leaning one against another; beside, Brick Buildings are less dangerous
in such Accidents. Your skilful Navigators can foretell these EARTHQUAKES, at
such time as they p^rceive the Waves to swell on a sudden without a Wind; and
likewise those on Land may also foretell them, when they behold Birds in a maze
to stay their flight; or when Waters in Wells are troubled more than ordinary,
having a bad unsavory smell: All these are Presages of such hidious Motions:
Pherecydes the Syrian drawing Water out of a Well, ^oretold an EARTHQUAKE; and
so did Anaximander Milesius; And the truest Signs are, either when the Wind
blows not; Or when the Sea and Region of the Air are Calm, for an EARTHQUAKE
never happens, when the Wind blows, or the Sea swells. JAMES HOWELL's Hist.
of Venice, Page 75, 76.

If we may Credit Aristotle, he tells us that EARTHQUAKES are most frequent in
Spring and Autumn; which remark, though slighted by G^ssendus, who generally
affects to contradict that Philosopher, is notwithstanding confirmed by that
great Naturalist Pliny, and several other Learned Men in all Ages; who do not
deny but that EARTHQUAKES may, and have several times happened both in Summer
and Winter, though not so commonly as in the other Two Seasons, in which there is
generally a greater abundance of Moisture sucked up, more Vapors and a larger
quantity of Nitre, as Experience does demonstrate, all which Ingredients may
conspire to the producing of an EARTHQUAKE. For if we consider, how capable
they are of a large Expansion, how forcible they are when ratified in Vessels
closed, and placed over the Fire; in Aeolypiles, or vents, from which they
break out, with forcible Blasts, or in Winds, which frequently proceed from the
rarisaction of such Principles, we may suppose that those Vapors, which
produce such great Commotions in the Air, may cause a considerable Disturbance
in the Earth, when pent and locked up by Cold, or any such like Accident.

It is generally observed, that some little time before an EARTHQUAKE, there is
not only a great Calmness, but likewise a sudden Coldness and Chillness in the
Air; which was observed just before the EARTHQUAKE that happened at Oxford, and
the parts adjacent Sept. 17. 1683. And the like Observations of Cold preceding
are in Dr. Wallis's Account of an EARTHQUAKE, Numb. 10. of the Philosophical
Transactions, as also in that of Mr. Boil, Numb. XI. concerning the same
EARTHQUAKE, THOMAS PIGOT's Account of the EARTHQVAKE at Oxford, etc. Sept. 17.
1683. in the PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 151. Page 312, 313.

In EARTHQUAKES the tremulous Motion sometimes extends so very far, that, though
it seems highly probable that the Shake that is given to one part of the Earth
by the Firing and Explosion of Subterraneal Exhalations, (if that be the true
and only cause of EARTHQUAKES) is not capable of reaching near so far as diverse
EARTHQUAKES have done, but that the Fire passes through some little
Subterraneal Clefts, or Channels, or hidden Conveyances, from one great Cavity
or Mine to another; yet it is not improbable, but that the vehemently tremulous
Motion does oftentimes reach a very great way beyond the places where the
Explosions were made. Since, though Seneca would confine the Extent of
EARTHQUAKES to two Hundred Miles, yet Observations made in this and the last
Century warrant us to allow them a far greater spread.

The Learned Josephus Acosta affirms, that in the Kingdom of Peru, in the Year
1586. an EARTHQUAKE reached along the Shore of the Pacifick Sea 160 Leagues;
And adds, that sometimes it has in those parts run on from South to North 300
Leagues. And in the beginning of this our Age ( Anno Dom. 1601) good Writers
relate a much larger EARTHQUAKE to have happened, since it reached from Asia to
that Sea that washes the French Shoars, and, besides some Asiatick Regions,
shock Hungary, Germany, Italy and France, and consequently a great part of
Europe. And if that part of the Narrative be certain, which relates, that this
lasted not much above a quarter of an Hour, it will be the more likely, that
this EARTHQUAKE shook great Tracts of Land beyond those places, to which the
fired Matter, passing from one Cavity to another, could reach in so short a
time: As you will the more easily guess, if you try, as I have done, that in
Trains of Gunpowder it self, the Fire do^s not run on near so swiftly as one
imagines. ROB. BOIL (...) the great Effects of even LANGVID MOTION, Page 49,
50, 51.

where they ^age with the greatest Violence.

HURRICANES are no strangers to the Moluccas, and Philippines, and we have most
incredible Relations of the Storms in the way to Iapan, which have carried
Ships a considerable distance from the Sea, up the D^y-Land: Some have been
miserably wrack^, and buried in the Waves, others split in a Thousand pieces
against the Rocks, that scarce one Ship in five escapes these Disasters in the
Tempestuous Months about Autumn, or at the Change of the Monsoons. From thence
we may collect this Considerable Remarque, That they never happen but on the
Eastern Shoars, where they are Fatal to the Chinese and Caribbee-Seas, and so
as far as the River of Plate; likewise to that part of Afric from the Cape to
St Lawrence, and the Adjacent Isles: When they are altogether unknown to the
African Ocean, from the Canaries to Cape Bon Esperance, nor are they ever heard
of at New-Spain, or the Coasts of Peru, nor toward any other Western parts of
America, because there the Winds, which blow off from Land, make no Opposition
against the General Brise, but comply with the constant Motion of the Air
between the Tropiques, from East to West* For the shifting of the Trade-Wind
from the Easterly Points, is usually the first Onset of an approaching
HURRICANE.

Yet, however these Suspicions of Mine be received, I think it cannot be
rationally disputed, but that those diresul Tempests have their first Rise from
the Western Continent: For we seldom meet them very remote from Land, and the
Experienced Masters of Ships are never jealous of HURRICANES in the Spacious
Ocean; Or, i^ they perceive them coming, imediately make out to Sea, where
their Fury is much less, than near the Shoa^s.

HURRICANES are most to be dreaded about the end of Summer, in the Months of
July and August: For both the Winds and Seas imitate the Motions of the Sun,
and being dilated by the Celestial Heat, annually revert from North to South;
and from South to North again; So that the Sun hastening from one Tropique to
another, causes the like sudden Conversions in the (...) and Winds; and being
the mo^^ V^iversal Efficient, must nee^s ^^ principally concerned in all
Vic^^^^udes of the Sublunary World.

HURRICANES are usually preceeded by an extraordinary Tranquillity of the
Heavens and Seas: Possibly. some Counter-Winds may for a short space balance
one another, and bring the Air to an equal pois^. So that ^^ose who h^ppen to
be in the Center of the Whirlwind are at first sensible of no disturbance; as
we see in Eddys or Whirl-Peo's of Water, that, while the Circumference is
violently agitated, in the middle it continues for some time quiet and calm. R.
BOHVN's Disc. of the ORIGIN and PROPERTIES of WIND, Page* 255, 256, etc.

This following Account of the Nature of HURRICANES, is given us by an
Ingenious Frenchman, in his History of the Caribbe-Islands; quoted by the
aforesaid Mr. Bohun, Page 280, 281, etc.

HURRICANES are terrible and violent Tempests, which may be termed the true
Images of the last Conssag^ation of the World: Formerly they happened but once
in Five or Seven Years; but they are now become more frequent, since the
Antilles were inha^^ted, for there was One in 51, another in 52, Two in 53, and
Two in 50: (Nay, in the Islands of Gardaloupe* lying about the 16 degree of N.
Latitude, there happened no less than three HURRICANES in one Year.) The Manner
of them is, as fo^l^^^th.

Ordinarily the Sea becomes Calm on a sudden, and smooth as Glass: Then
presently after, the Air is Darkened, and filled with thick and gloomy Clouds;
after which, it is all (as it were) on Fire, and opens on every side with
dreadful Lightnings, that last a considerable time: After which follow
wonderful Claps of Thunder, that seem as i^ the Heaven was re^t asunder.

The Earth trembles in many places, and the Wind blows with so great
Imperuosity, that it Roo^s up the tallest and greatest Trees which grow in the
Woods; beats down almost all the Houses, and tears up the Vegetables;
destroying every thing that grows upon the Earth; and very often compels Men,
whilst this dreadful Tempest lasts, to catch hold of the Trunks of Trees, to
secure themselves from being carried away by the Winds; some lie in the Caves
of the Rocks, or retire into the Huts of the Negroes and Caribbians, which are
built exceeding low on purpose to elude the Shocks of these Tempests.

But that which is most dangerous of all, and which causes the greatest
Mischief, is, that in Four and Twenty Hours, and sometimes in less space, it
makes the whole Circle of the Compass; leaving neither Road nor Haven secure
from its raging force; so that all the Ships that are at that time on the
Coast, do perish most Miserably.

At the Island of St. Christophers, several Ships in the Harbor, being laden
with Tobacco, were all cast away by an HURRICAN; and afterward the Tobacco
poisoned most of the Fish on their Coasts.

When these Storms are over, a Man may behold the saddest Spectacles that can
be imagined. There may be seen Pieces of Mountains shaken by the Earthquakes,
and Forests overturned; Houses beaten down by the Violence of the Winds;
abundance of poor Families undone by the loss of their Goods, and the
Merchandise in their Cottages; of which they can save but very little. There
one may see the poor Seamen drowned and rolling in the Waves, with many brave
Ships broken in pieces, and battered against the Rocks. It Is a thing so Woeful
and Deplerable, that should this Disorder happen often, I know not who could
have the Heart or Confidence to go to the Indies.

A Letter from a Sea-Captain, to Mr. R. BOHVN.
SIR.
IN Answer to your Request, concerning the HURRICANE, I can say little of its
Effects more, than what concerns our particular damage, and terror. It
happened upon the 18 th of August last (1670) Sixteen Hours after the New Mood,
in the 14 th Degree of North Latitude, about Ninety Leagues from Barbados; It
succeeded a Storm of 48 Hours continuance at North-East; an unusual way of its
appearing, for it commonly follows a Calm: Its presage being a shifting of the
Wind about the Compass, with the Appearance of a troubled Sky, the only
advantage we have to prepare for its reception. The Fury of it beg^n about 10
at Night, and continued till 12 the next Day. I'ts observed that the HURRICANES
of the New Mood begin at Night, and those at the Full in the Day; as was noted
two Fears since, when the Lord Willoughby perished with Eight Ships, and near a
Thousand Persons.

During its 14 Hours Fury with us, it shifted 14 Points, from the N. E. to the
S. S. West, keeping a Method of Changing One P^int an Hour; and then shifted
backward, and in its retreat still abated, until it returned to the Original
Point, where it wholly ceased.

In the height of it, we had some H^^l, the Stones whereof were very great,
which seemed to be thrown upon us for the space of the twentieth part of a
Minute, and then an intermission of Five or Six Minutes, before any more came.
The Sea in the Night seemed as a real Fire, and I believe we might have
distinctly perceived any Object at a great distance: In the day time we seemed
rather to S^il in the Air than Water, the Wind forcing the Sea so high that we
could scarce make a distinction of either Element.

The Terror of it was such, that I thought it the Emblem of Hell, and the last
D^ssolution of all things; especially the first two Hours, which were attended
with so much Thunder, and Lightning, so as^onishing, as if we had been wrapped up
into the Clouds, or the whole Air set on Fire. The strength of the Wind was so
great, that it blew a Boat of 18 Foot long (fastened to four Ring-^olts, and
each bolt through a Ring of the Ship) clear off the Deck: I^ blew away a piece
of Timber of great Substance and Weight, called the Cross-Piece of the Bits, to
which we fasten our Cables: It tore off the Sails from the Yards, though fast
furled; the Yards from the Masts, and the upper Masts from the lower: It blew
away four Men of F^ve, who were upon the Fore-Yard, three of which, by a
Strange Providence, were thrown in again upon the Deck by the Sea, and saved.
The last remain of its Fury was a Weighty Grinding Stone, which it left fastened
between two Timber Heads, but it blew away the Trough from under it* I had
several Accounts from Particular Friends how terrible it was in other places,
but to me it seemed beyond all Expression.

These HURRICANES are most frequent between the AeQUINOCTIAL, and the Tropique
of CANCER: They more rarely happen between the LINE and the Tropique of
CAPRICORN But that which to me is the greatest Wonder, is, that they should be
so terrible among the Caribbe-Islands, that, in some of them, they have neither
l^ft House, Tree, nor Plant in the Ground, beginning at St. JOHN De Porto Rico,
and so running Eastward: but the ISLANDS of HISPANIOLA, CUBA; and JAMAICA are
never troubled with them, though within few Leagues of the Rest.

There are some Old INDIANS that have given notice of them three or four Days
before their Coming: By what R^les, I was never curious to understand; It being
enough for us to study how to defend our selves and Ships from them, rather
than by any nice Enquiries to s^arch into their Causes: Only thus much I
observed, that they have an influence upon the SEA, as well as the MOON, both
upon them and it; for I found by Observation of the SUN and STARS, that there
was a Current tending so violently Northward, that in 24 Hours it would force
us as many Leagues from our Easterly Course; which did so confound us, having
neither Card nor Compass left to Steer by (which, with several other Goods,
were swept away in a Breach which the SEA made into our Ship) that I think it
was as great a difficulty for me to find out BARBADOS (this place being nearest
for our relief) as COLUMBUS, who first discovered those Countries* Sir, I have
been as modest as I could in giving you this Relation, because I know many who
are acquainted with the violence of these Tempests, will be incredulous; But I
should be sorry, that all who will not believe this Account, should have the
same Confirmation which I had* If there be any thing in it worth your notice,
it may engage me hereafter to recollect some more Particulars; In all things I
shall endeavor to assure you that I am, etc.


Were it not sufficient, that a Relation much of this Nature was presented to
his Majesty; and that the Ship, after it returned, lay at Anchor a long time in
the River of Thames; not without Signal Marks of the HURRICANE, I might have
been scrupulous enough, to have desired the Subscriptions of several others,
who could at^est the Truth of this Narrative. I should only wish that some of
those Reflections, which the Ingenious Captain is pleased to make upon this
Occasion, were inquired into, by those who live in any of the Caribbe-Islands:
Whether the HURRICANES of the NEW MOOD begin constantly by Night, and those at
the Full in the Day? Which would be remarkable, though I never remember to have
met with the like Observation in any other Description: However, w^ can by no
means exclude the Operations of this Influential Planet; which has a very great
Dominion over both the Winds and Tides; whether from its Pressure, or by what
means soever it produces these Effects: Some have thought that the MOON has an
Atmosphere of its own, and sends out Effluvium's to the Neighboring World; and
therefore acts more powerfully in the Perigaeum, when it approaches nearest the
Earth.

That wonderful Light which appeared during this HURRICANE, might be from the
Collision of the Lucid Salts, with which the Seawater is so deeply
impregnated: Light happily being nothing else but the Motion of some Subtle
Matter. --

Not only the Winds, but the Currents are observed to change, and run round in
Eddys, before the beginning of the Tempest. -- It Is likewise esteemed a sure
Prognostique, that the Birds (led by an instinct of Nature) come down before
hand in Flocks from the Mountains, to secure themselves in the Valleys against
the injury of the Weather.

I believe, there might be excellent use made of the Barometer for predicting
of HURRICANES, and other Tempests, especially at Sea; since I am credibly
informed, that a Person of Quality, who lives by the Seaside, (though happily
there may not be so considerable Alterations in the gravity of the Atmosphere
far off at Land) can by the Barometer almost infallibly foretell any great
Tempest for several Hours before it begins.

I find no mention of Salt Rains in any of the English Narratives; but the most
Inquisitive of the French and Dutch have reckoned it as a very infallible
Presage, that the Rain, which falls a little before, is bitter, and Salt as the
Seawater: Which happily may argue a Collection of some Saline and Sulphurous
Spirits, in the Regions of the Air, that encountering each other, may by their
violent Displosion be principally concerned in the Production of HURRICANES. R.
BOHVN, Ibid.

Dr. Stubbes says, that he had inquired of some, that had been in HURRICANES,
if it were so Cold then, as Vincent le Blanc relates it? They said, they had
not found it to be so Cold; but yet in Comparison of other times, it was much
colder then. He also enquired of the Nature of those Tempests, whether the Wind
varied all the Points of the COMPASS as it is said? They answered, No; but it
began always with a North Wind, and when it came EAST, it ceased: But betwixt
the NORTH and EAST-Point it varied so fast, and with such a violent Gust
always, that it was impossible for any Ship in the Water to answer the Veering
of the Wind. PHILOS. TRANSACT. Numb. 36. Page 706.

Observations concerning the TORNADOS.
THe TORNADOS are variable Winds, called in the Portugal Language TRAVADOS, but
most significantly by the Greeks ECNAPHIAS from (...)* Nubes; for their surest
Prognostique is a Thick Cloud, suddenly rising above the Horizon, which is
easily visible in those Countries, where the Air is generally defecate and
serene. The Cloud for its smalness at first was called Olho de Boy, the Bull's-
Eye; yet this, from so insensible a beginning, diffuses it self by degrees, and
at last, covering the whole Face of the Heavens with a Canopy of Darkness,
causes horrible Storms, Thunder and Lightning, swells the raging Seas up to the
Clouds, which pour them down in Deluges of Rain, falling rather in huge
Cascades, and by Buckets-full, than Drops; sometimes together with Hailstones
of prodigious bulk: So variable and unsteady are the TORNADO-Winds, so little
obliged to any certain Law, that they commonly shift all the Points of the
Compass in the space of an hour, blowing in such sudden and impetuous Gusts,
that a Ship which was ready to overset on one side, is no less dangerous
assaulted on the other; sometimes they shift without intermission, and
otherwhile they blow in Starts, so that you shall have a perfect Calm between
every puff: Let a Fleet of Ships sail as near as they can without falling foul
on each other, and they shall have several and contrary Winds: You shall be
alarmed with many of them in the same Day, most toward the Coasts of Africa,
for half an hour or three quarters at a time: And were they equally lasting, as
impetuous, few would be invited thither by the Guiny Gold, or venture to cross
the Line for the richest Merchandise of the East.

Our Seamen commonly meet with the TORNADOS from the 10 th sometimes the 11 th
and 12 th Degree of Northern Latitude, likewise in the Tropic of Capricorn
near the Promontory of Cape Bon ^sperance; where the Fatal Cloud rises as only
a small Spot in the Air, and then displays it self, spreading like a Carpet
over the top of the Mountain; which the Seamen espying, though in the Calmest
Weather, immediately furle their Sails, and provide for the ensuing Storm, that
not long after descends (...) Lightning and Winds, being the more terrible
because it begins with the utmost Fury at first, and the Changes of the Points
sudden, as the twinkling of an Eye. You shall have a treacherous Calm, a
dreadful Tempest, and in an hours space the Sky clear again, and the Sea Smooth
as Glass: The Portuguese in their Discoveries of the Oriental Indies, lost Nine
Ships out of Twelve, which was overset by the Prodigious Impetuosity of these
sudden Gusts. But we seldom hear of such Disasters now adays, our Seamen being
more expert to govern themselves, in these Dangerous Attacks; and always
jealous of Surprise in the African Seas: For the nearer you are to the Coasts
of Africa (as was observed by an Inquisitive Traveller of late, in the
Philosophical Transactio^s, Numb. 50. Page 1004.) so much more dreadful is the
Thunder and Rain; but the further Westward you go, the Thunder and Rain will be
less, and the Winds not so uncertain; so that, if you go as far West, as the
Meridian of the East side of Brasile, there is little Thunder, neither does the
Wind come down in such sudden Puffs and Flaws; but between the 4 and 8 Degree,
it is most inclined to Calms and thick Foggs, and the Rains come not in such
dangerous Showers.

I have not only consulted the most Experienced of our Seamen, from whom I had
information in these Particulars; but I find that many others, both English and
Foreigners, have in their Travels given u^ Descriptions of the TORNADOS, which
would be Superfluous to recite; I shall only add a Relation out of Sir Thomas
Roe (in his East India Vo^age) to confirm the precedent Discourses.

These TORNADO Blasts were so variable, that sometimes within the space of an
hour, all the several Winds of the Compass will blow; so that ^f there be many
Ships in Company, you shall have them Sail so many several ways, and every one
of them seem to go directly before the Wind. These strange Gusts came with much
Thunder and Lightning, and extreme Rain, so noisome, that it made their Clothes
who stirred much in it, to stink upon their Backs; and the Water of these Hot,
and Unwholesome Showers would presently bring forth Worms, and other offensive
Animals. The TORNADOS met with us, when we were about Twelve Degrees of N.
Latitude, and kept us Company, till Two Degrees Southward of the Aequinoctial.

This ECNEPHIAS not only visits the Coasts of Malaguta and Guiny, producing
vehement Gusts of Wind and Rain, but reaches as far as Terra de Natal, lying to
the East-North-East toward St. Lawrence; and at Cape Gardafui near the
entrance of the Arabian Gulf, it infests those parts in May, as was collected
by Varenius from the Dutch Iournals: In the Sea toward the Kingdom of Loango,
and that part of the Aethiopique Ocean, the TORNADOS are most frequent in
January, February, and March. On the Shores of Guiny, when no other Winds blow
in those Climats, and within Five, Six, or Seven Degrees of the Aequinoctial,
they reign in April, May, and June, which is the time of their Rains; and in
other parts of Africa, they observe other Months; For they have not only
Etesian Winds, but Anniversary Tempests in some Seas. Yet, to be fuller
satisfied in the History of this Ecnephias, I addressed my self to Mr. George
Cock of Greenwich (a Gentleman of a Generous and Communicative Temper) who
being interested in the Royal Company, is well versed in all Occurrences of the
African Trade, and at my request procured me this following Account of the
TORNADOS on the Coast of Guiny, from a Person long employed in their Service.

The place of the TORNADOS rising is, E.N.E to the N.N.E. they frequently give
2 or 3 hours notice of then coming, by a thick black Cloud gathered in the
Horison, with much Thunder and Lightning. Sometimes the Wind comes first, very
^orceable, and then a great quantity of Rain; otherwhile, the Rain begins, and
is followed by a Tempestuous Wind. At this Season the Blacks count it good
Planting Corn, or Roots.

They make the Air very clear; ^o that a Man may see 5 times further than
before: I my self lying at Anchor in the River, have seen the Isle of Princes,
at least Six Leagues up; when before, I could not see the Isle of Fernando do
Po^.

During the TORNADOS it is exceeding Cold, insomuch that the Natives, and other
Inhabi^^nts are very sensible of it for the time. Their Continuance is about an
Hour, or two Hours at most.

I lately made enquiries of several Ships, that, during the Winter Months,
never met with any TORNADOS, all the way from Brasile; They being most violent,
when the Sun is near their Zenith and in the time of their Rains, when the Air
is Moist, and affords greater Quantities of Flatulent Vapors. R. BOHVN of the
Origin and Properties of Wind, Page 235. etc.

Observations concerning ISLANDS.
WE must in the first place distinguish between Original Islands and Factitious
Islands; Those I call Factitious, that are not of the same Date and Antiquity
with the Sea, but have been made some at one time, some at another, by
accidental Causes, as the Aggestion of Sands and Sandbeds, or the Sea leaving
the tops of some shallow places that lie high, and yet flowing about the lower
Skirts of them; These make sandy and plain ISLANDS, that have no high Land in
them, and are but mock-ISLANDS in Effect. Others are made by divulsion from
some Continent, when an Isthmus or the Neck of a Promontory running into the
Sea, sinks or falls in, by an Earthquake or otherwise, and the Sea entering in
at the gap passes through, and makes that Promontory or Country become an
ISLAND. Thus the ISLAND Sicily is supposed to have been made, and all Africa
might be an ISLAND, if the Isthmus between the Mediterranean and the Red Sea
should sink down. And these ISLANDS may have Rocks and Mountains in them, if
the Land had so before. Lastly, there are ISLANDS that have been said to rise
from the bottom of the Sea; History mentions such in both the Archipelago's,
Aegean and Indian; and this seems to argue that there are great Fragments or
Tracts of Earth that he loose at the bottom of the Sea, or that are not
incorporated with the Ground.

But besides these ISLANDS and the several Sorts of them, there are others
which I call Original: because they could not be produced in any of the
forementioned ways, but are of the same Origin and Antiquity with the Channel
of the Sea; and such are the generality of our ISLANDS; They were not made of
heaps of Sands, nor torn from any Continent, but are as Ancient as the
Continents themselves, Namely, ever since the Deluge, the common Parent of them
both. Nor is there any difficulty to understand how ISLANDS were made at the
Dissolution of the Earth, any more than how CONTINENTS were made; for ISLANDS
are but lesser CONTINENTS, or CONTINENTS greater ISLANDS; and according as
CONTINENTS were made of greater Masses of Earth or greater Fragments standing
above the Water, so ISLANDS were made of less, but so big always, and in such a
posture, as to bear their tops above the Water. Yet though they agree thus far,
there is a particular difference to be taken notice of as to their Origin; ^or
the CONTINENTS were made of those three or four primary Masses into which the
falling Orb of the Earth was divided, but the ISLANDS were made of the
Fractures of these, and broken off by the fall from the Skirts and Extremities
of the CONTINENTS; we noted before, that when those great Masses and primary
Fragments came to dash upon the Abyss in their fall, the sudden stop of the
Motion, and the weighty Bulk of the descending Fragment broke off all the Edges
and Extremities of it, which Edges and Extremities broken off made the ISLANDS;
And accordingly we see that they generally lie scattered along the sides of the
Continents, and are but Splinters, as it were, of those greater Bodies. It Is
true, besides these, there were an infinite Number of other pieces brake off
that do not appear, some making Rocks under Water, some shal^ows and Banks in
the Sea; but the greatest of them when they fell either one upon another, or in
such a posture as to prop up one another, their Heads and higher parts would
stand out of the Water and make ISLANDS.

Thus I conceive the ISLANDS of the Sea were at first produced; we cannot
wonder therefore that they should be so numerous, or fa^ more numerous than the
Continents; These are the Parents, and those are the Children; Nor can we
wonder to see along the sides of the Continents several ISLANDS or Sets of
ISLANDS, sown, as it were, by handfuls, or laid in Trains; for the manner of
their Generation would lead us to think, they would be so placed. So the
American ISLANDS lie scattered upon the Coast of that Continent; the Maldivian
and Philippine upon the East-Indian Shore, and the Hesperides upon the A^rick;
and there seldom happen to be any toward the middle of the Ocean, though* by
an Accident, that also might come to pass. BVRNET's Theory of the Earth, page
137, 138, 139.

Athanasius Kircher, amongst many considerable Remarks in his China Illustrata,
tells us, that in China there were several Isles, to the Number of 99. all
turned into one, under the same Extent of space they had, when they were
divided by Water.

As concerning the Situation of ISLANDS, whether Comodious or not, this, says
Peter He^lin, is my judgment. I find in Machiavel, that for a City whose
People covet no Empire but their own Towns, a Barren place is better than a
Fruitful; because in such Seats they are compelled to Work and Labor, whereby
they are freed from Idleness, and by Consequence from Luxury: But for a City
whose Inhabitants desire to enlarge their Confines, a fertile place was rather
to be chosen than a Barren, as being more able to nourish Multitudes of People.
The like Pet. Heylin says of ISLANDS. If a Prince desire rather to keep than
augment his Dominions, no place fitter for his Abode than an ISLAND; as being
by it self and Nature sufficiently desensible. But if a King be minded to add
continually to his Empire, an ISLAND is no fit Seat for him; because, partly by
the uncertainty of Winds and Seas, partly by the length and tediousness of the
ways, he is not so well able to supply and keep such Forces as he has on the
Continent. An Example hereof is England, which has even to admiration repelled
the most puissant Monarch of Europe; but for the Causes above mentioned, cannot
show any of her Conquests on the firm Land, though she has attempted and
achieved as many glorious Exploits, as any Country in the World. PET. HEYL.
Cosmogr.

The Ingenious Dr. Sprat, now Bishop of Rochester, observes, that the chief
Design of the Ancient English was the glory of spreading their Victories on the
Continent: But this, says he, was a Magnanimous mistake: For by their very
Conquests, if they had maintained them, this ISLAND had been ruined, and had
only become a Province to a greater Empire. But now it is rightly understood,
that the English Greatness will never be supported or increased in this Age, by
any other Wars but those at Sea. SPRAT's Hist. of the R. S. Page 404.

ISLANDERS are for the most part longer lived, than those that dwell in
Continents: For they live not so long in Russia, as in the Orcades; nor so long
in Africa, though under the same Parallel, as in the Canaries, and Tercera's;
And the Iaponians are longer lived, than the Chinese; though the Chinese are
mad upon long life. And this is no wonder; seeing the Air of the Sea does heat
and cherish in cooler Regions, and cool in hotter. BACON's Hist. of Life and
Death.

Of the Origin of F^VNTAINS.
THat there is a Mass of Waters in the Body of the Earth, is evident from the
Origin of Fountains; for the Opinion of Aristotle imputing them to the
Condensation of Air in the Caverns of the Earth, and that of other Philosophers
ascribing them to the fall of Rainwater, received into such Cisterns in the
Earth which are capable of receiving it, are both equally unsatisfactory,
unless we suppose a Mass of Waters in the Bowels of the Earth, which may be as
the Common-Stock to supply those Fountains with. For it is very hard conceiving
how mere Air should be so far Condensed, as to cause not only such a Number of
Fountains, but so great a quantity of Water as runs into the Sea by those
Rivers which come from them, (as the River Volga is supposed to empty so much
Water in a Years time into the Caspian Sea, as might suffice to cover the whole
Earth,) by which likewise it is most evident, that there must be some
Subterranean Passages in the Sea, or else of necessity, by that abundance of
Water which continually runs into it from the Rivers, it would overflow and
drown the World. And from this Multitude of Waters which comes from Fountains,
it is likewise evident, that the Origin of ^ountains cannot be merely (...)
Water which (...), which would (...) maintai^ so full (...) many (...) that
(...), that Rainwater does never moisten the Earth above Ten Foot deep, for of
far greater profundity many Fountains are. And besides the Rainwater runs most
upon the Surface of the Earth, and so does rather swell the Rivers, which
thereby run with greater force in their Passage to the Ocean, and does not
lodge it self presently in the Earth, especially if it descends in a greater
Quantity, which alone is able to fill such Cisterns supposed to be in the
Earth, especially in Mountains, which may keep a Stream continually running.
Although therefore we may acknowledge that the fall of Rain may much conduce to
the Overflowing and Continuance of Fountains, as is evident by the greater
force of Springs after continued Rains, and by the d^c^y of many of them in hot
and dry Weather, (which yet I had rather impute to the Suns exhaling by his
continued heat those moist (...) Legs, because it is equally dispersed into all
the parts from the Center of it; so in the Body of the Earth, it is as natural
for the Water to ascend into the Tops of Mountains, as it is to fall down into
the Center of the Earth. And that it is no more wonder to see Springs issue out
of Mountains, than it is to see a Man Bleed in the Veins of his Forehead when
he is let Blood there. So in all places of the Earth the parts of it are not
disposed for Apertion; for some of them are so hard and compact, that there
seems to be no passage through them (which is the most probable Reason, why
there is no Rain neither in those places, because there is no such Exs^dation
of those moist Vapors through the Surface of the Earth, which may yield matter
for Rain, as it is in many of the Sandy places of Africa, but usually
Mountainous Countries have more large, and as it were Temple-Veins, through
which the moist Vapors have a free and open passage, and thence there are not
only more frequent Springs there, but Clouds and Rains too.) Now if this
Account of the Origin of Springs in the Earth be as rational as it is
ingenious and handsome, (and there is not much can be said against it, but only
that then all Fountains should be Salt, as the Water is from whence they come)
then we easily understand how the Earth might be overflowed in the Universal
Deluge; for then the Fountains of the Deep were broken up, or there was an
Universal opening of the Veins of the Earth, whereby all the Water contained in
them would presently run upon the Surface of the Earth, and must needs,
according to its proportion, advance it self to a considerable height. But
because the salving the difference of the Water in Springs from what it is in
the Sea is so considerable a Phenomenon in our present case, I therefore
rather take this following as the most rational Account of the Origin of
Fountains, viz. That there are great Cavities in the Earth, which are capable
of receiving a considerable Quantity of Water; which continually runs into them
from the Sea (which as it continually receives fresh Supplies from the Rivers
which empty themselves into it, so it dispatcheth away a like quantity through
those Spongy parts of the E^rth under the Ocean. which are most apt to suck in
and convey away the Surplusage of Water) so that by this means the Sea never
swells by the Water conveyed into it by the Rivers, there being as continual a
Circulation in the Body of the Earth, of the Water which passes out of the
Ocean into the Subterraneous Caverns, and from thence to the Mountains, and
thence into the Sea again; as there is a Circulation of Blood in Man's Body
from the Heart, by the Arteries into the Exterior Parts, and returning back
again by the Veins into the Heart. According to which we may imagine such a
place in the Heart of the Earth, like Plato's Barathrum, (...). As Plato in his
Phaedrus describes it out of Homer, a long and deep Subterraneous Cavity.
(...). Into which Cavity all the Rivers at last flow, and from which they again
disperse themselves abroad. Now this Cavity of the Earth thus filled with
Water, supplies the place of the Heart in the Body o^ the Earth, from which all
those several Aquaeducts which are in the Earth have their continual supply*
But that which makes those passages of Water which we call Springs and
Fountains properly, I suppose* is thus generated; from those Cavities filled
with Water in the Earth, by Reason of the hot Steams which are in the Body of
the Earth, there are continually rising some Vapors or little Particles of
Water, which are dis-joyned from each other by the Heat, by Reason of which
they attain a greater Celerity of Motion, and so pass through the inner Pores
of the Earth, till they come near the Superficies of it. Which when they have
approached to, they are beat back again by the Cold, which environs the Surface
of the Earth, or at least are so arrested by the Cold, and condensed by it,
that they lose the form of Vapors, and become perfect Water again. Which Water
being now more gross, than while it was a mere Vapor, cannot descend again
through the same Pores through which it ascended before, because these are not
now capable of receiving it: And therefore it seeks out some wider passages
near the Surface of the Earth, by which means it moves in an Oblique manner,
and is ready to embrace any other Vapors which are arrested in the same
manner; now when these are grown to a Considerable Body in the Surface of a
Mountain, or a Plain, and find a Vent fit for them, there appears a proper
FOUNTAIN, whose Streams are still maintained by the same Condensation of
Vapors, which when they are once come abroad, are in continual Motion, whereby
Rivers are made, which are still finding a passage through the declivity of the
Surface of the Earth, whereby they may return to the Ocean again. Now,
according to this Account, that grand Ph^^nomen^n of the freshness of
Fountain Water, when the Water of the Sea is Salt, whence it Originally comes,
is sufficiently resolved. For mere Transcolation may by degrees take away that
which the Chemists call the Fixed Salt; and for the Volatile Salt of it (which
being a more Spirituous thing, is not removable by Distillation, and so neither
can it be by Transcolation) yet such an Evaporation as that mentioned, may
serve to do it, because it is evident that Fresh Water will fall from the
Clouds, which has risen from those Vapors which have come out of the Sea; and
besides, these Vapors or small Particles of Water in their passage throw the
Earth (especially when they come near the Surface of it) do Incorporate with
other Sweet Vapors, as those which come from Rain and others, by which means
they insensibly lose their former Acidity and Sharpness: But those FOUNTAINS
which do retain their former Saltness, as there are many such in the World, may
very probably be supposed not to have come from these Vapors condensed, but to
be a kind of a breaking of a Vein, in which the Salt Water was conveyed up and
down the Body of the Earth. STILLINGFLEET's Orig. Sacr. lib. 3. Cap. 4. Sect. 6.

The Opinion of Mr. Edmund Halley, in the Philos. Transact. Numb. 192. That
Springs and Rive^s owe their Original to Vapors condensed on the sides of
Mountains, rather than unto Rains, I acknowledge to be very Ingenious, grounded
upon good Observations, and worthy of its Author; and I will not deny it to be
in part true in those hot Countries in the Torid Zone, and near it; where, by
reason of the great heats, the Vapors are more copiously exhaled out of the
Earth, and its likely carried up high in the form of Vapors: But in Europe,
and the more Temperate Countries, I believe the Vapors condensed in the manner
as Mr. Halley describes, have but little Interest in the producing of their
Springs. JOHN RAY's Miscell. Disc. of the Dissolut. of the World, Page 82. and
85.

Dr. Tankred Robinson's Letter to Mr. John Ray.
YOU may peradventure meet with some opposition against your Hypothesis of
FOUNTAINS, though indeed I am more and more confirmed in your Opinion of them,
and the use of the Mountains. Father TECHART in his second Voyage to Siam,
says, when he went up to the top of the Table Mountain at the Cape of Good
Hope, the Rocks and Shrubs were perpetually dropping and feeding the Springs
and Rills below, there being generally Clouds hanging on the sides near the top.

The same Observation has been frequently made by our English Merchants in the
Madera and Canary Islands, especially in their journeys up to the Pike of
Teneriff, in which, at such and such heights, they were always wet to the Skin,
by the droppings of the great Stones, yet no Rain over head; The same I have
felt in passing over some of the Alps. The Trees, which in the Islands of Ferro
and St. Thomas, are said to furnish the Inhabitants with most of their Water,
stand on the sides of Vast Mountains: Vossius in his Notes on Pomponius Mela,
affirms them to be Arborescent F^rula's; I believe there is something in the
many Relations of Traveller's and Voyagers concerning these Trees; but then I
fancy they are all mistaken, when they say, the Water issues out of the Trees:
The Vapors, s^^pt by the Mountains condense, and Distill down by the Boughs.
There being no Mountains in Egypt, may be one reason, why there is little or no
Rain in that Country, and Consequently no fresh Springs; therefore in their
Caravans they carry all their Water with them in great Borracio's. This may be
the cause that the Vast Ridge and Chain of Mountains in Peru, are continually
watered, when the great Plains in that Country are all dried up and parcht.
This Hypothesis concerning the ORIGINAL of SPRINGS, from Vapors, may hold
better in those Hot Regions within and near the TROPICKS (where the Exhalations
from the Sea are most plentiful, most rarified, and Rain scarce) than in the
Temperate and Frigid ones (where it Rains and Snows generally on the Tops of
the Mountains) yet even in our EUROPEAN Climates I have often observed the
Firs, Pines, and other Vegetables near the Summets of the ALPS and APPENNINES,
to drop and run with Water, when it did not Rain above; some Trees more than
others, according to the density and smoothness of their Leaves and
Superficies, whereby they stop and condense the Vapors more or less. The Beams
of the Sun having little force on the high Parts of Mountains, the interrupted
Vapors must continually moisten them, and, (as in the Head of an Alembick)
condense and trickle down; so that we owe part of our Rain, Springs, Rivers,
and Conveniences of Life, to the Operation of Distillation, and Circulation,
by the Sun, the Sea, and the Hills, without even the last of which, the Earth
would scarce be Habitable.

November. 12. 1691. TANCRED ROBINSON.


Since the Receipt of this Letter, an Experiment occurred to Me, which has much
confirmed me in the belief and persuasion of the Truth of those Histories and
Relations which Writers and Travelers have delivered to us concerning Dropping
Trees in FERRO, St. THOME, GUINY, etc. of which before I was somewhat
dis^ident; And likewise in the approbation of the Hipothesis of my Learned
Friend Dr. Tancred Robinson for the solving of that Phoenomenon. The same also
induces me to believe, that Vapors may have a greater Interest in the
production of SPRRINGS even in temperate and cold Regions, than I had before
thought. Therefore whenever in this Work I have assigned RAIN to be a
sufficient o^ only Cause of SPRINGS and RIVERS, I would not be understood to
exclude, but to comprehend therein MISTS an VAPORS; which I grant to have some
interest in the production of them, even in Temperate and Cold Regions; and a
very considerable one in Hot. Though I cannot be persuaded, that even there
they are the Sole Cause of SPRINGS, for that there fall such plentiful and long
continuing RAINS, both in the East and West Indies, in the Summer Months: Which
must needs contribute something to their ORIGINAL. IOH. RAY's Miscell. Disc. of
the Dissolution of the World, Page 249.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Plays Printed for R. Bentley.
BEaumont and Fletcher's Plays: in all 51. in large Fol. Mr. Shakespeare's
Plays: In one large Fol. Volume, containg 43 Plays. Mr. Nathaniel Lee's Plays:
In one Volume. Mr. Otway's Plays: In one Volume. Mr. Shadwel's Plays: In one
Volume. Mr. Dryden's Plays: In two Volumes.
His other Poems: One Volume more.
1 All mistaken, or the mad Couple. 2 Alexander the Great. 3 Andromache. 4
Ambitious Statesman, or the Loyal Favorite. 5 Virtue Betrayed, or Anna Bullen.
6 Abdellazor, or the Moor's Revenge. 7 Amoro^^ Prince. 8 Amends for Ladies. 9
Albumazor. 10 Amboyna, a Tragedy. 11 Brutus of Alba. 12 Byron's Conspiracy, 1.
Part. 13 Byron's Conspiracy, 2 d. Part. 14 Banditti, or the Lady in distress*
15 Busey d' Ambois. 16 Caesar Borgia. 17 Country Wit. 18 Calisto, or the Chaste
Nymph. 19 Country Wife. 20 City Politics. 21 Constantine. 22 Commonwealth of
Women. 23 Counterfeits. 24 Caius Marius. 25 Destruction of Jerusalem, in two
Parts. 26 Duke of Guise. 27 Dutch Lovers. 28 Duke of Millan. 29 Disappointment.
30 English Monsieur. 31 Esquire Old-Sap, or the Night Adventures. 32 Essex and
Elizabeth, or the Unhappy Favorite. 33 Empress of Morocco. 34 Evening Love, or
the mock Astrologer. 35 Forced Marriage, or the Jealous Bridegroom. 36 The Fond
Husband, or the Plotting Sisters. 37 Fool turned Critic. 38 The Fatal Wager.
39 Fatal Jealousy. 40 False Count. 41 Generous Enemies, or the Ridiculous
Lovers. 42 Gloriana, or the Court of Augustus Caesar. 43 Grateful Servant. 44
Henry the Sixth, or the Misery of Civil-War. 45 Henry the Sixth, or the Murder
of the Duke of Gloucester, the 2 d. Part. 46 Hamlet Pr. of Denmark, a Tragedy.
47 Humerous Courtier. 48 The Hollander. 49 Julius Caesar. 50 Island Queen, or
Mary of Scotland. 51 King Lear. 52 King, and no King. 53 Knave in Grain. 54
Little Thief. 55 Love Tricks. 56 Lucius Iunius Brutus. 57 Loyal Brother. 58
Mythridates King of Pontus. 59 Madam Fickle, or the Witty False One. 60 Mr.
Limberham, or the Kind Keeper 61 Mistaken Husband. 62 Moor of Venice.

