MIRACLES, No Uiolations OF THE LAWS OF NATURE.

Quid non miraculo est, cum primum in notitiam venit? Plinius Histor. Not. lib.
7. cap. 1.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Sollers at the King's Arms and Bible in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1683.

PREMONITION TO THE CANDID READER.
IT is the Judgment of most of the ancient Fathers of the Christian Faith, and
of the most learned Theologues among the Moderns; that the Authors of the holy
Scriptures, when they speak of natural things, do not design to instruct men in
Physical Speculations and the Science of Natural Philosophy; but aim only to
excite pious Affections in their breasts, and to induce them to the Worship and
Veneration of the true God, whom they celebrated in their Writings: whose Power
and Goodness they therefore took all fair Occasions to demonstrate, that they
might, from as well the natural as civil Order of things, establish in the
Minds of the Readers a right and firm Belief thereof. This then being the only
End they proposed to themselves, they found themselves obliged so to explicate
the visible Works of God and the nature of the things they were to relate, as
that they might not, by Novity and Insolency, appear too remote and abhorrent
from the common Sense and pre-conceiv'd Opinions of the Vulgar, to whose narrow
Capacity and grovelling Wit they were always to condescend; yea even to wrest
the general Causes and Ends of the whole Creation in favor of the Peoples
Prejudices, as if all things in the Universe were ordained only for the good
and benefit of Mankind. Nor could it conduce to this their principal purpose,
to insist upon second Causes, or defer much to their Efficacy: but rather in
all Contingents or Events to recur immediately to God himself, the First Cause,
Author and President of Nature; omitting to give any account of that Apparatus
and long Series of Causes, which Philosophers use to remark in explicating the
Phenomena of Nature, and which Nature her self uses in their production. Whence
it is, that these pious Writers compendiously refer all things to the immediate
Power of God and to his irresistible Will and Command: leaving men to learn
from the Light of Nature or right Reason, (which alone is able to teach it)
that the Power of God and the Power of Nature are one and the same, and that
all her Laws are his eternal Decrees. For their business was, not to treat of
the Principles of Natural Philosophy (as I said before) but to convince the
unthinking Multitude that God is the Origin of all things, that universal
Nature is obedient to his Will, and that his Providence presides over and
governs all things, as well natural as bumane; which he so disposes and
accommodates, as to make them conspire to the good and happiness of those who
follow Piety and Virtue, and to the Punishment of the Impious and Vicious: and
the Multitude was to be convinced, not by leading their Reason with a long
Chain of Premises and Conclusions Theological; but by surprising their
Imagination, and accommodating Events to their common Opinions, however
unreasonable in themselves.

This well considered, as we are not to admire, if we find in the holy
Scripture many memorable things related as Miracles, which yet notwith standing
proceeded from the fixed and immutable Order of Nature, and necessarily flowed
from a Series of Causes ordained according to her eternal Laws, that is, from
God's Decrees so ought we not rashly to accuse any man of Infidelity, only
because he refuses to believe, that those Miracles were effected by the
immediate Power of God, such as is not only inconsistent with, but point blank
repugnant to the fundamental Laws and Constitutions of Nature, which he in his
infinite Wisdom has made, and made so ample and fertile, as to extend to the
certain production of whatever Events he has willed and decreed. For first,
among the many Miracles related to be done in favor of the Israelites, there
is (I think) no one, that can be apodictically demonstrated to be repugnant to
the established Order of Nature: and then the Power of God being infinite, that
of Nature must be so too, because one and the same with the Power of God; but
humane Understanding is finite, and consequently incapable to know how far the
Laws of Nature extend themselves. In a word therefore, If by a Miracle in the
general, you understand nothing else but a certain Work or Effect, the Causes
of which cannot be explicated by men ignorant of the Principles of natural
things: I acknowledge many such Miracles to have been done in all Ages, and
among all Nations. Nay more, if by a Miracle you mean that, the Causes whereof
transcend the Capacity even of the most acute and profound Philosopher; I will
not deny, but that among the many things related in the Scripture, as Miracles,
some are found, that in this sense also may deserve that name; because I do not
measure the Power of Nature by the unequal Line of humane Wit. But if you will
have a Miracle to be such a rare Effect, which is absolutely above or (which
really is all one) contrary to the Laws of Nature, or which cannot possibly
follow from her fixed and immutable Order: then I dare not believe that any such
Miracle has ever happened in Nature, lest I oppose God to God, that is, admit
that God changes his own Decrees; which from the Perfection of the divine
Nature, I know to be impossible. If you, candid Reader, know so too, I have
already said more than is necessary to the defense of this innocent Discourse,
and therefore acquiesce in hope of being rightly understood.

Of Miracles.
BY MIRACLES are understood the admirable or wonderful Works of God. But
because Men following their own natural Reason, are wont to doubt, whether what
is by a Prophet delivered for the Command of God, be truly the Command of God,
or not; Miracles in the sacred Scriptures are called Signs, as signifying the
Will of God: as also in Ethnic Writers, for the same Reason, they are called
Ostenta and Portenta, as showing or portending the divine Will concerning
Things to come. That we may therefore understand, what a Miracle is, we must
observe, what Works those are, which men generally admire or wonder at. The
Things then that cause men to admire any Work or remarkable Effect, are only
two. One is, if that Work be rare, the like whereof they have seldom or never
seen done before: The other, if after the Work is done, they cannot conceive it
to have been done by natural Causes, but only by the immediate operation of God
himself. For if we understand the natural Causes of the Fact, however rare it
be; or if we have often seen the like done before, though we do not conceive
the natural Cause thereof; we no longer admire it, nor call it a Miracle. Quae
usu quotidiano novimus and frequenti experientia, ea neque admiramur, neque ad
eorum causas investigandas multum excitari solemus, quanquam saepe occultiores
sint inventuque difficiliores aliis, quae ob raritatem, hominum studia and
animos maxim occupant.

Thus, for example, if we should hear an Ox or Horse speak, we should call it a
Miracle, because rare, and of which we are not able to imagine a natural Cause.
Thus also in the generation of Animals, every unusual Error or deviation of
Nature, might be held for a Miracle. But if a Man or any other Animal generate
his like in specie, though we are equally ignorant how this and that is
performed, we do not take it for a Miracle. Also if a Man should be transformed
into a Stone, 'twould be a Miracle, because rare: but if Wood should be
converted into a Stone, because such conversion is often seen, it is no Miracle:
and yet notwithstanding we are as ignorant how God effects that conversion in
Wood, as how he effects it in a Man. The Rainbow that first appeared in the
Sky, was a Miracle; because the first, that is, the like had never been seen
before; and because it was shown by God for a Sign, to signify that the World
should never again be destroyed by a Deluge. But at this day, because Rain-bows
are often seen, no man looks upon them as Miracles. Again, many wonderful Works
are produced by humane Art; yet because after they are effected, we come to
understand how and by what means, we therefore not account them for Miracles.
For,

Admiration depends for the most part upon men's Knowledge and Experience, so
that what seems to be a Miracle to one man, seems not to be so to another. And
unskilful and superstitious men are wont to take for great Miracles those
things, which the Learned and well experienced do not at all admire. Eclipses
of the Sun and Moon have in times past been mistaken for supernatural Effects
and Prodigies by the Vulgar; while learned Astronomers understanding the
natural Causes of them, have certainly predicted them. Also cunning men
confederate among themselves, closely enquiring into and discovering some
secret actions of an unwary and simple man, and afterward relating them to him,
have been held in great admiration, as if they had come to the knowledge of
those Secrets by supernatural means, by divine Revelation at least: when the
same Confederates have not been able so easily to impose upon wary and prudent
persons. Admiration then (we see) is generally greater or less, according to
the various degrees of Science and observation among men; the most ignorant
being most prone to wonder: and the Causes of Admiration, which many times
makes a Miracle of what is purely natural, we have found to be Rarity and
Ignorance.

II. If this Disquisition be yet a little farther pursued, it will soon appear,
that Superstition also contributes largely to the belief of Miracles. For the
Minds of men being naturally prone to be agitated betwixt Fear and Hope of the
future (the two grand Passions that govern humane life) thence it comes to
pass, that they very often fancy a certain extraordinary divine power in all
Contingents which are unusual, and the natural Causes of which they do not
comprehend, as if those Contingents certainly proceeded, not from the order of
Nature, but from an immediate operation of God transcending or changing that
order; and that they presignified some good or evil Fortune to themselves. For
the Vulgar thinks, that the Power and Providence of God is then most apparent,
when they observe any Event unusual in Nature, and contrary to the opinion they
have from custom conceived of Nature; chiefly if the Event seem to promise any
thing of Commodity or Advantage to themselves: imagining that the Existence of
a supreme Being can be by no way better proved, than by the inversion of the
course of Nature, which they suppose to happen in all unusual Events. Whence it
is, that common Heads always accuse those Philosophers of Atheism and design to
extirpate the belief of God, at least of his Providence, who endeavor to
explicate what they call Miracles by natural Causes, and study to understand
the Reasons of them: erroneously conceiving, that God (forsooth) remains idle
while Nature acts in her usual Order, and on the contrary, that the power of
Nature is suspended, and the action of all natural Causes arrested or
frustrated, while God acts. Thus they form in their Brains confused Notions of
two distinct Powers, one of God, the other of Nature, which yet they allow to be
determined by God: but what to understand by either of these Powers, and
wherein the difference they suppose, consists; they know not. Only this they
will tell you, that the unusual Works of Nature are Miracles or the Works of
God; and partly out of blind Devotion, i. e. Superstition, partly from an itch
of opposing wise men that study Natures Laws and Constitutions, they please
themselves in their Ignorance, and think they please God too with their
affected Admiration: not considering how much they derogate from his infinite
Wisdom, while they conceive the Laws of Nature by him made and established,
insufficient to effect all things he has decreed to produce for the ends in
order to which he ordained them, without variation.

III. This popular Error seems to derive its Original from the primitive Jews,
who that they might convince the Ethnicks of their time, who adored visible
Gods, the Sun, Moon, Earth, Water, Air, etc. and show them that those Gods were
weak and inconstant, or mutable, and under the Command of the invisible God
whom themselves worshipped; recounted to them the Miracles he had wrought for
their sakes, as cogent Arguments that all Nature was by his Superintendency and
Command directed only to their Commodity and Advantage, other Nations the while
having not an equal share of his Providence. A persuasion so agreeable and
grateful to men, that to this day they have not ceased to feign Miracles in
favor of themselves, that others might believe them to be more beloved by God,
and dearer in the eye of his Providence, than the rest of Mankind; yea more,
the final Cause for which he at first created, and continually directs all
things. What does not the folly of the Vulgar arrogate to it self; having not
so much as one sound conception or thought concerning either God or Nature,
confounding the eternal Decrees of God with the mutable Placits of men, and
feigning Nature to be so narrow and limited, as that man is the chiefest part
of the whole Creation?

IV. Having from this brief Enquiry learned, what is generally understood by
the word Miracle, what are the Opinions and Prejudices of the Vulgar concerning
Miracles, and whence those Opinions and Prejudices have proceeded: urged as
well by zeal for the Glory of God, (which is never propagated by erroneous
conceptions of his Nature, Power, Wisdom and Providence) as by Charity for the
unlearned part of Mankind (which is always by Ignorance seduced into
Superstition) I resolve to endeavor by a few plain Reasons to show the
unsoundness, yea the absurdity of their Doctrine, who teach, that in every
Miracle God acts by a power distinct from, and superior to that of Nature,
which is the universal Law by him ordained and fixed for government of his
Creatures.

V. To effect this, I persuade my self, I need do no more but convince the
judicious Reader of the verity of these four things. (1.) That nothing in the
World happens or comes to pass contrary to Nature, but that Nature keeps an
eternal, fixed, and immutable Order: (2.) That from Miracles we cannot come to
understand and certainly know either the Essence, or Existence, or Providence
of God; but that all these may far better be collected from the fixed and
immutable Order of Nature: (3.) That the holy Scripture it self, by the Decrees
and Volitions, and consequently the Providence of God, understands nothing else
but the very same Order of Nature, which necessarily follows from his eternal
Laws: (4.) That most men have erred in the manner of interpreting the Miracles
recorded in the holy Scriptures. For, these things being well proved, I see not
what can remain to frustrate my present Design.

VI. As for the FIRST therefore, viz. that all Events happen according to the
eternal Order of Nature; this may easily be inferred even from hence, that
whatsoever God wills or determines, involves eternal necessity and truth. For,
since the Intellect of God is not distinguished from his Will, and therefore to
say that God wills any thing, is all one with saying that he understands that
very thing; by the same necessity which follows from the divine Nature and
Perfection, it is a genuine and inevitable consequence, that for God to
understand any thing, as it is, is for him to will or decree the same, as it
is. But since nothing is necessarily true, but only from the divine Decree;
hence it most clearly follows, that the universal Laws of Nature are the mere
Decrees of God, which follow from the necessity and perfection of the divine
Nature. If therefore any thing should be contingent in Nature, that should be
repugnant to her eternal Laws; the same would be repugnant also to the divine
Decree, Intellect, and Nature: or if any man should affirm, that God does any
thing contrary to the Laws of Nature, he would be compelled to grant also, that
God acts contrary to his own Nature, than which nothing can be more absurd. The
same may be farther proved also by this, that the power of Nature is no other
but the power and virtue of God; and the power of God no other but the very
Essence of God, and certainly that must be eternally the same or immutable.
Nothing therefore can be contingent in Nature, that is repugnant to her
universal Laws; nay that is not convenient or agreeable to them, or follows not
from them. For whatsoever is done, is done by the Will and eternal Decree of
God, i. e. is done according to the Laws and Rules, which involve eternal
necessity and truth, and which though they be not all known to us, are
perpetually without the least omission or deviation strictly observed by
Nature. Nor does any sound Reason urge us to ascribe a limited power and virtue
to her, or to think that her Laws are fit only for some certain Events, and not
for all. For, since the virtue and power of Nature is the same with the virtue
and power of God; and her Laws and Rules, his Decrees (as was just now proved:)
we are obliged to believe, that the power of Nature is infinite, and her Laws
so made, as to extend their force to all things conceived by the divine
Understanding. Otherwise we could not avoid running into that dangerous Error
of the Multitude, that God has created Nature so impotent, and given her Laws
and Rules so barren, as that he is compelled sometimes to help her by new
Ordinances and supplies of Virtue, in order to her Support and Conservation,
and that things may succeed according to his Intention and Design. An Error
than which nothing is more alien from Reason, nothing more unworthy the Majesty
of the divine Nature.

Now from these Positions, that in Nature nothing can happen or come to pass,
which does not follow from her Laws; and that her Laws extend themselves to all
things conceived by the divine Understanding; and in fine that Nature keeps a
fixed and immutable Order: from these undeniable Truths, I say, it most clearly
follows, that the name of a Miracle cannot be otherwise understood, than
respectively to the opinions of men, and that a Miracle signifies nothing else
but a Work, the natural Cause of which we are not able to explicate by the
example of another usually observed by us; at least he is not able to
explicate, who writes or relates the Miracle. I might say, that a Miracle is
that, of which we are not able, by the light of Nature, to explain the Cause
from the Principles we understand of natural things: but, because Miracles have
been wrought, Ad captum Vulgi, to convince the Vulgar, which was wholly
ignorant of the Principles of natural things; certain it is, the Ancients took
that for a Miracle, which they could not explain in the same manner, by which
the Vulgar is wont to explain natural things, namely by recurring to Memory, so
as to recall to mind another like thing, which they are wont to imagine without
admiration. For the Vulgar always think they then sufficiently understand any
thing, when they do not admire it. Nor does it appear that either the Ancients
in their Times, or any of their Successors since even down to ours, have had
any other Criterion or Rule whereby to discern Miracles from other Contingents,
i. e. insolite or rare Events from usual, besides this here mentioned, viz:
that these seemed capable of Explication from the known Principles of natural
things, but those not, according to the judgment of the Vulgar. And therefore
we are not forbidden to think, that in the sacred Writings themselves many
things are related as Miracles, of which sufficient Causes may be given from
the known Principles of natural Philosophy; and that too without any the least
derogation from either the Glory of God, or the Authority of the Writers, or
from the scope or end for which the things were done and written; as I design
to prove when I shall have conducted the Reader to the 4 th. and last Head of
this brief Discourse, which concerns the Interpretation of Miracles. For now
the Clew of my Method brings us to the

VII. SECOND Position, viz. That from Miracles, neither the Essence, nor the
Existence, nor the Providence of God can be understood by us; but on the
contrary, that all these may be better perceived from the fixed and invariable
Order of Nature, which to demonstrate I thus proceed. Forasmuch as the
Existence of God is not per se known to us, it ought to be necessarily
concluded from Notions, whose verity is so evident, firm and impregnable, that
no power can be given or conceived, by which they can be changed; to us at
least, from the time wherein we conclude upon the Existence of God from them,
they ought to appear such, if we will secure our Conclusion from all possible
Doubts: for if we could conceive that those Notions might be changed by any
Power, whatsoever it be; then should we doubt of their verity, and consequently
of that of our Conclusion also, namely of God's Existence, nor could we ever be
certain of any other thing whatever. Besides this, we know not this or that
thing to be according to Nature, or repugnant to it, unless we can evince the
same to be convenient, or repugnant to those fundamental Notions or Principles.
Wherefore if we could conceive any thing in Nature possible to be done by any
Power whatever, that is repugnant to Nature; that thing would be repugnant to
those first Notions, and so ought to be rejected as absurd; or else (as was
just now intimated) we must doubt of the truth of those first Notions, and by
consequence also of the Being of God, and of all other things what ever and
howsoever perceived. Miracles then, if understood to be Works repugnant to the
fixed Order of Nature, are so far from evincing the Existence of God, that on
the contrary they would make us doubt of it, when without them we might be
absolutely certain of the same, knowing that all things in Nature follow a fixed
and immutable Order. But let it be supposed, that what cannot be explicated by
natural Causes, is a Miracle; which may be understood two ways, either as that
which has indeed natural Causes, but such as cannot be investigated by humane
Understanding; or as that which has no Cause but only the Will of God. Now
because all things that are done by natural Causes, are done also by the sole
Power and Will of God; we are under a plain necessity of coming to this
Conclusion, That a Miracle, whether it be effected by natural Causes, or not,
is a Work that transcends humane Understanding: but from a Work that transcends
humane Understanding, we can know nothing: for whatever we clearly and
distinctly understand, must come to be understood by us, either by it self, or
by some other thing which we clearly and distinctly understand; therefore from
a Miracle or Work that transcends our Capacity, we can understand neither the
Essence of God, nor his Existence, nor his Providence, nor any thing else
concerning him, or his Minister Nature. But on the contrary, since we certainly
know, that all things are determined and decreed by God, that the Operations of
Nature follow from the Essence of God, and that the Laws of Nature are the
eternal Decrees and Volitions of God; we are obliged absolutely to conclude,
that we so much the better know God and his Will, by how much the better we
know natural things, and more clearly understand how they depend upon their
first Cause, and how they operate according to the eternal Laws of Nature.
Wherefore by reason of our Understanding, those Works that we clearly and
distinctly understand, are with much more right to be called the Works of God,
and to be referred to his Will, than those we do not at all understand,
although they strongly exercise the Imagination, and ravish men into admiration
of them: forasmuch as only those Works of Nature, which we clearly and
distinctly understand, render the knowledge of God more sublime, and most
clearly show his Will and Decrees. They therefore that when they do not
understand a thing, have recourse to the Will of God, talk impertinently, show
more of Bigotry than Wit, and ridiculously profess their Ignorance.

VIII. Moreover, could we conclude any thing from Miracles, yet we could never
thence conclude of the Existence of God. For since a Miracle is a Work limited,
and never implies any but a certain and limited Power: most certain and evident
it is, that from such an Effect we cannot rightly infer the Existence of a
Cause whose Power is infinite, but at most of a Cause whose Power is greater. I
say, at most; because from many Causes concurring there may follow some Work,
whose Force and Power is indeed less than the Power of all its Causes put
together, but far greater than the Power of any one of them taken singularly.
But because the Laws of Nature (as I have already shown) extend themselves to
infinite things, and are conceived by us under a certain semblance of Eternity,
and Nature according to them proceeds in a certain and immutable Order; those
very Laws do in some measure indicate to us the Infinity, Eternity, and
Immutability of God. I conclude therefore, that by Miracles we cannot know God,
and his Existence, and his Providence; but that these may be far better
concluded from the fixed and immutable Order of Nature. In this Conclusion I
speak of a Miracle as understood to be nothing else but a Work that transcends
humane Understanding, or is believed to do so. For, if it were supposed to
destroy the Order of Nature, or to interrupt it, or to be repugnant to it; then
certainly it could not only give us no knowledge of God, but on the contrary
would take from us all the knowledge we naturally have, and make us doubt of
God, and of all other things.

Nor do I here acknowledge any difference betwixt a Work contrary to Nature,
and a Work above Nature; that is (as some are pleased to speak) a Work not in
truth repugnant to Nature, but which cannot be produced or effected by her
Power alone. For since a Miracle is done, Non extra naturam, sed in ipsa
natura; though it be held to be supra naturam, yet still must it interrupt the
Order of Nature, which we conceive to be, from the Decrees of God, fixed and
immutable. If therefore any thing should be done in Nature, that should not
follow from her Laws; it would necessarily be repugnant to the Order which God
has by the universal Laws of Nature established in the Universe; and
consequently the belief of it would make us doubt of all things else, and lead
us into Atheism. And thus, if I be not grossly mistaken in the force of the
Reasons here alleged, I have sufficiently demonstrated what in the second
place I intended: and from the same Reasons I take liberty to conclude de novo,
that a Miracle against Nature, or above Nature, is a mere absurdity; and
therefore that by a Miracle in holy Scripture nothing else can rightly be
understood, but such a Work of Nature, which either really transcends humane
Understanding, or is believed to do so.

IX. Nevertheless, for more assurance of the truth of this new Doctrine, I
think my self concerned to confirm that part of it which affirms, that from
Miracles we cannot know God. This I humbly conceive may be done by having
recourse to the Authority of the holy Scriptures themselves. For, though they
no where ex professo and plainly teach that Position, viz. that God is not made
known to us by Miracles: yet notwithstanding there are found in them many
places, from which rightly understood, the same may be concluded easily and
genuinely. Among these, chiefly from that of Deuteronomy 13. where Moses
commands the people of Israel to put to death a false and seducing Prophet,
though he should work Miracles. The words of the Text are these in our most
correct Translation. If there arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of
dreams, and gives thee a Sign or a Wonder, -- And the Sign or Wonder come to
pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go after other Gods (which
thou have not known) and let us serve them; -- Thou shall not hearken unto the
words of that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams; for the Lord your God proves
you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all your heart and with
all your soul. -- And that Prophet, or that dreamer of dreams shall be put to
death, etc. From which it clearly follows, that Miracles may be wrought even by
false Prophets, and that men, unless they be well guarded by the true knowledge
and cordial Love of God, may as easily be induced by Miracles to embrace and
serve false Gods, as to acknowledge and worship the true God. For he adds,
because the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love him, etc.

Secondly, The Israelites could not from so many Miracles form in their minds
any sound Conception or Notion of God or his Providence; as Experience it self
testifies. For, when they had persuaded themselves that Moses was gone from
them, presently they importune Aaron to furnish them with visible Deities, and
(to the indelible shame of their Nation) embrace the Image of a Calf for an
Idea or Representation of their God, which they at length from so many Miracles
formed to themselves. Asaph also, though he had often heard of, and believed
all the Miracles done among his Ancestors, yet doubted of God's Providence, and
had deflected from the right way of absolute dependence thereupon, had he not
at last understood true Happiness to consist only therein, and Religion in
Justice and Charity: as we read in Psalm 73. Nor was Solomon himself, though
excellent in Wisdom, and King of the Jews too, even when the Affairs of that
Nation were at the highest point of Prosperity; able to form to himself any
competent Notion of God, after all he had read concerning the Miracles recorded
in the Books of Moses. For he more than once (Eccles. 3. v. 19, 20, 21. and
Chap. 9. v. 2, 3, etc.) confesses, he suspected all things to happen by
Chance: so far seems he to have been from concluding a divine Providence from
belief of those Miracles. And as for the Prophets; it may be without much
labor collected from their Writings, that few or none of them well understood,
how the Order of Nature and the Events of men could be brought to consist with
the Conception or Notion they had formed in their Mind of the Providence of
God: which yet has been always very clear to Philosophers, who endeavor from
clear Conceptions rightly to understand things as they are; those I mean, who
constitute true Felicity in nothing but Virtue and Tranquillity of Mind, not
studying to bring Nature to obey them, but on the contrary to bring themselves
to obey Nature: as certainly knowing, that God directs Nature, as the universal
Laws thereof, not as the particular Laws of humane Nature require; and so that
he takes care not only of Mankind, but of the whole Universe. Constant it is
therefore, and that too even from sacred Writ, that Miracles do not give a true
knowledge of God, nor clearly teach his Providence; which is what I designed to
prove. And as for what is found in some places of the Scripture, that to some
unattentive Readers may seem perhaps irreconcilable to this my Doctrine; as
(in Exodus 10. v. 2.) that God hardened the heart of Pharaoh and the hearts of
his servants, and showed wonderful Signs before them, that the Israelites might
know him to be God: it does not follow from thence, that Miracles do in truth
teach us to know and acknowledge God, but only that the Jews had such Opinions,
as that they might be easily convinced by those Miracles. For evident it is,
that the Prophetic Reasons mentioned in Scripture, or such as are formed from
Revelation, are drawn, not from universal and common Notions, but from the
granted (however absurd) Opinions of those to whom the things are revealed, or
whom the holy Spirit intends to convince. Which might here, if I had not firmly
resolved not to prolong this Discourse by Digressions, be proved from many
Examples, and also by the testimony of St. Paul, who with the Greeks made
himself a Greek, and with the Jews a Jew; that is, conformed his Doctrine
sometimes to the common Opinions of the Grecians, sometimes to those of the
Jews. But though the Miracles done in the sight of the Egyptians might convince
them, and the Jews also, from their common Opinions: yet could they not give a
true Idea and knowledge of God, but only bring both Nations to concede, that
there was a divine Numen more powerful than all things known to them, and that
this divine Numen took more care of the Hebrews, all whose Affairs at that time
succeeded most happily even above their hope, than of the Egyptians or any
other People whatever; but not that God takes equal care of all men, which
Philosophy alone can teach. And therefore the Jews, and all other men who have
not, unless from the disparile state of humane Affairs and the unequal Fortune
of men, known the Providence of God, have persuaded themselves that the Jews
Nation was more beloved by God than the rest of Mankind, though the Jews
exceeded not the rest in the Perfections of humane Nature, or in their
Inclinations to Virtue and Piety; as may be soon collected from their History.
I conclude therefore, that Miracles teach not men the true knowledge of God and
of his Providence: and find my self at liberty to proceed to my

X. THIRD Position, which you may remember to be this; That according to the
true sense of the holy Scriptures themselves, by the Decrees and Commands of
God, and consequently by the Providence of God, nothing else is signified but
the sixth and immutable Order of Nature: that is, that when the Scripture says,
that such or such a thing was done by God or by the Will of God, it does really
mean no other but this, that the Fact was performed according to the Laws and
Order of Nature; not as the Vulgar thinks, that Nature ceased to proceed in her
due course whilst the thing was in doing, or that her Order was for some time
interrupted. The Scripture indeed does not directly teach such things which
belong not to the Doctrine thereof; because it designs not to show the Natural
Causes of things, nor to teach things merely speculative: and therefore what I
here propose to my self to prove, must be by consequence deduced from some
Histories of the Scripture, which are casually related prolixly and with many
Circumstances. Of which I will produce a few, as Examples of the rest.

In the first Book of Samuel, chap. 9. and verse. 15, and 16. it is related,
that God revealed to Samuel, that he would send Saul to him; and yet God sent
him not expressly, as men are wont to send Messengers on purpose to others, but
this Mission of Saul by God was nothing but the very Order of Nature. For Saul
was in quest of Asses which he had lost (as is related in the same Chapter) and
now deliberating to return home without them, by the counsel of his Servant he
diverts his Journey to the Prophet Samuel, to know from him where he might find
his Asses, nor can it be collected from the whole Narration, that he had any
other Mandate from God, besides this Series of natural Causes or Order of
Nature, to address himself to Samuel.

In Psalm 105. v. 24. it is said, that God changed the mind of the Egyptians, so
that they hated the Children of Israel; and yet that this mutation also was
wholly natural, appears from Exodus chap. 1. where an account is given of the
Reason, and that no light one neither, why the Egyptians reduced the Israelites
to Servitude, viz. lest the Israelites being grown too numerous and mighty,
should in case of War join with their Enemies and overpower them.

In Genes. 9. v. 13. God says to Noah, that he would give the Rainbow in the
Clouds for a Sign: which action of God was no other but a certain refraction
and reflection of the Rays of the Sun, which they suffered in the small drops of
Water whereof the Cloud consisted. So that the Phenomenon it self was then (as
now) a natural Meteor, only the Signality was new.

In Psalm 147. v. 18. the natural action and warmth of the Wind, by which the
Hoar-frost and Snow are thawed and melted, is called the Word of God; and so
are the Wind and Cold also in verse. 15. In like manner Wind and Fire are called
in Psalm. 104. verse. 4. God's Angels and Ministers. All which places, with many
other of the like importance frequently occurring in sacred Writ, most clearly
show, that the Decree, Command, Saying, and Word of God, signify nothing else
but the Action and Order of Nature: and therefore it is not to be doubted, but
that all the Miracles recounted in the Scripture, came to pass naturally; and
yet notwithstanding are duly referred to God, because his Power and the Power
of Nature are one and the same; and because it is not the design of the
Scripture to explain Events by their natural Causes, but only to relate those,
which surprise the Imagination; and that also in such a method and style, which
serves more familiarly and easily to excite Admiration, and consequently
Devotion in the Minds of the Vulgar. If therefore in the Scripture there be
found some Things or Facts, whose Causes we understand not, and which seem to
have been done besides or contrary to the Order of Nature; they ought not to
amuse us, nor to hinder us from believing, that what has really happened, happened
naturally. Which is yet farther confirmed by this, that in Miracles were found
many Circumstances, though not always noted in the Narrations, chiefly when
they are described in a Poetic style: the Circumstances, I say, of Miracles
show clearly, that they require natural Causes. For instance, to infest the
Egyptians with Scabs, it was requisite Moses should sprinkle Ashes of the
Furnace upward into the Air, ( Exodus 9. v. 8.) Locusts also at the natural
Command of God, namely by an East Wind blowing strongly a whole day and a
night, came up and covered the Land of Egypt: and left it again, being carried
away by as mighty a West-wind (Exodus 10. v. 14, 19.) By the same Command of
God, namely an East Wind, that blew most strongly the whole night, the Red Sea
gave way to the Israelites (Exodus 14. v. 21.) The same may be inferred also
from the manner of the Prophet Elisha's raising up the Shunamites Son, that
perhaps only seemed to be dead. For Elisha thought it necessary to lay his Body
upon the Child's Body, to put his Mouth upon his Mouth, his Eyes upon his Eyes,
his Hands upon his Hands, and to stretch himself often in that posture; and all
this to excite Heat and Motion in the vital Parts of the Child, and
Sternutation in his Brain, until the Child opened his Eyes first, and then
neez'd seven times: More Examples of this kind might easily be brought hither
out of the Books of the Old Testament, were not these already alleged
sufficient to evince, that various Circumstances and natural Actions are
required to the production of Miracles, and consequently that they are all
effected by God according to the Order of Nature, not by interrupting or
perverting it. I see not therefore, why it may not be lawful for us to believe,
that though the Circumstances of Miracles be not always delivered in the
Narrations of them, nor their natural Causes assigned; yet they were not
effected without them. The same is constant also from Exodus 14. v. 27. where
it is only related in short, that at the bare beck of Moses, and the stretching
forth of his Hand, the Sea flowed back upon the Egyptian Host, without the
least mention of any Wind that might impel the Waters: and yet in the Canticle,
or Song of Moses, (chap. 15. v. 10.) it is said expressly, this Miracle was
performed by God's blowing with a most violent Wind upon the Sea.

XI. Here some perhaps will object, that we find in the Scripture very many
things, which seem absolutely incapable of Solution by any natural Causes
whatsoever; as that the Sins of men could cause Famine, and their Prayers bring
down Rain and cause Fertility of the Earth, and that Faith could restore Sight
to the Blind, and others equally strange. But this Objection I have (I think)
prevented, where I asserted, that it is not the design or scope of the
Scripture to teach the knowledge of things by their next Causes, but only to
relate them in that Order or Method, and in those Phrases, by which it may most
efficaciously move men, and chiefly the Vulgar, to Devotion and Reverence
toward God; for which Reason it many times speaks of natural things, yea even
of God himself very improperly; as aiming to affect and occupy the Imagination
of men, not to convince their Reason. For should the Scripture relate the Fall
and Devastation of any Empire, Kingdom, or Commonwealth, as politic Historians
are wont to do, assigning all the remote, concurrent, and proxime Causes
thereof: the Narration would not at all affect and commove the common People:
who yet are apt to be strongly surpised, and as it were charmed into
Admiration and Devotion, when the whole Revolution is described in Strains and
Figures of Poesy, and referred only to the immediate Power and Decree of God.
When therefore the Scripture relates, that the Earth became barren for the Sins
of men, or that the Blind recovered Sight by Faith; we have no more reason to
be moved to admiration, than when it tells us, that God is angry, sorrowful,
penitent of his Promises or Facts, mindful of his Promise upon sight of the
Sign pre-ordain'd, and many other like things, which are either delivered
Poetically, or related according to the pre-conceiv'd Opinions and Prejudices
of the Writer. Wherefore we here absolutely conclude, that all the Events that
are truly related in the Scripture to have come to pass, proceeded necessarily
(as all other Contingents do) according to the immutable Laws of Nature; and
that if any thing be found, which can be apodictically demonstrated to be
repugnant to those Laws, or not to have followed from them: we may safely and
piously believe the same not to have been dictated by divine Inspiration, but
impiously added to the sacred Volumes by sacrilegious men: for whatever is
against Nature, is against Reason; and whatever is against Reason, is absurd,
and therefore also to be rejected and refuted.

XII. But lest any man should, by misinterpreting any Miracle, suspect that he
has found in the Scripture something that is repugnant to the Light of Nature
or right Reason; it concerns me now to come to the FOURTH and last Part of my
present Subject, viz. the Interpretation of Miracles. Of this therefore I will
deliver (...) of many Thoughts, and by an Example or two endeavor to
illustrate them.

It very rarely happens, that men relate any Action simply, and as it was
really done, without mixing with it somewhat of their own Judgment. Nay when
they see or hear any thing new and surprising, unless they circumspectly defend
themselves from their own pre-conceiv'd Opinions, they are for the most part
prone to be so blinded and pre-possess'd by them, that they apprehend in their
Brain quite another thing than what they see or hear to have come to pass;
chiefly if the thing done exceed the Capacity of either the Reporter, or the
Hearer, and when the same is likely to bring some considerable Advantage or
Emolument to the Reporter, if it be believed to have come to pass in such or
such a manner. Hence doubtless it comes, that men in their Chronicles and
Histories rather relate their own Conjectures and Opinions, than things as they
were really done; and that one and the same Case or Event is by two men, of
different Opinions and Judgments, so diversely related, that they seem to speak,
not of one Case, but two; and in fine, that it is not very difficult to a man
that reads with attention, to investigate the Opinions of the Chronographer or
Historian merely from his Narrations. To confirm this, I might bring hither
many Examples, as well of Philosophers, who have written Natural Histories, as
of Chronographers; if I did not think it superfluous so to do. I will therefore
content my self with one pertinent and remarkable Example taken out of holy
Scripture, and then leave the Reader from thence to judge of the rest.

In the time of Joshua, the Hebrews (perhaps with all other Nations) believing
the Sun to be carried round the (...) in its diurnal Motion, and the Earth to
stand still perpetually; accommodated to this their pre-conceiv'd Opinion, the
Miracle that happened to them, when they were fighting against those five Kings
of the Amorites. For they have not simply related, that that day was longer
than any other day; but that the Sun and Moon then stood still, or ceased from
their Motions. And this could not but serve mightily to their advantage, at
that time, to convince their Ethnic Enemies, who adored the Sun and Moon, and
to prove by Experience it self, that those celestial Luminaries were under the
Command of another God, at whose beck they were forced to stop their Course,
and change their natural Order. Wherefore they conceived, partly from Religion,
partly from their pre-conceiv'd Opinions, the thing to have come to pass far
otherwise than it might really have happened; and related the same accordingly.
To interpret therefore Scripture -Miracles, and to understand from the
Narrations of them, how they really happened; it is necessary to know the
Opinions of those who first reported them, and who transmitted them down to
after-Ages by their Writings; and to distinguish the Narrations from that which
their Authors Senses might represent to their surpised Imaginations: otherwise
we shall confound their Opinions and Judgments with the Miracle it self, as it
really came to pass; nay more, we shall confound also things which have really
happened, with things purely imaginary, and which were only Prophetic
Representations. For in Scripture many things are related as real, and which
were also believed to be real even by the Relators themselves; that
notwithstanding were only Representations formed in the Brain, and merely
imaginary: as that God, the supreme Being, descended from Heaven (Exodus 19. v.
28. and Deuteron. 5. v. 28.) upon Mount Sinai, and that the Mountain therefore
smoked, because God came down upon it surrounded with Fire; that Elias
ascended to Heaven in a fiery Chariot drawn by fiery Horses: which were only
Representations accommodated to their Opinions, who delivered them down to us,
as they had been represented to them, viz. as things actually done. For all men
of Understanding above the Rabble, know, that God has no right nor left Hand,
that he is neither moved nor quiet, uncircumscrib'd by Place, but absolutely
infinite, and that in him are comprehended all Perfections. All these
Proprieties of his, I say, are known to those considering men, which judge
things from the Perceptions of a pure Intellect, and not as the Imagination is
affected by the outward Senses; as the Vulgar is wont, which therefore imagines
God to be Corporeal, and like an Emperor sitting in a Throne above the Stars in
the Convexity of Heaven, the distance of which they believe not to be very
great from the Earth. From these gross Imaginations and Opinions of common
Heads it is, that the Writers of holy Scripture, accommodating their Narrations
many times to vulgar Capacities, describe many Events in Expressions familiar
and suitable to those pre-conceiv'd Opinions; which therefore ought not to be
received by Philosophers as real. Besides, to understand how Miracles really
happened, it is requisite to be well versed in all the Idioms, Phrases and
Tropes of the ancient Hebrews: for he that does not understand and attend to
all these, will be apt to feign and add to the Scripture many Miracles, which
the Writers of it never thought of; and consequently remain ignorant, not only
how the Miracles that have been written, came to pass, but even of the true
Sense and Mind of the Writers. For Example, the Prophet Zacharias (chap. 14. v.
7.) speaking of War to come, says; And it shall come to pass in that day, that
the light shall not be clear, nor dark -- But it shall be one day which shall
be known to the Lord, not day, nor night; but at evening time it shall be
light, etc. Now by these words he seems to predict a mighty Miracle; and yet to
a man conversant in the Language, Phrases, and Style of the Prophets, it will
soon appear, that nothing is signified by him but this, That the Battle shall
be siercely fought by both sides, the event of it all the day known only to
God, but in the evening the Jews shall obtain the victory: for in such
Allegories and Phrases, the Prophets were wont to soretel and write the
Victories and Calamities of Nations, signifying those by light and day, these
by darkness and night. Thus we find Esaia (chap. 13.) describing the Ruin and
Devastation of Babylon in these words; The Stars of Heaven, and the
Constellations thereof, shall not give their light; the Sun shall be darkened
in his going forth, and the Moon shall not emit the splendour of her light:
which Prodigies no man of Understanding believes to have happened at the
Destruction of that mighty City; as neither those the same Prophet adds in the
subsequent Verse; I will shake the Heavens, and the Earth shall remove out of
her place. Thus again in chap. 48. verse. ult. to signify to the Jews, that
they should return from Babylon to Jerusalem securely, and suffer no thirst in
the Journey, he says; And they thirsted not when he led them through the
deserts; he caused the waters to flow out of the rock for them. By which words,
I say, Esaia intended only this, that the Jews shall find Fountains in the
Deserts (as Travelers commonly do) with which they shall mitigate their
thirst. For, when by the consent of Cyrus they went to Jerusalem, it is evident
even from the History of their return thither, that no such Miracles happened
to them. After this manner of speaking, in the holy Scripture occur very many
things, which were only old modes of expression among the Jews, and therefore
ought not to be interpreted according to the Letter, chiefly where Miracles are
rashly supposed to be intimated. To recite all these, is (after what I have
here said) unnecessary; and all I would have remarked in the general, is only
this, that the Hebrews were accustomed in these and the like phrases to speak,
not only ornately, but also, and chiefly devotely. For which very Reason in the
1 st. of Kings, chap. 21. and Jeb 2. v. 9. is found, to bless God, for, to
curse: and for the same, they referred all things immediately to God, and
therefore the Scripture seems to relate nothing almost but Miracles; and that
too when it speaks of things most plainly natural, of which I have already
alleged some Examples. When therefore the Scripture tells us, that God hardened
the heart of Pharaoh; we are not bound to believe, that it signifies any thing,
but this, that Pharaoh was contumacious or obstinate. And where it is said, that
God opened the Windows of Heaven, we may safely interpret the words to contain
no other sense but this, that Rain fell down from the Clouds in great
abundance; and sic de aliis. If our Reader then, laying aside all superstitious
Prejudices, shall be pleased to consider and remark these Instances, and withal
know, that in the Scripture many things are related briefly, without any
Circumstances, and imperfectly; I am fully persuaded, he will therein find
nothing that can be apodictically demonstrated to be repugnant to the Light of
Nature or right Reason, but on the contrary many things, which how obscure
soever they may seem at first, he will be able, upon a little Examen and
Meditation, to understand and interpret according to the genuine sense and
meaning of the Writer. And thus, I think, I have with sufficient clearness
proved what I intended.

XIII. But yet, before I put an end to this Discourse, there is one thing more,
of which it concerns me to advertise the Reader, and it is this; That the Method
here proposed for Interpretation of Miracles, ought not to be accommodated to
the prejudice of Prophesies occurring frequently in the Scripture. For of these
nothing ought to be affirmed, but what may be concluded from Fundamentals
revealed in Scripture; whereas the Conclusions precedent in this Discourse,
have been inferred only from Principles known by the Light of Nature. Prophecy
is a thing which transcends the limited Capacity of humane Understanding, nor
can any man comprehend wherein chiefly it consists, unless from Fundaments
revealed, which are purely Theological. But as for Miracles; because what I
here principally enquire (viz. whether we may safely admit, that in Nature any
thing can possibly happen, that is repugnant to the eternal Laws of Nature, or
that may not follow from them) is a Question Philosophical: I have therefore
thought it, as more proper, so also more advised, to investigate the same from
Fundaments or Principles known by the Light of Nature. I say, more advised;
because I could have solved this Question from only Positions and Fundaments of
the Scripture it self; to manifest which, I will now briefly show the
possibility thereof.

The Scripture in some places affirms of Nature in general, that she
perpetually observes a fixed and immutable Order; as in Psalm. 148. v. 6. He has
established them [the Heavens and all the Celestial Host, etc.] for ever: he
has made a Decree which shall not pass: and Jerem. 31. v. 35, 36. Thus says
the Lord, which gives the Sun for a light by day, and the Ordinances of the
Moon and of the Stars for a light by night, which divides the Sea when the
waves thereof roar. -- If those Ordinances depart from before me, says the
Lord, then, etc. And the Philosopher in his Ecclesiast. 1. v. 9. says
expressly, that nothing new happens in Nature: and in verse. 11, 12. illustrating
that Assertion, adds, that though a thing may come to pass, which seems new,
yet really it is not new, but the like has happened in Ages so long since past,
that no memory of them has reached down to us: There is, says he, no
remembrance of former things; neither shall there be any remembrance of things
that are to come, with those that shall come after. Again in chap. 3. v. 2. he
says, That God has appointed a season to every thing, and a time to every
purpose under the Sun: And at verse. 14. he says farther, I know that
whatsoever God does, it shall be for ever: nothing can be put to it, nor any
thing taken from it, etc. All which Texts most clearly teach, that Nature
always keeps her fixed and immutable Order, that God has been the same in all
Ages, as well unknown as known to us, and that the Laws of Nature are so
perfect and fertile, that nothing can be added unto, nothing detracted from
them, and in fine, that Miracles are not looked upon as new things, unless by
reason of men's Ignorance. These remarkable Truths therefore are (you see)
expressly taught in the sacred Books: but in them it is no where taught, that
any thing can happen in Nature, which is repugnant to her eternal Laws, or
which is impossible to follow from them; and therefore I think it unreasonable,
to impute such Doctrine to the Scripture. To these Arguments be pleased to
subjoyn some of our precedent Reasons, viz. that Miracles require Causes and
Circumstances, that they necessarily proceed from the divine Decree, that is
(as we have shown even from the Scripture) from the Laws of Nature and her
established Order, and in fine, that Miracles may be wrought also by Seducers
and Impostors, as is plain from Deuteronomy. 13. and Mat. 24. v. 24. and then, I
presume, you will perceive it to be genuinely consequent from all these
Premises, that Miracles have been natural things, and ought so to be
explicated, as to seem neither new (that I may use Solomon's word) nor
repugnant to Nature. And that you may the more easily so explicate them, I have
set down some certain Rules taken from the Scripture it self. But though I say,
that the Scripture teaches these things, yet I do not mean that it teaches them
as Precepts or Documents necessary to Salvation, but only that the Prophets
embraced them as we do: and therefore it is free for every man to think of
them, according as he shall judge it most conducive to his devoting himself to
the Worship of God, and the Exercise of Religion, with his whole mind. Which
agrees exactly with the Sentiment of that wise and grave Author Josephus,
expressed in the conclusion of his 2 d. Book of Antiquities, in these words.
Nullus vero discredat verbo miraculi, si antiquis hominibus, and malitia
privatis via salut is liquet per mare fact a, sive voluntate Dei, sive sponte
revelata: dum and eis, qui cum Alexandro Rege Macedoniae fuerunt olim, and
antiquit us a resistentibus Pamphilicum mare divisum sit, and cum aliud iter
non esset, transitum praebuit iis, volente Deo per eum Persarum destruere
imperium; and hoc confitentur omnes, qui act us Alexandri scripserunt. De his
itaque sicut placuerit unicuique existimet. In which Josephus modestly declares
his Judgment of Miracles. I add also that of Valesius, a pious man and
profound Philosopher, who (in sacrae Philosophiae cap. 57. in Psalm. 77.) having
asserted that the Manna wherewith God fed the Israelites in the Desert, though
different in some qualities from other sorts of Manna described by Physicians,
was yet produced secundum leges naturae; wisely subjoyns this Defense of
himself. Neque enim elevo Dei concu^sum, cum naturales rerum causas investigo;
sed laudo insinitam ej us sapientiam, qui it a omnia disponit, ut etiam quae
portentosissima sunt, vide antur bona ex part secundum naturalem rerum ordinem
evenisse.

Sanctus Augustinus in Epistola 7. quae est ad Marcellinum. Si ratio contra
divinarum Scripturarum autoritatem redditur, quamvis acuta sit, fallit
verisimilitudine; nam vera esse non potest: rursum, si manifestissimae
certaeque rationi, velut Scripturarum sanctarum objicitur autoritas; non
intelligit qui hoc facit, and non Scripturarum illarum sensum, ad quem
penetrare non potest, sed suum potius objicit veritati nec quod in eis, sed
quod in seipso, velut pro iis, invenit, opponit.

Burnetius in Telluris Theoria sacra, lib. 1. cap. ult. Ut in deducendis rerum
originibus, non temere recurrendum est ad Primam Causam; ita nec in explicandis
effect is singularibus, ad Miracula. Hoc omnes agnoscunt, atque etiam frustra
ac temere eo recurri, cum res aliunde per causas naturales satis explicari
potest. Satis autem explicatur aliquod Phenomenon, eujus rations redduntur
adaequatae, idque juxta analogiam Naturae: ita scilicet, ut caetera Natura
eidem explicationi consentiat and suffragetur.

Dr. Sprat in his Hist. of the Royal Society, page 360. It is a dangerous
Mistake, into which many good men fall; that we neglect the Dominion of God
over the World, if we do not discover in every Turn of humane Actions many
supernatural Providence, and miraculous Events. Whereas it is enough for the
Honor of his Government, that he guides the whole Creation in its wonted
Course of Causes and Effects: as it makes as much to the Reputation of a
Princes Wisdom, that he can rule his Subjects peaceably by his known and
standing Laws, as that he is often forced to make use of extraordinary Justice
to punish, or reward.

FINIS.

