ANIMA MUNDI: OR, AN Historical Narration OF THE Opinions of the Ancients
Concerning MAN'S SOUL After this Life: According to unenlightned Nature*

By CHARLES BLOUNT, Gent.

Qui Iovem principem volunt, falluntur nomine, sed de una potestate
consentiunt. Min. Fell.

London: Printed, and are to be sold by Will. Cademan, at the Pope's Head in
the Lowerwalk of the New-Exchange in the Strand. 1679.

To the Reader.
MEthinks I already behold some haughty Pedant, strutting and looking down from
himself as from the Devils Mountain upon the Universe, where amongst several
other inferior objects, he happens at last to cast his eye upon this Treatise;
when after a quibble or two upon the Title, he falls foul upon the Book it
self, damning it by the name of an Atheistical, Heretical Pamphlet: and to
glorify his own Zeal, under the pretense of becoming a Champion for Truth,
summons Ignorance and Malice for his Seconds: But such a Person understands not
wherein the Nature of Atheism consists, how conversant soever he may otherwise
be in the Practice of it. It were Atheism to say, there is no God; and so it
were (though less directly) to deny his Providence, or restrain it to some
particulars, and exclude it in reference to others. Such are Atheists, who
maintain such Opinions as these: and so are those Heretics, who err in
Fundamentals, and continue obstinately in such errour's. But the ignorant
Vulgar people (whose Superstition is grounded upon the assimulating God with
themselves) are apt to think that every one they Hate, are God Almighty's
Enemies; and that whosoever differs from them in Opinion, (though in never so
trivial a matter) are Atheists, or Heretics at least: Not rightly considering
the words of St. Peter, That in every Nation, he who fears the Lord and
works Righteousness, is accepted with him. And Minucius Felix says well to
the same purpose, He is the best Christian, who makes the honestest man.
Heresy is an act of the Will, rather than Understanding; a Lie, rather than a
Mistake: and thus St. Austin expresses it, saying, Errare possum, Haereticus
esse nolo. Heresy and Schism, (says the ingenious Mr. Hales) as commonly now
used, are two Theological Scare-Crows, with which they who uphold a Party in
Religion, used to fright away such as making an enquiry into it, are ready to
relinquish and oppose it, if it appear either erroneous or suspicious. For as
Plutarch reports of a Painter, who having unskilfully painted a Cock, drove
away all the Cocks and Hens he could find, that so the imperfection of his own
Art might not appear, by comparing it with Nature: so Men for some ends, not
willing to admit of any fancy but their own, endeavor to hinder all enquiries
by way of Comparison, that so their own deformity may not appear. Therefore if
any man blames me for comparing Christianity with Paganism, it shows nothing
but his unworthy distrust of the sufficiency of that Religion he professes.

There are two sorts of Judges unto whom all Writers are obnoxious, viz. the
Ignorant, and the Judicious. As for the Ignorant, they are such men as I before
was speaking of, than whose Approbation I dread nothing more: Simili simile
gaudet, is a maxim that holds true as well in all other things, as Physic; and
there is nothing would make me have so ill an opinion of my self, as to hear
one of them commend me. But the other Judge, viz. the man of Learning and
Judgment, is the He I fear, and before him only will I arraign my self. Nonage
is the general Plea for the First Fruits of Young men, but that I disown; for
he that thinks himself old enough to write a Book, can hardly excuse the folly
that is in it, by calling himself Child: Nor have I ever seen a Piece that was
written by one of 16 years of age, which was fitting for one of 17 to read;
such Writings being commonly like Poems that were made by men when they were
half drunk, unintelligible to any persons but such as are in the same
condition. Therefore waving all such frivolous excuses, I shall first disclose
those things which are most liable to censure, and then clear my self as well
as I am able.

Perhaps there may be these three Exceptions taken against this Treatise, viz.
my numerous Quotations, or Latin Sentences, my rambling from my Subject, and
my uneloquent Style.

First then, as for my many Quotations, whether in Latin or English, the
Nature of the discourse requires it. Were it a bare Moral Essay, wherein I made
use of none but my own Fancy, there to come in with a dixit autem Dominus, or
other such scraps of Latin, were to render my self ridiculous: But this being
a discourse of other men's Opinions, they would be thought my own, though
fathered upon the Ancient Heathens, did I not cite my Authorities from the
Authors themselves; so that I am enforced to play the Pedant even in my own
defense. And yet notwithstanding, I have had some Enemies, who were so
disingenuous, as to cast that Reproach upon me when they saw this discourse but
in Embryo: so ridiculous as well as uncharitable, were their Censures. A man
that with diligent search and care should collect together the Statues or
Pictures of diverse eminent Persons, and expose them in some public place to
the view of all Spectators, would not thereby procure to himself the repute of
a good Painter or Statuary; and yet certainly this Act of his were laudable,
and in some measure obliging: but it would render him most immodestly arrogant,
if among the Pourtraictures of those eminent men, he should erect his own. Now
this would be my case, if while I present you with the conceptions of great
Philosophers concerning the Infinite Being, I should vent any part of my own
inconsiderable fancy among theirs: Wherefore expect it not, for I neither have
vanity nor ability sufficient to erect an Opinion of my own; but acknowledge my
self totally subdued under the commands of that Government, whereto Providence
has assign*d my Life. Besides, in this Tract is comprehended a Relation of
various Sects contradictory the one to the other, so as I cannot be said to
hold them all: Neither (as I know of) have I any where showed my self the least
partial; but if one had stronger Arguments to justify their Opinion, than the
other, blame not me who deliver them but recitative, and am as it were their
Amanuensis, without ever concerning my self with the intrinsic value of their
Doctrines.

As to the second exception, that charges me with rambling from my Subject, if
this be an error, it is an error on the right hand, wherein I am but better
than my word. Constancy is not so absolutely necessary in Authors, as in
Husbands: And for my own part, when I have my Pen in my hand, and Subject in my
head, I look upon my self as mounted my Horse to ride a Journey, wherein
although I design to reach such a Town by Night, yet will I not deny my self
the satisfaction of going a mile or two out of the way, to gratify my senses
with some new and diverting prospect. He that always keeps at home, and never
goes so far as to the end of his own Parish, only once a year in Procession,
may be called a good Husband, but God deliver me from such a Companion. I
confess I cannot but love both Men and Books of a Rambling Fancy, for even
their very Extravagancies are diverting: Now he that is of this humor, will be
sure to give me his voice. However, in this I have honor to imitate (though
imperfectly) the great Montaigne, whose umbrage is sufficient to protect me
against any one Age of Critics.

Now for the third and last exception, against my Style; I was never so well
accomplished as to study the Iingling and Cadences of words, the happy
expressions, the more soft or harsh toned Syllables how to place them right;
nor had I ever the modishness to search in the Looking-glass which words gave
the most graceful motion to the Lips: No, I confess my only endeavor is to
write and speak so as to be understood; and as for Rhetoric, I leave that to
those who delight more in the study of Words, than Nature of things. Rarely
have I seen Orations full of Fancy, for Orators bring matter to words, and not
words to matter; besides, the gravity of Philosophy would as ill become fine
Language, as the Philosopher himself fine Clothes.

These are the main Exceptions which I conceive may be urged against me: but if
I have omitted any other, it proceeds from the abhorrence I have to read over
that thing twice, which I my self have written. This Piece I am sensible cannot
be altogether exempt from the evil Censures of some disaffected and interested
persons; as for instance, the Fanatics and others who pleaded a Call from God
to do the Work of the Devil, cutting off their Sovereigns Head, and are herein
exploded for it; also all manner of Hypocrites, who counterfeiting the true
Religion, are as much Traitors to Heaven, as those who counterfeiting Coyns,
venting false Metal for true, are Traitors to the King. By such persons as
these I expect to be condemned; but the Ingenious Reader (if impartial) will
not esteem it less worthy, for its sufferings under their Judgments: since by
the same Reason, he must also raise an outcry against the most sacred part of
Philosophy, because Socrates suffered under it. There is nothing so virtuous or
pious, which a contrary Faction will not decry: as on the other side, there is
nothing so mean or base, which has not from some Interested persons received
Adoration; even an Ape it self has not wanted Egyptian Syllogisms to back him,
so long as thousands lived by extolling him. Tantum Religio potuit suadere
malorum. Great is Diana of the Ephesians. But not to persecute you with too
long a Scotch Grace, before so short a Meal; pardon your coarse Entertainment,
and you are welcome.

Anima Mundi: OR, AN Historical Narration OF THE HEATHENS Opinions of Man's
SOUL after this Life.
I.
AS the luster of an Oriental Diamond is more clearly perceived, when compared
with counterfeit Stones; so Christianity appears in its greatest glory and
splendour, when compared with the obscurity of Paganism; the deformity of the
one, serving but as a foyl to the beauty of the other. Nor does the Divinity of
our Scriptures ever better appear, than when compared with the follies of the
Talmud, the Alchoran* or the Constitutions of Heathen Lawgivers; which is an
infallible sign of their Excellency, that they so well bear the Test of
comparison. Now upon these considerations, Arnobius, Minucius, Clemens,
Lactantius, Origin* Tertullian* and other Ancient Fathers of the first
Centuries, undertook to vindicate their Religion to the Heathens; which is also
the design of this Treatise: and if any one resents it otherwise, his want of
Charity betrays his Irreligion, and shows him to be none of the best Christian,
who thus whips the Fathers upon my back. Some men there are whose Fancies, like
weak Stomachs, turn the most wholesome food into corruption; and these are the
Enemies I expect. In this Discourse I undertake only to declare the absurd and
monstrous Doctrines of the Heathenish Superstition concerning this subject, as
far as may show the blind conjectures which mere Nature presented to their
Philosophers, yet not to all of them, but to those only which have been the
most considerable. And here I have not omitted to produce the most powerful
Arguments, which they made use of to justify their Vanities: partly, as
unwilling to fight against a shadow; and partly, as knowing our Religion scorns
to have them betrayed by a weak and dis-ingenuous representation of either
their Lives or Doctrines, Christianity being of it sell able to foyl them, even
in their richest dress.

II.
To begin then with the Original of their Superstition: It did certainly
proceed from some crafty discerning person, who having observed what is most
dear to Mankind, thought by pretending himself able to assist in the
preservation of that one particular, (whether he were so or no) he might
thereby procure an esteem and credit in the World: which having once obtained,
it would not be difficult under the pretense of other peoples good, to advance
his own. Thus observing that in this World the Body is every man's chief
Favorite, a wise Hippocrates comes and pretends to know what will conduce to
its health: being assured that Mankind, that sets so high a value upon life and
ease, would be largely bountiful to him who should be able to prolong and
preserve either; and from hence arises the Physician. In the same manner the
Lawgiver Primus in orb Deos fecit Timor.
observing a notion of some future Being implanted in every man's heart,
pretended to have some extraordinary way revealed to him from an invisible
Power, whereby he was able to instruct the People how to make that future
estate happy, if they would but pursue his directions* and the better to
countenance such a Revelation; they have absented themselves from the World
some time before they divulged it. Thus Minos having for twelve years led a
retired life in a Cave, at last came forth, and pretended to have spent all
that time in conversing with Jove, whose Son he feigned himself to be; also
that he had received from his mouth those Laws which he divulged to the People.
Also Numa Pompilius, after he had for some time concealed himself in a Wood,
appeared in public, and prescribed those Laws to the Romans, which he
pretended to have been delivered him by the Nymph Aegeria. A like Stratagem was
made use of by Pythagoras, who after two years retirement in a Den, feigned
himself to be risen from the dead, preaching up Rewards and Punishments in
another life, to the great terror of the People, who very much confided in his
Doctrine, because he had told them of all things which had happened amongst
them during the time of his absence: A thing very easy for him to do, after he
had been informed of the same from his Mother and Wife. Also Zamolxis (whom
Laertius and Herodotus call, Pythagoras his Disciple, though Suidas and others
oppose it) delivered those Laws to the Scythians, which he pretended to have
received in a certain Cave, where he had been conversing with the Gods. Nor did
Epimenides get himself less reputation, by his pretense of having slept fifty
years. And last of all, Mahomet having in the same manner retired himself into
the Mountains of Arabia, did there by the assistance of Sergius and two Jews,
compose that fabulous Law which he after divulged unto the World, as coming
from the Angel Gabriel, with whom he pretended himself very familiar. And thus
we see with what Arts each Lawgiver endeavored to establish their Laws among
men, thinking thereby to purchase that immortal Fame, which their Ambitions so
much desired: For as one of the Ancients well observed, Amari, coli, diligi
majus imperio est. But oh the Impiety of these Heathens, who fathered all their
Follies upon their Gods! not considering, that whosoever speaks in the name
of the Gods, intituleth them to whatsoever he publishes, and consequently if
his Doctrine be false, (as that of theirs must needs be, by reason of the
absurdities found therein) intituleth the Deities to false Doctrines.

III.
The next thing I shall insist upon, is their impious Opinions concerning the
Deity; which deserve the same reproof that a late ingenious and noble Writer
gave a rigid Predestinarian, affirming that God delighted in the death of
Mankind; Speak worse of the Devil if you can: For there was hardly any thing so
mean or base, as was not by some of them revered for a Deity; nor any Vice so
great, but some of their Gods were guilty of it. Wherefore Origin speaking of
the Egyptians, says thus to Celsus: When you approach their Sacred places, ye
shall meet with stately Groves, Chapels and Temples with magnificent Gates;
also with variety of mysterious Ceremonies; but when once you are entered and
got within their Temples, ye shall behold nothing but a Cat, or an Ape, a
Crocodile, Goat, or Dog, whereto they pay the most solemn veneration. But of
this I shall treat more at large in my discourse concerning Sacrifices, and
therefore now will return to that subject which the Title of my Book promises
to treat of.

IV.
In the first place, to discover the foundation of their Opinion concerning the
Soul, it was this, Iovis omnia plena; and of the World, Men's agitat molem: They
held God to be all in all, to be Infinite, (...).
and therefore but One; thinking that if there could be found any real thing,
(though but an Atom) which were no part of God, or any place wherein God were
not, then they could not esteem him to be Infinite, and everywhere present,
but thence excluded, and consequently limited, upon which account they denied a
Vacuum. Hence also they did not conceive the World (as some now do) to be a
great Body by it self, set apart from the Euripides. Horat.
Infinite God, but to be signified under that name, whose Being was in part
visible and exposed to our senses, and partly invisible as in its Spirituality,
not perceptible by our gross corporeal Organs, otherwise then in its outward
effects and productions: and that therefore no more of the Romans 1. 19, 20.
invisible things of God was known unto them, then what seemed of clear
inference from the visible: that in plain meaning, the Spiritual part of the
World was not by them discovered, further then was evidenced by its acting on
the Corporeal part, whereof though in the common form of speaking, when they
said God, they meant only the Spirit of God; and when they said World, they
meant grossly the material Globe: Yet the more knowing sort of Heathens did by
the World mean all corporeal Beings, both above and below, not allowing
plurallty of Worlds, but only one infinite Body, governed by the Divine Spirit,
acting all in all. Spiritus intus alit. So as when they mentioned Gods in the
plural number, they meant only diverse faculties, which their Soul of the World
( viz. God) had infused into several Creatures peculiar to them. Hence they
called every particular a Microcosm, or Little World, in some sort the Progeny,
or imperfect Copy of the Universe, as consisting of Body and Spirit; some more
perfect, as Man, and all animated Creatures; others less, as Plants, Minerals
and Stones: according as their several mixed bodily Temperaments were prepared
to receive a more or less pure degree of the Anima Mundi: not allowing more
Souls then one, although men gave them diverse names, according to the various
kinds of Creatures so animated. And this some held too Spiritual, to be any
more defiled by any diseased, nasty, or wicked Body, wherein it dwelt, then the
Sunbeams by shiniug into a Dungeon or Pesthouse.

V.
Now this Doctrine of the Soul seemed but ill to provide for Justice, either in
this life or another, however they allowed it Immortality in general, but
undertook not for its* disposal in any peculiar way; only that it lives here,
as long as it has vigor enough in it self to draw and digest to its own
support, fit and sufficient Nutriment out of the great World. But when its
Organs are either enfeebled, or by some accident disordered, that it can no
longer prey on the great World, then that preys upon it, and at death receives
back its Body and Spirit into it self: by which alternative Emanation of the
Universe into particulars, and their Restitution into the Universe, (without
any annihilation) the World (say they) enjoys a perpetual rejuvenescency. They
did by daily experience see composita dissolvi, and in their dissolution
nothing perished but that which was made up of the conjunction of those parts.
As when by death the Body and Soul were parted, the Man they thought was gone,
but the Spirit remained in its Original, and the Body in its Earth from whence
it came: and they when wrought again by Nature separately into new mixtures,
entered into a new state of Being* which they supposed no way concerned or
related unto the former, as we may see by the lines of the Poet:

Et si jam nostro sent it de corpore, postquam Lucretii lib. 3.

Distracta est animi natura animaeque potestas
Nil tamen hoc ad nos, coitu, qui, conjugioque
Corporis atque animae consistimus uniter apti.
Nec, si materiam nostram conlegerit aetas
Post obitum, rursumque redegerit, ut sit a nunc est:
Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae:
Pertineat quicquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum,
Interrupta semel cum sit retinentia nostri.
Et nunc nihil ad nos de nobis attinet, ante
Qui fuimus, etc. -- --
But only thought themselves assured, and held for an eternal verity, that
there never was, nor could be in Nature any Annihilation: however gross people
when things disappeared, considered not that they were dissolved into their
first Principles, but supposed them turned into Nothing: whereas if Nature did
admit of any Annihilation, the World, says Ocellus Lucanus, had long ago
vanished. Aristotle, Xenophon, Cicero, Averroes, and others, make the World
eternal, and void of all corruption: for not being able to comprehend whether
the Egg or the Bird were first generated, since no Bird could be without an
Egg, nor Egg without a Bird, therefore they conceived that the World, and the
beginning of every begotten thing, together with the end thereof, must be by
perpetual revolution sempiternal. So that this not admitting of any
Annihilation, caused their opinion of the Worlds Eternity. And the Stoics who
believed a final Conflagration, did not believe any Annihilation, any more then
of a Faggot, when it was burnt: but that there should be a new Heaven and a new
Earth, or rather that the Almighty Wisdom would produce some new Fabric
unconceivable by us, who are not able to conceive any thing whereof we have no
experience. Euripides, as the Translator renders him.


Genitum nihil emoritur,
Sed transpositum ultro citroque
Formam priorem alterat.
For say they, as Nature cannot create by making something out of nothing, so
neither can it annihilate by turning something Hackwell's Apol. lib. 1. cap. 4.
into nothing: From whence (says Dr. Hackwell) it follows* by consequence, that
as there is no access, so can there be no diminution in the Universe, no more
then in the Alphabet, by the insinite combination and transposition of Letters,
or in the Wax by the alteration of the Seal stamped upon it. Ocellus Lucanus
upon this subject writes, That if any should conceive the World to have been
made, he would not be able to find into what it is corrupted and dissolved,
since that out of which it was made, was before the Universe, as that into
which it shall be corrupted, will be after the Universe.

As for those things which are contained in the World, they have communion with
the World; but the World has communion with nothing else besides it self: for
all other things have not such a nature as is sufficient of it self, but stand
in need of communion with other things, as living Creatures, need respiration;
the Eye, light; and the other Senses, their several objects: Plants need the
juice of the Earth, for their growth: Nay the Sun, Ocell. Lucan. lib. 1.
Moon, Planets, and fixed Stars, require a certain portion of the Universe;
only the Universe stands in need of no other thing but it self. Now as Fire
which is able to give heat to other things, is of it self hot; so that which is
the cause of safety and perfection to other things, must of it self be safe and
perfect. Again, if the Universe be dissolved, it must be dissolved into
something, or nothing: not into something, for the Universe would not then be
totally corrupted, for something must be the whole Universe, or a part of it:
nor will it be annihilated, sor (says Ocellus) it is impossible that something
should be made of nothing, or reduced into nothing. Dr. Hackwell has well
observed, that no Prophets ever foretold the end of the World would ensue till
many years after their own deaths, being sure not to be proved Liars: according
to the Epigram,

Cur mundi sinem propiorem non facis? ut non Owen upon Napier.

Ante obitum mendax arguerere? sapis.
For they who prophecy the Worlds destruction, are upon sure grounds, viz.
that till it comes to pass, it may be expected. Josephus speaking of the Greeks
and other Nations, affirms, that every State and Kingdom have reported him that
was the first Founder of them* to be the first of the World: each Nation
reckoning their Antiquity but from some great change which happened among them.
And thus we are to understand the Original of the Greek History from Inachus
the Argive; not that he was the Original thereof, as some make him; but because
a most memorable alteration did then happen, some were so ignorant as to make
that construction thereof. For my own part, I who believe the Scriptures to be
the Word of God, do in this point, as in all others, resign up my poor Judgment
to that sacred Oracle; but if I did not, Josephus his Arguments would prove
altogether uneffectual unto me. For after he has Joseph. cont. Appion.
in his discourse against Appion, spent many lines in magnifying his
Countrymen the Jews, that they were the first Inhabitants of the Earth; He at
the last does in a manner confess, that he dares not nevertheless compare the
Monuments of the Jews, with those of the Egyptians, Chaldees and Phoenicians,
who dwell in such Countroys as were not so subject to the corruption of the
Air, and have carefully preserved the Records of their Country. Which is as if
he had said, that for as much as no other Nations but the Egyptians, Chaldees
and Phoenicians, have cortain Records of their Originals, therefore I will not
with them contend for Antiquity, but only with such as have no Records to show.
Also in the same Treatise Josephus makes use of Manethon, when it is for his
advantage, and to justify the Jews Antiquity, but in othermatters that are to
his disadvantage he rejects his Authority. But to return to the Heathen Opinion
of the Soul.

VI.
The most plausible Arguments they had to justify their wicked Opinion of the
Soul's mortality, or unrewarded condition, proceeded from their contemplation
of Man, whose Body when he dies, they plainly saw was by putresaction mingled
with the Body of the World, from whence it was: And by the same reason they
were so credulous as to believe his Soul mingled with the Soul of the World,
from whence that was. Their Priests also agreeing herewith, (though in another
form of words) taught, that in death the Soul went to God who gave it, and the
Body to the Earth of which it was composed: therefore as when the Sunbeams
shine into a dark room, and enlighten it, you may easily exclude it from
shining into the room, but can never intercept or cut those beams off from
their original, the Sun: the like relation they conceived the Soul of Man had
to the Soul of the World, whereto it ever has an inseparable conjunction: the
same also they held to be in all other Creatures, according to their several
degrees of animation from one and the same general Spirit, and that by reason
of its spirituality such passage could be no more hindered, then the Walls of a
Castle can hinder you from thinking what is within.

VII.
Ebencora an Arabian Philosopher, observing that Nature makes no sudden
transition from one extreme to another, and ever by some preparative degrees
fitting them to be invested into one another; so he willing to advance the Soul
into a more celestial condition, pretends that when it leaves the gross carnal
Body, it first mixes with some more subtle Body, (perhaps the Air) and so by
being more and more refined, receives a gradual capacity of a celestial
condition; not considering that the Spirit, when it is in any thing, is much
more spiritual then Air. But Hippocrates went further then this, who living in
a Republic, and so perhaps having his Philosophy infected with their kind of
Government, gives the Soul of all things a kind of reciprocal preferment and
recidivation, by rarefaction and condensation of its corporeal nature. For he
observing the dissolution of gross Bodies to be wrought by fermentation
intrinsic, which looses and ratisies them; as also that they are compacted by
condensation, whereby the Soul becomes wrought again into another gross Body,
and that the spiritual does ever act and govern the corporeal: He (I say) from
these Operations conceived a kind of alternative reign in Nature, saying after
his obscure manner, Lux Iovi Tenebrae Plutoni, Lux Plutoni Tenebrae Iovi: which
much agrees with the LondonVirtuosi in Sir Hugh Platt's time, who writes, that
they held no Original difference of things but thick and thin, not discerning
that (...), Divinum aliquid, or Spiritual Nature, which Hippocrates observed to
be in all things.

VIII.
Many old Philosophers of great eminency, especially the Platonists in their
airy discourses of Humane Souls, first in savor of their own, placed them in
an higher form then those of ordinary persons, and other Animals: pretending
that by frequent Philosophical meditation, they so far refined themselves, as
that after death they remained in a kind of Astral, or (as termed by later
times) Angelical condition. As if bare thinking could cause any real effect, in
a subject with whom all its thoughts vanish. But those of the Vulgar,
especially if vicious, they also acknowledged to be immortal, however to remain
more or less grieving, for the loss of that beatifical fruition, according as
they had led on Earth a life more or less vicious.

Which Opinion (mere Nature, and unenlightned Reason being Judge) cannot acquit
it self of many errors: First, they did not explain themselves, how they could
be capable of a confined locality; nor where, nor in what subjects those Souls
should remain, when they left their Bodies. Moreover, all their operations here
seeming to be Organical, they wondered how men could be supposed to see, when
their Eyes are gone; or to grieve, rejoice, or think, when the Brain, the
medium of thinking, is turned to dirt. Further, they grossly asserted, that
those departed Souls could have no knowledge of particulars, for that they are
not discernable, but by our bodily senses, which represent them unto us; but
they pretended their knowledge to be only of Universals, whereas there are no
such things really in Nature, they being only mere aggregate terms, devised by
our selves for convenience of discourse, to save the labor of enumerating
particulars. As when we say, Mankind is mortal, that in effect signifies no
more, but that John such-a-one, Thomas, Robert, Peter, etc. one by one, each
particular man living is mortal: but for as much as we cannot nominate all
those particulars, we are constrained to include them in one term, Mankind:
whereas if every particular Man, Woman and Child were dead, there would be no
such thing as Mankind left, no not so much as notionally in imagination,
because there would not then remain one man alive to conceive such a notion.

IX.
Others of later times, not taking the truly wise advice of St. Paul, to beware
of vain Philosophy, have adventured to uphold the knowledge of Humane Souls
after death, not by Faith and the Scriptures, whose sacred Authority were the
most proper support of that belief, but out of the presumption of their own
sufficiency, by the mere light of Natural Reason; and because this appears not
easily intelligible, they endeavor to illustrate it by terms to Nature as
unintelligible, telling us of the separate Souls intuitive knowledge, and that
without help of the imaginative part, which is acknowledged to perish with the
Brain, its seat and Organ. But Divinity is too sublime a thing to be tried by
the Test of our imperfect Reason, for that were to try God by Man, and in these
matters may it justly be called Folly before God. It Is usually observed, that
those who vent Doctrines which they are not able to evince, muffle them in
obscure terms, as one may call a kind of Canting, like Aristotle's Entelecheia,
which no body understood but himself. Thus this term of Intuitive Knowledge,
without the help of senses or imagination, is utterly unconceivable to us, who
in knowing make use of both. There is nothing that more betrays the Souls
infinity, than Thought; as when in one minute a man can think of the Northern
and Southern parts of the World, and in one moment run over many thousand
Leagues both of Sea and Land: but the chief Argument this point of their
Philosophy relyes upon, is a reflex knowledge, which we have in perceiving our
selves to know: and this they will have to be done without help from the
imaginative Representation; wherefore they say, the Soul may know, although
that part be lost. But if we confidently mark this inward perception of our
knowledge, it may perhaps be nothing but the inward experience, which our
imaginative faculty gives us of what we know, and does no more evince any
separable faculty of the Soul, (as Lucretius observes) than the reflex and
intrinsic perception of smart, which a man's Foot gives him in a Fit of the
Gout.

X.
Now the Ancients thinking the Spirit of the World to be universally diffused
through all things, not only Animals, but such as we call Inanimates,
considered it so as that the various actings thereof, might not be unfitly
compared to the Music of a pair of Organs, where all the wind comes from the
Bellows, which being distributed into several Pipes, makes Music so long as it
remains in them, but so soon as it is passed through the Pipes, the wind of
each Pipe mixes with that of the others again, and then the Music ceases: Thus
they foolishly conceived to be infused into all Creatures, each of their
Spirits from that of the World, and so to act according to the various
temperaments of those several Bodies, which they possess as long as they remain
therein; but immediately when they pass through them, they mingle again
promiscuously with one another into the Spirit of the World, from which they
were sent, and thus their former ways of acting ceased.

Others there were that looked upon the Soul to be to the Body, as we see
Gunpowder is to the Gun, (if I may fitly illustrate an Ancient opinion, by a
Modern comparison) and that a Body without a Soul, is but a piece of Ordnance
uncharg'd, useless to the operation Nature assigned it. Therefore when men run
mad through over much wit, knowledge or learning, they may not improperly be
said to be over-charg'd: as on the contrary, the reason why men vasto corpore
are generally more heavy, dull and half witted, may proceed from their being
under-charged. As we see the same quantity of Powder which gives a Report in a
Pistol, gives little or none in a Cannon, the disproportion of the Gun
diversifying the effects.

XI.
Some of the Ancient Philosophers having a vain ambition of getting eternal
Fame, by raising some particular Sect of Philosophy, which might generally take
amongst men, set up for one of these ways: either to please the Voluptuous, who
care for nothing, but delighting their senses without any further regard: or by
pretending to Futurity and Eternity to make a more glorious noise, and thereby
thought to prevail more powerfully and universally, as over-awing the timorous,
and alluring the ambitious: in which way they adapted eternal terrors to evil
doers, and everlasting glory to the virtuous. This they not improbably hoped
would make their Sect to be admitted and cherished by Princes, as commodious to
Government. Also this latter sort to compass their end, were necessitated to
wrest their Doctrines of the Soul so far from mere illuminate Nature, as one of
the Ancients said, They delivered things more like Dreams, or Old Wives Tales,
than Truths: and at length Posterity following their Ancestors like Carriers
Horses in a track, without seeking out any new or better way, they received
such frenzies from one another, and improved them with such dotages of their
own, as surpassed all Poetic Fictions, and instead of taking with the Vulgar,
grew ridiculous. For in truth they needed as much and as weak credulity, as
ever any vulgar Superstition did: but were not so craftily fitted to draw
vulgar capacities to honesty, or terrify them from vice, as other
Superstitions were. Their news of separate Souls in celestial Joys, or
infernal Agonies, Enumerus the Sext. Empir.
Atheist says most impiously, were as hard to prove as the Elysian Fields,
Acheron or Styx, or Pluto with his Infernal Guard. All this would do little or
no good upon the profane Rabble, for they would say within themselves, if this
be all, we will not for such Metaphysics forbear any manner of pleasure or
profit, how base soever. On the other side, should you hear Mahomet assuring
the people, that if they would lead a pious, religious and obedient life in
this World, they should hereafter live for ever in most pleasant Gardens, with
variety of delicious Fruits, beautiful Women, and high affections, with
abilities renewed eternally: but if they led an irreligious life, and were
disobedient unto his Doctrine, they should hereafter be delivered up to horrid
Devils, who would for ever torment them in a Lake of material Fire and
Brimstone: this Doctrine, when once by education, and the solemnity of public
Authority, implanted and upheld in the minds of men, proves far more prevalent
with them, than the sublime notions of Plato, how well grounded soever: and as
to an exact proof before natural reason, clear and not prepossessed, perhaps
Plato would not have much the odds of Mahomet; Nihil est infelicius homine cui
sua figmenta dominantur.

XII.
Many good Moral men, and some of the Fathers, as Tertullian, Lactantius, etc.
held the Soul to be ex Traduce from Father to Son, and that for these reasons:
First, if every man has a new Soul infused into him at his birth by God, and
not lineally descended to him from Adam to Eve, how then can they be guilty of,
or suffer for Original sin? 2. What means that place Exodus 1. 5. where it is
said, All the souls that came from the loins of Jacob, were seventy souls? Also
another place, Genesis 46. 26, 27. to the same purpose. 3. If the Soul be not ex
Traduce, then Man the most perfect of all Creatures, were worse than a Beast,
who begets both matter and form. 4. Every like does not then beget his like, an
error in Philosophy it self. 5. All that have Seed in themselves, do not
propagate their kind. 6. Gods Command, viz. Genesis 1. the Creatures to increase
and multiply, would be useless and of none effect. 7. God would infuse a Soul
to be punished here and hereafter for another sin, viz. Adams. 8. God seems to
concur to the act of Fornication, or Adultery, in that he furnishes their
unlawful Issue with a Soul; and if a Man lie with a Beast, and beget a Monster
half a Man and half a Beast, God will be thought to infuse a Soul into that
unnatural conception, and it is a Quaere what will become of that Soul
hereafter? 9. If the Soul be infused, nothing is begotten; for the Body cannot
generate per s^, any more than one House can of it self beget another, both the
Body and the House being of themselves but dirt, Generation is not without the
Soul. Lastly, Man begets not whole Man, for he consists of Body and Soul
jointly. These absurdities they inferred from that opinion of Gods infusing the
Soul immediately into every man at his first Creation. This opinion of the
Souls being ex Traduce (like the Body) from the Parents, is illustrated by the
simile of lighting one Candle by another* and that according to Holy Writ, God
first lighted Adam, from whom Posterity received their light, without
diminishing one another thereby, any more than one Torch is diminished by
lighting another. In a Candle if you observe it closely, you may plainly
perceive how the flame, as it melts and draws in the Tallow into little
bubbles, turns them into flame, which shines for a while, till its uppermost
part having spent its oily moisture, vanishes into Smoke and Air, the flame
still renewing not in identity, but by successive renovation. In resemblance
whereof, some thought the Soul out of the bodily Nutriment to make the Chyle,
and turning that into Blood, out of that to make the animal Spirits, and of
them the diseursive Soul, which in an humane temperature seemed refined to a
greater purity, than in the grosser constitutions of other Animals; likewise in
them more than in Plants, to a greater or lesser perfection or duration,
according to their different Temperaments more or less prepared to receive it:
and they that held this Opinion, laid down for an infallible maxim, that
Quicquid recipitur, recipitur admodum recipientis; and from hence (say they) it
comes to pass, that some men are more ingenious, others more stupid. But
generally they held, that men were more clearly rational, whilst other Animals
are stupid and dull, yet all from one and the same original Spirit, varying
only according to its different fuel. Just as Lamps, some shine brighter and
some more dim, according as their Oil or Wi^k is better or worse. From hence
(say they) it proceeds, that we often see as much difference between Men and
Men, as there is between Men and Beasts, only as stupidity is most prevalent in
Brutes, so is frenzy in Men. Nor did the Heathens perceive any considerable
difference betwixt us and other Creatures, than what is occasioned by speech
and use of Letters, whereof they being ignorant, could only think of objects,
noises, and what they felt, heard or saw, but could hold no mental discourses,
as Men did who had the use of Letters. Let us hear what Mountaign says on this
subject. Mount. Ess. lib. 2. c. 12.
That defect which hinders communication between them and us, why may it not
be in us, as well as in them? for we understand them no more than they do us;
by the same reason therefore may they despise our ignorance, as well as we
theirs: And we may as well think the Chinese Beasts, because we do not
understand them. When I am playing with my ^at, (says he) who knows whether she
has more sport in dallying with me, or I in playing with her? We entertain one
another with mutual Apish tricks; and if I have my hour to begin, or to refuse,
so has she hers. As we hunt after the tamer sort of Beasts, so do the wilder
hunt after us: and therefore as Sheep or Oxen are made for Men, so (if you will
credit Mountaign) are Men after a sort made for Lions, Bears, Wolves, Tigers;
the weakest for the strongest. Such as keep or entertain Beasts, (as he goes
on) may rather be called their Servants, than they theirs. Democritus was of
the opinion, that Men have learnt most of their Arts from dumb Creatures: as
that the Spider taught us to weave, the Swallow to build, the Nightingale to
sing, and diverse Beasts the Art of Physic. St. Austin in his dispute with the
Manichees, seems to give Beasts the use of Reason. Campanella gives them some
senses which we want: What (says he) makes the Cock to discover midnight and
morning, as it appears he does by his crowing? what teaches a Hen, before she
has had any experience, to fear an Hawk, and not a Goose, or Peacock, far
greater Birds? what makes the young Chickens more afraid of a Cat, than a Dog?
and to strut and arm themselves more against the mewing of the one, than the
barking of the other? what instructs Wasps, Emmets and Mice, to choose the best
Fruit and Cheese, without having tasted them before? and what teaches the Dog
when he is sick, to flee to the Grass, and the Stag, Elephant and Serpent to
certain Herbs, when they are wounded, for cure? how many ways speak we to Dogs,
and they understand us? what discipline may we learn from the Bees? what
prudence from the Ants, in laying up provision beforehand? or from the
Swallows, who at the approach of Spring search up and down, and pry about the
corners of the Houses, not without judgment and discretion, and from a
thousand places select that which is most convenient for them to build with?
and in that pretty, cunning contexture of their Houses, would Birds choose
rather a round than a square form, did they not know the convenience of it?
what makes them take first Clay, and then Water, unless they guessed the
moisture of the one, would mollify the hardness of the other? would they floor
their Apartments with Moss, did they not know, how much more soft and warm it
would be for themselves and young ones? what makes them shelter themselves from
stormy weather, building their Cabbins toward the East, but that they know some
winds are more healthful than others? why does the Spider spin her artificial
Web thicker in one place than another, using sometimes one, sometimes another
knot, had she not an excellent contrivance? Let us now consider Man, who (as
Mountaign says) is the only outcast and forsaken Creature, naked on the bare
Earth, having nothing to cover and arm himself withal, but the spoil of others;
whereas Nature herself has clothed and fortified all other Creatures with
skins, hair, wool, stings, horns, scales, feathers, talons, claws, hoofs,
teeth, etc. instructing them in every thing requisite for their own
preservation, as to swim, r^n, creep, fly, etc. but Man alone can neither feed,
speak, nor shift for himself, unless taught by others.

Tum porro, puer ut saevis projectus ab undis Lucret. l. 5. p. 222.

Navita, nud^ humi jacet infans, indigus omni
Vitali auxilio, cum primum in luminis or as
Nexibus ex alvo matris Natura profudit,
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, ut aequum est
Cui tantum in vita restat transire malorum.
At variae crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque
Nec crepitacula eis opus est, nec cuiquam adhibenda est
Almae nutricis blanda, atque infracta loquela:
Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore coeli.
Denique non armis opus est, non moenibus altis
Queis sua tutentur, quando omnibus omnia large
Tellus ipsa parit, Naturaque Daedala rerum.
Some Authors are of an opinion, that Man is nothing but an Ape cultivated;
others think, that as he is superior to Brutes in some things, so is he
inferior in other. By the Law sin first came into the World, says the Holy
Scripture; wherefore if Man be the only Creature that has knowledge of God,
then (say they) he is the only Creature that sins against that God whom he
knows: what Brute does a worse thing than Man, when he goes into Foreign Wars,
and for 4 pence or 6 pence a day murders men that never did him wrong? Birds
quarrel with one another either for meat, or females; and Men for
Superstitions, or for somewhat that does not at all concern them; and now which
is the most rational dispute? St. Ierom forgetting that it is said, Not a
Sparrow falls to the ground, without Gods knowledge, does in his Exposition
upon Habakkuk seem to limit Gods Providence, and make it not extend to Beasts,
but only unto Men: also Cicero writes De Not. Deorum, lib. 1. c. 3.
to the same purpose, Magna Dii curant parva negligunt. But this was only to
complement the Great ones: For as St. Austin says, Deus est maximus in minimis:
and as the excellency of the sight appears in discerning the smallest object;
so did he think the beauty of Providence most appeared in governing regularly
the smallest Atom. But to return to our subject.

XIII.
Men's natural passions and fears, when not enlightened by judicious and calm
consideration, nor repressed by a sober temper of mind, did ever so tyrannize
over them, that some (as now with us) dare not lie alone, or go in the dark,
for fear of Sprites; but this timorousness was more venial in the ignorant
Heathens, than in us, who believe that Man bears the image of the Almighty; for
what can be more absurd, than to think that the Devil when he pleases to make
sport, can invest himself in the same shape with the Almighty's Favorite? But
however, such reports have given some men an opportunity of showing the power
of their zeal, to lay those Spirits which never were raised. The good Demon of
Socrates was no other than his extraordinary prudence and wisdom, which ever
dictated to him in all his undertakings, both what to do, and what to avoid;
nor did this good Genius fail him, save in the choice of his Wife Xan^ippe, at
which time, if Matches were made in Heaven, he had certainly no Friends there.
It Is thought there is a decep^io visus wherewith timorous people are possessed,
that oft-times make them believe they s^e things, which they do not: and he
that believes there are such things, has half seen them, and wants only Brutus
his waking dream, to see such another Apparition, who instead of seeing what he
is reported to have seen in a dream, did only dream that he saw it, which very
much differ.

The ingenious Dr. Brown is zealous for Apparitions, and in a Reply to that
shrewd Objection, That the Devil only appears to silly weak people, he says,
That the Devil will not appear to the wicked, for fear of converting them: but
if this Argument held, he must never appear to any, for certainly his appearing
can never advance his Kingdom, but rather the contrary. However, that God can
raise up such things, no man I think will question; but that he does, so often
as men report, no man is obliged to believe. Nor shall I be so dogmatical as to
assert the contrary, since there is an aerial Creation, and for ought we know
every place is full of invisible Spirits, which like the Wind are unseen, yet
visible in their effects and operations. Th^s opinion of Spirits has ever been
received in the World, as we may learn from all Histories both Ancient and
Modern, and therefore I shall not be so positive in my assertion as to give all
Antiquity the lie. When I read of a Sceleton that appeared in chains to
Athenodorus the Philosopher; and the same of Cleonice, that tormented Pausanias
(who had slain her) as long as he lived; as also the Ghost of Agrippina did her
Son Nero. Alexander ab Alexandro Lib. 5. cap. 23.
tells us of several Houses in Rome, that were uninhabited on this occasion:
but particularly one of his own, wherein both himself and his daring Companion,
were severely srightned by an Apparition. Also Cardan (whom Causabon styles,
Homo ventosi ingenii) was for this very reason called Mendacissimus. He (though
incredulous enough in other things) yet here seems too easy, for he not only
believed such Apparitions, but affected to tell strange things concerning them:
which made his great Friend Nodaeus, (who extolled him in other things,) to
decry him in this. Suetonius also tells of a Spirit, that appeared in Caesar's
Camp, just before his passing the Rubicon, and in the form of an handsome young
man, snatching a Trumpet out of the hands of one of the Trumpeters, therewith
threw himself in o the River, and swam over, sounding a March all the while:
(Although men may question, whether this were not a Stratagem used by Caesar to
encourage his Men to proceed, the supposed Spirit being perhaps only a young
man that could swim well, and sound a Trumpet.) Therefore I shall not too
confidently oppose a Doctrine, which has been so long entertained in the
World. But in all these matters it is good to be neither too skeptical, so as
to need burning before we are convinced that the fire is hot; nor too
credulous, as those who see nothing but what is invisible, and believe nothing
but what is incredible.

XIV.
Again, others whose Ideas were more cheerful and vigorous, did frequently cast
away their lives, in hopes of being wrapped above the Skies; as the Negroes of
Guiney use to do, who upon any dislike of their condition, (thinking their
Being no longer to be preserved than it is a Well-being) do often make-away
themselves, in hopes to go dance with their deceased Friends beyond the
Mountains. The prodigious power of such waking dreams, have produced such
horrid effects in minds dark and susceptible of them, especially when they
represented Ideas of Terror. As at this time we frequently see poor old silly
Women confess, and really imagine that they have conversed with evil Spirits,
in the shape of black Dogs, or have flown in the Air, and so have suffered for
Witches, when perhaps Bedlam had been much fitter for them. Nor is a man that
is incredulous in the point of Witches, without some reason on his side. The
ingenious Bergerac in his Satyrs says thus: I have never heard any story of
Witches, but it was said to be acted above an hundred miles from the place it
was told me; the laying the Scene at which distance, made me suspect the
Relators aimed to render it impossible for the curious to inform themselves of
the truth; also that they were in the shapes of Cats, found in the midst of a
Field. Without many witnesses; the testimony of one person alone ought to be
suspected in things miraculous: Near a Village; it was easier to cozen the
Clowns: It Was a poor old Woman; Necessity might make her lie, to get money: She
was old; Age weakens Reason, and makes talk too much; or else she has invented
this Fable to entertain her Neighbors withal: Age decays the sight; she took
a Hare for a Cat: Age makes fearful; she thought she had seen fifty for one.
And it is much more probable, that any one of these things may happen, which are
every day seen, than such an extraordinary accident. Again, the party thought
to be a Witch, being some ignorant old Country-woman, has not wit to
disintangle her self from the intricate Questions which are put to her, whose
understanding is so stupefied with the imminent danger, that she is rendered
incapable of making any pertinent answer to justify her self; which if she
does, men conclude the Devil speaks in her; if she says nothing, they believe
she is convinced by a guilty Conscience, and so she is presently condemned: Or
for the better evidence whether she be a Witch or no, they cast her into the
Water, where if she sinks, she is drowned; and if she swims, she is convicted
for a Witch. But would the Devil be such a Fool? He that could at another time
give her the form of a Cat, can he not now give her the form of a Fly to escape
in? No, say they, Witches lose their power when they are in the hands of
Justice: But this is ill contrived, for it is not the way to encourage others
to serve the Devil, for him thus to abandon his servants in time of need, the
old Serpent should be wiser than so. Besides it may be observed, that all these
reputed Conjurers and Witches are generally beggarly and poor: Therefore is it
probable that any persons should expose themselves, upon the hope to continue
poor and odious, to misery both in this World, and that which is to come? How
can it be admitted with Montaign.
reverence to the Divine Nature, that Prophecy should cease, and Witches so
abound, as seems by their frequent excursions; which would make one think, the
strongest fascination is incircled within the ignorance of the Judges, malice
of the Witnesses, or the stupidity of the poor parties accused. These are the
things which are urged against this Opinion.

XV.
Others have in haste to their imaginary Joys in another life, neglected or
destroyed this. Several of Hegesia's Auditors have been found, and others have
upon reading Plato's Book of Immortality, killed themselves, and so made more
haste than good speed to enjoy those Pleasures. Proh, mira stultitia and
incredibilis audacia! spernunt tormenta praesentia, dum incerta metuunt and
futura, and dum mori post mortem timent, interim mori non timent, ita illis
pavor and fallax spes solatio redivivo blanditur. Whereby it appears, that in
things which Nature has not made our Reason capable of foreseeing, (as is the
Souls future estate) there strong belief is not always a sign of Truth: For in
some cases who so bold as blind Bayard? There never was any Sect so sottish and
false, but may boast of its Martyrs. Let this be understood of corrupt,
unenlightned Nature, that we may not confound Christianity with Paganism. Many
good men have died to justify, what Vaninus died madly to oppose; so contrary
are men's persuasions. Some of the Egyptians died fighting for the Deity of
Garlic, others for the Deity of Onions; so that a mistaken Martyrdom rather
betrays the easiness of the Party, than the truth of his Cause. For to believe
otherwise, were to do too great an honor to those Atheists or Heretics, who
have suffered for their Irreligion under the Laws of Christianity. The Apostles
suffered for the truth of what they saw with their own eyes; whereas many of
the Heathens did but like Knights of the Post, affirm the verity of things they
knew not, only had received by a Traditional hearsay from others, whose vain
Opinion of their great knowledge filled them with pride, as being the only men
which knew the secrets of Heaven: like Aesop's Conjurer, they pretended to know
all things which were done in Heaven and Earth, but was ignorant that his own
House was on fire at home.

XVI.
The two primitive Essentials which constitute all compounded things, were by
the Ancient Greeks termed Psyche and Hyle, that is, Spiritus and Materia, Soul
and Body* Both these they held, as considered in their single Natures, to be
from all Eternity, and to continue to Eternity, which together united in one
Infinite, they held to be God, whom they believed to be Maker of the World. Not
by operation from without, as a Cook makes a Pie of several materials, which he
has gathered together, and being no part of him, can after it is made subsist
without him: but by inoperation rather, resembling the Soul in a living
Creature, which by its intrinsic, plastic virtue, forms the Animal with all
its faculties and parts, both internal and external, not being able to subsist
without that Spirit which did first animate and inform it: however performed
with no less trouble and concern to the Anima Mundi, than the hairs of our head
are to us: and to this inoperation of the Divine Nature Virgil alludes, saying,

Principio Coelum ac Terras, camposque liquentes
Lucentemque globum Luna, Titaniaque astra
Spiritus intus alit, totamque infusa per artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet.
This, I say, was an opinion generally received among the Heathens, only the
wiser sort (so reputed) asserted, that God made all things of nothing but
Himself; whom they acknowledge to be Infinite, and therefore could not imagine
that there were any other real things besides him: supposing that if there
were, then God must have been but one eminent thing among many others; which to
speak or think, might be esteemed as great and sottish a blasphemy in
Philosophy, as Religion: and to this purpose Lucan speaks,

Jupiter est quodcunque vides, etc. --

Also Ovid,

Praesentemque refert quaelibet herba Deum. But the absurdity of this Opinion
is already by several ingenious Pens made known unto the World: As,

1. If every thing be God, or a portion The Answer to Mr. Hobbs Creed, p. 12,
13.
of God, some parts of the Deity must perceive what others do not. 2. Several
parts of the Deity (as Stones, Metals, etc.) must be void of understanding. 3.
Idolatry were no crime, but only an amicable officiousness in one part of the
Deity toward another. To which purpose Athenagoras writes, saying, If God and
Matter be the same thing under various appellations, then were it no less than
Impiety in us, to deny Divine honor to Stones, Trees or Metals.
Lastly, there would be no such thing as Virtue or Vice, Pain or Pleasure,
unless you will make God to commit the one, and suffer the other.

XVII.
Now they who held this vain Opinion, termed every Creature (especially Man,
who is esteemed the most excellent of all others) a Microcosm, or little World,
as composed of Psyche and Hyle. Also Moses has been thought to intimate as
much, in saying, That in the beginning of the Creation, the Spirit moved upon
the Waters; for so the Rabbis and Cabbalists expound him. They say it was the
Ruah Elohim, viz. the Spirit of God, which moved upon the Waters. Hippocrates
seems likewise to agree with this Doctrine, asserting the beginning of
Sublunary things to proceed from Fire and Water: But Moses, who was skilled in
all the Egyptian Learning, alludes perhaps to their Hieroglyphics, wherein
the figure of an unit, signified God; as a Cipher, stood for a Nonentity, i.
e. for Nothing; the character of Ten, did signify the World: and in the old
Hebrew Characters, as in our modern Figures, of a different shape, the figure
of an unit placed before a Cipher, signified Ten, by which was meant the World,
as I said: and hereby they expressed that God made the World of Nothing. And
perhaps in further conformity herewith, he is said to make Man more excellent
than other Creatures, after his own Image; that is, not in outward Effigies, or
Features of face and limbs, but as the Universe composed of Spirit and Body.
And so they held the World to be consisting of a Being partly corporeal and
visible, and partly spiritual and invisible: the visible or material part, by
reason of its more or less gross and solid corporeity, is of it self more or
less unfit for motion, but properly capable to receive the impulses of the more
active spiritual part: And thus in the little World of Man, as long as his
Spirit remains in him, it quickens his gross Body, carrying it up and down from
the remotest parts of the Earth, contriving many projects, and working great
things, however in a moment after that Spirit is gone, the Body is left a dull
putrid piece of Earth, and all his Thoughts perish.

XVIII.
But here give me leave to Montaignize, and so far to digress from my subject,
as to acquaint you with a great dispute, which happened among the Ancients
concerning Motion; for although, as I lately told you, there were some who
thought the material part of the World unfit for motion, yet there were others
of a contrary sentiment; and from hence arose the dispute concerning the motion
of the Earth. Aristotle, Ptolomy, and Tycho Brahe, h^ld that it was immovable,
(especially the two former;) because they saw the Sun rise in one place, and
set in another, as also their Houses stand in the same place to day, as they
did yesterday, they thought it an infallible truth that the Sun danced about
the Earth, whilst that stood still to receive its Salutation. In opposition to
this Doctrine there have risen up several men, both Ancient and Modern, who
have affirmed the contrary; it has been disputed for above these 2000 years.
That the Globe of the Earth moved, was of old the opinion (if not of Orpheus)
of Thales, Aristarchus, and Philolaus the Pythagorean, and is maintained by
Copernicus, Kepler, Zongomontanus, Origanus, etc. They held that the Sun, like
the Heart of Man, is placed in the midst of the Body of the Universe, as the
most convenient seat to heat and animate the whole, and that the Earth moved
about it: For (say they) we do not place a 1
Candle in the corner, but in the midst of the Room, when we would have it give
most light. Besides, the circular motion 2.
of the Planets round about the Sun, seems to argue that the Earth does the
same, and the Sun stands still. Further, 3*
it is more reasonable to believe, that the Earth which has need of light and
heat, should go to seek what it wants, than that the Sun should go to seek what
it wants not: The Fire does not turn before the Roast-meat, but the Roast-meat
before the Fire. Again, it is urged, Rest 4.
and Immobility is a more noble condition than Motion, wherefore more proper
for the Sun a type and resemblance of God. And then they observed, heavy 5.
things were kept up in the Air, only by virtue of motion, as a Stone mounted
in the Air by a Sling; and therefore how do we know (say they) but that the
Earth, like a Child's Humming-Top, may be kept up by its own motion, and the
swiftness of that motion, like that of the Tops, might make it seem immovable.
They who deny the motion of the Earth, 6.
must also deny it to hang in aequilibrio, which were an absurdity. Lastly, it
may 7.
seem much more credible, that the Earth moves five Leagues in a minute, than
that the eighth Sphere in the same time 8.
moves above forty millions; which it must do, if it be true that the extent
of the Heavens be infinite: so that to have all the Heavens move round in
twenty four hours, were to measure an infinite by a finite.

XIX.
But to return to our Anima Mundi: The dullest sort of the Vulgar People used
this word Soul, as we do that of Materid Prima, or the Philosophers Stone; they
thought it be some strange excellent Thing, but had no particular formed Notion
thereof: And so did not conceive of being Alive in any thing, beside their
living Body; and as soon as that was in the Grave, Actum est, they were at an
end. To which effect Seneca speaks, Post mortem nihil est, ipsaque mors nihil,
etc. There were another sort clean contrary to them, as holding the Soul to be
the Man; considering it, as inhabiting this Tabernacle of Clay, or clothed
with this Mortal Body, which in death they shed, as the Stag does his Horns, or
the Snake her Hackle.

Sed magis ire for as, vestemque relinquere ut Lucre^. lib. 3.
Anguis
Gauderet, praelonga s^nex aut cornua Cervus.
Whereupon the more easy sort advised with their Heathen-Priests, to learn
what kind of Renovation they should have, when the time came. Which Priests
aiming at their own Gain, and to render themselves necessary, did ever invent
some Tale agreeable to that purpose: As Varro himself ingenuously confesses,
That it is convenient, that the Vulgar should be ignorant of many Things that
are True, and believe others that are False. Quum veritatem qua liberetur
inquirat: credatur ei expedire, quod fallitur. Nay, and Plato himself, in his
Republic, acknowledges, That for the Benefit of Mankind, it is often necessary
to deceive them: So as it seems, their Religion served but as a Curb,
wherewithal to ride the Commonalty. From whence we may observe, that the
Religion of Nature, when corrected only by a Temporal Interest, does but like
Antimony prepared and made Stitium, become more Poisonous by its Correction and
Preparation. The Pseudo-Fathers of their Church, being such as brought Religion
to their Interest, and not Interest to their Religion; fulfilling that Verse of
the Poet's, Atque ipsa utilitas justi prope Matter, and Horat.
Aequi. Nevertheless, there were others among them, who being more opinionated
of their own Abilities, would not so easily suffer themselves to be imposed
upon; but using their own Reason, consulted Nature upon that point; and in so
doing, took into our more usual way of searching Knowledge, a Notioribus ad
Ignotiora: When finding their present Souls not to be kept in any separate
Immaterial Estate, but all their Life long, to have been very agreeably lodged,
and entertained in a bodily Subject, did conceive it probable, that they might
in like manner be disposed of here-after.

XX.
Now this last sort of Men, as well in former Ages as at this day, are thought
to be the most numerous, and greatest part of Mankind; that is, the People that
believe the Transmigration of Souls from one Body to another; which is by some
restrained within the same Species, by others not: The Soul of a Tyrant, they
thought after his death would go into a Lion, Tiger, or some other Beast of
Prey; because they equally thirst after Blood: and by the same Reason, the Soul
of a Poet, into a Grasshopper, who sings till he starves. Pythagoras writes of
himself, That he was first Euphorbus, then Callidus, then Hermotimus, then
Pyrrhus; and last of all, Pythagoras. This Doctrine, as we may learn from the
Holy Scriptures, and Josephus, Joseph. de Bell. Iud. lib. 2. 7.
had tainted not only the Pharisees, but Herod himself, and almost the whole
Nation of the Jews; as appears, in that they held Christ to have been Elias, or
one of the ancient Prophets. Nay, some of the Apostles themselves, (as St.
Cyril observes) were misled by this Error, as is evident In Graec^ Catena.
by their Question, touching the Man that was born blind; Master, Who did sin,
this Man or his Parents? For, How could Joh. 9. 2.
they conceive, that he could sin before he was born, unless in some other
Body, which his Soul actuated before in another Life? But, what was more
strange, many of the Jews thought Christ to be St. John Baptist, who had not
then been dead full three Years. So as by this it may appear, that the
Transmigration of a New Soul, was by them supposed to be, not only at the time
of ones Birth, but sometimes in ones Li^e also; and this Conceit perhaps they
might receive, from observing how strangely Men are oftentimes changed, either
for better or worse, both in Mind and Body, from what they were before.

XXI.
This Progress of the Soul seemed to many, to be better disposed for Reward and
Punishment, when not restrained into any one species, but of more free
Dissolution, and more suitable to that variety wherein Nature delights, as
better befitting, and more approaching to its Infinity: And by this Liberty,
they thought it often passed from a Man to a Beast, from thence to a Plant, and
next to a Stone, if the Circle were in the Descendent: But if in the Ascendent,
then its Progress was from more gross Subjects to more Spiritual ones; for, God
is able of Stones, to raise up Children unto Abraham. They thought, that in
Nature there was no such thing as Quies, the very hardest Stone in time
mouldring into Dust; only by a circular Motion, from Rarefaction to
Condensation, and from Condensation to Rarefaction again; as the Poet in these
follwing Verses describes it:

-- Resolutaque Tellus Ovid. Met. lib. 15.

In liquidas rarescit aquas, tenuatur in auras,
Aeraque Humor habet, dempto quoque pondere rursus
In superos ae^r tenuissimus emicat ignes.
Inde retro redeunt, idemque retexitur ordo,
Ignis enim densum spissatus in era transit,
Hinc in aquas Tellus glomerata cogitur unda.
The course which Nature takes in Governing the World, is by one Contrary
prevailing Ocell. Luc. cap. 2.
over another: Thus the Moisture in the Air prevails over the Dryness of the
Fire, the Coldness of the Water over the Heat of the Air; the Dryness of the
Earth over the Moisture of the Water; and so the Moisture of the Water over the
Dryness of the Earth; the Heat of the Air over the Coldness of the Water; and
the Dryness of the Fire over the Moisture of the Air: And thus the various
Alterations are made and produced out of one Extreme into another, Alternative.

XXII.
The most ingenious of this Sect (as if they had met with some blind Hint of
the Evil Angels, cast out of Heaven) supposed Cicero Not Deor. Expiandorum
scelerum caus^.
two Creations: The first to have been Spiritual, and that the Fall of those
Evil Angels, occasioned our Corporeal Creation; that so there might be Bodies
of diverse Tempers, and duration, in whom those wicked Spirits (their Souls)
should be, for expiating their Guilt included, and according to their Merits,
rendered sensible of more or less Pain and Grief; whereof, in their Spiritual
Condition, not clothed with Flesh and Blood, they were incapable, as they
conceived: For, as the Body has no Sense without a Soul; so they believed, the
Soul could have no Sense without a Body: And this they grounded upon Erroneous
Observations; as ex. gr. If, say they, you take out your Eye Balls, you have as
much Soul in you as you had before, but cannot see for want of those Organs;
and the Soul will be divested of all its other Powers in operating, as well as
in that of seeing, when it wants its Eyeballs. Which Error proceeded from
their not understanding of how much a Diviner Nature and Power the Soul is,
than the Body.

XXIII.
Now, by Men of this vain Opinion, our Sublunary Orb was esteemed the only
Hell; they thinking this World more proper, and better proportioned to the
Offenses and Capacities of the wicked Soul, in our passionate and momentary
Condition, than the Tradition of everlasting Torments, for acting those Vices
which their Nature prompted them to: or, as a learned Gentleman of our own
Nation expresses it, for not being sound, when we are created sick. An Excuse
so unlikely to procure our Pardon with God, that it should prove uneffectual
with one of us, if a Man that had robbed and wounded us, should tell us, He was
prompted thereunto by his Nature or Inclinations.

I do not find by their Writings, that they believed evil actions so much to
proceed from the Devil, as their own corrupt Natures; Format enim Natura prius
nos intus, etc. Horat:
And therefore many of them thought that the only evil Spirits which hurried
men to ruin, were their own passions, Love, Fear, Anger, Ambition, Revenge,
Lust, etc. which passions are generally the causes of men's destruction, both in
lives and fortunes. That Passion is an enemy to the knowledge of the Truth,
both in discourse and writing, we our selves experience. God came not in the
Earthquake, nor Whirlwind, but in the still Voice: and we shall never hear
Reason delivered in Passion. But that which chiefly induced the Heathens, to
impute all their Vices to their own corrupt Natures, was this, because they
could hardly believe, that God would suffer a declared Enemy so far to prevail
against him, as when he would have all men saved, the Devil should so far
overruled, as through his instigation a thousand men should be damned, for one
that is saved; which would happen, if all vicious persons were denied
Salvation. But this objection of theirs will be rendered vain, if we consider
the Devil as God's Executioner, having no power but from above.

XXIV.
As for the aforementioned Doctrine of Transmigration, it abounds much at this
day in China and both the Indies, especially the East, where the great swarms
of Mankind live; besides vast numbers in America and Africa. As for the
Mahometans, (who are no small part of Mankind) although they have a Religion,
so craftily fitted to vulgar capacities, as it is thought to be the most
politic, and likely to spread and last, that ever was invented: Yet even among
them they have a Sect or Heresy exceeding numerous, called by the Arabians
Altenasack, which signifies those that hold Transmigration of Souls; and the
whole Mohammedan Superstition, (although it gives not the Soul a new Body in
this life) allows departed Souls new Bodies, fresh and lusty, in the life to
come, without which it could not enjoy their sensual Paradise, which the
Alchoran promises them. But it still censures those of the Altenasack for
Heretics, chiefly because they cannot believe the everlasting and merciless
Hell, esteeming it a thing that would rob God of his Attribute of Mercy, which
they hold were not infinite (as all his Attributes must be) if in no measure it
extended to the most wicked and wretched Creatures. Not considering how short
soever a man's life is, it matters not, for he has an offer made him, either of
eternal happiness or misery, and he might choose either which he pleases: Nor is
Eternal misery more disproportionable to a vicious life, than Eternal happiness
to a virtuous, so that he plays but upon the square either way.

Now amongst those Heathens there were a third sort of men, whose fancy (as
they themselves thought) was of very obvious experience, but seemed to be
stifled and suppressed, as neither suiting to the wishes of men, nor conducive
to the governing of them: And these are those which conceived a man to be
neither Soul nor Body, but only the Result of their Conjunction, which
vanishing, he was for ever unconcerned and lost. Because that which in its best
estate was esteemed but a shadow upon Earth, they ignorantly supposed, must on
the parting of the Body, whose shadow it was, be for ever lost. Yea, and as I
showed before out of Lucretius, they held that if the same Body could return
upon Earth again, and be reunited to it, that might constitute a new man, but
of no concern to the former; no more than my shadow which I shall have next
year, will be to my this years shadow, although I have the same body next year,
as I have this. And this Chimaera of theirs is by one of their own Writers
compared to Clouds gathering together, under the representation of various
shapes, as of a Castle, Giant, Mountain, or the like: In which appearances they
often produce real effects, as Thunder, Lightning, Winds, Rain, etc. till by
their separation the Giant, Castle or Mountain vanish; as also the real effects
soon pass away, but still the same Clouds remain, though in new Conjectures and
Appearances: which vain opinion is expressed in these verses.

As Clouds in shape of Men dispersed by Wind,
The vanished Men do leave the Clouds behind:
So's Man of Soul and Body made in one,
Which severed, each have Being, but he none.
Pure Natures mix, and part without decay,
But what from them results, quite fades away.
Thus in sad earnest, true the old Proverb's found,
A man betwixt two Stools does fall to The Ground.
XXV.
In answer to this wicked opinion, I shall only recite that ingenious Argument
which Tertullian long since used upon the same occasion. O man that make this
objection to me, think what thou wast before created; thou wast nothing, for if
any thing thou could not but remember it. Thou then that wast nothing before
thy Creation, and when ceasest to live shall return to nothing, why can thou
not once again be brought out of nothing, by the will of the same Creator, who
at first created thee of nothing? Will there come any new thing unto thee,
seeing he made no difficulty to create thee what thou wast not? thou ought
not to suspect, but that he can as easily re-make thee what thou wast. We see
every day, the light after it has lost its darkness, reassumes it; the Stars
lose their light, and recover it again: Time begins at the same term it
finished: Fruits drop off from the Trees, and yet come again in their season:
The Corn after its bea^d is grown long with age, falls to the ground and
corrupts, but it wants not its Resurrection; therefore why should we think,
that Man should be less worthy of another life, then any of these things which
are made but for his service? Although we cannot Mathematically demonstrate the
same, any more then they can the contrary, yet the belief of the Resurrection,
is I am sure more for the Honor of God, and safety and happiness of Man.

XXVI.
Now these kind of Heathenish Souls, seem too Airy to raise any foundation
whereon to build the Principles of Virtue, or Moral honesty. One Motive which
induced them to believe men's Souls to be such Phantomes, was their observing
men to be so much delighted, and obstinately taken with the Fictions and
santastical Inventions of Poetry and Superstition: which have neither truth, or
so much as possibility in them, and therefore no fit food for any thing that
has a real Being, but their waking Dreams are far from deserving credit upon
this pretense, unless that be a sufficient Reason, which an ancient Writer
delivers in these words, Credibile quia Impossible, according to that old
saying, Quanto absurdius, tanto melius.

XXVII.
Epicurus perceiving the number of Sensual men, to exceed by far that of the
more Spiritual, laid the foundation of his Sect in sensual Pleasures, and held
a Corporeal Soul the better to fit it for those Corporeal Pleasures; and then
to secure this Anima against those severe after-reckonings, the apprehensions
whereof he perceived God and Nature had implanted in the hearts of all men, he
gave it a Quieta est, by pretending that the Soul is extinct in death, or at
least to vanish into an eternal insensibility, as unconcerned as if it had
never been. The finer sort of wits, unwilling to fall so low, could not admit
of this total mortality of the Soul, however they were so weak as to
acknowledge, that his Reasons seemed very powerful to assert it. As first, to
behold the Soul in its Infancy very weak, and then by degrees with the Body to
grow daily more and more vigorous, till it arrives to its perfection, from
which estate together with the Body it declined, till the decrepitude of the
one, and dotage of the other, made it seem to them probable, that they should
both likewise perish together.

-- Gigni pariter cum corpore and una Eucret. lib. 3.

Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere mentem.
As also that the many abominable passions of man's Soul, seemed to be its
diseases, and to argue its mortality, as plainly as bodily diseases do that of
the Body: and that the imputing them only to the irascible or concupiscible
parts, thereby hoping to keep the rational part safe, was, say they, as if one
should fancy that an Ulcer in the Heart or Liver, could not by consequence
destroy the Brain.

-- Mentem sanari corpus ut agrum Ibid.

Cernimus, and flecti medicina posse videmus.
Moreover, that in old age men felt their minds oppressed with cares, to faint
into a kind of despondency, and as fit for a Grave, as one that is tired with a
long and wearisom Journey, is for a Bed: and even in its strongest estate, a
Fever, Apoplexy, or little bite a of mad Dog, destroys all its most glorified,
scientifical faculties.

-- Corpoream naturam animi esse necesse est, Lucret* lib. 3.

Corporeis quoniam telis, ictuque laborat.
The last Argument they held, was as vain as any of the rest, viz. They could
not apprehend how two things of so different natures as mortality and
immortality, Body and Soul, should mix and associate together so long.

Quippe etenim mortale aeterno jungere and una Ibid.

Consentire putare, and fungi mutua posse,
Desipere est, etc. --
By these and such like symptoms, they suspected the Soul to be of a mortal
condition, although of a Divine off spring: and as at the Seige of Troy,
Sarpedon Jupiter's own Son was knocked on the head, as well as the ordinary
Trojans; so they ignorantly thought the Soul (though of a Diviner extraction
then the corporeal parts) might in such base company be crushed, -- Simul aevo
fess^ fatiscit. But these and the rest of their Arguments are soon answered, in
laying all the fault on the corporeal Organs, which being by Age or other
disorders made to fail, caused a proportionable failing in the faculties.
Whereupon they conjectured, that in a total failing of the Organs, occasioned
by death, there must consequently follow an equal failing, as they thought, of
the faculties; as it fares with a Watch, which if it happens by fall or other
accidents, to have a Wheel broken, however the Spring remain entire, yet it
becomes useless, and the Motions cease. These were the most plausible Arguments
for their vain Opinion of the Souls mortality, which deserve rather the name of
blind Conjectures, then convincing Arguments.

XXVIII.
The Nature of the Soul is so obscure, that the most discerning Philosophy
could not tell what to make of it, some holding it to be Fire, others Water;
some one thing, some another: and if they were so divided in the Nature of the
Soul* how much more incapable were they to judge of the Souls future estate?
Erasmus concerning the Immortality of the Soul, says, Hoc mihi persuasit non
humana Ratio sed Fides. However, I think there may be much more said for the
Immortality of the Soul, than can be urged against it. There is not any opinion
in the World, has been more generally received in the hearts of men, than this
of the Souls future estate: and how should it have been so long rooted in our
minds, were there nothing of truth in it? Nature which makes nothing in vain,
has implanted in Man a desire of Immortality, which desire is vain if he be
not capable of it. Nothing is corrupted but by its contrary, and therefore that
which has no contrary (as the Soul) must be free from corruption. The Harmony
of the World, which permits not things to pass from one extreme to another
without some mean, requires, that as there are pure Spirits and Intelligences,
which are immortal, and Substances corporeal and mortal; so there is a middle
nature between these two, Man, called by the Platonists on this account, the
Horizon of the Universe, because he serves for a link and medium to unite the
Hemisphere of the Intellectual Nature, with the inferior Hemisphere of the
Corporeal Nature. Also since the Soul can know all sorts of Bodies, it must be
consequently exempt from all corporeal Entity. As the Tongue to judge aright of
sapours, must it self have none; the same may be said of the eye, to discern
well of colors. To say that the Soul is mortal, because it acts only by the
help of its Organs, were to draw a conclusion from an uncertainty, it being
never yet proved, that the Soul cannot act of it self without its Organs. The
Law of all Nations is the Law of Nature, and the belief of the Souls
Immortality is a dictate of it: But the opposers are as rare as Earth quakes,
which (if there were no other Reasons) would be a miserable Argument to prove
the motion of the Earth. Remorse of Conscience, and Gods Justice not punishing
all sins in this life, presupposes another. Pomponatius under pretense of
defending the Souls Immortality has sought against it: and professing himself
a Peripatetick^* has in this particular embraced the sentiment of Epicurus,
saying, (...).
that although the Soul of man should be mortal, yet Virtue would sufficiently
recompense it self, thereby designing to render the belief of the Immortality
of the Soul unnecessary. But supposing this to be true of Virtue, yet would it
not be equally true of Vice that they which addict themselves thereunto, are
sufficiently punished by doing so. Nor was there ever yet such a Lawgiver
heard of, that established a constitution to punish a man for Robbery, by
forcing him to commit Adultery. Cyrus on (...). (...). (...)
his death bed declared to his two Sons, that he could never believe, that the
Soul all the while it is contained in this mortal Body, should live, and
afterward die and be senseless, but rather after death the Soul is most wise.
An excellent speech, and worthy of himself. If in the behalf of this Article my
Arguments prove not so effectual as at first I designed them, my excuse may be
the same as Plato made for himself upon the like occasion, viz. it is sufficient
if any speak but probably in so difficult a subject.

XXIX.
There is an ancient Maxim in Philosophy, viz. Nihil est in Intellectu, quod
non prius fuit in Sensa. All our knowledge arises out of the Experience which
our Senses give us: and therefore a man born thoroughly deaf, can have no
apprehension of Music. But the Soul is of a spiritual nature, and so in it
self utterly imperceptible by our senses; the Soul it self alone, can reflect
on its own acts and conceptions. It Is indeed very unsafe, any farther than it
can be made appear we are guided by the clue of Divine Revelation, to guess and
discourse overboldly concerning the nature of the Soul, or peremptorily to
determine of its future condition: Wherein among all the Ancients, Pliny has
been esteemed the most cautious, who to direct our Prognostication therein,
calls us back to observe the time past, and from thence to conjecture, what
will become of us hereafter: According to that of the Trag^dian, Quae^is quo
j^ceas post obitum loco? Quo non na^a j^cent. As if the wheel went rather
round, than forward. As Seneca the Philosopher, who blindly surmis'd the
Doctrine of future ^oys to be magis optantium, quam doc^m; and by the same
reason, the T^rours of the Infernal Lake to be magis (...), quam probantium.
But every man's Conscience tells him another tale, and surdo verbere caedit,
objecting, the terror of a Judgment to come.

XXX.
Yet for as much as in all Ages there were sound some Monsters of Men* who
having no sense of Divine Goodness, or Natural Ju^tice, would confound all
Humane Society, as not having in themselves any restraint, either from Nature
or Religion. For such the Heathen Lawgivers did wisely provide a Pluto, a Whip
and a Gallows; of all which the Gallows proved most effectual on those that
were debauched, beyond all fear of punishment hereafter, so they could but
escape in this life. And even among us, where the Light of the Gospel shines so
bright, and where there is such excellent Preaching, a man that frequents the
Sessions House, will soon find how great a share of our preservation we owe to
the Public Executioner.

XXXI.
The Heathen Philosophers (as I showed you) were much divided in their Opinions
concerning the Souls future estate, some held it mortal, others immortal. Of
those that held the mortality of the Soul, the Epicureans were the chief Sect,
who notwithstanding their impious Doctrines, yet some of their lives were
virtuous. Cardan had so great a value for their Moral actions, that he appeared
in Justification of them. It appears (says he) by the Writings of Cicero and
Diogenes Laertius, that the Epicureans did more religiously observe Laws,
Piety, and Fidelity among men, than either the Stoics or Platonists: and I
suppose the cause thereof was, that (as Galen tells us) a man is either good or
evil by custom, but none confideth in those, that do not profess sanctity of
life. Wherefore they were compelled to use greater Fidelity, thereby the better
to justify their prosession: from which reason it likewise proceeds, that at
this day few do equallize the fidelity of Usurers, notwithstanding they are
most base in the rest of their life. Also among the Jews, whilst the Pharise^s
that confessed the Resurrection, and the Immortality of the Soul, frequently
persecuted Christ: the Sadduces who denied the Resurrection, Angels and
Spirits, meddled not with him above once or twice, and that very gently too.
Thus if you compare the L^ves of Pliny and Seneca, (I do not mean their
Writings) you shall find Pliny with his mortality of the Soul, did as far
exceed Seneca in honesty of manners, as S^a excels him in Religious discourse.
The Epicureans observed honesty above others, and in their conversation were
usually found in offensive and virtuous, and for that reason were often
employed by the Romans, when they could persuade them to accept of great
Employs; for their fault was not any want of ability or honesty, but their
general desire of leading a private life, easy and free from trouble, although
inglorious. For where Immortality is not owned, there can be no ambition of
posthumous Glory, such as excited Tyrants to commit those follies, which the
Poet derides in these two lines: -- Idemens and saevas curre per Alps I^ven.
Sat.

Ut pueris placeas, and declamatio sias.
Now such as these were none of the Epicureans, but they instead of those
bloody Scenes of Gallantry, undertook to manage carefully the Inheritances of
Orphans; breeding up at their own charge the Children of their deceased
Friends, and were counted good men, unless it were in point of Religious
worship: For they constantly affirmed there were no Gods, or at least such as
concerned not themselves with humane affairs, according to that of the Poet,
Nec been promeritis capitur nec tangitur ira. Lueret.
Neither (as he goes on) does the hopes of Immortality conduce to Fortiude, as
some vainly suggest, for Brutus was not valianter then Cassius, and if we will
confess the truth, the deeds of Brutus were more cruel then those of Cassius:
For he used the Rhodians that were his Enemies far more kindly, then Brutus did
those amicable Cities which he governed. In a word, though they both had a hand
in Casar's murder, yet Brutus was the only Parricide. So that the Stoics which
believed a Providence, lived as if there were none, whereas the Epicureans who
denied it, lived as if there were.

This is that which Cardan urges (perhaps with an impious intent) in favor of
the Epicureans, which is not at all convincing, nor will it serve to wipe off
the deserved reproach cast upon them. I esteem the Epicurean Philosophy like
Gaming, even when managed with the greatest Art and cunning, to be but a
rational kind of madness. Cum ra^ione insanire.
Besides, however there might have been found some few good men of all Sects,
how absurd soever, yet that must not go for a ruled case that the Sect is so.
That Opinion which conduces most to the good of Mankind, is to be encouraged.
If these led such virtuous lives, while they were under the obscurity of
Paganism and a wrong persuasion, how much more eminent would they have been,
had they been guided by a true Light? Besides, all Historians agree not that
Seneca was so vicious, and Epicurus himself so virtuous, neither Dion nor
Laertius being altogether infallible.

XXXII.
The next Sect to the Epicureans in point of incredulity concerning the Soul, I
conceive to be the Scepticks, who were by some esteemed not only the modestest,
but the most perspicacious of all Sects. They neither affirmed nor denied any
thing, ^ut doubted of all things; Omnia in rebus Min. Fall.
humanis dubia, incerta, suspensa; magis omnia verisimilia, quam vera. They
thought all our knowledge seemed rather like truth, then to be really true, and
that for such like reasons as these.

1. They denied any knowledge of the Divine Nature, because, say they, to know
adaequately is to comprehend, and to comprehend is to contain, and the thing
contained must be less than that which contains it; to know inadoequately, is
not to know.

2. From the uncertainty of the Senses, as ex. gr. our Eyes represent things at
a distance to be less than really they are: A straight stick, in the water
seems to be crooked; the Moon to be no bigger than a Cheese; the Sun greater at
Rising and Setting, than at Noon: The Shore seems to move, and the Ship to
stand still; square things to be round at distance; an erect Pillar, to be less
at the top. Neither do we know (say they) whether objects are really so as our
eyes represent them to us; for the same thing which appears Sir W. Raleigh out
of Sext. Emp.
white to us, seems yellow to him that has the Jaundies, and red to a Creature
that has red eyes; also if a man rubs his eyes, the figure which he beholds
seems long or narrow: and therefore it is not improbable, but that Goats, Cats,
and other Creatures, which have long pupils of the eye, may also think those
things long which we call round: For as Glasses represent the object variously
according to their shape, so it may be with our eyes: And so the sense of
Hearing deceives: Thus the Echo or Trumpet sounded in a Valley, makes the
sound seem before us, when it is behind us. Besides, how can we think that an
Ear, which has a narrow passage, can receive the same sound with that which
has a wide one? Or the Ear whose inside is full of hair, to hear the same with
a smooth Ear? Experience teaches us, that if we stop, or half stop our Ears,
the sound comes not in the same manner, as when the Ears are open. Nor is the
Smelling, Taste or Touch less subject to mistake: For the same scents please
some, and displease others; and so in our Tastes, to a rough and dry tongue that
very thing seems bitter, (as in an Ague) which to the moist tongue seems
otherwise; and so is it in other Creatures. The like is true of the Touch: For
it were absurd to think, that those Creatures which are covered with Shells,
Scales, or Hairs, should have the same sense in touching with those that are
smooth. Thus one and the same object is diversely judged of, according to the
various qualities of the Instruments of Sense, which conveyeth it to the
Imagination; from all which the S^eptick concludes, that what these things are
in their own nature, whether red, white, bitter or sweet, he cannot tell: for,
says he, why should I prefer my own conceit in affirming the nature of things
to be thus, or thus, because it seems so to me? when other living Creatures
perhaps think it otherwise. But the greatest fallacy is in the operation of our
inward senses: for the fancy sometime is persuaded, that it hears and sees what
it does not; and our Reasoning is so weak, that in many disciplines scarce one
demonstration is found, though this alone produces Science. Wherefore it was
Democritus his opinion, that Truth is hidden in a Well, that she may not be
sound by men. Now although this Doctrine is very inconsistent with the light of
Christianity, yet I could wish Adam had been of this persuasion, for then he
would not have mortgaged his Posterity as he did, for the purchase of a
Twilight Knowledge. Now from these sinister observations it was, that they
esteemed all our Sciences to be but Conjectures, and our Knowledge but Opinion.
Whereupon doubting the sufficiency of humane Reason, they would not venture to
affirm or deny any thing of the Souls future state, but civilly and quietly
gave way to the Doctrines, and Ordinances under which they lived, without
raising or espousing any new Opinions. And in those times all the great
Innovations and Embroilments among men, were set up by the Stoics and
Platonists, who were highly possessed with the desire of Immortality and Glory.
Which thing being observed, did great violence in those days to the belief of
the Souls Immortality, making men the less willing to censure those for
Atheists who doubted or denied it, but sociably to admit them into business,
and Trusts of the highest importance. The Chinese have a Religious Sect called
the Nantolines, who preach up publicly the Souls Mortality. Also at this day
in the EastIndies, (where the greatest swarms of Mankind live, and those of
many Sects and Religions,) it is found by our Merchants trading thither, that
not only the far greatest number are of those which believe no other rewards or
punishments for the Soul, except what it shall after death meet with, in a new
Body upon Earth; but also they find by Commerce with them, that they are the
most eminently remarkable for their honesty, above any of the other Sects. From
whence Postellus observes, that few men can debauch Nature in themselves to
such a degree, as to commit all the wickedness they were capable of,
notwithstanding they believed no reward or punishment hereafter: For, says he,
you must either acknowledge Superstitions unnecessary, or else defile your own
Natures, and consess men to be worse then Beasts, who can live without those
terrors, and yet not devour one another unless in cases of necessity.

XXXIII.
Thus if you seriously recollect the Heathen Opinions concerning the Souls
estate after death, we shall find that the most inquisitive among them, had but
a slender conceit of the Souls eternal condition, or at best they thought (as
Bernier says the Inhabitants of (...) believe,) that it would mix with the Soul
of the World again: like Water taken out of the Ocean in a Bottle, and swims
therein for a while, till by some accident or other being broke, it returns
back to the Sea from whence it was taken; or else passing from one Body to
another, and then in either case, its condition, whether good or bad, would be
of no concern to its former Owner. Which made Seneca so little value his future
state, as to speak of it with a Quid mihi curae erit Transfuga? So that upon
what I can find, they looked upon Man to be made up of Soul and Body together;
not Body without Soul, nor Soul without Body, but Man to be the Result of both,
viz. Soul and Body. With whom (according to their vain Opinion) it fares after
death, as with a Parliament after Dissolution, which being made up of three
Estates, Lords Spiritual, Lords Temporal, and Commons, remain a Parliament
whilst the King pleases to grant them his Fiat: But when the King gives his
word to Dissolve it, the three Estates remain still, but the Parliament is
gone. And thus they held Man to be the Result of Soul and Body, till God
pleases to command his dissolution, after which the Soul and Body remain in a
separate Being, only that the Man as well as the Parliament is lost in the
Dissolution. And to proceed further with this comparison, as the Parliament
represents the Kingdom, of which they are a smaller part, so did the Heathens
believe that Man in some kind represents the Almighty, of whom he is a portion.
So as by this we may see the effect of all their impious Tenants, concerning
the Souls future estate, was, that Man is but a Passenger in this life, and the
World his Inn, till sickness brings up the Reckoning, and Death comes in with
an All is paid.

XXXIV.
These were the most considerable Opinions of the Heathen Philosophers; yet for
as much as there was never any Sect but had some defect either in Theory or
Practice: Some have thought it best not to espouse any, but to imitate the Bee'
and to gather what is good out of each Which was the way of Potamon of
Alexandria, who (as Diogenes Laertius records) sounded a Sect called Elective,
which allowed every one to choose what was best in all Philosophies. When I
seriously reflect upon many of these gross erroneous Tenants, recited in this
discourse, I cannot but acknowledge with Cicero, That there is no Doctrine, how
absurd and foolish soever, which has not had some Philosopher sor its
Champion; not that I have so mean an opinion of Philosophy it self, (which is
indeed the true knowledge of causes and effects,) especially the Moral part of
it, as to believe it altogether unnecessary in the Government of Mankind. Some
there be that have damned all other Philosophers for Epicurus his sake, as
thinking them no Friends to Religion. But such persons do ad pauca re^picere,
and theresore judge accordingly: For though a lawful acquaintance with Events
and Phenomenon that appear on this Theater of the World, would contribute much
to free men's minds from the servitude Lu^r. lib. 1. prope fin.
of Superstition, Arctis Religionum animos nodis exsolvere; yet it would breed
a sober and amiable belief of the Deity, as it did in the Pythagoreans,
Platonists, and other Sects of Philosophers, if we may take their own word for
it. He is a superficial Philosopher who adheres to Atheism, as a Noble
Philosopher speaks to this purpose: Philosophy and Religion being like two
wheels in a Watch, though they move contrary, yet are both conducive to the
regular motion and government of Mankind.

XXXV.
Now to all these various Opinions, there have been opposed various Objections:
As first, If the Soul be a portion of the Divine Spirit, inseparable from that
its Original, and acted thereby, men would then indulge themselves, by thinking
all the Evil they committed would go upon Gods Score, rather than their own: Et
mallant emendare Deum, quam seipsos: That all Industry were discouraged, all
blame or praise taken away. Therefore Tully calls this Ignava Ratio: Who blames
the Sword for a murder, and not the hand that imployes it? Nay, in Creatures
sensible, if a Lion or a Serpent kills a man, they but act according to their
Natures. To all which their usual Answer was, by a constant allowing unto the
Soul of Man a freedom of Will, not subject to be forced out of its own Conduct;
Wherefore men are said to be tempted into vicious courses, but not dragged or
compelled. And besides this freedom, Nature (says the Philosopher) has
implanted in the heart of man, before he debauches himself by evil customs, a
harmless and kind disposition, not willing to destroy or hurt other men, unless
it be upon an absolute Necessity, for his own Preservation: and then, when
enforced by such Necessity, though he choose to do it, as of two evils the
least, yet he cannot act it without regret, unless by evil Converse he has
poisoned that inbred Goodness which he brought with him into the World. And
upon such, one may observe the Justice of Divine Vengeance; the courses these
vitiated Spirits take, end in Poverty, or some other misery, and so brings them
either to a Prison, Hospital, or Gallows at home, or else to be slain in a
Foreign War, wherein they ought not to have concerned themselves. And thus we
see Punishment was ever judged due to all free Agents, for depraving of their
Natural Tempers, so true is that saying, When Man lost his Innocence, he lost
his Happiness; and that of the Poet is no less,

-- -- Semita certe Iuven. Sat. 10.

Tranquillae per Virtutem patet uhica vitae.
So that others, who according to their natural Goodness led harmless and
industrious Lives, enjoyed a sweet calmness of mind, free from those Terrors
which daily torment rapacious men; whereby, say they, it appears, that
admitting their Tenent of the Souls mortality were true, though nothing is less
so, yet this were enough to deter men from Impieties, I mean the Punishment
that attends the Wicked, and reward of the Good even in this life, unless
obstructed by their own folly. But of this I have spoken before.

XXXVI.
Another objection wherewith the Philosophers were much perplexed, (as indeed
they had reason to be) was their want of Assurance that the Soul should meet
with future Justice, demanding withal, how then in this Life could the baser
sort of Spirits be deterred from gainful Villainies, as might be acted in
secret, and so never like to be discovered, but to escape the Punishment of the
Laws, and hatred of men, such as Perjuries, unsuspected Murders, concealing
dead men's Trusts, and the like? especially those who by Stupidity and
Immortallty, have quite extinguished the Light of Nature in their minds. In
answer Mont. Ess. lib. 2. c. 12.
thereunto (Reason for the most part being like a Pitcher with two ears, that
may be taken on either side) the Philosophers have adventured in this Subject,
to take the Pitcher by the left ear, and rather than not justify their
Opinions, have (against all Reason) adventured to reply upon the things
objected, with such fallacious Arguments as these:

1. They seem to question whether any Villainy could be so secretly acted, as
might not admit some hazard of being discovered; and if so, then the danger of
that might terrify them into honesty. But grant (say they) that Vices may be
carried on with such secrecy, as no mortal eye could discover; yet we find by a
long and sad experience, that in those places, where by public institution men
are taught to expect Divine Justice after death, as some of us from Aeacus:
Nevertheless such dull and debauched Persons, have seldom their minds so clear
and sedate, as to weigh and regard those future accounts; or if they do, it is
not till at the point of death, when they are past doing any more mischief, and
that then the Apprehensions of Elysium, or the Stygian Lake, produces as little
good to the Public, as to themselves; Vice first leaving Them, and not they
Vice. Moreover, ibid.
say they, if such persons would betimes recollect themselves, they might
easily find, that no Humane wit could sound the depth of Nature; and therefore
how can men assure themselves, but that God who has sound out this way of
immersing a Spirit into flesh and blood, thereby to make it smart and grieve,
which otherwise, in its pure Nature, it could not have done, according to their
Opinions: How therefore (say they) do men know, but that the same Almighty
Wisdom, even without a miracle, may use it so again? or take it into millions
of other ways as natural to chastise it in a more afflicting manner,
especially seeing this way has so little purified it. These and many other
blind Surmises, instead of Arguments, were they fain to make Use of, rather
than acknowledge the belief of Immortality necessary; but no Argument is more
fallacious than this of theirs, which flies from Gods Power to his Will: For, a
posse ad esse non valet consequentia; and he who believes a thing only because
it may be true, may as well doubt of it because it may be otherwise. Besides,
the very Heathen Laws themselves, as recorded by their own Historians, show how
much inferior their Virtues were to ours. Which Law is more perfect, that
which says, Thou shall not kill; or that which 'says, Thou shall not be angry?
That which forbids Adultery; or that which turns the eyes from the object? That
which forbids evil actions; or that which forbids evil Speakings? That which
commands us not to wrong others; or that which permits us 'not to revenge a
wrong done to our selves* Vos scelera admissa punitis, apud nos and eogitare
peccare est, says Minucius Felix to the Heathens. And with the same Arguments
a modern most ingenious Poet, brings in St. Catharine vindicating Christianity
from Paganism.

It Is true your Virtues are the same we teach, St. Cath.

But in our Practice they much higher reach,
You but forbid to take another due,
But we forbid even to desire it too.
Revenge of Injuries, you Virtue call;
But we Forgiveness of our wrongs ex^ll.
Immodest deeds you hinder to be wrought;
But we proscribe the least immodest Thought.
So much your Virtues are in ours refined,
That yours but reach the Actions, ours the Mind.
By which we may see, how much more perfect our Laws are than theirs, how
crooked they appear compared with our straight Rule; and those unripe Virtues
they had, were meliorated by the Influence of Christianity.

XXXVII.
Another grand objection to those Philosophers, who denied the Souls
Immortality, and by consequence, all future entertainment according to a
virtuous or a vicious life, was grounded on their frequent observing of men
eminent for Virtue, to live and dye in misery: whereas others notorious for
Vice, lived and died in great prosperity. This put as well Philosophers, as
also Saints to their wits end, till the latter took Haven at the Heavenly
Jerusalem, and there sheltered themselves against all fears: (but they are not
within the reach of this discourse, which meddles with nothing but the vain
conceits of men, who had not that Port to friend.) In answer to this
unanswerable objection, some of them, especially the Stoics, would make us
believe that Poverty, Contempt, a Dungeon, Nakedness, Ulcers, and rotting in
the Streets, are not really evils, especially to a noble mind that can defy
Fortune. But these Bravado's become only Mad men, and whosoever is conversant
in such Writings, does only study to make himself a Fool: and perhaps the
French have respect hereunto, when they call a learned Ass Un Philosophe. Such
a man's Character is ingeniously given us by Horace, in these three lines:

Cum septem studiis annos dedit, insenuitque
Libris and curis statua taciturnius exit,
Plerumque and populum risu quatit. --
Horat. But to return to our Objections: There have been offered better
Solutions than those of the Stoics, (though not at all convincing to any
Rational man:) As first, they surmise, That peradventure those Virtues which we
take for sincere, may be counterfeit and mistaken, proceeding perhaps from some
wicked motive. Thus the Soldier whose courage we admire for scaling a Wall, it
may be (say they) he is moved by malice to murder some particular Enemy of his,
or he knows not of a Mine ready to spring under him. Thus also when a Woman is
praised for Chastity, perhaps either it is for want of Opportunity, Casta quam
nemo rogavit, or from some natural Defect in her Constitution, as Frigidity and
Phlegm, or else for fear of Conception, and from an unwillingness to have her
Reputation lie at the mercy of a loose young man's tongu^. Again, (say they) if
you see an Officer refuse a Bribe, consider if he be not one of a plentiful
Fortune, that covets Vulgar applause more than a Superfluity of Riches: Or
consider whether the Bribe were not small and inconsiderable, because many will
hazard their Reputation for Pounds, who will not for Pence: Or observe whether
the time was secret and convenient, wherein the Bribe was offered: or, last of
all, whether it was not refused out of a prospect of some greater Advantage,
when he could not possibly receive both. As the Banditi will let pass a single
Passenger, rather than by assaulting him miss the Booty of a whole Caravan. In
which cases their Honesty proceeds a metu, non moribus. Nor is there any thing
more frequent, than to see the wickedest of men highly to act Religion;

Zeal stands but Centry at the Gate of Sin,
Whilst all that have the Word pass freely in.
Thus in our late Civil Wars, all the Villainy which the Godly Party (as they
named themselves) committed, was by them called the Work of the Lord; and that
Curse which the Scripture pronounces against them that do the Work of the Lord
negligently, they pronounced against all such as refused to assist them in
cutting off their Sov^reigns head. So the Anabapti^ts of Germany chose rather
to wrest the Sense of Gods holy Word, than want a Text to justify the Evil
they committed: For in the minority of their Power, they had always in their
mouths that humble Sentence of our Saviors, If men strike you on one cheek,
turn the other; if they take your Cloak give them your Coat also. But when they
were grown an hundred thousand strong, then they fell to doing the Work of the
Lord diligently, (as they called it) making Use of another of Christ's sayings,
Blessed are the meek (meaning themselves) for they shall inherit the Earth; and
thus singing to the Lord a new Song, they plundered all Germany. Now these are
they who do the greatest mischief to Religion: These are they whom the Lord
Bacon calls the greatest Atheists, for that they are ever handling Holy things
without feeling; and these are they that in a perverted sense fulfill that
saying of the Scriptures, Godliness is great gain: For by reason of their
Imp^ety, seeing they can expect to receive little Benefit from our Savior in
the next World, they resolve to make what advantage they can of him in this.
Like Jugglers, they carry only their coal of zeal in their Mouths, not being
heated themselves, with what they go about to inflame others. But as it adds
deformity to an Ape, to be so like a man; so the near resemblance that
Hypocrisy bears to Religion, renders it the more deformed. By which you may
see, how little we can judge of Religion by outward appearance, Now in such
like cases, when the searcher of hearts afflicts them in this Life, we, who see
the outside only, do foolishly question Divine Justice.

XXXVIII.
Another Reply which the Philosophers made to the aforesaid Objection, was
this; That admitting the Virtues which men so highly extol, were not
hypocritical, but in earnest, yet (say the Philosophers) for ought we know,
they are not in the balance of Nature of such weight and Value as men esteem
them; but that it may fare with them as Coin made of Copper or Leather, which
though by Proclamation it goes at a high rate in one Country, it will not do so
in another, for want of intrinsic Value. A wise Roman did not guess much amiss
at the gifts that were most prevalent with Heaven, when he declared to the
Senate, Non votis neque supplicationibus muli^bribus auxilia Deorum parantur,
Vigilando, Agendo, been consulendo prospere omnia cedunt. Ubi socordiae tete,
atque igna^iae tradideris, nequicquam Deos implores. By which excellent words
he seems to mark out two above all other qualities of Mankind, as the most
prevalent with God to obtain his Blessing, viz. Wisdom and Industry: for
without Wisdom Industry is but Labor in vain; and without Industry, Wisdom is
but a bare thinking; and thoughts, though never so wise, unless put in
execution, are but dreams, which produce no real effect. Therefore when Aesop's
Clown having his Cart overthrown, desired aid of Hercules, to set it upright
again; the Demon bids him set his shoulders to the Wheel, and lift at it, and
then much might be done. Also to the same purpose Lucian tells us, that Jupiter
being often troubled with the impertinent Requests and Petitions of Princes,
and Generals on both sides for Victory, to prevent any further Trouble of that
kind, has for the future decreed, That whenever two Armies meet, the greater
number shall overcome the smaller, provided the Conduct, Discipline, and
Courage of both be the same. Furthermore, says the Heathen, if you observe the
several kinds of misery among men, and the Causes from which they proceed, you
shall for the most part find the want of Wisdom, Industry, or both, to have
been the cause. As for instance, when men are taken with horrid Diseases, they
usually come from an excess in eating or drinking, or from such things as with
a careful observation, they might easily have perceived to be disagreeable with
their health. Some are put to death for siding with a weak Faction; others are
beggared by Gaming, and spending beyond their Revenue, or by not keeping a
vigilant eye over it, but leaving the managery thereof to careless or false
Servants. Again, others have been ruined by being bound for their dear Brethren
over a Glass of Wine: among these may be reckoned Princes, who are ever ruined
by their Favorites, unless the Prince has the good fortune to ruin them
first, being, like Actaeon, subject to be slain by their own Hounds. These and
a million of other follies produce the ruin of most men, who still owe their
fall to want of Wisdom: Insomuch, as the Ancients had an opinion, that the Gods
before they brought any calamity upon a man, would first unwit him, as to some
particular occasion, and then punish his oversight; Perdere quos vult Jupiter,
hos prius dementat. Whereupon, when Persons esteemed pious and good natured,
are upon these or the like Errors cast into Prisons, or other misfortunes, the
fear lest at another time the like may befall us, breeds a compassion which
takes more notice of the misery, than the folly which occasision'd it. Hereto
some may rejoyn, That they have observed several that for the greatest part of
their Lives have been unblest, and poor, who by their Neighbors have been ever
esteemed pious, industrious, and of good Understanding. To which it is
answered, It does not often happen to be so: But whenever it does so fall
out, if we narrowly mark their courses of life, it will not be difficult to
perceive some notable foolish errors, which like Maw-worms destroy a man
without any great outward appearance of Evil. Or else peradventure if they
would enter scrutiny with their own hearts, they might find they had relied
upon themselves or others, more than upon that Almighty goodness, which made
and preserves all things, being the only root of all prosperity; who by this
desertion, having as much as in them lies, cut themselves off from that root of
Divine Providence, they become like Boughs set in a Chimney, which soon wither:
And last of all, (say they) if Sicknesses and Afflictions are sent us because
of our Sins, what makes Brutes subject to the same?

These are the chief Arguments that I find any where recorded by the Heathens,
in defense of their wicked Opinions, which are answered by the impulses of
every man's own heart; for the belief of a future state is implanted in every
ones Nature, and this appears as well by the progress of Idolatry and
Superstition, as of the true Religion: For no Religion of what kind soever,
whether false or true, could have gotten so general a possession in the hearts
of men, or have been so long entertained in the World, had there not been in
Nature some sense of a future Being, which has from the beginning made the
generality of men so apt to receive Religious Instructions of any kind
whatsoever, without which foundation to work on, even Solon, Lyeurgus, and Numa
might soon have abrogated their own Laws in despair.

XXXIX.
But to proceed, without any relation to the Souls future account, I find by
some of the wisest of the Ancients, that they thought they could never have too
high an opinion of Gods goodness, or too base of man's wickedness; whose Vices
nevertheless (since Nature does nothing in vain) they esteemed not altogether
unnecessary to the well-governing of Mankind: For, says one of them, If from
History, or Experience, you but observe any one Age, you shall find it has
much the resemblance of a wellwrought piece of Tapestry, wherein is represented
some great Action, as a Battle, which must not wholly consist of Generals or
Commanders, but also of many common Soldiers; some cutting of Throats, others
slain or wounded, and trampled under Horses feet: and yet notwithstanding,
these miserable wretches, nay and the very Horses too, are as skilfully
wrought, and made of as good Silk as the Generals themselves: but the Truth and
Harmony of the Story requires this great inequality of Particulars, whose
condition is framed with such regard to them, as may best serve to complete the
whole. Therefore (says he) in weighing the seeming unequal conditions of men
in this Life, it betrays a narrowness of Fancy, as well as Injustice, to judge
of their Atomlike Merits or Demerits apart from the Universe, wherein they have
their portion. And much to this Purpose Arnobius speaks.

XL.
Now to recollect and conclude these Observations, I cannot but wonder that the
Heathens (who being directed only by the Light of Nature, and not acknowledging
any future Reward* or Punishment) should be endowed with such Piety and
Veneration toward God, as in all their Writings it appears they had, whose
Providence though they doubted for the life to come, yet they plainly perceived
in this, and Entitled him Deus Optimus Maximus. Some indeed when they mentioned
him, chose rather to use the word Numen, than Deus, as unwilling to make him
either Male or Female like one of themselves, for they revered him as the Sole,
Infinite, Eternal Preserver of all things.

XLI.
As for the manner of their Worship, and the places wherein they celebrated
their Heathenish Rites and Ceremonies, that being a Subject unnecessary in this
Discourse to trouble you with; I shall only give you this short Account of it,
which I find already collected to my Hands by that Learned Satyrist Cornelius
De Vanit. Scient.
Agrippa. As for the Gentiles (says he) there were some very eminent for the
Structures of their Temples; but others there were who never made Use of any:
Of which number was Xerxes, who is Reported to have burnt all the Temples about
Asia, at the request of his Magicians, esteeming it no less than Impiety to
enclose the Gods in Walls. To the same purpose Zeno Cittious disputed in these
words: To build Churches and Temples (says he) is no way necessary, for
nothing ought to be accounted Sacred by right, or esteemed Holy, which men
themselves erect; neither among the Persians of old, nor among the Primitive
Hebrews, were there any Temples Dedicated to Divine Service, till at last one
was Founded by Solomon, in which if any think God can be included, he is
reproved by the Prophet* Isaiah, Heaven is my Throne, the Earth my Footstool,
therefore what is the House thou buildest for me? and Stephen the Protomartyr
adds, Solomon built an House, but the most High inhabits not in places made
with Hands. Also St. Paul himself exhorts the Athenians to the same effect,
telling them that God dwells not in Temples made with Hands, for being the Lord
of Heaven and Earth, he is not served by men's hands, he wants not their help.
Furthermore, Origin in his Writings against Celsus, says, that for a long time
after Christ's Death, there were no Churches, built; and so far goes Agrippa.
But I conceive, that however the Pagans did some of them refrain from erecting
Temples out of Superstition, yet the Primitive Christians did it upon another
account, viz. the Persecutions wherewith they were then oppressed. But
afterward, when they had gotten Kings for their Nursing-Fathers, and Queens for
their Nursing-Mothers, to favor their Righteous Couse, they either erected
public Houses commodious for Devotion, or converted those Magnificent
Structures, the Stately Temples Dedicated to Juno, Venus, Apollo, with the rest
of their Gods and Goddesses, to the Service of the true God: and indeed most of
the Christian Churches, (as the Musk-melon from the Dunghill) were raised out
of the filthy Corruption and Superstition of Paganism.

XLII.
The next thing I shall touch upon, is the Politic Institution of the Heathen
Ceremonies in times of their Public Devotion. There is nothing has a greater
Influence over the Generality of M^n, (especially the Vulgar) than their
Passions, and over their Passions, than Ceremonies which have a great
Influence* upon their minds. What is the pleasure of a Lord Mayors Show,
Horse-(...), Play or the like, but only the P^p and Solemnities wherewith they
are* attended? Who would be ambitious of seeing the Lord Mayor without any
Attendants? Of seeing two Horses run against one another, with no other Company
but the Grooms that ride them? Would any Person give Money, and stay in a Crowd
for three or four hours together with empty Stomachs to see any of these
Sights? Or would a man rise at four of the Clock in a Winters morning, riding
seven or eight hours together in the cold, for the uncertain expectation of
seeing nine or ten couple of Dogs, run barking after a Fox, without any other
Company than theirs? Who would buy such small pleasures at so dear a rate, were
they not attended with other Ceremonies? and yet as they are now performed, we
see people almost mad upon them. Which shows how prodigious an Influence they
have over our Affections in all kind of Pleasures. Nor are they less prevalent
in matters of Grief and Affliction, as well for the expelling as heightening of
it. All thoughts of the future Cares and Inconveniences of a married Life are
drowned in the Sackpossdt, and for that time banished by the Ceremony of
Company, Feasting and Music, which are but the gilding of the Pill. Also in
Death, what makes it so terrible, (but as the Lord Bacon well observes) the
Solemnity of Friends weeping and mourning about the Deathbed? According to
that saying, Pompa mortis magis terret, quam mors: ipsa. Now this being
observed by the Ancient Lawgivers, ( viz. how great an Influence such
Pageantries have over the minds of Men) it made them under pretense of decency
of Worship, introduce all those vain superstitious Rites wherewith their
Devotion was filled. Thus Numa Pompilius first instituted Ceremonies among the
Romans, thereby to induce a rude, harbarous People that had acquired a Kingdom
by Violence, to the love of Piety, Justice and Religion. Thus he erected the
Order of Vestal Virgins to preserve the Fire in the Temple, and to do Sacrifice
to the Goddess Vesta. Also he instituted twelve men of an Order called the
Salii, who in painted Garments were to sing Verses in praise of God Mars.
Besides other Priests called ^eciales, who were to punish offenders, and
sacrifice unto the Goddess Bona Dea. And the like course were the rest of the
Lawgivers fain to take in other Countries, and all little enough to uphold
their Superstitions. Whereas true Religion, like true Beauty, appears best in
la^ undress; and so does Christianity, especially the Reformed Religion. But
the ancient Hea^enism, and Mahumetanism, are all one Broth, as the Italian
Proverb expresses it: Both of Humane Invention, and disparaged with like
Absurdities. Yet let us not in shunning Charybdis, fall into Scylla, and for
fear of Idolatry, show our ill Breeding in Divine Worship, a crime whereof too
many are guilty, who pay much greater respect to their Landlord than their God.

XLIII.
But to hasten to a Conclusion; Many of them were not a little over-awed by
that old ^verse of E^nius, Desine fata Deum flecti sp^are preoando: and this
more evidently appears from these sacred lines of Iuvenal to the same purpos^.

Nil ergo optabunt homines? si consilium vis, Iuven. Sat. 10.

Permi^es ipsis expendere Numinibus, quid
Conve^iat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris.
Nam pro jucudis aptissima quaeque dabunt Dii.
Charior est illis homo quam sibi. Nos animorum.
Impulsu, and caeca magnaque cupidine ducti
Conjugium petimus, part^mque Uxoris, at illis
Notum qui Pueri, q^alisque futura fit Uxor.
And in another Place, -- Nocitura petuntur. By which we may see, that the
Devotion of all of them did not consist much in Prayers, further than Thy will
be done; and that rather by way of Acquiescence, than Petition: But all other
enlargement of request they declined; partly because they thought not the Deity
flexanimous, to be won by entreaty, or br^bed by Sacrifice; and partly because
they held it a Presumption in Man to direct God what to do, and what to
forbear, thinking that such a boldness would be but slende^ly excused, by an
additional clause of submission to his Will. And this made Cardan (who favored
the worst Opinions of the Heathens) to symbolize with them in this; Deum non
(...) precibus, esset enim quasi unus ^ nobis passionibus and doloribus
obnoxious. But certainly no Christian can write or speak in behalf of this
Opinion, without his Conscience flying in his face. For what can be greater
relief to a man, and comfort to him in affliction, than to have a God to flee
to in his distress? The gretest ease in sorrow, is to have a Friend to break
our mind to; and if so, how much greater relief and satisfaction must it be to
an afflicted man, to have a God who is so well able to counsel, direct and
assist him, for his Friend, to communicate his case to? And therefore says
Tertullian, A Christian while he is at his Prayers with his hands lift up to
God, is unsensible of all Punishment, Besides, the very thoughts that we have a
Providence at all times to flee to, animates us with a new Spirit of boldness
and resolution, which is no small assistant to our success: As for example,
Take a Dog and mark what courage he assumes when he finds himself maintained by
a man, who (as my Lord Bacon says) is to him as a God, or Melior Natura. And
of the same Use is Confidence in God, for it animates us with that assurance as
ever renders us successful. Neither were the Heathens (I mean the best and
wisest of them) against all manner of Prayer, as we may learn from that Verse
of the Poet;

Orandum est ut sit men's sana in corpore sano.

But the chief and most commendable part of their Piety, consisted in a total
and willing Resignation of themselves and their Concerns, unto that infinite
Majesty, Almighty and All-wise Goodness, whereof they had continual experience.

Quin damus id superis -- -- Pers. Sat.

Compositum jus, fasque animo, sanctosque recessus
Mentis and incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
They conceived, if they should presume to search into the Souls future Estate,
the knowledge whereof they thought God had reserved to himself, they should
speed like Ixion, who making it his Request to lie with Juno, found himself
deceived, having in his Embraces only an empty Cloud. As for their
apprehensions of Death, it appears, many of them were more fearful of Dying,
than of being dead: Like one that fears to draw his Tooth, yet wishes it was
drawn. And to this purpose Cicero speaks in his Tusculan Questions, Emori nolo,
sed me esse mortuum nihil existimo. Alleging this reason for his Opinion, Cur
mortem malum tibi videri dicis, quae aut beatos nos efficiet animis manentibus,
^ut non miseros sensu earentes? But this is a very fallacious Argument, which
supposes our Souls must be either happy or senseless, the reason is obvious*
Therefore others of them gave a more ingenious account, why they so little
feared death, which was this: They looked upon themselves to be like Dogs, who
having a loving Master, and hearing him call them forth, immediately with
cheerfulness leave the House and follow him, not distrusting the goodness of
that Ma^er, who had ever before used them so kindly, still expecting the like
Entertainment, although they knew not what it should be. Thus did they esteem
death to be Gods call unto them, to come out of this mortal Body; which they
obeyed with much assurance of the Divine goodness, that had kept and provided
for them all their Lives long. And as at their En^rance into this Life, God had
not made them capable of knowing how he would here provide for them, and yet
they found by Experience he did; so they hoped it would fare with them in their
Future condition, although in some new way whereof they had not yet any
experimental knowledge The sum of which Opinion is delivered in this Copy of
Verses.

Pul^malis Anima, and nequ^ens fulcire Ruinam Pythagoras Moriens.

Imperii^ ex^ussa s^is, sibi (...) Exul:
Liberate data redeuntibus in sua Regna.
Congener^m res qu^que fib^ co^sortia quaerit,
Blandaque deserit^r vit^ dis^orsque Tyrann^.
Ut I^bar exclusum foedo cui illuxerat Antro
In Solemn resilit, per quem ^bratur in Orbem.
Sic tandem rediens divinae partic^ela Aurae.
Progeniem factura novam cum Numine fertur,
Irrequiesque alia ex aliis in ^ata vocatur.
Ast Infinitus Deus omnia in omnibus U^s
Induit in formas sese quasi Proteus omnes.
Aeternoque aeterna manent sua membra, per^ nil,
Sed fit per veteres Mundo nova Scena Tragoedos.
Nos pa^ca angusti sapimus, nostratia tant^m
Experti; reliquis sua cur s^nsoria rebus
Remur abesse, qu^bus pateat nova gloria Mundi
Exibo intrepide Canis ut Venaticus (...)
Agnoscens Domini vocem, quae protinus illum
Evocat in campos* somnoque Domoq^ relictis,
Assilit excurritque alacris: sic Te Pater Alme,
Expertus fidensque sequar, Quo duxeris ibo.
And this was the Faith of the most v^tuous and prudent of the Heathens
concerning Death. But others being neither thus wise, nor thus good, were
either transported with some vain Sect of Philosophy, or else weakly surrendered
all their Reasons to the delusion of their Priests: who notwithstanding their
fictitious Pretenses, knew no more of Heaven than the meanest of the People, as
it evidently appears to any one, that shall compare their Devotion with
Christianity. But their Philosophers, without any pretense of Inspirations
extraordinary, adventured to address their Doctrines to humane Reason, as
aiming altogether at vainglory; whose Arguments must needs seem so empty and
irrational to all discerning Judgments, that instead of becoming glorious, they
rendered themselves ridiculous. And thus such as would not modestly repose
themselves in the ignorance of the Souls future state, which God had been
pleased for the most part to conceal from them, became vain in their
Imaginations, distracted between Philosophy on the one side, and Superstition
on the other: And so had only this choice, whether they would be cheated by
themselves, or other men.

Prudens futuri temporis exitum
Caliginosa nocte premit Deus.
FINIS.

