AN APPEAL From the COUNTRY To the CITY, For the Preservation of His Majesty's
Person, Liberty, Property, and the Protestant Religion.

Salus Populi, Suprema Lex.

LAOPOLIS.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXIX.

AN APPEAL From the COUNTRY to the CITY.
Most brave and noble Citizens,
As the City of London is the great Metropolis and Soul of our once flourishing
and glorious Kingdom, so is it no small honor to you the Inhabitants thereof,
to be Citizens of so brave a City. Wherefore it is the hopes of the whole
Nation, that you have Spirits and Courage to act according to the Character you
bear, that upon all necessary occasions you may vindicate the just Concerns of
your City: In them we are all involved; with you we stand, and with you we
fall; your example directs our conduct, and they who desire to lay you in
ashes, are the only persons who would subvert our Religion and Property; for
when you are once ruined, the next thing will be, Up Ahab, and take possession.

Now Gentlemen, before we represent to you the estate of our misery, and ground
of our jealousies and fears, it is our humble request, that those who have most
Power amongst you, would so far trouble themselves, as to go to the top of your
new raised Pyramid, and from thence take a Survey of that magnificent Pile of
Building, whereof you are yet Masters: In which posture, to animate you with
true English Spirits, be pleased to fancy to your selves these following
Objects, which you will infallibly see come to pass, when ever Popery prevails.

First, Imagine you see the whole Town in a flame, occasioned this second time,
by the same Popish malice which set it on fire before. At the same instant
fancy, that amongst the distracted Crowd, you behold Troops of Papists,
ravishing your Wives and your Daughters, dashing your little Childrens brains
out against the walls, plundering your Houses, and cutting your own throats, by
the Name of Heretic Dogs: Then represent to your selves the Tower playing off
its Cannon, and battering down your Houses about your Ears. Also casting your
eye toward Smithfield, imagine you see your Father, or your Mother, or some of
your nearest and dearest Relations, tied to a Stake in the midst of flames,
when with hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven, they scream and cry out to that
God for whose Cause they die; which was a frequent spectacle the last time
Popery reigned amongst us. Fancy you behold those beautiful Churches erected
for the true Worship of God, abused and turned into idolatrous Temples, to the
dishonor of Christ, and scandal of Religion; the Ministers of God's holy Word
torn in pieces before your eyes, and their very best Friends not daring even to
speak in their behalf; Your Trading's bad, and in a manner lost already, but
then the only Commodity will be Fire and Sword; the only object, Women running
with their hair about their ears, Men covered with blood, Children sprawling
under Horses feet, and only the walls of Houses left standing: When those that
survive this fatal day, may sigh and cry, Here once stood my House, there my
Friend's, and here my Kinsman's; But alas that time is past! The only noise
will then be, O my Wife, O my Husband, O my dearest Children! In fine, what the
Devil himself would do, were he here upon Earth, will in his absence infallibly
be acted by his Agents the Papists; those who had so much ingratitude and
baseness to attempt the Life of a Prince so indulgent to them, will hardly be
less cruel to any of his Protestant Subjects. Wake drowsy Subjects, and
prevent your doom,
Let England not be twice enslaved by Rome.
If the approaching ruin of the Father could open the dumb Son's mouth, then
all that are either true Protestants, good Englishmen, or well-wishers to the
Interest of this Nation, have now the same reason to speak and complain, when
without a miracle our apparent ruin is at hand, the Sword already hangs over
our heads, and seems to the supported by no stronger force than that of one
single hair, his Majesty's Life. We in the Country have done our parts, in
choosing for the generality good Members to serve in Parliament; but if (as our
two last Parliaments were) they must be dissolved or prorogued, when ever they
come to redress the Grievances of the Subject, we may be pitied, but not
blamed. If the Plot takes effect, (as in all probability it will) our
Parliaments are not then to be condemned, for that their not being suffered to
fit occasioned it. The Plot is now got so far out of our Enemies reach, that no
subtle evasion or trick can ever hope to extinguish it; wherefore they must
either suffer all to come out, or begin by force to justify it, which we see
they are going to do, by their endeavoring to get those worthy and brave
Commanders banished, who (as they think) are the most likely persons to conduct
and lead us up against any Popish Army; the Wolf has nothing more to do, but
to destroy the Shepherd, and then fall upon the naked Sheep. But Gentlemen, be
not dismayed, the Lord of Hosts will be of your sides; for so long as you fight
his Cause, he will fight your Battles; and if God be for you, who dares be
against you? Fear nothing, but as your Interests are united, so let your
Resolutions be the same; and the first hour wherein you hear of the King's
untimely end, let no other noise be heard among you but that of Arm, Arm, to
revenge your Sovereign's Death, both upon his Murderers, and their whole
Party, for that there is no such thing as an English Papist who is not in the
Plot, at least in his good wishes. Let not fear of losing part by your action,
make you lose the whole by your patience: Think not to fare better than the
rest, by meddling less, for that Conquerours promises are never kept, especially
coming from that sort of people, whose Maxim it is, never to keep their words
with Heretics. Wherefore if ever a Popish Successor comes amongst you, let his
promises of keeping your Religion and Laws, or of his Conversion, be never so
plausible, credit 'em not; for if you do, you will infallibly be deceived, and
in time find them to be but like the Bait to a Mouse-trap. Or if you think to
bind and fetter him by Laws, that will be no better than the wise men of
Gotham's hedging in the Cuckoo; for when he (as all other Popish Kings do
governs by an Army, what will all your Laws signify? You will not then have
Parliaments to appeal to; He and his Council will levy his arbitrary Taxes, and
his Army shall gather them for him: Therefore you may much easier prevent the
Distemper at first, than remedy it when it has once got a head. Now Gentlemen,
lest any amongst you should be ignorant either of your Enemies, or their
Designs both against the King and Kingdom, be pleased to consider what follows,
and then think how to prevent it.

I.
First then, That you may know who are your Enemies at this time: They are
young beggarly Officers, Courtiers, over-hot Churchmen, and Papists. The young
Officer or Soldier his Interest makes him wish for a standing Army, not
considering any further than his own Pay and Plunder, and so helps to ruin you
that way. The Courtier endeavors to advance Taxes, oppress the people by vast
and illegal Impositions, when looking upon his Prince but as his Ox, he fattens
him upon his Neighbors Pasture, only for his own eating. Over-hot Churchmen
are bribed to wish well to Popery, by the hopes (if not of a Cardinal's Cap)
yet at least of a Command over some Abbey, Priory, or other Ecclesiastic
preferment, whereof the Roman Church has so great plenty. These are the men
who exclaim against our Parliaments Proceedings, in relation to the Plot, as
too violent, calling these Times by no other Name but that of 40 or 41. when to
amuse as well his Sacred Majesty as his good People, they again threaten us
with another 48. and all this is done to vindicate underhand the Catholic
Party, by throwing a suspicion on the Fanatics. These are the Gentlemen, who
so magnify the Principles of Bishop Land, and so much extol the Writings of
the late same spirited Prelate Dr. Heylin, who has made more Papists by his
Books, than Christians by his Sermons. These are those Episcopal Tantivies, who
make even the very Scriptures Pimp for the Court, who out of Vrim and Thummim
can extort a Sermon, to prove the not paying of Tithes and Taxes to be the Sin
against the holy Ghost, and had rather see the Kingdom run down with blood,
than part with the least hem of a consecrated Frock, which they themselves made
holy. These are the persons who commend Oats and Bedlow, but yet find fault
with their Evidence, when by crediting some part of the Plot, and suspecting
the rest, by speaking three words for it, and two against it, they cunningly
endeavor to invalidate the whole. Lastly, The chief and most dangerous of your
Enemies are Papists, who to make sure of their own Game, allure all the three
forementioned Parties to their side, by the Arguments aforesaid. Their design
is to bring in Popery, which they can no ways effect, but either by a Popish
Successor, or by the French Arms: The first of these we may our selves prevent;
and for the latter, if they conquer, they will undoubtedly conquer for
themselves, and not for him that brought them in. And if we ever should be
reduced to that extremity, either to submit to the French, or to our own Popish
Successor, every man that has any brains or generosity, will soon find it his
interest of the two, rather to submit to a foreign Power, who has not violated
the Laws of Nature, in fighting against his own Subjects, and who will also be
less revengeful, and more likely to let us enjoy our own Religion and
Liberties, than any Popish Successor will: Besides, it is natural for every
noble Spirit, to bear a Cudgelling from another man's Servant with less regret,
than from his own; however, God deliver us from both.

II.
In the next place, to discover to you how long this Plot has been on foot; I
must acknowledge, that there is some coherence between the beginning of the
late Civil Wars, and this our present Age; for as well then, as now, the
ambitious Popish and Trench Faction were the chief, nay the only Incendiaries
which set us all in a Flame; the Catholic Cause, like the Chestnut in the
Fable, has ever since Queen Mary's Reign been in the Fire: wherefore as the
Fox made use of the Ape's, so both then and now the Papists make use of the
Episcopal and Court-Parties claw, to take it out; the first of these they
allure to their assistance, by the fright of Presbytery; the latter, by the
apprehension of a Republic: although nothing is less designed, or more
improbable. Secretary Windebank's many Orders (which stand recorded at this
day) to secure the Roman Catholics from the execution of all Penal Laws
against them, in the late King's time, are a sufficient evidence, that they
then received no less countenance, than now: and for that vain pretense of
their Loyalty to the late King, nothing will appear more ridiculous, if we
consider, I. That they had no other Party to expect any advantage from, for
that no Government but Monarchy, can in England ever support or favor that
Religion; neither (notwithstanding their many offers) could they ever be
entertained or received by the Parliament-Party, unless 'twas under a disguise,
which many for that purpose made use of: So as their Loyalty and good Service
paid to the King, was merely in their own defense, well knowing, that the
foundation of those Commotions, was only in opposition to their Party: who as
well then, as now, had a desire to run the hazard of a War. 2ly. and lastly,
Their Fidelity to their Sovereign appeared in its true colors, when they were
so earnest with Oliver to accept of the Crown; which showed, that since nothing
but a Crowned Head could do good to the Popish Religion, they did not care who
wore it, so long as it was but worn. Now in acquainting you herewith, I do in
effect show you what is at this time acting amongst them, for it is the same
Play, though an old one newly revived: and as that which the Papists then
acted, was laid upon the Fanatics, so was the like to have been done in this
present. Plot; in order whereunto, just before the discovery of the same, they
had seized upon, and imprisoned one Mr. Claypole, for having (as they
pretended) a design to murder His Sacred Majesty; thinking, when it was once
reported abroad, that he andthe Old Oliverian Party had a conspiracy to take
away the King's Life, then in the mean while the Papists themselves might
safely do it, (as we see they had at that time, viz. August 1678, resolved
upon) and that then it would all have gone upon the Non-Conformists score; for
however there was never any person living more generous and obliging to the
King's whole Party, than this very man the Lord Claypole was, when he bore that
Honor; yet he having married Oliver Cromwell's Daughter, rendered him a sit
subject to put this tick upon: which by Dr. Oates's discovery of the Plot, came
to light, the Evidence against him vanished, and the poor Gentleman released.
Much such another design was that of the Papists in Scotland, who first by
their Counsels procured the poor Inhabitants to be oppressed, and then sending
their disguised Priests and Emissaries amongst them, encouraged the poor silly
Natives to Mutiny against those oppressions, hoping yet by this second
Stratagem to cast the Plot upon the Presbyterians: for not only Dr. Oats
mentions this in his Evidence, but we all know the Papists themselves were so
well assured of this Rising, before it happened, that at the disbanding of this
late Popish Army, many of the Officers and Soldiers had secret orders not to
sell their Horses, but to be in a readiness, for that they should have occasion
to use them again within a fortnight; and so it happened, for within less than
a fortnight after the disbanding, the Rebellion broke out in Scotland: So well
acquainted were the Authors of this mischief, with the time when it would
happen. Now this Insurrection was in two respects advantageous to the Catholic
Party; for first, among Foreigners and Strangers who were not acquainted with
the depth of their Intrigues, it seemed to cast the Plot upon the
Non-Conformists; and 2ly. being beaten by the King's Forces, (whereof no other
was to be expected) it might make both them and us less apt to rise upon any
account whatsoever. But here give me leave to present you with one observation,
which is, that if this had been a Fanatical Plot, the same Party would
certainly have risen in England, at the same time when their Brethren of
Scotland were in Arms, the encouraging of one another being of more consequence
to both, than the expectation of the others success.

III.
After the Catholics had thus brought the Father's Head to the Block, and sent
the young Princes into Exile, let us reflect upon their usage of them in
France, and see whether the kindness that the French Catholics then paid to
our King, was sufficient to bring us into that Misery wherein we are immersed,
by so entirely espousing the French and Papists Cause, even almost to the
destruction of the Protestant Religion, and ruin of all Christendom besides.
Did their banishing of His Majesty, and slighting of him whilst he was amongst
them, deserve this kindness at our hands? What charitable Christians are we
grown, thus to return good for evil? I must confess they did ever treat his R.
H. with some Respect, as finding him to retain more favorable inclinations
both toward their Religion and Government, than His gracious Majesty did;
whose understanding and wit, as it made him contemn their Superstitious
Idolatry and Fopperies; so did his lenity and good nature, render their Tyranny
altogether odious in his sight: besides, if His Majesty had then discovered in
himself the least inclinations to Popery, it might in all probability have
rendered the Crown of England unaccessible. However, I cannot but ascribe great
part of our present Calamities, to his Highnesses Education in that Arbitrary
and Popish Government: With what eagerness have we assisted them in their
Conquests, even to the defamation of our own Honor, and violation of our
public Faith with all the rest of Christendom? We first made Them an Idol, and
now we worshipped it; we first taught them the Art of Navigation, and now are
ready to strike Sail to them our selves. Not any new invention that is of use
either in building Ships, or making Ordnance, can be discovered here, but
immediately we charitable English (for fear we should be too strong for them)
must communicate it to our dear Brethren the French. Nor have we been
altogether unkind to the rest of our Neighbors, when by procuring a general
Peace, we have plucked the Thorns out of their feet, to put 'em in our own;
made a Peace for them, in order to bring a War upon our selves. I confess, when
I think how faithful we have been to the French in all these late Wars, as also
how much Service our English Cannon (whereof we have too great plenty) did them
at their Siege of Valenciennes, Phil. Com. l. 6. c. 2.
I cannot but call to mind Commines relation of King Lewis the Eleventh's
bribing our English Council, paying at that time yearly Pensions to the Lord
Chancellor, Master of the Rolls, Hastings Lord High Chamberlain, Lord Howard,
and all other persons who had any power or Interest with their Master King
Edward; for is something of this nature did not prevail amongst us, His Majesty
would never have adhered to any but the Dutch, whose perpetual Interest it is
to keep the Crown upon his Head, for that nothing would so much advantage
France, and ruin Holland, as to have England become a Commonwealth; when like
Rome and Carthage, being continually clashing together, the French might in
time ruin both.

IV.
Having but now mentioned Commines, give me leave to insert another Story of
his, Phil. Com. l. 5. c. 6.8.
which may be very much to our purpose, to show you that when God designs the
destruction of a King or People, he makes them deaf to all discoveries, be they
never so obvious. This account is concerning the Duke of Burgundy, who being at
War with Lewis the XI. of France, entertained as his chief Minister and
Favorite the Earl of Campobache, upon whom he bestowed great Gifts, committing
to his care his whole concerns: But this Earl having no sense either of Honor
or Gratitude, took the advantage of his Masters the Dukes troubles, and set up
a resolution to destroy him. For which end and purpose, he began underhand to
treat both with the Duke of Lorrain, and with diverse of the Kings Officers that
were Quartered in Champaigne, near to the Dukes Camp. Now to the Duke of
Lorrain he promised so to order the marter, that this Siege of his Masters (the
Duke of Burgundy) against Nancy, should take no effect; for he would take care
that such things as were necessary either for the Siege or Battery, should be
wanting: which promise he was able to perform, for that the principal charge
thereof was committed to him, neither had any man so great Authority as he, in
the Army under the Duke of Burgundy. But to the Kings Officers he promised
either to kill his Master, or take him Prisoner, demanding for his recompense
thereof, the charge of those 400 Lances which he had then in keeping, with
20000 Crowns in ready money, and some good Earldom in France. Now whilst the
Earl of Campobache was plotting these Treasons, one Cifron a Gentleman
belonging to the Duke, and that was acquainted with this Earl's Conspiracy,
happened (in attempting to relieve the Town of Nancy) to be taken Prisoner by
the Duke of Burgundy, who was set down before it: Whereupon this Cifron being
condemned to die, in hopes of a Pardon, offered that if the Duke would give him
Audience, he would reveal a secret to him which concerned his Life; whereof
certain Gentlemen (to whom Cifron had told this) went to advertise the Duke;
with whom at their arrival they found this Earl of Campobache, come thither (as
was supposed) on purpose to be always ready, fearing left Cifron, to save his
own Life, should have any such intent to reveal the Conspiracy. The Duke
returned this Answer to the Gentlemen, who brought him the Message, That the
Prisoner used this delay only to respite his own Death, and commanded them that
he should discover what he knew to them; which way the Earl of Campobache well
approved of. Upon this Cifron replied, That he would communicate it to no man
but the Duke of Burgundy himself: So that he was again by the Duke's special
command led out to Execution; but in his way thither, he desired diverse
Gentlemen once more to acquaint their Master from him, that it was such a
Secret that the Duke would not for a Duchy but know. Many hearing this, went
again to entreat the Duke to vouchsafe him a hearing, but this treacherous
Earl, keeping the Duke's Chamber door, would not permit these Gentlemen to
enter, saying; That the Duke had resolved to hear no further from him;
wherefore he dispatched away new Messengers to the Provost, to hasten his
Execution. Thus was this Cifron hanged, to the utter ruin of the Duke of
Burgundy, his House, and his Dominions; so infatuated was his understanding.
After this our wicked Earl began to put in practice his Treachery, for the
which purpose he agreed first with a French Wakeman or Physician dwelling in
Lions, called Mr. Simon of Pavia; and afterward with the Kings Ambassador in
Savoy: neither of which ways succeeding, he offered to flee with all his Forces
from his Master to King Lewis; but the King detesting such. Treasons of a
Servant against his Master, sent by the Lord Conte to acquaint the Duke of
Burgundy with it: But the Duke (as if he had been himself in the Plot against
his own Life) was so sottish and stupid a Prince, that he received this second
warning with no more sense than the former, saying, That if this discovery were
true, the King (being his Enemy) would never have advertised him thereof;
wherefore he ever after that loved the Earl rather better than before. But this
folly of his was justly rewarded; for in a short time after, when the Duke of
Burgundy and the Duke of Lorrain were engaged, this Earl of Campobache, with
many of his Forces, revolted to the Enemy, whereby the Duke of Burgundy's
Forces were routed, and he himself actually slain. Never did Prince fall more
unpityed than this Duke did; nor did his people know which most to blame of the
two, either he who began this Conspiracy, by his wickedness, or the Duke
himself, who gave it success, by his folly: The application of which Story, I
shall leave for you to make.

V.
There are four several Arguments, which many times prevail with Princes, to be
incredulous of all pretended Conspiracies against themselves. The first is
drawn from their being in, or made privy themselves to part of the Plot, but
not the whole. The second, From their own good nature and clemency. The third,
From the nature of the Evidence. And the fourth, From the Nature and Interest
of the pretended Conspirations. To begin then with the first: When the Prince
has been made acquainted with the Design of introducing a new Government, or
new Religion, but not with the Design of taking away his own Life, this
sometimes has prevailed with him not to believe, that the same Party with whom
he himself is in a Conspiracy, should have any such other Plot against his
Life, But this I hope is not our case, for that no Religion or Government can
be so much for his Majesty's advantage, as that which is established amongst
us: Since in Popery, although his Majesty would be made absolute over his
Subjects, yet his slavery to the Pope would be so great, that as well his
Liberty as his Revenues would be much less than now. For besides the vast sums
of Money that would then go from the Exchequer to the Church, I dare boldly
affirm, that had his Majesty been never so absolute, he could not in this time
have squeezed more money from the Subject, than he has already received in
Taxes since his coming in; and that must have been done by a standing Army,
which would make him odious, and eat up half his profit. It Is policy in the
Prince not to take away all at one, but to leave a Nest-Egg, if he designs they
should lay again; but for the Church of Rome, who ever reads our Chronicles
will find, that no Schoolboys have been greater slaves to their Masters, than
many of our English Kings were to the Pope; and those who were above his
discipline, the Romish Church ever found some way or other to cut him off,
either by setting his own people against him, as they did by King John, or by
some infallible Catholic Poison, or by some bloody Godfrey Dagger. King Edgar
for his Incontinency was enjoined by Dunstan Abbot of Glassenbury, not to wear
his Crown for seven years, to which he was forced to submit. King Henry II. to
expiate the Murder of Thomas Becket, (committed by his Countries) was forced to
walk barefooted three miles to visit his Shrine, and then to receive fourscore
lashes upon his bare back from the Monks. King John for opposing Pope Innocent
III. was (after interdicting the Realm for six years and three months) forced
to render his Crown to Pandulphus the Pope's Legate, and take it again in
Fee-farm at the Rent of a thousand Marks yearly; nor did this satisfy the
Popish malice, for he was at last poisoned in Swinsted. Abbey by one Simon a
Monk. Furthermore to let you see, that in the time of Popery Princes lived not
so peaceably as now, be pleased to observe, that betwixt the Conquest and our
Reformation, seven of our English Kings were murdered, viz. King John, Richard
I. Edward II. Richard II. Edward V. Henry VI. and Richard III. (not to mention
the Emperor Henry VII. who was poisoned in the Eucharist by one Bernard a Monk,
nor Henry III. of France, stabbed by Clement the Monk, nor Henry IV. of France,
stabbed by Raviliac, or those many hundred Examples of this nature, which I
could produce out of other Chronicles.) So that what ever Prince considers
these things aright, I think he can have no Interest to introduce Popery,
unless he desires either to be whipped by a Monk, or stabbed or poisoned by a
Jesuit; for in such a case, it is the Jesuits that govern, and not the King.

VI.
The second Motive which may incline a Prince to disbelieve the report of a
Plot, is from his own good nature and clemency, which makes him not expect any
ill from those to whom he has been so kind. But this is a fallacious way of
arguing; for a Prince who would preserve himself against Conspiracy, is to have
an eye rather upon those he has obliged, than those he has offended, for those
that are offended, have not such frequent opportunities, nor such easy
accesses to him as the other have; and for their disposition, it is much alike,
the desire of dominion being as great if not greater than the desire of
revenge. We see therefore, that where any great Conspiracy has been made, it
has been most commonly begun by such as were most familiar with the Prince, and
most in his favor; for so it was in the Conspiracy of Perennius against
Commodus, Plautianus against Severus, Sejanus against Tiberius; all which were
Favorites, and highly obliged by their several Emperors. So that what ever
Prince trusts too much to the friendship of his dearest Favorites, nay to his
own Brother, may sometimes find himself deceived. The Earl of Campobache (whom
I mentioned before) had received Favors, sufficient to have obliged him more
faithfully to his Master the Duke, than he afterward proved. Brutus was as
dear, and (many think) as nearly related to Caesar, as any Brother, but yet we
see he had a hand in his Murder. The nearer a Friend is, the nearer is he to
be my Heir, therefore the more likely to wish my death. Friends are oftentimes
as dear to us as our Relations, therefore the Laws of Kindred may as well be
violated as the Laws of Friendship, than which, nothing is more usual. Who
betrays you in your Bed? Your Friend; for your Enemy is not admitted to your
House. Who betrays you in your Estate? Your Friend, for your Enemy is not made
your Trustee: So that nothing is more dangerous than a blind Friendship. The
Turks well know, how much more prevalent Interest is amongst Brothers than
Affection, which makes the Laws of their Empire, take so severe a course with
the Grand Seigneur's younger Brothers. How many Princes have been ruined by
their next impatient Heirs, nay even sometimes by their own Sons! That most
prodigious Empire which Tamberlain the Great had acquired, how was it torn in
pieces, and destroyed by a division betwixt his two Sons? Did not Cain kill
Abel? And was not Joseph sold into Egypt by his Brethren? Had not Agrippina her
Wakeman, wherewith the poisoned her own Husband the Emperor Claudius? And was
not she her self afterward killed by her own Son Nero? If (as we often see)
little petty Interests make one Brother wish the other's death, how much more
prevalent will the Interest of a Crown be? nay of two Crowns, viz. one here,
and another hereafter in Heaven, promised him by an old Fellow with a bald
Pate, and a spade Beard: Si violandum est jus, violandum est Regnandi gratia.
And besides all this, when a Successor observes, that the Life of one single
Person, not only keeps him from three Kingdoms, but also makes him, his Family,
and whole Party, be banished and persecuted, you must needs acknowledge, that
he lies under a great temptation to violate the sixth Commandment: Which things
being considered, together with that Law which wipes off all Attainders,
whether of Treason or Murder, by the descent of the Crown, I cannot but think,
that a Prince's good Nature, renders him secure only in his own conceit, and
not in reality. We all know, that his R. H. has held correspondence with
Cardinal Norfolk, and other the Pope's Nuncio's, about introducing Popery; and
we are likewise informed, that Popery was to be introduced by the King's Death:
So how a man could be privy to the Effect, without being acquainted with the
Means, seems very prodigious.

VII.
Thirdly, Most Princes believe or disbelieve the Information which is given
them of a Plot, according to the nature of the Evidence, and credit of the
Informants. First, For the nature of the Evidence, what is it? That they had a
Design to murder the King, and introduce Popery. What is there improbable in
all this? Was there never any Prince murdered before by a Conspiracy? Was
there never any Attempt before, to introduce into a Country a new Religion?
Why then have we so many Laws made to prevent such a thing, if it seems so
improbable ever to be done? When the Romans forbore to make any Law against
Parricide, it was out of a presumption that it would never be acted: But we all
know, that these are things which the Papists have several times before
attempted amongst us; witness the Gunpowder-Treason, the Invasion of the
Spaniards in 88. and their many Attempts both against Queen Elizabeth's and
King James's Persons. So that I cannot apprehend any thing strange in their
Relation: The only miracle that appears to me is, that any one (but those that
are in the Plot) should question the truth of it; especially when they consider
the wonderful manner of its discovery, wherein the Providence of God appeared
most remarkable, that still as one man's Evidence has been censured, a fresh
Witness has risen up to supply and strengthen the former. Had this Plot been a
forged Contrivance of their own; they would at the very first discovery of it,
have had half a dozen or half a score crafty Fellows, ready to have attested
all the same thing; whereas on the contrary, (notwithstanding we are now on a
burning scent) we were fain till here of a late to pick out by little and
little all upon a cold scent, and that stained too by the tricks and malice of
our Enemies: So that had we not had some such good Huntsmen as the right Noble
Earl of Shaftsbury, and our late Secret Committee, to manage the Chase for us,
our Hounds must needs have been baffled, and the Game lost. In my whole
lifetime, of all the Histories I have ever read or heard of, I do not remember
to have met with any action more bold or gallant, than was that of Dr. Oates's
Discovery; for one single man (as he did) to fly in the face of so prevailing
a Party as they were, without any second to back him; to persist and justify
his Evidence, after the many discountenances were at first showed him; to
accuse persons of that high quality, power and revenge, when Everard had before
been denied the benefit of the Sun, and kept close prisoner in a Dungeon four
years together, only for coming over to discover, that the Papists beyond Sea
had a design to bring in Popery here: When Justice Godfrey had been murdered,
only for acquainting the Council with what he told him; and yet for him to
adhere to his Information, certainly nothing could be more bold or brave. How
many and how great discouragements has this Discovery met with: First, When
the Lord of Danby was so long acquianted with it, and concealed it time enough
for the Plotters to convey away both their Persons and Papers. Secondly, The
Visit of her R. H. to see the Princess in Flanders, at the first breaking out
of the Plot, in which Voyage many Priests, Jesuits and Plotters, made their
escape. Thirdly, The conveying away all Coleman's Letters, which treated of
these two last years. Fourthly, The getting France to recede three several
times backward and forward from his own Evidence. Fifthly, The suffering
Priests to have access to tamper with the condemned Plotters in Newgate, to
make them deny all, and with a Lie in their mouths die as innocent as the Child
unborn. Sixthly, These frequent Dissolutions and Prorogations of Parliaments,
to prevent the Trial of the Lords. Seventhly, Suffering Sir Philip Floyd, Clerk
of the Council, at the Trial of Wakeman, to come and testify against the King,
in behalf of the Prisoner, what he heard at the Council Table, a place where
all things that are done, ought to be kept secret, and so had this, had it not
been in favor of Wakeman. Eighthly, The freeing Wakeman, and questioning the
truth of that very same Evidence, whereon the same Judge had hanged so many
before: But however my Lord Chief Justice and the Jury had so good an opinion
of his Innocence, yet Sir George himself had not so, as appears by his flying
away beyond Sea, so soon as ever his Trial was over. These and innumerable
other Discouragements has the Plot met with, which being observed, together
with the due circumstance of the Evidence, I think no man that is not in the
whole or part of the Plot himself, can doubt the verity of it. Indeed at the
first many thought to cast a suspicion upon what Oats and Bedlow informed, as
being two persons of an idle life and conversation; but how ridiculous is this?
As if such Rogues would trust such a Villainy with honest men, or any but those
that had been as bad as themselves; you might as well expect a Highway-man
should go and acquiant my Lord Chief Justice, or my Lord of Canterbury, when he
meant to commit the next Robbery; but a bad shift is better than none at all.
So that from the nature of the Evidence, or credit of the Informants, no man
can take exception against the Information either of Dr. Oats, Mr. Bedlow, or
any of the rest, to whom Mr. Iennison has lately given no small credit, in
discovering the four Villains, that (as Mr. Oats had said) were to have
assassinated his Majesty at Windsor.

VIII.
The fourth and last Argument (which may sometimes prevail with the Prince to
disbelieve any report of a Conspiracy) is taken from the Nature and Interest of
the pretended Conspirators: but neither of these motives can pretend to
influence our Prince into a disbelief of this Popish Plot: for first, as to
their Nature and Principles, we all know that in one of their own Councils,
viz. the Lateran, were introduced those two Hellish Tenants of murdering
Kings, and eating their God: But the Papists will tell you, that they do not
murder Kings, for the Pope he first deposes them at Rome, and then if they
kill him, they kill but a private person: We all likewise know, that it is held
an act of Merit amongst them, to murder an Heretic, witness their Massacre of
the poor Protestants at Paris: and to murder a Husband, a Brother, or any such
near Relation that is an Heretic, the greater is the Merit, by reason of the
self-denial and injury done to our selves, in the loss of so near a Friend; but
to murder an Heretic King, (especially where there is a Popist Successor) they
hold to be the greatest of all merits, even sufficient to canonize him for a
Saint, by reason of the vast advantage will thereby accrue to the Popish
Religion, not doubting but that the rest of the Kingdom will, Regis ad
exemplum, soon after turn Papists. Having thus therefore showed them to be
prepared with Principles, sufficient to undertake any such Villainy, let us in
the next place examine their Interest, as it stands at this time, where we
shall find, that their Interest does unavoidably excite them to murder his
Sacred Majesty: For first, They know he cannot long subsist without a
considerable sum of Money, which he must receive either from their Party, or
from the Parliament: Now for them to supply him with so vast a sum, is a
Charge, that (you may well imagine) they would desire to get rid of, if they
could, though by the King's Death: On the other side, for the Parliament to
supply him with Money, that they know cannot be done, but by taking off the
Heads of their Faction, excluding their Succession, and consenting to such Laws
as must of necessity ruin them: Besides, his Majesty has already permitted
the executing so many of their Party, as they never can or will forgive it. All
which put together, with the great expectation they have from a Popish
Successor, will make them vigorously and speedily attempt the King's Ruin,
unless he suddenly prevents it, by adhering to his Parliament, and ruining them
first. If his Majesty would be pleased for one Month to think himself Henry
VIII. and we his Subjects for the same time (forgetting we are Protestants) do
by the Papists, as they would do by us, were they in our condition, what would
become of Portugal and Brussels? even Rome it self would tremble at us.
Something must speedily be done; and if we will not begin with them, they will
begin with us: for all the favor His Majesty can show them, will not satisfy
that greater expectation which they have from a declared Popish King. So that
nothing does more justify the Plot, than their corrupt Principles, and present
Interest; which will make them (being sure to have the succeeding King on their
side) rather venture to push for it now, and run the hazard of the Peoples
revenge, than suffer any longer the inconvenience of an English Parliament, or
danger of the next Successor being a Protestant.

IX.
Having thus therefore showed you the danger wherein His Majesty's Person now
is; give me leave in the next place, to inform you Gentlemen, wherein is your
greatest danger, both in relation to your City, and your selves: First then, as
to your City, the chiefest danger whereunto it is obnoxious, is that of Fire;
for wheresoever the Jesuits Interest prevails, they will above all things
desire the Burning of London: first, because it is the only united Force able
to withstand Arbitrary Government; and without that, Popery can never prevail.
Secondly, it is the only place where by reason of their excellent Preaching,
and daily Instruction in the Protestant Religion, the people have a lively
sense thereof, and doubtless will not part with it to pleasure a Prince; but
perhaps rather lose their Lives by the Sword in the Wars, than by the Faggots
in Smithfield. Thirdly, it is too powerful for any Prince, that governs not by
the Love of his People, which no Popish Successor can expect to do. We read in
our English Chronicles, that Henry the 3d. of England threatened to burn the
City of London, for their taking part with the Parliament and Barons, who at
that time made War upon the King, for his too great countenancing of
Foreigners. Also in our great Fire of London in 66. (if you will believe either
Mr. Bedlow's Relation, or the Account which was then given in to the Committee
of Parliament appointed for that purpose) many were actually taken a Firing it,
and brought to Authority; but all let slip away, and none hanged for it, but
one poor Frenchman, who contrary to the Judge's persuasion, would violently
accuse himself. There is one most eminent great Papist, who in the time of that
Fire pretended to secure many of the Incendiaries, but secretly suffered them
all to escape: who this person was, is already mentioned by Mr. Bedlow: for a
Popish King, or a Popish Successor, cannot but rejoice in the Flames of such a
too powerful City. Secondly, the greatest danger accruing to your Persons, as
well as to the whole Kingdom, upon the King's untimely death, will proceed from
a confusion and want of some eminent and interessed person, whom you may trust
to Lead you up against a French and Popish Army: for which purpose no person is
fitter than his Grace the Duke of Monmouth, as well for quality, courage and
conduct, as for that his Life and Fortune depends upon the same bottom with
yours: he will stand by you, therefore ought you to stand by him. And remember,
the old Rule is, He who has the worst Title, ever makes the best King; as
being constrained by a gracious Government, to supply what he wants in Title;
that instead of God and my Right, his Motto may be, God and my People. Upon the
death of Alexander the Great, when there was so great a confusion amonst the
Officers about choosing a Successor to the Empire, no other expedient could be
found out to pacify the uproar of the Multitude, but the choosing of King
Philip's illegitimate Son Aridaeus, who nothwithstanding he was a man but of
reasonable parts himself, might (as they thought) perform that Office well
enough, by the help of his wife Protector Perdiccas. I confess upon the News of
his Grace's Banishment, the Countries were much surprised, and the more, for
that we all knew they could have no Interest or advantage by his absence, till
His Majesty was near his end. Which puts me in mind of the Story that Josephus
relates concerning Herod; viz. that Antipater (to secure to himself the Crown)
having by his treachery and false accusations prevailed with Herod to banish
his two innocent Sons Alexander and Aristobulus, as also in his lifetime to
declare Antipater for his Successor, did after that, the better to confirm his
Title, exasperate Herod to put them both to death; which was no sooner done,
and Antipater freed from the Jealousy of their Succession, but he begins to
think Herod himself had lived too long: wherefore entering into a Conspiracy
with Herod's own Wife, as well as with Pharoas and many others, he decreed to
poison him: yet not being willing to be present himself at the execution of it,
(for fear of some popular Tumult) he absented himself and went to Rome. But
providence discovering this Plot to Herod, it soon after cost Antipater his
Life; and may all such Traitors succeed accordingly.

These things (most worthy Citizens) I have presumed to offer to your perusal,
in respect that upon the death of any King, your Lord Mayor (then in being is
the only Magistrate in the Kingdom that retains any Office of power capable of
serving the Subject: You are the persons who must revenge our Sovereigns
violent death; which if ever it should happen, the Countries one and all would
be ready to assist you: But Heaven defend us from the occasion; God preserve
the King, and send your City to prosper: which is the constant and hearty
Prayer of,

Your Friend and Servant, Iunius Brutus

Postscript.
AS well to justify part of my preceding Discourse, as to acquaint you with
the pernicious Tenants of the Church of Rome, how dangerous they are both to
Prince and People, I have here inserted some few of their Canons, which all
Papists are obliged to believe and submit to.

Canons which the Romish Church holds, to the Ruin and Dishonor of Princes,
are these which follow.

1. The Emperor is the Bishop of Rome's Subject, and the Bishop of Rome may
revoke the Emperor's Sentence in Temporal Causes. 2. Princes Laws, if they be
against the Canons and Decrees of the Bishop of Rome, be of no force nor
strength. 3. All Kings, Bishops, and Noblemen, that believe or suffer the
Bishop of Rome's Decrees in any thing to be violate, be accursed, and for ever
culpable before God, as Transgressors of the Catholic Faith. 4. The Bishop of
Rome may Excommunicate Emperors and Princes, depose them from their States, and
dis-ingage their Subjects from the Oaths and Obedience to them, and so
constrain them to Rebellion.
These and many more there are to the same purpose; wherefore that Prince, who
thinks himself so weak as to need a Governor, who thinks himself too Rich, or
desires to be a Slave to an old Bardasso, let him turn Papist.

More Romish Canons, fitting to be considered by all Abby-Landed men.
1. The Goods of the Church may in no wise be alienated, but whoseever
receives or buyeth them, is bound to restitution, and if the Church have any
Ground that is little or nothing worth, yet it shall not be given to the
Prince; and if the Prince will needs buy it, the sale shall be void and of no
strength. 2. It is not lawful for the Bishop of Rome to alienate or mortgage
any Lands of the Church, for any cause whatsoever; except it be Houses in
Cities, which be very chargeable to support and maintain.
So that if any men (who have Estates in Abby-Lands) desire to beg their Bread,
and relinquish their Habitations and Fortunes to some old greasy bald-pated
Abbot, Monk, or Friar, then let him Vote for a Popish Successor and Popery; for
when once that Religion is established amongst us, these Canons will all come
in play; and the Pope will then tell you, (whatsoever he may pretend at first)
that his Predecessor had no Right to give away what belonged to the Church. And
this Mr. Coleman well knew, when he promised himself no less than to be once
Master of the Earl of Bedford's Estate: but unluckily the Gallows prevented it,
in making him a Saint before his time.

He that desires to be further satisfied about these Canons, let him look into
Dr. Burnet's late excellent History of the Reformation, and there he shall find
the Original and Authentic Quotations, which were too tedious here to insert.

FINIS.

