THE ORACLES OF REASON: Consisting of 1. A Vindication of Dr. Burnet's
Archiologiae. 2. The Seventh and Eighth Chapters of the same. 3. Of Moses's
Description of the Original state of Man, etc. 4. Dr. Burnet's Appendix of the
Brachmins Religion. 5. An Account of the Deist's Religion. 6. Of the
Immortality of the Soul 7. Concerning the Arrians, Trinitarians and Councils.
8. That Felicity consists in Pleasure. 9. Of Fate and Fortune. 10. Of the
Original of the Jews. 11. The Lawfulness of Marrying two Sisters Successively.
12. A Political Account of the Subversion of Iewdaism, and Original of the
Millenium. 13. Of the Auguries of the Ancients. 14. Natural Religion as opposed
to divine Revelation. 15. That the Soul is Matter. 16. That the World is
Eternal, etc.


In several Letters to Mr. Hobbs and other Persons of Eminent Quality, and
Learning.

By Char. Blount Esquire Mr. Gildon and Others.

LONDON, Printed 1693.

THE PREFACE.
NAture, or that Sacred and Supreme CAUSE of all Things, which we term GOD, has
furnished his Creatures with such Guides, as may best Conduct them to the
several Ends of their Beings. To the Birds, Beasts and other Animals, which we
generally hold Inferior to Mankind, he gave INSTINCT, as sufficient to direct
them to all that is necessary for them. We may well therefore excuse them, if
by that Guide they go not beyond a present Care of their Subsistence and
Continuation, all which reaches not beyond the Body; because we can discover no
other End of their Being (except what human Luxury has found out in their
Destruction) but to Support that Being by Food, and to Preserve it by
Propagation; and to this, Instinct is sufficient.

But in Man we (at least) discover a farther and nobler End. Nature therefore
must have given him another and a more sufficient Guide: For the Mind of Man
(the Chief Ingredient of his Composition) is not bounded by present Objects, in
which Instinct alone would serve. Futurity has always a share in its Thoughts,
and its Faculties will be employed with a Care of those Things that are to
come, from whence it may derive not only Advantage, Interest and Ease for the
Body, but also Improvement, Happiness and Tranquillity for its self.

But the things from which the Mind must gather, and of which Compose all
these, are so vast in Number, and so Various and Obscure in their Natures, that
without the Help of a very good Guide, it may make a Collection of Poisons
instead of Medicines, and reap its Destruction, not Satisfaction; But the
Omnipotent CAUSE, that had so well furnished Bruits, left not the Mind of Man
without its Director in this Maze and Lottery of Things; he gave it Reason, as
its sovereign Rule and Touchstone to examine them by, and to fit our Choice to
our double Advantage of Body and Mind. Reason is the Light, that brings Day to
those Things, that will contribute to, or oppose our Happiness; without which
we should in vain grope in the Dark; and we should owe entirely to Chance what
we obtained.

It Is true, Reason is not sufficient to bring us to a perfect Knowledge of all
Things, but it is able to furnish us with enough to make us happy, and that is
as much as we need care for. There is no necessity of our Skill in the inmost
Nature of Things, but there is (since we are ordained to an eternity of
Continuance) that we should know how to make Eternity Happy, since its Being so
depends on our selves; and since such a Knowledge is absolutely necessary, I
can discover nothing that can give it us, but our sovereign Guide, Reason.

REASON, therefore being the Supreme and Primitive Director of every Man, to
infringe its Liberty of directing, is to invade the common Charter of Nature,
and every Man's Right and Property; so that those that do so, are justly to be
looked on as the Enemies of Human-kind. But how that Character agrees with the
Fiery Glory of the Zealots for Religion, I cannot comprehend, unless they can
demonstrate, That Religion and Nature are directly Opposites.

I am not ignorant that they pretend their Severity against Heterodox Books
(that is, all that deviate from their Opinions) is the Effect of their Zeal for
the Good of Mankind. But then they cannot deny but that they make themselves
the Judges of that Good, and so make their Opinion the Standard, which is too
particular for what they would have of so universal Extent; and will afford us
no Refuge if they should lead us into an Error, which we may hereafter find
(unless they deny that they can ^e deceived) and if they should do so, then may
their Universal imaginary Good prove a Real and Universal Evil.

If they would have us believe, that they hold every Man must be saved by his
own, not another Faith; they must grant every one the Liberty of believing and
professing what his own Reason shall direct him; and that it is a Crime to
oppose this Liberty, I mean by indirect Means, for I shall never quarrel at
Reason if they can produce any. I must tell these Fiery Bigots, that their
Practice and Doctrine being so Contradictory, gives a more effectual Blow at
Religion, than all the Attempts of professed Atheists; for when these clash,
they give too great Grounds to suspect a trick in the whole: And when so
essential a Birthright of each Man is invaded, it must improve those Suspicions
very much, and cause a narrower Enquiry into Things that might otherwise pass
unregarded.

We should not have so great cause to resent this Severity, if we might say of
Religion and Eternity, as Pliny said of Providence, -- Ridiculum est agere
curam rerum humanarum, Quicquid est Summum, sed credi usui est Vitae. -- That
'twas merely a political Trick for the Convenience of Government and human
Life. Then indeed it would be something pardonable in these Gentlemen, that
Patronize the Fire and Faggot so vehemently, to strive with so much Ardor for
the reducing all to their own Fancy. Then the Profanation would not be great,
of making what they really believed a Chymaera serve a Turn, and complement a
Faction or any Interest. I will easily excuse the ancient Founders of Paganism,
for having recourse to Stratagems, to reduce Men's Reason to particular
Opinions, because they made use of them only to form Greatness to themselves,
by imposing on the Predominant Frailties of the Vulgar Sort, in a thing they
judged of no more Concern, than a temporal Convenience. 'Twas no ill Policy in
them, when they perceived the Generality of Mankind would easily submit their
Reason to every appearance of a Wonder, to fish for their Profit and Glory,
with so eas^e a Bait. Alexander the false Prophet, mentioned by Lucian, found
it turn to his Advantage, in gaining him so great an Interest in the People.
And from this Topic Philostrates magnifies Apollonius. These in short, every
new God and Prophet among them was to have, as Credentials of his Divinity, and
a Right to the Zeal of his Devotees. Some of these carried, I must confess,
extraordinary Circumstances to gain 'em necessary Credit, as one (among several
others) in those Marble Records found in the Temple of Aesculapius in Rome,
viz. (...), etc.


To this purpose in English. In those days there was an Oracle delivered to one
Caius, that was blind, that he should come to the Sacred Altar, and kneel down,
and should then go from the right side to the left, and place five Fingers on
the Altar, and lift up his Hand and put it on his own Eyes: Which done, he
plainly saw in the presence of all the People, who congratulated the Cure, that
such great Miracles should be performed under our Emperor Anteninus.

The Circumstances of this we^e very Remarkable, and there is nothing but the
Blind Man himself that could carry on the Imposture, in pretending a Cure of a
Disease he did not labor with, and for the Glory of their Gods the Romans
always found some that would attest the highest Improbabilities by Authority,
to influence the People with an Awe; as he that Swore he saw Romulus assumed
into Heaven, in that Senate, that had been the Authors of his Death, but they
were willing to grant him Immortality and Deity above, to be rid of him there,
and at the same time give the People a Vener^tion for their Princes, when they
s^^ they passed from governing them to ^e Gods.

But to return from this Digression, I could pardon these Heathens, because
they had no Opinion of the Sacredness of what they imp^sed, and besides feared
to trust Mankind with their Reason, least they should discover the Imposture.
But among Christians, whose Opinions in Matters of Religion, ought to be
Sacred, and ^eyond the Fear of the nicest Scrutiny of Reason, to confine our
Liberty of Judging is too Arbitrary for Englishmen to ^ear. If these Gentlemen,
with the Heathens, think this Method for their turn, I cant blame 'em; but if
with us they believe Religion and Eternity a sacred Truth, and that every Man
is so far interested in them, that his Enjoyment and loss of Eternal Happiness
depends on his own Faith; let them leave every Man in his Native Right to
Reason on what Concerns him so much, and bring nothing against us but what
Reason affords them. For it is but fair that if I must venture my Life in any
Cause, I have the Liberty of taking my own Methods of Security.

This Liberty among us extends to the interpreting that sacred Repository of
Truth, the Holy Scriptures, according to our own Reason; which is a Liberty
that has been for many Years asserted to be the Right of every reasonable Man:
This being granted, as indeed it cannot be denied, it inevitably follows, that
we ought to be allowed a Liberty of Declaring our Opinion and Interpretation,
or else it could be of no use in Nature to us. And if this be the Right of
every reasonable Man, how much more must it be of Men that to their natural
Reason have the acquired helps of Learning, as Dr. Burnet must be granted to
have, whom my ever Honored and Learned Friend has so well, and with so much
Evidence, vindicated in the first Letter of this Book. Nor is it through a vain
Opinion that I can add any force to that incomparable Defense of his learned
Advocate, that I presume to interest my self in the Doctor's Quarrel; but only
to plead for that Liberty for him (and in him for every ingenious Man) which
his great Opposers stand so much upon, against those Adversaries that would
deny the same to them. I should never complain of their confuting him by fair
Reason, for that is the Weapon of Mankind; but when they have Recourse to the
wretched Refuge of rooted Argument, Power, and the say so of such and such, we
have cause to complain of unfair Dealing, and that they press what they would
not admit themselves.

Let Reason be our Judge, and we can never fear being Censured by it, for
establishing its Sovereignty: Nor can the nicest Devotee that has any
deference to Reason deny, but that Dr. Burnet h^^ discovered more Veneration
for the great Prophet Moses, by reducing him to that noble Standard, and
freeing him from all the Absurdities vulgar Apprehensions had cast on him, than
those who stickle them, that involved him in 'em. In short, it is not Moses, but
his Interpreters that the learned Doctor has exposed, and by consequence it is
not that holy Lawgiver, but the blind Biggots of the old absurd Interpretation
of him, that we have offended in publishing this in English.

Let our Adversaries but consider that this Liberty I have been pleading for,
and which the Doctor has made use of, is only to examine the Interpretation of
Others, by the severe, yet just, Rules of Reason; which they will agree to be
very reasonable, when they shall reflect, that the Passions and Interests of
Men have not only emboldned them to misinterpret the Sacred Writ to their own
Ends, but also to add to and detract from the very Text it self.

Thus they have brought into Question several parts of the new Testament, and
among others particularly the Epistle to the Hebrews, which in some Manuscripts
is left out, and even in that of Beza, which is very ancient, it is put by its
self at the End, like an Apocriphal piece.

St. Jerome is a further Testimony of this, who having the Supervisal and
Correction of the Latin Bible, assures us, that having recourse to the Greek,
he found those Copies as defective, and as much altered by the Transcribers as
those of the Latins.

This liberty of Reasoning I have been so long pleading for, our severest
Oponents will grant us in Philosophical and Historical Points, of which that
part of this Book which relates not to Religion, is composed: I shall therefore
say nothing in defense of them, nor obviate those Objections I foresee will be
made against them by those, that do not consider, that we judge of things of
that nature but by bare Appearances, and Probabilities. 'Twill be time enough
to defend them when they are attack^. Nor shall I meddle with any other of the
Letters that relate to Religion except one, the subject of which is so
uncommon, the Reasons it contains so extraordinary, and the End it aims at so
evidently gained, that I cannot but take notice of it. Not that I can be so
vain to imagine, that my declaring my self of that opinion, will be any
Advantage to the cause, or that what I can say, will in the least strengthen my
Honored Friends Arguments, which of themselves are invincible, but I consult
purely my own satisfaction in running over some Particulars of the Subject of
it; which tho I am not vain enough to think, yet am I zealous enough to wish
serviceable to the Honorable Person the Letter is directed to. I mean that
about the Lawfulness of Marrying two Sisters.

All the weight and force of the Arguments of this Subject seem to turn upon
this one Point, viz. Whether the Marriage of two Sisters successively be
against the Laws of God. This is the Rock that all the Defenders of the
Affirmative depend on, and this they fix chiefly on Levit. 18.16, and 18. or
some other Mosaic Prohibitions. So that if it be made evident that such a
Marriage is not forbidden by the Law of God, the Bugbears of Custom (for those
of the Laws of the Land as well as the Canon Law evidently, from the proof of
my ever Honored and Learned Friend, depend entirely on this) will vanish; for
if the Law of God be not infringed, I think there is no other consideration can
reach the nicest scruple of the most severe Lady of Honor that has with it
Sense and Reason, as I am assured the Admirable Astraea has. Tho this Point as
well as the rest be already beyond contradiction cleared, yet I shall venture
to attempt a Supererogatory Argument or two, as a tribute I owe to the truth, I
so much approve of.

First then to make any Law the Law of God, strictly taken (for in some sense
every Law that tends to the temporary convenience or good of a people is so) it
must have one quality, that is inseparable from the Nature of God, and (by
consequence) of his Acts, viz. Immutability, that is it must be founded in
nature, and always the same. So that what was the Law of God in the time of
Abraham, could not cease to be so, or at least be opposite to his Law, in our
time; and what God plainly and openly espoused in the time of Abraham, cannot
but he supposed to be according to his Law: Now it is evident from the Sacred
Scriptures, that Sarah Abraham's Wife was his Sister, by the Father, tho not by
the Mother, Genesis 20.12. And yet indeed she is my Sister, she is the Daughter of
my Father, but not the Daughter of my Mother, and she became my Wife.

Here was at least a half-blood, and something with a face very like Incest,
and yet the Marriage justified by God himself, not only in the threats he used
to Abimelech, if he returned not his Wife, and those Plagues he inflicted on
Pharaoh and his House, Genesis 12.17. And the Lord Plagued Pharaoh and his House,
with great Plagues because of Sarai Abraham's Wife: But also in the farther
confirmation of it, Genesis 17.15, and 16. And God said unto Abraham, as for Sarai
thy Wife thou shall not call her Name Sarai, but Sarah shall her Name be. Now
this alteration of her Name showed a particular favor she had found in being
Abraham's lawful Wife, for God always altered or ordered the Names of those he
particularly chose, as Abraham's, Jacob's, etc. And ver. 16. is a confirmation
of my assertion, I will bless her, and give thee a Son also of her, and She
shall be a Mother of Nations, Kings of People shall be of her.

Certainly never was Marriage better confirmed than this, so solemnly approved
by the God of Heaven, the God of Right and Just. And afterward God chooses to
establish his Covenant with Isaac the Son of Sarah, not with Ishmael the Son of
Hagar, tho Hagar was not his Sister.

Yet we find this very sort of Marriage so approved of by God in Genesis,
forbid by Moses in Leviticus (that is if we will believe these Gentlemen, that
persuade us that he intended the prohibitions of the 18th. of Levit. as to
Marriage) for if, Thou shall not uncover the Nakedness of thy Fathers Daughter,
be the same as, Thou shall not marry thy Fathers Daughter, and this be a Divine
immutable Law, and by consequence so from the beginning, the very Case of
Abraham is expressly condemned. Nay if this Levitical Prohibition be in this
sense, and the Law of God too, then would there be a Divine Law expressly
contradictory to the Will of God himself. Such absurdities do some men incur,
whilst they pursue either some private design, or supinely interpret without a
diligent and through comparison of the several Texts of Scripture.

But before I proceed 'twill not be amiss in a line or two to show that this
Standard I make of the Law of God, is not my own particular Fancy, but a
Reality established by Christ himself. For he examining some of the Levitical
Law, tells the Jews this was permitted for the hardness of your Hearts, but
from the beginning it was not so, where he makes from the beginning the Test
and Standard of that permissory Law, which must hold good too for the
Prohibitions, both proceeding from the same cause, viz. the hardness of the
Israelites hearts, or the depravity of their inclinations.

But after all it is evident to me that there is no Prohibition of Marriage
intended by that 18. Chap. of Leviticus, for I meet not with the Phrase of
Uncovering the Nakedness, importing Marriage, in any part of Scripture, I mean
absolutely and alone; and it is evident from the 20. Chap. where the same
Prohibitions are repeated, that they are meant barely as to unlawful
Copulations without Marriage; for first to what purpose would it be to forbid
what never was done, or could indeed be supposed to be tolerated even among the
Jews. For we never read of any Daughters that Married their Fathers, or Sons
their Mothers knowingly; there was such a horror of this printed in the heart
of man, that the very Heathens gave a punishment to Oedipus for the involuntary
commission of it; and Periander killed his Mother for stealing his Embraces.
Next there is not one Verse in the whole Chapter except the 18th. that has any
relation to Marriage, and that indeed expresses the taking to Wife; which
evinces the truth of what I assert, viz. that Uncovering the Nakedness, is not
a Synonymous Expression for Marrying; else 'twould be perfect Nonsense in this
18th. Verse, which runs thus, Neither shall thou take a Wife to her Sister, to
vex her, to uncover her Nakedness besides the other in her lifetime. Now if
these Expressions were Synonymous, it would be thus, Neither shall thou take a
Wife to her Sister, to vex her, to take a Wife, etc. Besides it seems to imply
a liberty of espousing two Sisters at once, tho not of enjoying both, for
uncovering the Nakedness is only an expression for bare enjoyment, without
regard either to Marriage or not.

If it be objected, that the Chapter should be all of a piece, and that either
this Verse should not relate to Marriage, or the rest should, I answer, there
is no necessity of that, for in all the Chapters in the Books of Moses, where
several Laws are repeated, he does not observe, at least generally speaking,
any order or method in that, but mixes things of no relation to one another, as
is evident from the very next Chapter, where almost every Verse affords a new
and different Prohibition. Besides according to this the Verses that follow the
18th. as well as those that go before, must be of the same, which would indeed
be merry enough to make Moses forbid our Marriage with Beasts, or Men's Marrying
one another, which perhaps might reach one of Nero's Extravagant Actions, but
none else. But the 20th. Chapter explains this annexing each particular
punishment, to each particular transgression, whereas in this the punishment is
put in general at the End, as ver. 29. For whosoever shall commit any of these
abominations, even the souls that commit them shall be cut off from among the
People. It Is a common thing in this Prophet to repeat his Prohibitions, and
sometimes with a little variety. But methinks verse. 15. of this Chap. should
put this beyond all-question, where it is thus, Thou shall not uncover the
nakedness of thy Danghter in Law, for she is thy Sons Wife, etc. The Verb Is
being in the present Tense denotes the Son to be living.

But for a concluding Proof that Marriage was not meant here, or that, if it
was, not as an invariable Law of God, but only limited under such and such
considerations, and by consequence only Temporary, and therefore wants that
distinguishing mark given to the Divine Laws by Christ, let us compare verse.
16. of this 10th. Chapter of Levit. with Deuteronomy. 25.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10. First,
Lev. 1.18, 16. Thou shall not uncover the Nakedness of thy Brothers Wife, it is
thy Brothers Nakedness. Next, Deuteronomy. 25.5. If Brethren dwell together, and one
of them die, and have no Child, the Wife of the Dead shall not marry without
unto a stranger, her Husbands Brother shall go in unto her, and take her to him
to Wife, and perform the Duty of a Husbands Brother to her. Nay in the
succeeding Verses that is to the 11th. it is proved so evident a Duty, that he
who would not comply with it was to be affected by public Authority, with a
public Infamy. The firstborn was only to succeed to the Name of the deceased
Brother, That his Name be not put out of Israel. Now if Marrying the Brothers
Wife were contrary to the Law of God, and by consequence Malum in se, it could
not be despensed with to serve a mere Political turn, and that so trivial as
this, especially since any other might perform it (if not a stranger, yet at
least some other of the Family not so nearly related) and the Child so begotten
would be as much the Child of the deceased, as if begot by his surviving
Brother. Nay an Adoption might have kept up the Name, which seems to be the
whole Aim of it, without dispensing with the Law of God on so small and
inconsiderable an Account.

So that upon the whole, if (as I think is evident) the Marriage of a Brothers
Widow be not forbid, the ubi eadem Ratio, ibi idem Jus of the Canonists is
quite out of Doors against the Marriage of two Sisters. And were I deceived in
my Assertions in this particular (which I do not believe) yet can I see no
reason why this blind Prohibition of the old Law should affect us any more than
that of not wearing Garments of Linen and Woolen, since the former is no more
confirmed by Christ, than the latter, that is not at all. And great part of the
Levitical Law was calculated for the Israelites in regard to their Rites,
Customs and Inclinations, and are merely Political, which in their very nature
can have no tie upon us.

To conclude, if I have given the Scripture a contrary Interpretation to what
it has received before, I cannot help it; this I have chosen appears to me the
natural ^esult of the Words and Context, the other a plainly forced Exposition.

C. GILDON.
The Readers are desired to Correct the Errata's of the Press by their own
sense these Chance afford us, having no time to peruse the whole. Page 3. l.
23. add the. Page 179. l. 2. for it read in. Page 180. l. 13. for and read
could.

A LETTER To my Worthy Friend Mr. GILDON IN VINDICATION OF Dr. Burnet.
SIR,
I Have, according to my Promise, sent you herewith the Seventh and Eighth
Chapters, as also the Appendix, of the Great and Learned Dr. Burnet's Book,
Archilogiae Philosophicae, published ^his Winter in Latin, and by him dedicated
to his Most Sacred Majesty, and our Gracious Sovereign King William, being
employed about other Things, I had not time to make the Translation my self,
but transferred that Task upon -- yet dare answer for the Exactness of the
Version. As for the Piece it self, I think it one of the most Ingenious I ever
read, and full of the most acute, as well as learned, Observations. Nor can I
find any thing worthy an Objection against him, as some of the censorious part
of the World pretend; who would have you believe it a mere Burlesque upon
Moses, and Destructive to the Notion of Original Sin, wherefore by consequence
(say they) there could be no necessity of a Redemption, which however I think
no necessary Consequence: But for my part, either the great Veneration I have
for the Doctor's extraordinary Endowments, or else my own Ignorance has so far
b^ibed me to his Interest, that I can by no means allow of any of those Unjust
Reflections the Wholesale Merchants o^ Credulity, as well as their unthinking
Re^ailers, make against him. It is true, in the Seventh Chapter he seems to
prove that many parts of the Mesaie History of the Creation appear inc^nsi^^ent
with Reason; and in the Eigh^h Chapter the same appears no less inconsistent
with Philosophy; wherefore he concludes (as many Fathers of the Church have
done before him) that the whole rather ^^^ms ^o have been but a pious Allegory,
which Moses was forced to accommodate to the weak Understandings of the Vulgar
(who were incapable of Philosophy, or any higher Notions) thereby to imprint in
them a true Sense of one Supreme God, and of his Power, as also of the Original
of the World, wherewith all other Lawgivers began their Histories, as well as
Moses. But that the World had a beginning about Six thousand Years since, as
also the D^generation of Minkind, our learned Author does as strenuously
affirm, as it is possible.

Nor is Dr. Burnet the only ingenious Man either of this Age or Nation who has
been, upon Enquiry, startled at some Passages in the Mosaic History: For Dr.
Brown (so justly admired as well by Foreigners as his own Countrymen, upon the
Account of his Knowledge in all Gentile sorts of Literature) does both in his
Religio Medici and Vulgar Errors, betray his many Doubts and Scruples as well
upon this Subject as others, in these very words -- I confess (says the Doctor)
there are in Scripture Stories that do exceed the Fables of Poets, and to a
captious Reader sound like Garagantua or Bevis. Search all the Legends of times
past, and the fabulous Conceits of these present, and 'twill be hard to find
one that deserves to carry the Buckler unto little Sampson; yet is all this of
an easy possibility, if we conceive a divine Concourse, or an influence from
the little Finger of the Almighty. Im self (says he) could show a Catalogue of
Doubts, never yet imagined nor questioned, as I know of, which are not resolved
in Scripture, at first hearing; not fantastic Quaeries or Objections of Air:
For I cannot hear of Atoms in Divinity. I can read the History of the Pigeon
that was sent out of the Ark, and returned no more, yet not question how she
found out her Mate that was left behind. That Lazarus was raised from the Dead,
yet not demand where in the Interim his Soul waited; or raise a Law Case,
whether his Heir might lawfully detain his Inheritance bequeathed to him by his
Death, and he, though restored to Life, have no Plea or Title to his former
Possessions. Whether Eve was framed out of the left side of Adam, I dispute
not; because I stand not yet assured, which is the right side of a Man, or
whether there be any such distinction in Nature. That Eve was Edified of the
Rib of Adam, I believe, yet raise no question who shall arise with that Rib at
the Resurrection. Whether Adam was an Hermophrodite, as the Rabbis contend
upon the Letter of the Text ( Genes. 1.27.) because it is contrary to Reason
there should be an Hermophrodite before there was a Woman, or a Composition of
two Natures before there was a second composed. Likewise, whether the World was
crea^ed in Autumn, Winter, Summer or the Spring, because it was created in them
all: (...) whatsoever Sign the Sun possesses, those four Seasons are actually
existent: It being the nature of this Luminary to distinguish the several
Seasons of the Year, all which it makes at one time in the whole Earth, and
successive in any part thereof. That there was a Deluge once, whether in the
time of Deucalion or Noah, seems not to me so great a Miracle, as that there is
not one always. How all kinds of Creatures, not only in their own Bulks, but
with a Competency of Food and Sustenance, might be preserved in one Ark, and
within the Extent of Three hundred Cubits, will not appear very feasible. There
is also another Secret not contained in Scripture, which is more hard to
comprehend, and put the honest Father (St. Austin) to the Refuge of a Miracle;
and, that is, not only how the distinct pieces of the World, and divided
Islands, should be first Planted by Men, but Inhabited by Tigers, Panthers and
Bears? How America abounded with Beasts of pr^y and noxious Animals, yet
contained not in it that necessary Creature, a Horse, is very strange. By what
Passage those, not only Birds, but dangerous and unwelcom Beasts came over? How
there be Creatures there which are not found in this tripple Continent? All
which must needs be strange, to us that hold but one Ark, and that the
Creatures began their Progress from the Mountain Ararat: It Is a Paradox to me,
that Methusalem was the longest lived of all the Children o^ Adam; and no Man
will be able to prove it, when from the Process of the Text, I can manifest it
may be otherwise. Also that Judas perished by hanging himself, there is no
certainty in Scripture, the two Texts ( Matthew. 25. and Acts 1.18.) seeming to
contradict one another. That our Fathers after the Flood, erected the Tower of
Babel to preserve themselves against a second Deluge, is generally believed,
yet is there another Intention of theirs expressed in Scripture: Besides it is
improbable from the Circumstance of the Place, which was a Plain in the Land of
Shinar. I believe there was a Tree, whose Fruit our unhappy Parents tasted,
though in the same Chapter, where God forbids it, it is possitively said, the
Plants of the Field were not yet grown; for God had not then caused it to rain
upon the Earth. I believe that the Serpent (if we shall literally understand
it) from his proper Form and Figure, made his Motion his Belly before the
Curse. I find the trial of the Pucillage and Virginity of Women, which God
ordained the Jews, is very fallible. Experience and History inform me, that not
only many particular Women, but likewise whole Nations have escaped the Curse
of Childbirth, which God seems to pronounce upon the whole Sex. Having perused
the Archidoxes, and read the secret Sympathies of things, the Devil would
dissuade my Belief from the Miracle of the Brazen Serpent, and make me conceit
that Image workt by Sympathy, and was but an Egyptian Trick to cure their
Diseases with a Miracle. Again, having seen some Experiments of Bitumen, and
read many more of Naphtha, he whispered to my Curiosity, the Fire of the Altar
might be natural; and bid me mistrust a Miracle of Elias, when he entrenched
the Altar round with Water, since that inflammable Substance yields not easily
to Water, but flames in the Arms of its Antagonist. And thus would he inveagle
my Belief to think the Combustion of Sodom might be natural, and that there was
an Asphaltic and Bituminous Nature in that Lake, before the Fire of Gomorrah. I
know that Manna is now plentifully gathered in Calabria, and Josephus tells me
in his Days it was as plentiful in Arabia; the Devil therefore made me Quaere,
where was then the Miracle in the Days of Moses, since the Israelites saw but
that in his time, which the Natives of those Countries behold in ours? Brown's
Religio Medici. Also in his Vulgar Errors, our same Author writes thus: -- It
has puzzled the Enquiries of others to apprehend, and forced them to strange
Conceptions, to make out how Eve should be deluded by a Serpent, or subject her
Reason to a Beast, which God had subjected to hers? and how without Fear and
Doubt she could Discourse with such a Creature, or hear a Serpent speak,
without suspicion of Imposture. Others wonder at her simplicity, that when the
Serpent told her the eating that Fruit would make them like Gods, she did not
question the Beast, why he himself did not eat of it then. Brown, Vul. Err.

Now as one observes very well, in relation to Divine Miracles, there is
oftentimes great Errors committed in the manner of reading Scripture; as when
that is taken in a general Sense, which ought to be particularly understood: As
that of Adam, whom Moses made only to be the first Father of the Jews, whilst
others Hyperbolically make him to be the first Father of all Men. So likewise
the Darkness at the Death of our Savior, which some say was spread over the
Face of the whole Earth: Others, and some able Interpreters, have only
translated it, Upon all the Land of the Jews, viz. Palestine, which the Hebrews
always meant, when they said the Earth. So likewise the Star which Conducted
the Wisemen upon the Nativity of Christ, some place in Heaven among the rest of
the Stars; but others say, that could not be, for then other People had seen it
as well as those few Wisemen, and Herod among the rest; who being troubled at
this Report, and not being able to see it himself, calling the Wisemen to him
privately (says the Evangelist) he enquired of them what time the Star did
appear? And besides it marched before them like a Torch, and conducted them; so
that it cannot be said to have been a fixed Star in the Heavens. Again, some
will tell you, that the Fiery Army sent to the help of Elisha from Heaven was
such, whom the Prophet himself saw, and yet his Servant that stood by him could
not see. Likewise in the miraculous Sign which was given of Ezekiah's Recovery
from his Sickness, when it is said, -- That God brought back the shadow of those
Lines that it had gone down in the Dial of Achaz back ten Degrees -- Here some
affirm, That the Sun went not back in the Heaven (as it is generally believed)
but only in the Dial of Achaz; for, say they, if the Sun went back in the
Zodiac, or that Degree of the Ecliptic standing still, which he was running
that Day, the Primum Mobi^e came also backwards, and with it all the rest of
the Spheres; if we say that he went back only in the Zodiac, and a tenth part
of the Zodiac; then say they the Sun must needs return through a great many
Signs of the Zodiac, and bring back with him past Months, yea, and Seasons of
the Year. Besides, that this Sign was seen only in the Land of Judah and not
elsewhere, they pretend to prove from Ambassadors which were sent from Babylon
to enquire after the Sign, which (say they) might have been seen in Babylon, as
well as in Judah, had the Sun gone back in the Firmament. Much to the same
purpose they argue against the Miracle of the Suns standing still one whole Day
in Gabaon at the command of Joshua, alleging, That that long day extended not
it self beyond the Country of Gabaon, or otherwise it must have been apparent
elsewhere: And therefore they urge, That the Light of the setting Sun after he
was himself gone down, was only the Reflection of his Beams, remaining as yet
in the Atmosphere, which reverberated longer than ordinary upon the Mountain
and City of Gabaon, by a favorable Situation of the Hills: In the North of
Scotland they have at sometimes in Summer hardly any Night at all; and some
Mathematicians write, that according to the Obliquity of the Sphere, there were
some Days of six Months continuance, with them who live under the Parallel.
Likewise concerning the Miracle of the Jews, not wearing out their Garments or
their Shoes in Forty Years time that they continued in the Wilderness; some
pretend, that they feeding a Thousand Flocks in the Desert, made Cloth and
Raiment of their Wool, as well as Shoes of their Skin and Leather, wanting
neither Weavers, Tailors nor Shooemakers among (...) numerous a Mob. Now
lastly, others will not allow that the Flood of Noah was upon the whole Earth,
but only upon the Land of the Ie^s; nor to destroy all Men, but only the Jews:
For^ say they, God being offended at their Wickedness^ said, I will cut off Man
whom I have created from the Face of the Earth, from the M^n to the Peast, from
the creeping thing to the Fowl of the Heaven -- Where they will have it, that
the Hebrews by Earth ever meant their own, viz. Palestine; by the Man whom he
had created, the Jews, the Posterity of Adam; and by living Creatures the
Gentiles matched among the Jews: Besides Cattle, Birds and all creeping Things
within the Land of Palestine, except only Noah and his Family. Now that this
Flood was only in the Land of the Jews, they argue; First, From the Causes of
the Deluge, which were only the Sins of the Jews: Secondly, From the words of
Berosus, who has written of the Ark (says Josephus) in which the chief of our
Family was preserved; not the chief of Mankind, but the chief of our Lineage,
that is, the Jews. Thirdly, From the Dove that was sent out and returned at
Night with an Olive Branch free from Dirt or Slime and covered with green
Leaves; whereas, say they, in all places where the Flood had been, the Trees
were depressed and covered with Slime and Mud. They further tell you, That the
World was said to be divided by Ph^leg, who was the Fifth in Descent from Sem,
wherefore they question, how they could People China, America, the Southland,
Greenland and the rest with Inhabitants? These and many more Scruples are
raised by some nice and curious Enquirers; so that we see our Learned Dr.
Burnet stands not alone by himself in his more refined and speculative Doubts.
All which might easily be salved, were it not for that untoward Axiom in
Philosophy, a Posse ad esse non valet consequentia: However as that Argument
shows it may not be so, yet neither does it demonstrate it is not so. For God
seldom alters or perverts the Course of Nature, however Miracles may be
necessary sometimes to acquaint the World with his Prerogative, least the
Arrogance of our Reason should question his Power; a Crime no wise Man can ever
be guilty of: Who climbling up from Cause to Cause, shall ever find the highest
Link of Nature's Chain to be tied at the Foot of Jupiter's Chair^ --

The next Charge against our Author is for his disowning Original Sin, which I
must ingeguously confess was ever a difficult Pill with me to swallow, my
Reason stopping it in my Throat, and not having Faith enough to wash it down.
There are some Persons, I know, who believe that Wars, Plagues, Fevers and all
the Troop of natural Corruptions invaded the Earth by that imputation of the
Sin of Adam, without discriminating between Natural and Legal Sin. For Wars,
Plagues and Fevers, with whatever else of this sort troubles and afflicts
Mankind, are the consequences of Natural Sin, which is the Wickedness and
Imperfection of Nature. This will easily appear to such, who can suffer that
ancient Cloud of Prepossession to be taken off, which dulls their sight; for
who knows not that Wars had their Original from such, whom either greedy Desire
of Prey, or cruel Thirst after Revenge, or sacred Ambition of Rule stirred up
to take Arms? Then who has not had experience of the Breeding and Inflammation
of Plagues and Fevers, either by the natural Corruption of the Air, or by the
Corruption of our natural Bodies? We have as many Witnesses of this Observation
and Truth, as we have Statesmen and Physicians, therefore not from Adam's Sin
proceed our Diseases, but from our own Corrupt and Rotten Natures; the innate
Infirmity of Men being the chief and natural Calamity of Men. Nay it is not
known that Adam who was the Criminal and Fountain (as they say) of so great
Evils, was ever so much as troubled with the least Disease all those 930. Years
which he lived; unless you will believe him, who relates, out of I know not
what Author, that Adam died of the Gout, wherewith he was troubled from his
Ancestors. Did Cain fall sick when he slew his Brother? No; he was very strong
and lusty, he fled to the East of Eden, where he associated himself with a pack
of Lewd Fellows; he set up for the Trade of Padding, then married a Wife, begot
a Son, and built a City. Likewise the most excellent Poet falls out with his
Gods, for that his Mistress (Eugenia) being perjured, kept the same Face which
she had before, or rather became fairer and fairer: The same is also the
constant complaint of the Elect in Scripture, That the Wicked prosper so much
in this World. Wherefore to me it seems certain, that the Imputation of Adam's
Sin is no ways an occasion of our Sufferings. I know there are some affirm,
That if Adam had not sinned, Men should never have died; as if Immortality and
Eternal Life, which nothing but a New Creation could beget, should have been
bestowed on Men by Virtue of the First Creation, which by its own Nature is
subject to Death and Corruption: And that those Men should not have died, who
(as the Schools say) are naturally Corruptible, and were created Mortal. Some
will here object and say, God told Adam, That on the Day he eat that Fruit, he
should die the Death; from whence they gather, That if Death was given as a
Punishment to Adam on that Day wherein he trangress'd the Law of God, then
surely Adam would never have died, if he had never sinned: But that Consequence
I deny; for although they die which kill, yet they who do not kill are not
Immortal. Besides, to conclude this point, it is altogether inconsistent with
God's Attributes of Mercy and Justice, to punish all Mankind for one single
Persons sin, which we could no ways prevent or hinder, nor any but God himself,
who permitted that Evil Spirit to Reign in him. The Roman Schools affirm the
first Motions of Concupiscence to be no sin; because they are involuntary, and
come upon us whether we will or no; then why should they think Original Sin to
be really and truly a Sin in us, which is altogether as involuntary, and
unchosen by us as Concupiscence? For how can another sin, wherein we have no
hand, be imputed to us? Eternal Death was not threatened to Adam for his sin,
and therefore could not from him descend upon us, for that which was none of
ours. The Death that Adam's Sin introduced is such as could have a Remedy or
Recompense by Christ, but eternal Death has no Recompense, nor can ever be
destroyed, whereas temporal Death shall. If God should impute Adam's Sin so as
to damn us for it, then all our Good we receive from God, is much less than the
Evil, says Dr. Tailor. If God will not give Men Heaven by Christ, he will not
throw them into Hell by Adam; if his Goodness will not do the First, his Mercy
and Justice will not suffer him to do the Last. Nor did any Church ever enjoin
Penance or Repentance for Original Sin; wherefore it seems preposterous and
unreasonable, that any Man should be damned for that, which no Man is bound to
Repent. However I do no way find that Dr. Burnet does absolutely declare
against Original Sin; but rather the contrary, acknowledging the Degeneracy of
Mankind from its primitive State, which must be redeemed by the Seed of a
Woman. All Extremes are dangerous, as walking upon the Brink of a Precipice or
the like, and if he be not so violent in this Point; what others may only think
he wants in Piety, may perhaps be really supplied in Charity: And what they
only fancy they have in Piety, may be truly defective in Charity: An honest
Augure is ever in most danger of his own Fraternity.

But to proceed, it has been a point very much disputed among several
Politicians in the Commonwealth of Learning, who was the real and true Author
of the Pentateuch. A late and great Modern Philosopher of this Nation declares,
It is not an Argument sufficient to prove those Books were written by Moses,
because they are called the Five Books of Moses; for, as much as Books often
take their Titles from their Subject, as well as from their Authors. It Is true,
the History of Livy denotes the Writer, but the History of Tamberlain is
denominated from the Subject. We read in the last Chapter of Deuteronomy, v. 6
th. concerning the Sepulcher of Moses, that no Man knows his Sepulcher to
this Day, that is to say, to the Day wherein those Words were written;
wherefore it is manifest that those Words were written after his Interment. But
it may perhaps be alleged, That the last Chapter only, and not the whole
Pentateuch, was written by some other hand, and the rest by Moses. Let us
therefore consider, that which we find in the Book of Genesis (cap. 12. v. 6.)
and Abraham passed through the Land to the place of Sichem, unto the Plain of
Moreh, and the Canaanite was then in the Land; which must be the Words of one
that wrote when the Canaanite was not in the Land, and consequently not of
Moses, who died before he came into it. Likewise, Numb. 21. v. 14. the Writer
cites another more ancient Book, entitled, the Book of the Wars of the Lord,
wherein were Registered the Acts of Moses at the Red Sea, and at the Brook of
Amon; which he would never have mentioned of himself, but could as well have
given us an account himself of what he did in those places. Wherefore it is
evident, That the Five Books of Moses were written by another Hand after his
Decease. But yet it is rational to believe that Moses wrote the Volume of the
Law, contained in the 11 th. of Deuteronomy, and the following Chapters to the
27 th. which he commanded to be written on Stones in Entry into the Land of
Canaan. Also Moses himself delivered it to the Priests and Elders of Israel to
be read every seventh Year to all Israel at their Assembly in the Feast of
Tabernacles, as we may find in the 31 st. Chapter of Deuteronomy v. 9 th. Nay,
it may be also questioned, whether the aforesaid was that very Law which Moses
delivered, since having been a long time lost, Helkiah pretended to find it
again, and so sent it to King Josias (2 Kings 22.8. and the 23.1, 2, 3.) so
that we have only Helkiah's Word for it. The Book of Joshua was also written
long after Joshua's time, which may be gathered out of many places of the Book
it self: Joshua had set up twelve Stones in the midst of Jordan for a Monument
of their Passage; of which the Writer says ( Joshua 4.9.) They are there unto
this day; which Expression, Unto this day, is a Phrase that signifies a Time
past. And the same is manifest by like Arguments of the Books of Judges and
Ruth, that they were written long after the Captivity, Judges chap. 1.21, 26.
chap. 6.24. chap. 10.4. chap. 15.19. chap. 17.6. and Ruth chap. 1.1. but
especially Judges 18.30.

Now the Reason why I make mention of these things is only to show, That our
most Reverend and Ingenious Author is not the first that has had scruples in
this kind, and that he may well make an Enquiry into the Truth of some Passages
of the History, when the very Historians themselves are so much doubted of by
others; not but that we may pay a just deference to the Church, and yet at the
same time raise scruples for information sake, the better to arm our selves
against our Antagonists.

The next little Part or Epilogue of Dr. Burnet's Book, which we here present
you with in English, is his Appendix concerning the Brachmin's Religion, and
has reference to one of his former Chapters on the same Subject. I must confess
his Notion of their Omnipotent Spider (though what I have read many Years
since) was no less grateful to me, than the return of a Friend after a long
Voyage. That thought of Resolving all things into himself, an Estate for Life
that falls into the Landlords hands. Sure no good Tenant needs fear a good new
Lease the State of Man, if rightly well considered, is only wearing out our
Threads of Life, in order to our Deaths. And he that weighs our Progress here,
the great Vicissitudes without decay, since things may change, but never
annihilate, will find Penelope Telam Texere is our case: Dress and undress the
Emblem of our Lives, till shrouded in our mortal Dishabillie, we wait the
Morning for a different Dress; when the Celestial Drop as now enclosed, may to
a different Viol be exposed. But I shall trouble you no more upon this subject,
least you should mistake it for the foolish Funeral Sermon of,

SIR, Your ever Faithful Friend and Real Servant, BLOUNT.
March 23. 1693.
The 7 th. and 8 th. Chapters of Dr. Burnet's Archiologiae Philosophicae,
together with his Appendix to the same concerning the Brachmin's Religion, all
Written Originally in Latin, and now rendered into English, by Mr. H. B.
CHAP. VII. Concerning Moses's Description of Paradise as well as the Original
State of Nature and Mankind in the beginning of the World.
WE have hitherto made our Enquiry after the Originals of things as well as
after a true knowledge of Paradise among the Ancients; yet still with reference
to Sacred Writ, where it gave us any manner of light into the Subject, but
think it altogether unnecessary to define the place or situation of Paradise;
since in respect to the Theory of the Earth, it is much the same thing where you
place it, provided it be not on our modern Earth. Now if you enquire among the
ancient Fathers where the situation of it was, either they will have it to be
none at all, or else obscure and remote from our understanding; some of them
indeed term it an Intelligible Paradise, but confined to no one particular
place; whilst others at the same time make it a sensible one; and here it is
they first divided about it. Moreover, such as believe it to be a Sensible and
Corporeal Paradise, place it either on this Earth, or out of it, ( viz.) in the
Air or in the Lunary Orb; when they who believe those happy Mansions to have
been upon the Earth, place them either on this side the Equator, under the
Equator, or beyond the Equator or Torrid Zone; finally all that are of our
opinion believe the true Paradise, which is now passed away did in reality
formerly flourish upon the Earth, but nevertheless on such an Earth as was
quite different from what we now inhabit. However these different opinions we
have elsewhere more at large explained; especially that which carries Paradise
beyond the Equator, Torrid Zone, the Ocean and our Northern World. Not that
this opinion pleases me above the rest but because it is demonstrated by the
Calculations of the Ancients; and plainly evinces the Paradise we now pretend
to place in Mesopotamia, to be only a Modern fiction. Besides, as to the Theory
of the Earth, it does not in the least obviate a Local Paradise in any part of
the Earth; since it supposes that in the Infant world even the whole
inhabitable Globe was like a Paradise. Yet notwithstanding consequentially and
agreeably to the Mosaic Hypothesis, which make^ Mankind how numerous soever to
have first received its birth only from one Man and one Woman, you may
therefore (if you please) appropriate the name of Paradise to the original
native soil and first habitation of these two; a place most wonderfully
beautified as well with Trees as Waters; provided at the same time you grant to
the other parts of the same Earth a Perpetual Spring, and those advantages
which necessarily flow from it, ( viz.) spontaneous fertility together with
long life to its inhabitants; for that the World did in its first beginning
enjoy all these blessings we have sufficiently demonstrated as well from the
nature of the thing it self as from the testimonies of the Ancients. Ay but,
say you, Moses mentions only one Garden which he calls Began Eden or the Garden
of Deliciousness; and seems to suppose that all the other Regions of that Earth
enjoyed but one and the same common Lot with little variation from our modern
Earth: Now to this I answer, That among the Ancients, but more especially the
Orientals, there were two different ways of delivering their Divinity and
Philosophy, ( viz.) (...), a Popular and a hidden one; of which dubious sort of
style the Holy Scripture seems to make use in the explaining natural things;
sometimes accommodating it self to the capacities of the people, and sometimes
to the real but more clouded truth.

However, being resolved not in the least to deviate from the very literal
sense without an absolute necessity; that is to say, unless the Nature of the
thing does unavoidably oblige or enforce me to it; we must first enquire what
is in this case the literal sense, and how much it will bear; as also, on the
other side, what the Subject Matter will bear and what not; to the end that
having thus fairly stated the case on both sides, we may be the better enabled
to give a certain determination according to the merits of the cause as well as
to disclose where the real truth lies hid.

Now the History of Paradise (from whence we'll begin) according to Moses is
thus: When God had in six days finished the Creation of the World, the seventh
day he rested from all manner of work: And here Moses relates particularly each
days Operation; but for the story of Mankind, as well Male as Female, of that
he makes a peculiar Treatise by it self. Wherefore omitting the rest at
present, let us, if you please, consider the Mosaic Doctrine upon these three
subjects ( viz.) Adam, Eve and the Garden of Eden; together with those things
which are interwoven or adherent to them. As to the first man Adam, Moses says
he was formed, not out of Stones or Dragons Teeth, as others have feigned
concerning their men; but out of the dust or clay of the Earth; and when his
Body was formed, God blew into his nostrils the breath of life, and man was
made a living soul, Genesis 2.7.

But after another manner and of other matter was the Woman built ( viz.) with
one of Adams small bones; for as Adam lay asleep, God took away one of his
ribs, and out of that made Eve. The words of Moses are these, And the Lord God
caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept; and he took one of his
ribs and closed up the flesh instead thereof: And the rib which the Lord God
had taken from man, made he a woman and brought her unto the man for a wife,
Genesis 2.21.

So much for the forming of the first Man and first Woman according to the
literal Reading. Now Moses has likewise given us a large account of their first
habitation; he says that God made them a certain famous Garden in the East, or
as others render it ab antiquo, of old; and gave it to them as a Farm to
cultivate and inhabit; which Garden was a most delightful place, watered with
four several Fountains or Rivers, planted with Trees of all kinds, as well
those that bore fruit as those that were agreeable for their shade and aspect.
Amongst which Trees in the midst of the Garden, stood two more remarkable than
the rest, whereof one was called the Tree of Life, the other the Tree of Death,
or of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. Why one was called the Tree of Life is not
certain; perhaps because whoever had eat of it, would have from it received
Immortality, as many conjecture. The effect of the other fatal experience has
sufficiently taught us: Hino illae Lachrymae and infandus dolor: It Is for our
first Parents eating the fruit of this Tree that all their Posterity now
smarts; and is punished for a crime committed some thousands of years before
they were born. But of this I Will here present you with a full relation.

God upon pain of death prohibits Adam and Eve from tasting the fruit of this
Tree; But it happened upon a time that Eve sitting solitarily under this Tree
without her Husband, there came to her a Serpent or Adder, which, tho I know
not by what means or power, civilly accosted the Woman (if we may judge of the
thing by the event) in these words, or to this purpose.

Serp. All Hail most fair one, what are you doing so solitary and serious under
this Shade?


Eve. I am contemplating the beauty of this Tree.


Serp. It Is truly an agreeable sight but much pleasanter are the fruits
thereof. Have you tasted them my Lady?


Eve. I have not, because God has forbidden us to eat of this Tree.


Serp. What do I hear! who is that God that envies his Creatures the innocent
delights of Nature? Nothing is sweeter, nothing more wholesome than this very
fruit; why then should he forbid it, unless he were in jest?


Eve. But he has forbid it us on pain of death.


Serp. Undoubtedly you mistake his meaning: This Tree has nothing that would
prove fatal to you, but rather something Divine and above the common force of
nature.


Eve. I can give you no answer, but will first go to my Husband and then do as
he thinks fit.


Serp. Why should you trouble your Husband about such a trifle? Use your own
judgment.


Eve. Let me see, had I best use it or no? what can be more beautiful than this
Apple? How sweetly it smells! but it may be it tastes ill.


Serp. Believe me it is a bit worthy to be eaten by the Angels themselves; do
but try, and if it tastes ill, throw it away, and say I am a great Liar.


Eve. Well, I Will try then; thou have not deceived me; it has indeed a most
agreeable flavor. Give me another that I may carry it to my Husband.


Serp. Very well thought on; here is another for you; go to your Husband with
it. Farewell happy young Woman. -- In the meantime i will go my ways, let her
take care of the rest.


Accordingly Eve gave this Apple to the too uxorious Adam, which he likewise
eat off; when immediately upon their eating of it they became both (I know not
how) ashamed of their Nakedness; and sowing together Fig Leaves made them a
sort of Aprons to cover their Pudenda. Now after these transactions God did in
the Evening descend into the Garden; upon which our first Parents fled to hide
themselves among the thickest of the Trees; but in vain, for God called out,
Adam, where art thou? When he trembling appeared before the Almighty, and said,
Lord, when I heard thee in this Garden, I was ashamed because of my nakedness,
and hid my self amongst the most shady parts of the thicket. Who told thee,
said God, that thou were naked? Have you eaten of the forbidden fruit? That
Woman thou gave me brought it, 'twas she that made me eat on it. You have
finely ordered your business, you and your wife! Here, you Woman, what is this
that you have done? Alas for me, thy Serpent gave me the Apple and I did eat of
it.

This Apple shall cost you dear, and not only you but your posterity and the
whole race of Mankind. Moreover, for this crime I will curse and spoil the
Heavens, the Earth and whole Fabric of Nature. But thou in the first place vile
beast shall bear the punishment of thy craftiness and malice. Hereafter shall
thou go creeping on thy belly, and instead of eating Apples shall lick the dust
of the Earth. As for you Mrs. Curious, who so much love Delicacies, in sorrow
shall you bring forth Children; you shall be subject to your Husband, and shall
never depart from his side unless having first obtained his leave. Lastly, as
for you Adam, because you have hearkened more to your Wife than to me, with the
sweat of your brow you shall obtain your food both for her and her Children.
You shall not gather fruits, which, as heretofore, grew of themselves, but
shall reap the fruits of the Earth with labor and trouble. May the Earth, for
thy sake accursed, hereafter grow barren; may she produce thistles, thorns,
tares, with other hurtful and unprofitable herbs; and when thou have here led a
troublesome laborious life, Dust thou art, to Dust thou shall return. In the
mean while let these Rebels be banished out of my Garden, and sent as Exiles
into strange Lands; least they also eat the fruit of the Tree of Life, and live
for ever. However, for fear they should perish through the cold or inclemency
of the Weather, the Almighty made them Doublets of the Skins of Animals, and
being thus clad, he thrusts them out of Paradise. Finally, to prevent their
return, he placed Angels at the entrance of his Garden, who by brandishing a
Flaming-sword, and waving it on all sides guarded the passage that led to the
Tree of Life.

This is the Sum and Substance of Moses's Account concerning Paradise, and the
first State of Minkind; which keeping always close to the Sense, I have
explained in other words that we may more freely judge of the thing it self; as
is it were written by a Modern Author.

Now that there are in this Relation some things Parabolical, and, which will
not bear a construction altogether, Literal, there are few but do allow. Nay,
some proceed farther, and will have even the whole Discourse to be artificially
figurative, in order to explain things that were really true ( viz.) the new
and degenerate Condition of Mankind; as also paradisiac State of Infant Nature,
and its Degeneracy. For although in the beginning of the Discourse, this state
of Paradise seems confined only to one Region, which is called Began Eden, yet
afterward, when the Curse of Barrenness comes out, the whole Earth is brought
in for a share. The Earth shall not for the future bring forth her increase of
her own accord, nor any of her Fruits without Tillage and Husbandry; but
hereafter, says the Lord, with the Sweat of thy brow shall thou get those
things that are necessary for Life and Sustenance. Whence it is evident, that
before this Alteration of Curse, the whole Earth yielded her Increase without
Planting or Labor; for otherwise by this Curse nothing had been made new,
nothing had been changed in the Face of Nature. Besides from another thing it
plainly appears, that one small Country or some few Acres of Land, such as is a
Garden, could not alone enjoy this Fertility, together with those other
Privileges as well of Air as Soil; but that the whole inhabitable Globe did
partake of them in the primitive State of things. For suppose Adam had
continued Innocent, how would there have been room for his Posterity within the
enclosures of one Garden? Or admit you will have them all shut up there, like
so many unfledged Birds in a Nest, what must have been done with all those
other vast Tracts of Earth? Should they have stood Empty, Desert, and without
Inhabitants?

Nature it self does not allow of that, neither is it becoming the Divine
Wisdom. From all these things we may conclude what is very agreeable to Reason
(viz.) That Moses puts the part for the whole, and laid one Example before the
Eyes of the People instead of a greater number; because it was more suitable to
the Genius and Understanding of the Vulgar to conceive a pleasant Garden or
single Field, than that the whole Globe of the Earth should put on a new Face
and new Nature entirely different from what we now enjoy. But let us proceed in
the Road we have begun.

The aforesaid Relation consists of five or six parts, whereof the first is,
concerning the Birth and Formation of the first of Mankind. The second, the
Description of the Garden Eden. The third is, the History of the two Trees of
Life and Death. The fourth treats of the Serpent's Conference with Eve. The
fifth about the Wrath of God and his Curse for eating the forbidden Fruit.
Lastly, the sixth contains the Expulsion of these first of Mankind out of the
Almighty's Garden, as also how God made them Coats of Skins, and placed Angels
with flaming Swords at the Entrance of his Garden; together with other things
hereto belonging.

Great is the force of Custom and a preconceived Opinion over human Minds.
Wherefore these short Observations or Accounts of the first Originals of Men
and Things, which we receive from the Mouth of Moses, are embraced without the
least Demurr or Examination of them. But had we read the same Doctrine in
another, for Example, in a Greek Philosopher, or in a Rabbinical or Mohammedan
Doctor, we should have stopped at every period with our mind full of Objections
and Scruples. Now this difference does not arise from the Nature of the thing
it self, or of the Matter in hand, but from the great Opinion we have of the
Faithfulness and Authority of the Writer, as being divinely inspired.

All which we willingly acknowledge, neither do we in this occasion doubt of
our Author's Authority, but with what intent it was that he wrote these Things,
and what kind of Style he has made use of, whether Plebeian or Philosophical; I
say, Plebeian and not Fabulous, although this last word might have been used,
did we speak of a Profane Author. Now of Fables, some are pure Fictions;
others are built upon some Foundation, but beautified with Additions and
acquired Ornaments. Besides there are some Relations that have Truth at the
bottom, but not in every particular point of them; only as to the substance of
the thing, and drift of the Author. As in Christ's Parable of Dives and
Lazarus, and in many things which are related concerning the Day of Judgment,
as to the outward shell and form. Such kind of Relations I think ought not to
be termed Fables, but sometimes Parables, and sometimes (...), Hypotheses
adapted to the Vulgar. And if in this rank you place the Narration we have now
in hand, preserving always the good Name and Honor of the Author, I shall not
think it amiss.

But let us, if you please, first examine some Articles herein.

As to the Temporal Rise of Mankind, I have ever held it most certain and
undoubted: and that upwards of 5000 Years, according to the account given us by
Sacred Chronology. But out of what Matter the first of Mankind, whether Male or
Female was composed, is not so easily discovered, nor of so great importance to
know. If God had a Mind to make a Woman start from one of Adam's Ribs, it is
true it seems to be a Matter not very proper, but however, out of any Wood,
Stone or other Being God can make a Woman: And here, by the by, the Curious ask
whether this Rib was useless to Adam, and beyond the number requisite in a
complete Body?

If not, when it was taken away, Adam would have been a maimed Person, and
robbed of a part of himself that was necessary. I say necessary, for as much as
I suppose that in the Fabric of a Human Body nothing is superfluous, and that
no one Bone can be taken away without endamaging the whole, or rendering it in
some measure imperfect. B^t if on the other side you say this Rib was really
useless to Adam, and might be spared; so that you make him to have had only
twelve Ribs on one side, and thirteen on the other; they will reply that this
is like a Monster; as much as if the first Man had been created with three Feet
or three Hands, or had had more Eyes or other Members than the use or
compleatness of an human Body requires. But in the beginning all Things were
made with Number, Weight and Measure, that is to say, with all imaginable
Exactness.

For my part, I do not pretend to decide this dispute, but what more perplexes
me is, how out of only one Rib the whole Mass of a Woman's Body could be built?
For a Rib does not equal the hundredth, perhaps not the Thousandth part of an
entire Body. If you answer that the rest of the matter was taken from
elsewhere, certainly Eve might much more truly be said to have been formed out
of that borrowed matter whatever it was, than out of Adams Rib. I know very
well that the Rabbinical Doctors solve this business quite another way; for
they say, the first man had two Bodies, the one male and the other female,
whose sides stuck together, or (as some will have it) their Backs; that God cut
them asunder, and having thus Cloven Eve from Adam, gave her to him for a Wife.
Plato has in his Symposium something very like this Story, concerning his first
man Androgynus, who was afterward divided into two parts, Male and Female.
Lastly, others conjecture (which is not improbable) that Moses gave out this
original of Woman to the end he might breed a mutual Love between the two Sexes
as parts of one and the same whole; and that by this means he might more
effectually recommend to his people his own institution of Marriage (which does
unite them a second time) as if it had been imprinted in nature it self. But
leaving this Subject I will hasten to something else.

Now the second Article treats of Gods Garden in Eden, watered with four Rivers
arising from the same Spring. Which Celestial Garden mention^d by Moses some
will have to be the same with (...), Jupiters Garden in Plato, and that in both
places the History or Allegory is the same, (...), according to the secret
meanings of Moses, as Eusebius says, and I am so much the more wi^ling to
embrace these secret meanings in Relation to the Garden of Eden, because there
is no place in the whole World wherewith all the distinguishing Marks and
Characters of this Garden may agree, for not to speak of that continual
serenity of the Air, and spontaneous fertility of the place, even the very
Rivers themselves afford a most perplexing, and as yet undecided Controversy
both to Divines and Geographers as well Ancient as Modern.

Those Rivers are by Moses called Pishon, Gishon, Hiddekel and Perath, which
the Ancient Authors interpret by Ganges, Nile, Tigris and Euphrates. Nor do I
truly think without some reason; for Moses seems to have proposed nothing more
to himself than the bringing four of the most celebrated and most fertile
Rivers of the whole Earth to the watring of his Garden. Ay but, say you, these
four Rivers do not spring from the same source, or come from the same place;
it is true, nor any other four Rivers that are named by the Interpreters.
Wherefore this Objection (...) every where hold good as well against ^^e
Ancient as Modern Writers. But although you should reduce these Rivers, only to
two as some do, to Tigris and Euphrates, yet neither have these two Rivers the
same Fountainhead, but this is really and truly an Evasion rather than an
Explanation, to reduce, contrary to the History of Moses, a greater number of
Rivers to a smaller; only that they may the more conveniently be derived from
the same Spring; for these are the words of Moses, but there Comes a River out
of Eden to water the Garden, and from thence it divides it self into four
Branches: The Name of the first is Pishon, etc. Genesis 2.10. Whereby it is
apparent that either in the entrance or Exit of the Garden, there were four
Rivers; and that those four Rivers did proceed from one and the same
Fountainhead in Eden. Now pray tell me in what part of the Earth is this
Country of Eden, where four Rivers arise from one and the same Spring? But do
not go about to say that only two came from that Fountain of Eden, and that the
other two arose from the Tigris and Euphrates where they split near the Sea,
and make as it were a Bifrontic Figure. Since this does by no means answer the
words of Moses. Besides, he mentions in the first place Pishon and Gishon, and
afterward Tigris and Euphrates as lesser Rivers; whereas you on the contrary
will have those to be derived from these last (...) Rivers of an inferior
order; which is a manifest distorting the Historical Account. But to end all
these Difficulties or Controversies concerning the Originals and Channels of
the Rivers that watered Paradise, you will perhaps at last say that the Springs
as well as the courses of Rivers have been changed by the Universal Deluge. And
that we cannnot therefore be now certain where it was they formerly broke out
of the Earth, and what Countries they passed through. For my part I am much of
your opinion, provided you confess there happened in the Deluge such a fraction
and disruption of the Earth as we suppose there did; for from only an
Inundation or Superabundancy of Waters such a change could never possibly
happen. Besides, according to what Geography or Hydrography will you have Moses
to describe these Rivers Antidiluvian, or Postdiluvian? If the latter, there
has happened no considerable alteration of the Earth since the time of Moses or
the Flood; if the former, you then render Moses's description of the Earth
altogether superfluous, and unuseful to find out the situation of Paradise.
Lastly, it is hard to conceive that any Rivers, whether these or others, can
have subsisted ever since the very first beginning of the World, whether you
have regard to their Waters or to their Channels. The Channels of Rivers used
to be made by little and little as well as by a daily attrition, for if they
had been made, as Ditches and Furrows are, by Earth dug out and heaped up on
each side, or at least on one side, there would certainly have been every where
seen great Banks and Heaps of Earth. But we plainly perceive that this is only
fortuitous; forasmuch as they often run through Plains, and the River-banks are
no more than level with the adjacent Fields, besides whence cou^^d there be had
water at the first foundation of the World to fill these Channels? If you say
that on the third day when the great Bed of the Ocean was made the smaller
Channels of the Rivers were also; and as the greatest part of the Waters of the
Abyss fell into the Gulf of the Seas; so the remaining part descended into
these other Channels, and therewith formed the Primitive Rivers, admitting
this, yet the Waters would be not only as Salt as those of the Sea, but there
would be no continual Springs to nourish these Rivers; insomuch that when the
first stream of Water had flowed off, there being no fresh Supplys of Water to
succeed it, these Rivers would have immediately been dried up: I say because
there were no perpetual Springs, for whether Springs proceed from Rain, or from
the Sea they could neither way have rose in so short a time; not from Rain for
it had not as yet Rained, neither was it possible that in the small space of
one day the Waters of the Abyss should run down from the most Inland places to
the Sea, and afterward returning through ways that were never yet opened by
them, should strain themselves through the Bowels of the Earth, and ascend to
the heads of their Rivers. But of Rivers we have said enough, let us now
proceed to the rest.

We have in the third place a very strange account of a Serpent that talked
with Eve, and enticed her to mistrust God. I must confess we have not yet known
that this Beast could ever speak, or utter any sort of voice, besides hissing.
But what shall we think Eve knew of this business? If she had taken it for a
dumb Animal the very Speech of it would have so frightened her that she would
not have durst to stay and enter into a Conference with it. If on the other
side, the Serpent had from the beginning been capable of talking and
haranguing, and only lost his Speech for the crime of having by his seducements
corrupted the Piety and Faith of Eve; certainly Moses would have been far from
passing over in silence this sort of Punishment, and instead of that have
mentioned so small a Penalty as that of licking the dust. But besides all this,
pray will you have the particular Species of Serpents, or all the Beasts of the
Field that were then in Paradise to have been endued with the faculty of
speaking like the Trees in Dodona's Grove? If you say all, pray what offense
had the rest been guilty of, that they also must loose the use of their
Tongues? if only the Species of Serpents enjoyed this privilege, how came it
about that so vile an Animal, and by nature the most averse and remote from
Mankind, should before all his other fellow Bruits deserve to be Master of so
great a favor and benefit as that of Speech?

Lastly, since all discoursing and arguing include the use of Reason, by this
very thing you make the Serpent a Rational Creature. But I easily imagine those
who are great sticklers; for the Literal Interpretation will solve this
difficulty another way: For, say they, under the shape of this Serpent was hid
the Devil, or an Evil Spirit, who using the Mouth and Organs of this Animal,
spoke to the Woman as it were with an human voice. But what Testimony, with
Authority, have they for this? The most literal reading of Moses, which they so
closely adhere to, does not express any thing of it; for what else does he seem
to say, but that he attributes the seducing of Eve to the natural craftiness of
the Serpent, and nothing else? For, these are Moses's words: Now the Serpent
was more cunning than any Beast of the Field that the Lord God had made:
(Afterward continues he) The Serpent said to the Woman, yea, has God said --.
But besides had Eve heard an Animal, by nature dumb, speak through the means of
some Evil Spirit, she would instantly with horror have fled from the Monster.
When on the contrary she very familiarly receved it; they discoursed and argued
very amicably together, as tho nothing new or astonishing had happened; again,
if you say, that all this proceeded from the ignorance and weakness of a Woman,
'twould on the other side, have been but just, that some good Angels should
have succored a poor Ignorant weak Woman, those Just Guardians of human
affair^ would not have permitted so unequal a conflict; for what if an Evil
Spirit, crafty and knowing in business, had by his subtlety overreached a poor
silly Woman, who had not as yet seen the Sun either rise or set, who was but
newly come of the Mould, and wholly unexperienced in all things? Certainly a
Person who had so great a price set on her head, as the Salvation of all
Mankind might well have deserved a Guard of Angels: Ay, but perhaps (you will say)
the Woman ought to have taken care not to violate a Law established upon pain
of death: The day you eat thereof, you shall surely die, both you and yours;
this was the Law. Die! what does that mean, says the poor ignorant Virgin, who
as yet had not seen any thing dead, no not so much as a flower; nor had yet
with her eyes or mind perceived the Image of death (viz.) Sleep or Night. But
what you add concerning his Posterity and their Punishment that is not at all
expressed in the Law. Now no Laws are ever to be distorted, but especially not
those that are poenal. The punishment of the Serpent will also afford no
inconsiderable question if the Devil transacted the whole thing under the form
of a Serpent; or if he compelled the Serpent to do or suffer those things, why
did he pay for a crime committed by the Devil. Moreover as to the manner and
form of the punishment inflicted on the Serpent (viz.) that for the future he
should go creeping on his Belly, it is not easy to be explained what that
means. Hardly any one will say that the Serpent did before walk upright, or
after the manner of four-footed Beasts; and if on the other side from the
beginning he crept like our Modern Snakes, it may seem ridiculous to impose on
this Creature as a Punishment for one single Crime, a thing which by nature he
ever had before. But let this suffice for the Woman and Serpent, let us now go
on to the Trees.

I here understand those two Trees which stood in the middle of the Garden,
(viz.) the Tree of Life, and the Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil. The
Tree of Life was (they will tell you) so called, for that it would give Men a very
long life. But by what follows in the same Relation we find that all our
Forefathers before the Flood did without the help of this Tree attain to a very
great Age. Besides, if the Longaevity or Immortality of Men had depended only
upon one Tree, or its Fruit, what if Adam had not sinned? how could his
Posterity, when they were diffused over the face of the whole Earth have been
able to come and gather Fruit out of this Garden, or from this Tree? Or how
could the product of one Tree have been enough for all Mankind? As to the other
Tree of the Knowledge of Good and Evil, it does not so plainly appear what was
its virtue, or from whence it received that name: It seems by I know not what
juice or other virtue, to have instilled into them a new sense of shame and
modesty; or, as it is expressed of Nakedness, as though before the Fall they
had been wholly void of bashfulness in Venereal Pleasures; yet now adays in
things of that kind even the most innocent have some sense of shame. I know not
what St. Austin means, when he says, that in the first state and innocence of
Mankind, Women would have conceived and brought forth without violating their
Claustrum Virginale, the feed being immitted, and the Offspring coming forth
through the Pores, as do Virgins Monthly Purgations, and that the whole Act of
Generation would have been performed without any sting or transport, just as
one hand rubs another. If these things were taken-exactly according to the
Rules of Nature and Philosophy they would be very difficult to solve. But God
seems to intimate quite another Virtue in this Tree, when he says, Behold Adam
is become as one of us, knowing good and evil (viz.) by the force and Virtue of
the Fruit which he had eaten. Now certainly whatever heat or transport arises
from a vicious, inordinate Motion, is so far from making us like God, that it
on the contrary renders us but the more dissimular to him.

Having thus therefore spoken sufficiently concerning the Trees, let us next
proceed to the rest: Now after the eating this Apple, Fig or whatever other
Fruit it was, our Parents made themeselves Aprons: For, says the Text, they
sewed together Fig Leaves, and therewith made themselves Aprons. From whence
you may deduce the Original of the Tailors Trade, but where had they Needles?
And where their Thread that very first Day of their Creation? since the
Thread-makers Art was not yet found out, nor yet the Art of Working in Iron.
All which Questions may perhaps be thought a little too free, but the thing it
self requires us to deal freely, when we are seeking for naked Truth. When they
had thus made themselves Aprons, God gave them likewise Coats made of the Skins
of Animals: But here again we run into other Difficulties, wherefore to soften
the Thing, let us suppose an Angel to have been in the place of God, that 'twas
an Angel who killed and flead the Animals, or pulled off their Skins whilst
they were yet alive and Innocent. Notwithstanding this too smells more of the
Butcher or Executioner, than of an Angel. Besides, through this Butchery some
entire Species of Animals must necessarily have perished; for it is not believed
that from the beginning there were more than two of each kind created, and one
alone, without another for its Consort, could never have produced any
Offspring. After all this what follows? Why God expelled our Parents thus
clothed out of Paradise, and placed at the Entrance of the Garden, Cherubims
with a great two-handed flaming Sword, that continually waved about the same,
for fear least either by open force or by stealth they might have repossest
themselves again of those happy Mansions. Now is there any one of the
Interpreters that will put an exact literal Construction upon these Things?
that will make Angels to have stood like Sentinels, with drawn Swords before
the Doors of the Garden, for I know not how many Ages, as Dragons are feigned
by the Poets? To have guarded the Apples of the Hesperides? But how long did
this Angelical Corpse du Guard last? To the Flood, I suppose, if not longer. So
that you here suppose the Angels to have been for above Fifteen Hundred Years
employed in keeping a Garden. Sic vacat exiguis Rebus adesse Deos? How much
easier would it have been, in a place so well watered as Paradise, to have
Fenced the Garden about with a River? which to Adam and Eve, who were as yet
ignorant of the manner either of Building, or conducting Boats and Vessels,
would have been a more than sufficent Obstacle: But these, and other Things of
this Nature, least they should be thought to savor of Malice, I had rather
leave for others to reflect upon.

Thus have we in short run over the chief Heads of the History of Paradise; the
only thing now remaining to be considered, is, in how short a time all these
things are said to have been transacted, in one Days time, or perhaps, but in
half a Day. Divines suppose Adam to have consummated his Marriage with Eve the
first Night; afterward, say they, if Eve, whilst she was yet Innocent, had
conceived her first Born, she would have likewise brought him forth Innocent
and Free from all blemish of Sin: Whence also his whole Progeny, in Relation to
the Father's side, would have continued unspotted with it. But there is none of
that sort of Progeny unspotted, or so much as half pure, we are all of us
tainted with the same Blemish, have all the ^ame Disease. Wherefore we must
necessarily suppose all these Things to have been done on the sixth Day of the
Creation, before their lying together, or the Embraces of their Nuptial Bed.
How many therefore, and how great Things must we heap on this one Day! We will,
if you please, briefly run them over. That Day did God create all manner of
Cattle, all manner of wild Beasts, and all sorts of creeping Things: Lastly, he
created Adam; and when he had created all these things, he brought each kind of
Animal before Adam, that to every one of them he might give a name according to
their several Faculties. As for me, what Language Adam could speak the first
Hour or Day of his Nativity, I am wholly ignorant of; but however it be, since
there are so many different Ranks and Familles of Animals, to weigh and
consider well the Nature of each, and afterward to give them a name adapted to
it, seems a Task that requires no small time. Again, when all this work was in
some manner finished, God cast Adam into a deep sleep, and whilst he was
snoring, took from him a Rib out of which he built a Woman: The same Day these
new born Man and Woman commit Matrimony without Contract, or the formal
Preliminaries of Wooing. And that very same Day Mistress Bride being, to I know
not what intent, pleased to ramble among the Groves of the Garden, happened to
meet with the Serpent: This Serpent begins a Discourse with her; they argue on
one side and the other, about a certain Tree and eating, or not eating a certain
Fruit. She at length overcome by his Reasons, or seducing Expressions, eats of
this Fruit; and not only that, but carries it to her Husband, who likewise eat
of it. Upon this there happens a great alteration, they cast their Eyes on each
other's Nakedness, are ashamed, and make themselves Aprons of Fig Leaves sewed
together.

When things being in this Posture, God Almighty in the Evening descends into
the Garden; they conscious of their own Guilt fly away, and abscond themselves
among the Trees and shady Coverts; but all in vain; for God Summons the
Criminals, they appear, and upon Examination of the whole Cause, he Decrees to
the Man, Woman and Serpent the several Punishments they had merited. Lastly, to
fulfill all parts of the Punishment, our Parents are cast out of Paradise, and
sent into Exile: When several Angels being placed at all the Avenues of the
Garden, they are forced to wander alone among the Woods, and take up their
Lodging among the Wild Beasts. All which things we read to have been done
within the small space of one day; truly a very considerable and very numerous
piece of business. But I cannot bear to see, that in so short time all Things
were inverted and put into a total Disorder; and that the whole Nature which
had but just now been composed and polished, should, before the first time of
the Suns setting, fall to Ruin and Confussion: In the Morning God said all
things were good; and in the Evening of the same Day, all things are accursed.
Alas! how fleeting and unconstant is the Glory of Things created! A work that
was six days ever it could be elaborate and brought to perfection, and that by
an Omnipotent Architect to be thus in as few Hours ruined by so vile a Beast.
Now this is a faithful Account of Matter of Fact contained in the History of
Paradise and Creation of Mankind, as also of the time wherein each Part of the
said History was produced: All which things when I revolve in my Mind, which is
wholly unbiased and ready to comply on every side, where right Reason and the
Love of Truth conduct me: I cannot be angry with those of the Fathers and
ancient Writers who have endeavored to convert these things into Symbols,
Parables or ways of discoursing adapted to the Vulgar. But am angry with
Celsus, who calls this account an old Wive's Tale; upon which Origin tells him
very well by way of answer, (...), that these things were spoken in a
figurative Sense. However Celsus himself does in what follows acknowledge that
the fairest Interpreters both among the Jews and Christians were ashamed of the
literal Sense, and therefore accommodated them to Allegories. Hence you may
see, that in the first Ages of the Christian Church (at which time Celsus
lived) as also among the Jews before Christ's Birth, the more candid
Interpreters deviated from the literal Reading of Moses's History. And really
it seems a very cruel and very hard thing in this Respect that God should be
said to have tormented, nay and ruined Mankind for so small a Fault, and that
too committed through the Levity of a Woman's Mind. Wherefore some are of an
Opinion (which I am not much averse to) That Moses laid so vast a Punishment on
so small a Crime, only to the end he might procure the greater Difference and
Authority to his own Laws, which often Decree with the strictest Severity
things Frivolous, and in their own Nature, Indifferent. For who would not fear
to violate the most petty, inconsiderable Precept that comes in the Name of
God, if the eating of one Forbidden Apple could bring perdition to all Mankind?
But upon these and the other Articles in Moses's Narration, let every one enjoy
his own Sentiments, provided he do not destroy the Foundation.

Now by Foundation I here mean the Doctrine of the Temporal Rise of Mankind, as
well as of this Earth, the Degeneration of both; and that Mankind will be
redeemed by the Seed of a Woman. In this blind State of Mortality we are all
prone to Error; and among the Duties of Charity, it is not the least for us to
indulge and succor one another when we are Erroneous. For my own part, I call
God to Witness (who knows our most secret Thoughts) that in this or any other
Writing I never proposed more to my self, than the promotion of Piety founded
upon Truth. Neither do I in this Discourse about Paradise, and the Origination
of Mankind affirm any thing possitively, but with Modesty and Submissiou, that
I may the better Fathom the Judgm^nts (...) discr^et, well-minded Persons. Wh^
(...) they (...) but with me consider the U^age and Genius of the Primitive
Ages, more especially among the Oriental Nations (whose Custom it was to
deliver their Decrees and Doctrines by Symbols, Similitudes and Parables) if
they do not concur with, will yet at least not be prejudiced against those who
explain ancient Things after this manner.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the Original of Things, as they are Expounded in the
First Chapter of Genesis; together with the Manner of Interpreting Moses's
Hexaemeron, that is to say, his Account of the Creation performed in Six Days.
WHAT Reflections we have made in the foregoing Chapter about the Originals of
Things, chiefly respect Mankind, as also their Causes and primary State. But
the Original of Things inanimate and the Universe, as Moses describes it in the
First Chapter of Genesis, seems no less contrary to the Theory of the Earth.
This Account therefore which Moses gives us of the World, being much ancienter
than all those others before mentioned, we ought to examine it the more
diligently, and so to compose or dilute these Controversies by a friendly
Interpretation, that Truth (which is alike necessary to each of them) may at
the same time inviolably preserved.

The Hexaemeron and Theory ('it is true) agree in their first Foundation of
Things: For as they both suppose the Chaos to have been the matter out of which
the World was Built. So they likewise agree in their general Order, making the
World to have been first inanimate, and then afterward animated. But, as to
the rest, for Example, the Form an Limits of the created World, as also the
manner, time and other Things, they do not a little differ; all which we must
now at large examine.

It Is First, therefore to be observed, what Form and what Limits of the World
the Hexaemeron has proposed to its self. Now it is well known, that betwixt the
Learned and the Vulgar there are two different Systems of the World, whereof
one supposes the Sun to be the Center, and the other the Earth. Quaere then upon
which of these two Systems is Moses's Hexaemeron grounded? It Is most certain,
that Moses has begun his Work from the Earth, as the Basis or Foundation of the
whole Machine; and that he did not produce the Sun (according to what he says)
till the 4th Day, at which time the Structure of the Earth and Sea was already
finished. The Sun was not therefore the Center of the whole Work, since it had
no Being till the work was half brought to Perfection. Besides, as well the Sun
as the rest of the heavenly Bodies, are by Moses represented to have been
created merely for the use of the Earth, and in a manner but as so many servile
Bodies, whose only business was to measure out to us the Days, Years and the
rest of the several Season. But according to the other Hypothesis, the Sun and
fixed Stars are not only very great, but also very noble Bodies; bearing the
first Rank amongst the various Parts of the Universe, and being as it were the
Foundations of that prodigious Mass. It Is evident therefore from both these
Reasons, that Moses has followed the popular System; that which most pleases
the People, which most flatters our Senses, is believed and comprehended, or at
least seems to be comprehended by the greater number: And in so doing he
rightly consulted the public Safety; when neglecting Philosophy, he adhered to
more serious Counsels and Reasons of greater weight.

Secondly, Since it is evident that the Earth was the Center of this Mosaic
Chaos, it is next to be enquired after, how far upwards thi^ blind and confused
Mass did reach. The Hexaemeron truly seems to suppose that this Chaos filled
and possessed the whole Universe how great soever, together with all the
Heavens and Regions of the Air, which way soever they were diffused; as also
that the brightest and most resplendent Stars were composed of this chaotic
Matter, neither that there were any before the Birth and Creation of this our
Earth. Which is what the very Letter of the Hexaemeron seems to import, and
absolutely contradictory to the Nature of Things, as well as to all
Philosophical Reasons. It Is most certain that the fixed Stars are fiery Bodies;
that they do not all rest upon the same Superficies; being some more remote
from the Earth, and more profoundly immersed in the Heavens, than others; and
that upon this score there can be no common Center assigned to all of them at
least, to believe our modern Earth (a blind and sordid particle of the
Universe, inferior to each of the fixed Stars, as well in bulk as in dignity)
to be the Heart, the most noble and most vital Part of so vast a Body, is
altogether irrational and repugnant to the Nature of Things. I speak it again
with Indignation, that to say, or almost to think, that this Earth, the Dregs,
the mere Scum of Nature, is the Supreme Head of all Things, and as it were the
first born Product of the whole Creation cannot be without an Abuse and
Scandal, as well to the Operator as to the Work. Besides if that earthyly Chaos
had been extended throughout the vast Face of the Universe, and that this Earth
were the only Center in which all the grosser parts convened, the same Earth or
middle Body, being the common Recepticle of all the grosser Parts, would have
grown up to a bulk infinitely bigger, than this little Earth of ours. For that
the sublunary Chaos (or which reaches to the Moon) is of it self sufficient to
make up this Earth; and if to this you add the whole visible Heaven, and those
spaces above the Heavens, which are not obvious to our Senses, but surpass all
our imagination: Neither the Sun nor any visible Body is of so great a
magnitude as would be that Body composed in the midst of the Chaos. Moreover,
that as well the corporeal as the incorporeal World is more ancient than this
inhabitable Earth, may in some measure be proved out of Ecclesiastical Authors,
if we strictly examine the thing.

Many Fathers of the Christian Church were of Opinion, that before the Earth or
Mosaic World, there had been Angels for many Ages unknown to us; and some also
mention the same of the highest Heaven or Firmament. But this Opinion of the
Angels is a thing more positively asserted, and by a greater number. Not to
speak of Origin, St. Basilius says this in his Hexaemeron; Chrysostom. (...).
cap. 7. (...), etc. Gregorius Nazianzenus Orat. 38. and in other Places.
Johannes Damascenus. l. 2. Orth. Fid. cap. 3. Ioh. Philoponus, de Creatione
mundi, lib. 1. cap. 10. ult. Olympiodorus upon Job. 38. and others of the
Greeks have taught the same; not a few also of the Latins have been of this
Opinion. Hilarious, l. 12. de Trin. St. Ierom, Ambrosius (in Hexam. l. 1. c. 5.)
Isidorus Hispalensis, Beda and others. Accordingly these are St. Ierom's own
words upon the subject -- Our World has not yet seen Six Thousand Years; and
what Eternities, what vast Tracts of Time, what inexhaustible Fountains of Ages
ought we to suppose have been before it, in which the Angels, Thrones, Powers
and other Virtues have served God. In the Book de Trinitate (whether it was
written by Novatian or Tertullian) as well the Angelical World as the spaces
above the Firmament, are said to have been made before the Mosaical World, in
these words; Although in the higher Regions (viz.) those above the Firmament it
self he did before institute Angels, spiritual Virtues, Thrones and Powers, as
also create many other vast Tracts of the Heavens, etc. Insomuch that this
World appears rather to be the last Work of God, than his sole and only one. To
which Passage adds Damelius. -- Novatian was not only of this Opinion, but also
St. Jerome together with all the Greeks, that the Angels were sooner instituted,
(viz.) before any part of the Creation of our present World. Lastly, Cassian
tells us, That this was the common Opinion of the Catholics in his time; which
was at the beginning of the fifth Age: Whereof (says he) none of the Faithful
doubt. And having more fully explained this generally received Opinion, he
afterward adds, It Is most certain and undoubted, that God created all those
Celestial Powers before that Temporal beginning of the Creation. But to remove
all doubt concerning the preexistence of Angels, we have the very words which
the Lord himself spoke to Job, chap. 38.4, etc. Where were thou when I said the
Foundations of the Earth: when the morning Stars sang my praises, and all the
Sons of God shouted for joy? Whereupon says Olympiodorus, (...). It Is plain
from this Passage, that in the Creation of the World the Angels were first
made. Forasmuch as these words certainly employ that before the Foundations of
the Earth were laid, there were Angels, and that they sang praises to God at
the first Building of our World. Likewise if you take the Morning Stars
according to the very Letter, it is most certain that the Stars and Heavens
also preceded the Foundation of our Earth.

Besides, St. Ierom makes intellectual Beings pre-existent to the World by
those Passages of Scripture, where something is said to have been done, (...),
Tit. 1.2. 2 Timothy 1.9. or (...), 1 Cor. 2.7. before the World began. Nor is
there less included in this Expression, (...), 1 Pet. 1.20. Ephesians. 1.4. John
17.5. and 24. Before the Foundations of the World were laid. Which does not
denote a bare Eternity, but the Periods and Foundation of this World. Before
both which did exist the Soul of the M^ssias, and the Mystery of the Christian
Economy. But to return again to the Angels.

Lastly, We can evince the same by the Sacred Oracles and Authority of the
Fathers, as well as by Reason and Arguments. The Fall of the Angels was before
the Creation of the World, therefore they were before creat^d, and that for
some Ages. For really it is not at all probable that the most excellent
Creatures were made of so frail a nature, as that on the very day of their
birth they should fall into evil and misery; neither is it consistent with the
Deus, Opt. Max. the kind Father of all Intelligent Beings, to place the most
noble part of his work in so slippery a station, that no sooner had their Maker
taken his hand from off them, but they immediately fell headlong into
destruction; damned to the utmost of torments, and a most dismal Hell. Which
being thus stated, let us pass on from the Angels to the Corporeal World;
wherein we are first to observe, That if the Angels had not any ways been
united with matter, nor had from it received any pleasure, or any sort of
perception, it could scarce have been possible that they should have been
wrested from their habitations and first state: For pray where were the places
that these pre-existent Angels did inhabit? Basilius says, they dwelt in the
Heavens and Light^ Many of the Ancients did (as is well known) attribute to the
Angels, (...), thin Bodies, and not gross Terrestrial ones like ours. And the
second Nicene Council would have this Doctrine proposed out of the Book of John
Bishop of Thessalonica, to be confirmed; these are the words: Concerning the
Angels, Archangels, and their Powers, to which I also join our own souls: This
is the opinion of the Catholic Church; that they are it is true intelligible,
yet not wholly Incorporeal and Invisible, as you Gentiles say, but endowed with
a thin and Aerial or Fiery Body; as it is written, Who makes his Angels
Spirits, and those that minister unto him a flaming fire. This we know to have
been the opinion of many Holy-Fathers, amongst whom are Basilius, Surnamed the
Great, St. Athanasius, Methodius, and those that follow them; not that they
suppose Angels to be Bodies, but like human Souls to be invested with Bodies;
yet not such as are molded up of the same Clay, with our Modern ones, but thin
and pure like Air or Fire: Of the same nature as those we shall one day have,
when we come to be (...) equal to the Angels.

Lastly, those who interpret that passage, Genesis 6.2, etc. of the Angels joining
themselves with the Daughters of Men (which not a few of the Fathers and others
do) must necessarily assert that the Angels have Bodies, proper and agreeable
to their own nature, from all which we may conclude that together with the
Angels some Celestial Matter did exist before the Earth. But of whatever kind
this thin, subtle and lucid Matter was it could not exist by it self, and
before the remaining part of the Mass of Matter. For all Matter was together,
and at once produced out of Nothing. Neither ^ay we conceive the action of the
Creation as divided into parts and distant ages; whilst the rest of the Regions
and Tracts of the World remained empty. For my part if an Atom, or the smallest
Particle of Matter existed before the Mosaical Epoch, I am of opinion that the
whole Mass of the Universe did the same; and by the same Rule, if that
Angelical Matter, or Vehicle of the Angels preceded the beginning of the Earth,
all Matter in general did (as the Greek Fathers argue) in some measure precede
it; but its disposition and order according to its different parts, scituations
and forms have by the Decree of Providence been from time to time varied
sometimes after one manner, and sometimes after another. Thus by the Authority
of the Fathers we have hitherto treated of the pre-existence of Angels and of
Matter it self, as it has a connection with the Angels; let us now therefore
return to the nature of things, and to the visible World; for in the Corporeal
we have as many Arguments to confirm the same antiquity of Matter; and to
sufficiently demonstrate that the Mosaical Epoch of about six thousand years,
does not comprehend the Original of the whole Universe, but the Age of our
present Earth, and the time since it was formed out of its Chaos. If we again
consider the Phaenomenaes of the Heavens, and the Companies of both erring and
fixed Stars, we shall easily believe that so numerous a progeny, and which was
worthy of a better Parent, could not be the off^spring of one Earthly Chaos;
nor admit of their Ages and Histories being included within the limits of so
small a time, wherefore let us, if you please, call to mind a thing which is
now no longer doubted of ( viz.) that the Earth is a Planet; and that besides
the Earth there are many Planets of the same nature, as well as of a like
matter and form. All which, it is probable, have had the same manner and
principle of birth; that is, every one out of its own Chaos. Moreover, since
the Creation of the Earth, we have not seen the birth of any one new Planet;
for which reason certainly they are all either older than the Earth, or as old
now. If you grant the former, it is all we desire; and if you make them of the
same age with the Earth, you must suppose as many Chaos's as there are Primary
Planets since; for example, it is certain, that Jupiter who wheels about his own
Satellites or Tendours, is a Center to himself, and does not any ways depend on
our Earth, as do none of the rest, except it be the Moon. Again, the fixed
Stars seem ancienter than the Planets, and to be each of them the Center of its
own Orb or Vortex; as many Systems therefore must be constituted in the Heavens
as there are fixed Stars; which being very great both as to number and bulk,
would swallow up this little point of Earth, as if it were less than nothing;
wherefore whoever has any favor for the Heavens, and is an unbiassed observer
of God's Works, will not easily consent to have their Originals deduced from
the Earth, or dependent on it.

Lastly, it is probable that the Planets were formerly fixed, and that the Earth
it self ought to be numbered in the same rank, 'twill be no easy matter for you
to solve the Originals of the Planets by any other Hypothesis; at least, not if
they have fire in their Center, which it is very probable they have. Besides we
sometimes see the face of the Sun overgrown with thick spots, and perceive him
for some days pale, obscure, and as it were in the pangs of death; but he that
is sick may die; and what happens to one may happen to others of the same kind
(now all the fixed Stars are homogeneous) therefore the fixed Stars are
perishable. Now a fixed Star perishes, and is extinguished when being crusted
over with a thick shell of scurf which it cannot break through, it degenerates
into an obscure and opake body, such as is a Planet. Finally, the new Stars
that have of late years appeared in the Heavens, have not, it is probable, I
mean in respect to their Originals, had any connection or communication with
the Earth; neither have the Comets, which, although in some things they are
dubious and hard to be explained, do to me seem nothing else, but (as one may
say) the dead bodies of the fixed Stars, unburied, and not as yet composed to
rest, they like shadows wander up and down through the various Regions of the
Heavens, till they have found out fit places for their residence, which having
pitcked upon they stop their irregular course, and being turned into Planets
move Circularly about some Star. Whereas, if according to another Hypothesis,
Comets are held to have been just the same from the beginning, they take such
vast Tours, make such immense Circles and Periods, that no man can prove we
ever saw the same Comet twice in one and the same part of its circuit. These
and the like Phaenomenaes of the Heavens can hardly without using some violence
to the Laws of Nature be reduced to an Epoch of six thousand years. We should
much rather confess that our Earth had not the same Original, nor is of the
same age with the whole Universe, whether Intellectual or Corporeal. Nor is it
to be wondered at, that Moses did not distinguish them, or treat of the
Original of the Universe apart, from that of our Sublunary World; since the
common people never distinguish these things, nor have any separate Idaea of
them. The greatest part of Mankind esteems the remaining part of nature, and of
the Universe only as an Appendix of our World or Earth, worth nothing of it
self, but created merely for our use and benefit. 'Twas therefore not without
much reason, that our most wise Law giver left it to the Philosophers as their
business, that when human understanding was through age, use and observations
come to a greater maturity, they might digest the Works of God into another
Method adapted to the Divine perfections and nature of things. But enough of
this Subject, let us now proceed to something else.

Thirdly, Moses in his Hexaemeron mentions a famous Phenomenon whereof we have
not any appearance, I mean his Waters above the Firmament, in the making or
disposing of which he tells us God spent one entire day; which is no less time
than he employed about the Sun, Moon and all the Host of Heaven! It Is true,
these Noble Bodies deservedly claim to themselves twentyfour Hours labor, but
to an obscure unknown thing we cannot but grudg so much work. Let us make a
search therefore after these invisible Waters, let us enquire what are the
places they now possess, or where they have formerly resided. Moses says, they
were placed above the Firmament; but the Sun with the rest of the Stars he
mak^s to be in the Firmament: Thus he places those Waters above all the Stars,
and the Starry Heaven, nevertheless of these and all things else he supposes
the Earth to be the Center; but since the Waters are heavier than the
Celestial Matter, and than even the very air it self, how is it possible for
them to stay in the highest Regions, not being sustained by any intermediate
Bodies of a grosser kind? St. Austin in this matter forbids us having recourse
to the Divine Omnipotence when in treating on the same subject he thus very
gravely and much to the purpose admonishes us, neither let any one say, that
according to the Almighty Power of God to whom all things are possible, we
ought to believe that the Waters, thus heavy as we know and feel them to be,
are diffused above the Heavenly Body in which are the Stars; for now we ought
to examine by his Scriptures, how God has instituted the natures of things, not
how he is pleased to operate according to his Miraculous Omnipotence; and this
agrees with what he has more generally taught us elsewhere, God does after such
manner administer all the things he has Created, that he suffers them to be
exercised and governed by their own motions. Let your judgment then go
according to these Rules. Besides, suppose these I know not what kind of Waters
had been above the highest Heavens, what had it signified to the people to know
this Mystery? it is remote from Moses's custom, and what he proposed to himself
to relate in his Hexaemeron invisible, abstruse things which were of no use
when known; He in that only traces the Phaenomenaes of the visible World, which
strike upon the eyes of all people, and make them sensible that there must be a
Creator; whereas those things which are no way apparent, as they need no
Author, so neither do they require any explanation. And therefore some have
thought it proper to interpret these Waters above the Firmament, as it were
watery Clouds, and to that end they establish two Firmaments, an upper and a
lower; the former is that where the Stars reside, the latter that wherein the
Vapors, Clouds and Meteors roll about; that is to say, they call by the name
of Firmament, the space that lies between the Earth, and the middle Region of
the air. But according to this solution, pray what did God Almighty create the
second day, a little extension or space? The distance which is between us and
the Clouds; but that distance did before exist, being not only extended to the
middle Region of the Air, but even to the very highest Heaven; whether you
suppose the newly Created Light, or the Chaos to have been interposed. What a
business then is it to create distance; besides to create distance the second
day which did exit the first? Neither is there according to this Proposition
any solid fence or enclosure admitted in the fluid Heavens. But that we may
further confute this Interpretation, let us hear Moses's own words: The second
day (says he) God said let there be a Firmament in the midst of the Waters, and
let it divide the Waters from the Waters; that is the Superior from the
Inferior, these Waters therefore as well the one as the other did exist before
this Interaqueous Firmament was made. For there can be no bound or separation
but of things that do already exist. Tell me then what or where were these
Superior Waters before this Separation was made, they seem to have before been
one continued Mass, and after to have been by this partition divided into two
different Stories. But before all this there were neither Rain nor Clouds; if
therefore you will have these to be the Superior Waters this does not answer
Moses's words. Finally, 'twould be preposterous to suppose Clouds before the
Earth; or to imagine these coagulations of Vapors, which perish and are renewed
each day, considerable enough to take up the sixth part of the Almighties vast
Work. The thing in short comes to this; the vulgar do not comprehend the
natural Generation of Rain by the condensation of Vapors, but fancies rain is
sent down from Heaven by a Divine Impulse, or comes immediately from God, Moses
to favor this opinion goes and makes a common Receptacle for the Waters above
the Heavens; so that God by opening or shutting his Flood gates might at his
pleasure keep up or let down the Rain; this I take to have been the mind and
intent of the Sacred Author as to his Super celestial Waters. And this is the
best way to keep up the dignity of Moses, if whenever he deviates from the
Physical Truth, we suppose him to do it (...), by adapting his History of the
Creation to the capacity and use of the common people. Thus also when he treats
of light in the first day of the Creation, that Phoenomena is equally incapable
of being explained by any Physical reason; but least God should seem to work
three days in the dark, Moses thought it was convenient to produce light at the
beginning of the work. But what sort of a light was it? A light without any
source, without any original from whence it might be derived. Yet light, to
argue Philosophically, always flows from some Center wherein is the Heart and
Principle of its Motion. Nevertheless in this Account of the Creation, Light is
produced before any distinction of the Heavens into Orbs or Vortex's. Besides,
according to the literal reading, God seems to have rested from his work in the
Night time, as Men are used to do; but I do not see how another Haemisphere
either Celestial or Terrestrial could be perfected, if there was any
intermission of the work, and God acted only where there was light. But the
Vulgar never regard these little Niceties, nor do they dream of Antipodes or
another Hemisphere; conceiving the World to be like a Tent, whose covering is
Heaven, and foundation the surface of the Earth. Next comes the third Days
Task, wherein the Original of the Ocean is described, (...), purely according
to the Capacity of the Vulgar, in these words, Let the Waters be gathered
together unto one place, and let the dry Land appear. Now the dry Land he
called Earth, and the gathering together of the Waters he called Seas; this
gathering together of the Waters to uncover the Face of the Earth, which lay
hid under the Abyss, could not be effected any more than two ways ( viz.)
either by an accumulation of the Waters in certain places, so as that others
might remain empty; or else by hollowing the Earth, which was under the Abyss,
in certain places, so as that the Waters might subside there. But that
accumulation could not make the Channel of the Ocean, wherefore all the
Interpreters say, it was made by a hollowing of the Earth, and that the Waters
being drawn down, and aggregated there, the Earth was deprived of them in other
places. They also tell you, that the Mountains were made of this work ( viz.)
with the Earth, which was dug out of this Channel of the Sea, and heaped up in
diven places. Now what can be plainer than this Original of the Ocean and
Mountains, provided you do not too much play the Critic, and forbear too nice a
scrutiny: These things therefore must have pleased and satisfied the People who
do not trouble themselves about niceties. But if any one has a Mind to make a
more exact Enquiry into these Things, he may if he plases, consult what is
written on this Subject in Theor. l. 1. c. 8, 9. and last; in which last
Chapter by various Reasons and manifest Tokens, it is demonstrated that neither
the Channel of the Ocean, nor the first inhabitable dry Land, could proceed
from this Original. But it would not be worth my while to repeat the same here,
or to add any more upon this Subject.

So much for the first three Days of Moses's Creation, in which if our Author
had passed by the first and second Days Task ( viz.) that glimmering Light and
those Waters above the Firmament; and had put his ninth verse immediately after
his second, his World or inhabitable Orb had been never the more deficient: But
because he had resolved (at least as I suppose) to hold and consecrate the
seventh Day for a Sabbath, it was necessary for him to spin out his Creation to
six Days: That with the remembrance of the Worlds being finished, and after the
Example of God's resting from all manner of Work, the seventh Day might be for
ever solemnly observed. But the Tasks of each of these days are extremely
unequal, the first days work would have been finished in the twinkling of an
Eye; and so in my Opinion the second: Whereas the third days Task would have
been a vast and tedious piece of Business. First to cut out so large a Channel
as is that of the Sea; then to draw off all the Waters that covered the Surface
of the Earth, or rather to force them down into that Channel; I say force,
since they would not fall down toward the Sea of their own accord, there being
as yet no Channels to convey the Rivers, nor Descents of the Earth to c^rry
them down in those places where the new Mountains or heaps of Earth newly dug
up were fixed, the Waters would be thrown off, and the same proportion of them
fall down into the Pit of the Sea: But in all other places if no violence were
used to them, they would remain unmovable upon the Face of the Earth. However,
although you suppose them to have run down with the same rapidity as Rivers do.
Yet from some of the most Inland Places, 'twould be several Days Journey to the
Sea. The fourth days Task seems no less laborious ( viz.) the Sun, Moon and
Stars: Good God, how many and vast Bodies did that one day produce and perfect!
Even in the making each of the Planets there ought to be six Days employed, as
well as about this of ours, they being of the same Form (and as we have Reason
to believe) their Ornaments and Equipage not very unlike: Besides, according to
the order of Things in the Creation, they being terrestrial Bodies, ought all
to have been thrown into the third days work; especially the Moon, which could
scarce be torn from its Center the Earth, and transferred into another Glass.
But Moses follows the Philosophy of the Vulgar, and joins the Moon with the
Sun, as though they were of like Nature and Magnitude. Lastly, the fifth and
sixth Days Tasks consisted of great variety: In these two days were built the
Bodies of all the Birds, all the Fishes and all the Beasts, both great and
small that were produced out of the Earth and Waters. Now adays the Bodies of
Animals arrive more slowly at perfection; nor do I wonder at it, since they are
so artificially composed. But seeing the Bodies of Animals even to the smallest
are of so exquisite a Form and Composition, I shall never be induced to believe
that the Earth, the common Mother of all things, was from the beginning of the
World, as ruinous an ill shapen Mass as now it is. But this by the by.

St. Austin would have all those Things that are said to be the work of six
Days, to have been created in one Moment; although Moses divided them into
Classes and different Times that he might the better help the imagination of
the People, to comprehend the first Originals of Things. God Almighty did in my
Opinion create out of nothing in one moment, and by one individual act, all
Substance, whether intellectual or corporeal. Nor did St. Austin in that come
wide of the mark.

But here is not (in the reality of the thing) spoken of Substance in general,
but only of the terrestrial World; and not of its Creation, but its Formation.
As for the Creation of all Things out of nothing, or out of no preexistent
Matter, it is what cannot be doubted, as also that they were not from Eternity;
(for we cannot form to our selves any Idea of a thing created from Eternity)
but to prescribe the divine Creation so short an Epoch, as the limits of Six
Thousand Years, it is what I never durst. I had rather leave that together with
several other Things amongst the hidden secrets of God.

Now these short Annotations upon the Account Moses gives us of the first
Creation of Things, seems to imply that it was not this Sacred Author's design
to represent the beginning of the World, exactly according to the Physical
Truth (which would have been of no use to the common People who were incapable
of being made Philosophers) but to expound the first Originals of Things after
such a method as might breed in the Minds of Men Piety, and a worshipping of
the true God. And forasmuch as all the ancient Nations (viz.) the Chaldaeans,
Phaenicians, Egyptians, etc. had each of them their several Accounts of the
Creation of the World, placed as an introduction before their Histories or
Systems of Divinity; so Moses in like manner being to write Laws and
Institutions for the Israelites, thought it convenient also to prefix, as an
introductory Preface, an Account not only of the Original of his own Nation,
but even of the whole World. However, whereas the Heathens Accounts of the
Creation were frequently stuffed with Fables, and I know not how many Gods and
Goddesses, to the very great Corruption of Religion, he laying aside all those
Fooleries has handled this Subject with a great deal of Purity and Innocence.
When that he might tear up the very Roots of Idolatry, he represented the
Heavens, Sun, Moon and Stars, which were the chief Deities of other Nations,
not as eternal or created on their own account, but as subservient to this
sublunary World, as well as to the use of Mankind.

This to me seems the Scope of our Holy Writer; but if we seek only after pure
naked Truth, and a physical Theory, we must go quite upon another Foundation;
that is, we must (if I am not mistaken) suppose the World, which began near
upon six Thousand Years ago; to have been no other than the sublunary Orb, or
our Earth together with its Sky; and that Chaos from whence it arose, not to
have been universal or diffused over the vast spaces of the Heavens, but
contained within the aforesaid bounds, which are whatever is below the Moon.
Likewise the Primitive Earth did not arise out of that Chaos in the same Form
as M^ses had represented it: For his Description of it was just according to
what the People had before their Eyes, which was the Post diluvian and modern
one; nor could he without a great many far fetched obscure terms, and a long
Chain of Arguments, have ascended to its first Form, and have brought the
Thread of both down to his own Times. In short, neither the Sun nor Stars were
composed out of this terrestrial Chaos; but Moses having made Man to be the
Head and under God the supreme Lord of all things, he represented the whole
Universe as it were created and compiled purely for his sake. This to me seems
the Reason of both the physical and ethical Account of the Creation, for so I
call the Mosaical Relation, since it seems not to have been Instituted so much
(...) as (...). In the mean time, if to other Peoples Optics this appears in a
different view, I do not desire to trouble or disturb any one in their Opinion.
Let every one please and hug himself in his own. But we are all bound to make
use of that Portion of Reason God Almighty has distributed to each of us, till
we have some more clear Light to illuminate us from Above.

AN APPENDIX Concerning the Modern BRACHMINS IN THE INDIES, Together with their
generally received Opinions.
HAving already spoken of the Modern Brachmins in the Indies (whom, besides the
near resemblance of their Studies and Customs, we have several other Arguments
to show they are descended from the ancient Race) I think it may be neither
impertinent nor unpleasant to add some few Words here by way of Appendix, about
their Opinions, concerning the Originals and Revolutions of Things; which
Opinions are, it is true, neglected by most People, because they are delivered
in a mythological way; and that Truth is very much clouded with Fables.

Under the name of Indies, we here comprehend, besides the Chineze Empire, and
Kingdom of Indostan, or Dominion of the Great Mogul; the Kingdoms of Siam, of
the Malabars, of Cochinchina, of Coromandel, and whatever others are known to
us in the East, that have in some measure shaken off their Barbarity. Now in
each of these are a certain sort of Philosophers or Divines, and in the
Kingdoms of Indostan, Siam and the other adjacent Parts, there are some who
seem to be the Progeny of the ancient Brachmins, being different and
distinguished from the rest of the People by their Manner and Way of Living, as
well as by a Doctrine and Language wholly peculiar to themselves. They have a
certain Cabala, or Body of Learning, which they receive by Tradition from one
to the other. Now this Body of Learning does not treat of each little Point or
Nicety in Philosophy, as our modern Philosophers used to do; but like the
natural Theology of the Ancients, it treats of God, of the World, of the
Beginning and Ending of Things, of the Periods of the World, of the Primitive
State of Nature, together with its repeated Renovations. All which Opinions are
by some more plainly, by others more obscurely and fabulously, delivered; but
that they were of old spread amongst these Nations, is plain from several
Footsteps of them at this day remaining. For a Specimen whereof, we will give
you some short Remarks out of our late Voyages, upon several Heads of this now
barbarous Theology, or Philosophy: Nor is it of Moment with what Kingdom or
Country we begin.

The Mogul's Kingdom called Ind^stan is extremely large, and has been visited
by several Europeans, whose Credit and Authority are sufficient to make them be
believed. There are in this Kingdom, besides Mahometans, those they call
Gentiles or Pagans; among which Gentiles is a certain Tribe or Order of Men,
who bear the Title, and perform the Offices of S^ges, Priests or Philosophers.
They have a Language peculiar to themselves, which they call Hanscrit, or the
pure Tongue; in this Language they have some very ancient Books, which they
call Sacred, and say were given by God to the Great Prophet Brahma; as formerly
the Law of the Israelites was to Moses. Athan Kircher gives you an Alphabet of
this Brachmin's Language, written by the Hand of Father Henry Roth, who for
several Years in the Indies applied himself to the Learning of Brachmins. And
in this they not only write and conceal their Divinity, but also their Opinions
in Philosophy of all Kinds: besides the (...), and the (...), which are
Opinions of a very ancient Date. They likewise Philosophize after the manner of
the Ancients, upon the Creation of the Universe, together with its End and
Destruction; for they explain these Things by the Efflux or Emanation of all
things from God, and by their Reflux or Restoration into him again: But this
they propound in a Cabalistical Mythological way. For they ^eign a certain
immense Spider to be the first Cause of all Things, and that she, with the
Matter she exhausted out of her own Bowels, spun the Web of this whole
Universe, and then disposed of it with a most wonderful Art: whilst she her
self in the mean time sitting on the Top of her Work, feels, rules and governs
the Motion of each part. At last, when she has sufficiently pleased and
diverted her self in adorning and contemplating her own Web, she retracts the
Threads she had unfolded, and swallows them up again into her self; whereby the
whole Nature of Things created vanishes into nothing.

After this manner our modern Brachmins represent the Birth, Order and
Perishing of the World. Nor does this much differ from the Opinions of the
Ancients we have above mentioned ( lib. I. cap. 7. page 63, 64, etc.) provided,
that taking off the fabulous Shell, we go to the Kernel. If you have leisure to
read a larger Account of the Indostan Gentiles, it is what you may find in Henry
Lord, F. Bernier, and other Travelers, who have more diligently enquired into
their Literature.

In the Kingdom of Siam, which Borders upon the Empire of the Mogul, there is
the same Progeny of the Brachmins. Guido Tachard, one of the Jesuits Society,
who waited upon the French Ambassador to the King of Siam, has given us this
Account of their Philosophy or Theology. They say, That the first Men were of
greater Stature, and longer Lived than we now adays are; as also, that they
lived many Ages free from Distempers. That this Modern Earth, pa^ched with a
long Heat, will at length be consumed by Fire, the Ocean being dried up, the
Mountains melted, and the whole Surface of the Earth being made level. This I
find in our aforesaid Author, with more of the same in others; all which a late
Poet has compiled and facetiously explained in these Versicles.

Stolidus Regni Mysta Siami,
Octoginta dat perituro
Saecula mundo. Tunc qui tantum
Iam fuerit uno fervidus Oculo,
Septem pandet lumina Phoebus,
Qu^is aequor^as ebibet undas.
Qu^is immensum vindice flamma
(...) O bem^ Sed duo calidis.
Q^^ (...) favil^is
Einos homines ova creabunt.
Qui foecunda semine cultum
Iterum poterunt reddere mundum.
Quem non salsis Neptunus aquis,
Alluet unquam, tantum rigui
Undique fontes, Dulcesque lacus,
Irrorabunt molliter herbas.
Et perpetuo vere Beatos
Spargent variis floribus agros.
The Siamese Brachmins not only say, that this modern Earth must perish, and
that by Fire; but even that out of its ashes a new Earth must arise; and,
without a Sea, that is to say, such a one, as St. John the Prophet saw, Apoc.
21.1. and without the yearly Vicissitudes of the Seasons, being blessed with a
perpetual Spring; such another Earth as we have described in the Fourth Book of
our Theory, Cap. 2. It Is really a most wonderful thing that a Nation half
barbarous should have retained these Opinions from the very times of Noah: for
they could not have arrived to a Knowledge of these things any ^ther way, than
by Tradition; nor could this Tradition flow from any other Spring, than Noah,
and the Antediluvian Sages. But out of what Author or Siames's Traveller the
Poet has taken these Things, I have not yet been able to learn. Moreover the
Kingdom of Choromandel, on the Southren Coast of the Indies, has its Brachmins:
whose Manners and Doctrine have been with no small Diligence enquired into by
Abraham Rogers, who wrote the Book called -- Ianua aperta ad Arcana Gentilsimi.
Having Himself lived many years there. Now they affirm that there are several
Worlds which do at one and the same time exist in diverse Regions of the
Universe: and that there are several successive ones; for that the same World
is destroyed and renewed again according to certain Periods of Time. They say
also that our Terrestrial World began by a certain Golden Age, and will perish
by Fire. Lastly, they retain the Doctrine of the Ovum Mundanum comparing the
World to an Egg; as did the ancients both Greeks and Barbarians: Finally, to
the Kingdom of Choromandel is Contiguous that of the Malabers; where Father
Robert Nobilius, Founder (as it is said) of the Maudarian Mission, has spent no
small part of his life; learned as well in the vulgar Indian Language, as in
that of the Branchmins; then he is said to have written a great deal concerning
the Theory of the Brachmin, but I know not to what language: for I have not yet
happened to light upon any of his writings; neither have I any Accounts of this
or the rest of the Countries of the Indies to be depended upon, to furnish me
with their Opinions, either from eye or ear witnesses.

We have likewise before mentioned the Chinese, a People of great Antiquity,
but among the Ancients unknown, as to matter of Learning, they have this in
Common with the rest of the Orientals, that they compare the World to an Egg,
and will have it to be born of one. In like manner they say, their first Man,
whom they call Puoncuus, was born of an Egg; whether you will suppose, that by
it, they mean the Chaos or the Primitive Earth; and although they do not seem to
have derived their Philosophy or History from the Brachmins yet they set so
great a value on their Letters, and secret Alphabet, that as things sacred, and
of a very great Antiquity, they use to inscribe them on their Idols. As for the
Mahometans, who are spread at large over the East under several different
Dominions, I pass by them, as men of an upstart, ignorant kind what an Egyptian
Priest formerly told -- Solon ( You Greeks, always Boys; not one of the Greeks
ever comes to be Old) May changing names, be much more properly said to them.
Nor does the Egyptian give an ill reason for what he says -- Your are young in
your Minds; for in them is no tenent of the Ancients, that comes by ancient
Tradition: you retain no Learning that is gray with old Age. These things
exactly square with the Mehometans, wheresoever they are dispersed, they retain
nothing of Ancient Wisdom; for the Ambition of extending their D^minions, has
taken from them all manner of Love or Desire of Learning. Even in Persia it
self, where formerly flourished the Mystical Philosophy of the great Zoroaster,
and the Magi, at this day remains nothing worth taking notice of. The
aforementioned Henry Lord relates, that when the Saracens overran all Persia,
having beaten and slain the King Iezdegird about the Year of our Lord 628. Some
of the Persians who could not bear^ the yoke of a new Slavery and new Religion,
transported themselves and their effects by Sea into India: And that having
sworn Allegiance to the Indian Kings, they each of them freely exercised their
own Religion, and ancient way of living. The same Author relates some opinions
Generally received by these Persians transplanted into India, concerning the
Original Age, and End of the World: But they are so stuffed with Fables, that
they hardly seem worth while to repeat. This must be observed in General, of
the Modern Pagans, that there are (its true) now remaining amongst them some
Footsteps of the most ancient Tenants, which come to them by Tradition from
their Ancestors, but quite overwhelmed with Trash and Filthiness, being for
the most part clogged with fabulous Additions, even to the degree of being
nauseous; insomuch that when you come to manly Arguments, they are of no manner
of Validity. I cannot but pity the Eastern World, that the place which was the
first Habitation of wise men, and one day a most flourishing Emporium for
Learning should for some ages past have been changed into a wretched Barbarity.

Tantaene Animis coelestibus irae.
I pray God grant that we may not undergo the same Vicissitude, and that in his
Anger he may not withdraw that Light we now enjoy in the West, but that it may
be more and more diffused on all sides, till the Knowledge of God shall have
filled the Earth, as the Waters fill the Sea.

To the most Ingenuous and Learned Dr. Sydnham at his House near the Pestle and
Mortar in the Pall Mall.
SIR,
THE last time I had the happiness of your Company, it was your Request that I
would help you to a sight of the Deists Arguments, which I told you, I had
sometimes by me, but then had lent them out, they are now returned me again,
and according to my promise I have herewith sent them to you. Whereby, you will
only find, that human Reason like a Pitcher with two Ears, may be taken on
either side; However, undoubtedly in our Travails to the other World the common
Road is the safest; and tho Deism is a good manuring of a man's Conscience, yet
certainly if sowed with Christianity it will produce the most profitable Crop.
Pardon the have of SIR,

Your most obliged Friend and Faithful Servant, C. BLOVNT.
Rolleston, May 14 th. 1686.
A Summary Account OF THE DEISTS RELIGION.
CHAP. I. The Deists Opinion of God.
WHatsover is Adorable, Amiable and Imitable by Mankind, is in one Supreme
infinite and perfect Being, Satis est nobis Deus imus.

CHAP. II. Concerning the manner of Worshipping God.
FIrst, Negatively; it is not to be by an Image for the first Being is no
s^nsible, but in^e^ligible: Pinge sonum; puts (...) upon an impossibility no
more can an infinite mind be represented in matter.

Secondly, Nor by Sacrifice; for sponsio non valet ut alter pro altero
puniatur; However no such sponsio can be made with a bruit Creature; nor if God
loves himself, as he is the highest Good can any External Rite, or Worship
reinstate the Creature, after sin in his favor, but only repentance, and
obedience, for the future; ending in an Assimulation to himself, as he is the
highest Good, and this is the first error in all Particular Religions; that
external things or bare opinions of the mind, can after sin propitiate God;
hereby particular Legislators have endeared themselves, and flattered their
Proselytes into good opinions of them, and mankind willingly submitted to the
cheat; Enim facilius est superstitiose, quam just vivere.

Thirdly, Not by a Mediator; for, first it is unnecessary; Miserecordia Dei
being sufficiens justitiae suae. 2 ly, God must appoint this Mediator, and so
was really recon^iled to the World before. And 3 ly, a Medi^tor derogates from
the infinite mercy of God, equally as an Image does from his Spiritualitie and
Infinity.

Secondly, Positively, by an inviolable adherence in our lives to all the
things (...), by an imitation of God in all his imitable Perfections,
especially his goodness and believing magnificiently of it.

CHAP. III. Of Punishments after this Life.
A Man that is endued with the same Virtues we have before mentioned need not
fear to trust his Soul with God after death: For first, no Creature could be
made with a malevolent intent, the first Good who is also the first Principle
of all Beings has but one affection or Property, and that is Love; which was
long before there was any such thing as Sin. 2 dly, At death he goes to God,
one and the same being, who in his own nature for the sins of the Penitent has
as well an inclination to Pity as Justice, and there is nothing dreadful in the
whole Nature of God, but his Justice, no Attribute else being terrible. 3 ly,
Infinite Power is ever safe and need not revenge for self-preservation. 4 ly,
However Very simile est, similem Deo a Deo, non negligi.

CHAP. IV. The Probability of such a Deists Salvation before the credulous and
ill living Papists.
1. TO be sure he is no Idolater, the Jew and the Mohammedan accuse the
Christian of Idolatry, the Reformed Churches, the Roman, the Socinian the other
Reformed Church^^, the Deists the Socinian, for his Deus factus; but none can
accuse the Deist of Idolatry, for he only acknowledges one Supreme Everlasting
God, and thinks magnificently of him.

2 dly, The Morality in Religion is above the mystery in it; for, 1. The
Universal sense of Mankind in the Friendships men make, shows this; for who
does not value good Nature, Sincerity and Fidelity in a Friend, before subtilty
of understanding; and Religio and quaedam, cum Deo Amicitia: An unity of nature
and will with God, that is the Root of the Dearest Friendships. Then, 2 ly, it
is an everlasting rule that runs through all Beings, Simile a simili amatur,
God cannot love what is unlike him. Now, 3 ly, here lies our trial, here is the
scene of our obedience, and here are our conflicts with our Passions, if this
be true then the credulous Christian that believes Orthodoxly, but lives ill,
is not safe.

3 dly, If the Deists errs, he errs not like a fool but secundum verbum after
enquiry, and if he be sincere in his Principles, he can when dying appeal to
God, te bone Deus quaesivi per omnia.

Notae Aliquot: 1. The Grand Arcanum of Religion among the Pythagoreans was,
that the object of Divine Worship is one and invisible; Plutarch cites this in
the Life of Numa, as the Dogma of Pythagoras, and accordingly his Followers
used no Images in their Worships. 2 dly, The Heathens, notwithstanding their
particular and Topical Deities, acknowledged one Supreme God, not Jupiter of
Creet, but the Father of Gods and Men, only they said this Supreme God being of
so high a nature, and there being other intermediate Beings betwixt God and
Mankind, they were to address themselves to them as Mediators to carry up their
Prayers, and bring down his Blessings; so as the opinion of the necessity of a
Mediator was the foundation of the Heathen Idolatry; they could not go to the
fountain of Good it self. The Popish Religion stands on the same foundation;
whereas the greatest goodness is the most accessible, which shows that Popery
was a Religion accommodated to the Sentiments of Mankind from precedent
Religions, and not to Infallible Reason drawn from the eternal respects of
things; and Reason being the first relation of God, is first to be believed,
not depending on doubtful fact without us, but full of its own light shining
always in us. 3 dly, It was the common sense of the wisest Philosophers, that
things were good antecedent to all human Compacts; and this opinion, Pyrrho in
Sextus Empericus argues against, also Mr. Hobbs has of late revived in the
world Pyrrho's Doctrine, tho without reason; for as there are immediate
Propositions, to which the understanding ( sine discursu) assents, as soon as
proposed, so are there things good and just which they will at first view,
without deliberation approve of and chose also, ( viz.) the Veneration of an
Almighty invisible Being, referring of our selves to him, with a ( fiat
voluntas tua) abhorrence of breach of contract with man, of a lie, as a
violation of truth; so as, in my judgment, there is a sanction arising from the
nature of things, before any Law declared amongst men; that there is a
generosum bonestum hid in all our Souls is plain, from the Epicurean Deists
themselves, for they labor to have their Vices imputed rather to a Superiority
of their reason above that of others, than to a servitude of their reason to
their own passions; which shows vice is naturally esteemed a base and low
thing. This appears from the Legislators of the world, as Numa, Zamlox^, etc. a
Jove Principium, there they did begin, well knowing human compacts were too
weak to balance and restrain the passions of human nature; offenders presuming
to escape unpunished, and rightly enough were all Laws but human compacts. In
two cases which ordinarily happen in human life, (viz.) when the fact is
unevident, or when the Magistrate is too weak to punish. Hence is Grotius his
description of the law of Nature, Lex est, etc. The Law is a combination of the
Virtuous to punish the Vicious. Here the Obligation must be lodged, and this
appears in the Satyrs of the Poets, in the complaints of the Philosophers, and
in the several ages of the World against the manners of Mankind; for without
Virtue God is only a name amongst men, and no man without it can hope well of
God. 4 ly. I remember Plutarch speaking of Aristides's Justice complains thus,
men have commonly three Affections or Opinions of the Gods; the first that they
think them blessed; the second, that they fear them; and the third, that they
reverence them: They account them blessed, because they are Immortal; they fear
them, because of their Power; and reverence them because of their Justice; yet
of these three men most desire Immortality, whereof our nature is incapable:
Also Power which depends upon fortune, the only Divinity man is capable of;
they neglect, and undervalue, in that God is inimitable by us: And this is the
difference betwixt Corporeal and intellectual Love; If the object of my Love be
external beauty, a person or a face, that I cannot imitate; but if an Idea of
Perfection, and Intellectual Beauty, that I may be assimulated to, and partake
of, besides the soul in Intellectual love suffers not with the object it loves
as in a Corporeal love it does; because that its object the Sovereign God never
suffers; and this is the chief true conversion which frees us from all evils,
the Mors Philosophorum, which Porphery ^peaks of. Others are rolled as upon
Cylinders from one appearance of good to another, and live in a perpetual
storm; for it is not the change but the choice of our Object that makes us
happy. 5 ly. Antoninus says, if the question be put to us, what is thy art or
profession, our Answer should be, to be good; as God made the world; not for
his own good (who was infinitely happy before) but for his Creatures good: So
our Religion must necessarily be this, to do good to his Creatures; for therein
we concur with the will of God, and it is a grand truth, very proper for the
Immortal Deist to consider, that all vice and wickedness is but a denial and
disowning of God, to be the Supreme, Infinite Good; my Pride denies he has ever
been good to me; my lust believes the low and base matter can with its
pleasures make me happier than he can with all his goodness; my envy would not
have him good to others, but would have him contract and shrink up himself from
his Creatures; and lastly, my malice and revenge hates his Creatures, if they
be but once imagined my Enemies, and would destroy those whom his goodness
first and would have still to exist. 6 ly and Lastly, Campanella in his Book De
Sensu Rerum, observes, Aristotelem dicentem Deum non habere cum hominibus
amicitiam (quoniam non est proportio finiti ad infinitum) Majestatem non
bonitatem Dei considerasse.


For Mr. Hobbs, to be left with Mr. Crook, a Bookseller, at the Sign of the
Green Dragon without Temple Bar, near St. Clements-Church.
Ludgate Hill, 1678. Concerning the Arrians, Trinitarians and Councils. SIR,
BY your Permission, and Mr. Crook's Favor, I have had the Happiness to peruse
your incomparable Treatise of Heresy in Manuscript, wherein you have certainly
given us a more accurate and faithful Account of the Nicene Council, together
with their particular Grounds and Reasons for each distinct Article of their
Faith in the Nicene Creed, than is any where else to be met with. How grateful
this Discourse of yours will be to the Quicunque Men, I shall not presume to
determine, since I am sure Mr. Hobbs is as much above their Anger, as they are
below his Resentments. You your self have very well observed, when Reason is
against a Man, a Man will be against Reason; and therefore it is no wonder to
see, from several Interests, so many several Opinions and Animosities arise:
This made the Arrians and Trinitarians so zealously endeavor to supplant one
another; this made Constantine at first espouse the Arrian Interest to Mount
the Throne, as the present Lewis XIV did the Interest of the Hugonots; and
afterward thinking to weaken or at least to balance that Power that raised
him, strike in with Athanasius and the Trinitarians for a time, as our present
Lewis has since done the like with the Popish and Jusuitical Party against his
Protestant Subjects. For Mankind ever lived and died after one and the same
Method in all Ages, being governed by the same Interests and the same Passions
at this time, as they were many Thousand Years before us, and will be many
Thousand Years after us.

It must be confessed, the Arrians were so powerful a Sect in the Roman Empire
(especially the Eastern Part of it) that the Followers of the Nicene Council
were not equal to them, either in Number, Splendour, Interest or Riches. If you
will believe the learned Petavius and others, they did offer to be tried by the
Fathers that preceded the Nicene Council: For at that Council, they were rather
condemned by a Party than by the general Consent of the Christian Church;
because Constantine, out of above Two thousand Bishops then assembled, excluded
all but Three hundred and eighteen; nor were those perhaps (for Accounts vary)
all Bishops, that made up this great Council. They were all of a Judgment at
first, and so rather Parties than Judges; the Arrians had not the Freedom to
dispute their Cause: And the Emperor Constantine was afterward so ill
satisfied with their proscription, that he soon recalled Arrius, and a little
before his Death was baptized by an Arrian Bishop. Constantius and Valens were
professed- Arrians (and not to mention the Gots) Valentinian, Theodosius and
other Emperors protected and honored them, both with civil and military
Commands.

The Arrian Doctrine was not only confirmed by Eight Councils several times
assembled at Tire, Sardis, Syrmium, Milain, Selucia, Nice, Tarsis, and
particularly at Ariminum (where six hundred Bishops were of their Opinion, with
only three which held the contrary) but they also punished others their
Adversaries, who were of a contrary Opinion to them, with Confiscations,
Banishments and other grievous Punishments. Now whether the Power of their
Party, the Riches of their Churches, the Magnificence of their Worship (as the
first that brought Music into the Church) or the same of their Learning, and
pretensions to Reason (which is always an inviduous Plea) did raise Jealousy
and Hatred in the Emperors against them, as also rendered them odious to the
Trinitarians; or what most contributed to their first Depression and
Persecution, I know not: Since to persecute for Religion, was by the
Trinitarians ( Athanasi^s, Hillary and others) then accounted an Arrian and
unchristian Tenet. It is not to be doubted, but that, after the days of
Theodosius, Reason of State did most prevail toward their Subversion, left
they should join with the Goths, who at that time possessed of Italy, Spain,
Afric and other Provinces, were formidable to the Bizantine Empire.
Notwithstanding whatsoever it was, it is easy to comprehend that the Depression
of them did facilitate the Conquest of the Goths; and if you will credit
Salvian, the Goths were very pious in their Way, mild to the Conquered, just in
their Dealings; so that the Wickedness of the Christian Rulers of Provinces,
their Exactions upon the People, and Insolence of the Foreign Soldiers,
whereby they ruled, made even the Trinitarians themselves willingly submit to
their Dominion, and prefer it before that of the Eastern Emperors.

As for the Trinitarians of those Times, I must confess, I cannot but esteem
them as Enemies to all human Learning; for they had Cannons forbidding them to
read any Ethic Books, and a Zeal which disposed them to destroy all they met
with of that kind. Thus we may well suppose them universally ignorant, except
some few; and as the Pastors, so were the People. Their Religion also consisted
rather in an outside Service, than inward Piety and Knowledge; their Faith was
in a manner implicit, the Mysteries of Religion (for such I call the Doctrine of
the Trinity and its Dependencies) were scarce ever mentioned to them in
Sermons, much less explicated. Hence the Vulgar became prone to Embrace
Superstition and credit Miracles, how ridiculous and fabulous soever: Visions,
Allegories and Allusions to Texts, were convincing Arguments; and no
Demonstration like to a feigned Story and Legend, or what might be Interpreted
a Judgment upon an Heretic.

Amongst the Trinitarians were a sort of People who followed the Court
Religion, and believed as their Prince ordained, living then unconfined by the
Dictates of the then declining Church: And though the Trinitarians had resolved
upon, and subscribed to the Nicene Council, and embraced those Forms of Speech
which are now in use, yet did they not understand what was meant by them. The
Latin Church allowed of Three Persons, and not of three Hypostases; the Greek
Church allowed of three Hypostases, and not of three Persons. As difficult was
it for them to Explicate Vsia or Essence; which hard words produced a
subdivision amongst them, consisting of Nestorians and Eutychians. The
Nestorians believing the Deity of Christ, held that he was made up of two
distinct Persons, and so perfect God and perfect Man. The Eutychians averred,
that Christ had but one Nature, and that upon the Hypostatical Union, the Deity
and Humanity were so blended together, by Confusion of Properties and
Substances, that one Person endued with one Will did emerge thence. Now these
two Sects were of great Power in the Eastern Church, and though they were both
condemned in the third and fourth General Councils, yet did they spread far and
near, through Palestine, Egypt, the Kingdom of Abyssines, and all Persia over:
Each of them had their Patriarchs, Bishops and Churches contradistinct from the
Melchites, who adhering and subscribing to the Council of Chalcedon (which all
the Imperial Clergy did) were called Melchites, that is to say, Men of the
King's Religion. The Authors of the Nestorian and Eutychian Sects were Learned
and Potent Bishops: Eutychius was Patriarch of Constantinople, and with him
joined Dioscorius Patriarch of Alexandria, Severus Patriarch of Antioch, and
Iacobus Baradaeus, from whom the Iacobites are at this day denominated.
Nestorius was also Patriarch of Constantinople, and his Sect very much diffused.

The Truth is, such were the Ignorance of the People, and Debaucheries of the
Ages at this time, that if a Man did but live a pious strict Life, with great
Mortification, or outward Devotion, and were but an Eloquent Preacher, he might
in any place of the Eastern Empire have made a Potent Sect instantly. And to
show how ignorant the Clergy were at the General Council of Chalcedon, in the
time of Marcianus the Emperor, we find that the Greek Tongue was then so little
understood at Rome, and the Latin in Greece, that the Bishops of both Countries
(in all 630.) were glad to speak by Interpreters: Nay, in this very Council of
Chalcedon, the Emperor was fain to deliver the same Speech in Greek to one
Party, and in Latin to the other, that so both might understand him: The
Council of Jerusalem, for the same Reason, made certain Creeds both in Greek
and Latin: At the Council of Ephesus, the Pope's Legates had their Interpreter
to Expound the Words; and when Caelestine's Letters were there read, the Acts
tell us, how the Bishops desired to have them Translated into Greek, and read
over again, insomuch that the Romish Legates had almost made a Controversy of
it, fearing least the Papal Authority should have been prejudiced by such an
Act; alleging therefore, how it was the ancient Custom to propose the Bulls of
the Sea Apostolic in Latin only, and that that might now suffice. Whereupon
these poor Greek Bishops were in danger not to have understood the Pope's
Latin, till at length the Legates were content with Reason, when it was
evidenced to them, that the major part could not understand one word of Latin.
But the pleasantest of all, is, Pope Caelestine's Excuse to Nestorius, for his
so long delay in answering his Letters, because he could not by any means get
his Greek construed sooner. Also Pope Gregory the First ingeniously confesses
to the Bishop of Thessaly, that he understood not a jot of his Greek; wherefore
it is probable, the Proverb of honest Accursius was even then in use, -- Graecum
est, non Legitur -- and this was the Condition of Christianity in which
Justinian the Emperor found it, A. C. 540. So that, as Monsieur Daill^^ has
demonstrated with how little certainty we can depend upon the Fathers, I think
I may safely averr, there is as little Trust to be reposed in General Councils,
who have been Guilty of so much Ignorance and Interest, as well as so
frequently contradicting one another: And to say, that Councils may not Err,
though private Persons may, is (as Mr. Hales well observes) all one as to say,
that every single Soldier indeed may run away, but the whole Army cannot.

Sir, Your Treatise having revived these Meditations in me, I hope you will
pardon me if I have been too prolix; and though I am not so vain to pretend to
offer these Collections, or indeed any thing, for Mr. Hobb's Instruction, who
is of himself the great Instructor of the most sensible Part of Mankind in the
noble Science of Philosophy; yet I may hope for the Honor of your Correction
wherein I am Erroneous, the which will for ever oblige,

SIR, Your most unfeigned Humble Servant, C. BLOUNT.
Pardon, Sir, I beseech you, my sending this trifle, called Anima Mundi, being
commanded to do it by one, whom it is my duty, as well as my happiness, to obey.



To my Dear Friend Mr. Harvey Wilwood. That felicity consists generally in
Pleasure.
YOU often profess your self an Epicurean, but sacrifice your health in pursuit
of a mistaken happiness; the pleasure the wise Epicurus placed happiness in was
of another kind, 'twas more tempered with Reason; but hear what he says, and
then judge how far you are his Disciple. Felicity seems plainly to consist in
Pleasure, this is first to be proved in general then we must show in what
Pleasure particularly it consists.

In general, Pleasure seems to be, as the beginning so the end also of a happy
life, since we find it be the first Good, and convenient to our, and to all
animal Nature, and is that from which we begin all Election and Avoidance, and
in which at last we terminate them using this affection as a rule to judge every
good.

That Pleasure is the first and connatural good, or (as they term it) the first
thing suitable and convenient to Nature, appears from that, every animal
as soon as born, desires Pleasure, and rejoices in it, as the chief good,
shunneth pain as the greatest ill, and to its utmost ability repels it. We see
that even Hercules himself tormented by a Poisonous Shirt could not withold
from tears. Thus does every undepraved Animal, in its own nature judging
incorruptly and entirely.

There needs not therefore any reasoning to prove, that Pleasure is to be
desired, Pain to to be shunned, for this is manifest to ones sense Fire is hot,
Snow white, Honey sweet: we need no arguments to prove this, it is enough that
we give notice of it, for since that if we take away from man all his senses
there is nothing remaining; it is necessary that what is convenient or contrary
to nature, be judged by nature her self, and that Pleasure is expetible in it
self, and Pain in its self to be avoided; for what perceives or what judges,
either^ to pursue or avoid any thing, except Pleasure and Pain.

That Pleasure as being the first thing convenient to Nature, is also the last
of Expetibles, or the end of good things, may be understood even from this,
because it is Pleasure only for whose sake, we so desire the rest, that it self
is not desired, for the sake of any other but only for its self; for we may
desire other things to delight or please our selves, but no man ever demanded a
reason, why we should be delighted, certainly no more than for what cause we
desire to be happy, since Pleasure and Felicity ought to be reputed, not only
in the same degree, but to be the very same thing, and consequently the end, or
ultimate, and greatest good, on which the rest depend, but it self depends on
time.

This is farther proved, for that Felicity is, no otherwise than because it is
that state, in which we may live most sweetly, and most pleasantly, that is
with the greatest pleasure that may be; for take from life this sweetness,
jucundity, pleasure, and where I pray will be your notion of Felicity? Not of
that Felicity only which I termed Divine, but even the other esteemed human?
which is no otherwise capable to receive degrees of more, or less, or
intension, and remission, than because addition or detraction of Pleasure may
befall it.

To understand this better by comparing Pleasure with Pain; let us suppose a
man enjoying many great incessant Pleasures, both in Mind and Body, no pain
hindering them, nor likely to disturb them; what state can we say is more
excellent, or more desirable than this? For in him who is thus affected, there
must necessarily be a constancy of mind, fearing neither death nor pain,
because death is void of sense; pain if long, uses to be light, if great short;
so as shortness makes amends for its greatness, lightness for its length. When
he arrives at such a condition, as he trembles not at the horror of the Deity,
nor suffers the present pleasures to pass away, whilst his mind is busi'd with
remembrance of past, or expectation of future good things, but is daily joy'd
with the reflecting upon them, what can be added to better the condition of
this person?

Suppose on the other side, a man afflicted with as great pains of Body, and
Griefs of Mind, as man's nature is capable of, no hope that they shall ever be
eased, no pleasure past, present or expected; What can be said or imagined more
miserable than he?

If therefore a life full of pains be of all things most to be avoided,
doubtless the greatest ill is to live in pain, whence it follows that the
greatest good is to live in pleasure: Neither indeed has our Mind any thing
else wherein as its center it may rest all Sicknesses, and troubles are reduced
to pain, nor is there any thing else which can remove Nature out of her place,
or dissolve her.

That Pleasure wherein consists Felicity is Indolence of Body and tranquillity
of Mind. There being two kinds of Pleasure, one in station or rest, which is a
placability, calmness and vanity, or immunity from trouble and grief: The other
in motion, which consists in a sweet movement, as in gladness, mirth, or
whatever moves the sense delightfully with a kind of sweetness and titilation,
as to eat and drink out of hunger and thirst: It may be demanded whether, in
both, or in either, and in which consists Felicity? We say that Pleasure
wherein Felicity consists, is of the first kind, the stable, or that which is
in station, and so can be no other than indolence of Body, and tranquillity of
Mind. Or not pained in Body, and not troubled in Mind.

This Doctrine would make any one a Disciple of Epicurus, that will govern
himself according to the rules of Reason; and for the rest, my Friend, as they
are Brutes in quitting their best pretense to Humanity, so I shall no more
trouble my self about their manner of life, than I would about that of their
Brethren of the Forest, or have indeed any more regard to 'em. Let not the
complaisance your good nature infects you with, betray your Reason to the
importunities of Fools, but rather disoblige them than your self, and

Your Real friend, R.A. RICHARDSON.

To Madam -- Of Beneficence, Gratitude.
YOU condemn Epicurism and Profuseness, and at the same time Caress Avarice,
Ingratitude. You rail at the folly of men of sense, and make none but Fools
your Friends. Let your Enemy Epicurus, better instruct your life, or set some
bounds to your tongue. There are Virtues (says Epicurus) allied to Justice, for
that they have regard to other persons, tho they are not (as Justice is)
prescribed by Laws and Covenants, yet they import out of decency a certain
obligation like that of Justice.

The first is Beneficence, or the doing good to others, whereunto those are
obliged who are able to assist, or relieve others, either with their Hand or
Purse. Not to pass as Pyrrho is reported along without any regard to the
mischance of his Friend Anaxarchus, that was fallen into a Ditch, tho he that
could defend such sordid incompassion deserved, to be so left.
If they deny the assistance of their Hands, they are censured as barbarous,
cruel, inhuman: if that of their Purse, they are thought the same, as also
sordid, tenacious, covetous and the like. But if they assist others, they are
accounted courteous, civil, kind, as also liberal, magnificent, etc. so that
they are obliged for their own sakes to do good to others so far as may be
without prodigality.

For those that practice this Virtue procure to themselves good will, and (what
most of all conduces to a quiet living) dearness and tender estimation from
others; they who use it not ill will, and (what most occasions a troublesome
life) contempt and hatred. Take heed therefore you omit not to be Beneficent,
at least in small matters, that so you lose not the advantage of being
accounted ready to gratify others even in great.

Not without reason did I say formerly it is not only more honorable, but also
more delightful to give than to receive benefits; because the giver thereby
makes himself superior to the receiver, and reaps moreover the interest of
thanks; and there is not any thing that Joys a man more than Thanks. A
Beneficent person is like a fountain, which if you should suppose it to have a
reasonable soul, what joy would it not have at the sight of so many Cornfieldsd
and Pastures, which flourish and smile as it were with plenty and verdure, and
all by the diffusion of its streams upon them?

The second is Gratitude, to which every man that receives a benefit is
reciprocally obliged, unless he would incur the greatest hatred and ignominy.
For Ingratitude is worthily hateful to all men, because seeing nothing is more
suitable to Nature, than to be propense to receive a good, it is highly
contrary to Nature not to be readily grateful toward the Author of that Good.

Now since none is more gratefully affected toward his Benefactors than a wise
man, we may justly affirm, that only the wise man knows how to fulfill the duty
of Gratitude, because he alone is ready upon all occasions to express his
thankfulness to his Friends both present and absent, even to those that are
dead.

Others pay thanks only to present Friends, A foolish man behind a friends back
shall side with his enemy, not remembering that of Horace, Absentem qui rodit
amicum. qui non defendit, etc.
when present, and this perhaps for their own farther ends, to encourage them
to some new favor; but how few are there who gratefully commemorate their
absent Benefactors? who requite the good they did them upon their As Xenophon
to Xantippe, and the Children of Socrates, who received no other benefit than
his Learning from Socrates, and yet expresses himself in his Epistle to
Xantippe that he takes care only to thrive in the world for the sake of
maintaining her, and the Sons of his old Master Socrates.
Children, or other Relations? how few who honor their Memory after death? who
rejoice not rather as if their Obligations were cancelled? Who love those that
were dear to them, respect them, and as far as in them lies do them good?

Madam, my Relation to you makes me so zealous to reform your faults which
render you obnoxious to the Discourse of the World. If you will persist in
Vice, discover it not by your railery at the opposite Virtues; be a better
Christian, or learn the Dictates of Nature from a Heathen, either would render
you more agreeable to

Your Humble Servant and Kinsman, Rob. Yaxly.

To Mr. Savage; These. Of Fate and Fortune.
YOU sent me word that you desire to know what the ancient Philosophers held of
Fate and Fortune: I shall here send the Opinion of Two of the greatest (for I
shall not fear to prefer them to Aristotle) I mean Plato and Pythagoras.

Concerning Fate Plato held thus; All things are in Fate, yet all things are
not decreed by Fate; for Fate, though it be like a Law, yet it uses not to
speak after this manner, That this Man shall do thus and to that Man, that
shall befall (which were to proceed to infinite Generation of Men, and infinite
Actions happening daily to them; beside, that this would take away our free Will,
our praise or dispraise, or whatever is of that kind) but rather thus:
Whatsoever Soul chooses such a Life, and does such things, these shall follow.
The Soul therefore is free, and is left within its power to do or not do,
without any compulsion or necessity. But that which follows the Action is
performed by Fate. As from Paris's ravishing Helena (which is within my power
to do or not to do) shall follow, that the Grecians contend with the Trojans
about Helena. Thus Apollo foretold Laius, If thou beget a Son, that Son shall
kill thee. In the Oracle are comprehended both Laius and he begetting of a Son,
that which follows the begetting of a Son depends on Fate. That which may be
done is of a middle kind, betwixt true and false; and being so indefinite by
Nature, that which is in our power is carried on as it were unto it. That which
is done by our Election, is presently either true or false; that which is in
power is different from that which is said to be in Habit and Act. That which
is in power declares an Aptitude in that thing wherein the Habit is not
perfect: So a Boy may be said to be a Grammarian, a Musician, a Carpenter, in
power: He is in the Habit of one or more of these, when he he has acquired
this Habit. He is said to be in Act when he operateth according to that
acquired Habit. That which we call possible to be done is none of these.
Indeterminate is that which is in our power, and to which part soever it
inclines will be true or false.

Pythagoras of Fate and Fortune says,

All the parts of the World above the Moon are governed according to
Providence, and from Order, the Decree of God which they follow; but those
beneath the Moon by four Causes, by God, by Fate, by our Election, by Fortune.
For instance, to go abroad into a Ship, or not, is in our Power; Storms and
Tempest to arise out of a Calm, is by Fortune; for, the Ship being under water,
to be preserved, is by the Providence of God. Of Fate there are many Manners
and Differences; it differs from Fortune, as having a Determination, Order and
Consequence; but Fortune is spontaneous and casual, as to proceed from a Boy to
a Youth, and orderly to pass through other degrees of Age happens by one manner
of Fate. -- There is also Fate of all Things in general, and in particular, the
cause of this Administration:

As for Zeno and some other Philosophers, I will in my next send you their
Opinions, till then I rest

Yours to Command, AN. ROGERS.

TO THE Right Honorable THE MOST INGENIOUS STREPHON.
Ludgate Hill, Feb. 7 th. 1679/80. Concerning the Immortality of the Soul. My
LORD,
I Had the Honor Yesterday to receive from the Hands of an Humble Servant of
your Lordship's, your most incomparable Version of that Passage of Seneca's,
where he begins with, -- Post mortem nihil est, ipsaque mors nihil, etc. -- and
must confess, with your Lordship's Pardon, that I cannot but esteem the
Translation to be, in some measure, a confutation of the Original; since what
less than a divine and immortal Mind could have produced what you have there
written? Indeed, the Hand that wrote it may become Lumber, but sure, the Spirit
that dictated it, can never be so: No, my Lord, your mighty Genius is a most
sufficient Argument of its own Immortality; and more prevalent with me, than
all the Harangues of the Parsons, or Sophistry of the Schoolmen. No subject
whatever has more entangled and ruffled the Thoughts of the wisest Men, than
this concerning our Future State; it has been controverted in all Ages, by Men
of the greatest Learning and Parts. We must also confess, that your Author
Seneca has not wanted Advocates for the Assertion of his Opinion; nay, even
such, who would pretend to Justify it, out of the very Scriptures themselves:
Ex. gr. as when Solomon says ( Eccles. 7.12.) -- Then shall the Dust return to
Dust as it was, and the Spirit to God that gave it. -- And ( Eccles. 3.20, 21.)
when he declares, -- All go to the same place; all are of dust, and all turn to
dust again. Who knows the Spirit of Man that goes upward, and the Spirit of
the Beast that goes downward to the Earth -- Again ( Eccles. 3.19.) when he
tells us, -- That which befalls the Sons of Men befalls Beasts, even one
thing befalls them both: As the one dies so does the other; yea, they have
all one Breath: so that a Man has no preeminence above a Beast -- Likewise to
such who are desirous to know what their Friends are in the other World, or (to
speak more properly) their dead Friends, know; Solomon answers their
inconsiderate Vtinam ( Eccles. 9.5.) with these words -- The Living know they
shall die, but the Dead know not any thing. -- Moreover, others, for the
purpose, cite that Passage of Luke 20.38. where it is said -- He is not a God
of the Dead, but of the Living -- All which Texts (through the Weakness of
Understanding) have by some Men been misapplied, as concurrent with the Anima
Mundi of Pythagoras, which has been since in great measure revived by Averroes
and Avicenna, although in one point they differed among themselves: For, that
Averroes believed, after Death, our Souls returned and mixed with the common
Soul of the World; whereas Avicenna thought it a distinct^ portion of the Anima
Mundi, which after our Deaths remained entire and separate, till it met with
some other Body capable of Receiving it, and then being clothed therewith, it
operated ad modum Recipientis. Monsieur Bernier likewise gives us, agreeable to
Averroes, an account of much the same Opinion held at this time by some of the
Indians of Indostan, whose Faith he Illustrates after this Manner, -- They
believe (says he) the Soul in Man's Body to be like a Bottle filled with
Seawater, which being close stopped and cast into the Sea, tides it up and
down, till by some Accident or other the unfaithful Cork, or decrepit Bottle,
becomes disordered, so as the Water Evacuates and Disgorges it self again into
the common Ocean, from whence it was at first taken -- Which agrees very well
with what (as Philostratus tells us, lib. 8. chap. 13.) Apollonius after his
Death revealed to a Young Man concerning the Immortality of the Soul in these
words, as rendered from the Greek: -- Est Anima immortalis, and incorrupta
manebit,
Non tua res, verum quae provides omnia Divae;
Quae velut acer equus, corrupto corpore Vinclis
Prosilit, and tenui miscetur flamine Caeli:
Cui grave servitium est, atque intolerabile visum. --
The Soul's immortal, and once being free,
Belongs to Providence, and not to thee:
She, like a Horse let loose, does take her flight
Out of the Carcass, and her self unite
With the pure Body of the liquid Sky;
As weary of her former slavery. --


But he, among the Heathens, who spoke plainest and fullest of this matter, was
Pliny in his Natural History, lib. 7 chapter 4. where he writes to this purpose:
After the Interment of our Bodies, there is great diversity of Opinions
concerning the future state of our wandering. Souls or Ghosts; But the most
general is this: That in what condition they were before they were born men, in
the same they shall remain when dead: forasmuch as neither Body nor Soul has
any more sense after our dying-day, than they had before the day of our
Nativity. However such is the Folly and Vanity of men, that it extends even
to future Ages; nay, and in the very time of Death even flattereth it self with
fine Imaginations and Dreams of I know not what after this Life. For, some
crown the Soul with Immortality: others pretend a Transfiguration thereof: and
others suppose that the Ghosts sequestered from the Body have sense; Whereupon
they render them honor and worship, making a God of him, that is not so much
as a man: As if the manner of men's Breathing differ^d from that of other Living
Creatures: or, as if there were not to be found in the World many more things
that live much longer than man; and yet no man judges in them the like
immortality. But show me, if you can, what is the Substance and Body of the
Soul (as it were) by it self? what kind of matter is it apart from the Body?
where lies the Cogitation that she has? how is her Seeing? how is her Hearing
performed? what touches she? Nay, what one thing does she? how is she
employed? or if there be none of all this in her, what Good can there be
without the same? Again, I wonld fain know where she resides after her
Departure from the Body? and what an infinite multitude of Souls, like shadows,
would there be in so many Ages as well part, as to come? Now, surely, these are
but fantastical, foolish and childish Toys; devised by Men that would fain live
always; the like foolery is there in preserving the Bodies: Nor was the vanity
if Democritus less, who promised a Resurrection of the Body, and yet himself
could never rise again. But what a folly of follies is it, to think that Death
should be the way to a second Life? what Repose, what Rest could ever the Sons
of Men have, if their Souls did remain in Heaven above with sense, whilst
their shadows tarried beneath among the infernal Spirits: certainly these sweet
Inducements and pleasing Persuasions, this foolish Credulity and easiness of
Belief, destroys the benefit of the best gift of Nature, Death. It likewise
doubleth the pains of a Man that is to dye, if he does but consider what is to
become of him hereafter: how much more easy and greater security were it for
each Man to ground his Reasons and Resolutions upon an Assurance, that he
should be in no worse a condition, than he was before he was born? Now these
(my Lord) with what others? I have mentioned in my Anima Mundi, are the chief
Opinions of the Moralists among the ancient Heathens.

In Answer to which, some of our Moderns argue, That if the Soul be not
immortal, the whole Universe would at this time be deceived, since all our Laws
do now suppose it so. But to this it has been replied, That if the whole be
nothing but the parts, (as must be allowed) then, since there is no Man who is
not deceived, as Plato says, it is so far from an Offense, that it is
absolutely necessary to grant, either that the whole World is deceived, or at
least the greater part of it; for supposing that there be but three Laws, viz.
that of Moses, that of Christ, and that of Mahomet: either all are false, and
so the whole World is deceived; or only two of them, and so the greater part is
deceived. But we must know, as Plato and Aristotle well observe, That a
Politician is a Physician of Minds: and that his Aim is, rather to make Men
good, than knowing; wherefore, according to the deversity of Men, he must
render himself agreeable to the diversity of humors, for the attainment of his
end. Now there are some Men so ingenuous and good-natured, that they are
induced to Virtue by the mere excellency thereof, and withdraw themselves from
Vice, purely for the sake of its own deformity; and these are Men the best
disposed, tho^ rarely to be met with. Others, who are worse inclined,
notwithstanding the beauty of Virtue, and turpitude of Vice, do still practice
virtuous things, and refrain from those that are vicious, merely out of
Rewards, Praises, Honors, Punishments and Dispraises, whom we may enrol in the
second Rank. Again, others, for hope of some good, as well as for fear of
corporal punishment, are made virtuous: wherefore Politicians, that they may
attain such virtue, allure them with the hopes of Riches, Dignity and Command;
at the same time, to prevent their committing Vice, they terrify them with some
punishment either in Purse, Honor or Body. But others, out of a savageness and
ferocity of Nature, are moved with none of these things, as daily experience
shows: wherefore for such, they have proposed to the Virtuous, Rewards in
another Life; and to the Vicious, Punishments, which do most of all terrify:
since the greater part of Man, if they do good, do it rather out of fear of
eternal Loss, than hope of eternal Gain; forasmuch as we have a more sensible
Idea of Suffering and Losses, than of Elyzium, and the good entertainment
there. Now because this last Expedient may be profitable to all Men of what
condition soever, Lawgivers considering the proneness of Men to evil, and
themselves aiming at the Public Good, established the Immortality of the Soul,
perhaps, at first, not so much out of a regard to Truth, as to Honesty, hoping
thereby to induce Men to Virtue. Nor are Politicians to be so much blamed
herein, more than Physicians, who many times, for the benefit of their
Patients, are compelled to feign and pretend diverse things: since, in like
manner, Politicians devise Fables only to regulate the People; notwithstanding,
in these Fables, as Averroes says, ( Prolog. in 3. Phys.) there is properly
neither Truth nor Falsehood: Thus Nurses bring their Children to those things
which they know are good for them, after the like manner; whereas if the Man or
the Child were either sound in Body or Mind, neither would the Physician or the
Nurse stand in need of such contrivances. Likewise, if all Men were in that
first Rank abovementioned, though we should admit the mortality of the Soul, they
would yet (perhaps) be virtuous and honest; but such are rare to be found, and
therefore it is necessary to use other Expedients: neither is there any
Absurdity therein, since almost all humane Nature is immerst in matter, and
partaketh but little of the Intellect: whence Man is more distant from
Intelligences, than a sick Man from him that is sound, or a Fool from a
Wiseman; so that it is no wonder if a Politician makes use of such ways or
means, for the public establishment of good manners. And therefore, my Lord,
besides the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, as also the innumerable other
Arguments which may be deduced as well from Philosophy as Reason, to prove the
Immortality of the Soul, together with its Rewards and Punishments, (though I
determine not their duration) yet there is no Argument of greater weight with
me, than the absolute necessity and convenience that it should be so; as well
to complete the Justice of God, as to perfect the happiness of Man, not only in
this World, but in that which is to come. And for this very Reason, when I hear
Seneca the Philosopher, and others, preaching up the Doctrine of the Souls
Immortality, with a Quid mihi Curae erit transfuga?
Tackt to the end of it, nothing under Heaven to me seems more unaccountable or
contradictory. For, as to suppose a hu^-drum Deity chewing his own Nature, a
droning God sit hugging of himself, and hoarding up his Providence from his
Creatures, is an Atheism no less irrational, than to deny the very essence of a
Divine Being; so, in my Opinion, to believe an Immortality of the Soul, without
its due Rewards and Punishments, is altogether as irrational and useless, as to
believe the Soul itself to be mortal; by such a Faith we rob the Soul of its
best Title to Immortality: for what need is there of an Executor, where there
are no Debts to pay, nor any Estate to inherit? But Pomponatius, and especially
Cardan in his Theonoston, will furnish your Lordship with great Variety upon
this Subject, although I am sure you will meet with so noble an entertainment no
where, as in your own thoughts.

(My LORD) Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, BLOUNT.

To the deservedly Honored and most Ingenious Major A. concerning the Original
of the Jews.
SIR,
I Received yours, and have formerly seen a Translation of the Annals of
Tacitus, but never yet met with that of his History, although, as I have been
informed, it is not only rendered into English by the great Sir H. S. but
likewise illustrated with very learned Notes of his own writing: which makes me
the more admire at what you say, that a person of his knowledge and judgment,
should so far complement the Jewish, as to rob the English World of the Fifth
Book of Tacitus his History, by omitting any part of it in his Version; since,
according to the true method of Translating, an Author ought not to be drawn
off, but generously and freely poured out of one Language into another: least
in separating him from the Dregs, you leave the Spirit behind you.
Nevertheless, I hope, this one Example will not be sufficient to introduce an
Index Expurgatorius among us; whereby Posterity might be tempted to esteem
Writing, Reading and Books, as things unprofitable. Justin, the Epitomizer of
Trogus Pompeius, is more fairly dealt with; notwithstanding in the 36th Book of
his History, he does, for the most part, concur with Tacitus in his account of
the Original of the Jews; all which the Translator has sincerely and
impartially given his Reader in English: wherefore, according to your desire, I
shall only trouble you with what was never yet published in our Language, viz.
what Tacitus speaks concerning this Subject, in the 5th Book of his History,
which is as follows.

Some conceive the Jews to have been Exiles from the Island of Crete, and to
have planted themselves upon the Borders of Lybia, about the time when Saturn
suffered expulsion from his Dominions by Jupiter; the Reason whereof is
grounded upon the Name: for there being in Crete a Mountain, not a little
remarkable, called Ida, the Inhabitants, by a barbarous intrusion of a letter,
were called Iudaei, quasi Idaei. Others say, that the Mob swarming throughout
Egypt, when Isis bare Rule there, these were evacuated into bordering
Countries, Hyerosolimus and Judas having at that time the Command over them.
Again, many think them to have been a People of Ethiopia, whom King Cepheus,
betwixt fear and hatred, thought fit to have removed. Others also make them to
have been an indigent People of Assyria, who having possessed themselves of
part of Egypt, by degrees built Cities, incroaching upon the Hebrew Countries,
and Borders of Syria. But, among the rest, some will entitle their Original to
a more honorable derivation, viz. to be the Solimi of Asia, a People mentioned
by Homer with honor, who, from their own, gave name to Jerusalem. However,
sundry Author agree, that there being an Epidemical Scabies throughout Egypt,
which much polluted their Bodies, King Occhoris addressing himself to Hamon's
Oracle, and supplicating a Remedy, received this Mandate, viz. To purge the
Kingdom of that sort of People, which were not acceptable to the Gods, and to
convey them into other Countries. Whereupon Inquisition being made, they were
gathered together, and proscribed for a march. But being afterward left in a
Wilderness, disanimated and drooping with Lamentations, one of the
Proscription, Moses by name, advised them to abandon all expectation of Aid,
either from Gods or Men, being thus forsaken both, and to confide only in him
as their celestial Guardian, who were already by their present trust freed from
some miseries. They assented, and, as an ignorant People, adventured under his
Conduct; in which Pilgrimage, nothing fatigued them more, than the want of
Water: when lying in the Fields ready to perish with Thirst, there passed by an
Herd of wild Asses toward a Creek, very much shadow^d with Groves; whom Moses
followed, imagining there might be a fruitful Soil: and discovers fair Channels
of Water, wherewith they refreshed themselves. Now the sixth day of their
Travels being at an end, on the seventh they possessed themselves of Lands,
(expelling the Inhabitants) wherein were both City and Temple consecrated. When
Moses, to the end he might confirm to himself this People for the future,
constitutes new Rites different from the rest of the World; esteeming those
things profane, which, with us, were sacred; and indulging others, which we
interdicted. They, likewise, consecrated the Effigies of an Ass, for being
their Guide to the Waters where they satisfied their Thirst; as also sacrificed
a Ram in contempt of Jupiter Hamon. They offer^d up an Ox likewise, under which
Effigies the Egyptians worshipped Apis. They abstained from Swines flesh, in
memory of their Scabies, (whereto this Creature is very obnoxious) wherewith
they were polluted. They commemorate their long Famine with frequent Fastings;
the loss of their Fruits with unleaven^d Bread; and every seventh day they
rested, because that gave a Period to their Labors: which afterward grew so
pleasing to them, that they devoted every seventh year to their ease. Others
are of opinion that they did this in honor of Saturn; but by what means soever
they have been introduced, they have no Antiquity for their Patronization.
Other sinister and filthy Institutions have been prevalent for their pravity;
and all the very dregs of the People (who contemned the Religions of their own
Countries) accumulated Tributes hither: whereby the substance of the Jews was
very much enlarged. Among themselves, they were very fruitful and merciful; but
for all others, had an irreconcilable hatred. They were a People very much
inclin^d to Lust, and however they abstain^d from mixing with Aliens, yet
nothing was esteemed unlawful amongst themselves: Now this brought in their
Custom of Circumcising their Genitals, thereby to distinguish them from others;
and whosoever expected to be incorporated into them, was to do the same: after
which, the first Lesson they taught them was, to contemn the Gods, forsake
their Country, and disesteem of Parents, Children, Brethren, etc. Tacit. lib.
5.

Now, besides the concurrence of Trogus, we hear also of others, who pretend to
much the same both with him and Tacitus, as those ancient Egyptian Writers,
Manethon, Chaeremon, Lysimachus, Appion, and others: nor does Josephus seem to
produce any considerable Confutation of their Opinions; only in general, he
finds fault with their mistaking of Names, and other such small Variations in
their Histories, which to impartial Readers are very inconsiderable. Nay, we
see Josephus does not so much reject the Truth of Manethon's History; but when
it was for his advantage, he could make use of him, in qouting his Writings, to
prove the Antiquity of his Countrymen the Jews; so that, however in
Circumstances and Names of particular persons they might vary, yet that the
Jews were banished out of Egypt for Scabies, that Moses their Commander gave
them new Laws of his own making, forbidding them to converse or marry with
strangers; as also that they afterward, to revenge their Banishments, invaded
Egypt, putting the Egyptians and their King to flight, (as they did) in all
this (I say) most of the ancient Egyptian Writers agree, as we may gather from
Josephus his own Writings.

The Tradition of the Memphites, concerning Moses's passing the Red Sea, was,

That Moses being well acquainted with the condition of the place, observed the
Flux and Reflux of the Waters, and so brought over his Army by dry Land.

However, had this been wrought immediately by God, we need not (says Josephus)
so much wonder at it, for that the Pamphyliam Ocean did the same to Great
Alexander of Macedon, and gave way to him and his Followers, the Waves
themselves marking out a Path, rather than any thing should hinder the Design
which God had purposed to them, viz. to overthrow the Kingdom of Persia, and
this Josephus in these very words records; so that by lessning the Miracle, he
destroys it: making it cease to be a Wonder, while he strives to make it fit to
be believed.

Abraham and Moses seemed first to institute Religious Worship, and both of
them were well skill^d in Egyptian Learning: which gave occasion for some to
think, that Moses and the Jews took diverse of their Customs from the Egyptians;
as for Instance, their Circumcision, because Herodotus says, that the
Phaenicians and Syrians in Palestine (which must be the Jews, since none else
used it in Palestine) took their Circumcision from the Egyptians; also (says
he) they confess the same themselves: nor does Josephus deny as much: only says
(without giving any reason why) that he doubts, whether they learnt it of the
Egyptians and Ethiopians, or whether the Egyptians and Ethiopians learnt it of
them, but does not affirm or deny either: Joseph. Cont. Ap^ However, Bochartus
in his Phaleg, as well as Dr. Stillingfleet in his Origines Sacrae, affirm the
latter; not to mention Theophilus Gale, and other Gleaners upon the same
Subject.

The Article of one true God, was common both to Jews and Gentiles, even before
their Reception: the universality of Religious Worship consisting in the
practice of Virtue and Goodness, we may find also common to the Gentiles, as
well as to the Jews: or if it be said, that Precept in the Decalogue, That we
should make no graven Image, nor the likeness of any thing that is in Heaven
above, or in the Earth beneath; was particular to the Jews; it will be found,
that whatsoever they said thereof, the Persians and other neighboring Nations
concurred therein; as also in the rest of the Commandments: thus Feriari Deo is
a kind of Sabboth-keeping.

The ancient Jews, and modern Christians, have many Rites and Ceremonies common
with the Gentiles; which is more than our vulgar Divines do imagine. Most of
the Jewish Laws and Rites were practiced among the Gentiles indifferently, or
at least did not much vary from them, as the diligent Searchers into Antiquity
well know. The Gentiles as well as the Jews, held the most substantial parts of
Moses his Doctrines, without differing in much more than certain parcicular
Laws, more proper for that Country than any other, as, their not eating Swines
flesh; their making Adultery death, etc. since, as the Notions of God, and a
good Conscience, are written in our Souls at this day, so we cannot justly
think, any of our Forefathers among the Gentiles were deprived of them.

But when all is done, SIR, these Relations, of Trogus, Tacitus, and the rest,
are only the uncertain Accounts of partial Authors, since the best and only
History extant to be relied on for this Subject, is the Holy Scriptures,
(dictated, as every good Christian ought to believe, by the Holy Spirit)
therefore, though I send you these other Accounts to gratify your Curiosity, yet
referring you to these for matter of Truth, I shall give you no farther
trouble, than to assure you I am (without Reserve)

(SIR) Your unfeigned Friend, And faithful humble Servant, BLOUNT.
December. 12. 1692.
To his Friend, Torismond, to Justify the Marrying of two Sisters, the one
after the other.
SIR,
ACcording to your Letter, I find the Objections urged against your marrying
Eugenia, your Ladies Sister, are chiefly these three; 1. That you being her
Brother in Law, by having formerly married her Sister, it would be not only a
Violation of the Canon Law, but also of the Levitical, and consequently a sin.
2. That it is against the known Laws of the Land, and so might be dangerous and
troublesome to you both. 3. And Lastly, That such a match being a thing unusual,
and contrary to custom, it might reflect upon your Honors.


All which Objections I do conceive so easily to be answered, that (were it not
too great a confidence in any man to say so) with that little knowledge I have,
either in Civil, Canon or Common Law, I would assert it to be lawful, and
accordingly enter the Lists of Argument against any Levitical or Canonical
Gamester whatever upon that Subject. in the mean time, what I have briefly
collected, for your service, upon this occasion is, as follows.

It Is confessed, the 99 th Canon of the Church of England is positive in its
determination, that no man shall marry within the Degrees prohibited by the
Laws of God, and expressed by a Table fet forth by Authority, Anno Dom. 1563.
in the 17 th particular of which Table, it is declared, that a man may not
marry his Wives Sister: the foundation of which Prohibition, both in the Canon
and Table is this. (viz.) Kindred and Affinity forbidden to marry by the Laws
of God: So that the Prohibition, as well in the Canon, as in any part of the
Table, seems to be no farther obliging, then as it is forbidden by the Laws of
God, and the same dependence likewise have our Statute Laws in this Case, to
which they wholly refer.

The first Text of Scripture, which is commonly urged in this Case, is that of
marrying a Brothers Wife, which seems to be forbidden; where by a side wind
they would bring in that of marrying a Wives Sister as a parallel, saying, ubi
eadem Ratio, ibi idem Ius. But, with their pardon, the simile does not run upon
four feet, the Reason is not the same: For the words (in Lvit. 18. and 16.)
which forbid the marrying a Brothers Wife, say, because a man thereby uncovers
his Brothers Nakedness: which seems not at all to be a good Reason against
marrying the Wives Sister; because every man is supposed to have discovered his
first Wives Nakedness before any such marriage with her Sister. Besides, all
Penal Laws (such as Moses's are in this Chapter,) which concern Life, Limb, nay
and the very Soul too in this case, are no where construed by Parallels, but
straightly tied up to the very express Letter of the Law, or else no man would be
safe, if he were liable to hanged by way of comparison for a similitude, or
being like the Picture of a Traitor: and this makes Moses so exact in
particularizing each Crime, that whereas in prohibiting you to uncover your
Fathers Nakedness would have served likewise for the Mothers, the Reason being
the same, yet nevertheless he in express words particularizes and forbids both
distinctly by themselves, and in like manner does the same in all other Cases,
which he need not have done if he had designed to have any cases not mentioned
come within the equity and construction of those that are: as because I must
not marry my Brothers Wife, therefore I must not marry my Wives Sister, a
pretty Syllogism indeed. Besides, if it were so intended there, then, what
follows had been unnecessary. For --

The Canon of Scripture which seems more nearly to concern this Case, is Lvit.
18.18. where it is said, Neither shall thou take a Wife to her Sister to Vex
her, to uncover her Nakedness, besides the other in her Lifetime.

Though Polygamy was allowed under the Law, yea, and Jacob did actually marry
two Sisters, Leah and Rachel, yet it is here forbidden that one man should at
one and the same time have two Sisters in Marriage; It was adjudged
inconvenient, and Diodate upon this Text says --

The Reason of the Inconveniency is, it would be a kind of confusion, to make
two Sisters Rivals or Adversaries to one another, 'twould produce continual
Jealousies and Strifes, as an example may be ^een in Jacobs Marriage, which in
those first Ages were tolerated.

But this does not therefore seem to restrain or prohibit the marrying of two
Sisters one after another, for the first being dead, the other cannot be a
Rival or Vexation (as the Text calls it) to her dead Sister: and then how shall
the Prohibition be urged, if the Reason of it be removed? It is rationally
apparent, that there is great stress placed in those expressions ( during her
Life) and ( to Vex her in uncovering her shame upon her) as does more fully
appear in our Translation of the Bible in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, Printed Anno
Domini 1599. --

Thou shall not take a Wife with her Sister, during her Life to Vex her. in
uncovering her shame upon her. --

Which seems to be very suitable to the Greek Translation, (...): where the
Prohibition running upon these Terms, or containing these Conditions, that a
man shall not take a Wife, (...), with her Sister, (...), during her Life:
because it would be (...), a Vexation to her; but she being dead, all those
inconveniences expire with her, and so it may probably be imagined that
Cessante Ratione, Cessat Prohibitio.

And that this is the proper tendency of the words, is the opinion of the
Learned Grotius, in his Tract. de Iure Belli and Pacis, lib. 2. cap. 5. paragr.
14.

Nam de singulis partibus ne intelligatur, argumento esse potest interdictum,
de non habendis eodem tempore in Matrimonio Sororibus duabus: For that it ought
not to be understood upon all Occasions is sufficiently proved by the
Prohibition it self, which forbids only the having two Sisters in Marriage at
one time.

And this he does not deliver as his own private Opinion, but refers to the
Authority of the Ancient Canons, the Composers whereof did not seem to esteem
such a Marriage absolutely sinful, but inconvenient, and so obnoxious to
penalties: As in the same Paragraph of Grotius, ( Lin. 17.) Certe Canonibus
Antiquissimis, qui Apostolici dicuntur, Qui duas Sorores alteram post alteram
duxisset, aut (...), id est, Fratris aut Sororis Filiam; tantum a clero
arcetur: certainly whoever should have married two Sisters, the one after the
other, or the Daughter of his Brother or Sister, was by the most ancient
Canons, which are called Apostolical, only forbidden entering into the order of
Priesthood.

Where it was esteemed inconvenient and offensive, there the person so doing
ought not to be admitted to be a Priest, but that was the only punishment laid
upon him, tantum -a Clero arcetur. But does not prejudice a Layman, such as my
Friend Torismond is, who, I presume, never designs to to enter into the
Priestly Office, unless it were to be a Confessor to the fair Sex; neither does
it forbid Marriage to a Priest, only restrains him from Marrying two Sisters,
one after another.

For a man to marry two Sisters successively is unusual, (because most have
enough of one out of a Family) and by Canonists esteemed inconvenient; but it
does not appear by them to be forbidden any where, except it be Lege Human^; by
Human Law; which may restrain under a Penalty, but does not therefore make the
marriage either sinful, or void, when completed: Whereas, if it had been
prohibited Lege Divina, by a Divine Law, then both the contracting of it, and
living in full Matrimony had been sinful, whether the Canons of men had been
for it, or against it. But if it be not against the Laws of God, it is so far
from being forbidden by the Laws of our Land, that it is rather confirmed by
the 32 H. 8.38. where it is enacted and declared,

That the Marriages of all Persons shall be adjudged Lawful, who are not
prohited by Gods Law to Marry. Which I urge in opposition to the second
Objection, viz. that it is against the Laws of the Land to marry two Sisters,
and so may be dangerous.

But against this some may object, that this Statute of H. 8. was enacted,
1540. and the Table set forth by Authority, which the 99 th Canon does confirm,
was set forth after it, in 1563. to which may be answered, that the Canon
neither did, nor could repeal the Statute of H. 8. And that as a Canon it was a
Human Law, as well as the other, and cannot therefore be intended to make void
any Marriage, which the Law of God has not prohibited and made void: with
which Grotius does concur, and particularly applies it to the Case in hand, at
the conclusion of his aforementioned Paragraph --

Sed sciendum simul est, non quod vetitum est fieri lege human, si fiat,
irritum quoque esse, nisi and hoc Lex addiderit and significaverit: But (says
he) it is also necessary to be known, that what is forbidden by humane Law to be
done, if it be done, is not therefore void, unless the Law has also added and
signified as much. -- And then he proceeds to give you a Quotation of some
ancient Canons, which did, under a Penalty, forbid such a Marriage, but not
make it void: Canon Eliberinus, 60. --

Si quis post obitum uxoris suae, sororem ejus duxerit, and ipsa fuerit
fidelis, per Quinquennium eum a Communione abstinere, eo ipso ostendens, manner
vinculum Matrimonii; and ut jam diximus, in Canonibus qui Apostolici dicuntur.
Qui duas sorores duxerit, aut fratris filiam, tantum Clericu^ fieri prohibetur:
If any one, after the death of his Wife, marries her Sister, and she proves
faithful to him, he must, during five years, abstain from the Communion, which
shows that the Bond of Matrimony still remains inviolable; and, as we have
already said, in those Canons which are called Apostolical, whosoever marries
two Sisters, or his Brother's Daughter, is only forbid to be Priest -- which is
indeed as near as possible to the words of the Canon set forth by Ioverius in
his Collection of Ecclesiastical Constitutions, A. D. 1555. Clas. p. 3.
Apostolorum Canon, 18. Qui duas sorores duxit, aut Consobrinam, Clericus esse
non potest: Whoever has married two Sisters, or his Niece, must not be a Priest.

Now that these ancient Canons retain their Validity, is apparent, not only
from the practice of the learned and judicious Grotius, as well as other
eminent Civilians, who appeal to their Authority; but they likewise receive
confirmation and encouragement from the Laws of our own Nation; it being
Enacted, 25 H. 8, 19.

That all Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances, and Synodals Provincial, not
repugnant to the King's Prerogative, nor to the Customs, Laws and Statutes of
this Kingdom, shall be used and executed, till such time as they shall be
otherwise ordered and determined.

Now upon these preceding Authorities some Queries may be offered: As, 1.
Whether the 99th Canon Eccles. Angl. and the Table set forth 1563, concerning
the prohibited Degrees of Marriage, do not derive their Force from the Sacred
Writ, so that they are not to be understood, or extended farther than the
Scriptures do plainly direct? 2. Whether the Energy and Force of Levit. 18.18.
be not grounded upon the Reasons contained in the Text? so that cessante
Ratione, cessat Prohibitio. 3. Whether if the Marriage of two Sisters, one
after the other; be not positively against the Law of God, it be not adjudg'd
lawful, and confirmed by the 32 H. 8.38? 4. Whether the Solution of Justinian
in the like Cases of Affinity, (viz.) Privign^ and Nurus, in the first Book of
his Institutions, ( Tit. 10. de Nuptiis. Paragr. 6.) be not properly applicable
to Levit. 18.18? Si una tibi nupta est; ideo Alteram, Vxorem ducere non
poteris, quia duas Sorores eodem tempore habere non licet. 5. Whether if any of
the Canons Eccles. Angl. be dubious, it be not proper and convenient to consult
the ancient Canons for Explanation and Illustration? 6. And lastly, Whether
upon these preceding Considerations, to marry two Sisters, Alteram post
Alteram, be malum vetitum Lege divine, and so sinful foro Conscientiae, and
such Marriage void? or only inconvenient and obnoxious to Ecclesiastical
Censures and Penalties, which the Ecclesiastical Court may either inflict or
commute?


Now to conclude with this first and principal Objection, Whether it be a Sin
against the Levitical Law? I shall only make three short Remarques.

1. That there are many other Laws in Leviticus, that are no more abolished by
Christ, than this of Marriages, which yet are wholly neglected, and no ways
looked upon as obligatory. 2. Many doubt, Whether any of the Laws given to the
Jews in particular, are binding to other Nations, excepting only those revived
by Christ, which this of Marriages never was? 3dly, and lastly, It Is worth our
observation, that when the Question was put to Christ by the Sadduces, about
the Wife that had been married to seven Brethren, though 'twas a common practice
among them, and he had so fair an opportunity offered him, yet he never
reproves the Custom of one Woman's marrying several Brethren, but answers only
to the plain Question as 'twas put, That at the Resurrection they neither
marry, nor are given in Marriage: Now since he did reprove and abolish all
their other evil Customs, it may well be supposed he thought not this so, or
otherwise he would have condemned it with the rest.
As for the second Objection, That such a Marriage would be against the known
Laws of the Land, and therefore dangerous to you both:

I have sufficiently answered this already, as likewise the third and last
Objection; since, as well the Statute Laws, as Honor and Conscience in this
case do wholly depend upon the Legality of such a Match according to the Law of
God, which point I think has been pretty well cleared by what has been said
before. But for the better illustration of the matter, I will present you with
a short view of the Original and Foundation of these Laws.

The Statute Laws of this Land never meddled with the Degrees of Kindred in
relation to Marriages, till Henry the eighth's time; which happened thus.

Prince Arthur, eldest Son to Henry the 7 th married Katharine, the Infanta of
Spain in November, 1502, but on the second of April following the Prince dyed;
whose Death (says Dr. Burnet) was imputed to his using too great an excess in
his Love toward her. (So that it is not likely he left her a Maid, as some
would have it.) After which the Princess having watched ten Months, to see that
she was not with Child by Prince Arthur, she was married to her Husband's
youngest Brother, afterward Henry the 8 th, by whom she had two Sons, and one
Daughter Mary (since Queen of England,) the two Sons dying young, and only his
Daughter Mary surviving. Now Henry the 8 th growing weary of his Queen, as
thinking he should have no more Children by her, desired a Divorce, and then
(though he had be^n married many years, by and with the Advice of Fox Bishop of
Winchester, and several of his chief Clergy,) he first pretends a scruple of
Conscience, for being married to his Brothers Wife, the Pope nor Church would
not allow of his scruple in that kind, nor grant him any Divorce, but chose
rather to forfeit their Interest in these Kingdoms; however King Henry's Lust
prompting him, to make use of any shift to obtain his desires, he bribed some
few Members among the foreign Universities to give him their opinions^ that the
Marriage was unlawful, and a Divorce but reasonable, which accordingly his
Commissioners executed in a Clandestine manner at Dunstable. After this, the
Parliament (who, during his Reign, were awed into a compliance with him in all
things, being for the Pope's Supremacy, when ever he was for it; and as much
against it, when he was against it) made a Law (32 H. 8. chapter 38.) in compliment
and confirmation of his Divorce and second Marriage, limiting all Marriages to
the Degrees of the Levitical Law: so that we see this Law was made, not of any
Religious or pious Consideration whatsoever, but only to serve a turn, and
gratify the Lust of an imperious Prince. And one consideration further is
worthy our Notice; viz. that this very Princess Mary was afterward allowed and
approved of by the Judgment of the whole Nation, and of all Christendom
besides, to be undisputably the right and Lawful sovereign Queen of England,
and so lived and dyed, notwithstanding the said Act of Parliament and Divorce;
to which Title and Dignity, she could no ways have pretended, had the Marriage
between Hen. 8. her Father, and his Brothers Wife Queen Katharine, (who was her
Mother) been adjudged by the world unlawful.

As to the third and last Objection, that such a Match being unusual and
contrary to Custom, may reflect upon your Honors: this is the weakest
objection of all others. For as Conscience is but the Reflection of Virtue in
our own minds; so Honor is but the vibration or darting those Beams abroad
among our Friends and Acquaintance, thereby to illuminate our own Reputations.
So that all this Objection is at once answered, if there be no violation of
Virtue in the Action; which, I hope, I have already in a great measure
demonstrated by the former part of this Discourse: for I do not see where
Virtue can be concerned in an Action, that is neither impious to God, nor
unjust or injurious toward man; as I am sure such a Marriage is neither. Your
Relation of Affinity, was but in the nature of a Bargain, and upon your Lady's
death, the least expired, and the whole contract ended. Cousin Germans (who
marry daily) have a near Consanguinity and mixture of the same Blood, whereas
you two have not one Dram of the same. But the most confusedly and foolishest
Question of all is, What will the World say? Gather two Flowers off one Root,
eat two Grapes off one Branch, Marry two Sisters? a thing never known before:
But I hope both Torismond amd Eugenia have too much sense to be startled at
such Mobb Bugbears; since no Body of Reason will argue that the Rarity or
Novelty of a thing is any Reflection either upon Honor or Conscience; for as
much as every thing is intrinsically either good or bad of it self; nor can the
opinion of others any ways alter the Nature of it. At this rate, every new Law,
and every new Mode or Fashion, may be esteemed dishonorable and vicious, as
violating the oldest. He that alters his Watch by every Dial he come at, shall
never have it go well: so he that alters or steers his course of Life according
to the various Censures of the world, can never live wisely or comfortably; for
as much as every man's Interest furnishes him with a By-Conscience of his own,
however some may pretend the contrary, and others may perhaps not really
discern it themselves. Lastly, to urge the common Usage, Practice and Custom of
our times, is the effect of Narrowness of Soul, and meanness of Thought. For
Custom is an Argument will lie as well for Vice, as Virtue: Drinking, Whoring,
and Ga^^ing have as ancient a Prescription for their Plea, and as universal, as
any Virtues whatsoever. It is a common and ancient usage to rob upon St. Albans
Road, is it therefore ^^'e the more lawful? Nothing can be more ridiculous than
to make Antiquity and Presidents the standard and measure of Good and Evil:
'twould be a pleasant Argument for a Jilt to use to her Spouse, Lord Husband,
your Father was a Cuckold, will not you be one? And yet perhaps such a Question
would be as seriously Rational, as most of the things that govern Mankind: only
one's merry Folly, and the other a grave Folly. But, to conclude, at this rate,
we ought to have continued in the Popish ignorance of our Forefathers, as
esteeming all Reformations and Changes unlawful.

By Education most have been misled,
So they believe, because they so were bred:
The Priest continues what the Nurse began,
And thus the Child imposes on the man.
Hind and Pant. If what I have here written may prove effectual to the purpose
it was designed, I shall think my labor well spent: but never be dismayed with
the thoughts of being wondered at; or if any one should tell you (...) Bear
that is led through the Streets is no more: Pray ask him from me what Emperors
hazard their Crowns for? Generals venture their Lives for? Poets crack their
Brains over their Paladian Oil for? I doubt all ends in being wondered at;
crowed with a Mob in the Streets, who, by way of Gratitude, point at him, and
cry, that is He; and if they do the same to you, it is but fancying your self an
Emperor, a General, a Poet, or a Lover, it is all one among Friends.

Yours, BLOUNT.
Burton. Staff. March 8. 1693.
To the Right Honorable and most Ingenious Strephon, being a Discourse of Sir
H. B's. De Anima.
Ludgate Hill, Febr. 8th 1679. My Lord,
Nothing less than the Honor of your Commands, could have inspired me with a
Confidence sufficient to trouble your Lordship with this undigested heap of my
Father's Thoughts concerning the Soul's acting, as it were, in a state of
Matrimony with the Body: But since it is your Lordship's pleasure, as also to
have them in his own very words, I have here set them down accordingly, and
shall plead only your Lordship's Fiat for my Pardon.

SPiritus in Nobis non manet in Identitate, sed rec^ns ingeritur per
renovationem conti^^^m, sicut slamma, sed velociore transitu, quia ^word ^st
spiritualior. Nos quotidie facti sumus (...) ^^seunt in nos: morimur and
renas(...), neque iidem hodie and heri sumus, and personam quam transeuntem non
sentimus, tandem pertransisse agnoscimas.

Nulla est rerum transitio in nos, nisi per viam alimenti; omne alimentnm
respectu alimentandi est consimile and debilius: Alimentantis corpus succrescit
nobis in corpus; spiritus in spiritum. Non tamen proportio utriusque fit nobis
ad proportionem Cibi and Potus, aut aeris nisi a nobis been superantur; aliter
etenim non alunt ingesta, sed opprimunt si fortiora sunt, corrumpunt si
dissimilia, idque plus minusve pro gradu in utroque: Ideoque quo melius res
procedat multa fieri oportet: primum prudens electio and moderatio eorum, quae
ingerenda sunt; and deinceps debita praeparatio per artem, ut nobis similiora
and debiliora fiant: ex part Nostri praecipuum est exercitium ^requens sed
modicum quo calor naturalis vigeat.

Credibile est homines prout in iis pollet spiritus corpusve, alios melius in
se convertere alimentantium spiritum, alios corpus: ideoque inter gulones and
potores nonnulli minus stupidi redduntur quam alii, and nonuulli minus morboso
and oppleto corpore evadunt quam alii: plaerumque tamen ingenio plus obest
excessus in potu, quam in cibo; quia potus spirituosior est, corpus vero magis
apprimitnr esculentis, quoniam ea ut magis corporea plus gravant.

Anima sapiens lumen siccum: corpus sanum temperies sicca and pervia: ideoque
siccare sed deobstruere convenit: idque fit victi exercitio and aere idoneis
sed parum sagaciter plaeraque solum ut calida, frigida, humida vel sicca
notamus: in illis qualitatibus non est rerum energia: long divinius magisque
intrinsecum quiddam est in rebus, quo rei cardo vertitur quodque solum
experientia and effectu agnoscitur: est Deus in rebus; est que omnia, and omnia
agit: illius namque infiniti corpus est omne and spiritus: ex eorum Union
oritur creatura; quae etiam disperditur dissolutione istius Vnionis: cum autem
omnia perpetuo sunt in motu de una conjectura in aliam, Mundi autem corpus and
Spiritus aeterna sed no^as continuo conjuncturas ineunt; ideoqa^ nos creaturae
sumus aeterni Dei apparitiones momentaneae, quas tantum terris ostendunt fata,
nec ultra esse sinunt, veluti effigies in Auleis.

Dei opus sumus nos parentibus instrumentis; actionesque nostrae Dei sunt opera
instrumentis nobis, sed per electionem nostram agentibus: is it a vero electio
per aptas conjuncturas and Ideas adeo immissas invitatur and regitur.

Per Condensationem and Rarefactionem parts Mundi corporeae fiunt Spiritus,
and spirituales siunt corpora: sicque aeterne retro aguntur omnia: Lumen Jovi,
tenebrae Plutoni; Lumen Plutoni, tenebrae Jovi: ut Hippocrates habet; cum
Microcosmus a Mundo trahit, vivit Microc^smus: cum Mundus a Microcosmo trahit,
deficit Microcosmus.

These, my Lord, are only such twilight Conjectures as our human Reason
(whereof we yet so vainly boast) can furnish us with: this (...), or Divinum
Aliquid, (as Hippocrates terms it) is that which does all things; but our
Capacity not being able to discern it, makes us fasten either upon elementary
Qualities, as Hippocrates and Galen do: or upon Geometrical Proportions, as our
modern Descartes does; so that (indeed) all Philosophy, excepting Sceptism, is
little more than Dotage. Pardon, I beseech you, this Boldness from

(My LORD) Your Lordship's most faithful humble Servant, BLOUNT.

To the Right Honorable and most ingenious Strephon, giving a Political human
account of the Subversion of Judaism, Foundation of Christianity, and
Origination of the Millenaries.
Ludgate Hill, December. 1678. My Lord,
I humbly ask your Lordships pardon for this presumption; but when I had last
the honor of waiting upon you, your Lordships candor gave me the freedom of
Venting my own Thoughts; and then, as the subject of our discourse was, about
the great Changes and Revolutions that from time to time had happened in the
Universe, so I made bold to assert, that in all Mutations, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Civil, I would engage to make appear to your Lordship, that
a Temporal Interest was the great Machine upon which all human Actions moved;
and that the common and general pretense of Piety and Religion, was but like
Grace before a Meal: accordingly, I have presumed to trouble your Lordship with
these ensuing Remarques, to justify the same Assertion. THere was never any
Republic which dwindled into a Monarchy, or Kingdom altered into an Aristoracy
or Commonwealth, without a Series of preceding Causes that principally
contributed thereunto; had not other Circumstances concurred, never had Caesar
established himself, nor Brutus erected a Senate: And if you enquire, why the
first Brutus expelled Tarquin, and the second could not overthrow Augustus and
Anthony? Or why Lycurgus, Solon, and Numa, could establish those Governments,
which others have since in vain attempted to settle in Genoa, Florence, and
other places, you will find it to arise from hence: that some considering those
antecedent Causes, which secretly and securely incline to a Change, took
advantage thereof; whilst others did only regard the Speciousness or Justice of
their Pretensions, without any mature examination of what was principally to be
observed; for nothing is more certain, than that in these Cases, when the
previous dispositions all intervene, but a very slight occasion, nay,
oftentimes, a mere Casualty, opportunely taken hold on, and wisely pursued,
will produce those Revolutions, which (otherwise) no humane Sagacity or Courage
could have accomplished.

I cannot find any authentic Ground to believe, that the Sects among the Jews
were more ancient than the days of the Maccabees, but arose after that
Antiochus had subdued Jerusalem, and reduced the generality of the Jews to
Paganism; when (the better to confirm his Conquests) he erected therein an
Academy for the Pythagorean, Platonic and Epicurean Philosophers. This, I
conceive, (and so do others) was the Original of the Pharisees, Sadduces and
Essenes; though afterward, when the Macchabees had anathematized all that taught
their Children the Greek Philosophy, one Party did justify their Tenets, by
entituling them to Sadoc and Baithos, and the other to a Cabala derived
successively from Ezra and Moses. The Introduction of those Sects, and of that
Cabala, occasioned that Exposition of the Prophecy of Jacob, viz. The Scepter
shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his Feet, until Shilo
come, and unto him shall the gathering of the People be. From whence they did
(according to that fantastic Cabala) imagine, That whenever the Scepter
should depart from Judah, and the Dominion thereof cease, that then there
should arrive a Messiah. But as for his being of the Line of David, this was no
general Opinion; for how then could any have imagined- Herod the Great to have
been the Messiah? Or how could Josephus fix that Character upon Vespasian, as
him who should restore the Empire, and Glory of Israel, to whom all Nations
should how, and ^ubmit unto his Scepter? I do not read that the Jews harbor'd
any such Exposition during their Captivity under Nebuchadnezar; albeit that the
Scepter was at that time so departed from the Tribe of Judah, and house of
David, that it never was resetled in it more. After their return to Jerusalem,
no such thing is spoken of; when Antiochus Epiphanes subdued them, profaned
their Temple, destroyed their Laws, and left them nothing of a Scepter or
Lawgiver; during all which time, notwithstanding they had the same Prophecies
and Scriptures among them, there is no News of any expected Messiah. But after
the Curiosity of the Rabbis had involved them in the pursuance of mystical
Numbers, and pythagorically or cabalistically to explain them according to the
Gematria, then was it first discovered, that Shiloh and Messiah consisted of
Letters which make up the same Numerals, and therefore that a mysterious
promise of a Redeemer was insinuated thereby^ as also, that the Prophecy of
Balaam concerning a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter rising out of Israel, with
a multitude of other Predictions, (which the condition of their Nation made
them otherwise to despair of) should be accomplished under this Messiah. I name
no other Prophecies, because they are either general and indefinitely expressed
as to the time of their Accomplishment, or inexplicable from their obscurity,
or uncertain as to their Authority: such as are the Weeks of Daniel, which Book
the Jews reckon among their Hagiographa or Sacred, but not Canonical Books.

This Prophecy likewise had a contradictory one, where it is said of Coniah,
That no man of his seed shall prosper sitting upon the Throne of David, and
ruling any more in Judah, Ier. 22.30. Also Ezekiel. 22.26, 27. Thus says the Lord
God, Remove the Diadem, and take off the Crown, this shall not be the same,
etc. Now the aforesaid obscure Prophecy, which did not take effect at first,
until the Reign of David, and which suffer^d such a variety of Interruptions,
seems to have fallen under this Interpretation in the days of Herod the
Great, whom the Jews so hated for his Usurpation over the Macchabees Levitical
Family, and for his general Cruelties, that he was particularly detested by the
cabalistical Pharisees, who, to keep up the Rancor against him and his Lineage,
as well as to alienate the People from him, I could easily imagine the
Exposition of this Prophecy to have been for no other purpose. Neither perhaps
was Herod much displeased with the said Interpretation of the Prophecy, after
the Herodians had accommodated it to him, and made him the Messiah, who (after
their Conquest and Ignominy under Pompey) having restored the Jews to a great
reputation and strength, and rebuilt their Temple, found some who could deduce
his Pedigree from the thigh of Jacob, as directly as David's and Solomon's were.

Now this Construction of the Prophecy being inculcated into the People, and
into all those Jews, Strangers or Proselytes which resorted to Jerusalem at
their great Festivals, (from Alexandria, Antioch, Babylon, and all other parts
where the Jews had any Colonies) there arose an universal expectation of a
Messiah to come, (excepting amongst the Herodians, who thought Herod the
Messiah) and afterward possessed the Jews (for our Jews are but the Remains of
the Pharisees) to this very day. But their impatience for his appearance, seems
to have been less under Herod the Great, than ever since the first
Interpretation of the Prophecy, (there being no mention of false Messiahs at
that time) perhaps, because the Prophecy was not so clear and convincing whilst
that Herod was King: since under him the Scepter and Legislative Power seemed
to be still in Judah, though swayed by an Idumaean Proselyte, the Priesthood
continued, the Temple flourished, and there was a Prince of the Sanhedrin,
Rabbi Hillel, of the Lineage of David. But ten years after the Birth of Christ,
when Archelaus was banished to Vienna, and Judea reduced into the form of a
Province, the Scepter then seemed to be entirely departed from Judah; the
Kingdom was now become part of the Government of Syria, and ruled by a
Procurator, who taxed them severely, then the sense of their miseries made the
People more credulous; and whether they more easily believed what they so
earnestly desired might happen, or whether the Malcontents (taking the
advantage of their afflictions) did then more diligently insinuate into the
multitude that opinion, it so happened, that there arose at that time sundry
false Messiahs, and the World was big with expectation, (raised in every
Country by the Jews, who had received the intelligence from their common
Metropolis Jerusalem) that the great Prince was coming, who should reestablish
the Jewish Monarchy, and bring peace and happiness to all the Earth.

Now these Circumstances made way for the reception of Christ, and the Miracles
he did, (for Miracles were the only Demonstrations to the Jews) convincing the
People that he was the Messiah, they never staid till he should declare himself
to be so: (for I think he never directly told any he was so, but the Woman of
Samaria) or evinced his Genealogy from David; (for though some mean persons
called him the Son of David, and the Mobb by that Title did cry Hosanna to him,
yet did he acquiesce in terming himself the Son of Man) but esteemed him a
Prophet, Elias, Jeremiah, and even the very Messiah. Also when he made his
Cavalcade upon an Asinego, they extolled him as the Descendant of King David:
but his untimely apprehension and death (together with his neglect to improve
the inclination of the People to make him King) did allay the affections of the
Jews toward him, disappoint all their hopes, and so far exasperated them
against him, that they who had been part of his Retinue at his entrance, did
now call for his execution, and adjudge him by common Suffrage to be crucified:
insomuch that his Disciples fly, the Apostles distrust, and sufficiently
testify their unbelief, by not crediting his Resurrection. But after that he
was risen again, and they assured thereof, they reassume their hopes of a
temporal Messiah, and the last Interrogatory they propose unto him, is, Lord,
will thou at this time restore the Kingdom to Israel?

After his Assumption into Heaven, they attended in Jerusalem the coming of the
Holy Ghost, which seized on them, and gave them the Gift of Tongues (as it is
written) for a season; whereby they preached to the Jews, Elamites, Parthians,
Alexandrians, etc. (whom Salmasius shows, not to be absolute Strangers to the
Natives of those Countries, but Jews planted there) as also to the Proselytes.
These being surprize'd with the Miracle of the Cloven Tongues, and Gift of
Languages, as likewise being possessed with the desire and hopes of a Messiah,
and being further ascertained by the Apostle Peter, That Jesus (whom Pilate had
crucified) was the Lord and Christ, were, to the number, of 3000, immediately
baptized into his Name, and such as were to depart, when they came to their
Colonies, did divulge the tidings, and engage other Jews and Proselytes to the
same Belief: the Apostles themselves going about, and ordaining likewise others
to preach the glad tidings of a Messiah come; who (though dead) was risen again
(according to the obscure Prediction of David) for the salvation of Israel: and
whose second appearance would complete the happiness of all Nations, as well
Jews as Gentiles.

Having thus therefore given your Lordship an Account of the subversion of
Judaism, as well as of the foundation of Christianity, the origination of the
Millenaries is only the consequence of the Fall of the one, and Rise of the
other; for it is apparent, that not only the Jews, but also the Christians were
Millenaries, and did believe and expect the temporal Reign of a Messiah,
together with the Union of the Jews and Gentiles under one most happy Monarchy.
Not one of the two first Ages dissented from this Opinion; and they who oppose
it, never quote any for themselves before Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived (at
least) 250 years after Christ. Of this Opinion was Justin Martyr, and (as he
says) all other Christians that were exactly Orthodox. Irenaeus sets it down
exactly for a Tradition, and relates the very words which Christ used when he
taught this Doctrine; so that if this Tenet was not an universal Tradition in
the primitive Times, I know not what Article of our Faith will be found to be
such. This Doctrine was taught by the consent of the most eminent Fathers of
the first Centuries, without any opposition from their Contemporaries; and was
delivered by them, not as Doctors, but Witnesses: and not as their own Opinion,
but as Apostolic Tradition. Moreover, it was with this pretense of Christ's
being a coming to reign with them here in Glory, that stopped the mouths of the
unbelieving Jews, who before, upon his death and suffering like other Men,
began to doubt very much of the power of his Messiaship, which made them
distrust his reigning in Glory amongst them here on Earth, as it was foretold
the Messiah should do; wherefore this Millenary Invention of his coming again
to reign in Glory salv'd all.

And thus your Lordship sees, the wickedness of Men's Natures is such, that all
Revolutions whatever both in Church and State, as well as all Mutations both in
Doctrine and Matters of Faith, be they never so pious and sacred, or never so
beneficial and useful to Mankind, both in their Souls and Bodies, yet they must
still be seconded by some private temporal Interest, and have some humane Prop
to support them, or else all will not do. My Lord, I am sensible I have a
thousand Pardons to ask your Lordship for this tedious impertinence, but to do
so at this time, were but to lengthen, and consequently add to my Crime: So I
shall only beg the honor to subscribe my self at present,

(MY LORD) Your Lordship's most obedient humble Servant, BLOUNT.

To his Ingenious Friend Mr. Ph. Lodging between the Two Temple Gates in
Fleetstreet, concerning the several Sorts of Augury practiced among the
Ancients, 1692.
SIR,
ACcording to your desire, I have sent you my few inconsiderable Observations
concerning that sort of the ancient Heathenish Superstitions, which was
committed to the management of their Augurs. There were two kinds of Augury,
Natural, and Artificial: the Natural was taken from a constant Experiment of
Events following upon such and such Causes of Signs; the Artificial was that
which was interpreted by Augur to portend something more than can be known by
the ordinary course of Nature. Cicero herein mentions two sorts of Priests,
whereof the first took care of the Ceremonies and Rites; the second of
Divinations, and foretelling things to come; of which sorts, it was lawful only
for the latter to be Augurs or Prophets. Again, these were divided in three
Orders, Augures, Haruspices, and Extispices; who had all distinct Colleges,
but yet they were all Priests.

There were five principal kinds of Augury; the first taken from the Heavens,
or superior parts of the world: the second from Birds: the third from two
footed Creatures: the fourth, from four footed ones: and the fifth or last ex
divis, or from unusual Prodigies. They likewise took Divinations from Sneezing
once, twice, thrice, or oftener, as signifying something to come, either good or
bad. Itching, Palpitation, and shaking or trembling of some Limbs, or some
parts of the Body; had their Interpretation also: of all which the Egyptians
are said to have been the first Authors.

The Birds commonly used for Augury were of two sorts: Praepetes, such as
Eagles, Vultures, Butiones, Sanquales and Immussuli, of whom Pliny speaks, and
which may be a certain kind of Hawk; the other sort are called Oscines, as
foreboding something to come, by their Voice, Tune or singing. All manner of
Owls were thought fatal; but Swans the contrary. Other Birds, together with
certain Insects, as Bees, Ants, Locusts, etc. did signify sometimes good, and
sometimes bad, in the observation whereof, the Augurs regarded the sight of the
Heavens, as supposing certain Planets did preside and govern at some hours,
more than others. Young Birds were not admitted into Auguries, as not being of
ripe understanding. Some Praedictions were also taken from Fishes, as Pliny
says, whereby we may see that Superstition, like Fire, endeavors to resolve
all things into it self, or like a cunning Expositor, interprets every Text to
the Interest of his own party: for it here appears, that all Animals
whatsoever, were in some degree, time or place thought to be ominous.

Auguries were taken at the same time Meat was given to Chickens, which was
called Bolistima Tripudia: these Auguries were never undertaken till the Gods
were first invoked with much solemnity. At which time a procession was made by
the Senators, Patricii, and better sort of the People, who were for the most
part crowned with Bays, and attended with their Wives and Children, they again
being followed by the inferior sort: Before all whom the Pontifex Maximus
marched in great state, having about him only certain young Boys and Virgins,
either crowned with or carrying Laurels in their hands, and singing certain
Verses, which tended to the Demanding of the Gods prosperity and peace, (as
occasion was;) and in this pompous manner they made a Procession to the Temple
of their Gods; whose Images were carved with Garlands, called by the Ancients
Strophia, made of Vervin. There were also Lectisternia, or-Canopy-Beds
appointed for the Gods with much Magnificence and Ceremony, that, when they
pleased, they might repose themselves thereon by Couples; as Jupiter with Juno,
Neptune with Minerva, Apollo with Diana, Mars with Venus, or Vulcan with Vesta,
etc^ sometimes also the same Gods were represented in company with other
Goddesses, as it pleased the Priests, whereof you may read Gell. lib. 5.1. Now
from hence the manner of the Christians going in Procession was thought to be
first taken; it being esteemed but a politic and wise part in them to conform
their Religious Rite^ as much as was possible, to the practic^ of the ancient
Roman Empire, without innovating more than needs must.

Plato attributes much to this Art in a Natural Way; and for my own part, I
think, as the Ancient esteemed this Art of Divining too much, so we esteem it
too little; since, as many of their Observations concerning Auguries, were
either superstitious, or vain, or devised only to abuse the People^ so, on the
other side, useful Observations might have been taken from those Signs, the
Event whereof followed in a constant method and way.

These Arts have been very ancient, especially in Italy, Greece, and Asia
minor; where one Car or Cara is said to have invented them, and Orpheus to have
multiplied them: for as they there wanted the knowledge of Divination by the
Stars, in that perfection as the Egyptians and Chaldeans had it, so they
devised these Arts to make themselves esteemed Prophets. The Romans learnt this
Art from the Hetruscians, to whom they sent six Children of their best Families
to learn their discipline at a place not far from Florence, formerly called
Fesulae, and now Fiesoli, where a College of Augurs flourished; Another also
was built at Rome, which Sylla augmented to the number of 24. This being all I
have to trouble you with upon this subject, I shall take my leave, and
subscribe my self,

(SIR) Your most faithful Friend and Servant BLOUNT.

To the justly honored Sir W. L. ^. to be left for him in the Speakers
Chamber, concerning the Regulations of Corporations, and Surrenderer of
Charters, 1691.
SIR,
IF to have a Picture drawn by a Michael Angelo, a Raphael, or by the hand of
some eminent Master, be an advantage to the Person for whom it is drawn; then
certainly it is no less an Honor for a Country to be so well represented in
Parliament, as ours is by you. Foreign Courts have no better a taste of the
Wisdom and Grandeur of their Neighboring Princes, than from the Ambassadors
they send: nor^ can any thing be a greater Testimony of the Loyalties, Prudence
and Integrity, either of Country, City, or Corporation, than the Election of
such Magistrates, as are both Loyal, Prudent and honest; who (like your self)
have no other Intrest, but the true service of their King, and those whom they
represent; as well maintaining the Prerogative of the one, as supporting the
Liberty of the other; wherein, as by the King's Prerogative, I mean not his
single Will, or (as Divines pretend) a power to do what he list, only the
King's Law, or a Law relating, particularly to himself: so likewise, by the
Peoples Liberty, I mean not the Licentiousness of a Mobb, but only a Liberty
according to Law, whereby we might assert our Rights, and maintain our
Freeholds; which Liberty has been too lately in danger of being devoured, not
so much by Foreigners and Papists, as by our own Natives, and those too, who
have the Impudence to call themselves Protestants, even without blushing: I
mean our late Regulators of Corporations, and Surrenderers of Charters, in the
two former Reigns, upon whose account it is, that I presume to give you this
present trouble, as hearing it will be the next Business upon which your House
designs to fall; and hope the Offenses are not so long past, but that, Parthian
like, you may yet shoot back some punishments upon the Offenders: since it is
but reasonable, that they who mortgaged the Kingdom in the last Reign, should
pay the Intrest of their Crimes in this.

Therefore, Sir, with submission, I do humbly conceive, that to make the Church
of England concerned in the preservation of the late Regulators of
Corporations, or surrenderers of Charters, is one of the greatest Indignities
can be put upon her: and something like reviving the old Popish Law of
Sanctuaries, making her once more become (as it were,) an Asylum or place of
Refuge for the most notorious Malefactors. Pardon me, if it be an Error, to
join ^hese Regulators and Surrenderers together; I do but imitate Nature
herein, and am unwilling to make a separation between the Arm that gives the
strength, and the Hand that gives the Blow. The Charter of each C^rporation was
the undoubted Right and F^eehold of the same, as well as of every ^ndividual
Member of the same: where^^re he that had any hand in Surrendering or delivering
up such a Charter, did, what in him lay, to betray, nay, to rob the people of
their Inheritances. And if the Church of England can be supported only by such
ill men, the Lord have mercy upon her! if a Father of a Family has one Son that
proves an Extravagant, and sells his Birthright, may not that Son be
disinherited without a total Ruin to the whole Family? I hope the Church of
England has many more Sons, and many better Friends to stand by her, than those
who were concerned in so foul an Action^ And that it does not follow by
consequence, If we seclude all ill men from the Government, none but Fanatics
would be left in -- No, I will not, I cannot do so much honor to that Party,
as to admit of such an Objection.

Of how great importance an honest, impartial and duly elected House of Commons
is to this Nation, every Body well knows: and the ill effects of the contrary,
I think, is unknown to no body. My old Lord Burleigh used to say, We can never
be thoroughly ruined, but by a Parliament. They may cut the Throats of us and
our Posterity by a Law; whereas all other Arbitrary Acts of Violence or Tyranny
in a Prince, will either vanish by his Death, or blow over with every adverse
Gale of Fortune that attacks him. And this (undoubtedly) was well known to
those Instruments in the last Reigns, who were so zealously affected for the
regulating Corporations, that they would not have left one man amongst them,
who should not Iurare in Verba Magistri, have done as a Popish King and his
Popish Councils had dictated to them. So that, I confess, I cannot but couple
these Regulators or Surrenderers together with those Judges and other Gentlemen
of the Long Robe, who were for the Annihilating and Dispencing Power. Since,
these were the only sort of men, who (in those times,) laid the Ax to the Root
of the Tree: These were the men that were to have hewn down our Government, and
burnt both it and us in Smithfield Fire: These were the men tha^ should have
plundered the Rights of each Corporation: and then, (like so many Catalines, to
secure the Ills that they had done, by doing greater still,) have sent up such
Members to Parliament, such Representatives, such truly Representatives of
themselves, as should have confirmed their own Iniquities by a Law; in so much
as, the honest Subject of England was, at that time, but like a Traveller
fallen into the hands of Thieves, who first take away his Money, and then to
secure themselves, take away his Life: They Rob him by Providence, and then
murder him by Necessity. The Casuists (as one observes,) do well distinguish,
when they say, He that lies with his Mother commits Incest; but he who marries
his Mother does worse, by applying God's Ordinance to his Sin. In like manner
He that commits Murder with the Sword of Justice, aggravates his Crime to the
highest Degree: As these Gentlemen of whom I have been speaking, would have
done, in making the Government Felo de se, and ^^cessary to its own Ruin.

Sir, all that I can say of this matter is, (...) certainly never was a greater
Rape (...) upon any Government, and there(...) doubt not of your Intrest to
have the Delinquents brought to a Condign Punishment, for the Exemplary Benefit
of future Ages: which that they may be, is the hearty desire of,

(SIR) Your most obliged humble Servant BLOUNT
Possibly, Sir, a motion of a General Punishment, may produce a General Pardon;
wherefore it will be the surest way, to rest satisfied with making Example of
some few of the most notorious and Capital Offenders. And further, that all
Persons (how obnoxious soever in this case) who yet refused to take away the
Penal Laws and Test, might be exempt from any Punishment whatever; that at the
same time you reprove an ill Action, you may reward that which was good.



To Dr. R. B. -- of a God.
I Have perused your Arguments for the proof of a Deity, but think that you
undertook a needless trouble, since I Am confident there is no man of sense that
doubts whether there be a God or no. The Philosophers of Old of the Theodorean
sect, that had spent all their time and study to establish the contrary as a
truth, when they came to dye confuted all their Arguments by imploring some
Deity; as Bion in particular: I know not whether the Idea of a God be Innate or
no, but I Am sure that it is very soon imprinted in the minds of Men; and I must
beg Mr. Lock^s pardon if I very much question those Authorities he quotes from
the Travels of some men, who affirm some Nations to have no notions of Deity;
since the same has been said of the Inhabitants of the Cape of Good Hope, which
the last account of that place proves to be false. And if there be a God, the
necessary Qualities that must be granted him, will not permit a man that
^easons right of things to question his Care and Providence over humane
Affairs. Though I confess it a superficial way of Dispute; the Epicureans may
seem to have some Reason to conclude, that the Deity has no care of mankind,
because the confusion in humane affairs, and the general triumphs of Wrong over
Right, the preposterous endeavors of men in the persuit of Happiness, (which
consisting in mutual offices, yet they doing one another what mischief they
can, by the means destroy the end, and bring all things into such a confusion)
would persuade it, and almost make one think, if what the Pythagoreans and
Chaldeans held of Souls were true, viz. That they were created in Heaven, and
thence transmitted to the Bodies for punishment, that we are Devils, our Malice
to each other, our abounding Villainies gave some occasion for such thoughts.
This consideration gave that Beauty to the beginning of Claudians in Rufinum,
which a certain Critic admired so much, that he said, he that had amind to be
a Poet, should settle that perfectly in his memory, viz.

Saepe mihi dubiam traxit sententia mentem
Curarent superi terras an ullus inesset
Rector an incerto fluerent Mortalia Casu, etc.
The form and beauty of the Universe would not let the considering Heathens
doubt but there was a God; but the confusion of humane affairs, made others
think they were left to Chance. Though if they had thoroughly considred the matter,
they must have thought first that since all the rest of the Inanimate, and
merely Corporeal Substances, not dignified with undershanding, by the exact and
regular Order they observe, discover some divine Disposer and Providence; that
certainly man evidently more excellent, and not be wholly destitute of all
regard of Providence, or indeed be thought to have less than the more ignoble
Beings. Next, that if they confessed a God, they must not deprive him of his
necessary perfections, and certainly a Providence over his Works is one.

Having said all this, I may venture to tell you, that the very foundation of
your Arguments will not hold, since you pretend to demonstrats it in your
Analytick Method from the existence of Man: you begin thus. 1. Humane Kind that
now inhabits the Earth, did not always exist, as all Histories make appear,
asserting Man had a beginning. This they not only plainly testify, but imply
the same thing by the series of those things, which they deliver; for there is
no History that pretends to give an account of the transactions of above six
Thousand years or thereabouts.

This being the first step of your Progression, and which being removed, all
the rest falls to the Ground: give me leave to tell you, that all things that
are not self-evident, should be proved, or not pass upon us in Philosophy; but
this, you have laid for your foundation is so far from being self-evident, that
it is extremely controvertible. For though our Chronology in less than six
thousand years come up to the Creation, that of Eusebius being the longest, and
the only that exceeds that sum. Yet this takes not in all Nations, and if it
did, the Argument is weak, since it is possible there may have been Histories of
them that reached farther, though now lost. Or perhaps they kept no Records, for
the uncertainty of the Greek Chronology before the Olympiads, shows us they
came but late to a regular observation of time. And the Roman Histories can
give us no assurance or certainty, when or by whom Rome was built. Livy tells
us of Romulus and Remus, Salust, says, the Trojans built it, and concludes it
uncertain: I know as to the time they are more positive^ reckoning ab urbe
condita, though I cannot think there can be an absolute certainty of their
computation, since that was begun some years at least after its Foundation.

Besides, to draw an Argument from this, that because we have no History that
exceeds six thousand years, therefore the World was not before, is all one as
if I should say, that because the Goths, Vandals, and other barbarous Nations
were not known till the time of the Roman Empeperors, therefore they were not
in being before.

But since our Correspondence with China, we have found they have Records and
Histories of four or six thousand years date before our Creation of the World;
and who knows but some other Nations may be found out hereafter, that may go
farther, and so on. Nay, the Chinese themselves in a traditional account, tell
us, That the Posterity of Panzon, and Panzona, inhabited the Earth 90000 years.
The Bramins of Guzarat said the year 1639, that there had past 326669 Ages,
each Age consisting of a number of years, and if I mistake not Centurys. Nay
the Egyptians in the time of their King Amasis Contemporary with Cyrus, had the
Records, and Story of 13000 years, and a succession of 330 Kings, which shows
they were not Lunary years.

But you may say after all these accounts they settle some beginning of it:
true, they pretend to have Records of no more; but it follows not from thence
that there had been no other Ages before, whose Records, if they kept any, were
lost, or of no use: and a good reason for the loss of the Records of Countries,
is the several Revolutions they have been subject to. The Inhabitants of the
Earth changing their places from one part of it to another, as if there were a
necessary Circulation in that, as in the Blood of Man, and the Waters of
Rivers, etc. Next, the Earth and Sea, in process of time some very able
Philosophers hold, have changed places; and in the destruction of Conntries by
these several ways, their Records may very well be supposed to be lost.
Besides, the Languages and Characters altering, they would be of no use to
Posterity; so if spared in the havoc of Time, permitted to perish afterward.
As in the Kingdom of Trigremaen in Aethiopia, superior in Africa; where in the
City of Caxumo, the Aux^me of Ptolomy, there are now Obelisks full of engraved
Characters, which none of the Africans can read; as there are also on the
Coasts of Safola.

Mr. L. Clerk has split upon the same Rock with you: I would therefore desire
you to consider this Point a little more seriously, and build your
Demonstration of a thing of this Consequence on a firmer Basis, else instead of
promoting the Cause, you espouse, you only give advantages to those who would
be thought at least to be what they are not. I hope you will pardon this freedom
of,

SIR^ Your friend, and humble Servant CHAR. GILDON.

To Charles Blount Esquire.
AFter so many Favors, you must think me a very impudent Beggar indeed, to
importune you for more; but as I Am sensible the Benefits you bestow are the
effects of a generous Nature, so I persuade my self, that the pleasure you have
in conferring them, lessen the assurance of my asking; especially in a
disquisition of this Nature, which may afford a more substantial profit to my
Mind, than Favors of another kind, which I must always acknowledge I owe to
you; and none would be a greater, than your employing me in something that may
be serviceable to you, for then I shall be able to convince you, that my Will
extends beyond a bare Acknowledgment.

I have often doubted whether there were any such thing as a pure Spirit
independent of all Body and Matter: And, I must own, I think that there can be
no such thing as it is vulgarly apprehended. For what Idea can we form of it?
Thought, generally taken for the Essence of the Soul, seems only the Action, or
an Accident of it, since the Mind is often without it, as Body without Motion,
or any particular Modification of it. So that we may consider the Soul without
Thought, but not Thought without some Subject to in here in (unless by
Abstraction) no more than roundness without some round Body. And why the Intima
Natura, that composes the Matter, which goes to the making up that definition
of Body, as Extension, Divisibility, Impenetrability, should be incapable of
receiving the accident of Thought, I can find no Reason; for being ignorant of
the nature of those contiguous Particles of Matter that are extended divisible,
and impenetrable, how can we pretend to decide it magisterially against this
Opinion, especially since Memory, Wit and Judgment, the noblest Qualities of
the MIND, are agreed by the Naturalists, (as is evident from Physic) to have so
great a dependence on the Mechanism of the Brain, etc. And to show plainly that
we are ignorant of this inmost nature of things, one Example may suffice, since
we take the definition from certain general Qualities we discover in Matter. As
for Example, a Seed of Pepper -- we see it is extended, divisible, and
impenetrable; but we discover not what that quality of heating the mouth is
composed of, or proceeds from; or what secret power those Particles have, to
affect the Sense in that manner. So in all other things it is not Extension,
etc. that compose the Body, but some other occult thing we know not what, of
which Extension, etc. are the consequence, whether it be the congregation of
Atoms, or other invisible Particles of Matter solid or subtle, though it must be
confessed that even the least of these Atoms has the same Qualities; but yet it
must be also granted, they have other Qualitys probably not less in number,
which we know nothing of; so that when I term Extension, etc. the consequence
of those occult Qualities we know not, I mean a co-existent consequence, as the
consequence of a self-evident Principle. But if the Soul be not Matter, though
more fine and subtle than the Body, it is very strange the chief Part of us
should be of such a nature that we can form no Idea of it. But it is stranger
yet, that Men should think it so necessary to believe so, when a more obvious
and intelligible Opinion would answer all the ends of Religion as well. They
must acknowledge the Soul a Substance, and we have no Idea of Substance
distinct from that of Body. If they have any, they would do well to impart it
to the grosser understandings of the rest of the World.

But these Gentlemen that advance this Opinion of pure immaterial Substances,
trust to Fancy, and mere Conjectures, which they can give no account at all of,
but by one only Accident, viz. THOUGHT; which they can never demonstrate
incapable of inhering in Body modefy'd to that purpose, though not in all Bodies;
for I think Mr. Bently's far from Demonstrations, since they rise only to a
Probability. But by making Thought the Essence of the Soul, they distinguish it
not from that of Beasts; for they think, and have perhaps something equivalent
to Reason, or must at least be granted equal to Idects. Nay, this proves, that
either Thought and Matter are not incompatible; or that the Essence of the
Souls of Men and Beasts is the same, and by consequence both mortal, or both
immortal, for they both think. Besides, since it is evident from this
uncontrovertible Maxim, Nemo dat quod non habet, that the Qualities of all
things; and therefore of Body, are in God himself (that is in an infinite
degree of perfection) the most pure of Spirits, it is not likely that Body
should be derogatory to the purity of infinitely inferior Spirits.

On this Corporiety of Spirits depends a more obvious Explanation of two Texts
of Scripture, than I have met with in any of the vulgar and general Comments
(supposing the Book of Genesis a true History of matter of Fact, and no
Parable, as Dr. Burnet contends in his Archiologiae) If the Angels have Bodies,
we may, without Absurdity, suppose them to generate with Women, and so the Sons
of God might enter with the Daughters of men, and beget a Race of Giants on
them. For it is unaccountable to me, that none but the Daughters of Iniquity (as
the vulgar Interpreters will have it) should be capable of bearing so robust a
Generation. The other place is in the Epistles of St. Paul, where he enjoins
the Women to be covered in the Church because of the Angels. For the Church
being the more peculiar place of the Ministry of Angels, they might, perhaps,
by the beauty of that Sex, be diverted from their Duty. This Opinion would
restore the Free Will to the Angels, which IN cannot conceive should be so
absolutely necessary for the justification of Man, as the Clergy would persuade
us, and yet not at all requisite to that of Angels. If Free Will was taken from
them on the Fall, of one part of 'em, they met with a more indulgent Fate than
Man, who still possesses it to his Ruin.

These Considerations suggest an odd extravagant Thought, which I must set
down, if it be but to make you laugh, and, I hope, you will pardon my impertinent
freedom --

The Thought is this --

Who knows but this Race of Men was first of Angelic Degree, till by the
bewitching Smiles of Woman (the most lovely Brute of the Universe) betrayed to
Mortality i^ her Embraces. And then perhaps Columb^^ might be the first of the
Sons of Noah, tha^ entered the new discovered World of America, which might be
a Race deriv^d from some other deluded Angels, won by the same destructive Bait.

Pardon me if I think the Pandora of the Heathens (to say nothing of our Eve)
may favor this Imagination.

But these are only indigested Thoughts, I dare neither yield nor deny my
Assent to, till I know your Judgment, which has a very great Influence over,

SIR, Your much obliged Friend, And humble Servant, CHARLES GILDON.

To Mr. B. Fellow of -- College.
IN the last you honored me with, you said you were now giving your self to
the study of Philosophy, which makes me desire you to give me your Thoughts
upon these following Heads, in as brief a manner as may be.

1. Whether there be a Succession in Eternity, or i^ be as Boe^^us de^ines it
Interminabiles vitae to ^a si and and perfecta possessi^, ^ut be building his
Opinion with the rest of the old Platonists on a false Supposition, seems to me
in the wrong: For they imagined that it would be incompatible with the
Immutability of God, not to have his whole Existence to be all once, his
duration measured, as Mr. Cowly does by the Phrase of An Eternal now, because
they thought by succession he must loose those parts that are past, and gain
those that are to come, and only enjoy the present. But the Imperfection of
Succession in Creatures is no good Argument that it must be so in God; for it is
true that they both receive and loose by it, because as they grow old, they
acquire or are deprived of some property, which cannot happen in God. But that
which makes most for this Opinion, is that since the contrary is not built on
Revelation, there is no Reason we should implicitly yield our assent to it on
the bare Authority of the Platonists, unless they could make us understand it;
for I defy any one to think of Eternity without the Idea of Succession. 2. As
to the Origin of Good and Evil, methinks it is less contradictory, and
unreasonable to believe as the Ancient Peastans did, that there were two
beginnings of things, the one Good, and the other Evil. For how can Evil
proceed from a Being infinitely Good, and without whom nothing is, if Evil be
not? And if Dr. Burnet has proved Genesis but a Parable, why may not the
Persians be as much in the right as the Jews. 3. Supposing the Soul Immaterial,
why may not Material Fire have an operation on it, since the Body so much
influences it in this Life. 4. I would fain know what Reason some men have (and
those Philosophers) to term any one quality in God more excellent than an
other; for certainly let the number be infinite, so must the perfection of each
be, else the Infinite Being would in some be less Infinite, or rather Finite;
for I think there is no medium betwixt Infinite, and Finite; nor any difference
can I discover betwixt two equally infinite Qualities. If therefore the
Qualities of all things are, and by consequence originally were (for God's
Qualitys can neither increase nor suffer diminution) in God, as it may be
evidently proved, then it follows that those of Body are of equal excellency
with those of Spirits, since equally in him, and all the Qualities of God are
infinitely perfect. 5. The opinion of the Plurality of Worlds seems more
agreeable to God's infinite (for so must all God's Qualities be) communicative
Qve Quality to be continually making new Worlds, since other ways this Quality
or Act of Creating would be only once exerted, and for infinite duration lie
useless and dormant. But it seems strange, that only once this Infinite desire
of Communicating his Infinite Glory should be put in practice, and that only to
so little, and inconsiderable a Number as all the Sons of Adam can make up, in
comparison of Infinity. The opinion of Plurality of Worlds does at least give
us a more August Idea of the Wisdom and Power of God, and of his infinit^
Perfections, than to imagine all that Infinite Extension should be like a
barren Heath, without any Productions of the Infinite Being, and not filled
with Infinite and Endless Worlds.
But these are Doubts enough to be resolved in one better, if you will answer
them, I shall be extremely obliged to you, since they are designed for the
public view; and I would willingly have them resolved, of which I Am sensible
you are very capable. I am

Your oblieg'd humble Servant, C. GILDON.

To CHARLES BLOUNT Esquire Of Natural Religion, as opposed to Divine Revelation.
NAtural Religion is the Belief we have of an eternal intellectual Being, and
of the Duty which we owe him, manifested to us by our Reason, without
Revelation or positive Law: The chief Heads whereof seem contained in these few
Particulars.

1. That there is one infinite eternal God, Creator of all Things. 2. That he
governs the World by Providence. 3. That it is our Duty to worship and obey him
as our Creator and Governor. 4. That our Worship consists in Prayer to him, and
Praise of him. 5. That our Obedience consists in the Rules of Right Reason, the
Practice whereof is Moral Virtue: 6. That we are to expect Rewards and
Punishments hereafter, according to our Actions in this Life; which includes
the Soul's Immortality, and is proved by our admitting Providence. Seventhly,
That when we err from the Rules of our Duty, we ought to Repent, and trust in
God's mercy for Pardon.
That Rule which is necessary to our future Happiness, ought to be generally
made known to all men.

But no Rule of Revealed Religion was, or ever could be made known to all men.

Therefore no Revealed Religion is necessary to future Happiness.

The Major is thus proved:

Onr Future Happiness depends upon err obeying, or endeavoring to fulfill the
known Will of god.

But that Rule which is not generally known, cannot be generally obeyed.

Therefore that Rule which is not generally known, cannot be the Rule of our
Happiness.

Now the Minor of the first Syllogism is matter of Fact, and uncontrovertible,
that no Religion supernatural has been conveyed to all the World; witness the
large Continent of America, not discovered till within this two Hundred Years;
where if there were any Revealed Religion, at least it was not the Christian.

And if it be objected to the whole, That the ways of God's dealing with the
Heathen as to Eternal Mercy, are unknown to any; and that he will Judge them by
the Law of Nature, or (in other terms) the Rules of Natural Religion or
Morality. We urge again, that either those Laws of Natural Religion are
sufficient, if kept, to Happiness; or they who could know no more, are out of a
possibility of a future state of Blessedness: because they could not comply
with Laws they know not: And in saying this, they deny God's Infinite Goodness,
which provides for all his Creatures the means of attaining that Happiness,
whereof their Natures are capable. Again, if they urge, that Natural Religion
is sufficient, but not possible to be lived up to. The same answer falls more
heavy upon them; That then there is no visible means left for the greater part
of Mankind to be happy: And to do our duty according to what we are able, is
but a cold comfort, if we have no Assurance or Hope at least in the means we
have laid before us.

Now if they infer, that therefore a Revealed Religion is necessary, because
the Natural will not suffice, is to beg the Question, and to begin again the
Dispute: for we hold that a Natural Religion will suffice for our Happiness;
because it is the only general means proposed. And though we affirm not that we
can wholly live up to it; yet that a general expiation is discovered in the
Natural Religion, viz. Penitence, and Resolution of Amendment that we
acknowledge.

Sir Charles Wolsy tells us what is most ^rue, that Mankind in all Ages has
applied to God, as guilty and Offenders; that all have agreed an Expiation was
necessary, but looked up to him for the Revealation of it: wherefore they used
several Sacrifices and Lustrations, which they had, or thought they had
reveal^d.

This I think so weak an Argument for a revealed Religion, that it serves
rather ^o destroy it, because, that granting all Ages have thought an Expiation
necessary, (...) first their differing in the outward means, showed the means
was uncertain; And if there had been any outward Expiation necessary, it must
have been known generally, or the force of the first Arg^ment holds good,
namely, that it is not possible for the greatest part of Mankind to be happy
hereafter, where the means of compassing it was known to them. -- But, 2 dly,
these several Expiations were indeed all but Symbolical, and referred to our
Sorrow and Repentance: That it is the true and only Expiation of Sin, and is so
agreed upon by all men in all Ages, and of all Religions, wherefore take it for
an undoubted Truth: and this not revealed, but innate, and a part of Natural
Religion.

The same may be said of the Doctrinal part of it: Thus are the things
generally known and believed; but all end in the practice of Virtue, and
Reverence of the Deity.

Now all Revealed Religions are different from each other; and you cannot prove
any one of them to be truer than the rest, before you can prove that one of
them must be true; and if once known true, mankind would all agree in it;
otherwise those marks of Truth in it were not visible, which are necessary to
draw an unviversal assent.

For Rewards and Punishments hereafter, the Notion of them has not been
universally received; for the Heathens dis^greed in the Doctrine of the
^mmortality of the Soul: But grant that they seem reasonable, because they are
deduced from the Doctrine of Providence, which the most Rational of the
Heathens held: For if God governs all things, he is just, because it is a part
of In^inite Perfection; and if so, he either rewards here, or hereafter; but
not always here, therefore hereafter. Yet if they who hold Revelation, will
grant that they are parts of Natural and unreveal'd Religion, because the
wisest men have inclined to hold them amongst the Heathen, and now do in all
Opinions; then it follows that by living up to the Dictates of Reason and
Penitence, when we fail i^ so doing, men may be happy in a future state,
without any help of Revealed Religion, which is all I contend for.

The great Objections against the validity of Natural Religion to Eternal
Happiness, seem to be these.

1. That this Doctrine was never generally held in any Age; and therefore seems
not to carry that light of Moral certainty in it, which we hold necessary to
establish the tr^th of a Religion: for we say that Religion is only true, which
is or may be reasonable, and convincing to all men; now if it be not generally
held, it appears not convincing.

This Objection has not really the weight in it, which it seems to carry at
first sight; for it is evident that many men of all Religions at this day, have
centered in the Opinion of Natural Religion, and its sufficiency of Happiness.
The Heathen Philosophers and Poets (who were the first Priests) did at the
bottom acknowledge Virtue to be the guide of all our Actions; and all their
Mysteries referred to a good Life, and to Repentance. At this day the learned
in all Religions hold the same: this they agree in; in the outward Ceremonies
of every Religion, they are every man content to Conform to those of their own
Country. Which is an Argument for us, that whatever new Religions have sprung
up, yet they have all retained this part thereof, viz. that they disagreed
amongst themselves.

It Is confessed that whole Nations have never followed our Opinion: but how many
of a Nation ever consider to the bottom of any Religion! that which is
established draws the vulgar, who enquires not beyond it. And, besides, our
Opinion is so Charitable, that we do not exclude any Dissenters from eternal
Happiness: God may be pleased with different Worships, because we say that all
Worships are included in Prayer, Praise, exercise of Virtue and Penitence, when
we have done amiss: So that the foundation being the same, we labor not in the
Superstructures, which are only the Modes and Circumstances of Religion.

2. The next Objection against the Sufficiency of Natural Religion to Happiness
eternal, is only a bare Affirmation of our Adversaries, That Natural Religion
is but an imperfect Light, which God gives us so far, as that by improving it,
we may arrive at a Supernaturl Knowledge. As suppose I were going to Whitehall
from Goventgarden Church, and can then see only to the end of the Strand before
me, but coming thither, am directed further.

But I wholly deny any Natural Light can lead me to a Supernatural; there is no
proportion betwixt those two extremes: There is a Gulf betwixt, a (...): And
it is not so easy a passage as from Covent Garden to Whitehall; it is rather from
Covent Garden to some place beyond the Caelum Empyraeum, and wholly out of the
boundaries of Nature. Also to prove that God can reveal to me what is farther
Necessary, when I have used my best Natural Endeavors, is only to prove that
God is Omnipotent and Infinite; but proves not that it is necessary he should or
will do it: for a posse ad esse non valet Consequentia. I have already
endeavored to prove that it is not necessary he should reveal more; and
therefore till that point be determined (...) I humbly doubt and suspend my
Belief.

3. Another Objection may be this: That there is no foundation in Natural
Religion for a virtuous Life; or at least not so great as in a Revealed
Religion, where Rewards and Punishments are proposed. So that a mere Moral Man
upon bare Virtue, will be discouraged when he sees Virtue not rewarded here.

A second Objection is, That there is a difference betwixt our condition, and
that of the Heathens: for if they lived up to the height of Virtue and known
Reason, they might (say some charitable Christians) be happy in a future
condition: We cannot, because a revealed Religion has been discovered to us,
more then to them, though we believe it not: Therefore we ought in our own
defense to embrace it, because that by the Principles of a Natural Religion we
grant, that those of a revealed may be saved: but they of the revealed deny
that safety to us. (A foolish Catholic Argument.)

To the first Objection we Answer: That Rewards and Punishments are
acknowledged in Natural Religion, and are to expect them in a future Life
answerable to our Actions here; and according to the Justice and Mercy of the
great Creator. And till you prove they are inconsistent with the doctrine of
Natural Religion, we need answer no further to your Argument.

To the second Objection; It supposes like the other; first, a Supernatural
Religion, which is to prove. And if the Heathens living up to the height of
Natural Religion, might be eternally happy, I see no reason but why we may be
so too; for if our Happiness depends upon our Belief, we cannot firmly believe
till our Reason be convinced of a Supernatural Religion: And if the Reasons of
it were evident, there could be no longer any Contention about Religion: All
men would embrace the same, and acquiesce in it; no prejudice would prevail
against the certainty of a future good. It Is every man's greatest business here
to labor for his Happiness, and consequently none would be backward to know
the means.

For the Inference, namely, that though a Supernatural Religion be dubious, yet
it is the safest way to embrace it. I first Answer That I cannot embrace what
comes not within the compass of my knowledge: And if I cannot believe, it is a
sign the Evidence is not strong enough to make me. And secondly,

Two Arguments there are, which Sir Chapter Wolsy calls Demonstrations to prove a
Revealed Religion: -- The first is, The Notion of Sin, or deviation from good
in all men; a repugnant Principle to Virtue; a lapse from our first estate,
wherein God, who is all good, must needs create us, and which the World has
generrlly acknowledged by Lustrations and Sacrifices to appease the Deity: This
he says, we can know by no other Light but Revelation, etc. Secondly, The
approaches to God, and propitiation must be immediately and supernatually
discovered, how he will be appeased.


To the first, I Answer; This generally acknowledged Lapse of Nature that it
came may be discovered by Nature, viz. by Natural Reason; how it came, it is
reasonable to conclude without Revelation, namely, by a deviation from the
right Rule of Reason implanted in us: how he came to deviate from this Rule or
Lapse, proceeds from the Nature of Goodness, originally given us by our
Creator; which Reason tells to be an arbitrary state of goodness only,
therefore not a Necessary Goodness to which our Natures were constrained. In
short, our fall proceeds from our not being able to reason rightly on every
thing we act; and with such Beings we were created: For all our Actions are
designed by us to some good which may arise to us; but we do not always
distinguish rightly of that good: we often mistake the Bonum apparens for the
Bonum reale,; Decipimur specie Recti: The Bonum jucundum is preferred for want
of Right Reasoning to the Bonum honestum; and the Bonum vicinum (though it be the
less in it self) often carries it before the Bonum remotum: which is greater in
its own Nature. No Man ever held, that we could appetere malum qua malum: And
therefore I will not grant him a total Lapse in our Natures from God; for we
see many born with virtuous Inclinations. And though all Men at some times err,
even the best in their Actions; it only shows, that we were not created to a
necessitated goodness. It Is enough to prove no fatal Lapse, that many are
proved through the course of their Lives, more prone to do Good than Ill; and
that all Men do Ill only for want of right Reasoning, because the Will
necessarily follows the last Dictate of the Understanding.

To the Second; Namely, That the Propitiation for our Offenses must be
supernaturally discovered, or else we can come upon no certain Terms of
Acceptance with God.

I answer that which I have often hinted, viz. That all the World who have
agreed upon the Fault, agree upon the Compensation; namely, Sorrow and a true
Repentance: And Reason dictates this without Revelation. The World indeed has
differed in their Lustrations and Sacrifices; but more have in all Ages agreed,
that these without Repentance were nothing, and Repentance without them was
valid: But that bare Repentance is sufficient Compensation for an infinite
Offense against an infinite Being, is what our Adversaries deny, and therefore
point us to an infinite Sacrifice or Propitiation for Sin, namely, Jesus Christ.

I may first answer, That till all who profess Christianity, agree whether
Christ be a Propitiation or no, I need not go about a farther Refutation of
their Argument; for the Socinians will allow him only to be set up for an
Example, not as a Mediator or Sacrifice. But grant that the Offense is
committed against an infinite Being, we are but finite Creatures who commit it,
and Repentance is what we can answer to an Atonement; and therefore we may
reasonably assert, it is all God will expect from us: Faith even in Christ,
according to their Rules, being not good without it. If I owe a Million, and
can pay but a Thousand Pounds, my Creditor can have but All; it is true, my Body
is then subject to Imprisonment, that is to the farther Extent of the Law; but
then that Law is void of Mercy. Now Mercy is one of the greatest Attributes of
God, and I think that infinite Justice cannot be extended on a finite Creature
infinitely, without a Contradiction to infinite Mercy, which is, as 'twere,
God's High-Court of Equity in the Case to relieve from the extremity of the
Law: for though God's Attributes are all infinite, and though his Justice be
infinite as well as his Mercy; yet the infinity of his Justice is only as
inherent, not as extensive as his Mercy toward us, we receiving of his Justice
but according to the measure of our deserts, in punishment from his Mercy more
than we can deserve: As the strictest of Christians hold, If that his Mercy be
farther extended to us than his Justice, his Justice is not infinitely extended
in punishing us; for nothing is infinite which another thing can go beyond. And
in this I follow that Father of the Church Origin, who thought that by a long
Purgation, the greatest Sins might be washed away, and that Pythagoras and
Plato taught him

It has been demanded of me, Whether I should be convinced of my Opinion, and
admit of supernatural Religion, in case the Gospel ( i. e.) a supernatural
Religion had been promulgated to all the World? I answered, I should; and was
contented that the whole stress of the Dispute should be terminated in that one
Point. It was replied, That then if it could be proved that this nniversal
Revelation was unnecessary, I ought to acquiesce; I granted that also.

'Twas then urged, That this Revelation was not thought necessary by Almighty
God, because he foreknew that none of those Heathens, or whosoever else would
live up to the height of their natural Reason or Religion, and that therefore
it was not reasonable that they should receive this supernatural Help;
wherefore it was concluded, that they were all damned eternally.

I answer; This is to dive too far in^God's Secrets, to conclude them all
damned in all Ages, to whom that revealed LIght came not. The Apostle says,
They shall be judged by the Law of Nature; but he says not, They shall be
damned. Neither will they or can they be called of themselves, unless the means
had been offered to them as well as to us. Also by the same Reason, all to whom
this Revelation is come, shall be saved; because it was revealed to none who
were not worthy of it: For if he foreknew that no one of the Heathens should
live up to the worth of this new Light, and therefore denied it to them all,
then he who makes no distinction of persons, would only have revealed it to
those who should be saved: But our Adversaries confess that this Light is
revealed to many as shall not be saved among the Christians, as if it were only
to double their Condemnation; an Opinion which totally robs God of his
Attribute of Mercy, and Man is left at least in a very doubting condition, if
not totally desperate.

I am, SIR, Your Friend without Reserve, A. W.

To his Friend Mr. Gildon, concerning the World's Age, Beginning and End.
SIR,
That Part of Ocelius Lucanus which I promised to send you, is what follows.

OCELLVS LVCANVS.
MY Opinion is, That the Universe admits neither Generation nor Corruption,
for it ever was and ever shall be; inasmuch as if 'twere subject to time, it
would not yet continue. For if any Man should conceive it to have been made, he
would not be able to find into what it should be corrupted and dissolved; since
that out of which it was made, is before the Universe; as that into which it
shall be corrupted, will be after the Universe. Besides, the Universe being
made, is made together with all things; and being corrupted, is corrupted
together with all things; which is impossible: So that the Universe is without
Beginning and Ending. Now whatsoever had a Beginning of its Production, and
ought to partake of Dissolution, admits two Alterations; the one from that
which is less, to that which is greater; and from what which is worse, to that
which is better; and that term from whence it begins to be alterd, is called
Production; as that to which it arriveth is called the State: The other
Alteration is from that which is greater, to that which is less; and from that
which is better, to that which is worse: But the Period of this Alteration is
called Corruption and Dissolution. If therefore the whole be producible and
corruptible, when it was produced, it was altered from that which was less, to
that which was greater; and from that which was worse, to that which was
better: and consequently will afterward be altered from the greater to the
less, and from better to worse. So that the World being produced, admitted
Growth and State; and shall again receive Diminution and Corruption. For every
Nature that admits Progress, has three Terms, and two Intervals. The three
Terms are Production, State, and Dissolution; but the two Intervals are, from
the Production to the State, and from the State to the Dissolution. Now the
Universe does of it self afford us no such evidence, since no one ever saw it
produced nor altered either in Ascensu or Descensu, but it always remained in
the same condition it is now in, equal and like it self. The evident Signs
whereof, are the Orders, fit Proportions, Figures, Scituations, Intervals,
Faculties, mutual swiftness and slowness of Motions, Numbers, and Periods of
Times; for all such things admit Alteration and Dimination, according to the
Progress of a producible Nature: For that which is greater and better,
accompanies the State by reason of its Vigor; and which is less or worse,
accompanies the Dissolution, by reason of its Weakness. Now I call the World
by the Name of the Universe, which Appellation it obtains, in that it is
framed out of all things, being an absolute and perfect Collection of all
Natures: for besides the Universe, there is nothing; and if there be any thing,
it is contained in the Universe, either as a part, or excrescence thereof. As
for those things that are contained in the World, they have communion with the
World, but the World has communion with nothing else besides it self; for all
other things have not such a Nature as is sufficient of it self, but stand in
need of the communion with other things: As living Creatures need Respiration;
the Eye, Light, and the other Senses their several Objects; and Plants need the
Juice of the Earth for their growth: Nay, the Sun, Moon, Planets, and fixed
Stars, stand in need of a certain portion of the Universe; only the Universe
stands in need of no other thing besides it self. Now as Fire, which is able to
give heat to other things, is of it self hot; so that which is the cause of
perfection to other things, is of it self perfect; and that which is the cause
of Safety to others, must of it self be safe and permanent. Also that which is
the cause of Compactedness to others, must needs of it self be compacted: But
the World is to all other things the cause of Being, Safety, and Perfection;
wherefore of it self it must needs be eternal, perfect, and permanent for ever.
Again, If the Universe be dissolved, it must of necessity be dissolved into
Something, or into Nothing; Not into Something, inasmuch as there will not be a
total Corruption of the Universe, if it be dissolved into Something: for
Something must be either the Universe, or at least a Part of it; nor will it be
annihilated: For it is impossible that Something should either be made of
Nothing, or dissolved into Nothing; wherefore the Universe can admit neither
Production nor Corruption. Now if any one should conceive it is corruputed,
either it must be corrupted from Something that is without the Universe, or
from Something that is within; it cannot be from Something without it, for
there is Nothing without the Universe which comprehends all things, and is the
World. Nor can it be from things that are within the Universe, for then they
must of Necessity be greater and more prevalent than the Universe, which cannot
be; for all things are hurried by the Universe, and by means of it are saved,
compacted, and endew'd with Life and Soul. So that if it comes neither by any
thing without the World, nor within it, then it cannot be subject to Corruption
and Dissolution. Moreover, All Nature, if it be well considered, seems to
take away Continuity from the first and most honorable parts in a certain
Proportion, lessning it by degrees, and applying it to all mortal things, as
also admitting a Progress of its own Constitution, (for the first Bodies being
moved, do in a uniform manner perform their Periods) I say, a Progress not
continued and local, but consisting in Alteration; viz. Condensation and
Rarefaction. Thus Fire being pressed together produces Air, Air Water, and
Water Earth. Also from Earth there is the same Period of Alteration, till you
come to Fire again, whence the Alteration at first began, (according to what
Hippocrates says -- Lumen Iovi, Tenebrae Plutoni; Lumen Plutoni, Tenebrae
Iovi:) Likewise Fruits and Plants received their Beginning from Seeds, which
being come to maturity and perfection, are again resolved into Seeds, Nature
making her progress from the same unto the same. But Men, and other Animals, do
in a more inferior Manner finish the progress of their Nature, (since they do
not return to their first Age:) Neither have they a reciprocal change into one
another, as it is in Fire, Air, Water, and Earth; but after they have run through
all the four aforesaid parts of their Race, and passed their several Ages, they
are dissolved and dye, becoming in the same state as they were. ( Quo non Nati
Iacent, as Seneca and Pliny both speak.) These therefore are Arguments
sufficient to prove, That the Universe remains perfect and uncorrupted; as
also that the Excrescences and Results thereof, suffer only a Mutation, and not
an Annihilation; there being no such thing as Quies in Natura, all things being
in a perpetual circular Motion. Nay, that the Figure, Motion, Time, and
Substance thereof, are without Beginning and End; thereby it plainly appears,
that the World admits neither Production nor Dissolution: for the Figure is
spherical, and consequently on every side equal, and therefore without
Beginning or Ending. Also the Motion is circular, and consequently stable,
never shifting its former place. The Time likewise is infinite wherein the
Motion is performed, as that which is moved had neither Beginning, nor shall
have End; from all which it is evident, that the Universe admits neither
Production nor Corruption. Ocellus Lucanus, chap. 1.

Now it is very much, that this Author Ocellus Lucanus (who for his Antiquity
is held to be almost a Contemporary with Moses, if not before him) should have
so different a Sentiment of the World's Beginning from that which Moses had,
methinks if Moses^s History of the Creation, and of Adam's being the first Man,
had been a general received Opinion at that time, Ocellus Lucanus, who was so
ancient and so eminent a Philosopher, should not have been altogether ignorant
thereof.

Again, (says he) as the Frame of the World has been always, so it is
necessary that its Parts should likewise always have existed; by Parts, I mean
the Heaven, Earth, and that which lies betwixt, viz. the Sky; for not without
these, but with these, and of these, the World consists. Also if the Parts
exist, it is necessary that the Things which are within them should also
coexist; as with the Heaven, the Sun, Moon, fixed Stars and Planets, with the
Earth, Animals, Plants, Minerals, Gold and Silver; with the Air, Exhalations,
Winds, and Alterations of Weather, sometimes Heat, and sometimes Cold; forwith
the World, all those things do, and ever have existed as Parts thereof. Nor
has Man had any original Production from the Earth or elsewhere, as some
believe; but has always been, as now he is, coexistent with the World whereof
he is a part. Now Corruptions and violent Alterations are made according to the
Parts of the Earth: sometimes by the overflowing of the Sea; sometimes with the
dilating and parting of the Earth by Winds and Waters imprisoned in the Bowels
thereof; but an universal Corruption of the Earth never has been, nor ever
shall be. Yet these Alterations have given occasion for the invention of many
Lies and Fables. And thus are we to understand them that derive the Original of
the Greek History from Inachus the Argive: Not that he was really the Original
thereof, as some make him; but because a most memorable Alteration did then
happen, some were so unskilful as to make that Construction thereof; and if any
way we may believe Adam to be the first Man, we must expound it after this
manner; viz. That he was the first of the whole Race. But for the Universe, and
all the parts whereof it subsists, as it is at present, so it ever was, and
ever shall be; one Nature perpetually moving, and another perpetually
suffering; one always governing, and the other always being governed.

The course which Nature takes in governing the World, is by one Contrary
prevailing over another, as thus --

The Moisture in the Air prevails over the Dryness of the Fire; and the
Coldness of the Water, over the Heat of the Air; the Dryness of the Earth, over
the Moisture of the Water; and so the Moisture of the Water, over the Dryness
of the Earth; and the Heat in the Air, over the Coldness of the Water; and the
Dryness in the Fire, over the Moisture of the Air. And thus the Alterations are
made and produced out of one into another.

It plainly appears out of the Bible, that there were two Creations both of Man
and Woman, and that Adam was not the first Man, nor Eve the first Woman, only
the first of the Holy Race, and this diverse of the Jews believe: for in the
first Chapter of Genesis, ver. 27. It is said -- So God created man in his own
Image, in the Image of God created he him: male and female created he them.
Bidding them increase and multiply, and have dominion over all things: Which
plainly shows that Man was then created, and that the other Creation of Adam
and Eve spoken of in the second Chapter, Ver. 7. and 22. were of the first Man
and Woman of the Holy Race, and not the first Man and Woman that ever was in
the World; for it was a great space of time, and diverse great Actions were
accomplished betwixt those two Creations: Therefore when it is said -- Genesis
6.2. That the sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were ^air, and
took them for their Wives. The meaning is, that the Sons of Adam of the second
Creation, saw the Daughters of the Men of the first Creation that they were
fair, and married them. What Josephus speaks of the Greeks, and other Nations,
may with the same Reason be applied to Moses and the Jews, viz. That all
Founders and Establishers of new Estates, have each of them supposed in their
own behalf, that whosoever was of theirs, he was the first of the World, Contra
Apionem, lib. 1.

Now however Josephus boasts so much of the Antiquity of his Countrymen the
Jews, yet he himself confesses, That he nevertheless durst not presume to
compare the Nation of the Jews, with the Antiquity of the most ancient and
infallible Writings of the Egyptians, Chaldees and Phaenicians, who dwell in
such Countries as are not subject to the Corruption of Air; and have carefully
provided, that whatsoever has been done by them, should not sleep in obscurity,
but be kept in memory, in the public Writings of the most learned Men. Contra
Appionem, lib. 1. Which is as if he had said, Forasmuch as no other Nations but
the Egyptians, Phaenicians and Chaldees, have certain Records of their
Original, therefore will I pretend my own Nation of the Jews to be ancienter
than them, who cannot disprove me; but because the Egyptians, Phaenicians and
Chaldees have more ancient Records of their Country in being, to disprove me,
therefore to prevent being confuted, I think it more convenient to yield to
them in Antiquity. And this is the secret meaning of what Josephus says.

I have observed that no Prophets ever ^oretold the End of the World should
happen till many years after their own deaths, being thereby sure not to live
to see themselves proved Liars -- Cur mundi finem propriorem non facis? ut ne
Ante Obitum mendax arguerere? sapis.
Owen upon Napier.

For they who prophecy of the World's destruction, are upon sure grounds, viz.
that till it comes to pass, it may be expected.

As Nature cannot create, by making something out of Nothing; so neither can it
Annihilate, by turning Something into N^thing: whence it consequently follows,
As there is No Access, so there is no Dimin^tion in the Universe, no more than
in the Alphabet, by the infinite Combination and Transposition of Letters, or
in the Wax by the alteration of the Seal stamped upon it. Now as for the Forms
of natural Bodies, no sooner does any one abandon the Matter it informed, but
another steps instantly into the place thereof; no sooner has one acted his
part and is retired, but another comes presently forth upon the Stage, though it
may be in a different shape, and so act a different part: So that no Portion of
the Matter is, or at any Time can be altogether void and empty, but like
Vertumnus or Proteus, it turns it self into a thousand shapes, and is always
supplied and furnished with one Form or another, there being in Nature Nothing
but Circulation: Ne Res ad Nihilum redigantur protinus omnes. Lucret. lib. 2.
And to this purpose diverse of the Poets speak -- Nec sic interimit mors res, ut
materia
Corpora con^iciat, sed caetum dissipat ollis:
Inde aliis aliud conjugit and efficit, omnes
Res ut convertant formas, mutentque colores,
Et capiant Sensus, and puncto Tempore reddant:
Vt noscas refer eadem primordia rerum.
Lucret. lib. 2. -- Mutantur in aevum
Singula, and inceptum alternat natura tenorem,
Quodque dies antiqua tulit, post auferet ipsa.
Pontan. Metamorph. cap. 48. Nec species sua cuique manet: rerumque Novatrix
Ex aliis alias reparat Natura figuras.
Nec perit in tanto quidquam (mihi credit) mund^,
Sed variat faciemque novat: Nascique vocatur
Incipere esse aliud, quam quod fuit ante: morique
Desinere illud idem: cum sint huc forsitan illa,
Haec Translata illuc, summa tamen omnia constant.
Ovid. Metam. 15.

Also Philo in his Book of the World's Incorruptibility, alleges to this
purpose the Verses of a Greek Tragic Poet, and I think of Euripides, which the
Translator renders thus -- -- Genitum Nihil emoritur.
Sed Transpositum ultro Citroque
For mam priorem alterat.


Casaubon likewise in his first Exercitation against Baronius, shows from the
testimony of Hippocrates, Appolonius, Seneca, Antoninue the Emperor, and
others. Nihil in rebus Creatis perire, sed mutari duntaxat.

But to confirm what Ocellus says, we find something like it in the
Scriptures, for Solomon speaks much to the same purpose, Eccles. 1.4. One
Generation passes away, and another Generation comes, but the Earth abides
for ever.

Now as Geographers use to place Seas upon that part of the Globe which they
know not; so Chronologers, who are much of the same humor, do generally blot
out out past Ages, which are unknown to them; as the one drown those Countries
they cannot describe; so do the other with their cruel Pens destroy those
times, whereof they have no account.

The Grecians made three Divisions of Time; the unknown times: the Heroic or
fabulous Times: and the Historical times, or such as they knew to have been
true. The unknown Times were those with them, which past from the Beginning of
things to the Flood; which Time, whether it had a Beginning, by Computation can
never certainly be comprehended, as Censorinus from Varro affirms. The fabulous
and Heroic times were those that intervened betwixt the Flood and the first
Olympiad: buried likewise in obscurity; nor is it certainly known how long
Inachus was from Ogyges, or Codrus from Inachus. Lastly, the Historical and
known part of Time is computed from the first Olympiad, and treasured up by the
Greek Historians. That the Egyptians and Phenecians had a constant Record of
things past, is confessed by the very Greeks themselves; who but lately learned
the use of Letters from Cadmus the Phaenician: for which reason it has been
doubted, whether the Greeks had any use of Letters in time of the Trojan
Expedition; as we may find in Josephus against Appion: That the Phaenicians had
the use of Letters long before Moses, and spoke the same Language as the the
Hebrews did, is clearly proved by Samuel Petit in his Mescellanea, as well as
by the Learned Bochart in his Phaleg. For although we know of no Writer at this
time extant more ancient than Moses (unless it be Ocellus) yet few will deny
but that there were Writers before him, out of whom he collected much of his
own History; wherefore says Dr. Brown, I believe, besides Zoroaster, there were
diverse others that wrote before Moses. Upon which his Annotator quotes a
passage out of Apuleius (in Apol.) in these words: Si quod libet modicum
emolumentum probaveritis, ego ille- sim Carinondas, vel Damigeron, vel is
Moses, vel Iannes, vel Appollonius, vel ipse Dardanus, vel quicunque alius post
Zoroastrem and Hostanem inter Magos celebratus est -- Diodorus Sciculus was not
only famed for his great Learning but by reading, enquiring, and traveling
throughout Europe, Asia and Africa, for the space of forty years, had furnished
his Library with many ancient and exquisite Volumes. Now he speaking of the
Chaldeans, relates, that they thought very long ago, that the World according
to its own Nature, was eternal, having no beginning, nor that it should have
any Corruption, in order to an end, and that mankind was from Eternity, without
any beginning of their Ge^eration: that the Stars were eternal: and by long
observation of those eternal Stars, as also an acute knowledge of each of their
particular motions, they foretold many future Events. You will hardly (says he)
believe the Number of years that the College of Chaldeans affirmed they had
spent in Contemplation of the Universe; for before the Expedition of Alexander
into Asia, they reckoned four hundred and seventy thousand years, from the time
they began to observe the Stars. Likewise Cicero (who was cotemporary with
Diodorus,) mentions the very same account of Time and Number of years. Critias,
in Plato's Dialogue called Timaeus, tells us, how an ancient Egyptian Priest
laughed at old Solon for boasting of the Primitive acts of the Athenians, as of
Phoroneus and Niobe before the Flood, as also of Deucalion and Pyrrha after the
Flood; whereas the Priest told Solon, there had formerly been many more Floods:
that he was ignorant even of the most famous of his Ancestors: that he had no
knowledge of another Athens, the first and most ancient which stood before the
Flood, and was destroyed by it: that he never heard of the glorious Enterprises
which those first Athenians had performed ten thousand years before the Flood;
at which time an innumerable Company of fierce Warriors had invaded Egypt and
Greece, and all that was against Hercules Pillars: against whom, the only Valor
of the Citizens of old Athens was then shown, above all other Nations. Now
whether the Priest did this to banter poor Solon, I shall not determine; but
the same History is cited likewise in Arnobius's Treatise against the Gentiles,
where he uses these words -- We were the Cause (says he) that Ten thousand
Years ago a great Army of Men came from the Atlantic Islands, as Plato
relates, and destroyed a great many Cities. -- Scaliger (in his Book de Em^nd.
Temp.) says, That the Chinese reckoned the World to have been Eight hundred
eightscore thousand and seventy three Years old, Anno Domini 1594.

But I shall tire you no more with this Subject, which as it does to me, so
undoubtedly it will to you, and ought to do the same to every good Christian,
appear a mere Paradox, though of as great Antiquity as any thing I ever yet met
with in profane Story. However, notwithstanding it does not edify, yet if it
may in any kind serve to entertain and divert you, it is all that is aimed at by,

SIR, Your most faithful Friend and Servant, BLOUNT.

FINIS.

